A DISCOURSE Concerning the IDOLATRY Practiced in the CHURCH OF ROME, AND The
danger of Salvation in the Communion of it: in answer to some Papers of a
Revolted Protestant. WHEREIN A particular Account is given of the Fanaticism
and Divisions of that Church.

By Edward Stillingfleet D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix
in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall, 1671.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough I see no great effect of the Courtship commonly used toward the
Candid and Ingenuous Reader, unless it be in diverting the censure from the
Book to the Preface:. 1.
yet in some cases it looks like a breach of the Readers privilege, The
necessity of writing in these Controversies.
not to give him an account of the occasion and design of a Book. Especially,
when the matter handled therein, has been thought so often discussed, and is
of so general concernment, that every pretender thinks he knows as much
already, as is to be known in it. But we really find no greater advantage has
been given to our Adversaries than this, that the things in dispute between us
are generally no better understood, by the persons they have their designs
upon. For as soon as they have baffled their ignorance and mistakes, these have
been ready to yield up themselves and the Cause, imagining nothing more could
be said for it, than they could say for themselves. Whereby our Church has not
only suffered in its reputation, as far as that is concerned in the weakness of
some of its members; but strange boasts and triumphs have been made by those of
the Church of Rome, when such who understood not their own Religion have
embraced theirs. While these disputes were fresh in the world, every one
thought himself concerned to enquire into them; but since our Church has been
so long established on the principles of the Reformation, and other unhappy
controversies have risen up; the most have taken this Cause for granted, and
thought it needless to enquire any farther into the Grounds of it.

Which our Adversaries perceiving,. 2.
they have found far greater success in their attempts upon particular persons,
The present arts used by our Adversaries to gain Proselyter.
than in public Writings: for these have only provoked others to lay open the
palpable weakness of their Cause, whereas in the other by their ways of
Address, and all the arts of Insinuation, they have instilled their principles
into the minds of some less judicious persons before they were aware of it.
Thence it is easy to observe that the greatest mischief they have done, has
been like the Pestilence by walking in darkness, and spreading their infection
by whispers in corners. All their hopes and strength lie in the weakness and
credulity of the persons they deal with; but if they meet with any who truly
understand the differences between us, they soon give them over as untractable.
But to such, whose employments have not given them leave to enquire or whose
capacity has not been great enough to discern their Sophistry; their first
work is, to make a false representation both of the Doctrines and practices of
their Church, and if they be of such easy faith to believe them, they from
thence persuade them into an ill opinion of their Teachers, who possessed them
with so bad thoughts of such a Church as theirs. A Church of so great Holiness
(as may be seen by the Saint-like lives of their Popes and Converts) a Church
of so great Antiquity (bating only the Primitive times) a Church of so
admirable Unity (saving the divisions in it) a Church so free from any Fanatic
heats (as any one may believe that will.) If this first assault does not make
them yield; but they desire at least time to consider and advise in a matter of
so great importance, then they tell them there is not a man of our Church dares
give any of them a meeting; if they offer to pu^ it to a trial, they will
appoint a day which they foresee will be most inconvenient for the persons they
are to meet with. If upon that account, it be declined or deferred, this is
spread abroad for a Victory; if it be accepted, then one thing or other happens
that they cannot come; either the person goes out of Town unexpectedly, or his
Superiors have forbidden him; or such conferences are not safe for them (they
are so sorely persecuted) or at last, what good can an hours talk do to
satisfy any one in matters of Religion? But if there be no remedy, which they
are seldom without; and a conference happen, (which they scarce ever yield to,
but when they are sure of the person for whose sake it is;) then whosoever was
baffled, they are sure to go away with the triumph; and as an evidence of it,
such a person went off from our Church upon it, which was made sure of their
side before. If this way takes not, then a set of Questions is ready to be
sent; if another be returned to them to be answered at the same time, this is
declined, and complained of as hard dealing, as though they had only the
privilege of putting Questions, and we the duty of answering them. If answers
be given to them, after a Pass or two they put an end to the trial of their
skill in that place, and seek for another to show it in. But if the Papers
chance to be slighted, or business hinders a present answer, or there be a
reasonable presumption, that the person concerned has already forsaken our
Church, this becomes the occasion of a new triumph, the Papers are accounted
unanswerable (as the Spanish Armado was called invincible, which we thank God
we found to be otherwise) and it may be are demanded again as Trophies to be
preserved for the glory of the Catholic Cause.

All these several ways I have had experience of in the compass of a few
years, since by command I was publicly engaged in the Defense of so excellent
a Cause,. 3.
as that of our Church against the Church of Rome. The occasion of this present
writing.
I confess it seemed somewhat hard to me, to be put to answer so many several
Papers which I have received upon their tampering with particular persons of
our Church, while my Book it self remained unanswered by them, after so many
years of trying their strength about it. (For those two who in some small
measure have attempted it, have performed it in the way that Ratts answer
Books, by gnawing some of the leaves of them; for the body and design of it
remains wholly untouched by them.) But for the satisfaction of any person who
desired it, I was not willing to decline any service, which tended to so good
an end, as the preserving any member of our Church in the communion of it:
Which was the occasion of this present writing. For some time since, the person
concerned, after some discourses with her, brought me the two Questions
mentioned in the beginning of the Book; to which I returned a speedy answer in
the midst of many other employments; not long after, I received the Reply; but
hearing for a great while no further of the person for whose sake this
Discourse began, and having affairs more than enough to take up my time, I laid
aside the Papers, supposing that business at an end. But about Christmas last,
they were called for by a near Friend of the party concerned, and a personal
Conference being declined, an intimation was given me, that the Papers were
thought unanswerable. I began to fear so too, for at first I could not find
them; but as soon as I did, I found the great improvement they had made by lying
so long, for what at first I looked on as inconsiderable, was in that time
thought to be too strong to be meddled with; and I could not tell what they
might come to in time, if I let them alone any longer. And I was informed by a
worthy person that I. S. the man of confidence and principles, had expressed
great wonder I had not answered them; as though we had no cause to wonder that
the noble Science of Controversy should be so abandoned by him, and that a man
of such metal should all this while leave his poor demonstrations alone to
defend themselves? Upon these suggestions I resolved, as fast as other
employments would give leave (for we are not those happy men to have only one
thing to mind) to give a full and punctual answer to them. Which I have now
made public, and printed the Papers themselves at large, that my Adversary may
not complain of any injury done him by mis-representing his words, or meaning.
And besides other reasons, I the rather chose to appear in public, to draw
them from their present way of pickeering and lying under hedges, to take
advantage of some straggling members of our Church, not so able to defend
themselves; and whom they rather steal from us than conquer, being blinded with
their smoke, more than overcome by any strength of argument. If they have any
thing to say, either against our Church, or in Defense of their own, let them
come into the open Field, from which they have of late so wisely withdrawn
themselves, finding so little success in it.

And since these Disputes must be,. 4.
I am very well pleased, that the Adversary I have now to deal with, Of the
manner and design of the writing.
has the Character of a Learned and Ingenuous man; and I do not desire he
should lose it in the Debate between us; hoping that nothing shall proceed from
me, but what becomes a fair and ingenuous Adversary. If I were not fully
satisfied that we have truth and reason on our side, I should never have been
engaged in these combats; I am so great a friend to the peace of the Christian
world, that I could take more pleasure in ending one Controversy, than in
being able to handle as many as the most Voluminous Schoolmen have ever done:
For however Noble some may think, the Science of Controversy to be, I am not
fond of the practice of it, especially being managed with so much heat and
passion, such scorn and contempt of Adversaries, so many reproaches and
personal reflections, (as they commonly are) as if men forgot to be Christians,
when they began to be Disputants. I do not think it such a mighty matter to
throw dirt in a man's face, and then to laugh at him, or (rather to take a
Metaphor now from dry weather) to raise such a dust as may endanger the
eyesight of weaker persons. I think it no great skill to make things appear
either ridiculous or dark, but to give them their due Colors, and set them in
the clearest light shows far more art and ingenuity. And even that smartness
of expression, without which Controversy will hardly go down with many, seems
but like the throwing Vinegar upon hot Coals, which gives a quick scent for the
present, but vanishes immediately into smoke and air. In matters of Truth and
Religion, reason and evidence ought to sway men, and not passion and noise; and
though men cannot command their judgments, they may and ought to do their
expressions. And although this looks as like an Apology for a dull Book as may
be, yet I had much rather it should suffer for want of wit and smartness, than
of good nature and Christianity. My design is to represent the matters in
difference between us truly, to report faithfully, and to argue closely; and by
these to show, that no person can have any pretense of reason to leave our
Church, to embrace the communion of the Church of Rome; because the danger is
so much greater there in the nature of their Worship and tendency of their
doctrine; and what they object most against us in point of Fanaticism and
divisions, will equally hold against them; so that they have no advantages
above us, but have many apparent dangers which we have not.

Among the chiefest dangers in the communion of that Church,. 5.
I have insisted on that of Idolatry; Of the charge of Idolatry against the
Church of Rome.
not to make the breach wider than some others have done, but to let persons
first understand the greatness of the danger before they run into it. I wish I
could acquit them from so heavy a charge, but I cannot force my judgment: and
while I think them guilty, it would be unfaithfulness in me, not to warn those
of it, whom it most concerns to understand it. And where other things are
subtle and nice, tedious and obscure, this lies plain to the conscience of
every man; if the Church of Rome be guilty of Idolatry, our separation can be
no Schism either before God or man, because our communion would be a sin. And
although it may be only an excess of charity in some few learned persons, to
excuse that Church from Idolatry, (although not all who live in the communion
of it:) yet upon the greatest search I can make, I think there is more of
charity than judgment in so doing. For the proof of it, I must refer the
Reader to the following Discourse, but that I may not be thought in so severe a
censure, to contradict the sense of our Church, (which I have so great a regard
to) I shall here show, that this charge of Idolatry has been managed against
the Church of Rome, by the greatest and most learned defenders of it ever since
the Reformation.

What greater discovery can be made of the sense of our Church, than by the
Book of Homilies not barely allowed, but subscribed to, as containing godly and
wholesome doctrine, Articl. 35.
and necessary for these times? and nothing can be more plainly delivered
therein, than that the Church of Rome is condemned for Idolatry. So the third
part of the Sermon against the peril of Idolatry concludes, Homil. part^ 2. p.
75.
Ye have heard it evidently proved in these Homilies against Idolatry by Gods
Word, the Doctors of the Church, Ecclesiastical Histories, reason and
experience, that Images have been and be worshipped, and so Idolatry committed
to them to the great offense of Gods Majesty, and danger of infinite souls,
etc. Who the Author of these Homilies was, is not material to enquire, since
their authority depends not on the Writer, but the Churches approbation of
them; Dr. Iackson Original of Unbelief, Sect. 4. Chapter 34.
but Dr. Jackson not only calls him the worthy and learned Author of the
Homilies concerning the peril of Idolatry, but says, he takes him to be a
Reverend Bishop of our Church: and no wonder, since the most eminent Bishops in
that time of Queen Elizabeth, (wherein these Homilies were added to the former)
did all assert and maintain the same thing. Defense of the Apology, chapter 7. div.
2. p. 552.
As Bishop Jewel in his excellent Defense of the Apology of the Church of
England, and Answer to Harding, wherein he proves, that to give the honor of
God to a creature, Answer to Harding, 8. articl. p. 283.
is manifest Idolatry, as the Papists do, says he, in adoration of the Host,
Art. 14. p. 368. p. 382.
and the Worship of Images: And his works ought to be looked on with a higher
esteem than any other private person being commanded to be placed in Churches
to be read by the people. Of all persons of that Age none could be less
suspected to be Puritanically inclined, than Archbishop Whitgift; yet in his
Learned Defense of the Church of England against T. C. he makes good the same
charge in these words; Defense of the Answer to the Admonition, tr. 8. p. 152.
I do as much mislike the distinction of the Papists, and the intent of it as
any man does, neither do I go about to excuse them from wicked, and without
repentance and Gods singular mercy, damnable Idolatry. There are says he,
three kinds of Idolatry, one is, when the true God is worshipped by other means
and ways, than he has prescribed, or would be worshipped, i. e. against his
express command, which is certainly his meaning: the other is, when the true
God is worshipped with false Gods: the third is, when we worship false Gods
either in heart, mind, or in external creatures living or dead, and altogether
forget the worship of the true God. All these three kinds are detestable, but
the first is the least and the last is the worst. The Papists worship God
otherwise than his will is, and otherwise than he has prescribed, almost in
all points of their worship, they also give to the creature, that which is due
to the Creator, and sin against the first Table; yet are they not for all that
I can see or learn in the third kind of Idolatry, and therefore if they repent
unfeignedly, they are not to be cast either out of the Church, or out of the
Ministry. The Papists have little cause to thank me, or fee me, for any thing I
have spoken in their behalf as yet, you see that I place them among wicked and
damnable Idolaters. Thus far that Wise and Learned Bishop. After him we may
justly reckon Bishop Bilson, than whom none did more learnedly in that time
defend the perpetual Government of Christ's Church by Bishops, (nor it may be
since:) who in a set discourse, at large proves the Church of Rome guilty of
Idolatry. Bish. Bilson Dis^. of Christian subjection, part. 4. p. 319.
1. In the Worship of Images; the having of which, he says, was never
Catholic, and the worshipping of them was ever wicked by the judgment of
Christ's Church: and that, the Worship even of the Image of Christ's is
Heathenism and Idolatry; p. 321.
and to Worship it makes it an Idol, and burning Incense to it is Idolatry:
which he there proves at large, and that the Image of God made with hands, is a
false God, p. 324.
and no likeness of his, but a lewd imagination of theirs, set up to feed their
eyes with the contempt of his Sacred Will, dishonor of his Holy Name, and open
injury to his Divine Nature. p. 530, etc.
2. In the adoration of the Host, of which he treats at large. After these it
will be less needful to produce the testimonies of Dr. Fulk, Dr. Fulks
confutation of an Idolatrous Treatise of Nicol. Sanders.
Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Whitaker, who all asserted and proved the Church of Rome,
guilty of Idolatry: and I cannot find one person, who owned himself to be of
the Church of England in all Queen Elizabeth's reign, Dr. Reynolds de Idolat.
Eccles. Romans Dr. Whitaker c. Duraeum, l. 5. p. 138.
who did make any doubt of it. Let us now come to the reign of King James; and
here in the first place we ought to set down the judgment of that Learned
Prince himself, who so thoroughly understood the matters in controversy between
us and the Church of Rome, as appears by his Premonition to all Christian
Princes, K. James his Works, p. 303.
wherein after speaking of other points, he comes to that of Relics of
Saints: But for the worshipping either of them or Images, I must says he,
account it damnable Idolatry, and after adds, that the Scriptures are so
directly, vehemently, and punctually against it, as I wonder what brain of man,
or suggestion of Satan durst offer it to Christians: and all must be salved
with nice and philosophical distinctions -- Let them therefore that maintain
this doctrine, answer it to Christ at the latter day, when he shall accuse them
of Idolatry: and then I doubt if he will be paid with such nice Sophistical
distinctions. Is, Casaub. Ep. ad Cardin. Perron, ad quartam Instant.
And when Isaac Casaubon was employed by him to deliver his opinion to Cardinal
Perron, mentioning the practices of the Church of Rome in invocation of Saints,
he says, that the Church of England did affirm, that those practices were
joined with great impiety. Bishop Andrews, whom no man suspects of want of
learning, or not understanding the doctrine of our Church, was also employed to
answer Cardinal Bellarmin who had writ against the King: and does he decline
charging the Church of Rome with Idolatry? No, so far from it, that he not only
in plain terms charges them with it, Ad Tort^ librum respons. p. 312.
but says, that Bellarmin runs into Heresy, nay, into madness to defend it:
and in his answer to Perron he says, Answer to Perron 20. chapt. p. 58.
it is most evident, by their Breviaries, Hours, and Rosaries, that they pray
directly, absolutely and finally to Saints; and not merely to the Saints, to
pray to God for them, but to give what they pray for themselves. In the same
time of King James, Bish. Abbor against Bishop, Tom. 2. p. 1106.
Bishop Abbot writ his Answer to Bishop; in which he says, that the Church of
Rome by the Worship of Images, has matched all the Idolatries of the Heathens,
and brought all their juggling devices into the Church, abusing the ignorance
and simplicity of the people as grossly and damnably as ever they did. Whites
Reply to Fisher. p. 209.
Toward the latter end of his Reign came forth Bishop Whites Reply to Fisher,
he calls the worshipping of Images, a Superstitious dotage, a palliate
Idolatry, a remainder of Paganism, condemned by Sacred Scripture, censured by
Primitive Fathers, and a Seminary of direful contention and mischief in the
Church of Christ. Dr. Field of the Church, l. 3. chapter 20. p. 109.
Dr. Field charge the Invocation of Saints with such Superstition and
Idolatry as cannot be excused. We charge the adherents of the Church of Rome
with gross Idolatry, Bish. ushers Sermon before the Commons, p. 30.
(says Bishop Usher in his Sermon preached before the Commons A. D. 1620.)
because that contrary to Gods express Commandment they are sound to be
worshippers of Images. Neither will it avail them here to say, that the
Idolatry forbidden in the Scripture is that only which was used by the Jews and
Pagans: For as well might one plead, that Jewish or Heathenish fornication was
here only reprehended as Jewish or Heathenish Idolatry. But as the one is a
foul sin, whether it be committed by Jew, Pagan or Christian: so if such as
profess the Name of Christ shall practice that which the Word of God condemns
in Jews or Pagans; for Idolatry, their profession is so far from diminishing,
that it augmenteth rather the hainousness of the crime. About the same time
came forth Bishop Downams Book of Antichrist, Downam de Antichristo. l. 5. c.
1, 2, etc.
wherein he does at large prove, That to give divine honor to a creature,
Davenant. deter. quaest. 18.
is Idolatry; and that the Papists do give it in the Worship of Saints, D.
Iacksons Original of Unbelief, sect. 4.
the Host and Images: which is likewise done nearer our own times by Bishop
Davenant and Dr. Jackson.

I shall conclude all, (although I might produce more) with the testimony of
Archbishop Laud, Archbish. Lauds Conference, p. 277.
who in his Conference, says the ancient Church knew not the adoration of
Images; and the modern Church of Rome is too like to Paganism in the practice
of it, and driven to scarce intelligible subtleties in her Servants writings
that defend it; and this without any care had of millions of souls, unable to
understand her subtleties or shun her practice: Bell. de sanct. beat. l. 1. c.
20.
and in his Marginal Notes upon Bellarmin (written with his own hand, now in my
possession) where Bellarmin answers the testimony of the Council of Laodicea
against the Worship of Angels, by saying, That it does not condemn all Worship
of Images, but only that which is proper to God; he replies, That Theodoret who
produced that testimony of the Council, expressly mentions the praying to
Angels; therefore, says he, the praying to them was that Idolatry which the
Council condemns. By this we see, that the most Eminent and Learned Defenders
of our Church, of greatest authority in it, and zeal for the Cause of it
against enemies of all sorts, have agreed in the charge of Idolatry against the
Church of Rome.

And I cannot see why the authority of some very few persons, though of great
Learning should bear sway against the constant opinion of our Church ever since
the Reformation. Since our Church is not now to be formed according to the
singular Fancies of some few (though Learned men;) much less to be modelled by
the Caprichio's of Superstitious Fanatics, who prefer some odd Opinions and
ways of their own, before the received doctrine and practice of the Church
they live in. Such as these we rather pity their weakness, than regard their
censures, and are only sorry when our Adversaries make such properties of them,
as by their means to beget in some a disaffection to our Church. Which I am so
far from, (whatever malice and peevishness may suggest to the contrary) that
upon the greatest enquiry I can make, I esteem it the best Church of the
Christian world; and think my time very well employed (what ever thanks I meet
with for it) in defending its Cause, and preserving persons in the communion of
it.

THE Contents.
CHAP. I. Of the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, in the Worship of
Images.
THE introduction, concerning the occasion of the debate. The Church of Rome
makes its members guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry: First, Of the Worship of
God by Images: Some propositions for clearing the notion of Divine Worship. It
is in Gods power to determine the way of his Worship, which being determined,
Gods Law, and not our intention, is to be the rule of Worship. The main
question is, Whether God has forbidden the worshipping of himself by an Image,
under the notion of Idolatry? Of the meaning of the second Commandment, from
the terms therein used, the large sense and importance of them, which cannot be
understood only of Heathen Idols. Of the reason of that Law, from Gods infinite
and invisible nature: How far that has been acknowledged by Heathens? The Law
against Image Worship no ceremonial Law respecting merely the Jews; the reason
against it made more clear by the Gospel: The wiser Heathen did not worship
their Images as Gods, yet their worship condemned as Idolatry. The Christian
Church believed the reason of this Law to be immutable; Of the Doctrine of the
second Council of Nice; the opposition to it in Greece, Germany, France and
England. Of the Scripture Instances of Idolatry contrary to the second
Commandment, in the Golden Calf, and the Calves of Dan and Bethel. Of the
distinctions used to excuse image worship from being Idolatry: The vanity and
folly of them. The instances supposed to be parallel answered. P. 49
CHAP. II. Of their Idolatry in Adoration of the Host and Invocation of Saints.
The Argument proposed concerning the Adoration of the Host; the insufficiency
of the Answer to it manifested: supposing equal revelation for
Transubstantiation as for Christ's Divinity, yet not the same reason for
Worshipping the Host as the person of Christ; the great disparity between these
two at large discovered; the Controversy truly stated concerning Adoration of
the Host: and it is proved, that no man on the principles of the Roman Church
can be secure he does not commit Idolatry in it. The confession of our
Adversaries, that the same Principles will justify the Worship of any
Creature. No such motives to believe Transubstantiation as the Divinity of
Christ. Bishop Taylor's Testimony answered by himself. To Worship Christ in the
Sun as lawful as to Worship him in the Host. The grossest Idolatry excusable on
the same grounds. The argument proposed and vindicated concerning the
Invocation of Saints practiced in the Church of Rome. The Fathers Arguments
against the Heathens hold against Invocation of Saints; the state of the
Controversy about Idolatry as managed by them. They make it wholly unlawful to
give divine Worship to any Creature how excellent soever. The Worship not only
of Heathen Gods, but of Angels condemned. The common evasions answered. Prayer
more proper to God than Sacrifice. No such disparity as is pretended between
the manner of Invocating Saints and the Heathens Invocating their Deities. In
the Church of Rome, they do more than pray to Saints to pray for them, proved
from the present most Authentic Breviaries. Supposing that were all, it would
not excuse them. St. Austin no friend to Invocation of Saints. Practices
condemned by the Church pleaded for it. Of Negative points being Articles of
faith. p. 108.
CHAP. III. Of the hindrance of a good Life and Devotion in the Roman Church.
The doctrines of the Roman Church prejudicial to Piety. The Sacrament of
Penance, as taught among them, destroys the necessity of a good life. The
doctrine of Purgatory takes away the care of it, as appears by the true stating
it, and comparing that doctrine with Protestants. How easy it is, according to
them, for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Purgatory dreadful to
none but poor and friendless. Sincerity of devotion hindered by prayers in an
unknown Tongue. The great absurdity of it manifested. The effects of our
Ancestors devotion had been as great, if they had said their prayers in
English. The language of prayer proved to be no indifferent thing, from St.
Paul's arguments. No universal consent for prayers in an unknown tongue, by the
confession of their own Writers. Of their doctrine of the efficacy of
Sacraments, that it takes away all necessity of devotion in the minds of the
receivers. This complained of by Cassander and Arnaud, but proved against them
to be the doctrine of the Roman Church, by the Canons of the Council of Trent.
The great easiness of getting Grace by their Sacraments. Of their discouraging
the reading the Scriptures. A standing Rule of devotion necessary. None so fit
to give it, as God himself: This done by him in the Scriptures. All persons
therefore concerned to read them. The arguments against reading the Scriptures,
would have held against the publishing them in a language known to the people.
The dangers as great then, as ever have been since. The greatest prudence of
the Roman Church is wholly to forbid the Scriptures; being acknowledged by
their wisest men, to be so contrary to their Interest. The confession of the
Cardinals at Bononia to that purpose. The avowed practice of the Roman Church
herein directly contrary to that of the Primitive: although the reasons were as
great then from the danger of Heresies. This confessed by their own Writers. p.
178
CHAP. IV. Of the Fanaticism of the Roman Church.
The unreasonableness of objecting Sects and Fanaticisms to us as the effects
of reading the Scriptures. Fanaticism countenanced in the Roman Church, but
condemned by ours. Private revelations made among them the grounds of believing
some points of doctrine, proved from their own Authors. Of the Revelations
pleaded for the immaculate Conception. The Revelations of S. Brigitt and S.
Catharin directly contrary in this point, yet both owned in the Church of Rome.
The large approbations of S. Brigitts by Popes and Councils; and both their
revelations acknowledged to be divine in the lessons read upon their days. S.
Catharines wonderful faculty of smelling souls, a gift peculiar to her and
Philip Nerius. The vain attempts of reconciling those Revelations. The great
number of female Revelations approved in the Roman Church. Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession proved by Visions and Revelations.
Festivals appointed upon the credit of Revelations: the Feast of Corpus Christi
on the Revelation made to Juliana, the Story of it related from their own
Writers: No such things can be objected to our Church. Revelations still owned
by them; proved from the Fanatic Revelations of Mother Juliana very lately
published by Mr. Cressy: Some instances of the blasphemous Nonsense contained
in them. The Monastic Orders founded in Enthusiasm. An account of the great
Fanaticism of S. Benedict, and S. Romoaldus: their hatred of Humane Learning,
and strange Visions and Revelations. The Carthusian Order founded upon a
Vision. The Carmalites Vision of their habit. The Franciscan and Dominican
Orders founded on Fanaticism, and seen in a Vision of Innocent the third to be
the great supporters of the Roman Church. The Quakerism of S. Francis described
from their best Authors. His Ignorance, Ecstasies and Fanatic Preaching. The
Vision of Dominicus. The blasphemous Enthusiasm of the Mendicant Friars. The
History of it related at large. Of the Evangelium aeternum, and the blasphemies
contained in it. The Author of it supposed to be the General of the Franciscan
Order, however owned by the Friars, and read and preached at Paris. The
opposition to it by the University: but favored by the Popes. Gul. S. Amor
writing against it, his Book publicly burnt, by order of the Court of Rome.
The Popes horrible partiality to the Friars. The Fanaticism of the Franciscans
afterward of the followers of Petrus Johannis de Oliva. The Spiritual State
began (say they) from S. Francis. The story of his wounds, and Maria
Visitationis paralleld. The canting language used by the spiritual Brethren,
called Beguini, Fraticelli, and Bigardi. Of their doctrines about Poverty,
Swearing, Perfection, the Carnal Church and Inspiration: by all which, they
appear to be a Sect of Quakers after the Order of S. Francis. Of the Schism
made by them. The large spreading and long continuance of them. Of the
Apostolici and Dulcinistae. Of their numerous Conventicles. Their high opinion
of themselves. Their Zeal against the Clergy and Tithes; their doctrine of
Christian Liberty. Of the Alumbrado's in Spain: their disobedience to Bishops,
obstinate adhering to their own fancies, calling them Inspirations, their being
above Ordinances. Ignatius Loyola suspected to be one of the Illuminati, proved
from Melchior Canus. The Jesuits Order founded in Fanaticism; a particular
account of the Romantic Enthusiasm of Ignatius, from the Writers of his own
Order. Whereby it is proved, that he was the greatest pretender to Enthusiasm,
since the days of Mahomet and S. Francis. Ignatius gave no respect to men by
words or putting off his Hat, his great Ignorance and Preaching in the Streets:
his glorying in his sufferings for it; his pretense to mortification: the ways
he used to get disciples. Their way of resolution of difficulties by seeking
God; their itinerant preaching in the Cities of Italy. The Sect of Quakers a
new Order of Disciples of Ignatius, only wanting confirmation from the Pope,
which Ignatius obtained. Of the Fanatic way of devotion in the Roman Church.
Of Superstitious and Enthusiastical Fanaticism among them. Of their mystical
Divinity. Mr. Cressy's canting in his Preface to Sancta Sophia. Of the Deiform
fund of the soul; a superessential life, and the way to it. Of contemplating
with the will. Of passive Unions. The method of self-Annihilation. Of the Union
of nothing with nothing. Of the feeling of not-being. The mischief of an
unintelligible way of devotion. The utmost effect of this way is gross
Enthusiasm. Mr. Cressy's Vindication of it examined. The last sort of
Fanaticism among them, resisting authority under pretense of Religion. Their
principles and practices compared with the Fanatics. How far they are disowned
at present by them. Of the Vindication of the Irish Remonstrance. The Court of
Rome has always favored that party, which is most destructive to Civil
Government, proved by particular and late Instances. p. 235
CHAP. V. Of the Divisions of the Roman Church.
The great pretense of Unity in the Church of Rome considered. The Popes
Authority the fountain of that Unity; what that Authority is which is
challenged by the Popes over the Christian World; the disturbances which have
happened therein on the account of it. The first Revolt of Rome from the Empire
caused by the Popes, Baronius his Arguments answered. Rebellion the foundation
of the greatness of that Church. The cause of the strict League between the
Popes and the posterity of Charles Martel. The disturbances made by Popes in
the new Empire: Of the quarrels of Greg. 7. with the Empeperour and other
Christian Princes, upon the pretense of the Popes Authority. More disturbances
on that account in Christendom, than any other matter of Religion. Of the
Schisms which have happened in the Roman Church: particularly those after the
time of Formosus, wherein his Ordinations were nulled by his successors, the
Popes opposition to each other in that Age: the miserable state of that Church
then described. Of the Schisms of latter times, by the Italick and Gallick
factions, the long continuance of them. The mischief of those Schisms on their
own principles. Of the divisions in that Church about the matters of Order and
Government. The differences between the Bishops and the Monastic Orders about
exemptions and privileges; the history of that Controversy, and the bad
success the Popes had in attempting to compose it. Of the quarrel between the
Regulars and Seculars in England. The continuance of that Controversy here and
in France. The Jesuits enmity to the Episcopal Order and jurisdiction: the hard
case of the Bishop of Angelopolis in America. The Popes still favor the
Regulars, as much as they dare. The Jesuits way of converting the Chinese
discovered by that Bishop. Of the differences in matters of Doctrine in that
Church. They have no better way to compose them than we. The Popes Authority
never truly ended one Controversy among them. Their ways to evade the
decisions of Popes and Councils. Their dissensions are about matters of faith.
The ways taken to excuse their own difference will make none between them and
us, manifested by Sancta Clara's exposition o^ the 39. Articles. Their disputes
not confined to their Schools, proved, by a particular instance about the
immaculate conception; the infinite scandals, confessed by their own Authors,
to have been in their Church about it. From all which it appears that the
Church of Rome can have no advantage in point of Unity above ours. p. 355
CHAP. VI. An Answer to the Remainder of the Reply.
The mis-interpreting Scripture does not hinder its being a rule of faith. Of
the superstitious observations of the Roman Church. Of Indulgences; the
practice of them in what time begun, on what occasion, and in what terms
granted. Of the Indulgences in Jubilees, in the Churches at Rome, and upon
saying some Prayers. Instances of them produced. What opinion has been had of
Indulgences in the Church of Rome: some confess they have no foundation in
Scripture, or Antiquity, others that they are pious frauds: the miserable
shifts the defenders of indulgences were put to: plain evidences of their fraud
from the Disputes of the Schools about them. The treasure of the Church
invented by Aquinas and on what occasion. The wickedness of men increased by
Indulgences acknowledged by their own Writers: and therefore condemned by many
of that Church. Of Bellarmins prudent Christians opinion of them. Indulgences
no mere relaxations of Canonical Penance. The great absurdity of the doctrine
of the Churches Treasure on which Indulgences are founded, at large manifested.
The tendency of them to destroy devotion proved by experience, and the nature
of the Doctrine. Of Communion in one kind; no devotion in opposing an
Institution of Christ. Of the Popes power of dispensing contrary to the Law of
God in Oaths and Marriages. The ill consequence of asserting Marriage in a
Priest to be worse than Fornication, as it is in the Church of Rome. Of the
uncertainty of faith therein. How far revelation to be believed against sense.
The arguments to prove the uncertainty of their faith defended. The case of a
revolter and a bred Papist compared as to salvation: and the greater danger of
one than the other proved. The motives of the Roman Church considered; those
laid down by Bishop Tailor fully answered by himself. An account of the faith
of Protestants laid down in the way of Principles: wherein the grounds and
nature of our certainty of faith are cleared. And from the whole concluded,
that there can be no reasonable cause to forsake the communion of the Church of
England and to embrace that of the Church of Rome. p. 476
ERRATA.
Page 25. l. 19. for adjuverit, r. adjuvet: p. ibid. Marg. r. l. 7. de baptis.
p. 31. Marg. r. Tract. 18. in Ioh. p. 64. l. 13. dele only: p. 75. Marg. r.
Trigaut. p. 101. l. 24. for I am, r. am I: p. 119. l. 28. for is, r. in: p.
135. Marg. for 68. r. 6. 8. p. 162. l. 17. after did, put not: Chapter 3. for
penance, r. penance: p. 219. l. 10. for him, r. them: p. 257. l. 21. for or,
r. and: l. 31. for never, r. ever: p. 350. l. 21. for their, r. the: p. 414. l.
18. for these, r. their: p. 416. Marg. for nibaldi, r. Sinibaldi: p. 417. l. 2.
before another, insert one: p. 499. l. 16. after not, insert at: p. 526. Marg.
for act, r. art. p. 546. l. 8. after for, insert one.

Two Questions proposed by one of the Church of Rome.
WHether a Protestant having the same Motives to become a Catholic, which one
bred and born, and well grounded in the Catholic Religion, has to remain in
it, may not equally be saved in the profession of it?

2. Whether it be sufficient to be a Christian in the abstract, or in the whole
latitude, or there be a necessity of being a member of some distinct Church, or
Congregation of Christians?

Answer.
The first Question being supposed to be put concerning a Protestant yet
continuing so, does imply a contradiction, viz. That a Protestant continuing
so, should have the same Motives to become a Catholic (taking that term here,
only as signifying, one of the communion of the Church of Rome) which those
have, who have been born or bred in that communion. But supposing the meaning
of the Question to be this, Whether a Protestant leaving the communion of our
Church, upon the Motives used by those of the Roman Church, may not be equally
saved with those who are bred in it? I answer,

1. That an equal capacity of salvation of those persons being supposed, can be
no argument to leave the communion of a Church wherein salvation of a person
may be much more safe, than of either of them. No more, than it is, for a man
to leap from the plain ground into a Ship, that is in danger of being wrackt,
because he may equally hope to be saved with those who are in it. Nay,
supposing an equal capacity of salvation in two several Churches, there can be
no reason to forsake the communion of the one for the other. So that to
persuade any one to leave our Church to embrace that of Rome, it is by no means
sufficient to ask whether such a one may not as well be saved as they that are
in it already: but it is necessary, that they prove, that it is of necessity to
salvation to leave our Church, and become a member of theirs: And when they do
this, I intend to be one of their number.

2. We assert, that all those who are in the communion of the Church of Rome do
run so great a hazard of their salvation, that none who have a care of their
souls, ought to embrace it, or continue in it. And that upon these grounds.

1. Because they must by the terms of communion with that Church, be guilty
either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, either of which are sins inconsistent with
salvation; Which I thus prove.

That Church which requires the giving the Creature the Worship due only to the
Creator, makes the members of it guilty of hypocrisy or Idolatry; for it they
do it, they are guilty of the latter, if they do it not, of the former; but the
Church of Rome in the Worship of God by Images, the Adoration of the Bread in
the Eucharist, and the formal Invocation of Saints, does require the giving to
the creature the Worship due only to the Creator; therefore it makes the
members of it guilty of hypocrisy or Idolatry.

That the Church of Rome in these particulars does require the giving the
creature the honor due only to God; I prove thus concerning each of them.

1. Where the Worship of God is terminated upon a creature there, by their own
confession, the Worship due only to God is given to the creature; but in the
Worship of God by Images, the Worship due to God is terminated wholly on the
creature; which is thus proved; the Worship which God himself denies to
receive, must be terminated on the creature: but God himself in the second
Commandment not only denies to receive it, but threatens severely to punish
them that give it. Therefore it cannot be terminated on God, but only on the
Image.

2. The same argument which would make the grossest Heathen Idolatry lawful,
cannot excuse any act from Idolatry, but the same argument, whereby the Papists
make the Worship of the Bread in the Eucharist not to be Idolatry, would make
the grossest Heathen Idolatry not to be so. For if it be not therefore
Idolatry; because they suppose the bread to be God, then the Worship of the Sun
was not Idolatry by them who supposed the Sun to be God; and upon this ground,
the grosser the Idolatry was, the less it was Idolatry: for the grossest
Idolaters were those, who supposed their Statues to be Gods. And upon this
ground their Worship was more lawful, than of those who supposed them not to be
so.

3. If the supposition of a middle excellency between God and us, be a
sufficient ground for formal Invocation, then the Heathen Worship of their
inferior Deities could be no Idolatry: for the Heathens still pretended, that
they did not give to them the Worship proper to the Supreme God; which is as
much as is pretended by the devoutest Papist, in justification of the
Invocation of Saints. To these I expect a direct and punctual answer,
professing as much Charity toward them, as is consistent with Scripture and
Reason.

2. Because the Church of Rome is guilty of so great corruption of the
Christian Religion by such opinions and practices which are very apt to hinder
a good life: Such are, the destroying the necessity of a good life, by making
the Sacrament of Penance joined with contrition, sufficient for salvation; the
taking off the care of it, by supposing an expiation of sin (by the prayers of
the living) after death; and the sincerity of devotion is much obstructed in
it, by prayers in a language which many understand not, by making the efficacy
of Sacraments depend upon the bare administration, whether our minds be
prepared for them or not; by discouraging the reading the Scripture, which is
our most certain rule of faith and life, by the multitude of superstitious
observations never used in the Primitive Church, as we are ready to defend; by
the gross abuse of people in Pardons and Indulgences, by denying the Cup to the
Laity, contrary to the practice of the Church in the solemn Celebration of the
Eucharist for a thousand years after Christ; by making it in the power of any
person to dispense contrary to the Law of God, in Oaths and Marriages; by
making disobedience to the Church in disputable matters, more heinous, than
disobedience to the Laws of Christ in unquestionable things, as Marriage in a
Priest, to be a greater crime, than Fornication.

By all which practices and opinions we assert, that there are so many
hindrances to a good life, that none who have a care of their salvation, can
venture their souls, in the communion of such a Church, which either enjoins or
publicly allows them.

3. Because it exposes the faith of Christians to so great uncertainty: By
making the authority of the Scriptures to depend on the infallibility of the
Church, when the Churches Infallibility must be proved by the Scripture: by
making those things necessary to be believed, which if they be believed
overthrow all foundations of faith, viz. That we are not to believe our senses
in the plainest objects of them, as that bread which we see is not bread; upon
which it follows, that tradition being a continued kind of sensation, can be no
more certain, than sense it self; and that the Apostles might have been
deceived in the body of Christ after the resurrection; and the Church of any
Age in what they saw or heard. By denying to men the use of their judgment and
reason as to the matters of faith proposed by a Church, when they must use it
in the choice of a Church; by making the Churches power extend to make new
Articles of faith, viz. by making those things necessary to be believed, which
were not so before. By pretending to infallibility in determining
Controversies, and yet not determining Controversies which are on foot among
themselves. All which, and several other things which my designed brevity will
not permit me to mention; tend very much to shake the faith of such, who have
nothing else to rely on, but the authority of the Church of Rome.

3. I answer, That a Protestant leaving the Communion of our Church, does
incurr a greater guilt, than one who was bred up in the communion of the Church
of Rome, and continues therein by invincible ignorance, and therefore cannot
equally be saved with such a one. For a Protestant is supposed, to have
sufficient convictions of the Errors of the Roman Church, or is guilty of
wilful ignorance, if he has not; but although we know not what allowances God
will make for invincible ignorance, we are sure that wilful ignorance, or
choosing a worse Church before a better, is a damnable sin, and unrepented of
destroys salvation.

To the second Question I answer, 1. I do not understand what is meant by a
Christian in the Abstract, or in the whole latitude, it being a thing I never
heard or read of before; and therefore may have some meaning in it, which I
cannot understand. 2. But if the Question be as the last words imply it,
Whether a Christian by virtue of his being so, be bound to join in some Church
or Congregation of Christians? I answer affirmatively, and that he is bound to
choose the communion of the purest Church, and not to leave that for a corrupt
one, though called never so Catholic.

The Proposer of the Questions Reply to the Answer.
Madam,
I Did not expect that two bare Questions could have produced such a
super-foetation of Controversies, as the Paper you sent me is fraught with; But
since the Answerer has been pleased to take this Method, (for what end himself
best knows) I shall not refuse to give a fair and plain return, to the several
points he insists upon, and that with as much brevity as the matter and
circumstances will bear.

The Questions proposed were: 1. Whether a Protestant having the same Motives
to become a Catholic, which one bred and born, and well grounded in Catholic
Religion has to remain in it, may not equally be saved in the profession of it?

The 2. Whether it be sufficient to be a Christian in the abstract, or in the
whole latitude; or there be a necessity of being a member of some distinct
Church or Congregation of Christians?

The first he says, being supposed to be put concerning a Protestant
continuing so, implies a contradiction; but where it lies I cannot see, for a
Protestant may have the same Motives, and yet out of wilfulness or passion not
acquiesce to them. He saw no doubt this supposition to be impertinent to the
Question, and therefore in the second part of the 1.. states it thus: Whether a
Protestant leaving the communion of the Protestant Church, upon the motives
used by those of the Roman Church, may not be equally saved with those who were
bred in it.

The Question thus stated in its true supposition, he answers first,. 2. That
an equal capacity of salvation of those persons being supposed, can be no
argument to leave the Communion of a Church, wherein the salvation of a person
may be much more safe than either of them. But before I reply, I must do both
him and my self right in matter of fact; and it is, Madam, that when you first
addressed to me, you professed your self much troubled, that he had told you, a
person leaving the Protestant communion, and embracing the Catholic, could not
be saved. That we should deny salvation to any out of the Catholic Church, you
looked upon as uncharitable, and this assertion of his had startled you in the
opinion you had before of the Protestant Charity. Whereupon you desired to know
my opinion in the case, and I told you I saw no reason, why the same Motives
which secured one born and bred, and well grounded in Catholic Religion, to
continue in it, were not sufficient also to secure a Protestant, who convinced
by them, should embrace it. This Madam, your self can witness, was the true
occasion of your proposing the Question, and not as the Answerer supposes, that
I used the mere Question it self as a sufficient Argument to persuade you to
embrace the Catholic Communion. This premised, I reply, that the Answer he
gives, is altogether foreign to the matter in hand, the Controversy not being
between a Bred and a Converted Catholic on the one side, and a person supposed
to be in a safer Church than either of them on the other: nor yet between two
several Churches supposed to have in them an equal Capacity of salvation, but
between a person bred in the Catholic Religion on the one side, and another
converted to it from Protestantism on the other, whether the latter may not be
equally saved with the former? Nor is it to the purpose of the present
Question, to prove that it is of necessity to Salvation to leave the Protestant
Church, and become a member of the Catholic, because the Question is only of
the possibility, not of the necessity of Salvation. I say it is not necessary
to the present Question to prove this, but rather belongs to the second, where
I shall speak to it. Whether there be a necessity of being a member of some
distinct Church? Which being resolved affirmatively by both parts, it follows
then in order to enquire which this true Church is. As for the Example of a man
leaping from the plain, ground into a Ship that is in danger of being Wrackt,
meaning by that Ship (as I suppose he does) the Catholic Church. Some will be
apt to think he had come nearer the Mark if he had compared the Protestant to a
Ship, which by often knocking against the Rock on which the Catholic Church is
built, had split it self into innumerable Sects, and was now in danger of
sinking: his comparison was grounded only on his own supposition, but this is
grounded on the truth it self of too sad an experience. But to leave words, and
come to the matter. His second Answer is,. 3. that all those who are in the
communion of the Church of Rome do run so great a hazard of their Salvation,
that none who have a care of their souls ought to embrace or continue in it.
The first answer as I have showed, was nothing pertinent to the present
Question, nor comes this second any nearer the matter, for though it be
supposed, that none ought to embrace or continue in the Catholic Church by
reason of the great hazard, he says, they run of their salvation, yet if they
do embrace or continue in it, why may they not be equally saved, that is, with
equal capacity; but this assertion, however beside the Question, he makes it
his main business to prove, First,. 4. Because those who embrace or continue in
the Catholic Church are guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, either of
which are sins inconsistent with salvation. And here he must give me leave to
return upon him a more palpable contradiction, than that he supposed to have
found in the Question, viz. to assert only, that those of the Catholic
Communion run a great hazard of their salvation, and yet affirm at the same
time that they are guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, sins inconsistent
with Salvation: which reduced into plain terms, is no other but that they may
be saved, though hardly, and yet cannot be saved. But to the Argument, The
Church of Rome, by the Worship of God by Images, by the adoration of Bread in
the Eucharist, and the formal invocation of Saints, does require the giving to
the Creature the Worship due only to the Creator; Therefore it makes the
members of it guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry. The charge is great, but what
are the proofs?

Concerning the first he says,. 5. that in the Worship of God by Images, the
Worship due to God is terminated wholly on the Creature. And surely this
implies another contradiction, that it should be the Worship of God by Images,
and yet be terminated wholly on the Creature; Nevertheless he proves it thus;
The Worship which God himself denies to receive, must be terminated upon the
Creature; but God himself in the second Commandment, not only denies to receive
it, but threatens severely to punish them that give it, that is, that Worship
him by an Image. Therefore it cannot be terminated on God, but only on the
Image. To this Argument, which to be just to the Author, I confess I have not
seen any where proposed in these terms, I answer, the first Proposition is
built on a great mistake of the Nature of humane acts, which though they ought
to be governed by the Law of God, yet when they swerve from it, cease not to
tend to their own proper objects. Gods prohibition of such or such a kind of
Worship, may make it to be unlawful, but hinders not the act from tending,
whither it is intended; and consequently if it be intended or directed by the
understanding to God, though after an unlawful manner, it will not fail to be
terminated upon God: Thus when a Thief or a Murderer prays to God to give him
good success in the Theft or Murder he intends, though God denies to hear any
such Prayer, yet is the Prayer truly directed to him: and thus when the Jews
offered to God in Sacrifice the blind and the lame, though he had forbidden it,
yet was the oblation terminated on him, and therefore he reproves them for
having polluted him, Mal. 1. 8. and to convince them the more of their evil
doings: offer it now, says he, to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee,
or accept thy person? Though the Governor deny to accept what is presented to
him, yet it is truly offered to him by the presenter; and so, although God deny
to accept such or such Sacrifice, yet it is truly offered to him, though the
offering of it after a forbidden manner make it to be sin: Did not God refuse
to accept the Sacrifice of Cain, and yet the Scripture, Genesis 4. 3. says
expressly, that he brought an offering to the Lord? God had not respect to Cain
nor his offering, but this did not hinder, but that Cains offering had respect
to God, and was terminated on him. In like manner, though God deny such or such
a kind of Worship; if it be offered though unlawfully by the Creature, yet is
it terminated on him. The Proposition therefore which asserts, that the Worship
which God denies must be terminated on the Creature, I deny as absolutely
false, and so will you too, Madam, when you shall see the sense of it to be no
other, but that a wicked man cannot Pray to God, or Worship him in an unlawful
or forbidden manner, who is therefore a wicked man because he does so. What
follows from hence is, that though God should have forbidden men to Worship him
by Images, yet it does not follow but the Worship so given, would be terminated
on him. But now to speak to his second Proposition in which the main force of
this Argument consists.

We utterly deny that God in the second Commandment, forbids himself to be
Worshipped by a Crucifix, for example, or such like Sacred Image; for such only
are the subject of the present Controversy. What he forbids there, is to give
his Worship to Idols: and this is clear from the Circumstances of the Text:
First, Because this Commandment, if St. Austins Judgment be to be followed, is
but a part or Explication of the first, Thou shall have no other Gods before
me: Secondly, because the Hebrew word Pesel, in Latin Sculptile, is used in
Scripture to signify an Idol: Let them be confounded who adore Sculptilia,
that is, Idols, says the Psalmist, and so the Septuagint translate it in this
very place (...), an Idol, Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol; so that it
was an artifice of the Protestants to make their assertion seem plausible, to
translate Image instead of Idol; and not a certain kind of Image neither, but
any whatsoever. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. Now what is
all this to Catholics, who neither make to themselves, nor adore Idols, nor
yield Sovereign honor or acknowledgement of Deity to any but God? We give
indeed a veneration to Images, but the Image of God is not another God besides
him, nor is the Worship of it the Worship of another God, but of him who is
represented by it: for St. Basil says, The Worship of an Image stays not
there, but is referred or carried to the prototype, or thing represented.

We give therefore an inferior, or relative honor only to the Sacred Images of
Christ, and his blessed Mother, and Saints, not latriam, the Worship due to
God, but Honorariam adorationem, a certain honorary Worship, expressed by
kissing them, or putting off our Hats, or kneeling before them, much like the
Worship given to the Chair of State, or the Kings Picture, or his Garment by
the like actions; or to come nearer to the subject, such as was commanded to be
given by Moses and Joshua to the ground whereon they stood, by putting off
their Shoos, because it was holy; and by the Jews, in adoring the footstool of
God, Ep. 17. ad Marcellam.
or falling down before it, Psalm. 98. 5. and in Worshipping (as St. Jerome
testifies they did) that part of the Temple called the Holy of Holies, because
there were the Cherubims (sacred Images ordered by God himself to be placed
there) the propitiatory (representing Gods Throne) and the Ark, (his footstool)
In a word, such as the Protestants themselves give to the Name of Jesus when
they hear it spoken, by putting off their Hats, and bowing at it, or to the
Elements of Bread and Wine in the Supper, by kneeling before them, as figures
representing the death of Christ. If condescendence to the conscience of weaker
Brethren, will permit to own they have any honor or veneration for them, or
for the Altar before which they how. To conclude this point, the Objector
brings a Text, which forbids us to give the Sovereign honor due to God, to an
Idol: but let us hear out of Scripture an express Text that it is not lawful to
give to holy Images, and other things relating to God, an inferior or relative
Worship, such as we have declared, and that will be to the purpose.

. He aims to conclude the Catholic Church guilty of Idolatry, from the
adoration of the bread (as he believes it) in the Eucharist. Now to do this, he
ought to prove, that what we adore in the Eucharist, is bread indeed. But
instead of that, he brings a comparison between our adoration of Christ in the
Eucharist, and the Heathens adoration of the Sun: viz. That the Papists by the
same Argument, make the Worship of the bread in the Eucharist not to be
Idolatry, which would excuse the Heathens Worship of the Sun and of their
Statues from Idolatry; For if it be not therefore Idolatry, says he, because
they suppose the bread to be God, then the Worship of the Sun was not Idolatry
in them, who supposed the Sun to be God. I shall not complain here of the
unhandsomness of the expression, that Catholics suppose the bread to be God,
just as the Heathens supposed the Sun to be God: whereas he knows, that
Catholics believe, that the substance of the bread is changed into Christ's
body; but shall answer to the Argument, That the Worship of Christ in the
Eucharist, is not Idolatry, because we only suppose him to be really present
under the form of bread, but because we know and believe this upon the same
grounds and Motives upon which we believe (and those Motives stronger than any
Protestant has (if he have no other than the Catholic to believe) that Christ
is God, and consequently to be adored. And therefore that you may the better
see the inefficaciousness of the Argument, suppose it dropped from the Pen of an
Arrian against the adoration of Christ as God, and it will be of as much force
to evince that to be Idolatry, as it is from the Objection to prove the
adoration of him in the Eucharist to be so, see there how an Arrian might argue
in the same form. The same Argument which would make the grossest Heathen
Idolatry lawful, cannot excuse any act from Idolatry: but the same Argument,
whereby the Protestants make the Worship of Christ (a pure man, says the
Arrian) not to be Idolatry: would make the grossest Heathen Idolatry not to be
so: For if it be not therefore Idolatry, because they suppose Christ to be God,
then the Worship of the Sun was not Idolatry, by them who supposed the Sun to
be God, etc. Now the same answer which solves the Arrians argument against the
adoration of Christ as God, serves no less to solve the Objectors Argument
against the adoration of him in the Eucharist, since we have a like Divine
Revelation for his real presence under the Sacramental Signs, as we have for
his being true God and Man.

But what if Catholics should be mistaken in their belief? would it then
follow, that they were Idolaters? Dr. Tailor an Eminent and leading man amongst
the Protestants, denies the consequence. His words are these, in the Liberty of
Prophesying, Sect. 20. Numb. 26. Idolatry, says he, is a forsaking the true
God, and giving Divine Worship to a creature, or to an Idol, that is, to an
Imaginary God, who has no foundation in Essence or Existence: And this is that
kind of superstition, which by Divines is called the superstition of an undue
object: Now it is evident, that the object of their (that is, the Catholics)
adoration (that which is represented to them in their minds, their thoughts and
purposes, and by which God principally, if not solely, takes estimate of humane
actions) in the blessed Sacrament, is the only true and eternal God,
hypostatically joined with his holy humanity, which humanity they believe
actually present under the Veil of the Sacramental Signs; and if they thought
him not present, they are so far from worshipping the bread in this case, that
themselves profess it Idolatry to do so; which is a demonstration (mark that)
that their soul has nothing in it, that is Idolatrical. If their confidence
and fanciful opinion (so he terms the faith of Catholics) has engaged them
upon so great a mistake (as without doubt, he says it has) yet the will has
nothing in it, but what is a great enemy to Idolatry. Et nihil ardet in inferno
nisi propria voluntas; that is, Nothing burns in Hell, but proper Will. Thus
Dr. Tailor; and I think it will be a task worthy the Objectors pains, to solve
his Argument, if he will not absolve us from being Idolaters.

. 7. He proceeds to prove, that Catholics are guilty of Idolatry, by their
Invocation of Saints.: And his Argument is this; If the supposition of a middle
excellency between God and us, be a sufficient ground for formal Invocation,
then the Heathens Worship of their inferior Deities, could be no Idolatry, for
the Heathens still pretended, that they did not give to them the Worship proper
to the Supreme God, which is as much as is pretended by the devoutest Papists
in justification of the Invocation of Saints. To answer this Argument, I shall
need little more than to explicate the hard words in it; which thus I do. By
persons of a middle excellency, we understand persons endowed with supernatural
gifts of Grace in this life, and Glory in Heaven, whose prayers by consequence
are acceptable and available with God, what he means by formal Invocation, I
understand not well: but what we understand by it, is desiring or praying those
just persons to pray for us. The Supreme Deity of the Heathens is known to be
Jupiter, and their inferior Deities, venus, Mars, Bacchus, Vulcan, and the
like rabble of Devils, as the Scripture calls them, The gods of the Heathens
are Devils. The terms thus explicated, it is easy to see the inconsequence of
the Argument, that because the Heathens were Idolaters in worshipping Mars and
Venus their inferior Deities, or rather Devils, though they pretended not to
give them the Worship proper to Jupiter their Supreme God: Therefore the
Catholics, must be guilty of Idolatry, in desiring the servants of the true
God, to pray for them to him; upon this account we must not desire the prayer
of a just man, even in this life, because this formal Invocation will be to
make him an inferior Deity.

But if some Sect of Heathens, as the Platonists, did attain to the knowledge
of the true God, yet St. Paul says, they did not glorify him as God; but
changed his glory into an Image made like to corruptible man, adoring and
offering Sacrifice due to God alone, to the Statues themselves, or the
inferior Deities they supposed to dwell or assist in them. Which inferior
Deities St. Austin upon the ninety sixth Psalm, proves to be Devils or evil
Angels, because they required Sacrifice to be offered to them, and would be
worshipped as Gods. Now what comparison there is between this worship of the
Heathens inferior Deities, and Christians worship of Saints and Angels, let
the same St. Austin declare in his twentieth Book against Faustus the
Manichaean, chap. 21. Faustus there calumniates the Catholics (the word is St.
Austins) because they honored the Memories or Shrines of Martyrs, charging
them to have turned the Idols into Martyrs, whom they worship (said he) with
like Vows. The Objection you see is not new, that Catholics make inferior
Deities of their Saints. Faustus long ago made it, and St. Austins answer will
serve as well now as then. Christian people, says he, do with religious
solemnity celebrate the memory of Martyrs, both to excite to the imitation of
them, and to become partakers of their Merits, and be helped by their prayers,
but to that we erect Altars, not to any of the Martyrs, but to the God of
Martyrs, although in memory of the said Martyrs; For what Bishop officiating at
the Altar, in the places where their holy bodies are deposited; does say at any
time we offer to thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian? but what is offered to God,
who crowned the Martyrs, at the memories or Shrines of those whom he crowned,
that being put in mind by the very places, a greater affection may be raised in
us to quicken our love, both to those whom we may imitate, and toward him by
whose assistance we can do it. We worship therefore the Martyrs with that
Worship of love and society, with which even in this life also holy men of God
are worshipped, whose heart we judge prepared to suffer the like Martyrdom for
the truth of the Gospel. But we worship them so much the more devoutly, because
more securely, after they have overcome all the Incertainties of this world; as
also we praise them more confidently now reigning Conquerors, in a more happy
life, than whilst they were sighting in this; but with that Worship, which in
Greek is called Latria, (and cannot be expressed by one word in Latin) for as
much as it is a certain service properly due to the Divinity, we neither
worship them, nor teach them to be worshipped, but God alone. Now whereas the
offering of Sacrifice belongs to this Worship (of Latria) from whence they are
called Idolaters, who gave it also to Idols, by no means do we suffer any such
thing, or command it to be offered, to any Martyr, or any holy soul, or any
Angel: And whosoever declines into this Error, we reprove him by sound
Doctrine, either that he may be corrected, or avoided. -- And a little after.
It is a much less sin, for a man to be derided by the Martyrs for drunkenness,
then ever fasting to offer Sacrifice to them. I say to sacrifice to Martyrs, I
say not to sacrifice to God in the memories (or Churches) of the Martyrs, which
we do most frequently, by that rite alone, by which in the manifestation of the
New Testament he has commanded Sacrifice to be offered to him, which belongs
to that Worship, which is called Latria, and is due only to God. This was the
Doctrine and practice of Christian people in St. Augustines time, and that he
himself held formal Invocations a part of the Worship due to Saints, is evident
from the prayer he made to St. Cyprian after his Martyrdom. Li. de Bapt. cont.
Donat. c. 1.
Adjuveritque nos Beatus Cyprianus orationibus suis, etc. Let Blessed Cyprian
therefore help us (who are still encompassed with this mortal flesh, and
labor* as in a dark cloud) with his prayer, that by Gods grace we may, as far
as we are able, imitate his good works. Thus St. Austin, where you see he
directs his prayer to St. Cyprian, which I take to be formal invocation; and
for a further confirmation of it, we have the ingenuous Confession of Calvin
himself, Instit. li. 3. chapter 20. n. 22. where speaking of the third Council of
Carthage, in which St. Austin was present, he acknowledged it was the custom at
that time to say, Sancta Maria, aut Sancte Petre Ora pro nobis; Holy Mary, or
Holy Peter pray for us.

But now Madam, what if after all this, he himself shall deny, that any of the
opposite Tenets are Articles of his faith, viz. That honor is not to be given
to the Images of Christ and his Saints, that what appears to be bread in the
Eucharist, is not the body of Christ: That it is not lawful to invocate the
Saints to pray for us. Press him close, and I believe you shall find him deny,
that he believes any one of these Negative points to be Divine truths; and if
so, you will easily see his charge of Idolatry against us, to be vain and
groundless.

Having thus given a direct and punctual answer to his argument, I must now
expect as much charity from him, as is consistent with Scripture and Reason.
How much that is, you will see in his third Answer to the first Question. But
to proceed.

. 8. He brings a Miscellany of such opinions and practices (as he calls them)
which are very apt to hinder a good life, and therefore none who have a care of
their salvation, can venture their souls in the communion of such a Church,
which either enjoins, or publicly allows them. He reckons up no less than ten.
1. That we destroy the necessity of good life, by making the Sacrament of
Penance (that is, confession and absolution) joined with contrition, sufficient
for salvation. And do not Protestants make contrition alone, which is less,
sufficient for salvation? But perhaps the joining of confession and absolution
with contrition, makes it of a malignant nature: If so, certainly when the Book
of Common Prayer in the visitation of the sick, enjoins the sick man, if he
find his conscience troubled with any weighty matter, to make a special
confession, and receive absolution from the Priest in the same words the
Catholic Church uses, it prescribes him, that as a means to prepare himself
for a holy death, which in the judgment of the Objector, destroys the
necessity of good life.

2. Catholics, he says, take off the care of good life, by supposing an
expiation of sin (by the prayer of the living) after death: But certainly the
belief of temporal pains to be sustained after death, if there be not a perfect
expiation of sin in this life, by works of penance, is rather apt to make a man
careful not to commit the least sin, than to take off the care of a good life.
And though he be ascertained by faith, that he may be helped by the charitable
suffrages of the faithful living, yet this is no more encouragement to him to
sin, than it would be to a Spendthrift to run into debt, and be cast into
Prison, because he knows he may be relieved by the charity of his Friends. If
he were sure there were no Prison for him, that would be an encouragement
indeed to play the Spendthrift. And this is the case of the Protestants in
their denial of Purgatory.

3. The sincerity of Devotion, he says, is much obstructed by prayers in a
language which many understand not. If he speak of private prayers, all
Catholics are taught to say them in their Mother Tongue: If of the public
prayers of the Church, I understand not why it may not be done with as much
sincerity of devotion, the people joining their intention and particular
prayers with the Priest, as their Ambassador to God, as if they understood him:
I am sure the effects of a sincere devotion, for nine hundred years together
which this manner of Worship produced in this Nation, were much different from
those we have seen since the readucing of the public Lyturgie into English, as
is manifest from those Monuments, which yet remain of Churches, Colleges,
Religious Houses, etc. with their endowments, and in the conversion of many
Nations from Heathenism to Christianity, effected by the labors and zeal of
English Missionaries in those times, etc. But this is a matter of Discipline,
and so not to be regulated by the fancies of private men, but the judgment of
the Church; and so universal has this practice been both in the Primitive
Greek and Latin Churches, and is still (by the confession of the (Protestant)
Authors themselves of the Bible of many Languages, Printed at London, Anno
1655.) in most of the Sects of Christians, to have not only the Scriptures, but
also the Liturgies and Rituals in a Tongue unknown, but to the Learned among
them: that who will dispute against it, must prepare himself to hear the
censure of St. Austin, Ep. 118. where he says, That it is a point of most
insolent madness, to dispute whether that be to be observed, which is
frequented by the whole Church through the world.

4. He says, The sincerity of Devotion is much obstructed, by making the
efficacy of Sacraments depend upon the bare administration, whether our minds
be prepared for them or not. In what Council this Doctrine was defined, I never
read; but as for the Sacrament of Penance, which I suppose he chiefly aims at,
I read in the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. Falso quidam calumniantur, That some
do falsely calumniate Catholic Writers, as if they taught the Sacrament of
Penance did confer Grace without the good motion of the receiver, which the
Church of God never taught nor thought. But I am rather inclined to look upon
this as a mistake, than a calumny in the Objector.

5. He says, The sincerity of devotion is much obstructed by discouraging the
reading of Scriptures, which is our most certain Rule of Faith and Life. Here
he calls the Churches prudential dispensing the reading of Scripture to
persons, whom she judges fit and disposed for it, and not to such whom she
judges in a condition to receive, or do harm by it, a discouraging the reading
of Scriptures; which is no other than whereas St. Paul, Coloss. 3. 21. enjoins
Fathers not to provoke their children, lest they be discouraged; one should
reprove a Father for discouraging his child, because he will not put a Knife or
Sword into his hands, when he foresees he will do mischief with it to himself
or others; the Scriptures in the hands of a meek and humble soul, who submits
its judgment in the interpretation of it to that of the Church, is a Sword to
defend it: but in the hands of an arrogant and presumptuous Spirit, that has
no Guide to interpret it, but its own fancy or passion, it is a dangerous
Weapon, with which he will wound both himself and others. The first that
permitted promiscuous reading of Scripture in our Nation, was King Henry the
eighth; and many years were not passed, but he found the ill consequences of
it; for in a Book set forth by him in the year 1542. he complains in the
Preface, That he found entered into some of his peoples hearts an inclination to
sinister understanding of it, presumption, arrogance, carnal liberty, and
contention: which he compares to the seven worse Spirits in the Gospel, with
which the Devil entered into the house that was purged and cleansed. Whereupon
he declares that for that part of the Church ordained to be taught, (that is,
the Lay people) it ought not to be denied certainly, that the reading of the
Old and New Testament is not so necessary for all those folks, that of duty
they ought and be bound to read it; but as the Prince and Policy of the Realm
shall think convenient, so to be tolerated or taken from it. Consonant
whereunto, says he, the Politic Law of our Realm, has now restrained it from
a great many. This was the judgment of him, who first took upon him the Title
of Head of the Church of England; and if that ought not to have been followed
in after times, let the dire effects of so many new Sects and Fanaticisms, as
have risen in England from the reading of it, bear witness. For as St. Austin
says, Tract. 18. in To.
Neque enim natae sunt Haereses; Heresies have no other Origin but hence, that
the Scriptures which in themselves are good, are not well understood, and what
is understood amiss in them, is rashly and boldly asserted, viz. to be the
sense of them. And now whether the Scriptures left to the private
interpretation of every fanciful spirit, as it is among Protestants, be a most
certain Rule of Faith and Life, I leave to your self to judge.

6. He says, The sincerity of devotion is much obstructed by the multitude of
superstitious observations never used in the Primitive Church, as he is ready
to defend, he should have said to prove; for we deny any such to be used in the
Church.

7. By the gross abuse of people in Pardons and Indulgences. Against this, I
can assert as an eyewitness, the great devotion caused by the wholesome use of
Indulgences in Catholic Countries: there being no Indulgence ordinarily
granted, but enjoins him that will avail himself of it, to confess his sins, to
receive the Sacraments, to pray, fast, and give alms, all which duties are with
great devotion performed by Catholic people, which without the incitement of
an Indulgence, had possibly been left undone.

8. He says, The sincerity of devotion is much obstructed, by denying the Cup
to the Laity, contrary to the practice of the Church in the solemn celebration
of the Eucharist for a thousand years after Christ. This thousand years after
Christ makes a great noise, as if it were not as much in the power of the
Church a thousand years after Christ, as well as in the first or second Century
to alter and change things of their own nature indifferent, such as the
communicating under one or both kinds, was ever held to be by Catholics. But
although the Cup were not then denied to the Laity, yet that the custom of
receiving but under one kind was permitted, even in the primitive Church, in
private communions, the objector seems to grant, becasue he speaks only of the
Administration of it in the solemn Celebration, and that it was also in use in
public Communions, is evident from Examples of that time, both in the Greek
Church in the time of St. Chrysostom; Sozomen. li. and Hist. c. 5. and Niceph.
li. 13. c. 11. S. Leo Ser. 4. de Quad.
and of the Latin in the time of St. Leo the great. As for the pretended
obstruction of Devotion, you must know Catholics believe that under either
species or kind, whole Christ true God and man is contained and received; and
if it be accounted an hindrance to devotion to receive the total refection of
our soul, though but under one kind, what must it be to believe that I receive
him under neither, but instead of him have Elements of Bread and Wine? Surely
nothing can be more efficacious to stir up Reverence and Devotion in us, than
to believe, that God himself will personally enter under our Roof.

The ninth Hinderance of the sincerity of devotion is, that we make it in the
power of a person to dispense in Oaths and Marriages contrary to the Law of
God. To this I answer, That some kind of Oaths, the condition of the person and
other Circumstances considered, may be Judged to be hurtful, and not fit to be
kept, and the dispensation in them is, no more than to Judge or determine them
to be so: and consequently to do this cannot be a hinderance but a furtherance
to devotion, nor is it contrary to the Law of God which commands nothing that's
hurtful to be done. As for Marriages we acknowledge the Church may dispense in
some degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, but in nothing contrary to the Law
of God.

His tenth pretended Obstruction of Devotion is, that we make disobedience to
the Church in Disputable matters, more heinous than disobedience to Christ in
unquestionable things, as Marriage, he says, in a Priest to be a greater crime
than Fornication. I Answer, That whether a Priest may Marry or no (supposing
the Law of the Church forbidding it) is not a disputable matter; but it is out
of Question, even by the Law of God that Obedience is to be given to the
Commands or Prohibitions of the Church: The Antithesis therefore between
disobedience to the Church, in disputable matters, and disobedience to the Laws
of Christ in unquestionable things, is not only impertinent to the Marriage of
Priests which is unquestionably forbidden; but supposing the matter to remain
disputable after the Churches Prohibition, destroys all obedience to the
Church. But if it suppose them only disputable before, then why may not the
Church interpose her Judgment, and put them out of dispute?

But still it seems strange to them, who either cannot or will not take the
Word of Christ, that is, his Counsel of Chastity, that Marriage in a Priest
should be a greater sin than Fornication. But he considers not, that though
Marriage in it self be honorable, yet, if it be prohibited to a certain order
of persons, by the Church to whom Christ himself commands us to give obedience,
and they oblige themselves by a voluntary vow to live in perpetual Chastity,
the Law of God commanding us to pay our Vows, it loses its honor in such
persons, and if contracted after such vow made, is in the language of the
Fathers no better than Adultery. In the primitive Church it was the custom of
some Younger Widows to Dedicate themselves to the Service of the Church, and
in order thereunto to take upon them a peculiar habit, and make a vow of
continency for the future. Now in case they Married after this, St. Paul
himself, 1 Timothy 1. 12. says, That they incurred Damnation, because by so
doing, they made void their first faith, that is, as the Fathers Expound it,
the vow they had made. And the fourth Council of Carthage, in which were 214
Bishops, and among them St. Austin gives the Reason in these words; If Wives
who commit Adultery are guilty to their Husbands, how much more shall such
Widows as change their Religious State, be noted with the crime of Adultery?
And if this were so in Widows, much more in Priests, if by Marrying they shall
make void their first Faith given to God, when they were consecrated in a more
peculiar manner to his Service.

Thus much may suffice for Answer to the Argument, which with its intricate
terms may seem to puzzle an unlearned Reader, let us now speak a word to the
true state of the Controversy, which is, whether Marriage or single life in a
Priest be more apt to obstruct or further devotion. And St. Paul himself has
determined the Question, 1 Cor. 7. 32. where he says, He that is unmarried
cares for the things that belong to our Lord, how he may please our Lord; But
he that is Married cares for the things that are of the World, how be may
please his Wife. This is the difference he puts between the Married and
Single life, that this is apt to make us care for the things which belong to
God; and that to divert our thoughts from him to the things of the World. Judge
therefore which of these states is most convenient for Priests, whose proper
office it is to attend wholly to the things of God?

Having thus cleared Catholic Doctrines from being any ways obstructive to
good life or devotion, I shall proceed to his third Argument, by which he will
still prove that Catholics run a great hazard of their souls, in adhering to
the Communion of the Church of Rome, Because it exposes the Faith of
Christians to so great uncertainty. This is a strange charge from the pen of a
Protestant, who has no other certainty for his faith but every man's
interpretation of the Letter of the Scriptures. But, First he says it does
this, By making the Authority of the Scriptures to depend upon the
infallibility of the Church, when the Churches infallibility must be proved by
the Scriptures.

To this I Answer that the Authority of the Scripture, not in it self, for so
it has its Authority from God; but in order to us and our belief of it,
depends upon the infallibility of the Church. Li. contr. Epist. fund.
And therefore St. Austin says of himself, That he would not believe the
Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church did move him. And if you
ask him what moved him to submit to that Authority; he tells you, That besides
the Wisdom he found in the Tenets of the Church, there were many other things
which most justly held him in it: as the consent of people and Nations, an
Authority begun by Miracles, nourished by hope, increased by Charity, and
established by Antiquity, the succession of Priests, from the very seat of St.
Peter, to whom our Lord commended the feeding of his Sheep, unto the present
Bishopric. Lastly, The very name of Catholic which this Church alone among so
many Heresies has not without cause obtained so particularly to her self; that
whereas all Heretics would be called Catholics, yet if a stranger demand
where the Catholics go to Church, none of these Heretics dares to show either
his own house or Church. These (says St. Austin,) so many and great, most dear
bonds of the name of Christian, do justly hold a believing man in the Catholic
Church. These were the grounds which moved that great man to submit to her
Authority: And when Catholic Authors prove the infallibility of the Church
from Scriptures, it is an Argument ad hominem to convince Protestants who will
admit nothing but Scripture, and yet when they are convinced, quarrel at them
as illogical disputants, because they prove it from Scripture.

Next he says we overthrow all foundation of Faith, because We will not
believe our senses in the plainest objects of them. But what if God have
interposed his Authority, as he has done in the case of the Eucharist, where
he tells us, that it is his Body, must we believe our senses rather than God?
or must we not believe them in other things, because in the particular case of
the Eucharist we must believe God, rather than our senses? Both these
consequences you see are absurd: Now for the case it self, in which he
instances, Dr. Tailor above cited confesses, that they (viz. Catholics) have a
divine Revelation (viz. Christ's word, This is my Body) whose Litteral and
Grammatical sense, if that sense were intended, would warrant them to do
violence to all the Sciences, in the Circle; but, I add, it would be no
precedent to them not to believe their senses in other the plainest objects of
them, as in the matter of Tradition, or Christ's body after the Resurrection.

3. He says that We expose faith to great uncertainty, by denying to men the
use of their Judgment and Reason as to matters of faith proposed by a Church,
that is, we deny particular men's Judgment, as to matters of faith, to be as
good if not better than the Churches, and to infer from hen^e, that we make
Faith uncertain, is just as if on the contrary one should say, that Protestants
make faith certain by exposing matter of faith determined by the Church, to be
discussed and reversed by the Judgment and reason (or rather fancy) of every
private man. We have good store of this kind of certainty in England. But as
for the use of our Judgment and Reason, as to the matters themselves proposed
by the Church, it is the daily business of Divines and Preachers, not only to
show them not to be repugnant to any natural truth, but also to illustrate them
with Arguments drawn from reason. But the use, he would have of reason, is I
suppose, to believe nothing, but what his reason can comprehend, and this is
not only irrational in its self, but contrary to the Doctrine of St. Paul,
where he commands us to captivate our understandings to the Obedience of Faith.

4. He adds, We expose faith to uncertainty by making the Church power extend
to making new Articles of Faith. And this if it were true, were something
indeed to his purpose. But the Church never yet owned any such power, in her
General Councils, but only to manifest and establish the Doctrine received from
her Forefathers; as is to be seen in the prooems of all the Sessions of the
Council of Trent, where the Fathers before they declare what is to be believed,
ever premise that what they declare, is the same they have received by
Tradition from the Apostles. And because it may happen that some particular
Doctrine was not so plainly delivered to each part of the Church, as it
happened in St. Cyprians case, concerning the non-rebaptization of Heretics,
we acknowledge it is in her power, to make that necessary to be believed which
was not so before, not by inventing new Articles, but by declaring more
explicitly the Truths contained in Scripture and Tradition.

Lastly he says, We expose Faith to great uncertainty, because the Church
pretending to infallibility, does not determine Controversies on foot among our
selves. As if faith could not be certain, unless all Controversies among
particular men be determined, what then becomes of the certainty of Protestants
faith, who could yet never find out a sufficient means to determine any one
Controversy among them? for if that means be plain Scripture, what one Judges
plain, another Judges not so, and they acknowledge no Judge between them to
decide the Controversy. As for the Catholic Church if any Controversies arise
concerning the Doctrine delivered (as in St. Cyprians case) she determines the
Controversy by declaring what is of Faith. And for other Controversies which
belong not to faith, she permits, as St. Paul says, every one to abound in his
own sense. And thus much in Answer to his third Argument, by which, and what
has been said to his former Objections, it appears that he has not at all
proved what he asserted in his second Answer to the first Question, viz. That
all those who are in the Communion of the Church of Rome do run so great a
hazard of their Salvation, that none who have a care of their souls ought to
embrace or continue in it. But he has a third Answer for us, in case the
former fail; and it is,

. 10. That a Protestant leaving the Communion of the Protestant Church does
incurr a greater guilt, than one who was bred up in the Church of Rome, and
continues therein by invincible ignorance. This is the directest answer he
gives to the Question, and what it imports is this, That invincible Ignorance
(and he does not know what allowance God will make for that neither) is the
only Anchor which a Catholic has to save himself by. If by discoursing with
Protestants, and reading their Books, he be not sufficiently convinced, whereas
he ought in the supposition of the Answerer, to be so, that the Letter of the
Scripture as interpretable by every private man's reason is a most certain Rule
of Faith and Life; but is still overruled by his own Motives, (the same which
held St. Austin in the bosom of the Catholic Church) he is guilty of wilful
Ignorance and consequently a lost man; there is no hope of Salvation for him.
Much less for a Protestant who shall embrace the Catholic Communion, because
he is supposed (doubtless from the same Rule) to have sufficient conviction of
the Errors of the Roman Church, or is guilty of wilful Ignorance, If he have it
not, which is a damnable sin, and unrepented of destroys salvation. So that
now the upshot of the Answer to the Question, Whether a Protestant embracing
Catholic Religion upon the same motives, which one bred and well grounded in
it, has to remain in it, may be equally saved with him, comes to this, that
they shall both be damned, though unequally, because the converted Catholic
more deeply, than he that was bred so. And now who can but lament the sad
condition of that great Doctor and Father of the Church, and hitherto reputed
St. Austin, who rejecting the Manichees pretended rule of Scripture, upon the
aforesaid grounds, left their Communion to embrace the Communion of the Church
of Rome? And what is become now of their distinction of points fundamental from
not fundamental, which heretofore they thought sufficient to secure both
Catholics and Protestants Salvation, and to charge us with unconscionable
uncharitableness in not allowing them to be sharers with us. The absurdness of
these consequences may serve for a sufficient conviction of the nullity of his
third and last answer to the first Question.

As for what he says to the second, I agree so far with him, that every
Christian is bound to choose the Communion of the purest Church, but which that
Church is, must be seen by the grounds it brings to prove the Doctrines it
teaches, to have been delivered by Christ and his Apostles. That Church is to
be judged purest which has the best grounds: and consequently it is of
necessity to Salvation to embrace the communion of it.

What then you are bound to do in reason and conscience is, to see which
Religion of the two, has the strongest Motives for it, and to embrace that as
you will answer the contrary to God and your own soul. To help you to do this,
and that the Answerer may have the less exception against them, I will give you
a Catalogue of Catholic Motives (though not all neither) in the words of the
forecited Dr. Tailor, advertising only for brevity sake, I leave out some
mentioned by him, and that in these I set down, you also give allowance for
some expressions of his, with which he has misrepresented them: Thus then he,
Liberty of Proph. Sect. 20. Speaking of Catholics, The beauty and Splendor of
their Church, their pompous (he should have said) solemn Service; the
stateliness and solemnity of the Hierarchy, their name of Catholic, which they
suppose (he should have said, their very Adversaries give them) as their own
due, and to concern no other Sect of Christians; the Antiquity of many of their
Doctrines, (he should have said all) the continual succession of their Bishops,
their immediate derivation from the Apostles; their Title to succeed St. Peter,
the flattering (he should have said due) expression of Minor Bishops (he means,
acknowledging the Pope head of the Church) which by being old records, have
obtained credibility; the multitude and variety of People which are of their
persuasion; apparent consent with Antiquity in many Ceremonials, which other
Churches have rejected; and a pretended and sometimes (he should have said
always) apparent consent with some elder Ages in matters Doctrinal; The great
consent of one part with another in that which most of them affirm to be de
fide (of Faith) The great differences which are commenced among their
Adversaries, abusing the liberty of Prophesying into a very great
licentiousness; Their happiness of being Instruments in converting diverse (he
should rather have said of all) Nations. The piety and austerity of their
Religious Orders of Men and Women; The single life of their Priests and
Bishops, the severity of their Fasts, and their exterior observances, the
great reputation of their first Bishops for faith and sanctity; the known
holiness of some of those persons, whose institutes the Religious persons
pretend to imitate; the oblique Arts and indirect proceedings of some of those
who departed from them, and amongst many other things the names of Heretic and
Schismatic which they with infinite pertinacity (he should have said, upon the
same grounds the Fathers did) fasten upon all that disagree from them. These
things, says he, and diverse others may very easily persuade persons of much
reason, and more piety to retain that which they know to have been the Religion
of their Forefathers, which had actually possession and seizure of men's
understandings, before the opposite professions (to wit of Protestant,
Presbyterian, Anabaptist, etc.) had a name.

Thus Dr. Tailor, an eminent and leading man amongst the Protestants; and if he
confess that these Motives were sufficient for a Catholic to retain his
Religion, they must be of like force to persuade a dis-interessed Protestant to
embrace it, unless the Protestants can produce Motives for their Religion of
greater, or at least equal force, with these, which so great a man among them
confesses, that Catholics have for theirs. Here therefore you must call upon
the Author of the Paper you sent me to produce a Catalogue of grounds, or at
least some one ground for the Protestant Religion of greater or equal force
with all these: And as Dr. Tailor says, diverse others which he omitted, viz.
The Scripture interpreted by the consent of Fathers, the determination of
General Councils, the known Maxim of Catholics, that nothing is to be
believed of Faith, but what was received from their Forefathers as handed down
from the Apostles. The testimony of the present Church, of no less Authority
now, than in St. Austins time, both for the Letter and the sense of the
Scripture, etc. Do this, and the Controversy will quickly be at an end.
Particular disputes are endless, and above the understanding of such, as are
not learned; but in grounds and principles, it is not so hard for Reason and
common sense to Judge. That you may the better do it in your case, I shall
desire you to take these two Cautions along with you:

First, That the Subject of the present Controversy, are not those Articles in
which the Protestants agree with us, and for which they may pretend to produce
the same Motives, we do: But in those in which they dissent from us such as are
no Transubstantiation, no Purgatory, no honor due to Images, no Invocation to
Saints, and the like, in which the very Essence of Protestant, as distinct from
Catholic consists. What Motives they can or will produce for these. I do not
foresee: The pretense of Scriptures being sufficiently plain has no place
here, because then the foresaid Negatives would be necessary to be believed as
divine Truths. And for their own Reason and Learning, it will be found too
light when put into the scale against that of the Catholic Church for so many
Ages.

The second Caution is, That you be careful to distinguish between Protestants
producing grounds for their own Religion, and finding fault with ours. An
Atheist can cavil and find fault with the grounds which learned men bring to
prove a Deity, such as are the Order of this visible World, the general consent
of Nations, etc. In this an Atheist thinks he does somewhat. But can he produce
as good or better grounds for his own opinion? No, you see then it is one thing
to produce grounds for what we hold, and another to find fault with those which
are produced by the contrary part. The latter has made Controversy so long,
and the former will make it as short; let the Answerer therefore instead of
finding fault with our Motives produce his own for the Articles in
Controversy, and I am confident you will quickly discern which carry the most
weight, and consequently which are to be preferred.

A Defense of the foregoing Answer to the Questions.
CHAP. I. Of the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, in the Worship of
Images.
The introduction, concerning the occasion of the debate. The Church of Rome
makes its members guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry: First, Of the Worship of
God by Images: Some propositions for clearing the notion of Divine Worship. It
is in Gods power to determine the way of his Worship, which being determined,
Gods Law, and not our intention, is to be the rule of Worship. The main
question is, Whether God has forbidden the worshipping of himself by an Image,
under the notion of Idolatry? Of the meaning of the second Commandment, from
the terms therein used, the large sense and importance of them, which cannot be
understood only of Heathen Idols. Of the reason of that Law, from Gods infinite
and invisible nature: How far that has been acknowledged by Heathens? The Law
against Image Worship no ceremonial Law respecting merely the Jews; the reason
against it made more clear by the Gospel: The wiser Heathen did not worship
their Images as Gods, yet their worship condemned as Idolatry. The Christian
Church believed the reason of this Law to be immutable; Of the Doctrine of the
second Council of Nice; the opposition to it in Greece, Germany, France and
England. Of the Scripture Instances of Idolatry contrary to the second
Commandment, in the Golden Calf, and the Calves of Dan and Bethel. Of the
distinctions used to excuse image worship from being Idolatry: The vanity and
folly of them. The instances supposed to be parallel answered.

Madam,
. 1. THat increase of Controversies in my answer, The Introduction.
which the Proposer of the Questions, calls a superfoetation, was but the
natural issue of his own Questions. To which, I could not give a just answer,
without mentioning the hazards a person runs of his salvation in the communion
of the Roman Church: and if he thinks these too many (as in truth they are) he
ought to condemn that Church for it, which has been the cause of them. And, I
know no other end I had herein, but to let you see, there can be no reason to
forsake the communion of our Church, wherein the way of salvation is the same,
with that of the Apostolical and Primitive Church, for another, which has
degenerated so much from it; as I hope will appear in the following Discourse.

To wave therefore any farther debate, concerning the terms or sense of the
Questions: As to the occasion of them, I could not but suppose it to relate to
your own condition, and I dare appeal to himself, Whether the Question of the
possibility of the salvation of a Protestant turned to the Church of Rome were
moved for any other end, than thereby the easier to draw persons of our Church
into their communion; which being so common, and yet so weak an Artifice, I had
reason to premise an answer to that purpose: and I do still affirm, that such a
possibility being granted, it is no sufficient Motive to any one to leave the
communion of one Church for another. And whether this be to his Question or no,
I am sure it is very much to the purpose, for which this Controversy was first
started. I beseech you therefore Madam, do not so much disparage your own
Judgment, and the Church you have been bred up in, to forsake it, till some
better reason be offered, than the Proposer pretends that his Questions imply:
Which, if not for your own sake, yet for mine I desire you to insist upon, that
I may know one reason at least from them, (which I cannot yet procure, although
I have often requested it) why the believing all the ancient Creeds and leading
a good life, may not be sufficient to salvation, unless one be of the communion
of the Church of Rome? But lest I should be thought to digress, I return to his
Papers, and am willing to pass over his unhandsome reflection on our Church as
in a sinking condition, which God has hitherto preserved, and I hope will do,
to the confusion of its enemies: But why he should call my comparison a
supposition, and his own a truth, before he proved their Church to be the
Catholic Church, I am yet to seek. And so I come to the main business.

. 2. My second answer was, That all those who are in the communion of the
Church of Rome, do run so great a hazard of their salvation, that none who have
a care of their souls, ought to embrace it, or continue in it. which I am
amazed he should say, was not pertinent to the Question, if the Question were
propounded for any ones satisfaction, that doubted which Churches communion it
were best to embrace? This I proved,

1. Because They must by the terms of that communion, Of the Idolatry of the
Roman Church.
be guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry; either of which, are sins
inconsistent with salvation. Here he charges me with a contradiction, because I
overprove what I intended; but he may easily excuse me from it, if he will
allow the possibility of salvation to any one who commits any wilful sins; for
in the case of any such sins, it is true, that they are inconsistent with
salvation, and yet he that does commit them, does but run the hazard of
salvation, because he may repent of them. But if it be a contradiction to say,
that some sins are inconsistent with salvation, yet those who commit them, may
be saved, though hardly; he must make all who commit any wilful sin to be
unavoidably damned; and then it is to no purpose, what Church we are of. The
meaning therefore was this, That Hypocrisy and Idolatry, are sins inconsistent
with a state of salvation; and there is no way to escape being damned, but by
the repentance of those who are guilty of them. (But of this more at large in
the vindication of my third Answer) and those who are in the communion of the
Church of Rome, must be guilty either of the one or the other of these, I
proved by this Argument, That Church which requires giving to the creature the
Worship due only to the Creator, makes the members of it guilty of Hypocrisy
or Idolatry; but the Church of Rome in the Worship of God by Images, the
adoration of Bread in the Eucharist, and the formal invocation of Saints, does
require giving to the creature the worship due only to the Creator, therefore
it makes the members of it guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry. Which I did prove
by parts.

1.. 3. Concerning the Worship of God by Images, Of the Worship of Images.
I proved that it could not be terminated on God, because in the second
Commandment he not only denis to receive it, but threatens to punish those who
give it. To this he answers 1. That it is a contradiction to say, that it is
the worship of God by an Image, and yet be terminated wholly on the creature.
2. That this is built, on a mistake of the nature of humane acts, which though
they ought to be governed by the Law of God, yet when they swerve from it,
cease not to tend to their own proper objects: and that Gods prohibition of
such or such a kind of Worship, may make it to be unlawful, but hinders not the
act from tending, whither it is intended; which he proves by the prayers of
Thieves and Murderers, to God for good success; the Jews offering to God in
Sacrifice the blind and the lame, which he has forbidden; Cains offering a
Sacrifice to God, which he refused to accept of; from whence he concludes, That
though God should have forbidden men to worship him by Images, yet it does not
follow, but the worship so given, would be terminated on him. 3. That the
second Commandment only forbids the worship of Idols, or the giving the
Sovereign honor due to God to an Idol; but this does not forbid the worship of
Images, because they give to them only an inferior and relative honor, and
not, that worship which is due to God. This is the substance of his answer: but
to let you see the insufficiency of it, I shall prove these two things: 1. That
where God has prohibited any particular way or means of giving worship to
himself, that worship so given, cannot be said to be terminated on him. 2. That
God in the second Commandment has expressly prohibited the giving any worship
to himself by an Image; and not barely the worship of Idols.

1. That where God has prohibited any particular way or means of giving
worship to himself, that worship so given, cannot be said to be terminated on
him: And however new this way of proposing this Argument, seems to him, I do
not question to make it good, notwithstanding his so peremptory denying it, as
absolutely false. But in order to the clearing of it, I shall lay down these
Propositions.

1. That worship is nothing else but an external signification of honor and
respect. For we do not here speak concerning the bare internal acts of the
mind; but of the way whereby the esteem we have in our minds, is expressed in
such a manner as to give honor to that which we so esteem.

2. That the signification of honor, which is due to God is not to be measured
by the intentions of men, against the declared will of God. For, it being in
his power to determine in what way he will be worshipped, we are not to
enquire, whether men do intend any act of theirs for his honor; but whether
God does allow it or no? And herein lies his great mistake in thinking, That
men's intentions are to be the rule of Divine Worship: so that what they design
for the honor of God, must needs end in it. Whereas, if God has the power of
making a rule for his own worship, he cannot be honored by men's doing any
thing against his declared Will, whatever their intention be. For, then God
might be honored by the most palpable acts of disobedience; which is a plain
contradiction; for what can be greater dishonor to God, than to break his Laws
for his Honor.

3. The Divine Law being the rule of Worship, all prohibited ways of worship
must receive that denomination which God himself gives them. As if a Prince
should declare it by his Laws, to be Treason for any man to bow down to a
Sign-Post with his head upon it, under pretense of giving the greater honor to
his Prince; I desire to know, whether a man's intentions of honoring his Prince
thereby, excuse him from Treason or no? So it is in our case, if God absolutely
prohibits the worship of himself by an Image, whatever the intention of the
person be, and calls this by the name of Idolatry, no man's directing the
intention of his mind beyond the Image, can excuse him from it. From whence, it
necessarily follows, that the worship of God by an Image, when himself has
prohibited it, and declared it Idolatry, as I shall prove he has done in the
second Commandment, cannot be terminated on God, but only on the Image; for no
man will be so absurd, as to say, that an act of Idolatry is terminated upon
God. By which we see, how far it is from the appearance of a contradiction, to
say that the worship of God by an Image being declared to be Idolatry by
himself, should be terminated wholly on the creature, (which are but other
words explaining the nature of Idolatry) and what an easy answer will take off
all his other Instances. For those do not suppose, any prohibited object or
means of worship, which is the only thing we speak of; but either praying to
the true God for bad ends, as in the case of Thieves and Murderers praying for
good success; or bringing something in Sacrifice to him which he had forbidden,
as the Jews offering the blind and the lame: or some miscarriage in the minds
of them that sacrifice or pray to him, as in Cains oblation, and wicked men's
prayers; but all these are very remote from the present debate, concerning an
object or means of worship prohibited by God himself under the notion of
Idolatry. This being cleared, I come to prove,

. 4. 2. That God in the second Commandment has expressly prohibited the giving
any worship to himself by an Image: Of the meaning of the second Commandment.
and not merely giving the worship of God to Idols, as he asserts. Our
Controversy now being about the sense of a Law, the best ways we have to find
out the meaning of it, are either, from the terms wherein it is expressed, or
from the reason annexed to it; or from the judgment of those whom we believe
best able to understand and interpret it. I shall therefore prove that to be
the meaning of this Law of God which I have set down, from every one of these
ways.

1. From the terms wherein the Law is expressed: this I the rather insist upon,
because it is the way himself has chosen: for he says, The Hebrew word Pesel,
in Latin Sculptile is used in Scripture to signify an Idol, and so the LXX.
translate it in this place by (...), and therefore says, it was an artifice of
the Protestants to translate it Image instead of Idol, and not any certain kind
of Image neither, but any whatsoever; Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, instead of, Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol. By his own
acknowledgement then, we are to judge the sense of the Law, by the importance
of the words therein used; but I shall prove, First, That supposing Pesel did
signify only an Idol, yet that were not enough. Secondly, That Pesel is very
properly rendered by the Protestants, and that it does not signify barely an
Idol.

1. Supposing that were the signification of Pesel which he contends for, that
were not enough, unless there had been no other word but that used in the Law:
but another word is added to prevent a mistake of that nature, of as large a
signification as may be to this purpose: which is, Themuna, which they render
similitude as well as we, and is never used in the whole Scripture to signify
such an Idol as he supposes this Law intends. To what purpose then are words of
the largest signification put into a Law; if the sense be limited according to
the most narrow acceptance of one word mentioned therein? For there is no kind
of Image, whether graven, or painted, whether of a real or imaginary being, but
is comprehended under the signification of the words set down in the Law: for
not only the making a similitude in general, is forbidden, but any kind of
similitude whether of things in Heaven, or Earth, or under the Earth, to bow
down to them, or worship them. I confess it cannot enter into my mind, how God
should have forbidden the worship of Images by more express and emphatical
words than he has done; and if he had used any other words, their sense might
as well have been perverted as these are. If a Prince should under a very
severe penalty forbid all his subjects making any Image or resemblance, with an
intent to give honor to him by kneeling before them; would not that man be
thought very ridiculous, who should go about to interpret the Law thus, that
the Prince did not forbid them making any picture of himself or his Son, or any
of his Favorites (for the worship of these could not but redound to his own
Honor) but only that they should make the Image of an Ape, or an Ass, or a
Tiger, thinking to honor their Prince thereby? Much such an exposition is that
here given of the Law; God forbids any Image or similitude to be made with
respect to his worship (for it is ridiculous to imagine the Law means any thing
else) but, he says, This Law must not be understood to exclude a Crucifix, nor
I suppose any Image of God himself: (at least as he appeared of old;) nor of
his Saints or Angels, with an intention to worship God by them; but only they
should not worship Apis or Dagon, an Ichneumon or a Crocodile, or any of the
most ridiculous follies of the Heathen. If this had been the meaning of the
Law, why was it not more plainly expressed? Why were none of the words
elsewhere used, by way of contempt of the Heathen Idols here mentioned, as
being less liable to ambiguity? Why in so short a comprehension of Laws, is
this Law so much enlarged above what it might have been, if all that he says,
were only meant by it? For then the meaning of the two first Precepts might
have been summed up in very few words: You shall have no other Gods but me; and
you shall worship the Images of no other Gods but me. This is his meaning, but
far enough from being that of the second Commandment.

2. The only word he insists upon which is Pesel, is very properly rendered an
Image, and it does not signify barely an Idol: the word properly signifies any
thing that is carved, or cut out of wood or stone: and it is no less than forty
several times rendered by the LXX. by (...), sculptile, and but thrice by (...),
and which is very observable, although Exodus 20. 4. they render it by (...),
yet in the repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 5. 8. the Alexandrian MS. has it
(...), and Deuteronomy. 4. 16. in other Copies of the LXX. the same word is translated
(...); from whence it is plain, that when they translate it by an Idol, they
mean no more thereby than a graven image, and Isa. 40. 18. they translate it,
by (...), which is properly an image; so that no assistance can be given him by
that translation; and the Vulgar Latin it self uses Idolum, Sculptile and
Imago, all to express the same thing, Isa. 44. 9, 10, 13. By which it appears,
that any Image being made so far the object of Divine Worship, that men do bow
down before it; does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden
in this Commandment.

. 5. 3. We consider the reason given of this Law, Of the reason of the second
Commandment.
which will more fully explain the meaning of it; which the Scripture tells us,
was derived from Gods infinite and incomprehensible nature, which could not be
represented to men, but in a way that must be an infinite disparagement to it.
Isa. 40. 19.
To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? 20.
The workman melts a graven Image, and the Goldsmith spreads it over with
Gold, 21.
etc. Have ye not known? Have ye not heard? Has it not been told you from the
beginning? 22.
Have ye not understood from the foundation of the earth? It is he that sits
upon the circle of the earth, etc. I desire to know whether this reason be
given against Heathen Idols, or those Images which were worshipped for Gods or
no? or whether, by this reason God does not declare, that all worship given to
him by any visible representation of him, is extremely dishonorable to him?
And to this purpose, when this Precept is enforced on the people of Israel by a
very particular caution, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, etc. Take ye therefore good heed to
your selves, lest ye corrupt your selves and make you a graven Image, the
similitude of any figure, etc. the ground of that caution, is expressed in
these words, For ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke
unto you. If the whole intention of the Law, were only to keep them from
worshipping the Heathen Idols, or Images for Gods, to what purpose is it here
mentioned that they saw no similitude of God when he spoke to them? For
although God appeared with a similitude then, yet there might have been great
reason against Worshipping the Heathen Idols, or fixing the intention of their
Worship upon the bare Image. But this was a very great reason, why they ought
not to think of honoring God by an Image; for if he had judged that, a
suitable way of Worship to his nature and excellency; he would not have left
the choice of the similitude to themselves, but would have appeared himself in
such a similitude as had best pleased him.

. 6. From hence the wiser persons of the Heathens themselves condemned the
Worship of God by Images, Of the wiser Heathens Notion of Images.
as incongruous to a Divine Nature and a disparagement to the Deity. Theodoret.
c. Graec. Sermon. 3. p. 519.
So Theodoret tells us, that Zeno in his Books of Government, did absolutely
forbid the making any Images for Worship, because they were not things worthy
of God: And that Xenophanes Colophonius derided the folly of those who made
their Images which they Worshipped, to be like themselves, and by the same
reason says he, if Horses and Elephants could paint as men can, no doubt the
Gods would be made in their shape; as the Aethiopians and Thracians and others
made their Gods in their own Color and Fashion: but he adds, That the true
God ought not to be represented by the resemblance of men to whom he was unlike
in body and mind. And that the only reason which hindered Plato from prohibiting
all manner of Images was only the fear of Socrates his Fate: Clem. Alexand.
Strom. 5. p. 584.
for, says he, he did forbid all private Images, all Images of Gold and
Silver, of Ivory, of Iron and Brass, and left only Wood and Stone, which being
so contemptible matter might more easily keep the people from Worshipping
Images made of them. As God himself, says he, derideth the Idolater in the
Prophet; Isa. 44. 16, 17.
he burns part thereof in the fire, and the residue thereof makes he a God,
even his graven Image. Antisthenes in Clemens Alexandrinus condemns the use of
Images for Instruction, Clem. Alexand. Protrept. p. 46.
because there is so great a dissimilitude between God and any visible
representation of him, that no man can learn any thing of God, from an Image:
and Xenophon to the same purpose, that God is great and powerful, but we know
not how to represent him. Strom. 1. p. 304.
And Clemens gives that reason why Numa prohibited among the Romans all Images
to represent the Deity, because we could not attain to any due conception of
the Deity, but only by our minds, which is the same reason that Plutarch gives.
Plutarch in Numa.
And therefore Varro in the known Testimony to this purpose, Varro apud
Augustine. de Civit. Dei l. 4. c 31.
speaking of the old Romans who had no Images for 170 years in their Divine
Worship, says, that if the same Custom had continued, their Worship would
have been more pure and chaste; and that those who first placed Images in
places of Divine Worship, increased their Error and took away their Reverence;
Wisely judging says St. Augustine that the folly of Images would easily bring
the Deity into contempt. Philo de legate. ad Caium p. 1035.
And Augustus, as Agrippa in Philo reports, after he understood, that the Jews
in their Temple had no Images or visible representations of the Deity,
expressed his wonder with great Reverence, having no mean skill in Philosophy.
So that we see the wisest persons who had no such Law from God to direct them,
yet by the bare use of reason did agree in the thing it self, that it was
unsuitable to the Divine Nature to Worship God by any Images or visible
representations of him. From hence we have reason to suppose among the more
ancient Nations who kept nearer to the dictates of natural reason, Eus^bius de
prepar.
the Worship of Images was almost generally rejected. Evang. l. 6. c. 10.
So Bardesanes in Eusebius says of the most Eastern Countries then known; of
the Seres and the Brachmanns, Herodot. l 1. Strabo l 15. Diog. Laert. prooem.
So Herodotus, Strabo, Diogenes Laertius say of the Persians. So Tacitus of the
Germans, that they rejected Images, Tacit. de morib. German. c. 9. Lucian. de
Dea Syria. init.
because they thought them unsuitable to the greatness of their Deities. So
Lucian likewise says of the most ancient Egyptians; and Historians agree of
the Romans, as we have already seen. If all this had been a mere positive Law
intended only for the Jews, because of their dullness and stupidity, as some
imagine, whence comes it to pass that those who never heard of this Law yet
judged such a way of Worship to be wholly unbecoming a Divine Nature? It was
not merely the fear lest they should Worship the Images themselves for Gods,
which was the reason of the Commandment, but the incongruity of such a way of
Worship to a being supposed to be of an infinite and a spiritual nature.

. 7. And it seems of all things the most strange to me, The reason of this Law
more clear by the Gospel.
that any persons should think this precept only respected the Jewish Economy;
and that now under the Gospel where we have clearer discoveries of Gods
spiritual nature and Worship, that we should be left at liberty to do that,
which was before, unlawful to be done. Was it inconsistent with Gods nature
then, and is it less so now, when we understand his nature much better? and
that is given as a particular reason why we ought to Worship him after a
spiritual manner; John 4. 23, 24.
and not by any corporeal representation as the Jews say the Samaritans
Worshipped God in the form of a Dove in their Temple on Mount Garizim: in
which, notwithstanding what Morinus says, Morinus in Pentatench. Samarit.
there seems to be no improbability not only from our Saviors words and the
occasion of speaking them to a Samaritan woman, Exerc. 1. S. 9. c. 5.
(which we do not find he insisted on so much to the Jews as being then free
from this kind of Idolatry) and the constant tradition of the Jews; but from
the nature of the Samaritan Religion which they received from the ten Tribes,
which Worshipped God under Images, as will appear afterward, and the
agreeableness of the Symbol of a Dove to the name of Semiramis and their
Assyrian offspring among whom the Dove was accounted Sacred. But however this
be, since the reason of this command drawn from the invisible and spiritual
nature of God, is now enforced upon us by the Gospel as the ground of giving
spiritual worship to God, how can any men in their senses imagine that Worship
should be lawful among Christians which was unlawful to the Jews? Is it, that
there is now no danger of falling into Heathen Idolatry as there was among the
Jews, on which account God tied them up so strictly in this point of Images?
But this is to beg the Question, and to take it for granted that there was no
other reason of this command, Whereas God himself has told us another, and
that is, the incongruity of it to his infinite nature; which the very Heathens
themselves apprehended in this case. I grant God might by this means design to
keep them at the greatest distance from the Heathen Idolatry; but that does not
hinder, but there was an evil in the thing it self, as it does imply so great a
disparagement of the divine nature to be Worshipped by a corporeal
representation. As we may say that the prohibition of common Swearing was
intended by God to keep men from perjury; but besides that, it implies so great
an irreverence of God, that it is evil without that further respect. And can
any one imagine there should be greater irreverence of God shown in calling him
to witness upon every slight occasion, than there is in bowing down before a
block or a hewn stone representing God to my mind by it? What can such an Image
do to the heightening of devotion, or raising affections? if it be by calling
to my mind that Being I am to Worship, then there must be supposed some
likeness, or Analogy, or Union between the object represented and the image,
every one of which tends highly to the dishonor of the Deity, and suggests
mean thoughts to us of the God we are to Worship. And is there no danger among
Christians that they should entertain too low and unworthy thoughts of God? and
can any thing tend to it more effectually, than the bringing down the
representations of him to the figure and lineaments of a man drawn upon a Table
or carved in an Image? On which account, it seems much more reasonable for me
to Worship God by prostrating my self to the Sun, or any of the Heavenly
bodies, nay to an Ant or a Fly, than to a picture or an Image: For in the other
I see great evidences of the power, and wisdom and goodness of God, which may
suggest venerable apprehensions of God to my mind; whereas these can have
nothing worthy admiration, unless it be the skill of the Painter or Artificer?
And I cannot, for my heart, understand; why I may not as well, nay better, burn
Incense and say my Prayers to the Sun, having an intention only to honor the
true G^d by it, as to do both those to an Image: I am sure the Sun has far
more advantages than any artificial Image can have; the beauty and influence of
it may inflame and warm ones devotions much more. If the danger be, that I am
more like to take the Sun for God than an Image: on that account, that which
deserves most honor should have least given it, and that which deserves least
should have most. For the danger is there still greater, where the excellency
is greater, and by that means we ought rather to Worship a beast than a Saint,
for there is less danger of believing one to be God than the other; and so the
Egyptians were more excusable than the Papists. I must ingenuously confess, if
I had been an Heathen Idolater, only upon such principles as these, that there
is one supreme infinite Being, who makes use of some more illustrious beings of
the world, to communicate benefits to the rest, on which account, I thought my
self bound to testify the honor I owe to the supreme Deity, by paying my
devotions in subordination to him, to those subservient and ministerial Gods; I
should not have been afraid, of what any Papists in the World could have said
for my Confutation. Nay, I should have been tempted to have laughed at their
folly and despised their weakness, who should plead for the worship of God in
or by a dull and rude image, and condemn me for honoring God in the most noble
parts of the Creation? If they had told me, that the supreme God, must have a
worship proper to himself; Yes, I should answer them in their own terms, I by
no means question it, and that is it, which is called (...), which is reserved
to the supreme Deity, all that I give to inferior Deities, is but (...), only
the Sun deserved an (...), because of his eminent usefulness. If they had said,
I made them Gods by giving them religious Worship: no more, than they do
Images. If yet they had urged, that God had forbidden Worshipping the Host of
Heaven; Yes, that is, giving the Worship of the Supreme God to them, but not a
subordinate relative, inferior Worship, which was all I intended, and I hope
they are not so ignorant of the nature of humane actions as not to know that
they go whither they are intended; and my intent was only to honor the true
God by it: or else, that the Worshipping the Host of Heaven was forbidden to
the dull and stupid Jews, who had no kind of Philos^phy in them, and did not
see those admirable Images of the Divine perfections in them which I did; but
for men of Philosophical and contemplative minds what injury to God could there
be, as long as the more I saw cause to honor these, far greater I still saw to
honor him who produced all these things? or lastly, I would appeal to
themselves whether the precept against Worshipping the host of Heaven, or
images were more plain in the Scripture? the second commandment is not in words
against the Worship of the things but the images of them, and the first against
Worshipping them as the Supreme God; I did neither; but they could not possibly
excuse themselves who did the same things to an Image, which they do to God
himself. Thus we see the reason of the commandment is by no means appropriated
to the Jews, but does extend as far as the knowledge of it does: and the same
arguments which notwithstanding that command would justify the Worship of
Images, will likewise justify the most early, the most general, the most
lasting Idolatry of the World, which is the Worship of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. And a mighty Argument that the reason of this command, drawn from the
unsuitableness of the Worship of Images to the nature of God is of an
unalterable and universal nature, is, that the same reason is urged under the
New Testament against the Idolatry of the Heathens. So St. Paul dealt with the
Athenians, proving the unreasonableness of their Worshipping God by Images,
Act. 17. (...), 25.
because he was the God that made the World and is Lord of Heaven and Earth,
and that we are his offspring, therefore we ought not to think that the God
head is like unto Gold or Silver, 29.
or Stone graven by art or man's device: he does not speak merely against their
other objects of Worship besides the true God, nor their supposing their Gods
to be present in their Images, nor taking their images for Gods, but against
their supposition that there was any resemblance between God and their Images,
or that he was capable of receiving any honor by them. The same Argument he
uses to the Romans, speaking of those, in whom that which may be known of God
is manifest, Romans 1. 19.
even his eternal power and Godhead; yet these persons who knew God, 21.
did not glorify him as God, but changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into an Image made like to corruptible man, 23.
etc. where changing his glory into Images, is immediately opposed to the
glorifying him as God in respect of his eternal power and Godhead; so that
those two are inconsistent with each other, to glorify God by an Image and to
glorify him as God. For here the Apostle does not discourse against the most
gross and sottish Idolaters of the Heathens, but as St. Chrysostom well
observes against the Philosophers and the wisest among them: Who, though they
differed in their opinions of Religion extremely from the Vulgar, yet they
concurred with them in all the external practices of their Idolatry. And
therefore the Apostle does not charge them with false notions of a Deity, for
he says, they held the truth in unrighteousness, V. 18. 21.
that they knew God, but they showed their vanity and solly in thinking they
had found out subtiller ways of defending the common Idolatries among them,
and instead of opposing them, made use of their wits, to excuse them. And the
most intelligent Heathens did never look on their Images as any other than
symbols or representations of that Being to which they gave divine Worship.
Celsus apud Origin. l. 7. p. 373.
No one but a Fool thinks otherwise of them, says Celsus; They are only Books
for the ignorant says Porphyrie, Eusebius. de preparat. Evang. l. 3. c 7.
and the Heathens in Athanasius. They deny, in Arnobius, that they ever thought
their Images to be Gods, or to have any Divinity in them, but what only comes
from their Consecration, Athanas. c. Gent. p. 24. -- 31.
to such an Use; and in St. Augustine, that they Worshipped the Images
themselves, Arnob. c. Gent. l. 6. p. 203.
but through them they Worshipped the Deity; Maximus Tyrius discourses largely
on this Subject, August. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 113.
and shows, that Images were but the signs of divine honor, and helps to
remembrance. They are but Symbols of the presence of the Gods, Maxim. Tyrius
dissert. 38.
says Julian; We do not think them Gods, says he, but that through them we
may Worship the Deity; Julian. op. frag. ep. ed. Peravii p. 537.
for we being in the body, ought to perform our Service in a way agreeable to
it. And Eusebius testifies in general of the Heathens, Eus^b. prepar. Evang. l.
4. c. 1.
that they did not look on their Images as Gods; however some among them had an
opinion of the Gods being incorporated in them. I desire to know whether these
men who worshipped Images upon those grounds did amiss or no in it? I do not
ask whether they were mistaken as to the objects of their Worship, but on
supposition they were not, whether they were to blame in the manner of serving
God by Images in such a way as they describe? If not, wherefore does St. Paul
pitch upon that, to condemn them for, which they were not at all to blame in?
He ought to have done as the Jesuits in China did, who never condemned the
people for worshipping Images, but for worshipping false Gods by them; and
persuaded them not to lay them aside, but to convert them to the honor of the
true God: Trirant. de Christian. Expedit. apud Sinas, l. 5. c. 16. p. 588.
and so melted down their former Images, and made new ones of them. Can we
imagine St. Paul meant the same thing, when he blames men not for believing
them to be Gods, but that God could be worshipped by the work of men's hands;
and for changing thereby the glory due to God in regard of his infinite and
incorruptible being, into mean and unworthy Images, thinking thereby to give
honor to him.

. 8. And upon these grounds the Primitive Fathers disputed against the Heathen
Idolatry; The Christian Church believed this Law immutable. Clem. Alex. Strom.
5. p. 559.
for, the making use of corporeal representations makes the Deity contemptible,
says Clemens of Alexandria. Origin says, That Christians have nothing to do
with Images, because of the second Commandment; Origin c. Cells l. 7. p. 375.
and on that account will rather dye, than defile themselves with them: and
that it is impossible any one that knows God, should pray to them. That it is
no sufficient excuse to say, L. 6 p. 284.
they do not take them for Gods, but only for symbols or representations of
them, for they must be ignorant, mean, and unlearned persons, who can imagine
the work of an Artificer can be any representation of a Deity. It would be too
tedious at this time to transcribe all the invectives in the Writings of the
Fathers upon this subject: where they dispute against the Heathens from this
argument, and do still suppose the force of the reason of this Law, to oblige
Christians as much as ever it did the Jews; but I purposely forbear, only
taking notice that after the worship of Images came in, with the decay of the
Primitive Pi^ty and Learning in the Eastern Churches, yet the great defenders
of them still declared their abhorrence of any representation of the Divine
Nature. So Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople in his Epistles yet extant in
the actions of that wise Synod at Nice; Synod. Nic. 2. Act. 4. Ep. ad Johan.
Synad. Ad Thom. Claudiop. Ep. ibid.
We make, says he, no kind of Image, or similitude, or figure, or
representation of the invisible Deity; and that the meaning of the Commandment
of the Law against Images was, that the Divine Nature was invisible and
incomprehensible, and like to nothing we see, and that we ought not to
entertain any corporeal conceptions of God. And Damascen says expressly,
Damascen. Orthod. sid. l. 4 c. 17.
That it is the highest madness and impiety to go about to make an Image of
God: i. e. says Clichtovaeus, so as to think any Image to be like unto God, or
able perfectly to represent him to us; which is likewise Bellarmins answer: as
though ever any men were such fools to believe an Image could perfectly
represent an infinite Being; or, that God need to make a Law to forbid that,
which is utterly impossible in the very nature of the thing; he might more
reasonably forbid men to paint a sound, to grasp all the Air in the hollow of
their hands, to drink up the Ocean, to wear the Sun for a Pendant at their
ears, or to make new worlds, than to command them not to make any Image which
should perfectly represent his Nature: And yet of this kind of Image alone of
the true God, Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. cap. 8.
Bellarmine understands the prohibition of the Law, and the sayings before
mentioned, but all other, he says, were allowed by both, whether by way of
History or analogical resemblance, or the fashion of a man wherein he has
appeared: i. e. all possible representations of God are allowed, and only that
which is impossible forbidden. But this answer is not more weak and trifling,
than contrary to the meaning of Germanus, Tharasius, or the rest of the Nicene
Fathers, who do acknowledge, there was no ground to make any Images with
respect to the Divine Nature, till the incarnation of Christ; but since God
appeared in humane nature, there is no incongruity in representing that by an
Image, and by that to give honor to the invisible Godhead, as long as they
preserve the true belief concerning the Deity; and consequently may honor God,
by giving worship to the Images of those Saints whom they believe to be in
Heaven with God.

. 9. This is the substance of the Doctrine of the second Council of Nice; Of
the Doctrine of the second Council of Nice.
which they justify by fabulous stories, and impertinent citations, and
insufficient answers. For, when the Fathers of the Synod at Constantinople had
said, Synod. Nicaen. 2. Act. 6.
that Christ came to deliver us from all Idolatry, and to teach the worship of
God in Spirit and in truth; they bravely answer, That then it is impossible for
Christians to fall into Idolatry, because Christ's Kingdom was always to
continue, and the gifts and graces of God are without repentance. Which would
as well hold against the prevalency of the Turk, as Idolatry among them. Those
Fathers urge, That the Devil now not being able to reduce the world to the
former Idolatry, endeavors under hand to introduce it, under a pretense of
Christianity, bringing them again to the worship of the creature, and making a
God of a thing that is made, when they have called it by the name of Christ.
These answer, That it is true, the Fathers used that Argument against the
Arrians, who supposed Christ to be a Creature, and they grant that they were
guilty of Idolatry in giving Divine worship to Christ, when they believed him
to be a creature; but the difference lies herein, that the Arrians trusted in
Christ, and gave properly divine honor to him, which they say, they did not to
the Images, but only worshipped them for the sake of the object represented by
them. Aquinas Sum. p. 3. q. 25. art. 3.
But Aquinas and his followers have at large proved, that where any thing is
worshipped, merely for the sake of another, it must have the same kind of
worship given it, which they give to the thing represented by it: for as
Aquinas observes, the motion of the soul toward an Image is twofold: either as
it is a thing, or as it is an Image: the first, he says is distinct from that
motion which respects the object; but the second is the same; so that to the
Image of Christ, as made of Wood or Stone, no worship at all is given: and
therefore it being given merely on the account of its being an Image, it
necessarily follows, that the same worship must be given to the Image, which is
given to Christ himself. And so they are in the same case with the Arrians,
whom they acknowledge to be Idolaters; notwithstanding their Christianity, or
that the gifts and graces of God are without repentance. Besides the
Constantinopolitan Fathers urge The great absurdity of making an Image of
Christ, for worship; because Christ is God and Man, therefore the Image must be
of God and Man, which cannot be, unless the Deity be circumscribed within the
created flesh, or there be a confusion of both natures after their union, both
which are blasphemies condemned by the Church. The Nicene Fathers in answer to
this yield, That the Name Christ is significative of both natures, and that an
Image can only represent the visible humane nature, and that it agrees only in
name, and not in substance with the thing represented: and after many reviling
expressions against their adversaries, (no argument of the goodness of their
cause) they say, that if the Divine nature were circumscribed within the humane
nature in the Cradle, and on the Cross, then it is in an image, if not in one,
neither is it in the other. But what does this answer signify, unless there be
an equal presence and union of the Divine nature of Christ with the Image, as
there was with the humane nature? Which union, was the reason of the adoration
given to the person of Christ; and what ground can there be then of giving
divine worship to the Image of Christ, unless the same union be supposed? If
the humane nature without the union of the divine, could yield us no sufficient
reason of divine worship being given to it, how much less can an Image deserve
it, which can only at the best represent but the external lineaments of that
humane nature? And if the divine nature be supposed united with the Image, then
the same divine honor is due to the Image of Christ, which is to God himself,
which yet these Nicene Fathers deny: and the Image then joined with the divine
nature, is as proper an object of divine worship without respect to any
Prototype, as the person of Christ is consisting of the divine and humane
nature. Again, they urge, If the humane nature of Christ be represented in the
Image of Christ to be worshipped as separate from the divine, this would be
plain Nestorianism. To this the good Nicene Fathers, not knowing what to
answer, plainly deny the conclusion, and cry, They Nestorians? No, they lie in
their teeth; they were no more Nestorians than themselves, nor so much neither:
And now, good men, they say, It is true, they do represent Christ only by his
humane nature in an Image; and when they look on Images, they understand
nothing but what is signified by them; as when the birth of the Virgin is
represented, they conceive in their minds, that he who was born, was truly God
as well as man. Alas for them! that they should ever be charged with the
worship of Images! They plead for nothing now, but a help to their profound
Meditations by them. But the Controversy was about worship, what ever they
think; and their Adversaries argument did not lie in the Images being
considered as an object of perception, but of worship: i. e. if the Image can
only represent the humane nature of Christ, as separate from the divine; and in
that respect be an object of worship to us, then the charge of Nestorianism
follows; but this they very wisely pass by; and their distinction of the Image
from the principal, cannot serve their turn, since the Image receiving the
worship due to the principal, must have not only the name, (as they say) but
the reason of worship common with the principal which it represents. After
this, the Fathers of Constantinople proceed to another Argument, which is, That
all the representation of Christ allowed us by the Gospel, is that which Christ
himself instituted, in the Elements of the Lords Supper, whose use was to put
us in remembrance of Christ. No other Figure or Type being chosen by Christ as
able to represent his being in the flesh, but this. This was an honorable
Image of his quickening body, made by himself, say they; which he would not have
of the shape of a man to prevent Idolatry; but of a common nature, as he took
upon him the common nature of man, and not any individuated person; and as the
body of Christ was really sanctified by the divine nature; so by institution
this holy Image is made divine through sanctification by Grace. Here the Nicene
Council quarrels with them, for calling the Eucharist an Image, contrary, as
they say, to the Scriptures and Fathers; but they are as much to be believed
therein, as in their admirable proofs, that the worship of Images was the
constant doctrine of the Church; and having strenuously denied this, they
suppose that to be enough to answer the argument.

Besides these particular arguments against the Images of Christ, the Council
of Constantinople uses many more against the Images of any other, Because
these being the chief, there can be less reason for any other besides, that
there is no tradition of Christ or his Apostles, or the primitive Fathers for
them, no way of consecration of them prescribed or practiced, no suitableness
in the use of them to the design of Christian Religion, which being in the
middle between Judaism and Paganism, it casts off the Sacrifices of the one,
and not only the Sacrifices, but all the Idolatries of the other: and it is
blasphemy to the Saints in Heaven, to call in the Heathen superstitions into
Christianity, to honor them by: that it is unbecoming their glory in Heaven,
to be set up on earth in dull and senseless Images; that Christ himself would
not receive testimony from Devils, though they spoke truth; neither can such a
Heathenish custom be acceptable to the Saints in Heaven though pretended to be
for their honor. That nothing can be plainer in the Gospel, than that God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth; to which nothing can be
more contrary, than the going about to honor God by worshipping any Image of
himself, or his Saints. These and many other arguments from the Scriptures and
Fathers, that Council insists upon, to show the incongruity of the worship of
Images, to the nature of God, and the design of the Christian Religion; to
which the Council of Nice returns very weak and trivial answers, as shall more
largely appear, if any one thinks good to defend them. And we have this
apparent advantage on our side, that although the Popes of Rome sided with
these worshippers of Images, yet the Council at Francford condemned it, called
together by Charles the Great: Not out of misunderstanding their Doctrine, as
some vainly imagine; Vasquez in l. 2. q. 25. disp. 107. c. 5.
because as Vasquez well proves, the Copy of the Nicene Council was sent to
them by Pope Adrian, because the Acts of that Council were very well known to
the Author of the Book written upon this subject under the name of Charles the
Great, and published by du Tillet at Paris, about the middle of the last
Century; which is acknowledged by their learned men to have been written at
the same time; because the Popes Legates Theophylactus and Stephanus were
present, and might easily rectify any mistake, if they were guilty of it; and
none of the Historians of that time do take notice of any such error among
them. But Vasquez runs into another strange mistake himself, that the Council
of Francford did not condemn that of Nice, which is evident they did, expressly
by the second Canon of of that Council published by Sirmondus. Sirmond. Council.
Gall. To. 2. p. 194.
And all the Objections of Vasquez are taken off by what Sirmondus speaks, of
the great authority and antiquity of that MS. from which he published them, and
from the consent of the Historians of that time, that the Council of Francford
did reject that of Nice: and Sirmondus says, they had good reason to deny it
to be an Ecumenical Council, where only the Greeks met together, and none of
other Provinces were called, or asked their opinion, and Pope Adrian himself,
he says, in his defense of it against the Caroline Books, never gives it the
name or authority of an Ecumenical Council. Spelman. Con^. Tom. 1. p. 306.
The same Council was rejected here in England, as our Historians tell us,
because it asserted the adoration of Images, Hovedeni Annal. p. prior. ad A. D
792:
which the Church of God abhors; which are the words of Hoveden and others. And
we find afterward in France by the Synod of Paris called by Ludovicus Pius
upon the Letters of Michael Balbus Emperor of Constantinople, Simeon Dunel
Histor. p. 111.
in order to the Union of Christendom in this point, Matthew. Westmon. ad A. D.
793.
that these Western Churches persisted still in the condemnation of the Nicene
Council which they would not have done after so long a time to inform
themselves, if a mere mistake of their Doctrine at first, Caroli Capitut. de
non adora^dis imagi^ibus. Paris. A. D. 1549. and in Goldasti.
had been the cause of their opposition. But whosoever will read the Caroline
Books, or the Synod of Paris, or Agobardus and others about that time, will
find that they condemn all religious worship of Images, as adoration; Co^stit.
and contrary to that honor which is due to God alone, Imperial. To. 1.
and to the commands which he has given in Scripture. Synod. Paris. in
Supplement. Council. Gall. ad A. D. 824.
And I extremely wonder how any men of common sense, and much more any of
learning and judgment, that had read the Book of Charles the Great against the
Nicene Synod, Agobardi opera Ed. Massoni and Balazii.
could imagine it altogether proceeded upon a mistake of the meaning of it;
when it so distinctly relates and punctually answers the several places of
Scriptures and Fathers produced by it for the worship of Images. In the first
Book an answer is given to many impertinent places of the Old Testament
alleged in that Council; which the second proceeds with, and examines several
testimonies of the Fathers; and in the two remaining Books pursues all their
pretenses with that diligence, that no one can imagine all this while that the
Author did not know their meaning. And that by adoration he means no more than
giving Religious Worship to Images appears from hence, because he calls the
Civil worship which men give to one another, by the name of adoration: Caroli
liber de Imag. l. 2. c. 24.
when he shows, that it is another thing to give adoration to a man upon a
civil respect, and to give adoration to Images upon a religious account, when
God challenges all religious worship or adoration to himself: and whatever
reason will hold for such a worship of Images will much more hold for the
worship of men, who have greater excellency in them, and more honor put upon
them by God, than any Images can ever pretend to. Cap. 25.
That God allows no other kind of adoration to be given to any but himself, but
that which we give to one another. Can any be so senseless to think, that by
this civil adoration, he meant, we honored every man we met as our Sovereign
Prince? And as little reason is there to say, that by adoration given to
Images, he meant only the incommunicable worship due only to God, in the sense
of those Fathers. Can we imagine, says he, that S. Peter would allow the
worship of Images, who forbad Cornelius to worship him? Or St. John whom the
Angel checked for offering to worship him, and bid him give that honor to God?
Or Paul and Barnabas, who with such horror ran among the men of Lycaonia when
they were about to worship them; and yet, surely Angels and such persons as
these deserved more to be worshipped than any Images can do. But we see by
these examples, that even these are not to be adored with any other kind of
adoration, than what the offices of civility require from us. Besides in his
language those who followed the Council of Constantinople are said, C. 31.
not to adore Images, by which nothing else can be meant, than their giving no
Religious worship to them; and when he shows the great inconsequence of the
argument from the adoration of the Statues of the Emperors to the adoration of
Images, because in matters of Religious Worship we are not to follow the
customs of men against the will of God; L. 3. c. 15.
he thereby shows what kind of adoration he intended, not the worship of
Latria, but supposed to be of an inferior sort. Council. Tom. 5. p. 553.
In so much, that Binius confesses, that the design of these books was against
all worship of Images. It is true Pope Hadrian in the answer he sent to these
Books which is still extant in the Tomes of the Councils does deny, Tom. 6. p.
143.
that the Synod intended to give proper divine worship to Images; but that is
no more than the Synod it self had in words said before; but that was not the
Question what they said, but what the nature of the thing did imply? Whether
that religious worship they gave to Images was not part of that adoration which
was only due to God? And he that expects an answer to this from him, will find
himself deceived; who is so pitifully put to it for an answer to the demand of
any example of words of the Apostles to justify Image Worship, C. 36.
that he is forced to make use of some Mystical passages of Dionysius the
supposed Areopagite, wherein the word Image happening to be, is very sufficient
to his purpose. And this answer of Hadrians gave so little satisfaction to the
Western Bishops, that A.D. 824. the Synod at Paris being called by Ludovicus
Pius to advise about this point, Delaland Supplem. Council. Gall. p. 109.
did condemn expressly Pope Hadrian for asserting a superstitious adoration of
Images; which they look on as a great impiety: and say that he produces very
impertinent places of the Fathers, and remote from his purpose; and that
setting aside his Pontifical authority in his answer to the Caroline Books,
there were some things apparently false: and they have nothing to excuse him
by, but his Ignorance. And therefore they at large show, that the Religious
worship of Images came first from Heretics; and that it was always condemned
by the Fathers of the Christian Church: and answer the arguments produced on
the other side out of the Writings of the Fathers. And supposing that
superstitious custom of worshipping Images, had for some time obtained, yet
they show by several testimonies, that it ought to be abrogated. Bellarm.
Append. ad. lib. de cultu Imag. c. 3.
No wonder then that Bellarmine is so much displeased with this Synod, for
offering so boldly to censure the Popes Writings, and a Synod approved by him:
wherein the says, they exceed the fault of the Author of the Caroline Books:
because, as he confesses, C. 4.
they offered to teach the Pope, and resisted him to the face. And yet, no
doubt, they had read and considered Hadrians words, wherein he disowns the
giveing true divine honor to Images. Not long after this Synod came forth the
Book of Agobardus Archbishop of Lions against Images, occasioned says Papirius
Massonus, by the stupendous superstition in that Age in the worship of them.
And this, says he, is the substance of his Doctrine out of St. Augustine and
other Fathers, that there is no other Image of God, but what is himself, and
therefore cannot be painted, and he ought not to be worshipped in any Image,
but what he has prescribed us to worship, which is Christ; that adoration is
external or internal; that, both of them are called Religion, by which we are
bound eternally to God, and only to him: from whence it follows, that neither
Angels nor Saints are to be worshipped by any religious worship: for this is
the Law of Adoration, that no creature, no phantasm of God in our minds, no
work of men's hands ought to be worshipped: for if Gods creatures are not to be
worshipped, much less ours, such as Images of God, Angels and Saints are.
Neither is it enough to say, that they do not worship the Image, but the thing
represented; for the object terminates the worship, and it is a deceit of the
Devil under the pretense of honoring the Saints, to bring men's minds to Idols,
and from the true God to carnal things: that Images are to be used only for
show and memory, and not at all for Religion; that God alone is to be
worshipped with all Religious worship, whether called Latria or Doulia, or what
name soever, and for the casting away all superstition, that no Images be
painted in Churches, no Statues erected, nor accounted holy, that the true God
may be worshipped alone, for ever. This is the abstract of his Doctrine
delivered by Massonus, whose other Writings show he was far from being partial
toward the Reformation. And the Book it self is lately published by Baluzius
again, where any one may easily satisfy himself concerning fidelity. Agobardi
opera p. 221. Ed. 1666.
But Baluzius very honestly tells us, some have suspected this Book not to be
very Catholic: and therefore it was censured by Baronius and the Spanish
Index; yet he ingenuously confesses, he says no more than the whole Gallican
Church believed in that Age. What that was, I have already showed. This I have
the larger insisted upon, to show, that it is no new thing for us to plead for
all Religious worship being appropriated to God, and that the command against
Image Worship was no Ceremonial Law respecting merely the Jews, but that the
reason of it does extend to all Ages and Nations, and especially to us who live
under the Gospel. From all which it follows, that it was not merely the Heathen
Idolatry which was forbidden by God, nor barely to prevent their falling to
that by degrees, but the giving to himself such a worship; which he judges so
unworthy of him.

. 10. 3. From those who were best able to understand the meaning of it. Of the
Scripture Instances of Idolatry contrary to the second Commandment.
We can imagine none so competent a Judge of the meaning of a Law, as the giver
of it, and what he afterward declares to be the sense of this Law. The first
occasion given for knowing the meaning of the Law concerning Images, was not
long after the making of it, when upon Moses his absence, they compelled Aaron
to make them a Golden Calf, Exodus 32. 4. Here was an Image made contrary to the
Law, as is on all sides acknowledged; but the question is, Whether by this the
Israelites did fall into the Heathen Idolatry, or only worship the true God
under that Symbol of his presence? That they did not herein fall back to the
Heathen Idolatry, I thus prove: 1. From the occasion of it, which was not upon
the least pretense of Infidelity as to the true God, or that they had now
better reason given them for the worship of other Gods besides him; but all
they say, was, that Moses had been so long absent, they knew not what was
become of him, and therefore they say to Aaron, make us Gods (or a God, as in
Nehem. 9. 18.) to go before us. We cannot imagine the people so sottish; to
desire Aaron to make them a God in the proper sense, as though they could
believe the Calf newly made, to have been the God, which before it was made,
brought them out of the Land of Egypt as they say afterward, v. 4. but it
must be understood as the symbol of that God which did bring them from thence:
the controversy then lies here, Whether they thought the Egyptian Gods
delivered them out of Egypt, while they forsook all their own worshippers, to
preserve those who were so great enemies to them, that their very way of
worship was an abomination to all the Egyptians, Exodus, 8. 26. and whether they
could think the Gods of Egypt had wrought all the Miracles for them in their
deliverance and after it? Whether they appeared not long before on Mount Sinai,
and delivered the Law to them? Or, whether it were not the true God they meant,
who had made that the Preface to his Laws, I am the God that brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt; to whom they intended still to give honor: but the only
question was concerning the symbol of his presence, that was to go before them.
For which, we are to consider, that immediately before Moses his going up into
the Mount, the last promise God made to them was, that he would send his Angel
before them, Exodus 23. 20, 23. which is elsewhere called his presence, Exodus
33. 14. Moreover, they understood that there should be some extraordinary
symbol of this presence; but what it was, they could not tell; for Moses was
then gone into the Mount to learn: but he not being heard of in forty days,
they took it for granted, he was not to be heard of more; therefore they fall
upon devising among themselves what was the fittest symbol for the presence of
God going before them; and herein the greatest number being possessed with the
prejudices of their education in Egypt, where golden Bulls were the symbols of
their chief God Osiris, they pitch upon that, and force Aaron to a compliance
with them in it. 2. There is no intimation given in the whole story, that they
fell into the Heathen Idolatry; for when afterward they fell into it, the
particular names of the Gods are mentioned, as Baalpeor, Moloch, Remphan. Numb.
25. 3. Acts 7. 43. But here, on the contrary, Aaron expressly proclaims a Feast
to the Lord, Exodus 32. 5. and the people accordingly met and offered their
accustomed offerings, v. 6. whereas if it had been the Egyptian Idolatry,
their common Sacrifices were abominations, they must not have sacrificed Sheep
and Oxen, as they were wont to do. And that it was not the Idolatry of other
Nations, who worshipped the Host of Heaven, is plain from St. Stephens words,
Acts 7. 41, 42. And they made a Calf in those days, and offered Sacrifice unto
Idols, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands; then God turned and gave
them up to worship the Host of Heaven. Whereby it is both observable that the
Idolatry of the Calf was distinct from the other Heathen Idolatry, this being a
punishment of the other; and withal though the Calf was intended by them, to be
only a symbol of Gods presence, yet being directly against Gods Command, and
having divine worship given it, it is by S. Stephen called an Idol; and to the
same purpose the Psalmist speaks, They made a Calf in Horeb, and worshipped the
Molten Image; thus they changed their glory (or rather his) into the similitude
of an Ox that eats grass, Psalm. 106. 19, 20. Which certainly was Idolatry as
well as that St. Paul charges the Romans with, viz. that they changed the glory
of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things, Romans 1. 23. And we see how
highly God was displeased with the Israelites for this sin of the golden Calf,
Exodus 32. 7, 8, 9, 10.

The same may be said of the two Calves of Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel; for it
was neither agreeable to his end, nor so likely to succeed, to take the ten
Tribes off from the Worship of the true God; but only from the place of it at
Jerusalem, and the occasion of the Kingdoms coming to him was from Solomon's
falling to Heathen Idolatry, 1 King. 11. 33. Which would make him more Cautious
of falling into it, especially at his first entrance: And when the Gods of
other Nations are mentioned, they are particularly described, as Ashtoreth of
the Zidonians, Chemosh of the Moabites, and Milcom of the Children of Ammon, 1
Kings 11. 33. And in Ahabs Idolatry, the occasion and description of it is
given, 1 Kings 16. 31. But of Jeroboam it is only said that he set up the
Calves at Dan and Bethel, and said unto the people, It is too much for you to
go up to Jerusalem, behold thy Gods O Israel which brought thee up out of the
Land of Egypt, 1 Kings 12. 28, 29. How easy had it been to have said that
Jeroboam Worshipped the Gods of Egypt if that had been his intention! but, how
much better had he then argued, that they had been hitherto in a great mistake
concerning the true God, and not merely as to the place of his Worship, which
is all he speaks against: for he continued the same Feasts and way of Worship,
which were at Jerusalem, 1 King. 12. 32. Besides, how comes the sin of Ahab to
be so much greater than that of Jeroboam, if they were both guilty of the same
Apostasy to Heathen Idolatry, 1 Kings 16. 31.? how came the Worship of the
true God in the Ten Tribes to be set in opposition to Heathen Idolatry, 1 Kings
18. 21? how comes Iehu at the same time, to boast his zeal for his Lord, when
it is said of him, that he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, viz. the
golden Calves of Dan and Bethel, 2 Kings 10. 16, 29? Lastly, how comes the
Worship of the true God to be preserved in the Ten Tribes after their
captivity, when they still continued their separation in Religion, from the
Kingdom of Judah, 2 Kings 17. 28? For, certainly, if the Samaritans had only
desired information concerning the Worship of the God of Israel after the way
of Jerusalem, they would have sent only thither for it; but because they sent
into the Land of their Captivity, for a Priest to be sent to them; it is plain
the former differences still continued, and yet it is said he taught them to
fear the Lord. And notwithstanding it be thus evident that Jeroboam did not
fall then into Heathen Idolatry, yet we see that he is charged with Idolatry in
Scripture; for it is said, that he had done evil above all that were before
him, and had gone and made him other Gods and Molten Images to provoke God to
anger, and had cast him behind his back, 1 Kings 14. 9. From whence it
necessarily follows, that if God may be allowed to interpret his own Law, the
Worshipping of Images though designed for his honor is Idolatry.

And since the Lawgiver has thus interpreted his own Law, we need not be
solicitous about the sense of any others; yet herein we have the concurrence of
the Jewish and Christian Church: the Jews have thought the prohibition to
extend to all kinds of Images for Worship, and almost all for ornament: and the
Image Worship of the Church of Rome is one of the great scandals to this day
which hinder them from embracing Christianity. The primitive Christians were
declared enemies to all Worship of God by Images; but I need the less to go
about to prove it now, since it is at last consessed by one of the most learned
Jesuits they ever had, that, for the four first Centuries and further there
was little or no use of Images in the Temples or Oratories of Christians;
P^tav. dogmat. Theol. To 5. l 15. ^. 13. s. 3. c. 14 s. 8.
but we need not their favor in so plain a cause as this; as shall be
evidently proved if occasion be farther given. And against my Adversaries
opinion, that the second Command only forbids the Worship of Idols, we have the
consent of some of the most learned Writers of his own Church against him: Vas^
e^ in 3. Thom. disp. 94. q. 25. c. 3.
For Vasquez acknowledges, that it is plain in Scripture that God did not only
forbid that in the second command, which was unlawful by the Law of Nature, as
the Worshipping an Image for God, but the Worshipping of the true God by any
similitude of him, and he reckons up many others of the same opinion with him
of great estimation in the Roman Church.

. 11. But we must now consider what he further produces for his opinion, Of the
distinctions used to excuse this from being Idola^ry.
he therefore says, if St. Austins judgment be to be followed, the second
Commandment is but a part or explication of the first. But why does he not tell
us whether St. Austins judgment be to be followed or no, if it be of so much
consequence to the resolving of this Controversy? Nay how is he sure this was
St. Austins constant judgment; Aug. c. duas Epist Pe^ag. l. 3 c. 4.
since in his latter Writings, he reckons up the Commandments as others of the
Fathers had done before him? But if St. Austins Judgment were to be followed
in this? does it thence follow that this Commandment must be only against
Idols? no, but that all things concerning the Worship of God must be in one
command and so they may be, and yet be as full against Image Worship, as in
two: so, that no relief is to be had from hence.

And as little from his distinction of an inferior and relative honor only
which is given by them (he says) to the Sacred Images of Christ and his B.
Mother and Saints, and that which they call Latria or Worship due to God; the
former he says is only honorary adoration expressed by putting off our Hats,
kissing them or kneeling before them. Which is just as if an unchaste Wife
should plead in her excuse to her Husband, that the person she was too kind
with, was extremely like him, and a near friend of his, and that it was out of
respect to him that she gave him the honor of his bed; Can any one think that
such an excuse as this would be taken by a jealous Husband? How much less will
such like pretenses avail with that God who has declared himself particularly
jealous of his honor, in this Command above others, and that he will not give
his glory to another; but has reserved all divine worship as peculiar to
himself; and no such fond excuses of relative, inferior, and improper Worship
will serve, when they encroach upon his prerogative. It was well observed by a
very learned Bishop of our Church, that such kind of distinctions so applied
are like the dispute among some of the Church of Rome in Scotland, B. Andrews
Answer to Perron p. 57
whether the Lords Prayer might be used to Saints or no, and it was well
resolved and very subtly, that ultimately, principally, primarily and
strictly they might not; but secondarily, less principally and largely or
relatively they might. The same would certainly hold for Images too. And I
wonder very much they stick at any kind of Worship to be done to Images; for my
own part, were I of their mind, I should as little scruple offering up the Host
to an Image, as saying my Prayers to it; and I should think my self hardly
dealt with if I did not come off with the same distinctions. For if I do it to
God absolutely and for himself, and to the Image only improperly and
relatively, wherein I am to blame? I cannot understand if the Image have the
honorary adoration as he calls it given to it, only with a respect to what is
represented by it, but I may give the same kind of Worship to the Image which I
do to the Prototype: and that, upon the rule he quotes from St. Basil (although
he uses it quite upon another occasion, as if he looks upon the place he may
see) that the Worship of the Image is carried to the Prototype or thing
represented. I desire therefore seriously to know of him, whether any Worship
does at all belong to the image or no? if none at all, to what end are they
kneeled before, and kissed, which if the Images had any sense in them, would
think was done to them? and why does the Council of Trent determine that due
worship is to be given them? if there be any due, whether it be the same then
is given to the Prototype, or distinct from it? if it be the same then proper
divine Worship is given to the Image; if distinct then the Image is Worshipped
with divine Worship for it self, and not relatively and subordinately, as he
speaks.

I know, Madam, when any thing pincheth them, they cry presently these are
disputes of the Schools, and Niceties too deep for you to be able to judge of;
but I assure you some of the best learned among them, have determined which
side soever you take you fall into Idolatry; and I hope that is no Scholastic
nicety with you. I shall endeavor to give you their sense as plainly as I can.
Be^^arm. de imag. l. 2. ^ ^4.
Bellarmin says, That no Image is to be Worshipped properly with that Worship
which the thing represented is worshipped by; for Latria, (as he calls it) is a
Worship proper to God; but no Image upon account of relation, or any other way
is God; therefore that Worship does not belong to it. It may be says he, some
will say, that Latria is a Worship proper to God, when it is given for it self,
and not for another, (or relatively.) I Answer, that it is of the Nature of
Latria, (or Divine Worship,) to be given for it self: for, that is the Worship,
which is due to the true God as the first principle of all things, and it
implies a contradiction for the highest Worship to be given to the first
principle and relatively or for another; and therefore this worship is given to
the Image for it self, which is plain Idolatry, or else it is not given for it
self, and then it is not Latria or properly Divine Worship. Again, either the
Divine Worship, or Latria, which is given to the Image relatively for another
is the same with that which is given to God, or an inferior Worship; if it be
the same, the Creature is equally Worshipped with God, which certainly is
Idolatry; For Idolatry, says he, is not only when God is forsaken, and an Idol
Worshipped; but when an Idol is Worshipped together with God. If it be an
inferior worship, then it is not Latria, for that is the highest Worship. Thus
far Bellarmin; On the other side Vasquez a Jesuit, Vasquez. 3. Th. disp. 108.
q. 25. art. 3. c. 9.
a man of great reputation too, and of as searching a wit as Bellarmin, he
says, That it an inferior Worship be given to the Image, distinct from that
which is given to the thing represented, he that so gives it incurres the crime
of Idolatry; for he expresses his submission to a mere inanimate thing, that
has no kind of excellency to deserve it from him. By which we see that it is
in men's choice what sort of Idolatry they will commit, who worship Images; but
in neither way they can avoid it.

. 12. But yet he thinks to escape by some parallel instances, The instances
supposed to be parallel Answered.
as he fancies them; such as, the honor given to the Chair of State, or the
Kings picture or garment, Moses and Joshua's putting off their Shoes because
it was holy ground, the Jews falling down before Gods footstool, and
Worshipping the Holy of Holies, where were the Cherubims, Propitiatory, and
Ark, Protestants bowing at the name of Jesus, or kneeling at the Eucharist, and
bowing before the Altar; from these he thinks he has sufficiently cleared,
that inferior and relative Worship which they give to Images. To which I
answer,

1. To that of the Chair of State; that our dispute is not concerning Civil
Worship, but Divine; and as to civil worship; I suppose he would not say that
were any honor to the King in case he had absolutely forbidden it, as we have
proved God has done in the case of Images.

2. To the putting off the Shoes upon holy ground: (1.) That we think there is
some little difference to be made between what God has commanded, and what he
has forbidden; for in the case of Moses and Joshua, there was an express
command, Exodus 3. 5. Josh. 5. 15. but in the case of Image Worship there is as
plain a prohibition. (2.) That the special presence and appearance of God does
sanctify a place to so high a degree, that we may lawfully testify our
reverence toward it; but this will not hold for Images, unless God be proved
present in them in the same manner as he appeared to Moses and Joshua, and yet
even then the reverence he required, was not kissing it, or bowing to it, much
less praying to it, but only putting off their Shoes. (3.) If these things had
been done toward the ground, the danger had not been so great as to Images,
because the ground had nothing of representation in it, but was only Sacred by
Divine consecration; and therefore it could not pretend to be any similitude of
God. But in Images there is nothing Sacred, but being an Image, and so the
representation is that, which gives all the excellency and value to it; and
therefore the Reverence of holy places and things, is of quite a different
nature from the Worship of Images.

3. To the Jews adora^ion toward the Ark and the Holy of Holies, where the
Cherubims and Propitiatory were: (1.) That they only directed their Worship
toward the place, where God had promised to be signally present among them;
and signifies no more to the Worship of Images than our lifting our eyes to
Heaven, does when we pray, because God is more especially present there. (2.)
That though the Cherubims were there, yet they were always hid from the sight
of the people, the High Priest himself going into the Holy of Holies but once a
year; that the Cherubims were no representations of God; and his Throne was
between them upon the mercy seat; and were Hieroglyphical figures of Gods own
appointing which the Jews know no more than we do: which are plain arguments
they were never intended for objects of Worship; for then they must not have
been merely appendices to another thing, they must have been publicly exposed,
as the Images are in the Roman Churches, and their form as well known as any of
the B. Virgin.

4. To bowing at the name of Jesus; that he might as well have instanced in
going to Church at the toll of a bell, for as the one only tells us the time
when we ought to go to Worship God; so the mentioning the name of Jesus does
only put us in mind of him we owe all manner of reverence to, without
dishonouring him as the object of our Worship, by any image of him, which can
only represent that which is neither the object nor reason of our Worship.

5. To kneeling at the Eucharist, that of all things should not be objected to
us, who have declared in our Rubric after Communion, That thereby no adoration
is intended or ought to be done either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine,
there bodily received or any corporal presence of Christ's natural Flesh and
Blood; for the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural
substances* and therefore may not be adored; for that were Idolatry to be
abhorred of all faithful Christians.

To bowing toward the Altar, or at entering in and going out of the Church,
that it is of the same nature with the putting off our Hats, while we are
there; and is only determining a natural act of Reverence, that way which the
ancient Christians did use to direct their Worship.

CHAP. II. Of their Idolatry in Adoration of the Host and Invocation of Saints.
The Argument proposed concerning the Adoration of the Host; the insufficiency
of the Answer to it manifested: supposing equal revelation for
Transubstantiation as for Christ's Divinity, yet not the same reason for
Worshipping the Host as the person of Christ; the great disparity between these
two at large discovered; the Controversy truly stated concerning Adoration of
the Host: and it is proved, that no man on the principles of the Roman Church
can be secure he does not commit Idolatry in it. The confession of our
Adversaries, that the same Principles will justify the Worship of any
Creature. No such motives to believe Transubstantiation as the Divinity of
Christ. Bishop Taylor's Testimony answered by himself. To Worship Christ in the
Sun as lawful as to Worship him in the Host. The grossest Idolatry excusable on
the same grounds. The argument proposed and vindicated concerning the
Invocation of Saints practiced in the Church of Rome. The Fathers Arguments
against the Heathens hold against Invocation of Saints; the state of the
Controversy about Idolatry as managed by them. They make it wholly unlawful to
give divine Worship to any Creature how excellent soever. The Worship not only
of Heathen Gods, but of Angels condemned. The common evasions answered. Prayer
more proper to God than Sacrifice. No such disparity as is pretended between
the manner of Invocating Saints and the Heathens Invocating their Deities. In
the Church of Rome, they do more than pray to Saints to pray for them, proved
from the present most Authentic Breviaries. Supposing that were all, it would
not excuse them. St. Austin no friend to Invocation of Saints. Practices
condemned by the Church pleaded for it. Of Negative points being Articles of
faith.

. 1. I Proceeded to the Adoration of the Host; Of the Adoration of the Host.
and here the Argument I proposed, was, to take off the common answer, That
this could not be Idolatry because they believed the Bread to be God, upon the
same ground, I said, they who believe the Sun to be God and Worship him on that
account would be excused from Idolatry too, nay the grosser their Idolatry was,
the more excusable it would be, as that of those who supposed their Images to
be Gods, and upon this ground their Worship was more Lawful than of those who
supposed them not to be so. To this he answers two ways; 1. That they do not
barely suppose that the substance of bread is changed into Christ's body, and
that he is really present under the form of Bread, but that they know and
believe this upon the same grounds and motives upon which they believe that
Christ is God, and consequently to be adored; and further adds, that the same
argument will hold against the adoration of Christ as God, as against the
adoration of him in the Eucharist, since they have a like Divine Revelation for
his real presence under the Sacramental signs, as for his being true God and
man. 2. Supposing they were mistaken, yet it would not follow they were
Idolaters, which he proves from Dr. Tailors words. But notwithstanding these
appearances of answering, that my argument still stands good, will be evident
by proving these things. 1. That supposing there were the same revelation of
Christ's Divinity, and of his presence in the Eucharist by Transubstantiation,
yet there could not be the same reason for the Adoration of the Host, as for
worshipping Christ himself. 2. That there are not the same motives and grounds
to believe that Doctrine of Transubstantiatim, that there are to believe that
Christ is God. 3. That supposing they are mistaken in the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, this does not excuse them from Idolatry. 4. That the same
reason which would excuse them, would excuse the most gross Idolaters in the
World.

. ^. That supposing there were the same divine revelation of Transubstantiation
and of Christ's Divinity, yet there could not be the same reason for adoration
of the Host as of Christ himself. 1. Because there is a plain command in
Scripture for one, and there is nothing like it for the other. All the Angels
are commanded to Worship the Son of God, Heb. 1. 6. and much more all men who
have greater obligation to do it. All men are to honor the Son as they honor
the Father, Joh. 5. 23. and to his name every knee is to bow, Phil. 2. 10. But
where is there the least intimation given that we are to Worship Christ in the
Elements, supposing him present there? If it be said, the general command does
extend to him wherever he is present, It is easily answered that this argument
does prove no more his Worship in the Elements, than in a turfe, or any other
piece of bread; for Christ being God is every where present; and if his
presence only may be ground of giving adoration to that wherein he is present,
we may as lawfully Worship the Sun, or the Earth or any other thing, as they do
the Sacrament. For he is present in all of them. But our Worship is not to be
guided by our own Fancies, but the will of God; and we have a command for
Worshipping of the person of Christ, and till we see one as to his presence in
the Sacrament, we ought not to think the one parallel with the other. And by
this the weakness of his retorting the argument in the Arrians behalf (so he
calls those who believe Christ to be a pure man) against those who Worship the
Son of God will appear: for our Worship does not merely depend upon our belief
but upon the divine command; and therefore those who have denied the one, have
yet contended for the other. 2. The one gives us a sufficient reason for our
Worship, but the other does not: There can be no greater reason for giving his
person adoration than that he is the eternal Son of God; but what equivalent
reason to this is there, supposing the bread to be really converted into the
body of Christ? All that I can believe then present is the body of Christ; and
what then? is that the object of our adoration? do we terminate our Worship
upon his humane nature? and was it ever more properly so than in dying? is it
not the death of Christ that is set forth in the Eucharist? And is his body
present any other way than as it is agreeable to the end of the institution?
But it may be they will say, the body of Christ being hypostatically united
with the divine nature, one cannot be present without the other. That indeed is
a good argument to prove the body of Christ cannot be there by
transubstantiation: for if the bread be converted into that body of Christ
which is hypostatically united with the divine nature, then the conversion is
not merely into the body but into the Person of Christ, and then Christ has as
many bodies hypostatically united to him, as there are Elements Consecrated,
and so all the accidents of the bread belong to that body of Christ which is
hypostatically united with the divine nature. Nay to make the Elements the
object of divine worship as they do; they must suppose an hypostatical union
between them and the divine nature of Christ; for if the only reason of joining
the humane nature with the divine in the person of Christ as the object of our
Worship, be the hypostatical union of those Natures; then we can upon no other
account make those Elements the object of Worship, but by supposing such an
union between Christ and them. But I suppose they will not venture to say, that
Christ is hypostatically united with the shape, figure and color of the bread:
for they will have nothing else to remain after Consecration (in spite of all
the reason and sense of the world) but merely those accidents; Council Trident.
Sess. 13. c. 5.
and the Council of Trent determines That the same Divine Worship which we give
to God himself, is in express terms to be given to the most holy Sacrament, and
pronounces an Anathema against all who deny it. And what is the holy Sacrament
but the body of Christ, according to them under the accidents of the bread; and
although the body of Christ being believed to be there is the reason of their
Worship, yet the Worship is given to the Elements upon that account.

. 3. But this being a matter of so great importance, The State of the
Controversy.
to make it as clear as the nature of the thing will allow, I shall yet further
prove, that, upon the principles of the Roman Church, no man can be assured
that he does not commit Idolatry every time he gives adoration to the Host: and
I hope this will abundantly add to the discovering the disparity between the
Worship given to the person of Christ, and that which is given to the Eucharist
upon supposition of Transubstantiation. But before I come to this, I shall
endeavor to give a true account of the State of the Controversy between us:
which I shall do in these particulars.

1. The Question between us is not, whether the person of Christ, is to be
Worshipped with divine worship; for that we freely acknowledge. And although
the humane nature of Christ, of it self, can yield us no sufficient reason for
adoration, yet being considered as united to the divine nature, that cannot
hinder the same divine Worship being given to his person, which belongs to his
divine nature; any more than the Robes of a Prince, can take off from the
honor due unto him.

2. It is not, whether the person of Christ, visibly appearing to us in any
place, ought to have divine honor given to him? For supposing sufficient
evidence of such an appearance, we make no more question of this, than we do of
the former. Neither do we say, that we need a particular command in such a case
to make it lawful; any more than the Patriarchs did at every appearance of God
among them; or those who conversed with our Lord on earth, every time they fell
down and Worshipped him. Where our sense and reason is satisfied as well as St.
Thomas his was in a visible appearance of Christ, we can give divine Worship as
he did when he said, My Lord and my God; for in this Worship given to the
Person of Christ, I am sure I give it to nothing, but what is either God or
hypostatically united to the divine nature: But is there not the same reason of
believing Christ to be present as seeing him? I answer, in matters of pure
revelation there is, where the matter proposed to our faith can be no object of
sense; as Christ's infinite presence in all places as God, I firmly believe upon
the credit of divine revelation, and I give divine Worship to him as God
suitable to that infinite presence; but our question is, concerning the visible
presence of Christ, where honor is given on the account of the divine nature,
but he can be known to be present only by his humanity, in this case I say, the
evidence of sense is necessary in order to the true Worshipping the person of
Christ. If any should be so impertinent to urge that saying to this purpose,
Joh. 20. 29.
blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed, I shall only say,
that does not at all relate to this matter, but to the truth of Christ's
resurrection.

3. It is not, concerning the spiritual Worship of Christ, in the Celebration
of the Eucharist: For we declare that in all solemn acts of Religious Worship,
and particularly in the Eucharist we give divine honor to the Son of God, as
well as to the Father. We affirm that we ought not only perform the offices of
Religion out of obedience to his divine commands, but with a due Veneration of
his Majesty and power, with thankfulness for his infinite goodness, and with
trust in his promises, and subjection of our souls to his supreme Authority.
About these things which are the main parts of divine and spiritual Worship we
have no quarrel, nor do we find fault with any for giving too much to Christ in
this manner; but rather for placing too much in the bare external acts of
adoration, which may be performed with all external pomp and show, where there
is no inward reverence nor sincere devotion. And yet,

4. It is not, concerning external Reverence to be shown in the time of
receiving the Eucharist: For that our Church not only allows but enjoynes, and
that not barely for the avoiding such profanation and disorder in the holy
Communion as might otherwise ensue, Rubric after Communion.
but for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgement of the
benefit of Christ therein given to all worthy receivers. But it is withal
declared, that thereby no Adoration is intended or ought to be done either unto
the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto any corporal
presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood; as I have already recited it. But
the Controversy concerning the adoration of the Host lies in these two things.
1. Whether proper divine Worship in the time of receiving the Eucharist may be
given to the Elements on the account of a corporal presence of Christ under
them? 2. Whether out of the time of receiving, the same adoration ought to be
given to it, when it is elevated or carried in procession, which we would give
to the very person of Christ? And that this is the true state of the
Controversy, I appeal to the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church in this
point. For it is expressly determined by the Council of Trent, Council. T^^ dent.
(...) c. 5.
That there is no manner of doubt left, but that all Christians ought to give
the same Worship to this holy Sacrament which they give to God himself. For it
is not therefore less to be Worshipped because it was instituted by Christ our
Lord that it might be taken. By which words the true state of the Controversy
is made evident, which is not about the reverence due only to Christ, supposed
to be corporally present there, but the adoration due to the Sacrament upon
that account. And by the Sacrament the Council must understand the elements or
accidents (or whatever name they call them by) as the immediate term of that
divine Worship, or else the latter words signify nothing at all. For what was
that, which was instituted by our Lord as a Sacrament? was it not the external
and visible signs or elements? why do they urge, that the Sacrament ought not
the less to be adored because it was to be taken, but to take off the common
objection that we ought not to give divine Worship to that which we eat? And
what can this have respect to but the Elements? But this is not denied, that I
know of, by any who understand either the doctrine or practice of that Church;
although to answer our Arguments they would seem to direct their Worship only
to Christ as present under the elements, yet yielding that on the account of
this corporal presence, that which appears, ought to have the same Worship
given to it, with that which is supposed or believed. And so they make the
accidents of the Sacrament to have the very same honor which the humane nature
of Christ has, which they say has no divine honor for it self, but on the
account of the conjunction of the divinity with it.

. 4. The Controversy being thus stated I come to show that upon the Principles
of the Roman Church, No security in the Roman Church against Idolatry in
Adoration of the Host.
no man can be assured that he does not commit Idolatry every time he gives
Adoration to the Host. For it is a principle indisputable among them, that to
give proper divine honor, called by them Adoration, to a creature is Idolatry;
but no man upon the principles of their Church can be assured every time he
Worships the Host, that he does not give proper divine honor to a creature.
For there are two things absolutely necessary to secure a man's mind in the
performance of an act of divine Worship. 1. That either the object be such in
it self, which deserves and requires such Worship from us as in the divine
nature of Christ: Or, 2. That if of it self, it does not deserve it, there be a
reason sufficient to give it; as is the humane nature of Christ upon its union
with the Divine: but in this matter of the adoration of the Host no man can be
secure of either of these upon their own Principles.

1. He cannot be secure that the object is such as does deserve divine worship.
If a man should chance to believe his senses, or hearken to his reason, or at
least think the matter disputable, whether that which he sees to be bread, be
not really bread, what case is this man in? He becomes an Idolater by not being
a fool or a mad man. But because we are not now to proceed upon the principles
of sense or reason, but those of the Church of Rome; I will suppose the case of
one that goes firmly upon the received principles of it, and try whether such a
one can be satisfied in his mind, that when he gives divine worship to the
Host, he does not give it to a creature. And because we are now supposing
unreasonable things, I will suppose my self to be that person. The Mass-bell
now rings, and I must give the same divine honor to the Host, which I do to
Christ himself: but hold, if it should be but a mere creature, all the world
cannot excuse me from Idolatry, and my own Church condemns me, all agreeing
that this is gross Idolatry; how come I then to be assured, that what but a
little before was a mere creature, is upon the pronouncing a few words turned
into my Creator. A strange and sudden change! And I can hardly say, that God
becoming man was so great a wonder, as a little piece of bread becoming God.
When God became man, he showed himself to be God, by Wonders and Miracles which
he wrought for the conviction of the world: I will see, if I can find any such
evidence of so wonderful a transformation from a Wafer to a Deity. I see it to
be the very same it was, I handle it as I did, if I taste it, it has the very
same agreeableness to the Palate it had: Where then lies this mighty change? But
O carnal reason, what have I to do with thee in these mysteries of faith! I
remember what Church I am of, and how much I am bid to beware of thee: but how
then shall I be satisfied? Must I rely on the bare words of Christ, This is my
body? But I have been told, the Scripture is very obscure and dangerous for me
to be too confident of the sense of it. I have heard some wise men of our
church have said, that these words may bear a figurative sense, like that rock
was Christ, and that if there were no other evidence for transubstantiation,
but what the Scripture gives, there were no reason to make it an Article of
faith. I have heard the great names of Scotus, Aliaco, Biel, Fisher, Cajctan,
Canus and others quoted to this purpose, and their testimonies produced. What a
case am I in then, if those words do not prove it? Now I think better of it, I
must trust the Church for the sense of Scripture; and if I be not strangely
mistaken, I am sworn to interpret Scripture according to the unanimous consent
of the Fathers: but alas, what relief is this to my anxious mind? This is a
thing I am to do or not to do almost every day, and to be resolved of it, I am
put to a task which will hold me all my life time: and may be as unsatisfied at
last as I am now. For I see the world is full of Disputes concerning the sense
of their words as well as the Scriptures: One says, that a Father by a figure
means a substance, and that another by a substance means a figure; one man
says his adversaries authorities are counterfeit, and another says the same
of his: one quotes the saying of an Heretic for the Orthodox; and another
makes it appear, that if he spoke his own mind, he must contradict himself and
others of the Fathers. One produces a Pope confirming the Doctrine of
transubstantiation, and another as plain a testimony of a Pope of greater
antiquity and more learning overthrowing it. One appeals to the first Ages of
the Church, another to the latest: one says, the Fathers spoke Rhetorically,
and another, Dogmatically. One, that they loved to talk mystically, and
another, that they spoke differently about this matter. In this great confusion
what ground of certainty have I to stand upon, whereby to secure my mind from
commission of a great sin? I am sure if I live in wilful sin all my days, I
shall be damned; but God has never told me, if I do not study the Fathers all
my life, I shall be damned. It is satisfaction I desire, and that I am not like
to have this way, when I see men of greater Wit, and Subtlety, and Judgment,
than ever I am like to come to, are still disputing about the sense of the
Fathers in this point: Witness the late heats in France about it. While I am in
this Labyrinth a kind Priest offers to give me ease, and tells me, these are
doubts and scruples I ought not to trouble my self about, the authority of the
present Church is sufficient for me: I thank him for his kindness, only
desiring to know, what he means by the authority of the present Church: For I
find we Catholics are not agreed about that neither. May I be sure if the Pope
who is Head of the Church say it? No, not unless he defines it: but may I be
sure then? No, not unless a General Council concur: but may I be sure, if a
General Council determines it? Yes, if it be confirmed wholly by the Pope, and
does proceed in the way of a Council: but how is it possible for me to judge of
that, when the intrigues of actions are so secret? I see then, if this be the
only way of satisfaction, I must forbear giving adoration, or be guilty of
Idolatry in doing it. But suppose I am satisfied in the point of
transubstantiation, it is not enough for me to know in general, that there is
such a change; but I must believe particularly that very bread to be changed
so, which I am now to worship, and by what means can I be sure of that? For my
Church tells me, that it is necessary that he be a Priest that consecrates, and
that he had an intention of consecrating that very bread which I am to adore.
But what if it should come to pass after many consecrations, that such a person
prove no Priest, because not rightly baptized; (which is no unheard of thing)
what became of all their actions who worshipped every Host he pretended to
consecrate? They must be guilty of Idolatry every Mass he celebrated. But how
is it possible for me to be sure of his Priesthood, unless I could be sure of
the intention of the Bishop that ordained him, and the Priest that baptized
him? which it is impossible for me to be. Yet suppose I were sure he was a
Priest, what assurance have I, that he had an intention to consecrate that very
Wafer which I am to adore? If there were thirteen, and he had an intention to
consecrate only twelve, if I worship the thirteenth, I give divine honor to a
mere creature; for without the intention of the Priest in consecration, it can
be nothing else; and then I am guilty of downright Idolatry. So that upon the
principles of the Roman Church no man can be satisfied, that he does not
worship a mere creature with divine honor, when he gives adoration to the Host.

2. No man can be satisfied that he has sufficient reason for giving this
worship to the Host. For which we must consider, what suppositions the
adoration of the Host depends upon, if any of which prove uncertain, I am in as
bad a case as I was before. I first suppose, that the bread being really and
substantially changed into that very body of Christ which was crucified at
Jerusalem, I ought to give the same honor to that body of Christ in the
Sacrament, which I am to give to the person of Christ as God and man, and that
the body of Christ being present in the Sacrament, I may on the account of that
presence give the same honor to the Sacrament, in which he is present. But if
it prove uncertain, whether the humane nature of Christ as conjoined to the
divine nature be capable of receiving proper divine worship, then it must be
much more so, whether the body of Christ as present in the Sacrament be so? But
granting that, it may be yet uncertain, whether I ought to give the same honor
to the visible part of the Sacrament, which I do to the humanity of Christ; for
though Christ may be present there, his presence does not make the things
wherein he is present, capable of the same divine honor with himself. Now that
these things are uncertain upon their own principles, I now make appear. I find
it generally agreed by the Doctors of the Roman Church, that the humane nature
of Christ, considered alone, ought not to have divine honor given to it; and I
find it hotly disputed among them, whether Christ's humane nature though united
to the divine, ought, abstractly considered, to have any true divine honor
given it; and those who deny it, make use of this substantial argument, proper
divine honor is due only to God, but the humane nature of Christ is not God,
and therefore that honor ought not to be given it: and I am further told by
them, that the Church has never determined this controversy. Let me now apply
this to our present case: It is certain if the body of Christ be present in the
Eucharist as distinct from the divine nature I am not not to adore it: It is
very uncertain, if it be present, whether I am to give divine worship to the
body of Christ; but it is most certain, that if I worship Christ in the
Sacrament, it is upon the account of his corporal presence. For although when I
worship the person of Christ as out of the Sacrament, my worship is terminated
upon him as God and man; and the reason of my worship is wholly drawn from his
divine nature, yet when I worship Christ as in the Sacrament, I must worship
him there upon the account of his bodily presence, for I have no other reason
to Worship him in the Sacrament, but because his body is present in it. And
this is not barely determining the place of Worship, but assigning the cause of
it; for the primary reason of all adoration in the Sacrament is, because Christ
has said this is my body, which words, if they should be allowed to imply
Transubstantiation, cannot be understood of any other change than of the bread
into the body of Christ. And if such a sense were to be put upon it, why may
not I imagine much more agreeably to the nature of the institution, that the
mere humane nature of Christ is there, than that his Divinity should be there
in a particular manner present to no end; and where it makes not the least
manifestation of it self.

But if I should yield all that can be begged in this kind, viz. that the body
of Christ being present, his divinity is there present too; yet my mind must
unavoidably rest unsatisfied still as to the adoration of the Host. For
supposing the divine nature present in any thing gives no ground upon that
account, to give the same Worship to the thing wherein he is present, as I do
to Christ himself. This the more considerative men of the Roman Church are
aware of, but the different ways they have taken to answer it, rather increase
men's doubts than satisfy them. Greg. de Val. de Idolol. l. 2. c. 5.
Greg. de Valentia denies not that divine honor is given by them to the
Eucharist, and that the accidents remaining after Consecration are the term of
adoration, not for themselves, but by reason of the admirable conjunction which
they have with Christ. Which is the very same which they say of the humane
nature of Christ, and yet this same person denies, that they are hypostatically
united to him: which if any one can understand, I shall not envy him. Bell. de
Sacr. Euchar. l. 4. c. 30.
Bellarmin in answer to this argument, is forced to grant as great an
hypostatical union between Christ and the Sacrament, as between the divine and
humane nature; for when he speaks of that, De Incarnat. l. 3. c. 8.
he says it lies in this, that the humane nature loses its own proper
subsistence, and it assumed into the subsistence of the divine nature; and in
the case of the Sacrament, he yields such a losing the proper subsistence of
the bread, and that what ever remains makes no distinct suppositum from the
body of Christ, but all belong to him and make one with him, and therefore may
be Worshipped as he is. Is not this an admirable way of easing the minds of
dissatisfied persons about giving adoration to the Host, to fill them with such
unintelligible terms and notions; Vasquez. Tom. 1. disp. 108. c. 12 n. 111.
which it is impossible for them to understand themselves or explain to others?
Vasquez therefore finding well that the force of the argument lay in the
presence of Christ, and that from thence they must at last derive only, the
ground of adoration; very ingenuously yields the Consequence and grants that
God may very lawfully be adored by us in any created being, wherein he is
intimately present: and this he not only grants, but contends for in a set
disputation, wherein he proves very well from the principles of Worship allowed
in the Roman Church, Disput. 110. c. 2, 3.
that God may be adored in inanimate and irrational beings as well as in
Images, and answers all the arguments the very same way that they defend the
other, and that we way Worship the Sun as lawfully, and with the same kind of
Worship that they do an Image, and that men may be worshipped with the same
worship with which we Worship God himself if our mind do not rest in the
Creature, but be terminated upon God, as in the adoration of the Host. See here
the admirable effects of the doctrine of divine worship allowed and required in
the Roman Church! For, upon the very same principles that a Papist Worships
Images, Saints, and the Host, he may as lawfully worship the Earth, the Stars,
or Men; and be no more guilty of Idolatry in one than in the other of them. So
that if we have no more reason to Worship the person of Christ, than they have
to adore the host, upon their principles we have no more ground to worship
Christ, than we have to worship any creature in the World.

. 5. 2. There are not the same motives and grounds to believe the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, No such motives to believe Transubstantiation as the
Divinity of Christ.
that there are to believe that Christ is God, which he affirms, but without
any appearance of reason. And I would gladly know what excellent motives and
reasons those are which so advantageously recommend so absurd a doctrine as
Transubstantiation is, as to make any man think he has reason to believe it? I
am sure it gives the greatest advantage to the enemies of Christ's Divinity, to
see these two put together upon equal terms: as though no man could have reason
to believe Christ to be the Eternal Son of God, that did not at the same time
swallow the greatest contradictions to sense and reason imaginable. But what
does he mean by these motives and grounds to believe? The authority of the
Roman Church? I utterly deny that to be any ground of believing at all, and
desire with all my heart to see it proved: but this is a proper means to
believe Transubstantiation by, for the ground of believing is as absurd as the
doctrine to be believed by it. If he means Catholic Tradition, let him prove
if he can, that Transubstantiation was a Doctrine received in the universal
Church from our Saviors time; and when he pleases I shall join issue with him
upon that Subject. And if he thinks fit to put the negative upon me, I will
undertake to instance in an Age since the three first Centuries, wherein if the
most learned Fathers, and Bishops, (yea of Rome it self) be to be credited,
Transubstantiation was not believed. But if at last he means Scripture, (which
we acknowledge for our only rule of faith, and shall do in spite of all
pretenses to infallibility either in Church or Tradition) I shall appeal even
to Bellarmin himself in this case, whether there are the same motives and
grounds from thence to believe Transubstantiation, as there are, the Divinity
of Christ. In the proof of Transubstantiation, his only Argument is from those
words, this is my body, which words says he, Bellar. de Sacr. Euch. l. 3. c.
19.
do necessarily infer either a real mutation of the Bread as the Catholics
hold, or a metaphorical as the Calvinists, but by no means do admit the
Lutherans sense; and so spends the rest of the Chapter against them: and
concludes it thus, although there be some obscurity or ambiguity in the words
of our Lord, yet that is taken away by Councils and Fathers, and so passes to
them. Which are a plain indication, he thought the same which others of his
Religion have said, that the doctrine of Transubstantiation could not be proved
from Scripture alone. De Christo l. 1. c. 4.
But when he proves the Divinity of Christ, he goes through nine several
classes of arguments, six of which are wholly out of Scripture; the first out
of both Testaments, the second only out of the Old, the third out of the New,
the fourth from the names of the true God given to Christ, the fifth from the
Divine Attributes, Eternity, Immensity, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Majesty; the
sixth from the proper works of God, Creation, Conservation, Salvation,
Fore-knowing of secret things, and working Miracles. All which he largely
insists upon with great strength and clearness, so that if he may be judge, the
motives to believe the Divinity of Christ, are far from being the same in
Scripture, that there are to believe Transubstantiation.

. 6. 3. But supposing they are mistaken in the belief of this doctrine, A
mistake does not excuse from Idolatry.
this does not excuse them from Idolatry. To his quotation out of Dr. Tailors
Liberty of Prophesying to the contrary, I shall return him the opinion of their
own Divines. The Testimony of Coster is sufficiently known to this purpose, who
says the same thing in effect that I had done, Coster. Enchir Contr. c. 8. de
Euch. Sacram. p. 308.
If the doctrine of Transubstantiation be not true, the Idolatry of the
Heathens in Worshipping some Golden or Silver Statute, or any Images of their
Gods, or the Laplanders Worshipping a red cloth, or the Egyptians an animal,
is more excusable than of Christians that Worship a bit of bread. Fisher c.
Oecolompad. l. 1. c. 2. p. ((...).) 760.
And our Countryman Bishop Fisher confesses, That if there be nothing but
bread in the Eucharist, they are all Idolaters. But none is so fit to answer
Dr. Tailor as himself, after almost twenty years time to consider more
thoroughly of those things, and then he confesses, B. Tailors second part of
disswasive Introduct. in Answ. to I S. 5. way.
That the Weapons he used for their defense were but wooden daggers, though the
best he could meet with; and if that be the best they have to say for
themselves which he has produced for them, their probabilities will be soon
out-ballanced by one Scripture-testimony urged by Protestants; and thou shall
not Worship any graven Images will outweigh all the best and fairest
imaginations of their Church: and elsewhere, That the second Commandment is so
plain, 2. Part of diss^as. b. 2. s. 6. p. 139.
so easy, so peremptory against all the making and Worshipping any Image or
likeness of any thing, that besides that every man naturally would understand
all such to be forbidden, it is so expressed, that upon supposition that God
intend to forbid it wholly, it could not more plainly have been expressed. By
which it is clear he did not think that Idolatry did lie only in forsaking the
true God, and giving divine Worship to a Creature or an Idol, that is to an
imaginary God, who has no foundation in essence or existence; which is the
reason he brings why they are excused from Idolatry in Adoration of the Host,
because the object of their adoration is the true God; for he not only makes
the second command to be peremptory and positive against the Worship of the
true God, by an Image, but elsewhere plainly determins this to be Idolatry;
Ductor dubitant. b. 2. c. 2. p. 344. p. 339.
and says that an image then becomes an Idol, when divine Worship is given to
it; and that, to Worship false Gods, or to give divine honor to an image which
is not God is all one kind of formal Idolatry. If therefore they cannot be
excused from Idolatry who Worship the true God by an Image; though the object
of their adoration be right and they think the manner of it to be lawful;
neither can they who worship Christ upon the account of Transubstantiation in
the Sacrament; for not only the superstition of an undue object, but of a
prohibited manner or way of Worship is Idolatry; even according to the opinion
of him whom he produces as a testimony of their innocence.

. 7. 4. That if a mistake in this case will excuse them, The grossest Idolatry
excusable on the same grounds. Aug. prefat. in Psalm. 93. To. 8. p. 2. p. 184.
it would excuse the grossest Idolatry in the world. St. Austin speaks of some,
who said that Christ was the Sun, and therefore worshipped the Sun, I desire to
know whether this were Idolatry in them or no? They had Scripture to plead for
it as plain as, This is my body, for he is not only called the Sun of
Righteousness; but the Vulgar Latin (which they contend to be the only
authentic version) reads that place, Psalm. 19. 6. in sole posuit tabernaculum
suum, he has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun; and that this is to be
understood of Christ, may be proved from the Apostles applying the other words,
their line is gone out through all the earth; to the Apostles Preaching the
Gospel, Aug. c. Faust Manich. l. 20. c. 1. 68.
Romans 10. 18. And the Manichees did believe that Christ had his residence
partly in the Sun and partly in the Moon, and therefore they directed their
prayers always to the Sun. Let us now consider two persons equally persuaded,
that the Sun is now the Tabernacle of Christ, and that he is really present
there, and dispenses all the comfortable influences of heat and light to the
world, he being so often in Scripture called the true light, 1 John 8. 9. and
another, that he is really present by Transubstantiation in the Sacrament. I
would fain understand why the one should not be as free from Idolatry as the
other? If it be said, that all those places which speak of Christ as the Sun,
are to be understood metaphorically, that is the same thing we say to them
concerning those words of Christ, this is my body; and if notwithstanding that,
they are excused by believing otherwise; so must the other person unavoidably
be so too. It is to no purpose to allege Fathers and Councils for the opinion
more than for the other; for the question is not concerning the probability of
one mistake more than of the other (although if they be strictly examined, the
absurdities of Transubstantiation are much greater) but we suppose a mistake in
both, and the question is whether such a mistake does excuse from Idolatry or
no? and we are not to enquire into the reasons of the mistake, but the
influence it has upon our actions. And then we are to understand why a mistake
equally involuntary as to the real object of divine adoration may not excuse
from Idolatry, as well as to the wrong application of Worship due to a real
object of adoration? i. e. whether a man giving adoration to what he believes
to be God, which is not so in it self, be not as excusable, as believing a true
object of adoration in general, but giving divine worship to that which is not
it? as whether the Worshipping false Gods, supposing them to be true, be not as
venial a fault, as Worshipping that for the true God which is not so? as for
instance, suppose the Egyptians Worshipping the Sun for God, and the
Israelites the golden Calf, believing it was the true God which brought them
out of the Land of Egypt? or let us take one of the Inca's of Peru, Garcilasso
de la vega le Conmentaire Royal. live. 2. c. 1.
who believed by a Tradition supposed infallible among them, that the Sun was
their Father and the visible God, by which the Invisible did govern the World;
and therefore they ought to give all external adoration to the Sun, and
internal only to the Invisible Deity; upon what account shall these be charged
with Idolatry, if an involuntary mistake and firm belief that they worship the
true God does excuse from it? Nay the most stupid and senseless of all
Idolaters who worshipped the very Images for Gods (which the wisest among them
always disclaimed, and pretended only such a relative worship as he pleads
for) were in truth the most excusable upon this ground; for supposing that it
be true which they believed, they did a very good thing; and which every person
else ought to do upon the same belief. Which is the utmost can be said for the
Papists adoration of the Host, supposing the doctrine of transubstantiation
were as true, as it is false and absurd.

. 8. 3. As to invocation of Saints, Of Invocation of Saints.
I found the chief answer given was this, That they did not attribute the same
kind of excellency to Saints, which they give to God; but suppose only a middle
sort of excellency between God and us, which they make the foundation of the
worship which is given to them. And as to this my argument was thus framed, If
the supposition of a middle excellency between God and us, be sufficient ground
for formal invocation, then the Heathens worship of their inferior Deities
could be no Idolatry, for they still pretended they did not give to them the
worship proper to the supreme God; which is as much as is pretended by the
devoutest Papists in justification of the Invocation of Saints. To this he
answers two ways: 1. By showing the disparity of the Heathens worship from
theirs in two things: 1. In the object. 2. In the manner of their worship. 1.
The persons whom they worship, he says, are such as are endowed with
supernatural gifts of grace in this life, and glory in Heaven, whose prayers by
consequence are acceptable and available with God, but the Supreme Deity of the
Heathens, is known to be Jupiter, and their inferior Deities Venus, Mars,
Bacchus, Vulcan, and the like rabble of Devils as the Scripture calls them; and
therefore there can be no consequence, that because the Heathens were Idolaters
in the worship of these, though they pretended not to give them the worship
proper to Jupiter the supreme God; therefore the Catholics must be guilty of
Idolatry in desiring the servants of the true God to pray for them to him. 2.
As to the manner of worship, he says, If any of them did attain, as the
Platonists, to the knowledge of the true God, yet as St. Paul says, they did
not glorify him as God, but changed his glory into an Image made like to
corruptible man, adoring and offering sacrifice due to God alone to the Statues
themselves, or the inferior Deities they supposed to dwell or assist in them;
which St. Austin upon the 90. Psalm proves to be Devils, or evil Angels,
because they required sacrifice to be offered to them, and would be worshipped
as Gods. But all he means by formal Invocation, he says is, desiring or
praying the Saints to pray for them. And if this were Idolatry, we must not
desire the prayers of a just man, even in this life, because this formal
invocation will be to make him an Inferior Deity. 2. He answers, that the same
calumny was cast upon the Catholics in St. Austins time, and is answered by
him, and his answer will serve as well now as then, in his twentieth Book
against Faustus, Chap. 21. who himself held formal Invocation a part of the
worship due to Saints, as is evident from the prayer he made to St. Cyprian
after his Martyrdom, l. 7. de bapt. c. Donat. c. 1. and Calvin confesses (he
says) it was the custom at that time to say, Holy Mary, or Holy Peter pray for
us. This is his full answer: in which are two things to be examined. 1. Whether
the disparity between the Heathen worship and theirs be so great as to excuse
them from Idolatry? 2. Whether the answer given by St. Austin does vindicate
them: and whether Invocation of Saints as it is now practiced in the Church of
Rome, were allowed or in use then?

. 9. 1. Concerning the disparity. The Fathers arguments against Heathen
Idolatry condemn Invocation of Saints.
1. As to the object of worship. Far be it from me to parallel the Holy Angels
and Saints, with the impure Deities of the Heathens; as to their excellencies:
but the true state of the Question is, whether the Heathens were only too blame
in making an ill choice of those they worshipped, as in worshipping Jupiter,
and Venus, and Vulcan, who are supposed to have been wicked wretches; or else
in giving divine worship to any besides the true God? And if their Idolatry lay
not only in the former, but the latter, then this disparity cannot excuse them.
There were two Questions in debate between the Primitive Fathers of the
Christian Church, and the Heathen Idolaters; The first was more general, and in
thesi, whether it were lawful to give divine worship to any besides the true
and Supreme God? The second was more particular, and in hypothesi, whether on
supposition that were lawful, those whom the Heathens worshipped were fit
objects for such adoration? In this latter they triumph over them with a great
deal of eloquence, laying open the impiety of those whom they commonly
worshipped; but withal knowing that the wiser among them had another notion of
these Deities under the common names than the Vulgar had; they therefore charge
them with Idolatry in giving the worship proper to God to any creature, let it
be never so excellent and serviceable to mankind, and that it was the property
of the Christian Religion to give divine worship to none but God himself and
his Son Christ Jesus, without ever making any distinctions of absolute and
relative worship which they must have been driven to, in case they had given
Religious worship to any besides. Thus Justin Martyr tells the Heathen
Emperors, Justin. Martyr Apol. 2. p. 65, 66.
to whom he makes his Apology for the Christians, that Christ did persuade men
to worship God alone, by saying, this is the great Commandment, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; and that we are to
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods: on which account, says he, we worship God alone, and give cheerful
service in all other things to you. Theophil. ad Autolyc. l. 1. p. 77.
Theophilus Bishop of Antioch (who lived in the second Century after Christ, as
well as Justin) giving an account why the Christians refused giving adoration
to the Emperors which was then used (not that adoration which was proper to
the Supreme God, for none can be so senseless to imagine they required that;
but such kind of religious worship as they gave to the Images of their Gods)
says, That as the King or Emperor suffers none under him to be called by his
name; and that it is not lawful to give it to any but himself: so neither is it
to worship any but God alone: and elsewhere says, L. a. p. 110.
that the Divine Law does not only forbid the worship of Idols, but of the
Elements, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, or any thing else in Heaven, in Earth,
in Sea, or Fountains, or Rivers, but we ought only to worship the true God and
Maker of all things, in the holiness of our hearts and integrity of our minds.
To the same purpose speak Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin,
Athenagoras, Lactantius, Arnobius, who all agree, that religious worship is
proper to the true God, and that no created thing is capable of it, on that
very account because it is created; it were easy to produce their testimonies,
if it were requisite in so evident a matter as this is. If it be said, That all
these testimonies are only against that Idolatry which was then practiced by
the Heathens. I answer, 1. Their reasons equally extend to the giving divine
worship to any created being whatsoever, so that either they argued weakly and
unskilfully, or else it is as unlawful to give divine worship now to Saints, as
it was then to any creature. 2. I would willingly understand why it should be
more unlawful to worship God for his admirable Wisdom, and Power and Goodness
in the works of Creation; than in supposed Saints? i. e. why I may not as well
honor God by giving worship to the Sun, as to Ignatius Loyola, or St. Francis,
or any other late Canonized Saint? I am sure the Sun is a certain monument of
Gods Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, and I cannot be mistaken therein, but I can
never be certain of the Holiness of those persons I am to give divine worship
to. For all that I can know, Ignatius Loyola was a great hypocrite; but I am
sure that the Sun is none; but that he shines and communicates perpetual
influences to the huge advantage of the world. However I know the best of men
have their corruptions, and to what degree it is impossible for others to
understand; but I am certain the spots in the Sun are no Moral impurities, nor
displeasing to God. And Philip Nerius could not be mistaken in the shining of
the Sun, although he might be in the shining of Ignatius his face, which yet is
thought so considerable a thing, Breviar. Romans 31. Iul. Antw. 1663.
that it is read in the Lessons appointed for Ignatius in the Roman Breviary.

3. On what account should the Christians refuse giving all external signs of
Religious worship to the Heathen Emperors, if they thought it lawful to be
given to any sort of men? Why might not they worship the Statues of Kings and
Princes, as well as others do those of Rebels and Traitors? I mean, why might
not the Image of King Henry the second have the same reverence shown to it,
that the Shrine of Thomas Becket had? unless it be more meritorious to disobey
a Prince, than to give him reverence. Might not the Primitive Christians have
much easier defended themselves in giving those outward signs of worship to the
Images of Emperors, than others can do in the worship they give to Saints? For
they might have pleaded, that external signs are to be interpreted by the
intention of the person who uses them, that they intended no more by it, but
the highest degree of Civil honor on the account of the authority they
possessed? or if this would not serve, might not they have said, that Kings and
Princes were Gods Vicegerents, and represented him to the world, and that in
giving divine worship to them, they gave it to God; and that their absolute,
ultimate, and terminative worship was upon God; and only a relative, inferior,
and transient worship was given to them, and all this might be better justified
by St. Basils rule, S. Basil. ad Amphiloch. p. 332.
That the honor of the Image passes to the Prototype; for he there pleads for
the worship of Christ, because he is one with the Father being his Image, as
the Image of a King is called the King, and has the same honor given to it;
for the honor of the Image passes to the thing represented. And as Christ
has the advantage above all, by being Gods natural Image; so Princes above
Saints, in that they represent God to the world, which the other do not. But
notwithstanding all these Pleas, the Primitive Christians were so punctual in
observing that Command of worshipping God alone, that they rather chose to lose
their lives and suffer Martyrdom, than be in the least guilty of giving any
divine worship to a creature.

4. They absolutely deny any religious worship to be given to the most
excellent created Beings, and therefore did not only condemn the Idolatry then
in use, but that which has obtained in the Roman Church: supposing all the
persons worshipped therein to have been real Saints. For that, we are to
consider that all the Heathens were not such great Fools, as some men make them
to excuse themselves: V. Aug. c. Faust. l 20. c. 9.
if the wiser men were contented to let the people worship the Poetical Gods,
having their minds possessed with those Idea's of them, which they had taken up
by their education; yet they understood them only as Allegories, Baron.
Martycol. Apr. 23 and Iulii 25.
(as some make the Image of St. Christopher and St. George in the Church of
Rome to be no other) and they had Temples erected to the greatest Virtues, to
Piety, Faith, Concord, Justice, Chastity, Clemency, etc. and others to the
greatest Benefactors to mankind, which was the only ground they pleaded for
giving worship to them: but still they acknowledged one Supreme God, not
Jupiter of Creet, but the Father of Gods and men; only they said, this Supreme
God being of so high a nature, and there being other intermediate beings
between him and men whose Office they conceived, it was to carry the prayers of
men to God, and to bring down help from him to them; they thought it very
fitting to address their solemn supplications to them. Here now was the very
same case in debate, (altering only the names of things) which is between us
and the Church of Rome; and if ever they speak home to our case, they must do
upon this point. And so they do, but very little to their comfort.

. 10. These things I shall largely prove if farther occasion be given, All
divine worship given to a cre^ture condemned by the Fathers.
at present I shall only insist on two things. 1. That they did condemn all
such kind of worship, supposing their principle true. 2. That they did not only
condemn it in those Spirits which the Heathens worshipped, but in good Angels
themselves. 1. They did condemn the worship, supposing their principle true.
For this I shall produce now but few Authorities, but such as are full as to
the Heathens pretenses, Origin. c. c^ls. l. 8. p. 381.
and the Christians answers. The first is of Origin in his answer to Celsus,
who objects against the Christians, the unreasonableness of forsaking the
worship of inferior Deities, because no man can serve two Masters; which,
says he, is a seditious principle, and arises from attributing our passions to
God; but he that honors them as Subjects to the Supreme God, cannot offend him
who is the Lord of them. To which Origin answers, That the Scripture does
indeed style God, the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, but withal says, that to
us, there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him; which the Apostle speaks, says
he, of himself and all others whose minds were raised up to him, who is the God
of Gods, and Lord of Lords; and his mind ascends up to the Supreme God, who
worships him inseparably and indivisibly by his Son, who alone conducts us to
the Father. Therefore seeing there are many Gods and many Lords, we endeavor
by all means, not only to carry our minds above those things on Earth, which
are worshipped by the Heathen for Gods, but above those whom the Scripture
calls Gods, by which it is plain by the drift of his discourse, he means the
Angels. And Celsus afterward yielding, P. 384.
That it is not lawful to give honor to any, but to whom the Supreme does
communicate it: Origin desires proof from them, That God has communicated this
honor to their Gods, Heroes and Demons, and that it did not arise from the
ignorance and folly of mankind, who thereby fell off from him who ought
properly to be worshipped. But he proves, from Miracles and Prophecies and
Precepts, than this honor was given to Christ, that they who honor the
Father, should honor the Son also: and that was all which Celsus had to object
against the Christians, That they did not keep to their own rule of worshipping
God alone; for they thought God was not dishonored by the honor they gave to
Christ; and on the same account he thought, they might give it to inferior
Deities. If there had been then any suspicion of Religious worship given to
Saints or Angels by the Christians, when had there been a more proper season to
object it? No man of the meanest capacity would have omitted a matter so
necessary to his business, much less so inquisitive and malicious an enemy as
Celsus was. And the account Origin gives of the worship the Christians
attribute to the Son of God is, because it is said, I and my Father are one;
and the Father in me, and I in him; which cannot be said of any created Beings.
It is true afterward he says, That if Celsus had spoken of the true Ministers
of God, such as Gabriel, Michael and all the Angels and Archangels, he
acknowledges, that by explaining the notion of worship or respect, and the
actions of those who give it, somewhat more might be said on that subject. But
he utterly denies, that our prayers are to be offered to any but Christ alone,
and that any word which is proper only to Religious worship, is to be
attributed to the Angels themselves. For he says elsewhere, Although the
Angels be called Gods in Scripture, L. 5. p. 233.
yet we are not to worship them with divine worship: and lest any should think,
that offering up our Prayers or Invocations to them were not excluded by this;
he immediately explains himself; For, says he, all our supplications, prayers,
intercessions and thanksgivings are to be offered only to God over all; by that
High Priest who is greater than all the Angels, the living Word and God. And
afterward says, (...), P. 238.
we ought not to pray to them, who pray for us; for they would rather
themselves send us to that God to whom they pray, than have us pray to them, or
divide our supplications between God and them. This he speaks indeed of the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, but upon the supposition that they are intellectual
Beings, and do pray to God for us. And again he says, I. 8 p 395.
We ought to pray only to the God over all, and his only Son the first born of
every creature, who as our High Priest, P. 402.
offers our prayers to his God and our God. And because Celsus argues much for
worship to be given to Daemans, because to them is committed the care of
terrestrial affairs: to this Origin answers, by denying those whom he calis
Demons, P. 416.
to have any administration of the affairs of Christians; but supposing we knew
they were not Demons, but Angels, which had the management of these things
committed to them, yet then we dare not give them that honor which is due to
God, for neither would God have it so, nor they themselves; but (...), we
celebrate their praise and happiness, to whom God has entrusted such great
things. But Celsus yet further urges, that according to the doctrine of the
Egyptians every part of a man has a particular Demon or Ethereal God, and
every one of these being invocated, heals the diseases of the parts proper to
themselves. Why then may they not justly invocate them, if they love health
better than sickness, and happiness than misery. If one of the Church of Rome
had been to answer Celsus, he must have told him, that the thing was rational
which he said, only they were out in their names; for instead of Chnumen,
Chnaachumen, Cnat, Sicat, Biu, Eru, etc. they should have chosen Raphael for
traveling and against Diseases, Apollonia against the Toothache, Sebastian and
Roch against the Plague, St. Nicholas against Tempests, Michael and St. George
against Enemies; and others in like cases. Serrar. Litan. 2 q. 32.
For so Serrarius tells us, That experience and tradition has discovered the
particular help of these in such cases; if they be particularly invocated. But
Origin gives a shorter answer, That these things do arise from a distrust of
the sufficiency of that incommunicable worship we give to God alone, as though
he were not able to protect every one that serves him from all snares: and that
far more effectual cures have been wrought by the name of Jesus than all their
Demons. And how much better do those who are Christians who slight all these
things and commit themselves to God over all through his son Jesus Christ, and
of him do desire the help and protection of his Holy Angels? I shall conclude
his Testimony with that excellent saying of his. p. 420.
Our care ought to be to please one God over all, and to make him propitious to
us, by piety and all virtue, but if we would have others under God to be
pleased with us too, we ought to consider, that as the shadow follows the body,
so God being pleased, all his friends whether Angels, Souls or Spirits will be
so too, and not only so, but are ready to help them, and pray to God for them.
But not the least foundation in his discourse for our invocation of them.

The Author of the Commentaries under the name of St. Ambrose, Ambros. in 1.
Romans To. 5. p. 174.
of the same age with him, as appears by several passages in him: says, That
the Idolaters made use of this miserable excuse for themselves, that by those
inferior Deities they worshipped they went to God himself, as we go to the
King by his Courtiers. But, says he, is any man so mad, or regardless of
himself, to give the honor due to the King to any of his Courtiers, which if a
man does he is condemned for treason? And yet they think themselves not guilty
who, give the honor due to Gods name to a creature, and forsaking God adore
his fellow servants, as though any thing greater than that were reserved for
God himself. But therefore we go to a King by his Officers and Servants,
because the King is but a man, who knows not of himself whom to employ in his
public affairs, (without being recommended by others:) But with God it is
otherwise, for nothing is hid from him, he knows the deserts of every one, and
therefore we need no one to recommend us to his Favor; a devout mind is
enough. Was this now all the quarrel the Christians had with the Heathens that
they worshipped Jupiter and Venus and Vulcan? Do they not expressly deny the
giving Gods Worship to any Creature? and do they not as plainly affirm that men
do it when they invocate their fellow servants to be intercessors with God for
them? and that it is no less a guilt of Idolatry in this case, than it is in
giving the Honor due to a Prince to any of his Servants?

St. Austin gives this account of the principles of the Heathen Worship, Aug.
de Civit. Dei. l. 8. c. 14. 18.
that there were three sorts of beings to be considered, purely divine, and
mortal, and a middle sort between them which participated of both, and that the
intercourse between Gods and men was by the means of those intermediate Beings,
who carried the prayers of men up to God, and brought down the blessings they
prayed for to men. Against these indeed St. Austin disputes first, by showing
that those spirits which they worshipped were evil spirits, and that there was
no reason to imagine that God had a greater intercourse with them, than with
penitent sinners, but withal he adds, C. 21.
that this kind of worship does proceed upon the supposition that the Gods
cannot know the necessities and prayers of men, but by the intervention of
those Spirits: but if our minds can be known without their help, there is no
need of their mediation. L. 9. c. 15.
And afterward says, that those who are Christians do believe that we need
not many, but one Mediator, and that such a one by whose participation we are
made happy, i. e. the word of God not made but by whom all things were made:
and he has showed that to the attaining blessedness we ought not to seek many
Mediators, by whom we are to make our degrees of approach to God, because God
himself by partaking our Nature, has shown us the shortest way of our
partaking his divinity. Neither does he delivering us from mortality and misery
carry us so to immortal and blessed Angels, that by participating with them, we
should become blessed and immortal; but to that Trinity by whose participation
the Angels themselves are blessed. And concludes that Book with this saying, L.
9. c. 23.
that immortal and blessed Spirits however they are called, which are made and
created; are no Mediators to bring miserable mortals, to blessedness and
immortality. And it would be ridiculous here to distinguish mediators of
redemption and intercession; for all that they attributed to their goods
spirits was only Intercession; and Christ being made a Mediator, effectual for
the end he designed, there could be no necessity of any Intercessours besides
him. And St. Austin there adds, that the design of his following book, is to
prove that those good Spirits which are immortal and blessed, which they
thought ought to be Worshipped with Sacred Rites and Sacrifices, whatsoever
they are and howsoever called, would not have any one worshipped by such
religious worship, (i.e. by sacred rites as well as Sacrifices) but only one
God by whom they were created, and by whose participation they are made happy.

. 11. By which the second thing I proposed will appear to be true, The Worship
of Angels condemned.
viz. that they did not only condemn giving this Worship to the Spirits which
the Heathen Worshipped but to good Angels too. Col. 2. 18.
For St. Paul in the general does condemn the Worship of Angels; if he had
meant only evil Angels he would have expressed it so, especially if St. Austins
observation be true, that the evil Spirits are by their names in Scripture
distinguished from the good; if he had meant any particular superstition used
in the Worship of Angels, he would not have used such terms which condemn all
worship of them as superstitious; if he had meant only the Worship of Angels so
as to exclude Christ, he would have intimated that the fault, lay in excluding
Christ, and not in the bare worship of Angels; but by the series of his
discourse it appears that those who set up other Mediators besides Christ do
not hold the head, i. e. do not adhere to Christ alone, as him whom God has
appointed as our Mediator only. Whether this were practiced by Jews,
Philosophers, or Heretics is all one to us, since the practice is condemned
wherever it is found. Theodoret says, Theod. in Coloss 2. 18.
they were the Jews who persuaded men to worship Angels, because the Law was
delivered by Angels; which practice he says, continued a long time in Phrygia
and Pisidia, and therefore the Synod of Laodicea does forbid praying to Angels;
and to this day the Oratories of St. Michael are among them, they therefore
thought it a piece of humility, since God could not be seen, nor touched, nor
comprehended by us, to obtain the favor of God, by the intercession of Angels.
No wonder Baronius is so much displeased with Theodoret for this
interpretation; Baron. An. 60. s. 20, 21.
for he very fairly tells us what he condemns (and St. Paul too) was the
practice of their Church; and those Oratories were set up by Catholics and not
by heretics. But whether as to the lawfulness of this Worship, Baronius or St.
Paul, whether as to the ancient practice of the Church, Baronius or Theodoret
deserves more to be believed, I leave any one to judge. And yet Theodoret is
not alone in this, Iren. l. 2. c. 57.
for Irenaeus denies any invocations of Angels to be in use among Christians,
if he had meant only evil Angels it seems very strange he should use the name
generally given to good, and always indifferent to both. Orig. c. Cells. l. 5.
p. 233.
Origin expressly denies any offering up of Prayers to them to be practiced by
Christians or reasonable to be done, P. 236.
and produces this very place of the Apostle against it. Con^il. Laodic. Can.
35.
The Council of Laodicea we see by Theodoret is very severe against all who
Worship Angels and charges them with Idolatry in so doing; if they had only
meant the Heathen Idolaters as Baronius contends, yet by that it appears that
the Heathens were condemned for Worshipping those whom they believed to be good
spirits; but these are only shifts to escape by, and such which would not have
come into the mind of any man if he did not first fear the force of that Canon
against the practice of the Roman Church. For why the Heathen Idolatry should
at that time be called secret or hidden as it is in that Canon, is not easy to
be thought upon; but very easily intelligible according to Theodorets
interpretation because of the clandestine meetings of those who worshipped
Angels, and therein separated themselves from the Christian Churches. St.
Austin discourses purposely on this subject (as is intimated before) whether
God or the Blessed Spirits are willing we should perform any sacred offices or
Sacrifices to them; Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 10. c. 1.
or consecrate our selves or any thing of ours to them by any religious rites,
which he denies: For this, says he, is the worship proper to the Deity, called
by him in one word Latria, which he thinks more proper to express divine
worship, as distinct from the honor and service we give to men (which is
plainly his meaning there) than any one word Greek or Latin besides. And this
word he says is proper to the Deity as such, because he elsewhere tells us,
Aug. q. in Exodus q. 94.
the difference between (...) and (...), is this, that (...) is the Service of
God properly as God; (...) is the service of God as Lord.

. 12. I know very well by what arts all these testimonies are endeavored to be
evaded, The common evasions answered.
viz. by saying, That these are intended against the Gentiles Idolatry who
Worshipped those Spirits as Gods, and offered Sacrifices to them; but this
cannot hold as to the Doctrine or practice of the Roman Church, who deny them
to be Gods, and assert that the Worship by Sacrifice is proper only to God: but
such devices as these are can never satisfy an impartial mind. For (1.) They
do expressly deny that invocation or prayer is to be made to them; for so Origin
and Theodoret speak expressly, that men are not to pray to Angels; and any one
that reads St. Austin will find that he makes solemn invocation to be as proper
to God as Sacrifice is. (2.) On what account should it be unlawful to Sacrifice
to Saints or Angels if it be lawful to invocate them? may not one be relative
and transient as well as the other? nay the Heathen in St. Austin argued very
well, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 10. c. 19.
that Sacrifices being mere external things might more properly belong to the
Inferior Deities, but the more invisible the Deity was, the more invisible the
Sacrifices were to be, and the greater and better the Deity, the Sacrifice was
to be still proportionable: and can any man in his senses think that a mere
outward Sacrifice is more acceptable to God, than the devotion of our heart is?
and wherein can we better express that to God, than in offering up our prayers
to him? so that in all reason the duty of prayer ought to be reserved as more
proper to God than any external sacrifice, and those who did appropriate
Sacrifice to God did comprehend prayer as the most spiritual and acceptable
part of it: L. 10. c. 4.
So St. Austin speaking of the Sacrifice due to God, makes our heart the Altar,
and Christ our Priest, and our Prayers and Praises to be offered up to God by a
fervent charity; and any work which is therefore done that thereby we may be
united to God in a holy Communion with him, C. 6.
in order to our happiness, to be a true Sacrifice; and let any man judge
whether this description do not so naturally agree to prayer, as if it had been
only intended for it. Besides it is observable that sacrifices of old were
solemn rites of supplication; Genesis 21. 33. 26. 25.
and calling upon the name of the Lord where Altars were erected is the main
thing spoken of, thence the Temple (though the place of sacrifice) is called
the house of Prayer; Isa. 56. 7.
and where God slights sacrifices, Psalm. 50. 8. 15.
he requires prayer as much more acceptable to him. It seems then very strange
that sacrifice alone as distinguished from prayer should be that Latria that is
proper to God. (3.) Upon the same account that the Heathen did give divine
honor to their inferior Deities, those in the Roman Church do so to Angels
and Saints. For the Heathens made a difference in their sacrifices to the
supreme God, and their inferior Deities and their Heroes: so that if the
putting any difference in the way of religious Worship does excuse the one, it
must do the other also. Did the Heathen use solemn Ceremonies of making any
capable of divine worship? so does the Roman Church. Did they set up their
Images in public places of worship and there kneel before them and invocate
those represented by them? so does the Roman Church. Did they consecrate.
Temples and erect Altars to them, and keep Festivals and burn Incense before
them? so does the Roman Church. Lastly, did they offer up Sacrifices in those
Temples to the Honor of their lesser Deities and Heroes? so does the Roman
Church. Bell. de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 7.
For Bellarmin reckoning up the honors belonging to Canonized Saints besides
those before mentioned, reckons up this as one, that the Sacrifices of the
Eucharist, and of lauds and prayers are publicly offered to God for their
honor. I would fain understand what the sacrificing to one for the honor of
another means? To offer Sacrifice to one for another is an intelligible thing,
but to Sacrifice to one for the honor of another is a thing beyond my reach,
if that sacrifice does not belong to him for whose honor it is offered; and if
the sacrifice do belong to him, I wonder at the scrupulosity of those who dare
not say they Sacrifice to him as well. For what is sacrificing to God, but
sacrificing to his honor, or doing such an act of Religion with a design to
honor God by it: but when men offer a Sacrifice, but not to honor God by it,
but the B. Virgin, or any Saints or Angels, how can that Sacrifice belong to
any other but those whose honor is designed by it? It being then the opinion
and practice of the Roman Church, that Sacrifices are to be offered for the
honor of Saints or Angels, it is evident they have reserved no part of divine
worship peculiar to God himself, any more than the Heathen did. (4.) There can
be no material difference, that the Heathen called those they worshipped Gods,
but they do not so in the Roman Church. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 9. c. 23.
For St. Austin says there was scarce any difference between the Heathen and
them about the name, whether Angels might be called Gods or no: for he thinks
that they are called so in Scripture, as well as Origin: but the Question was
about the thing, whether they were to be Worshipped as Gods or no, i. e. by
giving any part of religious worship to them? which they utterly deny. And were
I in the communion of the Roman Church I should much less scruple calling
Canonized Saints, or Angels by the names of Gods, than giving them the worship
of Invocation, or the honor of Sacrifices: but in so doing they are not only
condemned by plain Scripture, and reason, but by those of the primitive Church
who writ against the Heathen Idolatry: which was the thing to be showed.

. 13. 2. Another disparity is insisted on by him, Of the practice of Invocation
in the Church of Roms.
which is, as to the manner of Worship. And as to this, he says, all that they
understand by formal invocation, is desiring or praying those Just persons, who
are in glory in heaven to pray for us; and if the Catholics be guilty of
Idolatry in this, we must not desire the prayers of a just man even in this
life, because this formal Invocation will be to make him an inferior Deity.
To show the palpable weakness of this answer, I shall prove these two things.
1. That those in the Church of Rome do allow and practice another kind of
formal Invocation from what he asserts. 2. That supposing this were all, it
would not excuse them, and that it is of a very different nature from desiring
the prayers of just men for us in this life.

1. That they do allow and practice another kind of formal Invocation from what
he asserts. He might very well say, he did understand well what I meant by
formal Invocation, when he makes this to be the meaning of it; for never any
person before him imagined that sense of it; And that term of formal Invocation
was purposely chosen by me, to distinguish it from the rhetorical Apostrophe's
of some of the Greek Fathers, the Poetical Flourishes, of Damasus, Prudentius,
and Paulinus; from general wishes that the Saints would pray for us. Of which
are some instances, in good Authors; from assemblies at the monuments of
Martyrs, which were usual in ancient times; and that which I thought any man
would understand by it was that which is constantly practiced in the Roman
Church. viz. in places and times purposely appointed for divine and religious
worship, with all the same external signs of devotion which we use to God
himself, to offer up our Prayers to Saints, or Angels to help us in our
necessities as well as to pray to God for us. The former part none can be
ignorant of, that have but so much as heard of the devotion of the Church of
Rome; all the difficulty lies in that, whether they pray to them to help their
necessities as well as pray for them? And so many forms of Prayer allowed and
practiced in their Church have been so often objected to them, wherein these
things are manifest, that I cannot but wonder this should be denied. Do they
believe, we never look into their Breviaries, Rosaries, Hours, and other Books
of Devotion, wherein to this day such Prayers are to be found? Do they think we
never heard of the Offices of the B. Virgin, or our Ladies Psalter a
Blasphemous Book, never yet censured, wherein the Psalms, in their highest
strains of Prayer to God are applied to the V. Mary? I have known my self
intelligent persons of their Church who commit their souls to the V. Mary's
protection every day, as we do to Almighty Gods: and such who thought they
understood the doctrine and practice of their Church as well as others. But,
Madam, these are mysteries not to be known till they have their Proselytes safe
and fast enough, then by degrees they let them know, what is to be done, when
they have given away all liberty of judging for themselves. Then it is no
matter what they are commanded or expected to do, they must do as others do, or
else their sincerity is questioned, and they are thought Heretics in their
hearts, whatever they profess. I shall not insist upon any ancient Breviaries,
or obsolete Forms, or private Devotions, which yet they are accountable for,
till they do condemn them. I need no more than the present Roman Breviary
restored according to the Council of Trent, and authorized by three several
Popes. In the Feast of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, as though it were not
enough in the Antiphonae to say, Brev. Romans Antw. 1663. p 984.
Hail Blessed Virgin, thou alone have destroyed all Heresies in the world; but
lest this should be interpreted of doing it by her Son, a formal Invocation of
her follows, Vouchsafe to let me praise thee O Holy Virgin; and give me
strength against thy enemies. And in the Hymn frequently used in her Office,
and particularly that day, she is not only called the Gate of Heaven, but she
is entreated to loose the bonds of the guilty, to give light to the blind, and
to drive away our evils, and to show her self to be a Mother; (or as it is in
the Massbook at Paris 1634. Iure Matris impera redemptori, as thou art a
Mother, command the Redeemer) In a word, They pray to her therein for purity of
life, and a safe conduct to Heaven. But lest the Hymns should be thought only
Poetical, in the Feast of S. Maria ad Nives; P. 911.
Aug. 5. a formal prayer is made to her, to help the miserable, to strengthen
the weak, to comfort those that mourn, and that all who celebrate her holy
Festivity may feel her assistance. By which we may understand the meaning of
that solemn Hymn used in her Office, wherein she is called the Mother of Mercy
and Clemency, Offic. parv. B. Mariae. p. 127.
and is prayed to protect us from our enemies, and to receive us in the hour of
death. Is all this only praying to her to pray for us? What could be more said
to Almighty God or his Son Jesus Christ? Nor is this devotion only to the
Blessed Virgin, but we shall see it alike in that to Angels and Saints; Brev.
p. 224.
in the Antiphona upon the apparition of Michael the Archangel May 8. he is
prayed to come to the help of the people of God. And in the Feast of the
Guardian Angels recommended to all Catholics by Paul the fifth in the last
words of the Breviary, they are prayed to defend them in War, that they may not
perish in Gods terrible judgment. Commun. Apostol. p. 2. 9.
In the Hymn to the Holy Apostles they are prayed to command the guilty to be
loosed from their guilt, to heal unsound minds, and to increase their virtues,
that when Christ shall come, they may be partakers of eternal glory. These may
suffice for a present taste of the sincerity of such persons who say, that in
the Church of Rome they do nothing but pray to the Saints to pray for them. And
it is a very pitiful shift that Bellarmin is put to, Bell. de Sanct. Beatit. l.
1. c. 17.
whereby to excuse such prayers as these, That indeed as to the words
themselves they do imply more than praying to them to pray for us; but the
sense of the words, he says, is no more. But whence I pray must the people
take the sense of such prayers as these are, if not from the signification of
the words? If this were all, why in all this time that these prayers have been
complained of, has not their sense been better expressed? Have not their
Breviaries been often reviewed, if this had not been their meaning, why have
they not been expunged all this while? Suppose then that any persons in the
Roman Church (as no doubt most do) take their sense from the words, and do not
force it upon them, and they pray according to the form prescribed; do they
well or ill in it? If they do ill in it, their Church is guilty of intolerable
negligence in not preventing it; if they do well, then their Church allows of
more than praying to Angels and Saints to pray for them. Bellarmins instances
of the Apostles in Scripture being said to save men, do show what shifts a bad
cause will put a man to: For will any man in his wits say the case is the same
in ordinary speech and in prayer? Is it all one, for a man to say, that his
Staff helped him in his going, and to fall down upon his knees to pray to his
Staff to help him? God did use the Apostles as instruments on earth to promote
the salvation of mankind, but may we therefore pray to them now in Heaven to
save us? May we not truly say, that the Sun enlightens the world, but may we
therefore pray to the Sun to enlighten us? No, the Sun is but Gods instrument,
and our addresses must be in prayer to the Supreme Lord over all. But to take
his own explication of praying to them for these things: i. e. praying to them
that they would pray to God for them, as we desire one another to pray: would
not that man be condemned of gross Idolatry, or prodigious folly, who instead
of desiring his Friends to pray to God for the pardon of his sins, and the
assistance of Divine Grace, should say to them, I pray you pardon my sins, and
assist me with the Grace of God? What would St. Paul have said to such men that
should have asked such things of him, who yet says, that he was an instrument
of saving some?

. 14. 2. Supposing this were all that were done and allowed in the Roman
Church, The difference between praying to Saints in Heaven, and desiring men on
Earth to pray for us.
yet this would not excuse them: for their practice is very different in their
Invocation of Saints, from desiring our Brethren on Earth to pray for us. And I
cannot but wonder, how any men of common sense can suffer themselves to be
imposed upon so easily in this matter. For is there really no difference in St.
Paul's desiring his Brethren to pray for him, as he often did; and a man's
falling down upon his knees with all the solemnity of devotion he uses to God
himself, to St. Paul to desire him to pray for him, when he was present upon
earth, and did certainly know what he desired of him? Suppose in the midst of
the solemn devotions of the Church where St. Peter or St. Paul had been
present, the Letanies of the Church had been then as they are now; and after
they had prayed to the persons of the Holy Trinity, the people should with the
same postures and expression of devotion have immediately turned themselves to
the Apostles, and cried only Peter and Paul pray for us; do you think, this
would have been acceptable to them? No doubt St. Peter would have been less
pleased with this, than with Cornelius, A^^s 10. 25, 26.
only falling down before him, and yet then he bid him stand up, I my self also
am a man. They who impute this only to his modesty, will not allow him to carry
it to Heaven with him; For they suppose him to be very well pleased with that
honor in Heaven, which he refused on earth. And St. Paul would have rent his
garments and cried out, as he did to the men of Lystra, Acts 14. 14, 15.
Why do ye these things; we also are men of like passions with you? They would
not receive any honor that might in the least seem to incroach upon the divine
honor, and yet they might upon better grounds have done it to them on earth,
than now in Heaven, because they were then sure they heard them, which now they
can never be. And would it not be a senseless thing to desire some excellent
person in the Indies, when we are at our solemn devotion to pray for us,
because it is possible God may at the same time reveal our minds to him? I
would willingly be informed, if we had assurance of the Sanctity of a person in
this life, as great as they have in the Church of Rome of those they invocate;
whether there would be any evil at all in public places of worship, and at the
time used for the service of God, to set such a person up in some higher place
of the Church, to burn incense before him, to prostrate themselves with hands
and eyes lifted up to him, if at last they pretended, that all that time they
only prayed to him, to pray for them? And certainly a good man is much more the
Image of God, and deserves more reverence than all the artificial Images of
Saints, or of God himself. If they will condemn this, they may conceive, that
supposing, they only prayed to Saints in their devotions to pray for them, this
would not excuse them: For they do it in those places, at such times, and in
such a manner as highly incroaches upon the worship and service due to God
alone.

. 15. 2. I now come to consider, St. Austin no Friend to Invocation of Saints.
whether the answer given by St. Austin will vindicate them, and whether
invocation of Saints, as it is now practiced in the Church of Rome were
allowed, or in use then? Here he tells us, That Faustus the Manichean
calumniates the Catholics (the word is St. Austins he says, and we do not
quarrel with the word, but that they are not such Catholics as St. Austin
speaks of) because they honored the Memories or Shrines of Martyrs, charged
them to have turned the Idols into Martyrs, whom they worshipped said he with
like vows. To show how very far what St. Austin says, is from justifying the
present practices of the Roman Church, we need no more than barely to represent
what St. Austin affirms, and what he denies. He affirms, that it was the custom
of the Christians in his time to have their religious Assemblies at the
Sepulchers or Memories of the Martyrs, where the place it self would raise
their affections, and quicken their love toward the Martyrs and toward God;
but he utterly denies, that any religious worship was performed to the Martyrs:
for neither was any Sacrifice offered up to any of them, nor any other part of
religious worship: for thereupon he shows (which is very conveniently left out
in the citation) that not only Sacrifice was refused by Saints and Angels, but
any other religious honor which is due to God himself, as the Angel forbad St.
John to fall down and worship him. All the worship therefore, he says, that
they give to Saints is, That of love and society, and of the same kind which we
give to holy men in this life, who are ready to suffer for the truth of the
Gospel. But that the worship of Invocation is expressly excluded by St. Austin,
appears by what himself says on a like occasion; where he shows the difference
between the Gentiles worship and theirs: Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 20. c. 10.
They (says he) build Temples, erect Altars, appoint Priests, and offer
Sacrifices; but we erect no Temples to Martyrs as to Gods, but Memories as to
dead men whose Spirits live with God; we raise no Altars on which to sacrifice
to Martyrs, but to one God, the God of Martyrs as well as ours, at which as men
of God who have overcome the world by confessing him, they are named in their
place and order, but are not invocated by the Priest who sacrifices. And
elsewhere says, L. 8. 6. 27.
Whatever the Christians do at the memories of the Martyrs, is for ornaments to
those memories, not as any sacred Rites or Sacrifices belonging to the dead as
Gods: we therefore do not worship our Martyrs with divine honors, nor with the
faults of men, as the Gentiles did their Gods. Which gave occasion to Lud.
Vives in his Notes on that Chapter to say, that many Christians in his time
(what sort of Catholics those were, it is easy to guess, but to be sure, none
of St. Austins) did no otherwise worship Saints, than they did God himself;
neither could he see in many things any difference between the opinion they had
of Saints, and what the Gentiles had of their Gods. I cannot understand then
how St. Austins answer should justify that which he condemns: He denies that
there was an Invocation of Saints, but only a commemoration of them; the Church
of Rome pleads for any Invocation of them, and condemns all those who deny it.
So that his answer is very far from clearing the Roman Church in the practice
of Invocation, and the objection we make against it, that it does parallel the
Heathen Idolatry; for it grants, it would do so, if they gave to the Saints the
worship due to God, of which he makes Invocation to be a part.

But after all this, can we imagine, that he should practice himself contrary
to his own doctrine? Yes, says he, he made a prayer to St. Cyprian, Aug. de
bapt. c. Don. l. 7. c. 1.
let Blessed Cyprian therefore help us in our prayers. But is there no
difference to be made between such an Apostrophe to a person in ones writing
and solemn supplication to him with all the so^emnity of devotion in the duties
of Religious worship? If I should now say, Let St. Austin now help me in his
prayers, while I am defending his constant opinion, that Invocation is proper
to God alone, would they take this for renouncing the Protestant doctrine, and
embracing that of the Church of Rome? I doubt they would not think that I
escaped the Anathema of the Council of Trent for all this. The Question between
us, is not how far such wishes rather than prayers were thought allowable being
uttered occasionally, as St. Austin does this to St. Cyprian, but whether
solemn Invocation of Saints in the duties of Religious worship, as it is now
practiced in the Roman Church, were ever practiced in St. Austins time, and
this we utterly deny. We do not say, that they did not then believe, that the
Saints in Heaven did pray for them, and that some of them did express their
wishes, that they would pray particularly for them, we do not say, that some
superstitions did not creep in after the Anniversary meetings at the Sepulchers
of the Martyrs grew in request; for St. Austin himself says, that what they
taught was one thing, and what they did bear with was another, C. Faust. l. 20.
c. 2.
speaking of the customs used at those solemnities: But here we stand, and fix
our foot against all opposition whatsoever, that there was no such doctrine or
practice allowed in the Church at that time, as is owned and approved at this
day in the Church of Rome. But from St. Austin we are sent to Calvin, whose
authority (though never owned as infallible by us) we need not fear in this
point: Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 20. n. 22.
and I cannot but wonder, if he saw the words in Calvin or Bellarmin, that he
would produce them. For Calvin does there say, Bell. de Beatit. sanct. l. 1. c.
16.
That the Council of Carthage did forbid praying to Saints, lest the public
prayers should be corrupted by such kind of addresses, Holy Peter pray for us.
If St. Austin were present in this Council, as my Adversary says he was, I
wonder what advantage it will be to him from Calvin's saying, that the Council
did condemn and forbid those prayers; which were in use by some of the people.
But it seems, he takes the peoples part against the Council and St. Austin too;
and thinks it enough for them to follow the practices condemned by Councils and
Fathers; which we are sure they do, and are glad to find so ingenuous a
confession of it. He may as well the next time bring St. Austins testimony for
worshipping Martyrs and Images, De Morib. Eccl. Cath. c. 34.
because he says, he knew many who adored Sepulchers and Pictures: and for the
worship of Angels, because he says, he had heard of many, Confess. l. 10. cap.
42.
who had tried to go to God by praying to Angels, and were thought worthy to
fall into delusions.

. 16. But the strangest effort of all the rest, Of Negative points of faith.
is what he has reserved to the last place, viz. That the charge of Idolatry
against them must be vain and groundless, because if I be pressed close, I
shall deny any one of these Negative points to be divine truths; viz. that
honor is not to be given to the Images of Christ and his Saints, that what
appears to be bread in the Eucharist is not the body of Christ, that it is not
lawful to Invocate the Saints to pray for us. But the answer to this is so
easy, that it will not require much time to dispatch it. For I do assert it to
be an Article of my faith, That God alone is to be worshipped with divine and
religious worship: and he that cannot hence infer, that no created Being is to
be so worshipped, has the name of reasonable creature given him to no purpose.
What need we make Negative Articles of faith, where the Affirmative do
necessarily imply them? If I believe that the Scripture is my only rule of
faith, as I most firmly do; will any man that considers what he says, require
me to make Negative Articles of faith, that the Pope is not, Tradition is not,
Councils are not, a private Spirit is not? for all these things are necessarily
employed therein. And so for all particular doctrines rejected by us upon this
principle, we do not make them Negative points of faith, but we therefore
refuse the belief of them, because not contained in our only rule of faith: On
this account we reject the Popes Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Infalibility of
the present Church in delivering points of faith, Purgatory, and other
fopperies imposed upon the belief of Christians. So that the short resolution
of our faith is this, that we ought to believe nothing as an Article of faith,
but what God has revealed, and that the complete revelation of Gods will to us
is contained in the Bible; and the resolution of our worship, is into this
principle, that God alone is to be worshipped with divine and religious
worship, and therefore whether they be Saints or Angels, Sun, Moon and Stars,
whether the Elements of a Sacrament, or of the World, whether Crosses, and
Relics, or Woods and Fountains, or any sort of Images; in a word, no creature
whatsoever is to be worshipped with religious worship, because that is proper
to God alone. And if this principle will excuse them from Idolatry. I desire
him to make the best of it. And if he gives no more satisfactory answer
hereafter, than he has already done, the greatest charity I can use to those
of that Church, is to wish them repentance, which I most heartily do.

CHAP. III. Of the hindrance of a good Life and Devotion in the Roman Church.
The doctrines of the Roman Church prejudicial to Piety. The Sacrament of
Penance, as taught among them, destroys the necessity of a good life. The
doctrine of Purgatory takes away the care of it, as appears by the true stating
it, and comparing that doctrine with Protestants. How easy it is, according to
them, for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Purgatory dreadful to
none but poor and friendless. Sincerity of devotion hindered by prayers in an
unknown Tongue. The great absurdity of it manifested. The effects of our
Ancestors devotion had been as great, if they had said their prayers in
English. The language of prayer proved to be no indifferent thing, from St.
Paul's arguments. No universal consent for prayers in an unknown tongue, by the
confession of their own Writers. Of their doctrine of the efficacy of
Sacraments, that it takes away all necessity of devotion in the minds of the
receivers. This complained of by Cassander and Arnaud, but proved against them
to be the doctrine of the Roman Church, by the Canons of the Council of Trent.
The great easiness of getting Grace by their Sacraments. Of their discouraging
the reading the Scriptures. A standing Rule of devotion necessary. None so fit
to give it, as God himself: This done by him in the Scriptures. All persons
therefore concerned to read them. The arguments against reading the Scriptures,
would have held against the publishing them in a language known to the people.
The dangers as great then, as ever have been since. The greatest prudence of
the Roman Church is wholly to forbid the Scriptures; being acknowledged by
their wisest men, to be so contrary to their Interest. The confession of the
Cardinals at Bononia to that purpose. The avowed practice of the Roman Church
herein directly contrary to that of the Primitive: although the reasons were as
great then from the danger of Heresies. This confessed by their own Writers.

. 1. 2. THe second Reason I gave, why persons run so great a hazard of their
salvation in the communion of the Roman Church was, because that Church is
guilty of so great corruption of the Christian Religion, by opinions and
practices which are very apt to hinder a good life, which is necessary to
salvation. But,

1. This necessity I said, Of the Sacrament of Pen^ance destroying the
necessity of a good life.
was taken off by their making the Sacrament of Penance joined with
contrition, sufficient for salvation. Here he says, That Protestants do make
contrition alone, which is less, sufficient for salvation, and our Church
allowing confession and absolution (which make the Sacrament of Penance) in
case of trouble of conscience, they being added to contrition, cannot make it
of a malignant nature. To this I answer: That contrition alone is not by us
made sufficient for salvation. For we believe, that as no man can be saved
without true repentance, so that true repentance does not lie merely in
contrition for sins. For godly sorrow in Scripture, is said, to work repentance
to salvation, not to be repented of; 2 Cor. 7. 10.
and it cannot be the cause and effect both together. Repentance in Scripture
implies a forsaking of sin, (as it were very easy to prove, if it be thought
necessary) and without this we know not what ground any man has to hope for
the pardon of it, although he confess it, and be absolved a thousand times
over; and have remorse in his mind for it, when he does confess it. And
therefore I had cause to say, that they of the Church of Rome destroy the
necessity of a good life, when they declare a man to be in a state of
salvation, if he has a bare contrition for his sins, and confess them to the
Priest, and be absolved by him. For to what end should a man put himself to the
trouble of mortifying his passions and forsaking his sins, if he commits them
again, he knows a present remedy, toties quoties; it is but confessing with
sorrow, and upon absolution he is as whole, as if he had not sinned. And is it
possible to imagine a doctrine that more effectually overthrows the necessity
of a good life, than this does? I cannot but think, if this doctrine were true,
all the Precepts of Holiness in the Christian Religion were insignificant
things: But this is a doctrine fitted to make all that are bad, and willing to
continue so, to be their Proselytes; when so cheap and easy a way of salvation
is believed by them: especially if we enquire into the explication of this
doctrine among the Doctors of that Church. Diss^asive. p. 1. chapter ^ p. 81.
I cannot better express this, than in the words of Bishop Tailor, whom he
deservedly calls an eminent leading man among the Protestants, where after he
has mentioned their doctrines about contrition, The sequel of all (he says)
is this, that if a man live a wicked life for sixty or eighty years together,
yet if in the article of his death, sooner than which God (say they) has not
commanded him to repent, by being a little sorrowful for his sins, then
resolving for the present that he will do so no more; and though this sorrow
has in it no love of God, but only a fear of Hell, and a hope that God will
pardon him; this, if the Priest absolves him, does instantly pass him into a
state of salvation. The Priest with two Fingers and a Thumb can do his work for
him; only he must be greatly prepared and disposed to receive it: greatly we
say according to the sense of the Roman Church; for he must be attrite, or it
were better, he were contrite; one act of grief, a little one, and that not for
one sin more than for another, and this at the end of a wicked long life, at
the time of our death will make all sure. Upon these terms, it is a wonder that
all wicked men in the world are not Papists, where they may live so merrily,
and dye so securely, and are out of all danger, unless peradventure they dye
very suddenly, which because so very few do, the venture is esteemed nothing,
and it is a thousand to one on the sinners side.

But we dare not flatter men so into eternal misery; we cannot but declare to
them the necessity of a sincere repentance and holy life in order to salvation:
and that we cannot absolve those, whom God has declared he will not absolve.
Indeed for the satisfaction of truly penitent sinners, our Church approves of
applying the Promises of Pardon in Scripture to the particular case of those
persons; which is that we mean by absolution. But if they pretend they can
absolve whether God will or no; we must leave God and them to dispute the point.

. 2. 2. I said the care of a good life was taken off among them, The doctrine
of Purgatory takes away the care of a good life.
by supposing an expiation of sin (by the prayers of the living) after death.
No, says he, it is rather apt to increase it, because of the temporal pains
the sinner is to sustain after death, if there be not a perfect expiation of
sin in this life by works of penance; and although he be ascertained by faith,
that he may be helped by the charitable suffrages of the faithful living, yet
this is no more encouragement to him to sin, than it would be to a Spend-thrift
to run into debt and to be cast into prison, because he knows he may be
relieved by the charity of his friends. If he were sure there were no prison
for him, that would be an encouragement indeed to play the Spend-thrift, and
this he says, is the case of the Protestants in denial of Purgatory. One would
think by this answer, we Protestants had a very pleasant Religion, and that we
held nothing could affright a sinner from continuing in his sins, because we
destroy Purgatory: but we had thought there had been something more dreadful in
the torments of Hell, than in the flames of Purgatory. But if our plain
doctrine, that every impenitent sinner must expect no less than eternal
vengeance in another world, will not prevail upon men to leave their sins, and
lead a good life, can we ^magine a groundless fiction of Purgatory should ever
do it? Especially, considering the true stating of the doctrine of Purgatory
among them, by which we shall easily discern what obligation it lays upon men
to Holiness of life. There are (say they) two sorts of sins which men are
guilty of, some of which are in their own nature venial, and so do not deserve
eternal punishment, and for these a general and vertual repentance is
sufficient: but there are other which they call mortal sins, which have a debt
and obligation to eternal punishment belonging to them; but this eternal
punishment is changed into temporal, by the Sacrament of Penance; but still
this temporal punishment, must be undergone either in this life, or that to
come; if a man do not satisfy in this life, and cannot get help enough out of
the stock of the Church to do it for him; there is no remedy, to Purgatory he
must go: and if he be not helped by his Friends on earth, God knows how long he
may stay there; but then he is to blame that he took no more care for his soul
when he lived, if not by a holy life, yet by leaving no more to those whose
Office it should be, to procure him a deliverance thence. Judge now Madam, if
this be not a very frightful doctrine, especially to those, who are poor and
friendless. But in case a man be rich enough to provide Masses to be said for
his soul, and that he has a good stock of Indulgences before hand, for some
thousands of years, he may make a pretty tolerable shift in Purgatory,
especially in these last Ages of the world; wherein it is probable, it may not
be near so long to the day of judgment (when the final sentence is to be
pronounced) as he has got years of Indulgences already. I pray what need a
person be afraid of, that lives a very bad life, according to these principles?
Must he suffer for his Original sin? No, that, guilt and punishment, and all is
clear done away in Baptism. Must he suffer for his Venial sins? That were
strange, if he had never any general repentance for them. Need he be afraid of
the dreadful sentence of the day of judgment, Go ye cursed into everlasting
flames? He is a Fool indeed, that by a little present contrition and
confession, will not obtain absolution from a Priest, and in a trice the
eternal flames are extinguished, and only some temporal punishment succeeds in
the room of them. But it would seem somewhat hard to a voluptuous man however
to be put to severe pennances; is there no remedy in this case? Yes, there is a
stock in the Church, and if he will not procure help for himself thence by some
plenary Indulgences, if he will not bear it here, he must in another world.
What then? Is he past all hope of remedy there? That is according to his Purse
and Friends. How easy is it for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God?
But we have no such easy way of escaping the miseries of another life: we dare
not tell men they may be relieved there by Masses and Sacrifices, and I know
not what: our doctrine is plain and agreeable to the most obvious and easy
sense of the Gospel, if men be good here, they shall be happy afterward; if
they be bad, and continue so, they shall be certainly miserable, and
unavoidably so. But for those who are neither good nor bad, (if any such can
be) neither sincere nor hypocrites, neither penitent nor impenitent, we leave
them to take care of them: our Savior has only declared, that those who are
good, sincere, and penitent, shall be happy; those who are otherwise, must be
miserable: if they have found out some ways for them to escape
notwithstanding, at their peril be it, who rely upon them. But for others, we
understand no more how punishment in another life should remain after the guilt
of sin is pardoned, than how a shadow should continue, when the body is gone:
for punishment follows guilt, as the shadow the body. And if pardon of sin
signifies any thing, it is taking away the punishment we were obnoxious to by
reason of sin. But how that man should be said to have his debt forgiven, who
is cast into Prison for it, only whereas he might have lain and rotted there,
his Creditor tells him, he shall endure the same misery, but he shall escape at
last, is a thing no man would believe, who suffered in such a case. He might
indeed say, that he did not exercise the utmost rigor of Justice, but would
hardly be brought to magnify the infinite clemency and kindness of his
Creditor. But we that desire to understand the way of salvation as it is
delivered by our Lord Jesus Christ, and to be saved in that way, cannot for our
hearts understand any more by his doctrine, but that men shall be saved, if
they believe and obey his doctrine, and shall be condemned, if they do it not.
We find nothing of half saving and half damning men, such as the state of
Purgatory is believed to be in the Church of Rome. For the pains of person
therein are said to be as great as the damned in Hell, and yet all this while
God is their Friend, and they are sure to be saved. They had need in such a
case call in the help of their Friends on earth, if God be so ill a Friend in
Heaven.

And can he not believe, that it is a far greater encouragement to a
Spend-thrift to be told indeed of a dreadful Prison, but such as if he leaves
but money behind him to employ his friends in begging his pardon, he shall be
surely delivered; than to be assured if he continues his folly, there will be
no redemption or hopes of deliverance, when he is once cast into it. I dare
appeal to any one who can but understand what we speak of, whether of these
two, is the more probable way of reclaiming a man from riotous courses? but
that which is beyond this, is, that the one is most certainly true, the other
but a mere figment of the brains of men, who have contrived a way to bring
wicked men to Heaven at last, although somewhat the farther way about, and it
must cost them dear, for their Friends to help them through.

. 3. 3. After I had showed how much the necessity and care of a good life were
obstructed by the principles of the Roman Church, Sincerity of devotion
hindered by prayers in an unknown Tongue.
I proceeded to show, how the sincerity of devotion was hindered among them by
several particulars.

1. By prayers in a language which many understand not. To this he answers, If
I speak of private prayers, all Catholics are taught to say them in their
Mother Tongue: If of the public prayers of the Church, he understands not why
it may not be done with as much sincerity of devotion, the people joining their
intention and particular prayers with the Priest, as their Ambassador to God,
as if they understood him; he is sure the effects of a sincere devotion for
nine hundred years together, which this manner of worship produced in this
Nation, were much different from those we have seen since the reducing the
public Liturgy into English: for which he instances in building and endowing
Churches, Colleges, Religious Houses, and the conversion of several Nations by
English Missionaries. But this, he says, is a matter of Discipline, and not to
be regulated by the fancies of private men, but the judgment of the Church:
and withal is confessed by some Protestants, Preface to the Polyglott Bible*
1655.
that most Sects of Christians have the Scriptures, Liturgies and Rituals in a
Tongue unknown but to the Learned; and therefore according to St. Austin, it is
insolent madness to dispute that which is frequented by the whole Church
through the world. For our more distinct proceeding in answer to this, three
things are to be considered: 1. Whether praying in a known or unknown tongue,
do more conduce to devotion? 2. Whether this whole matter be a thing left in
the power of the Church to determine? 3. Whether prayers in an unknown tongue,
be universally received in all other parts of the Christian world.

1. Whether of these conduce more to devotion, is our main enquiry. And if
praying in an unknown tongue does so, I wonder he tells us, that all Catholics
are taught to say them in their Mother Tongue: Why so I pray? Is it that by
understanding what they speak, their minds might be more attentive, and their
affections more raised in the desires of the things they pray for? And will not
the same arguments more hold for public prayer, wherein all the Congregation
are to join together? So that their private prayers condemn their public,
unless Latin in the Church be of greater force, than uttered in a Closet. But
can it enter into the minds of any men, who consider what the end of meeting
together to pray is, that such an end should as much or more be attained, where
people know not what they say, as where they do? If all the business of
Christian worship were only to patter over a few words (as if there were no
difference between prayers and charms) what he says, were to some purpose: but
that is so dishonorable a thing to Christian Religion, that it is hard to say,
whether they have more corrupted the doctrine or the devotion of the Christian
Church. If I saw a company of Indians met together with their Priest among
them, using many antic gestures and Mimical postures, and speaking many words
which the people muttered after him, but understood not what they said* I might
probably suspect they were conjuring, but should hardly believe them, if they
called that praying. I could not but enquire of them, what they meant by
praying? If they told me, saying so many hard words, which they understood not,
I had done with them, but should shrewdly suspect the knavery of their Priests.
If they told me, by praying they meant, expressing their desires of the things
they stood in need of to the God they worshipped, I could not but ask of them,
whether it were not necessary for them to know what it was they asked, or how
could they desire they knew not what? Or whether the God they worshipped,
understood only that one tongue, and so they were fain to speak to him, in his
own language? This I confess, were a sufficient reason, and in that case the
people were to be pitied, if they could not learn that tongue themselves. But
supposing all languages equally known to him we make our addresses to, why
should not the people use that, which they understand themselves? Are their
prayers like counterfeit Jewels, that the less they understand them, the better
they like them? It may justly give men some suspicion, that there are not fair
dealings, where so little light is allowed to judge by: and that devotion
commended most, which Ignorance is the Mother of. We think it as unreasonable
to desire the people to say Amen to prayers they know not the meaning of, as
for men to set their hands to Petitions without reading what is contained in
them. It is a great chance if they do not mistake to their own great prejudice,
and do what they repent of afterward. We declare, that our meeting together to
worship God, is to join together our hearty prayers, which the more the people
understand, the better their minds are satisfied in what they desire, and the
more fervent will their supplications be. If it be enough for some to
understand them, it may as well be enough for some to pray them; if their
prayers who understand them, prevail for those who do not, then it is no matter
at all whether they be present or no, unless the efficacy of the others prayers
be confined within the walls where they meet. And if their prayers be most
prevalent who understand most, then it were ten times better, if all the people
understood what they prayed for: and it must necessarily follow, that praying
in an unknown tongue, is a great obstructer of the devotion of the people, and
that which hinders the efficacy of their prayers. If it be enough for the
people to be present, and to pray their own private prayers there in public,
to what End is there any public Liturgy at all? Why should not all of them be
at their private prayers together? Why should the Priest with his Iargon of
hard words interrupt them? for it can be no more to them who know not what he
says; and why may they not as well say their private prayers at the chiming of
Bells, as at the words of a Priest, for they understand both alike, and both
seem to sound as such wise people will have them.

But he tells us, The effects of this devotion were admirable in the charitable
and pious works of our Ancestors, who used this way so many Ages together. I
pray Madam, ask him, whether he really thinks, they would have done none of
those things, if they had said their prayers in English? If they would not, I
do much admire the force of the Latin Tongue: If they would, then that was not
the cause, and so these things do not prove what they were intended for. And so
Tenterden Steeple was not the cause of Goodwin Sands. We do not go about to
disparage our Ancestors, we bless God for the good they did; but do not think
that does oblige us to think them infallible in their opinions, or without
fault in all their practices: But our true Ancestors in Religion* are Christ
and his Apostles and the Primitive Church, and all these are yielded to be of
our side, by the most zealous Adversaries we have; and give us leave to think
their examples ought to have more force with us, than any other whatsoever. We
pretend not to be wiser than they were, nor to know what is more expedient for
devotion than they; we are content to be condemned for error with those who are
allowed to be infallible, and to want devotion, where we follow the examples of
the most holy persons the world ever had. If the practice of the Primitive
Church in this point were not given us for the first six hundred years and
more, it were an easy matter to evince it by express testimonies: but that is
not the thing insisted on, but that this is a matter of Discipline, and the
Church has the power to determine it in one Age as well as another.

. 4. Which is the next thing to be considered. The languag^ of prayer, no
m^tter of discipline.
Here I shall desire but two principles to resolve this by. 1. That the
Churches power is only to edification and not to destruction; for this was as
much as the Apostles challenged to themselves, 2 Cor 10. 8
and I hope none dare challenge more: but this is a principle of natural
reason, that no power in a society ought to be extended beyond the benefit of
it, or to contradict the end or design of it. 2. That the Apostles were the
most competent Judges of what made for the Edification of the Church; and what
they declared did tend to that end, no succeeding persons ought to condemn as
contrary to it. This depends upon that infallible Spirit which the Apostles
had, and the mighty care in them of the Churches good, which we cannot think
any since them can exceed them in. These things being supposed, we are only to
consider, whether the Apostle has not delivered his sense in our present
subject, viz. that prayers in an unknown tongue are contrary to the Edification
of the Church? It seems somewhat hard to us to be put to prove a matter so
evident from St. Paul's discourse, 1 Cor. 14. and we could not imagine, any
would go about to reconcile prayers in an unknown tongue, to 1 Cor. 14. but
those who think they can reconcile the worship of Images to the second
Commandment. The abuse St. Paul corrects with so much sharpness in the Church
of Corinth, was an impertinent use of the gift of Tongues; such I mean as did
not tend to the Edification of the Church: as for Instance, one man made a long
Harangue in Hebrew, and pleased himself mightily in the sound of the words,
when not a person there, it may be, understood a word that he said, another of
a sudden begins a Hymn in Syriack or Chaldee, another falls a praying in
Ethiopick, but all this while, no man interprets what these several men said:
to what purpose is all this, says the Apostle, only for bystanders, 1 Cor.
14. 20, 23.
to think they were Children or mad men: could they imagine God gave them these
gifts of tongues, to make uncouth and insignificant sounds with, where the
people were met together for the worship of God? If they were so much tickled
with the noise, they might make that at home, V. 28.
and not in the Church of God, where all things ought to be done to
Edification. V. 26.
For they met together as a company of reasonable men to receive some benefit
that might be common to them all; V. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
and therefore the gift of tongues in a society of Christians could be of no
use without an Interpreter. But lest all this should seem to be spoken only of
instruction of the people, and not of prayer to God, and that the case were not
alike in both these, he adds, If I pray in an unknown tongue, V. 14.
my Spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful. i. e. I may exercise my
gift, but it is to no use at all in the Church. How so? One of the Roman Church
might have told St. Paul, when I see him pray, and know what he is doing, may I
not join my intention of praying with his, as our Ambassador, and pray my own
private prayers at the same time that he does? I know the substance of what he
designs to pray for; and although I do not know his meaning, God knows mine:
and therefore I can see no hinderance of devotion at all in this, that when one
begins a prayer in an unknown tongue; all the people fall upon their knees, and
pray too: This is the plain answer they must give St. Paul who justifies
prayers in an unknown tongue. But we are content with St. Paul's judgment in
this case, and the reason of it, that the acts belonging to the worship of God
in the Church ought to be of so common concernment, that all may have a share
in them, and receive the benefit by them: Or else they were far better hold
their peace. It is very impertinent to say, that the Apostle speaks only of
extraordinary gifts, and not of the settled and ordinary devotions of the
Church. For the case is the same, where the language is not understood, whether
it be spoken by a Miracle or not: And the Apostle lays down a general rule
from this particular case, that all things must be done to edifying, which it
appears he judges the use of an unknown language not to be. And if after all
this, it be in the Churches power to reverse the Apostles decree as to praying
in an unknown language, they may use the very same power, as to all other
Offices of Religion, and may command preaching to be in a tongue as unknown as
praying; that so the people may meet together, and pray, and hear Sermons, and
understand never a word, for their great edification. Unless among us God
should put it into their hearts to speak English, whether they would or no, as
was once said by an ignorant person on the like occasion. If all that is
intended in the prayers of the people, be only an intention to pray, whatever
the words be, Abracadabra might serve to pray with, as well as Ave Maria, and
the old Woman's saying of it, Avi Mari gratia plinam dams ticum, beneditta tu in
mulabs yeth Benedictus frictus frentris tui, sweet Jesus, Amen; was as
effectual a prayer if she meant it so, as could be uttered by the most skilful
Priest.

. 5. 3. But the universal consent of the Christian Church is pleaded for this
practice, No universal consent for prayers in ^n unknown tongue.
only Protestants excepted, and therefore it is insolent madness in them to
oppose it, as St. Austin says: but we had however rather follow St. Paul, who
says it were madness to practice it. But I assure you, Madam, we are not to
take all things for granted which are told us by them concerning the opinions
and practices of the Eastern Churches: (as I may in time discover) but in this;
he says* our own Protestant Authors of the Bible of many languages Land. A. D.
1655. do confess that in most of the Sects of the Christians, they have not
only the Scriptures: but also the Liturgies and Rituals in a tongue unknown but
to the learned: from which he concludes this to be an universal practice both
in the Primitive Greek and Latin Churches, and in these latter Sects of Eastern
Christians. It were a very pleasant enquiry, how in the Primitive Greek and
Latin Churches the service could be in an unknown language, when Greek and
Latin were the Mother Tongues of those Churches? Does he think they did not
understand their own Mother Tongues? How many of their own Writers have
confessed, that in the Primitive Churches all public Offices of Religion were
performed in the proper language of every Country, which in express words is
affirmed by Origin against Celsus: Orig. c. Col. l. 8. p 402.
and some of the Church of Rome have been so ingenuous to confess, it were much
better that custom were restored again. Cassandr. consult. art. 24.
So Cassander affirms of Cajetan, and that being reproved for it, he said, he
learned this) doctrine from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. and the Title of the twenty
eighth Chapter of Cassander his Liturgicks is, That the Ancients read the
Canonical Prayer and the consecration of the Eucharist, so as the people did
understand it and say Amen. Lyra (...) 1 Cor. (...).
Lyra says, That all public Offices of Religion were in the Primitive Church
performed in the Vulgar Tongue. So that it was not upon the account of any
sanctity in the Greek or Latin, that they were more used, but because they were
more generally understood. On which account Pope Innocent the third gave strict
command, that where people of different languages did inhabit, care should be
taken to provide men able to administer Sacraments, and instruct them in their
several tongues; which decree of his is inserted in the Canon Law; and was not
intended out of honor to the Greek and Latin Tongues only, but the advantage
of the people. So likewise John the eighth yielded to the Prince of Moravia, to
have their Liturgy in the Sclavonian Tongue, because St. Paul says, Let every
Tongue praise the Lord: which is the reason given by the Pope in his Letter
extant in Baronius, Baron. Tom. 10. A. 880. n. 16.
and not merely on the account of a present necessity for want of Priests who
could read Latin, as Bellarmin conjectures, for he appoints it should be first
read in the Sclavonian tongue. If this were then a Catholic practice, these
Popes were hugely to blame to give way to the breach of it. Walafrid Strabo de
reb. Eccles. c. 7.
And Walafridus Strabo says in his time, among the Scythians, the divine
Offices were performed in the German Tongue; which was common to them and the
Germans. But our own Protestant Writers, he says, own this to be in use in the
most Sects of Christians. I have endeavored to find this confession in the
Preface cited by him, but I cannot meet with it, and the learned Bishop who
writ it, understood these things, better than to write so. It is true he says
(not in the Preface, but Proleg. 13. n. 19.) that the Syriack Tongue is the
Tongue of the learned among the Christians throughout the East, as appears by
the Liturgies and divine Offices, which are almost every where performed in
this language, although it be the Mother Tongue now only to a few about Mount
Libanus: but any one who enquires into a Catholic practice, must not merely
give an account of the most Eastern Christians of whom he here speaks. For
there are many considerable Churches besides these, which do to this day use
their own language in their Liturgies, as their own Writers attest: but I need
not go about to prove this, since Bellarmin confesses, That the Armenians,
Aethiopians, Egyptians, Russians and others do it, but he says, he is no more
moved by these, than by the practice of Protestants: but we cannot but be moved
so far by it, as thereby to see that the practice of the Church of Rome is no
more a Catholic practice, than it is founded either on Scripture or Reason.

. 6. 2. I said the sincerity of devotion was obstructed by making the efficacy
of Sacraments to depend on the bare administration whether our minds be
prepared for them or not. Of their doctrine of the efficacy of Sacraments.
This, he says, he had rather look upon as a mistake, than a calumny, having
never read any Council wherein this doctrine is defined, and as to the
Sacrament of Penance (which he supposes I chiefly mean) the Council of Trent
has determined it to be a calumny for any to say, that according to their
doctrine it does confer grace without the good motion of the receiver. Madam, I
either expected he should have understood the doctrine of his own party better,
or been more ingenuous in confessing it. For my quarrel had no particular
respect to the Sacrament of Penance, more than to any other Sacrament of
theirs; and if I can make it appear, that it is their doctrine, that the
efficacy of Sacraments does not depend upon the preparation of the receiver,
but the bare administration, or the external work done, I need not add much to
show how much this does obstruct the sincerity of devotion. It had been an
opinion long received in the Schools, although with different ways of
explication, that the Sacraments of the new Law differed from those of the old
in this, that the efficacy of those of the old Law in conferring grace, did
depend upon what they called opus operantis, i. e. the faith and devotion of
the receiver of them; but that the Sacraments of the new Law did confer grace
ex opere operato, i. e. by the thing it self, without any dependence therein
upon the internal motion or preparation of mind in him that did partake of
them. This doctrine began to be in a particular manner applied to the Mass,
because that contained Christ in a more especial way than any other Sacrament,
thence it was believed and asserted, that it did produce saving effects, as
remission of sins and true grace, although we should suppose an impossible
thing, Gabr. Biel sup. Canon. Miss^e lect. 26. lit. 6.
that no man in the world had any true Grace; as Baptism takes away original
sin, and gives grace to the Infant baptized, whatever the sins of men are.
These are the expressions of one of their profound Doctors. And therefore they
distinguished the efficacy of the work done, not barely from the dignity of the
Priest, and the merit of the receiver, but from the devotion and preparation of
mind which the receiver came with. Bell. de effecta Sacram. l. 2. c. 1.
Which Bellarmin himself cannot deny, only two things he says to take off the
odium of it. One is, That they do not wholly exclude them, but only from the
efficacy of Sacraments; which, he says, is effectually proved by the case of
Infants, that it does not depend upon any quality of the receiver: the Other,
that though the Mass as a Sacrament, may not profit those who are not duly
prepared, yet as a Sacrifice it may. By which these things are evident: 1. That
the efficacy of the Sacraments in conferring grace, does not at all depend upon
the qualification of the receiver. 2. That although upon other accounts some
dispositions are required in adult persons to receive the benefit of them as
Sacraments, yet the effect of the Mass as a Sacrifice, is not at all hindered
by want of them. If it were a thing possible, I would willingly understand what
they mean by Sacraments conferring grace ex opere operato (which are not only
the express terms of the Council of Trent, Council. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 8.
but an Anathema is denounced against any one who denies it.) For the manner of
it is declared by themselves to be unintelligible, and no wonder, for they
suppose Grace to be contained in the Sacrament (and it is defined with an
Anathema by the Council of Trent) and by the Sacrament of it self it is
conveyed into the heart of a man; Can. 6.
but whether it be contained as in an univocal cause, as in an instrument, or
as in a sign; Whether it be conferred by the Sacraments as Physical, or as
Moral Causes, whether by a power inherent in the Sacraments themselves; or a
power assistent concurring with the Sacraments; whether it be conveyed as
Physic in a Cup, or as Heat to Water by a red hot Iron, or as healing to the
person who touched the hemm of our Saviors Garment; whether they produce only
a next disposition to grace, or not the grace it self, but the union of grace
with the soul, or (which is the most common opinion) that Physical action
whereby grace is produced which does truly, really and physically depend upon
the Sacraments (meaning thereby the external action of administering them) These
are looked on as great Riddles among them, and so they ought to be; but these
things, say they, need not be determined, nor the manner of the thing be
understood, no more than those who were miraculously healed, did the manner of
the cure; a very proper instance, if the matter of fact were as evident in one,
as it is the other. But if I should say, that the wearing a Cap of a certain
figure would certainly convey wit and understanding into a man, and the mere
putting it on was enough to produce the effect: and a person should tell me it
was an unintelligible thing, were it enough think you, as Bellarmin does in
this case, to run to other mysteries of faith and nature which are as hard as
that? By this consequence no man ought to be charged with believing absurd and
unreasonable things, and the Trinity and resurrection shall serve to justify
the Fables of the Alcoran as well as the doctrine of Transubstantiation and the
efficacy of the Sacraments ex opere operato. We could easily dispense with the
barbarous terms and ungrammaticalness of them, if there were any thing under
them, that were capable of being understood; but that is not the greatest
quarrel I have with this doctrine; for I say, still notwithstanding all the
tricks and arts which have been used to palliate it, it does obstruct the
sincerity of devotion, by making the exercise of it by the preparation of our
minds for the use of Sacraments to be unnecessary. For if Grace be effectually
conferred by the force of the bare external action, which is acknowledged by
them all, what need can there be of a due preparation of mind by the exercise
of faith, prayer, repentance, etc. in order to the receiving the benefit of
them? Yes, say they, the internal disposition of the mind is necessary to
remove impediments, and to make a subject capable of receiving it: as dryness
in Wood to make it burn: but what do they mean by this internal disposition of
mind? the exercise of the graces and duties I mentioned? by no means: but that
there be no mortal sin unconfessed, that there be no actual opposition in the
Will to the Sacrament, as for Instance, if a man when he is going to be
baptized, resolves with himself that he will not be baptized; or while he is
baptizing, that he will not believe in Father, Son and Holy Ghost; nor renounce
the Devil and all his works. This indeed they say hinders the efficacy of
Sacraments, but not the bare want of devotion; and if want of devotion does not
hinder Grace being received, what arguments can men use to persuade persons to
it? Who will undergo so strict an examination of himself, and endeavor to
raise his mind to a due preparation for the participation of Sacraments, if he
knows before hand that he shall certainly receive Grace by the Sacraments
without it? And surely they will not say, but what does obstruct the exercise
of these things, does very much hinder devotion. If men had a mind to banish it
out of the world, they could never do it under a fairer pretense, than that
Grace, and consequently the effects of it may be obtained without it: and I do
not question but this doctrine has been one of the great causes of the corrupt
lives of those who believe it? From hence the trade of saying Masses has
proved so gainful, and such multitudes of them have been procured for the
benefit of particular persons, this being a much easier way of procuring Grace
and Salvation, than fervent prayer, constant endeavors after a Holy Life,
Mortification, Watchfulness and other things we make necessary to enjoy the
benefit of what Christ has done and suffered for us.

And these things have been complained of, This proved to be (...) doctrine of
the Roman Church. Cassand. Consult. art. 24.
by persons of their own communion who have had any zeal for devotion, and the
practice of true Goodness. Cassander, although he denies the doctrine of the
efficacy of the Sacraments without the devotion of the receiver, to be the
received doctrine of the Roman Church, yet cannot deny, but such a Pharisaical
opinion (as he calls it) had possessed the minds of many of those who did
celebrate Masses, and were present at them: and that too just an occasion was
given to those who upbraid them with that opinion, because of the multitude of
Masses which were celebrated by impure and wicked Priests merely for gain, at
which those who are present, think they depart from them with a great deal of
sanctity, although they never once resolve to change their lives, but return
from thence immediately to their former sins. Arnald. de freq. Commun. prefat.
Sect. 2.
Mons. Arnauld in his Book of frequent communion (written upon that occasion)
confesses, that some in the Roman Church by their doctrine and instructions
given to persons did destroy all preparations as unnecessary to the partaking
the benefits of the Eucharist, Part. 3. c. 7. p. 554.
and that the worst persons might come without fear to it. And that the most
required as necessary by them, is only the Sacrament of Penance to recover
Grace by, which he says, they reduce to bare confession; and that this by them
is not made necessary neither by the more probable opinion, but only being at
that time free from the guilt of mortal sin. It is not to be denied that Mons*
Arnauld has proved sufficiently the other opinion to be most consonant to
Scripture and Fathers, and the rules of a Christian life; but when that is
granted, the other opinion is yet more agreeable to the doctrine of the Roman
Church. For although Cassander produce some particular testimonies against it
of persons in that Church; yet we must appeal for the sense of their Church, to
the decrees of the Council of Trent; which are so contrived, as not to condemn
the grossest doctrine of the opus operatum. For when it does determine, That
whosoever shall say, that the Sacraments do not confer grace ex opere operato
shall be Anathema, it cannot be interpreted according to the sense of Cassander
and those he mentions, that the efficacy of Sacraments does not depend upon the
worth of the Priest: For the twelfth Canon relates to that, Whosoever shall
say, that the Minister being in mortal sin, although he uses all the
essentials to a Sacrament, yet does not celebrate a Sacrament, let him be
Anathema. Those reverend Fathers were not sure so prodigal of their Anathema's,
to bestow two of them upon the same thing: Their meaning then in the eighth
Canon must be distinct from the twelfth, and if it be so, the opus operatum
cannot have respect to the worth of the Priest, but the devotion of the
receiver, and it is there opposed to the faith of the divine promise. This will
appear more plain by the account given of it in the History of that Council.
The History of the Council of Trent, l. 2. p. 237.
After, they treated of condemning those, who deny Sacraments do confer grace
to him that puts not a bar, or do not confess, that Grace is contained in
the Sacraments, and conferred, not by virtue of faith, but ex opere operato,
but coming to expound how it is contained, and their causality, every one did
agree, that grace is gained by all those actions that excite devotion, which
proceeds not from the force of the work it self, but from the virtue of
devotion, which is in the worker, and these are said in the Schools to cause
grace ex opere operantis. There are other actions which cause grace, not by the
devotion of him that works, or him that receives the work, but by virtue of
the work it self; such are the Christian Sacraments, by which grace is
received, so that there be no bar of mortal sin to exclude it, though there be
not any devotion. So by the work of Baptism, grace is given to the Infant,
whose mind is not moved toward it, and to one born a Fool, because there is no
impediment of sin. The Sacrament of Chrisme does the like, and that of extreme
Unction, though the sick man has lost his memory. But he that has mortal sin,
and does persevere actually or habitually, cannot receive grace by reason of
the contrariety, not because the Sacrament has not virtue to produce it ex
opere operato, but because the receiver is not capable, being possessed with a
contrary quality. I dare now appeal to the most indifferent Judge, Whether what
I objected to them concerning the efficacy of Sacraments, whether the minds of
the receivers of them be prepared or no, were not so far from being a calum^y,
that there is not so much as the least mistake in it: if the doctrine of the
Council of Trent be embraced by them. And any one who shall consider their
number of Sacraments, and the admirable effects of every one of them, may very
well wonder how any man among them should want Grace, or have any Devotion? For
Grace being conferred by the Sacraments at so many convenient seasons of his
life, whether he has any devotion or no, he is sure of Grace, if he does but
partake of their Sacraments, and need need not trouble himself much about
devotion, since his work may be done without it. Never any doctrine was
certainly better contrived for the satisfaction of impenitent sinners than
theirs is. Our Savior seems very churlish and severe when he calls sinners to
repentance, that they may be saved; but they have found out a much easier and
smoother passage, like that of a man in a Boat, that may sleep all the while,
and land safe at last. Not so much as the use of reason is required for the
effect of that blessed Sacrament of extreme Unction, by which like a Ship for a
long Voyage, a person is pitched and calked for eternity. Surely, it is the
hardest thing that may be, for any one to want Grace among them, if they do but
suffer the Use of Sacraments upon them, and they are the gentlest givers of it
imaginable, for all they desire of their Patients for Grace, is only for them
to lie still; but if they should chance to be unruly, and kick away the
Priests, or their rites of Chrisme, I know not then what may become of them.
Yet the Church of Rome has been so indulgent in this case, Rituale Roman. de
Sacram. ext. Unct.
that supposing men under a delirium, or wholly insensible, if before it be but
probable they desired it, or gave any signs of contrition, Lutet. Paris. 1665.
it ought not to be omitted; always provided, that those who are mad do
nothing against the reverence of the Sacrament. That being secured, their work
is done; and if any sins have remained upon them; they are taken off by virtue
of this sacred Unction; and being thus anointed like the Athletae of old they
are prepared to wrestle with all the powers of the Air, who can then fasten no
hold upon them. Yet to be just to them, the Roman Ritual says, that impenitent
persons, and those who dye in mortal sin and excommunicate and unbaptized are
to be denied extreme Unction. A hard case for those who dye in mortal sin! for
if they could but express any sign of contrition, by the motion of an Eye or a
Finger, all were well enough? And for the impenitent, we are not to imagine
them so cruel to account any so, but such who refuse the Sacrament of Penance;
the sum of it then is, if a man when he is like to live, and therefore to sin
no longer, does but probably express some signs of contrition, and does not
refuse the Sacrament of Penance, if time and the condition of the Patient
permit the using it, then he is to have grace conferred on him by this last
Sacrament which he is sure to receive, although he be no more sensible what
they are doing about him, than if he were dead already. So that upon the whole
matter, I begin to wonder how any sort of men in the Church of Rome can be
afraid of falling so low as Purgatory: I had thought so much Grace as is given
them by every Sacrament (where there are so many, and some of them so often
used) might have served to carry one to Heaven; they receive a stock of Grace
in Baptism, before they could think of it; if they lose any in Childhood, that
is supplied again by the Sacrament of Chrisme or Confirmation; if they fall
into actual sins, and so lose it, it is but confessing to the Priest and
receiving absolution, and they are set up again with a new stock: and it is a
hard case, if that be not increased by frequent Masses, at every one of which
he receives more; and although Priests want the comfortable Grace that is to be
received by the Sacrament of Matrimony, yet they may easily make it up by the
number of Masses: and to make all sure at last, the extreme Unction very
sweetly conveyes Grace into them whether they be sensible or not. But all this
while, what becomes of Purgatory? That is like to be left very desolate; if the
interest of that opinion were not greater, than the evidence for the Sacraments
conferring grace ex opere operato. Let them seek to reconcile them if they can,
it is sufficient for our purpose, that both of them tend to destroy the
sincerity of devotion, and the necessity of a good life.

. 8. 3. I said the sincerity of devotion is much obstructed by discouraging
tdiscourahe reading of the Scriptures, Of their discouraging the reading the
Scriptures.
which is our most certain Rule of faith and life. To this he answers two
ways: 1. That their Churches prudential dispensing the reading the Scriptures
to persons whom she judges fit and disposed for it, and not to such whom she
judges in a condition to receive or do harm by it, is no discouraging the
reading of them; any more than a Father may be said to discourage his Child,
because he will not put a Knife or a Sword into his hands, when he foresees he
will do mischief with it to himself or others; and the Scriptures, he says,
are no other in the hands of one who does not submit his judgment in the
interpretation of it to that of the Church; the doing of which he makes the
character of a meek and humble soul, and the contrary of an arrogant and
presumptuous spirit. 2. That the ill consequences of permitting the promiscuous
reading of Scripture were complained of by Henry the eighth, who was the first
that gave way to it; and if his judgment ought not to be followed in after
times, let the dire effects of so many Sects and Fanaticisms as have risen in
England from the reading of it, bear witness. For all Heresies arise, says St.
Austin, from misunderstanding the Scriptures; and therefore the Scripture being
left as among Protestants to the private interpretation of every fanciful
Spirit, cannot be a most certain rule of faith and life. In which answer are
three things to be discussed: 1. Whether that prudential dispensing the
Scriptures as he calls it, be any hinderance to devotion or no? 2. Whether the
reading of the Scriptures be the cause of the numbers of Sects and Fanaticisms
which have been in England? 3. Whether our opinion concerning the reading and
interpreting Scripture, does hinder it from being a most certain rule of faith
and life?

1. Whether that prudential dispensing the Scriptures used in the Church of
Rome, does hinder devotion or no? This prudential dispensing I suppose he
means, the allowing no persons to read the Scriptures in their own tongue,
without license under the hand of the Bishop or Inquisitor, by the advice of
the Priest or Confessor concerning the persons fitness for it; and whosoever
presumes to do otherwise, is to be denied absolution. For this is the express
Command in the fourth Rule of the Index published by order of the Council of
Trent, and set forth by the authority of Pius the fourth, and since by Clement
the eighth, Index libror. prohibit. Alexand. 7.
and now lately enlarged by Alexander the seventh. And whether this tends to
the promoting or discouraging the sincerity of devotion will appear, Romae. A.
D 1665.
by considering these things. 1. That it is agreed on both sides, that the
Scriptures do contain in them the unquestionable Will of that God whom we are
bound to serve. And it being the end of devotion (as it ought to be of our
lives) to serve him; what is there the mind of any one who sincerely desires to
do it, can be more inquisitive after, or satisfied in, than the rules God
himself has given for his own service? Because it is so easy a matter for men
to mistake in the ways they choose to serve him in; I see the world divided
more scarce about any thing than this. Some think God ought to be worshipped by
offering up Sacrifices to him of those things we receive from his bounty:
Others, that we ought to offer up none to him now, but our selves in a holy
life and actions. Some, that God is pleased by abstaining from flesh or any
living creature; and others, that he is much better pleased with eating Fish
than Flesh, and that a full meal of one is at some times mortification and
fasting; and eating temperately of the other, is luxury and irreligion. Some
think, no sight more pleasing to God, than to see men lash and whip themselves
for their sins, till the blood comes; others that he is as well pleased at
least, with hearty repentance, and sincere obedience without this. Some, that
frequent crossing themselves, going in Pilgrimage to the Images of Saints,
baptizing Bells, being sprinkled with holy water, and buried in a Monks habit,
are great acts of devotion; and others, that they are superstitious fooleries.
Some think that unless they make confession of their sins to a Priest, they
cannot be pardoned; others, that sincere confession to God, is sufficient, and
the other never necessary to the pardon of sin, though it may be sometimes
useful to the ease of the sinner. Some, that they honor God by setting up
Images of him, and worshipping them for his sake, by addressing themselves to
Saints and Angels to be Intercessors with him; and others, that they cannot
dishonor God more, than by these things. Some, that they may pray for what
they do not understand, as well as what they do; others, that since men expect
to be answered in their prayers, they ought to understand what they say in
them. Since these and other disputes are in the world, not barely between
Christians and those of other Religions, but among Christians themselves, what
course should a person take, who desires to be satisfied? For he finds the
several parties divided about them. Can any man imagine a better way, if it
could be hoped for, than that God himself should interpose, and declare his own
mind according to what way they ought to serve him? And this is acknowledged to
be done already by all Christians in the Scriptures; and after all this, must
not all persons concerned, be allowed to enquire into that which is owned to be
the will of God? Or do they think that ordinary people, that understand not
Latin or Greek, ought not to be concerned what becomes of their souls? If they
be and do in good earnest desire to know how to please God, and to serve him;
what directions will they give him? If they tell him, they must do as they are
bidden; true, say they, if we were to worship you for Gods, we would do as you
bid us, for we think it fitting to serve God in his own way. But we would know,
whether that God whom we serve, has given us any rules for his worship or no?
Yes, say the Priests of the Roman Church, he has done so, but it is not fit
for you to see them. To what end, say the people then, were they given, if they
may not be seen? How shall we know whether we keep them or no, or will you take
upon you the guilt of our sins in disobeying his Will, since you will not let
us know what it is? This seems to be a very just and reasonable request, and I
fear it will one day fall heavy upon those, who conceal that which they confess
to be the Will of God from the knowledge of the people. And it has been
ingenuously acknowledged by some in the Roman Church, that the people would
never be kept to that way of devotion they are in there, if they were suffered
to read the Scriptures; but the more shame the mean time for those who impose
such things upon them under a pretense of devotion which are so repugnant to
the Will of God. But the same reason which has made them leave out the second
Commandment in their offices of devotion, has brought them to so severe a
prohibition of reading the Scriptures in a known language, but where themselves
are already so secure of the persons that they dare to give way to it: and that
is, lest their consciences should start and boggle at the breaking a command of
God, when they pretended to serve him.

. 9. 2. That no objection can be now made against the peoples reading the
Scriptures, The arguments against reading the Scriptures would have held
against the publishing them in a language known to the People.
but would have held against the publishing them in a language to be understood
by the people. For were the people less ignorant and heady, less presumptuous
and opinionative then, than they are now? Was not there the same danger of
mistaking their sense at that time? Was not the people of Israel as refractory
and disobedient as any have been since? Were they not as apt to quarrel with
divine Laws and the authority God had set up among them? Did not they fall into
Sects and diverse opinions by misunderstanding the Law? yet were these reasons
then thought sufficient for God not to make known his Law to all the people;
but to commit it only to Aaron and the Priests for them prudentially to
dispense it to them? No; so far from it, that strict care was taken to make the
people understand it, particular commands given for this very end, and the Law
on purpose declared to be easy and intelligible, that they might not make its
obscurity a pretense for their Ignorance. Was not this Law given them as a rule
to direct themselves by? Were not all sent to this to learn to govern their
actions? Psalm. 119. 9.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his ways, by taking heed thereto
according to thy word. Is not this Law said to convert the soul, Psalm. 19. 7.
and to make wise the simple? and was that done by not understanding it? Was it
not the delight, exercise, and continual Meditation of those who were truly
devout among them? But how comes our case to be so much worse under
Christianity? Is the Law of Christ so much more difficult and obscure than the
Law of Moses? Is not his Sermon on the Mount, wherein he delivers the rules of
a Christian Life, as plain as any Chapter in Leviticus? What does the Gospel
teach men, but to be and to do good, to love all men, and to love God above
all, to believe in Christ and to obey his commands, to repent of sins past and
to live no longer in them, and in short, so to live in this world as they hope
to live with God in happiness hereafter? And are these things so hard to be
understood, that the people ought not to be made acquainted with them in their
own language? Or is there any danger they should know them too well? Was ever
the Law of Moses more perverted by false interpretations than in our Saviors
time by the Scribes and Pharisees? Why does not he then take some other care
for his own Law to prevent this for the future, if that had been judged by him
the proper way of cure? But thereby we see the mistakes of the people are owing
to their Teachers, and there can be no means to prevent errors in the people
but by stopping them at the fountain heads from whence they run down among
them. For the common people might have had a better notion of Religion, if
their minds had not been corrupted by the traditions and Glosses of the
Pharisees. Therefore methinks they have not gone the wisest way to work in the
Church of Rome; instead of this prudential dispensing the Scriptures, their
only way had been to have destroyed them, as Dioclesian their predecessor in
this kind of prudence once designed. For let them assure themselves, they who
understand Greek and Latin are the persons they have ten times more cause to
fear than the common people. And considering the advantage they once had by the
horrible Ignorance of Priests and people, it must be imputed only to the
watchful eye of Divine Providence, that the Scriptures (being of so little use
in the Roman Church) have been preserved entire to our days. There had been no
such means in the world to have prevented a Reformation as this; for they are
not out when they take the Scripture so much for their enemy, as appears by the
force and restraint they put upon it, and the fear and jealousy they are in
about it continually. If it had not been for this, would any one have compared
the Scriptures, in the hands of the common people as my Adversary does, to a
Sword in a mad man's hand? Is it of so destructive a Nature, and framed for no
other use than a sword is? which nothing but discretion keeps a man from doing
mischief by; and all the way a man has (though never so meek and humble) to
defend himself by it, is by destroying his enemy with it, if he continues his
assault. These expressions do not argue any kindness to the Scripture, nor an
apprehension of any great good comes to the world by it; but that really men
might have been more at ease and fewer differences in Religion had happened, if
all the Copies of the Bible had been lost as soon as the Pope had placed himself
in his infallible Chair. This design was once attempted, as I shall show
afterward, but failed of success: and I know not how far the principles of
this prudence may carry them, if ever such a season should fall into their
hands again; having found so much trouble to them from the Scriptures and so
little benefit by them, their Church being once owned as infallible. For I
would fain know whether the Scripture has not done more mischief according to
them in the hands of the Reformers, than it can be supposed to do in the hands
of the common people. If it must be a sword in a mad man's hand, whether the
more strength and cunning such a one has, he be not capable of doing so much
the more mischief by it? And if it were possible to get it out of such a man's
hands, whether it were not the highest prudence, and care of the public safety
to do it? It can be then nothing but the impossibility of the thing, which
makes them suffer the Scripture to be in the hands of any who are capable of
doing mischief by it; and the more mischief they may do, the more desirable and
prudential it is to take it from them. But all men see none are so capable of
doing mischief thereby, as men of the greatest wit and learning, and that have
the fairest appearance of piety to the world: the consequence then of this
doctrine is, if pursued to the true design of it, that the Scripture should be
kept if possible out of the hands of the most subtle, learned and pious men
above all others, if they be not true to the interests of the Roman Church? It
is but a mere show to pretend only to keep the people in order, (for when are
they otherwise but when cunning men have the managing of them?) the true
meaning of this principle is, that it will never be well with the World till
the Books of Scripture are all burnt which are abroad, and that only one
Original be preserved in the Vatican to justify the Popes title to
Infallibility, and that (as the Sybilline Oracles of old,) never to be
consulted but in cases of great extremity, and that under the inspection of
some very trusty officers, nor to be interpreted but by the Pope himself. If I
were of the Church of Rome, and owned the principles of it, I must needs have
condemned the great men of it in former times for want of Prudence in this
matter; That would have served their turn much better than forging so many
decretal Epistles, falsifying so many testimonies, perverting so many Texts of
Scripture to maintain the dignity of the Papal Chair. There was only one small
circumstance wanting, (their good will we have no cause to question) and that
was the possibility of it; for although the Roman Church called it self
Catholic, they were wise enough to know, there were many considerable Churches
in the world besides theirs, where the Scriptures were preserved, and from
whence copies might be procured by persons who would be so much the more
inquisitive, the more they were forbidden to get it. Therefore they pitched
upon an easier way, and finding the people under a very competent degree of
Ignorance, they indulged them and soothed them up in it, and told them they
could never miss the way to Heaven, though never so narrow, in the dark. Their
only danger was too much light, for then probably they might be in a great
dispute, whether the broad way was not the true; for there they saw most of
their Friends and Leaders. And while they kept the people in this profound
Ignorance and superstition, they jogged on in their opinion, as securely to
Heaven, as Ignatius Loyola's Mule did to Mount-serrat, Orlandin. hist. Societ.
Jesus l. 1. n. 17.
when he laid his Bridle on his neck, to see whether he would take the way to
pursue the Moor, Maffeius vit. Ignat. l. 1. c. 3.
which was the more beaten track, or the more craggy and untrodden way to that
place of devotion, and by a mighty providence, (and I suppose a little help of
the Rider) the Beast took the more narrow way. But when persons began to be
awakened by learning, and thereby grew inquisitive in all matters and so by
degrees in those of Religion, they then espied their error in letting such a
Book lie abroad in so many hands, from whence so many irresistible arguments
were drawn against the Doctrine and practices of the Roman Church. This I
assure my self, is the true ground of the quarrels against the Reading the
Scriptures; but that being now irremediable, they betake themselves to smaller
arts, and endeavor to hinder any one particular person whom they have the
least suspicion of, from meddling with a Book so dangerous to their Church and
Religion.

. 10. For if this were not it, The practice of the Roman Church herein directly
contrary to that of the Primitive Church.
what makes them to be more jealous of the use of the Scriptures, than ever the
Christians were in former Ages? Was there not much more danger of
misunderstanding the Doctrine of the Gospel at first than ever after? Nay were
there not very many who were false Apostles and great and dangerous Heretics,
presumptuous and arrogant, if ever any were? But did Christ or his Apostles for
all this, think it unfit to communicate the doctrine of the Gospel to the
people; or were the Books containing it written in Languages not to be
understood by them? no, they chose the most popular languages of that time,
most largely spread and generally understood. The Apostles never told their
Disciples of the danger of reading the Divine Writings that were among them,
when they were first spread abroad; and never so proper a season to give them
caution as then. But instead of that, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
they advise them to take heed to the sure word of Prophecy, and that they did
well therein, Romans 15. 4.
that the Scriptures were written for their instruction and comfort, 2 Timothy* 3.
15, 16.
that being divinely inspired they were able to make them wise unto salvation.
What, did the Apostles never imagine all this while the ill use that might be
made of them by men of perverse minds? yes, they knew it as well as any, and
did foretell Schisms and Heresies that should be in the Church, and saw them
in their own days; and yet poor men, wanted that exquisite prudence of the
Roman Church, to prevent them, by so happy an expedient as when they had
written Epistles to several Churches, to forbid the promiscuous reading of
them. But it may be, it was the awe of the Apostles and their infallible Spirit
in interpreting Scripture, made this prohibition not so necessary in their own
time; did the Church then find it necessary to restrain the people after their
Decease? We have an occasion soon after given, wherein to see the opinion of
the Church at that time; the Church of Corinth fell into a grievous Schism and
opposition to their spiritual Governors: upon this Clemens writes his Epistle
to them, wherein he is so far from forbidding the use of Scripture to them to
preserve unity, that he bidds them look diligently into the Scriptures,
Clement. Epistol. ad Corinth. p. 58.
which are the true Oracles of the Holy Ghost: and afterward, take St. Paul's
Epistle into your hands, P. 61.
and consider what he says and commends them very much for being skilled in
the Scriptures: P. 68.
Beloved, says he, ye have known, and very well known the holy Scriptures, and
ye have thoroughly looked into the Oracles of God, therefore call them to mind.
Which language is as far different from that of the Roman Church, as the Church
of that Age is from theirs. Nay the counterfeit Clemens (whom they can make use
of upon other occasions) is as express in this matter as the true. For he
persuades private Christians to continual meditation in the Scriptures,
Constit. Clement. l. 1. c. 4.
which he calls the Oracles of Christ; and that this is the best employment of
their retirements. But we need not use his testimony in this matter, nor the
old Edition of Ignatius, wherein Parents are bid to instruct their Children in
the Holy Scriptures, Ignat. ep. ad Philadelph.
nor that saying of Polycarp to the Philippians out of the old Latin Edition, I
am confident you are well studied in the Scriptures; for in the Greek yet
preserved, he exhorts them to the reading of St. Paul's Epistles that they might
be built up in the faith. Polycarp. Ep. ad Philipp. p. 16. ed. Usser.
So little did these holy men dream of such a prudent dispensing the Scriptures
among them, for fear of mischief they might do themselves or others by them.
Clemens Alexandrinus mentions the reading the Scriptures among Christians
before their Meals, Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 7. p. 728.
and Psalms and Hymns at them; and Tertullian mentions the same custom.
Tertul. de anim. c. 9. Origin.
Origin in the Greek Commentaries lately published, persuades Christians by all
means, Comment. in Matthaeum. p. 320.
by attending to Reading, Prayer, Teaching, Meditation therein day and night,
to lay up in their hearts not only the new Oracles of the Gospel, Apostles and
Apocalypse, but the old ones too of the Law and the Prophets. And elsewhere
tells his hearers, Comment. in Ios. p. 27.
they ought not to be discouraged if they met with difficulties in reading the
Scriptures: for there was great benefit to be had by them. But lest it should
be thought he speaks here only of public reading the Scriptures, in his
Homilies on Leviticus he speaks plainly, that he would not only have them hear
the Word of God in public, Homil. in Levit. 9.
but to be exercised and meditate therein in their houses night and day; For
Christ is every where present, and therefore they are commanded in the Law, to
meditate therein upon their journeys, and when they sit in their houses, and
when they lie down and rise up. But had not the Church yet experience enough of
the mischief of permitting the Scriptures to the people? Were there ever
greater and more notorious heresies than in those first ages of the Church, and
those arising from perverting the words and designs of the Scriptures? But did
the Church yet afterward grow wiser in the sense of the Roman Church? In the
time of the four General Councils they had trial enough of the mischief of
Heresies, but did the Fathers of the Church forbid the reading the Scriptures
on that account? No, but instead of that they commend the Scriptures to all, as
the best remedy for all passions of the mind, so St. Basil, Basil. in Psalm. 1.
Hieron. prefat. com. in ep. ad Ephesians.
and St. Hierome call it, and this latter commends nothing more to the Women he
instructed in devotion, than constant reading the Scriptures; and withal they
say that infinite evils do arise from ignorance of the Scriptures; S. Chrysostom.
prefat. in Epist. ad Romans
from hence most part of Heresies have come, from hence a negligent and
careless life; and unfruitful labors. Nay so frequent, so earnest and vehement
is St. Chrysostom in this matter of recommending the reading of Scriptures,
that those of the Roman Church have no other way to answer him, but by saying
he speaks hyperbolically; which in plain English is, he speaks too much of it.
But how far different were the opinions of the wise men of the Church in those
times, from what those have thought who understood the interest of the Roman
Church best? We may see what the opinion of the latter is, by the counsel given
to Julius 3. by the Bishops met at Bononia for that end, to give the best
advice they could for restoring the dignity of the Roman See, Consil. de
stabilienda Romans sede. p. 6.
that which was the greatest and weightiest of all, they said, they reserved to
the last, which was that by all means as little of the Gospel as might be
especially in the vulgar tongue, be read in the Cities under his jurisdiction;
and that little which was in the Mass ought to be sufficient; neither should it
be permitted to any mortal to read more. For as long as men were contented with
that little, all things went well with them, but quite otherwise since more was
commonly read. For this, in short, is that Book, say they, which above all
others has raised those Tempests and Whirlewinds, which we are almost carried
away with: And in truth, if any one diligently considers it, and compares it
with what is done in our Churches, will find them very contrary to each other;
and our very doctrine not only to be different from it but repugnant to it. A
very fair and ingenuos confession! and if self-condemned persons be Heretics,
there can be none greater than those of the Roman Church, especially the
prudential men in it, such as these certainly were, whom the Pope singled out
to give advice in these matters. But how different is the wisdom of the
Children of this world from that of the Children of Light! We have already seen
what another kind of judgment the ancient Fathers had of the usefulness of
Scriptures to the people, than they have in the Roman Church: but we need not
more to prove it, since it is acknowledged by those who are against the reading
the Scriptures by the people, that it was otherwise in the Primitive Church; so
Alphonsus a Castro and Sixtus Senensis confess. Alphons. a Castro advers.
haer^. l 1. c. 13.
Espencaeus quotes many plain places from St. Austin and St. Chrysostom to
prove, Sixti Senens. Biblioth. l. 6.
that the people ought to be very diligent in reading the Scriptures in their
own houses, and that nothing should excuse them from it: Annot. 152. Espencaeus
in Tit. c. 2. p. 517.
and confesses that St. Paul's precept, Colos. 3. let the word of God dwell
richly in you was intended for the people, and that they ought to have it among
them not only sufficiently but abundantly. The sum of this argument is, that
the reasons now urged against the peoples Reading the Scriptures would have
held against the publishing of them in a language to be understood by the
people; that they saw the same inconveniences which are objected now, and yet
commended the reading the Scriptures to all, that in all the primitive Church,
the practice was not only retained but vehemently urged, after all the Heresies
which had risen in the Church in their time; and therefore for the Church of
Rome to account it wisdom to keep the people from it, is to charge not only
the Fathers of the Church with folly, but the Apostles, and our Savior, and
God himself.

CHAP. IV. Of the Fanaticism of the Roman Church.
The unreasonableness of objecting Sects and Fanaticisms to us as the effects
of reading the Scriptures. Fanaticism countenanced in the Roman Church, but
condemned by ours. Private revelations made among them the grounds of believing
some points of doctrine, proved from their own Authors. Of the Revelations
pleaded for the immaculate Conception. The Revelations of S. Brigitt and S.
Catharin directly contrary in this point, yet both owned in the Church of Rome.
The large approbations of S. Brigitts by Popes and Councils; and both their
revelations acknowledged to be divine in the lessons read upon their days. S.
Catharines wonderful faculty of smelling souls, a gift peculiar to her and
Philip Nerius. The vain attempts of reconciling those Revelations. The great
number of female Revelations approved in the Roman Church. Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession proved by Visions and Revelations.
Festivals appointed upon the credit of Revelations: the Feast of Corpus Christi
on the Revelation made to Juliana, the Story of it related from their own
Writers: No such things can be objected to our Church. Revelations still owned
by them; proved from the Fanatic Revelations of Mother Juliana very lately
published by Mr. Cressy: Some instances of the blasphemous Nonsense contained
in them. The Monastic Orders founded in Enthusiasm. An account of the great
Fanaticism of S. Benedict, and S. Romoaldus: their hatred of Humane Learning,
and strange Visions and Revelations. The Carthusian Order founded upon a
Vision. The Carmelites Vision of their habit. The Franciscan and Dominican
Orders founded on Fanaticism, and seen in a Vision of Innocent the third to be
the great supporters of the Roman Church. The Quakerism of S. Francis described
from their best Authors. His Ignorance, Ecstasies and Fanatic Preaching. The
Vision of Dominicus. The blasphemous Enthusiasm of the Mendicant Friars. The
History of it related at large. Of the Evangelium aeternum, and the blasphemies
contained in it. The Author of it supposed to be the General of the Franciscan
Order, however owned by the Friars, and read and preached at Paris. The
opposition to it by the University: but favored by the Popes. Gul. S. Amor
writing against it, his Book publicly burnt, by order of the Court of Rome.
The Popes horrible partiality to the Friars. The Fanaticism of the Franciscans
afterward. Of the followers of Petrus Johannis de Oliva. The Spiritual State
began (say they) from S. Francis. The story of his wounds, and Maria
Visitationis paralleld. The canting language used by the spiritual Brethren,
called Beguini, Fraticelli, and Begardi. Of their doctrines about Poverty,
Swearing, Perfection, the Carnal Church and Inspiration: by all which, they
appear to be a Sect of Quakers after the Order of S. Francis. Of the Schism
made by them. The large spreading and long continuance of them. Of the
Apostolici and Dulcinistae. Of their numerous Conventicles. Their high opinion
of themselves. Their Zeal against the Clergy and Tithes; their doctrine of
Christian Liberty. Of the Alumbrado's in Spain: their disobedience to Bishops,
obstinate adhering to their own fancies, calling them Inspirations, their being
above Ordinances. Ignatius Loyola suspected to be one of the Illuminati, proved
from Melchior Canus. The Jesuits Order founded in Fanaticism; a particular
account of the Romantic Enthusiasm of Ignatius, from the Writers of his own
Order. Whereby it is proved, that he was the greatest pretender to Enthusiasm,
since the days of Mahomet and S. Francis. Ignatius gave no respect to men by
words or putting off his Hat; his great Ignorance and Preaching in the Streets:
his glorying in his sufferings for it; his pretense to mortification; the ways
he used to get disciples. Their way of resolution of difficulties by seeking
God; their itinerant preaching in the Cities of Italy. The Sect of Quakers a
new Order of Disciples of Ignatius, only wanting confirmation from the Pope,
which Ignatius obtained. Of the Fanatic way of devotion in the Roman Church.
Of Superstitious and Enthusiastical Fanaticism among them. Of their mystical
Divinity. Mr. Cressy's canting in his Preface to Sancta Sophia. Of the Deiform
fund of the soul; a superessential life, and the way to it. Of contemplating
with the will. Of passive Unions. The method of self-Annihilation. Of the Union
of nothing with nothing. Of the feeling of not-being. The mischief of an
unintelligible way of devotion. The utmost effect of this way is gross
Enthusiasm. Mr. Cressy's Vindication of it examined. The last sort of
Fanatioism among them, resisting authority under pretense of Religion. Their
principles and practices compared with the Fanatics. How far they are disowned
ai present by them. Of the Vindication of the Irish Remonstrance. The Court of
Rome has always favored that party, which is most destructive to Civil
Government, proved by particular and late Instances.

. 1. 2. WE come to consider whether the reading the Scriptures be the cause of
all the Sects and Fanaticisms which have been in England? The unreasonableness
of objecting Sects and Fanaticism to us, as the effect of reading the
Scriptures.
He might much better have charged the Philosophers, especially Aristotle, with
all the disputes in the world; for they not only by their writings have
occasioned many, but have taught men the pernicious use of reasoning, without
which, the world might be as quiet as a Flock of Sheep. If they could but
persuade men to lay aside that mischievous faculty, I dare undertake for them,
that let the people have the Bible never so much among them; they shall never
hurt the Church of Rome. Do they not tell us, that the words of Scripture are
plain for Transubstantiation, This is my body, Why do not then the people as
readily believe that, as any other proposition? By which we see, it is not
merely reading, but a more dangerous thing, called considering or reasoning
which make them embrace some things as they lie in words, and interpret others
according to the clearest evidence, which the nature of the thing, the
comparing with other places, and the common sense of mankind will give. But why
are we not all of a mind? I would fain know the time when men were so. This
variety of Sects was objected against the Philosophers, and thought no argument
then; it was objected against the primitive Christians, and thought of no force
then; why must it signify more in England, than ever it did in any other age
or place? But say they, It was otherwise in England before the Scriptures came
to be read by all, it was and is otherwise in all Churches where they are not
read, therefore these Sects and Fanaticisms are the dire effects of the
promiscuous reading the Scriptures. This is the common and popular argument.
All things were well with us when we offered up Cakes to the Queen of Heaven;
when all joined in the communion of the Roman Church, then there were no
Fanaticisms, nor New Lights, no Sects, as there are now in England; therefore
why should any one make any doubt, but he ought to return to the Church of
Rome? This necessarily leads me into the examination of these two things. 1.
Whether there be no danger of Fanaticism in the Roman Church? 2. Whether the
Unity of that Church be so admirable to tempt all persons, who prize the
Churches Unity, to return to it?

. 2. Concerning the danger of Fanaticism in the Roman Church. Fanaticism
countenanced in the Roman Church.
By Fanaticism we understand either an Enthusiastic way of Religion, or
resisting authority under a pretense of Religion. In either sense it shall
appear, that the Church of Rome is so far from being cleared from it, that it
has given great encouragement to it.

1. As to an Enthusiastic way of Religion; I shall now prove, that there have
not been greater Enthusiasts among us in England, than have been in the Roman
Church; all the difference is, they have been some always, others for a time,
allowed and countenanced and encouraged by those of the Church of Rome; but
among us they have been decryed and opposed by all the members of the Church of
England. I shall not insist upon the resolution of faith, and the infallibility
of the Church, which must be carried to Enthusiasm at last; but I shall prove
it by plain revelations which have been made the grounds among them of
believing some doctrines in dispute, and the reasons of setting up a more
perfect way of life, which in the highest strain of their devotion, is mere
Enthusiasm.

1. Revelations have been pleaded by them in matters of doctrine; Private
Revelations pleaded for matters of doctrine.
such I mean which depend upon immediate impulses and inspirations since the
Canon of Scripture and Apostolical Traditions. Of this we have a remarkable
instance in a late controversy managed with great heat and interest on both
sides, viz. of the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary: about the ending
of which, a solemn Embassy was sent from the Kings of Spain, Philip the third,
and Philip the fourth to the Popes Paul the fifth and Gregory the thirteenth,
and an account is given of it by one concerned himself in the management of the
Theological part of it, Iucas Waddi^g us Legation, de concept.
which, he says, is therefore published, that the world may understand upon
what grounds the doctrines of faith are established among them. Virg. Mariae.
pre^at.
One of the chief whereof insisted upon was, some private revelations made to
some Saints about the immaculate conception, Sect. 3. Tract. 11. Sect. 1. n. 3.
which being once received in the Church, adds no small strength, he says, to
any doctrine, and gives a solid foundation for a definition: i. e. that the
matter may be defined to be of faith, and necessary to be believed by all
Christians. Upon this he reckons up several revelations publicly received in
the Church, one, mentioned by Anselm, being a divine apparition to an Abbot in
a storm (a fit time for apparitions) whereby he was admonished to keep the
Feast of the Conception of the blessed Virgin, upon which, Baron. not. in
Martyrolog. Romans 8. December.
as Baronius observes, that Feast was first kept in England. Which revelation
Wadding tells us, is publicly recited in the office for the day, and was not
only extant in several Breviaries of England, France, Spain and Italy; but he
had diverse himself authorized by the Pope, wherein it was recommended as true
and piously to be believed, and accordingly have been publicly sung and used
in the Church about an hundred years. And what, says he, is the consequence of
disbelieving this, but to say in effect, that the Pope and the Roman Church are
easily cheated and abused by impostures, and forgers of false revelations to
institute new Festival Solemnities upon the credit of them? Another revelation
was made to Norbertus the founder of the Order of the Praemonstratenses, in
which, the Virgin Mary appeared and commended her veneration to him, and gave
him a white garment in token of her Original Innocence; which revelation is
believed by all of that Order, and taken as the reason of their habit. Besides
these, there are several other revelations to S. Gertrude, and others to the
same purpose reckoned up by several Catholic Authors, which no man ought to
reject, unless he intends to be as great a Heretic (or therein as wise a man)
as Erasmus was. Nay, these revelations were so frequent, he says, that there
has been no age since the tenth Century, wherein there has not been some made
to devout men or women about this matter. But above all these, most remarkable
were those to S. Brigitt, who had not one or two, but many to this purpose; and
the latest were of Joanna a Cruce, which, it seems, were at first eagerly
opposed, but at last came out with the approbation of two Cardinals and several
Bishops of the Inquisition in Spain. But now who could imagine a thing so often
revealed, so publicly allowed, so many times attested from Heaven, should not
be generally received? but the mischief of it was, the contrary doctrine had
revelations for it too. For Antoninus and Cajetan say, S. Catharine of Siena
had it revealed to her, that she was conceived with Original sin. What is to be
done now? Here we have Saint against Saint, Revelation against Revelation, S.
Catharine against S. Brigitt, and all the rest of them. Here to speak truth,
they are somewhat hard put to it; for they grant God cannot contradict himself,
and therefore of one these must be false, but which of them is all the
question. Here they examine which of these doctrines is most consonant to
Scripture and Tradition, which is most for the benefit of the Church, which
were persons of the greater sanctity, and whose revelations were the most
approved. For. S. Brigitts they plead stoutly, that when they were delivered by
her to her Confessors, they were strictly examined, and after them by the
Bishops and Divines of Sweden, and approved as divine revelations; from them
they were sent as such to the Council of Basil; from thence they were examined
over again at Naples, and there allowed and preached in the presence and by
command of the Queen and Archbishop before all the people of the City; again
examined at Rome by Prelates and Cardinals, A. D. 1377. by the Popes
appointment, and there approved: and A. D. 1379. they are declared by those
Urban the sixth committed the new examination of them to, to be authentic, and
to come from the Spirit of God: and so much is declared by Boniface the ninth
in the Bull of her Canonization, and at last approved, says Wadding, at the
General Council of Basil. What could be expected less after this; than that
they should have been received as Canonical Scriptures, they having never taken
so much pains in examining and approving any controverted Books of the Bible,
as they had done about these revelations? And no man knows how far their
authority might have prevailed, if the whole Sect of Dominicans had not been
engaged in the opposite opinion. For nothing else that I can find, has given
any discredit to her revelations but this; which makes Cajetan call them old
Wives dreams, as Wadding confesses. Wadding. l. c. Sect. 24. p. 35^.
But it falls out very conveniently, that S. Catharines revelation was just in
the Dominican way in which she had been educated; and for all that I can see,
wants little of the reputation of St. Brigitt. For they were both very
wonderful persons, and had more familiar reyelations, than any of the Prophets
we read of. S. Brigitt in her Childhood (if we believe the account given of her
in the Bull of Canonization by Bonifacius, and her life by Vastavius) had
Visions as frequently as other Children have Babyes, and was as well pleased
with them; the Virgin Mary was once her Midwife, as the Pope very gravely tells
us; but her revelations (after Christ took her for his Spouse) have filled a
great Volume. Revelationes S. Bri^ittae. A^tw. 1611.
Wherein a person that has leisure enough, may see strange effects of the
power of imagination, or a Religious Melancholy; and to that Book the Pope in
his Bull refers us: and if any thing can be more considerable than the Popes
authority, the whole Roman Church in the prayers upon S. Brigitts day, Brevi^r.
Romans ^. Octobr. p. 1017.
do confess these revelations to have come immediately from God to her; and in
one of the Lessons for that day, do magnify the multitude of her divine
revelations. But to say truth, the Church of Rome allows fair play in the case,
Brev. Romans Apr. 30. p. 808.
for it magnifies S. Catharine as much as S. Brigitt: for her holy Ecstasies are
mentioned in the Lessons upon her day, in one of which, were five rays coming
from the five wounds of our Savior to five parts of her body; and she (being
wonderful humble) prayed our Lord, that the wounds might not appear (for fear
she should have been thought as holy as S. Francis) and immediately the color
of the blood was changed into pure light upon her hands, and feet, and heart.
And her Confessor Raimund (who is always a principal man in these things, as
Matthias a Suecia was to S. Brigitt) without whom she was advised from Heaven
to do nothing, saw these splendid wounds upon her body; (but by what instrument
did he see the wound in her heart?) Well, though we Heretics are not apt to be
too credulous in these cases, the Church of Rome very gravely tells us in the
next Lesson; that her learning was not acquired, but infused, by which she
answered the most profound Doctors in the most difficult speculations in
Divinity; but these were nothing to her revelations and the service she did the
Church of Rome by them in a time of Schism. But one gift she had above S.
Brigitt, which was that while she was on earth she could not only see, but
smell souls too, and could not endure the stench of wicked souls, Raynald.
Annals Ecclesiast. A. D. 1380. n. 25.
as Raynaldus tells us from her Confessor Raimund: a gift very few had besides
her and Philip Nerius the Father of the Oratorians, for Raynaldus one of his
Order, tells us from Bacius the Writer of his life, that he was sometimes so
offended with the smells of filthy souls, Raynald. ib^
that he would desire the persons to empty the Iakes of their souls. Such
divine Noses had these two Saints among them! A degree of Enthusiasme above the
Spirit of discerning any Quakers among us have ever pretended to. Pope Pius the
second in the Bull of Canonization of S. Catharine, Bzov. Annals A. D. 1370.
n. 20.
not only acknowledges a gift of Prophecy to have been in her, but that
sometimes her Ecstasies were so great, that she was sensible of no kind of pain
in them. And S. Brigitt was often seen much above ground in her devotions, and
one saw Rivers and another Fire came out of her mouth; but I think not at the
same time. These are things we rake not the old Kennells of the Golden Legends
for, but are at this day allowed and approved of in the Roman Church; and their
days kept, and they prayed to, upon the account of such things as these are.

. 3. Yet still we are to seek what is to be done, Revelations contrary to each
other approved by the Roman Church.
when two Revelations contradict each other? for the Dominicans are as
peremptory for the revelation of S. Catharine, as their adversaries are for
that of S. Brigitt. Two bold Fellows called Henricus de Hassia and Sybillanus
knew no other way, Del: Rio disquis.
but to reject both as illusions and fancies; but what becomes then of the
Popes and Councils infallibility, Mag. l. 4. c. 1. q. 3. Sect. 4.
who have approved both? Franciscus Picus Mirandula being a Learned and
Ingenuous man, Ioh. Francis. Picus Mirand. de rerum praenot. l. 9. c. 2.
confesses himself at a loss, both being concerning a thing passed, there must
be truth on one side, and falsehood on the other: for the case is not the same,
says he, as to past and future things, in which a condition may be understood.
By which means St. Bernard escaped, when he promised great success to an
expedition into the Holy Land, and they who went in it found the quite
contrary. But at last gives us leave to conjecture his meaning when he says,
That if any thing be false in a prophecy, though some prove true, we have cause
to suspect all; especially if it come from women, whose judgments are weak,
and their passions vehement, and imaginations easily possessed with what they
are most desirous of, and least able to distinguish between the strength of
imagination, and a divine revelation: but as to that particular case of S.
Catharine and S. Brigitt, C. 4.
where both were women; he says, The Divines were generally for the former,
and the Monks for the latter; but which was in the truth, he thinks cannot be
known upon earth.

Martin Del Rio discoursing of the Revelations of Canonized Saints who were
women in the Church of Rome, Del Rio ib.
reckons up S. Angela a Carmelitess, whose Book of Revelations came out above
four hundred years ago, S. Gertrude A. D. 664. S. Hildegardis in Germany, A. D.
1180. and about the same time S. Elizabeth of Sconaugh, all whose revelations
were published, and the last collected by Roger an English Cistertian; and in
latter times he mentions S. Brigitt, and S. Catharine whose revelations, he
says, were opposed by some, but he declares for his part, that he is not at
all moved with their arguments, for that would diminish too much the honor due
to those holy Spouses of Christ, as he calls them; but in truth he confesses,
the honor of their Church is concerned in it; for, says he, several Popes
upon diligent examination have allowed and approved these revelations, as
Eugenius the third did those of Hildegardis as well as Boniface the ninth,
those of S. Brigitt. For the argument from the contradiction of these
revelations, he knows not how to come off, but by a charge of Forgery on the
Dominican side; and why might not they as well return it on the other; unless
Matthias a Suetia Confessor to S. Brigitt were more infallible than Raimundus,
or those who believed S. Catharine.

But this is not the only case, wherein these female revelations so much
approved by the Church of Rome are contradictory to each other in those things
whereon the proof of a point of doctrine depends. For who knows not to what end
the revelation of S. Gregoryes delivering the soul of Trajan by his prayers, is
so frequently urged? and this is confirmed by a revelation of S. Brigitt to
that purpose; Brigittae Revel. l. 4. c. 13.
from whence Salmeron calls it an unanswerable argument, and Alphonsus
Ciacconius published by the Popes authority an Apology for that revelation.
Salmero in 1. ad Cor. 15. disp. 27.
Yet Baronius tells us, that S. Mathildis had a revelation to the contrary,
Baron. Annal. A. D. 604. n. 59.
and if it were not contradictory to S. Brigitts, it must be contradictory to
it self. And therefore he very fairly rejects them all, but with what honor to
his Church (which had before approved them) I can by no means understand. Bell.
de Purgat. l. 2. c. 8.
And Bellarmin to the revelation of Mathildis, (wherein she desired to know
what became of the souls of Sampson, Solomon, Origin and Trajan, and God
answered her that none should know what he had done with them) opposes another
revelation wherein the soul of Origin was seen together with that of Arius and
Nestorius in Hell. So infallible are these revelations, even when they
contradict each other.

How often have visions and apparitions of souls been made use of to prove the
doctrine of Purgatory? Bellarm. de Purg. l. 1. c. 7.
Witness the famous testimonies to this purpose out of S. Gregory's Dialogues,
and Bedes History; which latter is at large recited (being very proper for it)
in the late great Legend published by Mr. Cressy under the name of a Church
History; Cressy's Church History. l. 20. c. 10.
who justifies the substance of the story as far as it concerns the Doctrine of
Purgatory, although he does not think the person really dead but only in a
Trance; which is all one to our purpose as long as such arguments as these, are
made use of to prove matters of faith by.

We need not go so far back as Gabriel Biel, Biel in Cano^. Miss^e lect. 51.
to show that the doctrine of Transubstantiation has been proved by the
appearance of a Child in a Host, such an argument has been lately published to
the World; Bellar. de Sa^ram. Euchar. l. 3. c. 8.
and Bellarmin reckons up several to this purpose, one, wherein instead of
Bread was seen real Flesh, and another, wherein Christ was seen in the form of
a Child. Which are well attended, with St. Anthony of Padua 's Horse, which
would never have left his Provender to Worship the Host, unless he had seen
some notable sight there.

And he very doughtily proves Auricular Confession, Bell. de poenit. l 3. cap.
12.
by a certain Vision of a tall and terrible man with his Book in his hand,
which blotted out presently all the sins which the humble Thief confessed upon
his knees to the Priest; but he has not proved that terrible man did not
represent the Devil, who by that Ceremony might show that he turned over the
keeping of his Books of Accounts to the Priest, who upon Confession, might tell
men's sins, as well as he could do without.

But they have not only attempted to prove matters of Doctrine by these things,
Festivals appointed on tho credit of Revelations.
but things have been defined in the Church merely upon the credit of private
revelations. So the Spanish Ambassador urges the Pope smartly upon the
Revelations of St. Bridgitt, Legatio de Concept. V. Mariae Sect. 3. n. 42. p.
371.
That there were many of his predecessors that had determined more things in
the Church partly relying upon private Revelations therein, whose authority was
not greater than hers were. Pius. 1. he says, determined the Controversy of
Easter Day upon the credit of a Revelation made to Hermes. Bullar. Romans Tom. 1.
p. 147. Cherubini.
Urban 4. Instituted the Festival of Corpus Christi in opposition to the
denyers of Transubstantiation upon the instinct and revelation of a certain
Woman. Paul the Hermit was Canonized for a Saint upon the Authority of a
Vision and Revelation to Anthony, the one of his soul flying to Heaven, the
other of his being there. The Feast of the apparition of the Archangel
Michael, which is constantly observed in the Church of Rome, depended upon a
revelation to the Bishop of Siponto and a few Drovers upon the Mountain
Garganus. These are things briefly touched by the Ambassador, but it will not
be amiss to give a more particular account of those instances which concern the
Institution of Festival Solemnities, by which it will appear that they are
Fanatical even in their Superstitions. Pope Urban 4. in the Bull still extant
for the Celebration of Corpus Christi day, mentions that as one of the great
reasons of appointing it, that while he was in a lower capacity he understood
that a revelation had been made to certain Catholics that this Feast should be
observed in the Church. This which is only intimated here is at large explained
by Ioh. Diestemius Blaerus Prior of St. James in Liege, where these things
happened. Apud Bzov. Annal. To. 13. A. D. 1230. n. 16.
In an Hospital hard by the Town he tells us, there was a famous Virgin called
Iuliana, which had many Ecstasies and Raptures, and so Prophetical a Spirit as
to discern the thoughts and intentions of her Neighbors Hearts; she wrestled
with Devils, discoursed with the Apostles, and wrought many Miracles. But one
thing peculiar to her was, that in her Prayers she almost always saw the Moon
in her brightness, but with a snip taken off from her roundness: at which she
was much troubled, but by no means could get it out of her Fancy. At last God
was pleased to reveal it to her, that the Moon signified the present Church,
and that fraction the want of one solemnity more to be observed in it: upon
which she received a command from Heaven to proclaim the observation of this
solemnity. For twenty years, she prayed that God would excuse her, and make
choice of a more worthy person; but none being found she communicates it to
Johannes de Lausenna, and he to Iacobus de Trecis then Archdeacon of Liege,
and afterward, Urban 4. But although all the persons to whom it was
communicated highly approved it; yet she was not satisfied till (one of her
Gossips,) named Isabella, after a whole years praying for it had the same thing
revealed to her, with that circumstance, that this Feast had always been among
the Secrets of the B. Trinity, but now the time was come that it should be
published to the World; and she in one of her ecstasies saw very distinctly all
the heavenly orders upon their faces, supplicating God, that to confirm the
faith of Christians; this day might be speedily observed. This Isabella was so
much intoxicated by this Vision, says the Author, that out of the abundance of
her spiritual drunkenness (they are his own words) she declared she would
promote the observing this Feast, although the whole world should oppose her.
Which (we may well think) Iuliana rejoiced to hear, and hence forwards they
joined counsels to advance this solemnity. Iuliana gets an ignorant young
Priest to draw up an Office for it, and while he writ, she prayed, by which the
Office was so well composed; that it would melt (says he) the hardest hearts
into devotion: and when it was seen by Divines, they said it was not written by
man, but inspired by God himself. And yet when Pope Urban published his Bull
upon the credit of these revelations, for the Celebration of this Feast, he
appointed Tho. Aquinas to compose an Office for it, and rejected that divine
Office of Iuliana. The Epistle of Urban to Eva one of the Nuns of Liege, and a
companion of the two Virgins is still extant in Diestemius and Binius about the
institution of this Feast of Corpus Christi. And that this was the occasion of
this Festival, is not delivered alone by Diestemius, but by Arnoldus Bostius
and Petrus Praemonstratensis, by Vignier and Molanus, (as Binius confesses of
this last,) who can no more be suspected of partiality in this case than.
Diestemius; but we need no other evidence than the Popes own Bull. Breviar.
Roman 8. Maij p. 825.
The story of the other is remarkable too, for it is read constantly in the
Roman Breviary upon the eighth of May. It came to pass that among the Droves of
Cattle, the Bull of a certain inhabitant wandered from the rest, which having
long sought for, they found in the entrance of a Cave. And when one shot an
arrow at him to destroy him, the arrow was driven back again to him that shot
it. Which thing so affrighted them all, that they durst not come near the Cave,
the Sipontines consult their Bishop, who appointed three days fasting and
Prayer to seek God in the case; after the three days the Archangel Gabriel
admonishes the Bishop, that place was in his custody, and by that act he
showed, that they ought to worship God there in remembrance of him and his
fellow Angels. The Bishop and people go accordingly thither, and they find the
place already formed into the fashion of a Temple, and there they perform
divine Offices, where many Miracles were afterward wrought. Not long after
Pope Boniface Dedicated the Church of St. Michael the third of the Calends of
October in which the Church celebrates the memory of all Angels, but this day
is consecrated to the apparition of Michael the Archangel. Thus far the 5 or 6
Lessons of the present Roman Breviary, whereby we understand what infallible
grounds the Church of Rome proceeds upon in all her definitions and
observations.

. 5. And is it not a hard case now, Revelations still owned by them.
we should be so often told of Fanaticism among us, by the members of the Roman
Church? Where are the Visions and Revelations ever pleaded by us in any matter
of Doctrine? Did we never discard any of the Roman opinions or practices upon
the account of Revelations made to Women or to any private persons? Do we
resolve the grounds of any doctrine of ours into any Visions and Ecstasies? have
we any Festivals kept upon such occasions? Do we collect Fanatical Revelations,
and set them out with comments upon them, as Gonsalvus Durantus has done those
of St. Bridgitt? Have we any mother Iuliana's among us? or do we publish to the
world the Fanatic Revelations of distempered brains as Mr. Cressy has very
lately done, to the great honor and service of the Roman Church, the sixteen
Revelations of Divine Love showed to a devout servant of our Lord (and Lady
too) called Mother Juliana? We have, we thank God, other ways of employing our
devout retirements, than by reading such fopperies as those are. Excellent men!
that debarr the people reading the Scriptures in their own tongue, and instead
of them put them off with such Fooleries, which deserve no other name at the
best than the efforts of Religious madness. Were we to take an estimate of
Christian Religion from such Raptures and Ecstasies, such Visions and
Entertainments as those are, how much must we befool our selves to think it
sense? Did ever H. N. Jacob Behmen, or the highest Enthusiasts talk at a more
extravagant rate than this Iuliana does? As when she speaks of our being
beclosed in the mid-head of God, 16 Revelations of divine love. chapter 49. p. 112.
Chapter 5. p. 12. Chapter 46 p. 105.
and in his meek-head, and in his benignity, and in his buxomness, though we
feel in us wrath, debate, and strife: Of being substantially united to God; and
that, God is that goodness which may not be wrath, for God is not but goodness:
our soul is oned to him, unchangeable goodness; and between God and our soul is
neither wrath nor forgiveness in his sight, for our soul is so fulsomely oned
to God of his own goodness, that between God and our soul may be right naught.
Chapter 9. p. 24.
That in mankind that shall be saved is comprehended all; that is to say, all
that is made and the maker of all; for in man is God, and God is all, and he
that loves thus he loves all: Chapter 56. p. 144.
That our soul is so deep grounded in God, and so endlesly treasured that we
may not come to the knowing thereof, till we have first knowing of God; which
is the maker to whom it is oned, and therefore if we will have knowing of our
soul, and commoning, and dalliance therewith, it behooveth to seek into our
Lord God in whom it is enclosed: and that worshipful City that our Lord Jesus
sits in, it is our sensuality in which he is enclosed; P. 145.
and our kindly substance is beclosed in Jesus with the blessed soul of Christ,
resting in the Godhead: and notwithstanding all this we may never come to the
full knowing of God till we know first clearly our own soul; for into the time
that it is in the full mights, we may not be all holy; and that is, that our
sensuality by the virtue of Christ's passion be brought up into the substance,
with all the profits of our tribulation, that our Lord shall make us to get by
mercy and grace. I had in party touching, and it is grounded in kind; that is
to say, our reason is grounded in God which is substantially kindness.
Afterward she discourses of three properties in the Holy Trinity, Chapter 58 p.
151.
of the Fatherhead, of the Motherhood, and of the Lordship, and she further saw
that the second person which is our Mother substantially, the same dear worthy
person is now become our Mother sensual; for we be double of Gods making,
substantial and sensual. We may justly admire what esteem Mr. Cressy had of
that Lady to whose devout retirements he so gravely commends the blasphemous
and senseless tittle tattle of this Hysterical Gossip. It were endless to
repeat the Canting and Enthusiastic expressions, which signify nothing in
Mother Iuliana's Revelations; and one would wonder to what end such a Book were
published among us, unless it were to convince us of this great truth, that we
have not had so great Fanatics and Enthusiasts among us, but they have had
greater in the Roman Church. And by this means they may think to prevail upon
the Fanatics among us, by persuading them, that they have been strangely
mistaken concerning the Church of Rome in these matters; that she is no such
enemy to Enthusiams and Revelations as some believe; but that in truth she has
not only always had such, but given great approbation and encouragement to
them. So that among all their visions they do but mix some that confirm their
particular Doctrines; as the Visions of Iuliana concerning the great Worship of
the B. Virgin from her son, the holy Vernacle at Rome, and such like fopperies;
these make all the rest very acceptable among them.

. 6. 2. That which they account the most perfect way of life, The Monastic
orders founded on Enthusiasm.
has been instituted by Enthusiastic persons, and upon the credit of visions
and revelations, and the highest way of devotion in that Church is mere
Enthusiasme.

1. That the Religious orders were instituted among them by Enthusiastic
persons upon the credit of their visions and revelations. The most celebrated
orders at this day in the Roman Church are the Benedictines, Carthusians,
Dominicans, Franciscans and Jesuits, and if I can prove this concerning each
of these, we shall see how much Fanaticism has contributed to the support of
the Roman Church. And it is a very fair way toward the proof of it, that
Bellarmin confesses concerning the four first and that of Romoaldus, that they
were at first instituted by St. Benedict, Bellar. de Pontif. Romans l. 3. c. 18.
St. Romoaldus, St. Bruno, St. Dominick, St. Francis, by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost; and for Ignatius Loyola if he do not appear as great a Fanatic as
ever has been in the world, we shall be contented to be upbraided with the
charge of Fanaticism among us. It is observable in the life of St. Benedict,
Gregor. Dial. l. 2.
as St. Gregory relates in the second Book of his Dialogues, that he was a
great hater of humane learning, and that was the first occasion of his retiring
from the World: being very much afraid a little knowledge should have destroyed
him. He therefore forsook not only his Studies, but his Fathers house and
business, being as St. Gregory says, knowingly ignorant, and wisely unlearned:
he might as well have said ignorantly learned, and foolishly wise. One might
have suspected it had been rather hatred of his Book, than devotion at his age,
which made him run away from School and his Fathers house; but one of his
Visions in his Cave makes it more probable there was some other occasion of it.
But however away he goes, and only an old Nurse with him, and he requited her
soon for it, for he by his Prayers set together the winnowing Sieve which she
had broken in pieces, which was after hanged up before the doors of the Church
to the Lombards times. But this is nothing to his being three years in a Cave
without the knowledge of any but St. Roman, who let him down victuals by a rope
and a Bell; and the Devil owing him a great spite, threw a huge stone and
broke the Bell. Here he lay so close, that he was fain to be discovered by a
vision, and was so devout that he had forgotten Easter day, till he was put in
mind of it by the person, who by a vision was sent to him: and was so little
like a man that the shepherds took him for a beast lying in a den. But at last
he is brought to light, and found to be a wonderful person; (for among
superstitious people, ignorance and devotion are most admired together) and now
many are sent to him for education; having conquered his amorous passions by
rolling himself naked among thorns and nettles: which thorns a long time after
St. Francis grafted Roses upon, Bollandi Acta Sanctorum Martii. 21. not. in.
vit. Bened. c. 1.
(as Bollandus well observes) which bear in the coldest part of Winter, and of
them Rose water is made which is sent as a present to the greatest Princes. He
had an admirable Sagacity in spying Devils; Cap. 4.
for he saw a little black Devil which led away a Monk from Prayers; and was
fain to pray two days with Pompeianus and Maurus that God would afford them
the Grace to see him too: and at last Maurus being young, and his sight good,
saw him; but Pompeianus being older and wiser could not. However St. Bennet
sent the little Devil packing with a stroke of his rod, as he did at other
times with the sign of the cross: and easily caused a stone to be lifted up
whereon the Devil sat, C. 9.
which could not be stirred before his coming. It would take up too much time
to tell of his Miracles, my business is only with his visions and revelations,
by which he could not only foretell things to come, but could discover absent
things; so that the Monks could not eat out of his sight, C. 12, 13.
but he could tell as well as if he saw the meat in their teeth when they
denied it. He discovered Riggo's fraud when he came to him in Totila's habit,
C. 14, 15.
and told Totilas how long he should reign; nay, if we believe St. Gregory, C.
16.
he knew the secrets of the Divinity, being one Spirit with God: no wonder then
the unhappy Boy could not hide one Flask of Wine, nor the Monks receive
handkerchiefs of the Women, C. 18, 19.
but he found it out, but most admirable was his sight of his Sister
Scholastica's soul entering into Heaven in the shape of a Dove: C. 34.
and another time the soul of Germanus Bishop of Capua in a fiery Circle
carried by Angels to Heaven; C. 35.
but above all was his seeing all the world under one ray of the Sun, which he
could not do, Gregory concludes without a Divine internal light; upon which a
dispute has been raised in the Schools, whether St. Benedict saw the divine
Essence or no? Possevin. A par. v. S. Benedict.
Aquinas thinks not, but only that he had an extraordinary revelation; Aquin.
Sum. 2. 2. qu. 180. art. 5^ ad. 3.
Vasquez does not seem much to oppose it, but upon two grounds, the one very
considerable, that we never read the Virgin Mary did it, Vasquez in 1, a. d'sp.
56. n. 5. Joh. 1. 18.
who ought to have the highest share in revelations and visions: the other only
a plain place of Scripture; No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten
Son of the Father he has revealed him. As though that were intended to exclude
St. Benedict and other Founders of Religious orders and not rather the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles who came not near them in Visions and
Miracles. But no one has handled this profound question with that care and
accuracy which Angelus de Nuce has done, ChronicoN. Monast. Cassiaens. p. 65.
Lut. Paris. 1668.
in his Notes upon St. Gregory's life of St. Benedict: he tells us therefore
the Question is not concerning the highest sort of abstractive contemplation of
any thing short of the Divine essence, for that, he says, none doubt of; but
of an intuitive vision, by which the divine essence is seen clearly in it self
immediately, and not in any created image: the Negative he grants is held by
Aquinas and many of the Schoolmen: but yet he says, many Schoolmen of great
note are for the affirmative, and he deduces many arguments to prove it from
St. Gregory's words: but that which adds most weight to it, besides the number
of authors quoted by him, is that Urban 8. in a Bull upon the feast of St.
Benedict, A. D. 1632. does expressly assert it. Ioh. Bona de divina Psalmodia.
cap. 18. s. 3.
And Ioh. Bona a present Cardinal at Rome, says, that St. Benedict was rapt up
into the third Heavens, where he heard the Choire of Angels, and saw God face
to face: for which besides Gregory, he cites St. Bernard, Rupertus Tuitiensis,
Bonaventure, Dionysius Carthusianus, Maximilian Sandaeus, and others. And adds
to this as extraordinary a thing as any has been yet said of him, that he and
his Sister Scholastica sung very distinctly in their Mothers Wombs, a presage
(says he) of the cheerful singing of their Order. For which he quotes several
Authors of the Benedictines, and although he grants it may be suspected,
because it does not occurr in the more ancient writers, yet he justifies it by
many parellel Stories. These things are enough for St. Benedicts Enthusiasme.
St. Romoaldus was as happy as St. Benedict in his ignorance. For as Petrus
Damiani reports in his life, Petr. Damiani vit. S. Romoaldi cap. 4.
when he first entered himself under the discipline of Marinus the Eremite, he
could hardly read his Psalter, though he had been a Monk three years before;
and he adds it as a great instance of his patience, that when Marinus in
teaching him, did often beat him with a wand upon the left side of his head,
for his dullness, he desired his Master that he would now change his side, for
he had by his strokes quite lost his hearing in his left ear: and yet he met
with a worse companion than Marinus; Cap. 7.
for, for five years together he says, the Devil lay upon his feet and his
legs in the night, that he could not easily stir himself. He was so possessed
with the thoughts of him, that a Monk could not knock at his Cell door, but he
asked the Devil, what he did there in the Wilderness? and was ready to
encounter with the Devil, when he found him to be one of his Brethren. But the
Devil once got him down (as he imagined) while he was saying his Psalms, Cap.
16.
and wounded him, and bruised him sadly; but of a sudden he rose up as sound as
ever, and went on just where he left. All the crows and ugly birds he saw in
the Wilderness, Cap. 17.
he fancied to be Devils, and challenged to fight with them; and exceedingly
triumphed when at his loud cries they flew away. He was converted by a vision
of St. Apollinaris, C. 2.
as his Father Sergius ran stark mad with a vision of the Holy Ghost, C. 14.
he wept so abundantly that he never durst say Mass in public, C. 31.
and bid his Brethren have a care of shedding too many tears, because they hurt
the sight and the brain. Yet by immediate revelation he writ an excellent
commentary says Mugnotius on the Book of Psalms, Andreas Mugnotius de Eremo
Camaldulensi. lib. 1. Pet. Damiani vit. S. Romualdi c. 50.
though not very agreeable to Grammar says Petrus Damiani; and being led by
the Divine Spirit to the top of a Mountain, in his sleep he saw Ladders
reaching from thence to Heaven, and a great many Monks going up to Heaven upon
them. A divine vision indeed! and he meeting with Maldulus who by great fortune
had the same vision, they presently agreed about erecting a Monastery there. If
the order of Carthusians did not begin upon the story of the Doctor of Paris
speaking those dreadful words after his death, which is delivered, say the
defenders of it, by sixty authors of the Roman Church; Launoy de vera causa
seccssus Brunonis in Erem^m c. ^ p. 165.
yet it is agreed on all hands among them, that Hugo who joined with Bruno in
laying the foundations of that order, had a vision of Gods building a house of
seven stars conducting them, Launoy ib. p. 32, 69, 71, etc.
to the place called la grand Chartreuse, from whence the whole order has
taken its name. The Carmelites have an especial vision of Simon Stock, wherein
the B. Virgin upon his devout prayers to her appeared with the habit in her
hand, which she would have them wear, with a promise greater than ever her son
made, Launoy d^ viso Simo^is Stockii. cap. 1.
that whosoever dyed in that habit, should not perish by everlasting flames.

. 7. But S. Francis and S. Dominick were the persons whom Innocent the third
saw in a Vision supporting the tottering Fabric of the Lateran Church; The
Franciscan and Dominican Orders founded in Fanatisism.
whereby he understood what Props and Supporters those two Orders would be to
the Church of Rome. Rainald.
From hence those high Elogiums are given of those two persons by Bonaventure,
Annal.
Antoninus, Eccles. A. D. 1215. n. 17.
Bozius and others, that they were the two great lights of Heaven, Bonavent.
vit. Francisci, c. 3. Sect. 8.
the two Trumpets of Moses, the two Cheru^ims, (or rather the two Calves of Dan
and ^ethel,) the two breasts of the Spouse, the two Olive branches, Sedulius in
Elogiis S. Franc.
the two Candlesticks, the two Witnesses; almost all the noted two's of the
Bible, but the two Thieves, and the two Testaments; and these, as will appear
presently, were in no great esteem among them. But S. Francis got the start of
the other; for (if a Canonized Saint may be believed upon his Oath) Bonaventure
did publicly swear at Paris, Bernard. a Bustis Rosar. p. 2. sermon. 27.
says Bernardinus a Bustis, that Christ did reveal it to him, that S. John
(Apocalypse. 7. 2.) by the Angel ascending from the East having the seal of the
living God, meant no other than S. Francis. And therefore that is the Motto
placed under his Picture; and is applied the same way by Pope Leo the tenth.
Sedul. 16.
I shall not take the advantage that is sufficiently given us by the Book of
Conformities, the Alcoran of the Franciscans, nor the declared enemies of those
Orders, to represent S. Francis by but only take the account given of him by
persons of greatest reputation in the Roman-Church. Cardinal Vitriaco, who
says, Iac. de Vitriaco Hist. Occident. c. 32. Rainald. A. 1219. n. 14.
he saw him when he went to Damiata, calls him a simple and illiterate man.
Cardinal Bonaventure is received as the most approved Writer of his life; and
he describes him as an ignorant Enthusiast; being bred a kind of Woollen
draper, as appears by the selling his Cloth and his Horse at Foligno, Bonav.
vit. Francis c. 2.
after he left off trading upon the Vision of building Churches. His first
conversion to Quakerism was by Dreams and Visions, Cap. 1. sect. 6.
in which he was sometimes swallowed up in God, as Bonaventures expression is,
and his soul melted at the sight of Christ; and was so tender hearted to the
poor, that he sometimes put off his clothes to give them, sometimes unript
them, sometimes cut them in pieces, I suppose that he might give to the more.
Cap. 2. sect. 1.
All this while he had no Teacher but Christ, and learnt all by inspiration,
but went besides himself at hearing the voice come from a Crucifix (as any one
almost would have done) and it seems he was not well recovered when he came
from the Cave, Sect. 2.
for the people flocked about him as a mad man, and gave him the common
Civility to such persons of dirt and stones: and his Father entertained him
with dark rooms and chains, as the fittest for him, whom neither words nor
blows could bring to himself. But finding no amendment, he made him renounce
his Patrimony, and so discharged him, Sect. 4.
which S. Francis did so readily that he would not so much as keep the Clothes
on his back. Brev. Roman. 4. October. Lect. 4.
Whereby; says Bonaventure, in a wonderful zeal, and being drunk in the
Spirit, casting away his very Breeches, and being stark naked before them all,
said thus to his Father, Hitherto I called thee Father on earth; but hence
forward I can securely say, Our Father which art in Heaven. As though his duty
to God and his Parents had been inconsistent. The Bishop, in whose presence all
this was done, gave order to have his nakedness covered, highly admiring his
zeal; and he no sooner had got some rags about him, but he falls to making
Crucifixes in Mortar with his own hands, as Children do Babies in the dirt. In
this height of Fanaticism he goes about, and preaches to the people, Cap. 3.
sect. 1.
whose words pierced their hearts, much sooner than sense and reason would have
done; and he soon brought the superstitious and ignorant multitude to a great
admiration of him, for his very way of saluting the people, he pretended, he
had by revelation. At last one Bernard joins with him, but S. Francis tells
him, Sect. 2.
They must seek God for direction what to do; and after prayers, he being a
great worshipper of the Trinity, in honor to it opens the Gospel three times,
and the first three sentences he met with, were to be the rule of their Order:
their second Brother was F. Gyles, who though an Idiot and a simple man, Sect.
3.
was full of God, as he says, and had so many ecstasies and raptures that he
seemed to live rather among Angels than men. One day when S. Francis was alone
in a solitary place, Sect. 5.
He fell into an ecstasy of joy, and had full assurance of the remission of his
sins; and being transported beyond himself, he was catched up into a wonderful
light, wherein his mind being enlarged, he foresaw all that should come to pass
concerning his Order. His number being increased, Sect. 7.
to Rome he goes to confirm his Order; but the Pope rejected him with scorn;
but in the night he saw a Palm growing between his feet into a goodly Tree;
which he wisely interpreting to be S. Francis, sent for him, and promised him
fair things, and upon the other Vision of his supporting the Lateran Church, he
approves his Rule, and establishes his Order. And his whole life afterward was
agreeable to this beginning (...) and the Rule of his Order he called,
Possevin. Appar. v. Franciscus.
as Possevine tells us, The Book of life, the hope of salvation, the marrow of
the Gospel, the ladder of Heaven, the key of Paradise, the Eternal Covenant.
Let any Fanatics be produced among us, (though we are far from looking on them
as the supporters of our Church) who have exceeded S. Francis in their actions
or expressions. Brigittae Revel. l. 7. c. 20 p. 559 Col. 1.
S. Brigitt says of the Rule of S. Francis, That it was not dictated, or
composed by the wisdom of man, but by God himself; nay, every word therein was
inspired by the Holy Ghost, which, she says likewise, of all the other Rules
of Religious Orders. What horrible blasphemy is this, which is so solemnly
approved in the Church of Rome for divine Revelations? But lest Dominicus
should seem to come behind S. Francis in ^^sions, Ra^nald. A. D. 1216. n. 48.
he tells him at Rome where they met, That it was revealed to him in a Vision,
that Christ was just coming to destroy the world for the wickedness of it, and
his Mother stopped him, and told him she had two servants would reform it,
whereof himself was one, and Christ approved of him, as one that would do his
work, but his companion he did not know, till he met S. Francis, and so they
embraced one another. Which Vision out of his great humility S. Francis
reported, having it from the others own mouth. I shall not insist on any more
of Dominicus, nor on the blasphemous Images set up in S. Marks Church at
Venice, Wolfii Lection. Memorab. cent. 13. p. 509.
one of which was of S. Paul with this Inscription, By him we go to Christ; the
other of Dominicus with this, but by him we go easier to Christ; but I shall
proceed to their followers, among whom we meet with one of the most blasphemous
pieces of Enthusiasm the world has ever known.

. 8. For which we are to understand that in the beginning of the thirteenth
Century one Almaricus a Student in Paris was suspected for some dangerous
Opinions, The blasphemous Enthusiasm of the Meadicant Friars.
for which he was sentenced to recant; Nauc^ur.
and soon after dyed. Among these. Opinions he broached this blasphemy,
Chronogr. Vol. 2. Genesis 40. p. 900.
which was privately instilled into his followers; That every person of the
Trinity had his successive time of ruling the world; Spondani Angales Eccles.
A. D. 1204. n 17.
that the Law of the Father continued till Christ's comeing; the Law of the Son
to their time, and then the time of the Holy Ghost was to begin. Bellarm.
Chronol. ad A. D. 1209.
In which the use of Sacraments was to cease, and all internal administrations,
Caesar. Bulaeus in Histor. Unive^s. Paris. Tom. 3 p. 49.
and every one then was to be saved by the inspiration and inward grace of the
Holy Ghost, without any external actions. They so highly extolled Love, that
what would have been a sin without it, they thought to be nothing with it; as
Fornication, Adultery, etc. and promised impunity to the women with whom they
committed these things, Rigo^d in vita Philip^. August. A. D. 1109.
because they said God was only good, and not just. That these were their
opinions, Eym^ric. Dir^ct. Inquisit. p. 2. ^. 7.
is delivered by Rigordus who lived in that age, and was upon the place, being
a Monk of S. Denis and Physician to the King of France, F^a^is^. Pegna. No^. in
Direct. p. 1. page 6.
and by Eymericus and Pegna, and many others. But by the care and endeavor of
the Bishop and University of Paris, though they had spread very far abroad, and
with a great deal of secrecy, yet by the fraud and artifice of one employed
among them, who pretended to revelations and the Spirit as highly as they could
do, they were convicted, condemned, and some of them executed. Notwithstanding
which severity about fifty years after this came forth a Book with the Title of
Evangelium aeternum, or the Eternal Gospel published by the Mendicant Friars,
and supposed to be written by Johannes de Parma about A. D. 1254. who was
General of the Franciscan Order; but the Book was received and defended by both
Orders, as will presently appear. But it will be first necessary to consider
what the doctrines are, which are contained in this Book; and if ever there
were higher Fanaticism than is therein, or rather greater blasphemies, let them
have leave to triumph. The most perfect account we have of it, Eymeric. Direct.
Inquisit. p. 2. c. 9.
is from Nicol. Eymericus, who was himself an Inquisitor, and tells us these
Heresies or Errors are contained in it.

1. That the doctrine of Abbot Ioachim (a great Fanatic) excelled the doctrine
of Christ, Bulaei Hist. Universit. Paris. To. 3. s. 5. p. 330.
and consequently the New and Old Testament.

2. That the Gospel of Christ is not the Gospel of the Kingdom, and therefore
is not edifying.

3. That the New Testament is to be evacuated, or lose its force, as the Old
has already.

4. That the New Testament shall not remain in force above six years longer;
viz. to A. D. 1260.

5. That they which shall live beyond that time, shall be in the state of
perfection.

6. That the Gospel of Christ shall give way to another Gospel, and so instead
of the Priesthood of Christ, another Gospel shall succeed.

7. That no simple man is fit to instruct men in spiritual and eternal things,
but they that walk barefoot.

8. That although God afflict the Jews in this world, yet he will save them,
though they remain in Judaism, and will in the end deliver them from all the
opposition of men, remaining such as they are.

9. That the Church has not yet brought forth Children, nor will do before the
end of the temporal reign: which shall be after six years; and by this we are
to understand, that the Christian Religion, which has brought forth many
called to the faith of Christ, is not the Church.

10. That the Gospel of Christ brings no man to perfection.

11. That the Gospel of the Holy Ghost coming, or Ioachims work obtaining
(called the Everlasting Gospel or of the Holy Ghost) the Gospel of Christ shall
be done away.

12. That no man in Religious Orders is bound to expose his life for defense of
the faith, or preserving the worship of Christ, but other men are.

13. That as when John Baptist came, the things that were before must needs be
confuted, because of new things coming in their place; so when the time of the
Holy Ghost shall come, or the third state of the world, the things that were
before must be confuted, for the sake of the New which are to come; from whence
it must be understood, that the New Testament must be refuted, and the old cast
away.

14. That Christ and his Apostles were not perfect in the contemplative life.

15. That the Order of the Clergy shall perish; but one of a Religious Order
shall be perferred above all in dignity and honor; and that as the authority
under the Father was committed to one of the married order, so under the Holy
Ghost to one or some of the order of Monks.

16. That those who are over the Colleges of Monks, ought in those days to
think of departing from the Seculars, and prepare themselves to return to the
ancient people of the Jews.

17. That the Preachers which shall be in the last state of the world, shall be
of greater dignity and authority, than the Preachers of the Primitive Church.

18. That the Preachers and Doctors of Religious Orders, when they shall be
infested by the Clergy, shall go over to the Infidels; and it is to be feared,
lest they go thither for that end to bring them in battle against the Roman
Church, according to the doctrine of S. John, Apocalypse. 15.

These may suffice out of twenty seven, to let the world know, where the height
of Blasphemy and Fanaticism was first hatched; and no one could imagine, that
any who had the face or name of Christians should own these things; yet they
came from those excellent and inspired persons of the newly founded Religious
Orders. And if it had not been for the mortal hatred that then was between the
University of Paris, and the Mendicant Friars (who usurped the Professors
places in the University against their will) God knows how far this doctrine
might have prevailed without the least censure. For the Popes were extremely
partial to the Friars, and would hear no ill of them; they now finding them
their most useful instruments in all their quarrels with Princes, Matthew. Paris.
Hist. ad A. D. 1255. p. 909.
the Secular Clergy and the People. So Matthew. Paris relating the Story of the
quarrels between the University and the Friars, tells, That though the King and
the City were for preserving the privileges of the University; yet the Friars
being at the Popes devotion, and doing them a great deal of service, were more
acceptable in the Court of Rome, and therefore got the better of the
University. Nay, so zealous was Alexander the fourth in the cause of the Friars
against the University, that in the six years of his Popedom, he sent out near
forty Bulls against the University, of which not one now appears in the
Bullarium: but most of them are preserved in that accurate Preface before the
Works of Gul. de Sancto Amore the zealous Defender of the University against
the encroachments of the Friars, Oper. Gul. de S. Amore. prefat. p 63, Bulaei
Hist. Universit. Paris. A. D. 1255. To^. 3.
and in the late History of the University of Paris. In the midst of these
heats, some intimation was given the Divines of the University of such a Book,
which was in great esteem among the Friars, called Evangelium aeternum, wherein
were very dangerous doctrines, Matthew Paris, ibid.
which were (says Matthew Paris) preached, read and taught by the Friars: and
were put together by them in a Book called Evangelium aeternum, and taken,
(says he) chiefly out of the Books of Abbot Joachim; Richerii Chron. S^nonens.
l. 4. c 37.
and Richerius acknowledges, that the Book was composed by the Friars, and
that the Divines of Paris by some art got a Copy of it, and extracted some
Heads out of it, which were contrary to faith: and upon that (as Du Bouley
says) they caused it to be burnt publicly at Paris. Bulaei Hist. p. 299.
But not being satisfied herewith; they preached against it, as appears by a
Sermon of Gul. de Sancto Amore, Gul. de S. Amore oper. p. 500.
at the end of his Works, wherein he says, That he had seen no small part of
that Book; and he had heard that it does in all contain more than the Bible;
and therein, he says, it is taught, that the Sacraments of the Church are
nothing, that the Gospel of Christ is not the true Gospel; and that the Book it
self is the Gospel of the Holy Ghost, and the everlasting Gospel; and that the
Gospel of Christ should be preached but for five years to come; that then men
shall have another Rule of life, and the Church shall be otherwise managed.
Which, says he, is execrable and abominable to be spoken. But not content with
bare preaching against them, he writ a very smart Book in the name of the
University of Paris, de periculo novissimorum temporum, of the dangers of the
last times, wherein he does at large set forth the hypocrisy, Gul. de S. Amore
de peric. novis. temp. c. 8. p. 38.
idleness, flattery and baseness of the Friars; but coming to show the near
approach of the dangers he mentions, he says, It is now fifty five years (for
about that time Almaric broached his doctrine) that some have endeavored to
change the Gospel of Christ into another Gospel, which they said would be
better, more perfect and worthy, which they call the Gospel of the Holy Ghost,
or the everlasting Gospel; which will by its coming turn the Gospel of Christ
out of doors; as, says he, we are ready to prove, out of that cursed Gospel;
and a little after he adds, That this Everlasting Gospel was publicly
explained at Paris, A. D. 1254. from whence it is certain, that it would be
preached, unless there were some other thing which hindered. And afterward he
says, That in that Book, this Everlasting Gospel is said to exceed the Gospel
of Christ, as much as the light of the Sun does that of the Moon, or the Kernel
does the Shell. This Book of his extremely incensed the Friars, and they
presently sent informations against him to the Pope; and by their interest got
his Book to be condemned and burnt publicly before the Pope and the Court at
Anagnia, and afterward at Paris: to which purpose the Pope published a Bull,
and denounced the sentence of excommunication against any who should presume to
defend it: and the Write of it was deprived of his Ecclesiastical Promotions
and banished France, Chronicon. Nicol. Trivetti ad A. D. 1256.
as far as the Popes power could do it. All this was done in great haste,
before the Legates from the University could appear; and when they came, three
of them recanted and returned; only Gul. de S. Amore resolved to stand it out,
and answered all their objections, and persisted still in the accusation of
that horrible Book: and at last prevailed so much, that the Pope was fain to
condemn the Evangelium aeternum together with S. Amors Book; but it appears
how unwillingly he did it, by his carriage in it, which is related by Matthew.
Paris; Matthew. Paris A. D. 1257. p. 939.
for he condemned the other Book solemnly, and caused the sentence to be
publicly executed; but he gave order that this Book should be secretly burnt,
and as much as might be without any offense to the Friars. Lo here the true
zeal of the Head of the Church! A Book only writ against the Mendicant Friars
is condemned as impious, wicked, execrable, and what not, in the Bull against
it; and a Book against Christian Religion in the highest manner hardly procured
to be condemned; and when it is, with great fear of displeasing the Authors and
approvers of it. And since that time, they have been very careful to suppress
the least mention of the latter, but very forward to set forth the other. For
in the Roman Bullarium, Bullar. Romans Tom. 1.
the Bull against S. Amors Book is set forth at large; Alex. 4. Bull. 8. p.
137.
but not the least intimation of any such Book condemned as the Evangelium
aeternum. So much dearer to the Pope is the honor of Friars, than of Christ
and the Christian Religion! And therefore S. Amor said well in the University
of Paris before they went, Bulae. p. 330.
That it was to no purpose to go about to procure the condemning that Book at
Rome, where it had so many Favorers; the design of it being to advance the
honor of Religious Orders, though to the overthrow of the Gospel of Christ. It
is well these things were written and preserved by Writers of their own Church,
and persons of the same Age (out of whom only I have given account of them) for
otherwise according to their usual Method of confuting things which do not
please them, they would be denied with a mighty confidence, and the world
should be told, that these are only the Lies and Forgeries of Heretics. But
these are to their shame preserved in their own Books, and we can show them the
very words, if occasion requires it.

. 9. Yet we are not to think, The Fanaticism of the Franciscans afterward.
that only the preaching Friars sell into these extravagancies; for the
Franciscans had a great hand in them too, and were as forward to promote that
which they accounted their common interest. And notwithstanding the Popes
condemning the Book, said to be taken out of Abbot Ioachims Writings, Guido
Carmelit. de haeres. Abb. Ioachim and Pet. Ioh.
yet his doctrine did in no long time after break forth again in the Franciscan
Order. For toward the latter end of the same Century, or as most think,
Alphonsus a Castro advers. haeres. v. Apost. haer. 1.
in the beginning of the next in the time of Clement the fifth appeared one
Petrus Iohannis de Oliva a great Disciple of Ioachims, as Guido Carmelita,
Alphonsus a Castro, and Franciscus Pegna affirm. All the difference says
Alphonsus, Pegna in direct. Inquisit. p. 2. q. 9.
between them was, that Ioachim made the spiritual State to commence from the
founding the Benedictine Order, but Petrus Iohannis would have it begin only
from S. Francis: Which State, Eymeric. ib.
as Eymericus relates, where he recounts his errors, began with the Franciscan
Order, when the Angel of Christ, that is, Haeres. 6.
S. Francis, did set his mark upon all his Soldiers; and that S. Francis
appeared as Christ did with his wounds upon him. For we are to understand, that
S. Francis in one of his Visions upon the very day of the exaltation of the
Cross, had the same bleeding wounds on his hands, feet and side, which Christ
had upon the Cross, and carried them for two years together before his death;
and lest this should be suspected, Pope Alexander the fourth preached it in S.
Bonaventures hearing, that himself saw them, as the sixth Lesson on S. Francis
day in the Roman Breviary, Brev. Romans 4. October. Lect. 6.
and Bonaventure assure us. And who dares question the infallibility of the
Popes eyesight? Unless the Story in latter times of Maria Visitationis,
Bonavent. vit. Francis. c. 18. Sect. 9.
as she was called, Abbess of the Annuntiation in Lisbon, may give some
suspicion of it. For this Virgin had gained so great a reputation for sanctity,
not only in Portugal, but in Spain, Italy and the East Indies, that she seemed
to be a fit match for S. Francis. And she out-did him in the number of her
wounds, for she had thirty two upon her head, caused by Christ's putting his
Crown of Thorns upon her, and in her hands, and ^eet, and side, they were as
exact as in St. Francis, she made no difficulty of showing them, if her
Confessor bid her, but never otherwise; lest she should seem too much to glory
in the honor which Christ had done her. This Confessor was no less a man, than
Ludovicus Granatensis, a man highly commended for learning and piety, who as
verily believed them, as Pope Alexander did those of S. Francis. One day in the
Week she laid rags to her wounds, upon which the print of the wounds was made.
These rags with incredible devotion, says the Writer of the Story, were sent
to the Pope himself, and to the greatest and most religious persons in all
parts, by whom they were received with great Veneration. And when he was
Inquisitor in Sicily, he says, he saw many of them with her Picture, and a
Book of her life and eminent sanctity by a person of great authority, which
were preserved as precious things by the Viceroy's Lady. But this is nothing
to Gregory the thirteenth then Pope, who writ a Letter of encouragement to her,
to go on in the same way of sanctity she had begun. She had been examined by
the Inquisition, and her wounds were allowed by them after diligent search: But
at last they found what she aimed at, which was the Revolt of Portugal from
Spain; which being once suspected, she is brought before the Inquisition, and
her Sanctity is condemned, her wounds declared to be a mere Imposture, being
artificially made by red Lead, and her self sentenced by the Inquisitors to a
very severe penance all her days December. 8. A. D. 1588. I suppose, my
Adversary having been upon the place, has often heard the truth of this; but
if he doubts it, Lud. a Paramo de Origin Inquisit. l. 2. tit. 2. c. 15. n. 11.
tit. 3. c. 5. n. 16.
he may find it, as I have related it, in Ludovicus a Paramo. By which it is
very easy to ghess what it is, which gives and preserves the reputation of
these things in the Roman Church; for if this Saint had dyed before her design
brake forth, we might have heard of her wounds in the Roman Breviary, as well
as those of St. Francis, and a Festival might have been kept in commemoration
of her sanctity, and her self as religiously invocated as the rest of the Popes
making. But supposing Pope Alexander the fourths authority prevailed so much
upon the people, to believe that S. Francis had the same wounds which Christ
had, etc. No wonder then, it should be written in the Book called, Wolfii Lect.
Memor. Cent. 13. p. 522.
The Flowers of S Francis, that those only were saved by the blood of Christ,
who lived before S. Francis; but all that followed, were redeemed by the blood
of S. Francis. No wonder, this Petrus Iohannis made the Rule of S. Francis, to
be the very same with the Gospel, and that which Christ and his Apostles lived
by: of which S. Francis was the greatest observer next to Christ and his
Mother; and that as Christ when he was to reform the world chose twelve
Apostles; so S. Francis had twelve Brethren, by whom the Evangelical Order was
founded; that those who opposed this Order, were the carnal persecuting Clergy,
in whom the Seat of the Beast is much more, than in the people; that in the
time of this Mystical Antichrist, the Carnal Church shall oppose the doctrine,
life and zeal of the Saints, and burn as it were with fire against them; but it
shall be dried up from all spiritual Wisdom, and Grace, and the riches of
Christ, and be exposed to errors and delusion as it was with the Jews and
Greeks. Those who will not take the pains to see how faithfully I have
translated these words out of Eymericus, would imagine I have borrowed some of
the canting language of the modern Quakers. But he goes on: saying, That as
Vasthi the Queen being cast off from the Kingdom and Marriage of Ahassuerus,
the humble Esther was chosen to succeed in her place, and the King made a great
Feast to his Princes and Servants: so in this last state of the Church, the
adulterous Babylon, the carnal Church being rejected, the spiritual Church must
be exalted, and a great and spiritual Feast be kept to celebrate these Nuptials
with, that under the Mystical Antichrist, there shall be overturnings and
commotions, by which the Carnal Church shall be terribly stirred up and moved
against the Evangelical Spirit of Christ; but that, the Whore of Babylon, the
Carnal Church shall fall; in which time the Saints shall preach, saying, from
this time it is no longer the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan, and
the Habitation of Devils, which before said in the pride of her heart, I sit as
a Queen in great honor and glory, I rule over my Kingdom, I sit at ease, I am
no Widow, i. e. I have Bishops and Kings on my side: that, the Roman Church is
that great Whore spoken of in the Revelations, which has committed fornication
with this world, having departed from the worship, and sincere love, and the
delights of Christ her Spouse; and embraced the world, the riches and pleasures
of it, and the Devil, and Kings, and Princes, and Prelates, and all the lovers
of this world. That, the Teachers of this spiritual State, are more properly
the Gates to lead men into the wisdom of Christ, than the Apostles themselves.
These things are expressly delivered concerning the doctrine of this Franciscan
Friar by the Inquisitor Eymericus; I know, Wadding in his Franciscan Annals to
preserve the reputation of his Order, Wadding. Annals Minorum ad A. D. 1297.
would clear him from all suspicion of Heresy, but I suppose the credit of an
Inquisitor having such opportunities to know the truth, so near his own time,
and having the examination of many of his followers, is to be relied on rather
than the testimony of one at such a distance, and partial for the honor of his
order. Especially that being considered which Possevin says of Eymericus,
Possevin. Appar. v. Nicol. Eymeric.
that most of his accounts of the times a little before his own were the very
same with what was contained in a Manuscript in the Vatican Library both as to
order and words; which is though to have been brought from Avignon to Rome,
where he was made Inquisitour General by Gregory 11. A. D. 1358. But it is not
denied by Wadding or others, that the Beguini and Fratricelli, the Beguardi and
others were his followers; and we shall find so great an agreement in their
opinions, that it would be strange they should be accounted the Disciples of
any other. Eymeric. dir^ct. Inquisit. p. 2. quaest. 15.
Eymericus gives this account of them, that in the time of Clement 5. there
arose in the Province of Narbonne, one Petrus Iohannis a Franciscan Friar, who
published by Writing and Preaching a great many Errors and Heresies in the
same Province, and drew many after him, who had spread themselves over France,
Italy, Germany, and other places, and continued in his time, being daily
searched for, condemned by the Inquisitours. They all agreed that their
doctrine was from God by immediate inspiration; Error. 36.
and that all the writings of Petrus Johannis were revealed to him from the
Lord and that he had declared this to some of his Friends; that he was so great
a Doctor that from the time of the Apostles and Evangelists, there have been
none greater than he in Learning and Holiness: and that his writings, theirs
only excepted (wherein they fell short of the former Sect) were the most useful
to the Church.

. 10. Their doctrines may be reduced to these four heads, Of the Doctrines of
the spiritual Brethren.
1. Evangelical poverty. 2. Unlawfulness of Swearing. 3. The Doctrine of
perfection. 4. Opposition to the carnal Church. Which being joined with that
greater degree of light which they supposed themselves to have above all the
rest of the world, makes up a Sect of Quakers after the Order of St. Francis.

1. Their Doctrine of Evangelical poverty; about which they said, That our Lord
Jesus Christ as man, and his Apostles had nothing in proper, or in common,
because they were perfectly poor in this world; and that this is perfect
Evangelical poverty; but the enjoying any thing though in common takes off from
the perfection of it; and that the Apostles themselves could not without sin
have any property in any thing, and that it is Heresy to say otherwise;
therefore the rule of St. Francis prescribing this poverty was that which
Christ observed and prescribed to his Apostles, and was the same with the
Gospel of Christ, and therefore whosoever adds to it, or takes from it (be it
the Pope himself) he is a Heretic in so doing: on which account they condemned
John 22. and all the Prelates and Friars for Heresy, who opposed this
Doctrine. For we are not to imagine a Doctrine so contrary to the beloved
interests of the Roman Church, should escape opposition: nay it was so far from
it, that it immediately caused a breach in their own order. Papir. Masson. de
Episc. Urbis, l. 6. v. Ioh. 22.
For as Papirius Massonus well observes from Petrarch, none hate poverty more
than they who profess it most; and the Franciscan order had gotten into their
hands goodly possessions, and built magnificent houses, and laid up great
provisions of Corn and Wine; which these followers of Petrus Iohannis declare
against as directly contrary to the rule which they professed, being the
strictest poverty; which this was as like as hypocrisy is to sincerity, or St.
Francis to Christ. Upon this a great division happens in the Order: between the
Brethren that followed Petrus Iohannis de Oliva, who were called the Spiritual
men, and the Brethren of the community; both parties appeal to Clement 5.
Alexander de Alexandria, General of the Order appears in behalf of the
Community, and Vbertinus de Casali on the other side: But the spiritual
Brethren, fearing hard usage at Rome and from their other superiors choose new
ones to themselves and so make an open Schism. In the Council of Vienna, A. D.
1311. a Decree was made to declare the rule of St. Francis, Clementin. l. 5.
tit. 11.
which is extant in the Canon Law under the title of Clementines but this by no
means effected a cure; for the people favoring the dissenters in the Province
of Narbon, Bulaei histor. universit. Paris. Tom. 4. p. 152.
they turned out all the Brethren of the community; and took upon themselves
new habits to be distinguished from the rest. During this heat Gonsalvus
General of the Order, favoring the stricter Friars dyed at Paris, P. 166.
not without suspicion of poison from the looser Brethren. John 22. being Pope
resolves to take a severer course with the dissenters, and A. D. 1318. imployes
the Inquisitours for that end; the fruit of which was, that they brake out into
a more open Schism and chose one Henricus de Ceva, or de Sena for their
General; and kept their Conventicles as John 22. in his constitution, Sancta
Romana, declares, and every day added to their Sect. And the more constitutions
he published, the greater opposition was made, in so much that Michael de
Caesena, Gul. Ockam and others found out Heresies at last in them, and plain
contradictions to those of his predecessors, especially that of Nicolaus 4.
which Bellarmin confesses cannot in all things be reconciled. B^ll. de Po^ti^.
Romans l. 4. (...) 14.
No fewer than eighteen errors Francisc. Pegna confesses he was charged with
in one constitution, Fran. Pegna in direct. Inquis. comment. 42. Gul. Ockam
Compend. error. Papae.
to which he answered in another decretal not published, in which they found 32
Errors, but William Ockam went farther, and charged him with no fewer than 90.
A goodly number for an infallible Head of the Church! in which there ought to
be some allowance for humane frailty, as Benedict 12. his successor pleaded in
behalf of Nicolaus 4. when he answered the objections of the Fraticelli against
John 22, as may be seen in Eymericus. Direct. Inq^isit. c. 17. l. 5.
And his answers are thought so insufficient by Pegna, that he says there are
some doubtful and some false which ought not to be passed over without
animadversion, and therefore solemnly invocates God, that he may be able to
answer them better: and yet this Benedict was accounted a notable Divine, for a
Pope; which made the dissenters, says Pegna, hate him the more. The substance
of his answer which Pegna is so much displeased with is, that though Nicolaus
4. had determined contrary to John 22. yet the former definition being contrary
to Scripture ought not to stand. Thus when Popes fall out, the Scripture comes
by its own; which is, to be the standing rule of all Controversies.

2. They thought it unlawful upon any occasion to swear; this John 22. in his
decretal, Gloriosam Ecclesiam, charges them with, and that those were guilty of
mortal sin, and liable to punishment, who were under the obligation of any Oath
whatsoever: the same is reported by Wadding and others concerning them.

3. The Doctrine of perfection was stiffly maintained by them. Spondan. Annals
Eccles A. D. 1311. n. 7.
This Spondanus would have to be one of the opinions of the Beguardi, whom he
distinguishes from the Beguini; but not only Eymericus and Pegna make them to
be the same, but John 22. in the Extravagant Sancta Romana condemns both
together, as the title is in Eymericus; and in the body of it, it appears that
they went under diverse names in several places, being sometimes called
Fraticelli, sometimes Fratres de poenitentia, sometimes Fratres de paupere
vita, sometimes Bizochi, sometimes Beghini and sometimes Beguardi, Eymeric. p.
2. q. 11. Alvarus de pla^ctu Eccles. l. 2. c. 52.
which latter seems to be the name that they were known in Germany most by.
Eymericus speaking of Petrus Olerii and Bononatus two of the Begardi in Spain,
that were burnt for their Heresy by the Inquisitour and Bishop of Barcelona,
Tur cremata S^m. l. 4. c. 36. part. 2.
says, that they held the opinion mentioned before concerning Evangelical
poverty, Bzov. Annal. A. D. 1309. n. 12.
which Spondanus thinks peculiar to the Beguini. About perfection their
opinions were these as Alvarus Pelagius, S^ondan. Annal. A. D. 1311. n. 7.
Ioh. Turrecremata, Bzovius, Spondanus, and Raynaldus all agree that a man in
this life may attain to so great perfection as to live without sin, Raynald.
Annal. A. D. 1312. n. 17.
that a man who has attained to such a degree he is above ordinances, i. e. he
need not fast and pray as others do; that, such as are perfect, have the spirit
of liberty and are not subject to any humane Ordinances either of Church or
State. That, every intellectual Being has enough within it self to make it
happy, or a light within; so that it does not need any external light of Glory
in order thereto. That, to live in the exercise of moral virtues is an argument
of a State of imperfection; and that, one truly perfect is above them. From
hence they accounted all actions which were designed to satisfy natural
inclinations to be indifferent and so looked on unclean mixtures as no sins.
Alvarus says, he saw one of them who was a German, and seemed a very spiritual
man, in a very mean habit and looking sowrely with tears in his eyes, and full
of raptures, and thought himself a Contemplator and a Taster; Names not yet
taken up by any Fanatics among us. And to let others understand how easily men
were imposed upon by visions and raptures among them; he says, Alvarus l. 2.
c. 45. p. 87.
that he knew a woman who was afterward known to be naught, that had raptures
at her pleasure, whom he had honored as a Saint himself, and the very ground
she stood on; and not only he, but many others, even Prelates and Cardinals too:
by which he saw evidently how easily the Devil, could transform himself into an
Angel of Light; and after says of the Beguinae, that under the show of
sanctity they committed many vile things. A strange instance of the impostures
of one of the Beguinae, who gained a great reputation for sanctity by her
constancy and devotion at prayers, her pretending to raptures and ecstasies
wherein her soul was carried to Heaven, her long fastings whereby she imposed
upon the Bishop, the Friars, and all the people to so great a degree that the
Bishop was about building a Church on purpose to lay her in, that all comers
might behold her who led such an Angelical life, and how accidentally the
imposture was discovered, to the great dissatisfaction of them all, (...)
Chronic. Sen^nerse l. 4 cap 18.
but especially the Bishop, is at large related by Richerius.

4. But notwithstanding all this, they had a mighty zeal against the carnal
Church; and called all those blind who were not of their way, as Eymericus
says of them; in these ma^ters they followed Petrus Iohannis of whose opinions
about the Church we have already spoken; Eym^^^. p. 2. q. 15. err. 41.
any that suffered among them were cried up as Martyrs; Error. 20.
and four of the Brethren suffering at Marseilles A. D. 1316. they said they
were so far from suffering as Heretics, that they were as good Martyrs as St.
Laurence, or Vincentius; that Christ was spiritually Crucified in them; that
all who approved or consented to their death, Pope, Prelates or others were all
Heretics for it, and lost all right of governing the Church or administering
Sacraments, and are out of the Church and therefore not in a state of
Salvation, Q. 16. s. 2.
and they only are the true Church. These are the chief of their doctrines,
although Eymericus reckons up no fewer than fifty five Errors and Heresies
among them. And notwithstanding all the care used by Popes and Inquisitours
against them in the time of Clement 5. John 22. Benedict 12. Clement 6.
Innocent 6. and afterward, Gerson. oper. To. 1. p. 1. page 574.
they not only continued but spread themselves still further. John Gerson who
lived in the beginning of the next Century, mentions not only the doctrines of
the everlasting Gospel, but those of the Begardi, the substance of which he
says is, that a perfect soul being reduced to God, loses its own will, so
that it has no other will but the divine will, which it had from eternity in
that Ideal being which it had in God: which being supposed, they say they may
do any thing which their affection puts them upon without sin, because they
have no will of their own. The way of renouncing their own wills was somewhat
different, he tells us; for the more cunning pretended to do it only to God;
but these prevailed upon the other to renounce their own wills before them;
which when they had done, they told them they could now sin no longer: and so
did what they pleased together. Under which pretext of renouncing their own
wills, all manner of wickedness was committed among them. Neither were they
only in France, Italy, Sicily and Germany; but they prevailed much in Spain
too; for in the time of Benedict 12 in Catalonia there were many Beguardi says
Eymericus, Eymeric. p. ^. q. 11. s. 5.
the chief of whom was Friar Bonanatus who was burnt for his Heresy; in the
time of Clement 6. there arose many of them in the Province of Valencia whose
leader was Iacobus Iusti, and was therefore immured and so dyed. In the time of
Innocent 6. Urban 5. Gregory 11. appeared in Catalonia, one Arnoldus
Montanerius, who publicly Preached for nineteen years together, the opinions
of the Begardi about poverty, and added these of his own, that no one can be
damned who wears the habit of St. Francis, that St. Francis once a year goes
down into Purgatory, and thence draws the souls of all that have been of his
order, and carries them to Paradise. These we have from Eymericus, who says
that by order of Urban 5. and Greg. 11. he sat as Inquisitour upon him. And
lest we should think this Sect inconsiderable among them, Ludovicus de Paramo
the Inquisitour of Sicily declares that the Fratricelli, Lud. de Paramo de
orig. sa^ctae Inquis. l. 2. tit. 3. cap. 4. n. 23.
carrying an appearance of Sanctity with great poverty drew the hearts of all
men to them, and drove John 22. into great straights, and by the Schism they
raised gave a great disturbance to the whole Church. Neither was it of any
short continuance, if we consider the fundamental principles of this Sect,
which were immediate revelations, renouncing property, and liberty of actions:
for so it began with Almerick at Paris, and we have seen how much afterward
promoted by the Mendicant Friars, and especially by those who called themselves
of the third Order of St. Francis, Spondan. Annal^s A.D. 1294. n. 9.
and pretended to far greater strictness as to their rule than others: on which
account Celestine 5. A. D. 1294. gave them first liberty to separate themselves
from the Community, Bulae histor. universit.
which was afterward pleaded by the Fratricelli, Paris. Tom. 3 p. 510.
against Clement 5. and John 22.

. 11. But besides these who before were of this order, Of the continuance of
this Sect.
others took up the same way and opinions which were never originally of it; as
the followers of Geraldus Segarelli and Dulcinus in Italy, Platina in vit.
Clem. 5. Spondan.
who are called Fratricelli by Platina, by others Pseudo-Apostolici and
Dulcinistae. Spondanus confesses those in Italy, Annals. A.D. 1297. n. 9.
who were the followers of one Hermannus of Ferrara to be the same with the
Fraticelli and Beguini; Prateolus de haeres. l. 8 v. Herman.
whose body says Prateolus, after he had been twenty years worshipped for a
Saint, was by the command of Boniface 8. taken up and burnt for an Heretic:
Paramo de orig. inquisit. l. 2. tit. 3. c. 4. v. 38.
Ludovicus de Paramo says that it was thirty years after, he had been
publicly worshipped by the people of Ferrara; and he reckons up this as one of
the great blessings which comes by the Inquisition, that they are thereby
undeceived in many whom they worship for Saints, of which he gives several
other instances. But the burning of Hermannus bones, did not extinguish the
Sect of Fraticelli there; the only effect of this severity was, that they grew
more numerous and bold, as Patreolus and Spondanus confess. They kept their
Conventicles more frequently, and spread the further, insomuch that great
multitudes of people fell in with them. Among whom as their chief leaders were
several of the order of St. Francis, as Spondanus proves from the Extravagant
Sancta Romana of John 22. And of the same Sect were the Pseud-Apostolici, whose
chief leaders were Geraldus Segarelli and Dulcinus one of his Disciples,
Direct. Inquisit. p. 2.. 12.
the one of Parma, the other of Novara, these filled all the Country
thereabout with their errors, says Eymericus; and made an Independent
Congregation among themselves, which acknowledged obedience and subjection, as
he adds, to none but God himself, and said that they followed the Apostolical
rule in a very singular manner. Paramo l 2. tit. 3. c 4 n. 19.
This Geraldus says Paramo and his followers by a show of extraordinary
sanctity, drew many to their party: but Friar Salimbenus (in a Manuscript seen
by Pegna in the Library of Cardinal Savelli at Rome) being himself a
Franciscan, Pegn. not. in direct p. 2. q. 12.
gives this account of him, whom he calls Gherardinus Segalellus, that being
desirous to be admitted into their order, he was refused by them, after which
he spent some time in the Franciscans Church, where observing the pictures of
the Apostles, and the habits they were drawn in; he put himself as exactly as
he could into the very same habit; and having sold his house and received the
money for it, he distributed it all among the people; and afterward got a
companion who was a servant to the Franciscans; but by degrees their number
increased, so that in a short time they spread over many Cities in Italy: and
from thence were dispersed over almost all Europe: They went up and down in the
Streets, says Eymericus, Preaching repentance with a white Mantel, a white
Coat, and long hair, barefoot and bareheaded, and what they eat was publicly
in the Streets, and only what was given to them: after forty years in which
they mightily prevailed, Boniface 8. caused Gerald to be taken and burnt; upon
this Dulcinus with six thousand of his companions retired into the Alps, where
they increased so much, says Pegna, that Clement 5. was forced to send a
Croisado against them: where they starved a great part of them; but Dulcinus
and his Wife Margareta, as Patreolus calls her, were taken and burnt. It is not
credible says Bzovius, Bzov. Annals A. D. 1309. n. 13.
how long they endured upon the Alps all extremities of hunger and cold, rather
than they would yield to their Adversaries. But notwithstanding all the
endeavors could be used, they could not wholly extinguish that Sect, Prateolus
de haer. l. 4. v. Dulcinus.
says Prateolus, but the remainders of it were still left in the Mountains
about Trent, and continued to his time, which was about A. D. 1560. These were
of the same opinions with the Fratricelli before mentioned as to the Roman
Church, that by reason of the wickedness of the Clergy and Religious Orders, it
was a reprobate Church; and the Whore of Babylon; but being no more content
with this, than the greatest Fanatics of our Age, they pretended to great
things themselves, that they were the only spiritual Congregation, sent, and
chosen out by God to bear testimony to his truth, in the last ages; and that
they, and only they, had the power which St. Peter had; that Geraldus
Segarelli, was a plant of Gods own planting, growing up from the root of faith;
by whom God began the work of Reformation of his Church, to the purity,
perfection, life, state and poverty of the primitive Church, in that state
wherein Christ committed his Church to St. Peter. That they only are the Church
of God, and in that perfection wherein the Apostles were, and therefore are
bound to live in subjection to none, because their rule which was immediately
from Christ, is free, and has the greatest perfection, that no one can be
saved who is not of their Order, that it is a sign any one is in a state of
damnation to persecute them: that all the Popes from Sylvester downward, and
all the Prelates were impostours and deceivers, excepting only Celestine 5. who
renounced his Popedom, and gave leave to the spiritual Brotherhood to separate
from the rest in the Franciscan Order. That the Orders of Clergy and Religion
are dangerous to the Church. That no laymen ought to pay any tithes to Priest
or Prelat, who lives not in the same perfection and poverty which the Apostles
did. That it was as well to Worship God in Woods, or Stables, or Barnes, as in
consecrated Churches: That it was unlawful for Christians to swear at all,
says Prateolus, or never but in case of the Articles of faith, or the divine
commands, say, Turrecremata and Eymericus, but in all other cases it was lawful
to use all aequivocations and mental reservations, and to deny their Sect with
their mouths, as long as they kept true to them in their hearts. That nothing
was unlawful which was done out of a principle of Love: and that all things, in
the worst sense, were to be common among them; and therefore they are charged
with allowing and practicing promiscuous mixtures among themselves, if their
Adversaries do not charge them as unjustly in this point as the Prmitive
Christians were charged by the Heathen. This is the sum of their Principles
and practices as they are reported by Turrecremata, Turrecremata Sum. de
Eccles. l. 4. p. 2. c. 37.
Eymericus, Prateolus, Spondanus, Raynaldus, and others. But that which is
still observable to our purpose is, that these were looked on as a sort of
Friars in the Roman Church; Eymeric. p. 2. q. 12.
for when Honorius 4. Prateolus l 14. n. 41.
condemned them by his Bull extant in Eymericus, he does it upon this account,
Spondan. A.D. 1370. n. 16.
that they were a sort of Mendicant Friars not approved by the Roman See;
whereas Greg. 10. Raynald. A.D. 1311. n. 66.
in the Council of Lions had absolutely forbid all Orders of Mendicants after
the Lateran Council, Naucler. Genesis 44. p. 986.
that should not receive express confirmation from the Pope; but his Holiness
was informed, that some who called themselves of the Apostolical Order,
Gaulticri Chronol. sec. 1300. c. 8.
had since that time assumed to themselves a new habit of Religion without due
applications being made to his See, and a great number of these went up and
down, as Mendicants into many parts of the world, doing unseemly things to
their own peril and the scandal of others; especially some among them being
guilty of Heresy: therefore all Ecclesiastical Officers, are required to
admonish and compel them to lay down their habits, and to enter themselves
among some of the approved Religious Orders; and in case of refusal they ought
to proceed judicially against them and to deliver them over to the secular
power. By which we understand the true ground of the quarrel against them, viz.
not yielding subjection enough to the Roman See, and how easily all their
Blasphemies and Villainies might be forgiven, if they entered themselves into any
of the approved Religious Orders.

. 12. As we see all the care used could not root out this Sect wholly, Of the
Alumbrado's in Spain.
but the remainders of them continued in some of the Mountains of Italy, so I
am very much mistaken if the Alumbrado's in Spain, or the Sect of Illuminati,
were any other than a remainder of the Beguini and Fraticelli whom we observed
before to have got footing there. Spondan. Annals. A.D. 1623. n. 7.
Spondanus indeed and some others from him, say, they were detected in the
Diocesses of Sevil and Cadiz, A. D. 1623. and were condemned by Andreas
Pachecus the general Inquisitour in Spain, in twenty six Articles, and the
seven chief of them were burnt: but withal he says, they were not so much a
new Sect, as a renewal of an old one with some additions. Nay we meet with the
very same name of the Sect long before that: Lud. de Paramo de origin
Inquisit. l. 2. tit. 3. c. 5. n. 15.
For Ludovicus de Paramo says, that several Priests were taken by order of the
Inquisition in the Town of Lerena, who under pretense of extraordinary
illumination from God, did gain upon the people, and spread dangerous opinions
among them. And afterward he particularly describes them under the names of
the Illuminati, Lib 3. q. 5. n. 189, etc.
by their pride and disobedience to their Superiors, by their obstinate
adhering to their Illusions, and indulging themselves in their sensual lusts;
all which fully agree to the Character already given of the Fraticelli, N. 192.
and Begardi. For the first, he says they chose rather to be broken in pieces,
than give obedience to their Bishops; for the second he proves, that as long as
they gave way to sensual lusts, their illumination could not be from God; for
they who would sleep in the divine light, as he speaks, must have their
eyelids shut as to all worldly vanities and pleasures, therefore we ought to
shun such illuminated, N. 211.
or rather blind persons, who transform themselves into Angels of light,
spreading diverse doctrines and revelations which they have; N. 238.
of whom he interprets the Epistle of St. Jude. By all that has been said,
this Sect seems to be nothing else but Gnosticism revived under new shapes and
names; and with a difference of opinions suitable to the age wherein it
appeared. Spondanus gives this account of the opinions and practices of the
modern Alumbrado's, that under a pretense of mental Prayer and divine
contemplation, and union with God; they despised the use of Sacraments,
Preaching the Word of God, and all holy exercises; and did extol the other so
highly, that they said those things would not be sins in them, which were so in
others, and by this means committed all impurities. Of this Sect Ignatius
Loyola was vehemently suspected to be, and upon that account was cast into
prison by the Inquisition in Spain. Which Maffeius himself does not deny,
Maffeius in vit. Ignatii l. 1. cap. 17.
that it was upon the account of the Illuminati, and his Enthusiastical
Preaching in the Streets, that he was Questioned. But Melchior Canus that
learned Bishop of the Canaries puts the matter out of dispute, for in a
discourse of his concerning the foundation of the Society of Jesus, preserved
entire in the hands of Dominicus Canus Bishop of Cadiz his Nephew, and
published in part by Schioppius, Schiopp. Infam. Famiani p. 62.
he says, that the General of that Order was one Innico who fled out of Spain,
lest he should be laid hold on by the Inquisition, being suspected for the
Heresy of the Illuminati; and coming to Rome he desired to be judged by the
Pope, where no accuser appearing he was absolved. He gives him the Character of
a vain man; for, being once in his company at Rome, he presently without any
occasion began to boast of his righteousness, and the unjust persecution he had
suffered in Spain: and spoke many and great things of the revelations he had
from God, without any necessity; upon which account he says, he believed not
anything at all concerning them. Another day, he adds, when he went to dine
with him, he commended one of his Brethren for a great Saint, who coming into
the room where they were, he presently suspected the man to be mad: and when he
talked with him about matters of Religion, he answered heretically, not out of
design, but because he was an Idiot, a rude, ignorant fellow. Ignatius being
confounded at this, said he was no Heretic, but a Fool; but he believed he had
some lucid intervals; and at that time by reason of the conjunction of the
Moon, he was not a very sound Catholic. See from what Man, the Jesuits derive
the infallibility of their faith! But although Canus was a person of more
learning and judgment than a thousand Ignatius 's; yet the Jesuits decry him
as very partial against them: for Orlandinus in his history of the Society
complains of him as one of the bitterest enemies they had in the beginning of
their Society; Orlandin. hist. Societ. Jesus l. 8. n. 46.
for he every where set them forth as the forerunners of Antichrist, and
explained the Prophecy of them, concerning the men that should be in the last
times. 2 Timothy 3. 1. to the 8. v.
Wherein it is said, Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters,
blasphemers, etc. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than
lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof: For
of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead Captive silly Women
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, etc. The same thing (says
Orlandinus and truly) was charged upon the Orders of Dominicans and Franciscans
as well as them: and we shall not quarrel with them which order of them all
has the greatest share in the accomplishment of this Prophecy.

. 13. That which is our present business, The Jesuits Order founded in
Fanaticism.
is to show that this Order was instituted as the other were upon the credit of
visions and revelations; for Ignatius was certainly as Ignorant and
Enthusiastical as St. Francis himself; and to prove this, I shall only make use
of those of his own Order, who have writ his life, (Maffeius, Orlandinus and
Ribadeneira) and pursue it no farther than the institution of the Order, as I
have done with the other. The first remarkable thing in him was that he was
converted by reading the Legends of the Saints, as Don Quixot began his
Errantry by reading the old Romances: I wonder how Ignatius did to read them,
for Maffeius describes him, Maff^ius vit. Ignat. l. 1. c. 1.
as one that had hardly ever learnt his letters: but it is possible St. Peter
taught him, for they all write that St. Peter appeared to him, Ribadene^ra vit.
Ignat. c. 1.
before he was so far recovered as to be able to read. But his Countryman was
not more moved with the adventures of former Knights; than Ignatius was with
the stories of St. Dominick and St. Francis, for these Maffeius tells us, did
particularly work upon him; in so much that before he took up a firm resolution
of Religious Errantry, he would put cases to himself of the difficult
Adventures of those two illustrious Heroes, and found himself to have mettle
enough to undertake any of them: and therefore in a fit of zeal one night he
gets out of his bed and fell down upon his knees before an Image of the B.
Virgin, Ribadencira c. 1.
and in that posture vowed himself her Knight. Orlandin. hist. l. 1. ^. 12.
Which is a circumstance so considerable, I admire that Maffeius omits it; as
he does likewise the strange noise in the house, the trembling of the room and
the breaking of the glass windows that time: an argument says Orlandinus, that
the Devil then took his leave of him, although there be some reason to doubt
it. After this the V. Mary appeared to him with a great deal of glory with her
Child in her lap (and all this while, for the vision continued for some time,
he thought himself awake) by which sight he was hugely animated for all his
future adventures. The first whereof was to a place of great devotion to the B.
Virgin, called Montserrat, and in the way thither he was like to have begun his
first adventure with a Moore who allowed the B. Virgin to have been so till her
delivery, but would not yield it afterward; at which Ignatius, considering
whose Knight he was, began to be so enraged, that he thought it necessary to
revenge her quarrel upon him, but disputing with himself what to do, and the
Moore being gone another way, he leaves the cause to the wisdom of the Mule,
and puts the Reins in his neck, that if he followed the Moors way at the
parting of the two ways he would have his life, but the good Mule
understanding his Riders mind, left the beaten road and went on to Montserrat;
where a remarkable Ceremony was performed by him; for as Orlandinus and
Maffeius expressly say, Orla^din. hist. l. 1. n. 18.
Ignatius having read in Books of Chivalry, that the ancient Knights at their
first entering upon that hononourable employment, were wont to watch all night
in their arms; he thought it fit to begin his Errantry in the same manner, he
therefore hangs up his Sword and Dagger before the Altar of the B. Virgin, and
puts on his habiliments, but instead of his shining Armor, he had gotten a
long Coat of Sackcloth, with a cord about it, at which he hangs his bottle for
water, and instead of his Lance a plain Crab-tree staff, with a wicker shoe
upon one foot and the other naked, having no Morrion on his head, but exposed
that to the violence of the weather. All these habiliments (having procured
them by the way,) he hung at the pummel of his Saddle when he entered the Town
says Maffeius, Maffei^s l. 1. c. 3.
(for fear the people should think him in his wits) but he puts them not on
till he came to the sacred place where he was by the Laws of Chivalry to watch
in them, and so he did, say they, sometimes standing, sometimes kneeling, and
devoting himself with all his might to the service of the B. Virgin. Which
having done, early the next morning (for that is a necessary circumstance too
in the adventures of Chivalry) away he goes for Manresa, where he takes up his
lodging in the Town-Hospital, and lets his Hair and Nails grow, and beggs
from door to door (and yet fasted six days in the week) he whipps himself
thrice a day, was seven hours every day in vocal prayer, lay upon the bare
ground, and all to prepare himself for his adventures to Jerusalem. Which sort
of life growing very uneasy to him, he was once near says Maffeius, Maffeius
l. 1. c. 6.
throwing himself out of a Window to put an end to it; but God (having designed
his order for a further punishment to the world) not permitting that; not long
after he had such clear divine revelations, C. 7.
that in a moment of time, says Maffeius, he understood the greatest mysteries
of Religion, and the most subtle speculations in Philosophy (especially the way
of Gods making the World, made clear to him, but not expressible to others)
which other men cannot attain to with the hardest study and pains. Orland. l.
1. n. 27.
In one of his Visions, says Orlandinus, while he was repeating the Horary
Prayers of the B. Virgin, he saw the B. Trinity, as plainly as we do one
another, under a corporeal representation, and was so full of joy at it, that
he could not hold weeping before all the people, and was so enlightened by it,
that although he was yet very ignorant, he began to write a Book of the glories
of the B. Trinity. In one of his ecstasies he continued eight days, in which it
is probable, says the same Author, N. 28.
he saw the frame and model of the Society of Jesuits. A Blessed sight! if he
saw all the consequences of it too. After this in order to his voyage to
Jerusalem, away he goes for Barcelona where Elizabeth Rosella espying him at
Church sitting among the Boys, N. 32.
she saw a great shining about his mouth, and heard a voice within her, which
bid her call that man to her house. Ribadeneira c. 4.
While he was in Italy in his way to Jerusalem, Christ appeared to him again
at Padua, as he was wont to do at Manresa: Orland. l. 1. n. 34.
at Venice one of the Senators had a vision concerning him, checking him for
lying in so much state, while that holy man Ignatius lay in the open air. N 35.
Visions were grown so familiar with him now, that it is to no purpose to
recount those which he had at Jerusalem, and elsewhere. In his return through
Italy, the Spanish Soldiers used him hardly, taking him for a Spy, and carried
him to their Commander; N. 44.
now says Orlandinus, it had been his custom not to give men any titles of
respect, but to call them only by their common names; and he questioned a
little with himself whether he ought to break that custom now he was to appear
before the Commander, and resolves it in the Negative, because to do it
proceeded from too great fear of men: therefore being brought before him, he
gives him no testimony of respect either in his words or actions; and (both
Maffeius and Orlandinus testify) he would not put off his Hat to him. Maff. c.
16.
By which we understand, who was the first Founder of that Fanatic Sect among
us, which is distinguished so much from others, by denying common civilities to
men. Upon this the Commander severely rebuked the Soldiers, for bringing a mad
man to him, at which they were so enraged, that he might have saved himself the
labor of whipping himself that day; they doing him that office very
effectually. Being returned to Barcelona at thirty three years of Age he begins
to learn his Grammar, but as Maffeius observes, Maff. l. 1. c. 16.
he could not have Amo in his mouth, but his mind was carried he knew not
whither, and was so full of visions all that while, that he could not remember
one word that he learnt; upon which he beggs his Master, falling in great
humility at his feet (having it seems more reverence for him, than he had for
the Spanish Officer) that he would tie him punctually as he did the Boys to his
Lessons, Orland. hist. l. 1. n. 47.
and if he could not say them, that he might be whipped as they were. But as dull
as he was at his Book, he had so great elevations in his Prayers, that (if we
believe him) one John Paschal, N. 49.
says Orlandinus, saw him raised up from the ground in a dark night; but that
being a suspicious circumstance, he adds that the room at the same time was
filled with a great light. Having stayed out his two years at School in
Barcelona, to the University he goes, where he privately studies Logic,
Physics, and Divinity together, to very little purpose, as Maffeius
confesses, Maffei. l. 1. c. 17.
and in the mean time Preaches and Beggs in the Streets. Orland. l. 1. n. 56.
Here he was several times under examination by the Inquisition, and once
imprisoned for forty one days, out of which he was not dismissed, till they
had commanded him not to Discourse of Divinity again till he had studied four
years, and to wear the same habit with other Students. Upon this he removes to
Salamanca, where he finds no kinder entertainment, being put into chains in the
Dungeon and strictly examined; N. 61.
For here he follows his former course; he and his companions in an
Enthusiastical manner (being mere laymen, Maffei. l. 1. c. 17.
as Maffeius acknowledges) going up and down the Streets, Preaching in all
places, and to all sorts of persons; and being examined by the Sub-prior of the
Dominicans what Studies they followed, Ignatius very fairly confessed the
truth, that they were unlearned. He then asked him, why they took upon them to
Preach; Ignatius very subtly told him, they did not Preach; they did only
hold forth to the people in a familiar manner concerning virtue and vice, and
thereby endeavored to bring them to the hatred of one and love of the other.
The Sub-prior told him this was Preaching, which no one could pretend to do,
but either by learning, or immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost; and since
you do not pretend to learning, you must pretend to be inspired. Here Ignatius
finding himself caught; resolutely denied to give him any answer, unless he
were legally empowered to examine him. Say you so, said the Dominican? I will
take care of that suddenly: So they were three days kept in the Convent, and
after that by order of the Bishop of Salamanca, were committed to close Prison,
where he Preached to the people with great zeal, who now flocked in great
numbers to him; and gloried as much in his sufferings, and talked at the same
rate, that the Ringleaders of the Quakers are wont to do among us. And just
with the same resolution, when the rest of the Prisoners made their escape by
the negligence of the keepers, Ignatius and his companions would not stir:
When they were called to answer, Ignatius Preached at large upon several points
of Divinity to them, under pretense of answering questions. After twenty two
days promising to submit themselves to the judgment of the Church, they are
dismissed, but with a charge in four years time not to meddle with nice Cases
of Conscience, which Ignatius took with so much indignation, that he had a
present impulse upon his mind to be gone; and no consideration whatever could
hinder him, but away he must go to Paris, to see if he could meet with any
better success there. And accordingly he begins his journey, driving all his
learning before him, which was an Ass laden with Books, Maffei. l. 1. c. 18.
as Maffeius relates, and so reaches Barcelona, and afterward arrived safe at
Paris. Where being sensible of his own ignorance and dullness, he resolves to
ply his Book better, and to that end enters himself among the Boys in the
School and begins his Grammar again. A sad case! that after two years Schooling
at Barcelona, being at two Universities in Spain, and having so many
revelations, he should be yet so great a Dunce that he could not tell the rules
of Grammar. Now he finds it necessary to pray and whip less and to study more.
Here he finds so cold a reception, that Hospitals, Begging, help from Country
men, were all little enough to keep him at first from starving; but however
after eighteen months spent in learning a little Latin, he applies himself to
Philosophy, but the Enthusiastic heat of his brain was so great, that he had
much ado to keep his mind to it, but at last he obtained his Degree in
Philosophy after three years and a half study, or at least so much time spent
there. Then he goes to the Dominican School to learn Divinity, where he got
just enough to keep him from being a Heretic; for so much Maffeius his words
imply. All this while his Enthusiastic head was full of projects in order to
the drawing Disciples to himself, that he might in imitation of former Heroes,
Found a new order: for this it is apparent he aimed at, and for the sake of
this he went through so many difficulties, and pretended so much to Enthusiasm,
without which he knew his design could not be compassed. Orlandin. hist. Soc.
Ies. l. 1. ^. 66.
Orlandinus therefore tells us, that being at Antwerp, (as he used to make
excursions sometimes from Panis to beg a subsistence) being in a company of
Merchants he looked steadfastly upon a young Merchant, and (not knowing what
effect such words might have upon him afterward) he called him aside, and told
him he ought to thank God who had chosen him to build a College for the
Society of Jesus in his own Country. By which it is plain what he designed at
that time, before he had yet formed any thing like a Society; and the same
Author would have men believe that God had then revealed it to him that he
should found that Society, otherwise, he says well, no man would have taken so
much pains as he did, unless he had such a thing in his head. During his abode
at Paris, he had prevailed upon three Students, and the first thing he
persuaded them to, was to give away all that they had and their Books too, and
to beg their bread; which caused a great heat in the University, he being
suspected to have made them mad, and by force they took them away from the
Hospital whither he had drawn them. I omit his flying, or rather being carried
as it were in a rapture from Paris to Rouen, Orland. n. 68, 69.
and the joy and extatick expressions he had in it; his standing up in dirt and
mire to the neck, to represent to his companion the filthiness of the sin he
lived in, his so narrowly escaping being publicly whipped in the University for
seducing the Students, that Orlandinus makes it almost a Miracle: N. 71.
But we are now to take notice that his design being to form a Society, he had
for that purpose used himself to all the arts of insinuation imaginable,
Maffeius l. 1. c. 21.
accommodating himself to the humors of the persons he had to do with,
endeavoring to oblige all men with expressions of the greatest kindness,
Orland. n. 75.
bearing all affronts with a wonderful dissimulation, as Maffeius describes
him. By these arts he labors to get some of the most hopeful Students in the
University to him, and at last prevails upon nine to join with him: he
studies their humors and applies himself accordingly, not acquainting them at
first with his design, but by degrees prepares them for it; N. 84.
among them Xaverius at first laughed at him and despised him, but was at last
won by his obsequiousness, flattery, and insinuation. And finding his former
Disciples soon grew weary of him and forsook him, he resolves to tie these
faster, and to that end appoints a meeting in a Church, dedicated to the B.
Virgin in the Suburbs of Paris; where they all solemnly vow before receiving
the Eucharist (none but themselves being present) either to go to Jerusalem, or
to offer themselves to the Popes service; which was done A. D. 1534. upon the
day of Assumption of the B. Virgin to whose Patronage they particularly devoted
themselves. After this Ignatius fearing their relapse, kept them together as
much as might be, and used all means to prevent any differences happening among
them, having now gotten persons to his mind, and for fear the Friends of some
of his chief confidents in Spain should take them off, N. 96.
he offers to go himself and dispatch their business for them. Maffeius l. 2.
cap. 1.
In his return to Spain he observes his former course of Preaching and Begging,
and was followed by such a multitude of people that he was fain to Preach in
the Fields, where (which deserves admiration in so weak and mortified a man)
though he could not raise his voice, yet it was heard distinctly above a
quarter of a mile, Orlandin. l* 1. n. 116.
say Orlandinus and Ribadeneira, but Maffeius more prudently omits it. Ribad.
n. c. 8.
But he helps us with as good a passage instead of it, Maff. l. 2. c. 1.
Ignatius was prevailed upon now by his Disciples to make use of a horse in his
journey to Spain, which when he was come thither he left to an H^spital, which
the people looked on with so much reverence that no man durst use him
afterward, but as a consecrated horse was preserved in ease and good pasture
all his life time. At Venice, at the time appointed, his companions meet him,
where they debate their voyage to Jerusalem; Orland. l. 1. n. 111.
and their custom Orlandinus says was this, in any matter of debate, they
were to join together in Prayer, and after seeking God, what opinion the most
were of that they resolve upon, which they observed, says he, till the
self-denying Ignatius, was, after much seeking God in their way made the
General; and then his Will was to rule them: after a years stay about Venice
(their courage being now cooled as to Jerusalem) wherein Ignatius and the rest
that were yet Laymen entered into Orders, they determine to go to Rome, and
submit themselves wholly to the Popes pleasure: and in the mean time wander
about the Country, Preaching in the Streets and Market places, Maff. l. 2. c.
4.
and making use of the Bulks of Shops for their Pulpits, and invited the people
to hear them, says Maffeius, with a loud voice and whirling their Caps over
their heads; and though few understood them, being strangers, yet all admired
and commended them, and no doubt they converted many, as their followers have
done, from the use of Laces and Ribbands. All this while, since Ignatius began
to have any smattering of Learning, we read little of his visions and
revelations; but the time coming near that he hoped for a confirmation of his
Order from the Pope; L. 2. C. 5.
now says Maffeius, he began to have them again as frequently as he had at
Manresa (which in a kind of a religious jest, he says, he was wont to call his
primitive Church) nay he exceeded them: for what he now saw, being above humane
nature cannot be expressed; only one Vision did him a great deal of service,
which was, that lying in a trance which was frequent with him as well as
Mahomet, he saw God the Father commending Ignatius and his Brethren to his Son
Jesus bearing his Cross; whom he very kindly received, and spoke these words
with a smile to Ignatius, I will be favorable to you at Rome: which gave him
and his companions great comfort. At Rome, hearing the fame of St. Benedict and
his Revelations, or remembering them in the Legends, he withdraws to the same
place, Monte Cassino, and there it fell out luckily (that he might come behind
none of them in visions) as St. Benedict saw the soul of Germanus go to Heaven,
so did he in the very same manner the soul of Hozius one of his Society; and a
little after as he was praying to the Saints he saw Hozius among them all.
Notwithstanding all this, they met with great difficulties at Rome; but Pope
Paul 3. being thoroughly satisfied in the main point, of their being serviceable
to the interest of that Church, all other difficulties were soon conquered, and
the Pope himself became Enthusiastical too, Maff. l. 2. c. 12.
and cried out, having read, says Maffeius, the first draught of the rules of
the Society made by Ignatius, The Spirit of the Lord is here, and many things
to the same purpose. But one of the Cardinals to whom the examination of them
was committed still opposing the establishing this Order, Ignatius flies to his
usual refuges, for besides fastings, prayers, keeping of days, etc. he and his
Friends offered three thousand Masses for this end alone: (and it must be a
hard heart indeed that would not yield with so much suppling) this Cardinal all
of a sudden quite changed his mind and commended the business himself to the
Pope: and so the Society of Jesus was confirmed by the Popes Bull, 3 October. A.
D. 1540. to the joy of Ignatius his heart, and soon after he was made General
of the Order, which he accepted with as many tears and protestations, and
entreaties (till he plainly saw it was the will of God it must be so) as ever
any Usurper took the Government into his hands, which he had most eagerly
sought after. And now let the world judge, whether there has appeared a
greater Enthusiast or pretender to revelations than Ignatius was, since the
days of Mahomet, and St. Francis? Methinks they might be ashamed to upbraid us
with the Fanaticism of the Quakers and such persons, the chiefest of whom fall
very much short of Ignatius, in those very things for which they are condemned
by us, yet any one who compares them would imagine, the life of Ignatius had
been their great exemplar. I know not whether any of that innocent and
religious order of Jesuits, had any hand in forming this new Society among us
(as has been frequently suggested) but if one may guess the Father by the
Child's likeness, Ignatius Loyola the founder of the Jesuits, was at least the
Grandfather of the Quakers.

. 14. Thus I have gone through the most illustrious Orders of the Church of
Rome, Of the Fanatic way of devotion among them.
and showed how they have been founded on Fanaticism, and given encouragement
thereby unto it. It remains now that I consider the way of devotion in greatest
request among them, and prove that it does encourage and promote Enthusiasme.
For this, we are to take notice that those of the Church of Rome, who have set
themselves to the Writing Books of Devotion, have with great zeal recommended
so mystical and unintelligible a way of devotion, as though their design had
been only to amuse and confound the minds of devout persons, and to prepare
them for the most gross Enthusiasme and extravagant illusions of Fancy. But
this is the fruit of leaving the Scriptures and that most plain and certain way
of Religion delivered therein; there can be no end of Fantastical modes of
devotion, and every superstitious Fanatic will be still inventing more, or
reviving old ones. No Laws or Rules publicly allowed can serve their turn,
they must have something peculiar to themselves to gain a reputation of greater
sanctity by; and it is hard, if they do not light upon some affected phrases,
unintelligible notions, ridiculous or singular postures, that they may be sure
to charge those with following carnal reason who condemn them. And they triumph
in nothing more, than when they can handsomely revenge themselves on that
bitter enemy of theirs called Reason, which they never do with greater pleasure
than when they pretend it to be upon the account of Religion. In the Church of
Rome the case has been thus; among them as in all Religions and places in the
World, there are some persons of a temper naturally disposed more to Religion
than others are; being melancholy, thoughtful, tender, and easily moved by
hopes and fears. These do more easily receive the impressions of Religion,
which they being possessed with, if they be not carefully governed, are more
liable to fall into the dotages of superstition, or to be transported by the
heats of Enthusiasme. Against both of them there can be no better cure
imaginable than the true understanding the nature and reasonableness of the
Christian Religion, which fills our minds with a true sense of God and
goodness, and so arms us against superstition, and withal acquaints us that
the conduct of the Spirit of God is in the use of the greatest reason and
prudence, and so prevents the follies of Enthusiasme. But it being so much the
design of that Church to keep the members of it from knowing any thing against
her interest, so much as the true practice of Christianity is, and therefore
keeping the Bible out of the hands of the people, they must substitute some
other ways in the room of that, to gratify the earthy dullness of a
superstitious temper, and the airiness and warmth of the Enthusiastical. For
the former, they are abundantly provided by a tedious and ceremonious way of
external devotion as dull and as cold as the earth it self; to the other they
commend abstractedness of life, mental prayer, passive unions, a Deiform fund
of the soul, a state of introversion, divine inspirations, which must either
end in Enthusiasme or madness. And the perfection of this state lying in an
intime Union with God (as they speak) whereby the soul is Deified, is to be
attained only in the way of unknowing, (for nothing so dangerous as the use of
reason) and self-annihilation and many other things as impossible to be
understood as practiced. Which makes it difficult to give any account of such
unintelligible stuff, for we must only grope in obscurity and profound
darkness, and draw a Night piece without lights. This way came first into
request in the Monastic orders by the examples of their founders, as will
easily appear by our former discourse; but the men who most solemnly preached
and divulged it were Rusbrochius, Suso, Harphius, etc. and he who in these
latter ages has gathered together most that had been said before him, and is
commended by Balthazar Corderius and others as a most sublime interpreter of
mystical Divinity, Corderii Isagog. in mystis. Theolog. D^onys. c. 7.
Ludovicus Blosius, from these it were not difficult to put together some of
their words and phrases as an account of their Divinity; but I rather choose to
do it, chiefly from a late Author published by Mr. Cressy not many years since,
who after his many turnings and changes of opinions sits down at last (as
appears by his publishing Mother Iuliana's revelations and the Preface to
Sancta Sophia) with the deserved Character of a Popish Fanatic. Which Book of
Sancta Sophia being compiled by Mr. Cressy out of many writings of Father
Augustine Baker, and set forth A. D. 1657. with large approbations at the
beginning and end of it, I hope no doctrine contained therein will be thought a
scandal to their Church. The design of it is as the title tells us, To give
directions for the Prayer of Contemplation, etc. I would they had given
directions for understanding it in the first place, for if we have no other
help than what Mr. Cressy gives in his Preface, we may as well hope to
understand the Quakers Canting as Mr. Cressy's. Let the Reader judge by these
few passages in his Preface. The only proper disposition toward the receiving
supernatural irradiations from Gods holy Spirit is an abstraction of life,
Preface to Sancta Sophia. s. 33.
a sequestration from all business that concern others (though it be their
salvation) and an attendance to God alone in the depth of the Spirit: and a
little after, the lights here desired and prayed for are such as do expel all
images of creatures, and do calm all manner of passions, to the end that the
soul being in a vacuity, may be more capable of receiving and entertaining God
in the pure fund of the Spirit. What this pure fund of the Spirit means, I had
been somewhat to seek for, had not Lud. Blosius in the Preface to his spiritual
Institution told us, that the Deiform fund of the soul, is the simple essence
of the soul stamped with a divine impress, or if this be not plain enough, that
from whence arises a super-essential life: but if yet it cannot be understood,
we may be the less troubled at it, since the same Author says afterward, that
very few do know that hidden fund of their souls, Lud. Blo^ii. Instit. Spirit.
cap. 12.
or believe that they have such a thing within them. It being, it seems, like
some very cunning drawer in a Cabinet where the main treasure lies, which the
owner himself cannot find out, till it be broken to pieces; for
self-annihilation is necessarily required in order to it. And this
super-essential life, as he admirably describes it, is a way of knowing without
thoughts, of seeing in darkness, of understanding without reason, of unknowing
God by perceiving him, of being melted and brought to nothing first, and then
being lost and swallowed up in God; by which means all created being is put
off, and that which is only divine put on, being changed into God, as iron
heated into the nature of fire. This being the state of perfection aimed at
here in this world, we must now consider the directions given in order to it.
To this end in the first place, a contemplative state is commended above an
active as more perfect, Sancta Sophia treat. 1. c. 3. s. 1, 2.
and more easy, more simple and more secure from all errors and illusions
which may be occasioned by an indiscreet use of Prayer. Where by an active and
contemplative state we must not understand what we commonly do by those terms,
Treat. 1. c. 1. s. 4, 5.
but the active-state is, the use of reasoning and internal discourse to fix
our affections upon God, and expressing it self in sensible devotion and
outward acts of obedience to Gods will; the contemplative in the Authors
language is, seeking God in the obscurity of faith with a more profound
introversion of Spirit, and with less activity and motion in sensitive nature,
and without the use of grosser images; and such souls are not of themselves, he
says, much inclined to external works; but they seek rather to purify
themselves and inflame their hearts to the love of God by internal, quiet and
pure actuations in spirit, by a total abstraction from creatures, by solitude
both external and especially internal, so disposing themselves to receive the
influxes and inspirations of God, whose guidance chiefly they endeavor to
follow in all things. Now, he says, the security of such a state above the
other lies in this; Sancta Sophia. cap. 3. S. 2.
that a contemplative soul tending to God, and working almost only with the
heart and blind affections of the will, pouring themselves upon God apprehended
only in the obscure notion of faith, not enquiring what he is, but believing
him to be that incomprehensible being which he is, and which can only be
comprehended by himself, rejecting and striving to forget all Images and
representations of him, or any thing else; yea transcending all operations of
the imagination, and all subtlety and curiosity of reasoning, and lastly
seeking an union with God only by the most pure and most intime affections of
the spirit, what possibility of illusion or error can there be to such a soul?
none doubtless: for this is more than a mere sleep of the soul, for all
reasoning and images of things being wholly laid aside, there is not so much as
a possibility of dreaming left. The next thing he takes notice of, which is
very well observed, S. 3.
is that men given to sublime speculations (or I suppose any who have the use
of reason) are not so capable of it as unlearned persons and Women, and
therefore Father Leander a Sancto Martino, approves the Book as containing very
sound and wholesome doctrine for the direction of devout souls, The
approbations. page 319.
and fit and agreeable to our calling and rule, and especially for the use of
our Dames; because they might more easily swallow it, as they do pills, without
chewing; and so find not any bitterness in it: which is to the same purpose
with that reason Baker himself gives, viz. that the perfection of contemplation
scarcely at all lies in the operations of the understanding. A most admirable
way of contemplating with the will: but why might it not consist as well in the
volition of the understanding as in the contemplation of the Will? The proper
end of this contemplative life, he adds, is the attaining to an habitual and
almost uninterrupted perfect union with God in the supreme point of the spirit
(or rather fund as Mr. Cressy more mystically calls it) and such an union as
gives the soul a fruitive possession of him and a real experimental perception
of his divine presence in the depth and center of the spirit, S. 6.
which is fully possessed and filled with him alone. And lest we should think
this were all to be hoped for in this contemplative state, he says further, S.
11.
that besides this active union wherein the soul her self concurrs, there are
others merely passive, in which God after a wonderful and inconceivable manner
affords them interior illuminations and touches, yet far more efficacious and
Divine; in all which the soul is a mere patient and only suffers God to work
his divine pleasure in her, being neither able to further or hinder it. The
which unions though they last but even as it were a moment of time, yet do more
illuminate and purify the soul, than many years spent in active exercises of
spiritual Prayer or Mortification could do.

The steps he sets down in order to this state of perfection, Cap. 4. S. 11.
are, 1. The way of external and imaginary exercises of Prayer, in which
without a discreet diligence and constancy in them, the soul may perhaps end
her days therein. A sad case, to end our days as Christ and his Apostles did,
who used this low dispensation of praying to the last! But alas, they never
understood these passive unions with God in the fund of the spirit, they taught
men a plain and intelligible way of serving God, and bid them look for
perfection in another world. 2. Aspirations and pure elevations of the
superior Will. 3. The divine inaction. 4. Then when one would least expect
them, follow, woeful obscurities and desolations: and after them; 5. Comes the
State of perfection. Treat. 3. Sect. 11. cap. 1. S. 10.
Elsewhere he describes the progress toward this State of perfection thus,
that he who would come to it must practice the drawing of his external senses
inwardly to his internal, there losing and as it were annihilating them; then
he must draw his internal senses into the superior powers of the soul: and
there annihilate them likewise; and those powers of the intellectual soul he
must draw into that which is called their unity, and lastly that Unity which
alone is capable of perfect union with God must be applied and firmly fixed on
God; wherein the perfect divine contemplation lies. In which union, he says,
all is vacuity or emptiness, S, 15.
as if nothing were existent but God and the soul; yea so far is the soul from
reflecting on her own existence, that it seems to her, God and she are not
distinct, but one only thing. This is called by some mystic Authors the state
of Nothingness; by others (it being indifferent it seems among them) the state
of Totality; but the most sublime description of it, is that of the Union of
nothing with nothing: Treat. 3. sect. 4 cap. 6.
which being hard terms to be understood he explains them thus, S. 8.
that the soul being no where corporally or sensibly, is every where
spiritually and immediately united to God this infinite nothing. By which it is
just as intelligible as it was before. Nay; which I think is the highest state
of all, it is, that the soul comes to a feeling of her not being, S. 9.
and by consequence of the not being of creatures; the which is indeed a real
truth: or else intolerable nonsense; as we cannot think it otherwise, who know
we have cause to thank God, we are yet in our Wits, and are not possessed with
such a Spiritual Frenzy, Treat. 3. sect. 4.
as this Author says, Friar Bernard one of the disciples of St. Francis had;
S. 19, 20.
neither was the other free from it, who as Baker related, in the heat of his
interior affection, could usually cry out nothing but V. V. V. Neither can any
persons who have any use of their understandings left, think such discourses
the effect of any thing but the height of Enthusiasm or a Religious Madness. I
do not think such expressions as those I have already produced can be paralleld
by the most frantic Enthusiasts that have been since the beginning of the
Family of love. Yet these Books are licensed, approved, nay admired in the
Roman Church, whereas we have always disowned, disproved, and condemned any
such Writers among us, and have used all care to suppress and confute them. The
plain effect of such Enthusiastic fooleries is to make Religion laughed at by
some, despised by others, and neglected by all, who take no other measures of
it, than from such confounded Writers. If once an unintelligible way of
practical Religion, become the standard of devotion, no men of sense and reason
will ever set themselves about it, but leave it to be understood by madmen and
practiced by Fools.

. 15. But supposing this way were intelligible and practicable which it is not;
The utmost effect of this way is gross Enthusiasm.
yet what would the effect of it be but the highest Enthusiasm? For the same
Author lays it down, Treat. 1. sect. 2. cap. 1.
as a fundamental rule, that God only by his holy Inspirations is the guide and
directour, S. 6.
in an Internal contemplative life, and that all the light they have therein is
from immediate divine illumination: as well as our strength from the divine
operation: S. 7.
and that this light does extend further and to more and other more particular
objects than the divine light or Grace, by which good Christians living common
lives in the world are lead, extends to, yea than it does even in those that
seek perfection by the exercises of an active life. But which is very
extraordinary in this supernatural light, he says that generally when there is
proposed the not doing or doing of an external work, S. 12.
and both of them are lawful, the divine inspiration moves to the not doing;
but this is not all, but among the impediments to divine Inspirations he
reckons, not only all external duties of Religion, Cap. 5. S. 10.
but the doing things merely for Edification. A most excellent and Apostolical
doctrine! but it is happy for the Christian world the Apostles had other kind
of Inspirations from these: or else they had never done much good in the World,
or been such eminent examples of holy life and actions. What becomes of all the
precepts they have left us of doing good, of mutual edification, of constant
business, besides the commands for the outward duties of Worship, if these be
the hindrances in the way to perfection? Sact. 2. c. 1. S. 14.
And although he would not have his spiritual, internal liver to pretend to
extraordinary apparitions, voices, conversations with spirits, message from
Heaven, etc. Yet in his Discourse of Passive Unions, Treat. 3. sect 4 cap 3.
he says, that God reveals himself to the soul by a supernatural species
impressed in her, S. 2.
which revelations are either sensible as apparitions, words, etc. or
intellectual either immediately or by Angels; the effects of which supernatural
inactions of God are Rapts or Ecstasies, S. 6.
internal visions, S. 36.
etc. in which, he says, that the less experienced and imperfect are to advise
with their directour about them, but those who were more eminently perfect have
followed their own light in judging of those things and practicing accordingly,
without consulting others; S. 37.
and withal adds, that such souls which receive these things must carefully
observe her internal direction: and that they are not so absolutely obliged to
resign their judgments and wills to others, as to neglect their own proper
call received from God. And does this doctrine now differ from that of the
Fanatic Sectaries which have swarmed in England? Yes. Mr. Cressy in his
Preface undertakes at large to show the difference: by answering the objection
taken from thence against the publishing this doctrine, because it would
justify them in all their frenzies and disorders: Cressy 's Preface to Sancta
Sophia. S. 23.
and in order to this; 1. He very foolishly goes about to prove the necessity
of divine Inspirations; from the necessity of divine Grace, for the doing good
actions; which is not denied by the greatest enemies to Enthusiasme. S. 24.
2. He says, we ought to correspond to those Divine Inspirations which stir
us up to good actions, if he means by them nothing but the assistance of Divine
Grace, S. 25.
no one questions it. 3. That there may be false suggestions of the Devil,
which may appear like the motions of Gods Spirit. S. 27.
4. That, it being necessary these should be distinguished from each other; the
only means imaginable, that can be proper, natural, and efficacious to obtain
such a supernatural light to discern Gods will in all things as pure spiritual
prayer exercised by a soul living an abstracted, internal, recollected life,
spent in a continual attendance on God, etc. i. e. in short, the directions of
F. Augustine Baker. And is not this, think we, a very cunning way of vindicating
his doctrine from Fanaticism, to make Enthusiasm necessary to distinguish the
motions of the good, and bad Spirit in our minds? I have already showed that he
teaches the highest Enthusiasm, and it seems those who made the objection were
sensible of it. But how does Mr. Cressy answer it? by showing what they
condemn, to be necessary; and in effect that no man can know the difference
between the motions of the Holy Ghost and the Devil, but by Enthusiasme; nay,
that is the plain meaning of his words; for this contemplative prayer, he
says, is the only means to gain such a supernatural light whereby we can
distinguish one from the other. An admirable way! to tell men they must first
be mad, before they can know whether they be in their wits or no. But since
this contemplative state, has besides the common though immediate
illuminations, many passive unions, or extraordinary revelations attending it,
suppose the Question were put how one should know whether these came from God,
or the Devil, what answer will Mr. Cressy then give? will he return back again
to try illuminations by inspirations (as he calls them) and so inspirations by
illuminations, which is just like the Scripture by the Church, and the Church
by Scripture?

But here, S. 29.
says Mr. Cressy, is no pretending to new or strange revelations, no walking
in mirabilibus super se: yes I think he does so, when he utters these things;
for what are passive unions, but new revelations, and as great as ever any
Fanatic Sectary pretended to? Did not they deliver this for their Doctrine,
that men ought to hearken to the immediate impulses of the Spirit of God within
them, and that now God does acquaint his own people with his mind and will in a
way peculiar to themselves? And what have they done of the mystical way, but
only changed a few terms, and asserted the thing it self higher than our
Enthusiasts did, who did not boast of so many raptures, visions, and
revelations as those of the Church of Rome have done. Lud. Blosii Monile
Spirit. p. 78.
Lud. Blosius in his works has one Book called Monile Spirituale, which
consists of nothing but the new and strange revelations which were made to four
Women Saints St. Gertrude, St. Mathildis, St. Bridgitt, and St. Catharine; and
in his Preface says, it is a sign of a carnal mind to despise such revelations
as these are: for the Church of God is wonderfully enlightened by them. What,
says he, did not the Prophets and Apostles receive truth from Heaven by
Revelations? As though the case were the very same in these melancholy Women
and in the holy Prophets and Apostles: and we had just as much reason to
believe the effects of hysterical vapors and the divine Spirit. And lest we
should imagine these were only the Fancies of some Women, which their Church
would not be concerned for the credit of, he concludes with saying, that these
Revelations were known to the world and approved. For those of St. Bridgitt we
have before showed how much they were approved; For St. Gertrudes, he says the
same; and that one very learned and illuminate man did say after the accurate
reading of them, that man could not have the Spirit of God, who Questioned
whether those revelations came from it or no. And therefore Blosius is so far
from denying any new or strange revelations among them, that, being a devout
man, he prays God to pardon those who questioned the authority of these
revelations. But if no new revelations are allowed among them, what means that
saying in the spiritual exercises of the Jesuits, p. 31, 32. of the Impression,
A. D. 1574. It is the great perfection of a Christian to keep himself
indifferent to do what God shall reveal to him, and not to determine himself to
do what he has already revealed and taught in the Gospel. This is speaking to
the purpose; and lest I should seem to charge any unjustly, (this passage not
appearing in the latter impressions) it may be found in the Moral practice of
the Jesuits, Moral Practice of Jesuits. p 379.
from the Bishop of Malaga. But the Jesuits are not so much Mr. Cressy's
Friends that he should be concerned in their Vindication: I can tell him
therefore of a Friend of his, whom I am sure he is concerned for, that is for
new and strange revelations too, and that is the worthy publisher of the
sixteen Revelations of Mother Iuliana: and if those be not new and strange, I
think none ever ought to be accounted so.

But supposing they have new and strange revelations among them, yet Mr. Cressy
says, they are not seditious and troublesome to the World, S. 33.
no dissolving unity or crossing lawful authority by them; because these are
enjoyed in solitude and retirements, and supposing they be mistaken, no harm
would accrue to others by it. As though persons were ever the less mad for
being chained, and having a keeper assigned them: such in effect do they make
the office of a confessor to these contemplatives. The mischief to the world
is not so great while they are kept up, but that to Religion is unsufferable,
while they lead devout persons in such an unintelligible way, that the highest
degree of their perfection is Madness. But I have already proved at large, that
they have not been able in some cases, or willing in others to keep up these
Enthusiastical persons among them, but they have done as much to the
disturbance of the peace, and been as unreclaimable among them, as ever any
Fanatic Sectaries have done or been in England. And we are not to think that
the Principles of their Church are such quiet, meek and obedient things, that
not a man among them would ever lift up his finger to give any disturbance to
the peace of a Nation: For,

. 16. I now come to prove that they are as much guilty of the second sort of
Fanaticism as any Sectaries among us have been, Of their Fanaticism in
resisting Authority under a pretense of Religion.
which is the resisting authority under a pretense of Religion. This I shall
prove by two things. 1. That the Principles and practices of the Iesuitical
party in the Roman Church are as destructive to Government, as of the most
Fanatic Sectaries which ever have been among us. 2. That this party is the
most countenanced and encouraged by the Court of Rome.

1. That the Principles and Practices of the Iesuitical party in the Roman
Church are as destructive to Government as of the most Fanatic Sectaries which
ever have been among us. What effects of Fanaticism have we seen in England so
dreadful which may not be paralled with examples, or justified by the
principles of that party? Is it, that so many men's lives have been destroyed
under a pretense of Religion? and do they think the Massacre at Paris and the
Rebellion in Ireland can ever be forgotten by us? Is it, that Government was
supposed by them to be so originally in the people, that they by their
representatives may call their Sovereign to an account, and alter the form of
Government? This is the express doctrine of the Jesuits: Bellar. de l^i is, l.
3. c. 6.
for, says Bellarmin, Civil power is immediately in the people as the
immediate subject of it: and is indifferently transferred by them either to one
or many; and if they see cause may change it as they see good from a Monarchy,
to an Aristocratie or a Democratie. But because after the writing that Book,
some persons had published a doctrine contrary to his, Recognit. p. 56.
therefore in the recognition of his works he endeavors to strengthen what he
had delivered, and produces a saying of Navarre, that the people never do
transferr their power so far to the King, but they retain it habitually in
themselves, and may in certain cases resume it into their own hands. Marian. de
Regis I^stit. l. 1. c. 6.
John Mariana, whose name will never be forgotten in these matters, determines
the case plainly, That if there be no hope of a Princes amendment, the
Commonwealth may take away his Kingdom, and because that cannot be done
without War, they may raise armies against him, and having proclaimed the King
their public enemy may take away his life. De justa abdicatione Hen. 3. l 3.
c. 8.
Reynolds in his Book of the just abdication of Henry 3. of France, says that
all the Majesty of the Kingdom is in the assembly of the states, to whom it
belongs to bridle the Kingly power, and to settle all things that belong to the
public Government. This is a doctrine fitted for such a season wherein there
is hopes to prevail upon a considerable party (as in the League in France) to
do their business, but in case the States of the Kingdom be faithful to their
Prince, they have easier ways of dispatch. And to this end they declare it
lawful for any person to take away the life of a Prince excommunicated by the
Pope. But here their juggling and shuffling show their meaning is not good, for
they who mean honestly are not afraid to speak plainly. If any one ask them,
Whether it be lawful to kill their Sovereign? they will tell you by no means,
and that none of them ever said so; but being excommunicated they do not
account him their Sovereign, Philopater c. edictum. Elizab. p. 149.
and so they may lawfully do it. Nay it is avowed by some of them, that it is a
point of faith to believe it is in the Popes power to depose Heretical Princes,
and that subjects are upon their being declared heretical thereby absolved from
all duty of obedience to them. Nay that there needs no sentence of the Pope to
be pronounced against him: and Mariana makes an intention of public good, or,
the advice of grave men sufficient, such as the Jesuits in France were to
Clement, Chastel, and Ravaillac, the first and last the actual Murderers of
Henry 3. and Henry 4. and the second showed his good intention when he stabbed
Henry 4. in the mouth. If any Priest or Friar should attempt it, they have an
excellent salvo for him, that being a spiritual person (acording to their
doctrine of exemption) he is no Subject to the King. If the Authority of the
Council of Constance be objected by them as the doctrine of their Church
against these Principles, they have withal given us an answer, that it meddles
not with the case of Sovereign Heretical Princes excommunicated by the Pope. I
need not produce the particular testimonies in this matter of Bellarmin,
Suarez, Valentia, Vasquez, with the herd of the Iesuitical order who follow
these, having been produced by so many already, and particularly by the two
worthy Authors of the Answer to Philanax, Answ. to Philan. chap. 5. p. 111.
and the Papists Apology, from the latter of whom, we shortly expect a more
accurate examination of these things: Answ. to Apology. p. 6.
and by the former, may appear what influence the Iesuitical party had upon the
most barbarous effects of Fanaticism here, Answ. to Philan. p. 53. to 65.
in the Murder of a most excellent Prince. To whose observations I shall only
add this, that A. D. 1648. a Book was Printed with this Title Several Speeches
delivered at a Conference concerning the Power of Parliament to proceed against
their King for misgovernment, licensed by Gilb. Mabbot, which is, word for
word, taken out of Parsons the Jesuits Book of succession to the Crown of
England, (purposely designed against our Kings title) as will appear to any one
who will take the pains to compare them. By which we may see to whom our
Fanatics owed their principles and their precedents, and how much Father
Parsons (though at that distance) contributed to the cutting off the Kings
Head. But it may be now they have changed their principles and renounced all
these Doctrines; we should like them so much the better if they once did this
freely and sincerely, and not with sly tricks and aequivocations which they use
in these matters whenever they are pinched with them. Let them without mental
reservations declare but these two points, that the Pope cannot absolve the
Kings Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance they make to him, and that though
the Pope should excommunicate the King as a Heretic and raise War against him,
they are bound to defend the King against the Pope; and by the owning these two
Propositions, they will gain more upon our belief of their fidelity, than the
large volumn in vindication of the Irish Remonstrance has done; Remonstr.
Hibernor^^. p. 1. cap 4. S. 2.
For there they falter in the very entrance; for being charged from Rome, that
by their Remonstrance they had fallen under the condemnation of the Bull of
Paul 5. against the Oath of Allegiance, they give these three Answers which
ought to be considered by us. 1. That in the Oath of Allegiance they swear and
testify in their Consciences before God and the World, that King Charles is
their lawful King, and that the Pope has no power to depose, etc. Whereas they
only acknowledge it. 2. That in the Oath of Allegiance, the contrary opinion is
condemned which is not in theirs. 3. That in the Oath of Allegiance, they
declare that they believe that the Pope cannot dispense with that Oath or any
part of it; but this is omitted by them: and surely not without reason on their
parts, but with little satisfaction on ours. And it is easy to observe that
this Remonstrance was grounded upon this, that the Pope owned our King to be
lawful King of England (a great kindness) and this being supposed all the rest
follows naturally as they well prove against the Divines of Lovain; Romanstr.
Hib. p. 1. c. 2. art. 2. 5.
but suppose it should come into his Holiness's head, to be of another opinion,
we see no assurance but they will be so too. And it may make the Pope more
cautious for the future, how he declares himself when such ill use is made of
it; and others how they rely upon such Remonstrances which have still a tacit
reservation of the Popes power to declare and dispense. But will they declare
it unlawful to resist Authority when the cause of their Church is concerned;
Caron. p. 1. c. 5. S. 24. p. 25.
and supposing that thereby they can settle the Pope in the full exercise of
his spiritual Authority among us? No, this is their good old Cause that
undermines Parliaments, that Sanctifies Rebellion, and turns Nuptials into
Massacres. This is that which changes blood into Holy water, and dying for
Treason into Martyrdom; this is that which gives the glory at Rome to
Regicides, and makes the Pictures of Gueret, Guignard and Garnet so much valued
there; of which we have a sufficient testimony from Mons. S. Amor; S. Amour's
Iournal part. 2. chapter 11. p. 58.
who tells us that among the several pourtraicts of Jesuits publicly sold
there with permission of the Superior, he saw one of Garnet, with this
Inscription, Pater Henricus Garnetus Anglus Londini pro fide Catholica
suspensus and sectus 3 Maii 1606. Father Henry Garnet hanged and quartered at
London for the Catholic Faith: by which we see that Treason and the Catholic
faith are all one at Rome; for nothing can be more notorious than that Garnet
suffered only on the account of the Gunpowder-treason; of which as M. S. Amor
observes, he acknowledged himself guilty before he dyed. The most dangerous
Sect among us, is of those who under pretense of setting up the Kingdom of
Christ, think it lawful to overturn the Kingdoms of the World. But herein they
have mightily the advantage of those of the Church of Rome, that what they do
for Christ, the other do it only for his Vicar: and surely if either were
lawful, it is much fitter to do it for one, than for the other. We are of
opinion that it is somewhat better being under Christ's own Government than the
Popes whatever they think; but we condemn any opposition to Government under
any pretense whatsoever; and though Venner and his company acted to the height
of Fanaticism among our Sectaries, yet Guido Faux with his companions in their
Church went beyond them.

2. That party which has been most destructive to Civil Government, has had
the most countenance and encouragement from Rome. Of which I shall give but two
instances but sufficient to prove the thing, A. D. 1594. 27 of December John
Chastel a Citizens Son of Paris, and disciple of the Jesuits, having been
three years in the School, watched his opportunity to stabb Henry 4. but by his
stooping just at the time of the blow, he struck him only into the mouth; upon
which the Jesuits were banished France, and a Pyramid erected in their place of
his Fathers house, in the Front whereof toward the Palace gate, the Arrest of
the Court of Parliament against the Traitor was engraven, containing his
examination and confession of being a Scholar of the Jesuits, a Disciple of
Guerets, and the sentence passed upon him because he believed it lawful to Kill
Kings, that Henry 4. was not in the Church till he was approved by the Pope,
etc. This Arrest continued without notice taken of it at Rome, till October 9.
A. D. 1609. and on that day it was condemned by the Order of the Inquisition
and put into the Index Expurgatorius, Index Expurg. Alex. 7. p. 205.
as it is at this day to be seen. Which was a time wherein many reports were
fled abroad in many parts of the Murder of Henry 4. and Letters came to Paris
from several places to know the truth of it; and the consequence of this was,
that it being found how careful the Court of Rome was to preserve the honor of
Regicides, it was but seven months and twenty four days, before Ravaillac
perfected that work which the other had begun. Ioh. Launoy Epistol. par. 6.
page 358.
This observation I owe to an ingenuous and learned Doctor of the Sorbon yet
living, who detests these practices and doctrines, and himself lies under the
same censure there. And the more to abuse the world, on the same day a Book of
Mariana's was suspended, which those who look no farther than the name might
imagine, was the dangerous Book so much complained of; but upon search it
appears to be a Book quite of another nature concerning Coins.

The latter instance concerns the Irish Remonstrance, the account of which I
take from Caron the publisher of it. Remonstr. Hib. p. 1. c. 5. p. 27.
The Popish Clergy of Ireland (a very few excepted) were accused of Rebellion,
for opposing themselves to the Kings Authority, by the instigation of the Popes
Nuncio, after which followed a meeting of the Popish Bishops, where they
banished the Kings Lieutenant and took the Royal Authority upon themselves,
almost all the Clergy and a great part of the people joined with them: and
therefore it was necessary since the Kings return to give him better
satisfaction concerning their Allegiance, and to decline the Oath of
Allegiance, which they must otherwise have taken, some of them agree upon this
Remonstrance to present to the King, the news of which was no sooner come to
Rome, but Cardinal Barberin sends a Letter to the Irish Nobility 8 July A. D.
1662. to bid them take heed of being drawn into the ditch by those blind
guides; who had subscribed to some propositions testifying their Loyalty to the
King, which had been before condemned by the Apostolic See. After this the
Popes Nuncio at Brussels, July 21. 1662. sends them word how displeasing their
Remonstrance was at Rome, Cap. 3. p. 6.
and that after diligent examination by the Cardinals and Divines, they found
it contained Propositions already condemned by Paul 5. and Innocent 10. and
therefore the Pope gave him order to publish this among them, that he was so
far from approving their Remonstrance, that he did not so much as permit it, or
connive at it, and was extremely grieved that the Irish Nobility were drawn
into it, and therefore condemned it in this form, That it could not be kept
without breach of faith, according to the Decree of Paul 5. and that it denied
the Popes Authority in matters of faith according to that of Innocent 10. By
this very late instance we see what little countenance they receive from Rome
who offer to give any reasonable security to the King of their Loyalty; and by
the Popes own Declaration, the giving of it is an injury to the faith, and a
denying his Supremacy. For which we are to understand that A. D. 1648. when the
Papists were willing to make as good terms for themselves as they could, and it
was objected to them, that they held Principles inconsistent with Civil
Government, viz. that the Pope can absolve them from their obedience, that he
can depose and destroy Heretical Magistrates, that he can dispense with all
Oaths and contracts they make with those whom they call Heretics; upon which
they met together and to save themselves from banishment resolved them in the
Negative, but no sooner was this heard at Rome, but the sacred Congregation
condemned this resolution as heretical, and the subscribers as liable to the
penalties against those who deny the Popes Authority in matters of faith, upon
which they are cited to appear at Rome, and Censures and Prisons are there
prepared for them. The sum of it then, is, that they can give no security of
their Loyalty to the King against the Popes power to depose him, and absolve
his Subjects from whatever Oaths they make to him, or they must be accounted
Heretics at Rome for so doing. For this good old Cause is as much still in
request at Rome, as ever: and it is in their power to be accounted Heretics at
Rome, or bad Subjects in their own Country; but one of them they cannot avoid.
So much may suffice to show that the most dangerous Principles of Fanaticism
either as to Enthusiasm or Civil Government are owned and allowed in the Church
of Rome; and therefore the number of Fanatics among us is very unjustly
charged upon the Reading the Scriptures in our own Language.

CHAP. V. Of the Divisions of the Roman Church.
The great pretense of Unity in the Church of Rome considered. The Popes
Authority the fountain of that Unity; what that Authority is which is
challenged by the Popes over the Christian World; the disturbances which have
happened therein on the account of it. The first revolt of Rome from the Empire
caused by the Popes; Baronius his Arguments answered. Rebellion the foundation
of the greatness of that Church. The cause of the strict League between the
Popes and the posterity of Charles Martel. The disturbances made by Popes in
the new Empire: Of the quarrels of Greg. 7. with the Emperor and other
Christian Princes, upon the pretense of the Popes Authority. More disturbances
on that account in Christendom, than any other matter of Religion. Of the
Schisms which have happened in the Roman Church: particularly those after the
time of Formosus, wherein his Ordinations were nulled by his successors, the
Popes opposition to each other in that Age: the miserable state of that Church
then described. Of the Schisms of latter times, by the Italick and Gallick
factions, the long continuance of them. The mischief of those Schisms on their
own principles. Of the divisions in that Church about matters of Order and
Government. The differences between the Bishops and the Monastic Orders about
exemptions and privileges; the history of that Controversy and the bad
success the Popes had in attempting to compose it. Of the quarrel between the
Regulars and Seculars in England. The continuance of that Controversy here and
in France. The Jesuits enmity to the Episcopal Order and jurisdiction: the hard
case of the Bishop of Angelopolis in America. The Popes still favor the
Regulars, as much as they dare. The Jesuits way of converting the Chinese
discovered by that Bishop. Of the differences in matters of Doctrine in that
Church. They have no better way to compose them than we. The Popes Authority
never truly ended one Controversy among them. Their ways to evade the
decisions of Popes and Councils. Their dissensions are about matters of faith.
The ways taken to excuse their own differences will make none between them and
us, manifested by Sancta Clara's exposition of the 39 Articles. Their disputes
not confined to their Schools, proved, by a particular instance about the
immaculate conception; the infinite scandals, confessed by their own Authors,
to have been in their Church about it. From all which it appears that the
Church of Rome can have no advantage in point of Unity above ours.

2.. 1. THE other thing objected, Of the great pretense of Unity in the Church
of Rome.
as flowing from the promiscuous reading the Scriptures, is, the number of our
Sects, and the disturbances which have been among us upon their account:
whereas among them the Government of the Church is so ordered as to keep all in
peace and Unity. This makes it necessary to examine that admirable Unity they
boast so much of; and either they mean by it, that there has been less
disturbance in the world before the Reformation, or no Schisms among
themselves, or no differences in the matters of Religion. But I shall now
prove: 1. That there have never been greater disturbances in the World than
upon the account of that Authority of the Pope, which they look on as the
Foundation of their Unity. 2. That there have happened great and scandalous
Schisms among themselves on the same account. 3. That their differences in
Religion both as to matter of Order and Doctrine have been as great and managed
with as much animosity as any among us.

1. The disturbances in the World upon the account of the Popes Authority: I
meddle not barely with his usurpations, (which work is lately and largely
done,) History of Romish Usurpations by Hen. Foulis.
but the effects of them in these Western Churches. For which we are to
consider what authority that is, which the Pope challenges, and what
disturbances has been given to the peace of Christendom by it. The Authority
claimed by the Pope, is that of being Universal Pastor over the Catholic
Church, by virtue of which not only spiritual direction in matters of faith,
but an actual jurisdiction over all the members of it does belong unto him. For
otherwise they say the Government of the Church is imperfect and insufficient
for its end; because Princes may easily overthrow the Unity of the Church by
favoring Heretics, if they be not in subjection to the Pope as to their
temporal concernments, because it may happen that they have a regard to no
other but these; if it were not therefore in the Popes power to depose Princes
and absolve Subjects from their Alleagiance, when they oppose the Unity of the
Church, his power, say they, is an insignificant title, and cannot reach the
end it was designed for. Besides they urge, that all Princes coming into the
Church are to be supposed to submit their Scepters to Christ, so as to lose
them in case they act contrary to the Catholic Church, of which they are made
members: for whosoever does not hate Father and Mother, etc. cannot be my
Disciple. And what officer is there so fit to take all Escheats and Forfeitures
of Power as Christ's own Vicar upon Earth? But to add more strength, Bellarmin
very prettily proves it out of Pasce oves, Bell. de Pontif. R. l. 5. c. 7.
for every Pastor must have a threefold power to defend his flock, a power over
wolves to keep them from destroying the Sheep, a power over the Rams that they
do not hurt them, and a power over the Sheep to give them convenient food; now,
says he, very subtly, if a Prince of a sheep should turn a Ram or a Wolf,
must not he have power to drive him away, and to keep the people from following
him? This is then the only current doctrine concerning the Popes Authority in
the Court of Rome, although some mince the matter more than others do, and talk
only of an indirect power, yet they all mean the same thing, and ascribe such
power to the Pope, whereby he may depose Princes and absolve subjects from the
duty they owe to them. And how much in request this Doctrine continues at Rome
appears by the Counsel given by Michael Lonigo, Master of the Palace, to Pope
Greg. 15. Consilium Greg. 15. exhibitum per Mich. Lonigum. A. D. 1623.
Printed A. D. 1623. about persuading the Duke of Bavaria then newly made
Elector to receive a confirmation of his title from the Pope; to which end, he
says, some skilful person ought to be employed to acquaint him, that the power
of the Empire was the mere issue of the Church, and did spring from it as a
Child from the Mother, and that it was a great sin for any Christian to call
this into Question; and consequently the Popes power and authority to determine
concerning the State and affairs of the Empire, and this he attempts to prove
by no fewer than nineteen arguments, all of them drawn from the former
Usurpations of the Popes and encroachments upon the Empire: from whence he
concludes that the Electorship could not be lawfully taken away from one and
given to another, without the Popes consent and authority, and that such a
disposal of it was in it self null, and of no force. The same year came forth a
Book of Aphorisms concerning the restoring the state of the Church, Aphorismi
de statu ecclesiae rest aurando per Mich. Lonigum.
by the decree and approbation of the College of Cardinals, collected by the
same person and by him presented to the Pope; wherein the same power of the
Pope is asserted, and that it belongs to him to transferr the Electoral dignity
from one to another; and that it ought to be taken away from the Electors of
Saxony and Brandenburg for opposing his Authority, and that to allow the
Emperor authority in these things was to rob the Apostolic See of its due
rights. By which we may understand what that Authority over the Church is,
which is challenged by the Pope as supreme Pastor in order to the preserving
the Unity of it.

. 2. We now consider what the blessed effects of this pretended power has been
in the Christian World; Of the disturbances of the Christian World under the
pretense of the Popes Authority.
and I doubt not to make it appear that this very thing has caused more wars
and bloodshed, more confusions and disorders, more revolts and rebellions in
Christendom, than all other causes put together have done, since the time it
was first challenged; and this I shall prove from their own Authors, and such
whose credit is the greatest among them. The revolt of Rome and the adjacent
parts from the subjection due to the Roman Emperor, then resident at
Constantinople, was wholly caused by the Pope. The first Pope says Onuphrius,
Onuphr. An^ot. in Platin. vit. Constant.
that ever durst openly resist the Emperor was Constantine 1. who opposed
Philippicus in the matter of Images, which the Emperor commanded to be pulled
down because they were abused to Idolatry, and the Pope utterly refused to
obey; and not only so, but set up more in opposition to him in the Pertico of
St. Peter, and forbad the use of the Emperors name and title in any public
Writings or Coins. The same command was not long after renewed by Leo 3. upon
which, says Onuphrius, Gregory 2. then Pope took away the small remainder of
the Roman Empire from him in Italy: Sigonius de regno Italiae. l. 3. A. D. 726.
and Sigonius more expressly, that he not only excommunicated the Emperor, but
absolved all the people of Italy from their Alleagiance, and forbad the payment
of any Tribute to him; Naucler. Chro^o^. Genesis 25.
whereupon the inhabitants of Rome, Campania, Ravenna, and Pentapolis, i.e. the
Region about Ancona, immediately rebelled, and rose up in opposition to their
Magistrates whom they destroyed. At Ravenna, Paulus the Emperors Lieutenant or
Exarch was killed; at Rome, Peter the Governor had his eyes put out, in
Campania, Exhilaratus and his Son Hadrian were both Murdered by the people of
Rome, and not content with this, he writ a Letter to the Emperor full of the
greatest reproaches imaginable. Baron. Annals Eccles. A. 726. ton. 9.
Baronius is here very hard put to it, to Vindicate the Pope, for he confesses
the Rebellion of the people was occasioned by the Popes opposing the Emperor,
and commends their zeal for Religion in it, and acknowledges that the Emperor
laid all the blame on the Pope, and that the Greek Historians, Theophanes, and
Zonaras do so too; but all this he says proceeded only from their spite
against the Roman Church and their ignorance of affairs in it; but if we
believe him, the Pope rather endeavored to keep them in obedience to the
Emperor, and when they would have chosen another he opposed it: which he
proves from Paulus Diaconus and Anastasius. But what is that to the business?
the question is not, whether the Pope did not hinder the choosing another
Emperor, but whether he did not draw the people off from their obedience to
the Emperor that then was? And this is not only affirmed by the Greek
historians; but by those of the Roman Church. Chronicon. Sigeberti ad A. 728.
Sigebert says, that Gregory 2. finding the Emperor incorrigible, he made
Rome, Otto Frising. l. 5. c. 18.
Italy and all the West to revolt from him, and forbad his Tributes: the same
is affirmed by Otto Frisingensis, Urspergens. Chron. ad A. 718.
Conradus Vrspergensis, Hieronymus Rubeus and others, who cannot be suspected
of any enmity to the Roman Church. Hier. Rubei histor. Raven. l. 4. p. 190.
As for the making a new Emperor, therein the Pope had another game to play,
he was not willing the Soldiery should make another Emperor; Hadr. Vales.
Rerum Francic. lib. 25. tom. 3. p. 520.
for as Hadrianus Valesius well observes the Pope durst not so affront the
Emperor, if he had not held a private correspondency with Charles Martel at
that time, whose honor and arms were the greatest in these Western parts.
Having thereby strengthened his interest against both the Emperor his known
enemy and the Lombards that were at best but unfaithful friends, he makes what
advantage he can of the places that owed subjection to the Emperor to make up
the Patrimony of the Church: as Valesius observes particularly of Sutrium,
Sigon. de regno Ital. l. 3. ad A. D. 727.
but Sigonius says, the people not only cast off the Emperor, but did swear
to be faithful to the Pope, (no wonder then he was not willing to have a new
Emperor chosen) so that at this time Rome, and the Roman Duchy came into the
hands of the Pope, the Cities of which are enumerated by Sigonius; Papir.
Massonus de Episcop. urbis. l. 3. p. 126.
and therefore Papirius Massonus deservedly makes this Pope, the founder of the
greatness of the Roman Church: which we see was laid in downright rebellion:
and can be no otherwise justified than by making the Pope absolute Governor of
the World. Not long after the Pope begins says Valesius, Vales. tom. 3. p. 525.
a war with the Lombards who watched any occasion to take away some part of
his newly gotten Patrimony, he therefore sends away Anastasius and Sergius into
France to Charles Martel, with the Keys of St. Peter's Sepulcher, in token of
their owning him as their Protector. Which Embassy being acceptable to
Charles, Platina in Gregor. 3.
he procures a peace to be concluded between the Lombards and the Romans: which
was contrary to the Popes desire, who sent several Letters and Messengers to
him to come into Italy to revenge St. Peter's quarrel against the Lombards with
Fire and Sword; and as he loved St. Peter he would come with all Speed into
Italy; as appears by the letters still extant and published by Sirmondus.
Sirmondi Council. Gallic. Tom. 1. p. 526.
But he soon after dying, his Son Pepin succeeding in all his power, and
growing weary of having so much as the name of a King above him, sends to Pope
Zachary to know whether it were not fitter for him to bear the name who did all
the business of a King, who very well understood his meaning and readily
assented to it, upon which Chilperick was deposed and put into a Monastery,
Otto Frising. Chron. l. 5. c. 22.
and Pepin was afterward absolved by the Pope from his Oath of fidelity,
Papir. Masson. Annal. Franc. l. 2. p. 86.
with all the Nobles and People. There being now so close a League between the
Popes interest and Pepins, Sabellic. Enead. 8. l. 8
the ones title to his Crown depending on the Popes authority, the others
security upon his protection, no wonder to see them endeavor the promoting
each others advantage. Blond. decad. 1. lib. 10.
The Popes Territories being not long after molested by Aistulphus King of the
Lombards, Stephen writes a very pitiful Letter of complaint to Pepin, and
Charles and Charlemagne his Sons, wherein he says that Aistulphus had almost
broke his heart with grief, because he would not leave one foot of Land to St.
Peter and the Holy Church; and therefore he conjures them by St. Peter who had
anointed them Kings, that they would recover the lands again out of the
Lombards hands, or otherwise they may think what a sad account they will give
to St. Peter in the day of Judgment: These are the words of the Popes letter
lately published by Delaland Sirmondus his Nephew in his Supplement of the
Gallican Councils. Conci^or. Antiq. Galliae s^pplement. p. 78. A. D. 756.
Upon this, Pepin comes to his assistance, and every peace adds still more to
the Churches Revenew, by which it was now grown very considerable by the
spoils of the Empire, the Exarchat of Ravenna in Pope Stephens time being
destroyed, which was the only remainder then left of the Empire in Italy: and
the revenews of it were given by Pepin to the Church of Rome: as appears by an
ancient inscription in Ravenna mentioned by Papirius Massonus. Papir. Masson.
Annals Franc. l. 2. p. 87.
Which the Pope solicited hard for, when he went himself into France on purpose
to stir up Pepin against the Lombards, Sigon de reg. Ital. l. 3. A. 754.
and was much afraid lest the Exarchat should have been restored again to the
Emperor; Sermond. Council. Tom. 2. p. 12.
but Pepin promising to give the Region of Pentapolis and Ravenna to the Roman
See (as soon as he had taken them from the Lombards) the Pope went away well
satisfied: and drew after him a mighty Army, whereby a great part of Italy was
laid waste, Blond. decad. 2. l. 1.
and the people miserably harrassed; for no other end, but to secure that to
the Pope which did by all right belong to the Emperor. Platin. in Steph. 2.
Who sent Ambassadors first to the Pope, and then to Pepin to desire the
restitution of those places, to their true owner, but the Pope denied, and
Pepin urged the promise he had already made to the Pope, and that he could not
go back from it; because he undertook that quarrel merely for his souls,
Adelmus in Franc. Annal. ad A. 755.
and the Popes sake, without expecting any advantage to himself by it.
Aistulphus being dead, Desiderius takes upon him the Kingdom of Lombardy, but
he fearing Rachis the right heir, B^ondus ib. Platina in Stephan. 2.
makes a League presently with the Pope, and by surrendering up some more
Cities, makes him wholly of his party, and Rachis is fain to retire again to a
Monastery: but after a while, Desiderius finds an occasion to quarrel with the
Pope, and takes several cities into his hands which the Pope had gotten
possession of, and threatens suddenly to besiege Rome, Pope Adrian finding
himself in these straights dispatches away messengers with all speed to Charles
the Son of Pepin, that he would imitate his Father and Grandfather in relieving
the Church of Rome in this distress. Charles not willing to omit such an
opportunity of enlarging his Dominions enters Italy with a great Army, and in a
little time puts a period to the Kingdom of Lombardy, which had then lasted in
Italy 206 years; and was magnificently received at Rome by Hadrian and the
people, by whom he was chosen Protector of the Roman Church and state under the
name of Patritius; and he being desired by Hadrian to confirm his Fathers
Promises to the Church, not only does that, but adds a considerable accession,
the more firmly to oblige the Romans, and especially the Pope to him. Italy
being thus reduced, nothing was now wanting to Charles but the Title of
Emperor, having already so great a dominion in Italy, besides what he had in
Germany and France. This had been often treated on between the Pope and him,
but the seditions of Rome by the Emperors party frequently happening by the
presence of some of his Officers there, as Platina confesses, Platina in
Stephan. 3.
and his party being not inconsiderable in other parts, though not daring
publicly to appear, and Charles by his Wars being elsewhere employed, this
was put off till Pope Leo 3. by the conspiracy of some of the chief Citizens of
Rome was seized on and imprisoned, from whence making a difficult escape, he
goes in haste to Charles, who coming into Italy and punishing the
conspiratours, the Pope then, (some say, by his own Authority, of which number
Bellarmin reckons thirty three Authors, De translat. Imp. Romans l. 1. c. 4.
others by the consent of the Senate and people) declares Charles to be
Emperor of Rome, who solemnly performs the office of his Inauguration. Thus we
have seen the Foundation laid of the Greatness of the Roman Church, which being
begun in Rebellion was carried on by continual wars, and so great devastations
of the Country, Platin. in Steph. 2. Blond. decad. 2. lib. 1.
that Platina and Blondus both say, that the country about Rome, suffered more
in that time than in all the invasions of the barbarous Nations for 344 years
before. And was not the Church like to enjoy much happiness and peace under a
Government founded in Rebellion and maintained by blood? for we see the Popes
were the great instruments of casting off their lawful Prince, and taking his
Territories to themselves and to maintain what they had unjustly gotten, never
scrupled beginning quarrels, making wars, calling in any foreign assistance
that might the most serve to promote their designs.

. 3. It might now be imagined that the Popes having been so highly obliged by
Charlemagne, The disturbances made by Popes in the new Empire.
they should in mere gratitude have done their utmost to preserve the Empire in
peace under his posterity, but they are great strangers to the Court of Rome
who look for any thing there, but what tends to their own advantage. For in the
time of Ludovicus Pius son of Charles the great, his sons combining together
against him in France, the Pope Gregory 4. going thither under a pretense of
reconciling them joins with the Sons in their Rebellion against their Father.
Annals Eccles. ad A. D. 833. P. Aemilius in hist or Franc. p. 54.
This Baronius would have to be a mere calumny, and endeavors to vindicate the
Pope, because Paulus Aemilius says, that the Pope abrogated the Decree,
whereby Ludovicus was deprived of the Empire: But Baronius understood his
business too well to make use of the Testimony of so late an Author, if he
could have had any assistance from those who lived near the time. Nithard.
hist. l. 1. a Petr P'thae. ed. in Annal. Franc.
Nithardus who lived in the same age, and was nearly related to the Imperial
Family, wrote a Book on purpose of the differences among the Sons of Ludov.
Pius, and he expressly says, that they drew the Pope into their Party; Vita
Ludovici Pii a Pithaeo ib. p. 245.
which is likewise affirmed by the Author of the life of the said Emperor, who
lived at the same time, the Pope, he says, indeed pretended to reconcile them,
but the event showed it to be otherwise; and the Emperor sent to him to know
if he came to him, what made him stay so long before he came at him? and
Understanding that he came with a design to excommunicate all that would not
join with the Sons against the Father, he said, that if he came to
excommunicate others, he should go away excommunicated himself, Papir. Masson.
in vit. Greg. 4.
because he acted against the Canons. Papirius Massonus, upon the Testimony of
Nithardus (whom he calls Vitaldus) makes Gregory guilty of the conspiracy of
the Sons against their Father: and the reason he gives of it is, that Lotharius
having the command of Italy might dispossess him of his seat if he opposed him;
and more he says, are ready to worship the rising than the setting Sun. A very
worthy excuse for the head of the Church to encourage the Rebellion of Sons
against their Father, and him too who had all his life showed as much kindness
to the Roman See as his Ancestors had done! Sigeberti Chron. A* D. 832.
Sigebertus Gemblacensis says, that Pope Gregory went into France being of the
party of the Emperors Sons against himself. Hincmar. Rhemens. Epistol. p. 577.
ed. Cord.
And Hincmarus the famous Bishop of Rhemes, who lived in the time of Ludovicus
his sons, in his Letter to Pope Hadrian 2. says, that Gregory came into France
with Lotharius against the Emperors will, and there was no peace in France
after, as had been before; and that he returned with infamy to Rome. It would
be too large a task to reckon up particularly all the quarrels, which the Popes
after this did either begin with or foment among Christian Princes, I shall
only at present single out some of the most remarkable of them, not managed by
Beasts and Monsters as their own Writers call some of their Popes, but persons
applauded for their Wisdom and Courage in maintaining the dignity of their See.

. 4. Among these, Of the quarrels of Greg. 7. with the Emperor and other
Christian Princes.
Gregory 7. deserves the first place; I meddle not with other things in this
life, which Cardinal Benno has writ, (and is very weakly suspected by
Bellarmin to have been made by some Lutheran; it being first published by a
zealous Papist) but that which I design, is to show, that under a pretense of
advancing his Authority he was the great Boutefeu of Christendom. Urspergens.
Chronic. p. 226. marg.
It is observed by some Historians that Henry 4. then Emperor sought sixty two
pitched Battails (ten more than ever Julius Caesar fought) and he may thank the
Pope for so many opportunities to show his courage. For he was no sooner well
settled in his chair, but he finds a pretense of quarrelling with the
Emperor, and he had such a spirit of contradiction in him, Otto Frising. l. 6.
c. 32.
that it was enough for any thing to displease him, to hear it was liked by the
Emperor and the Bishops, as Otto Frisingensis reports of him. While he was yet
but Archdeacon of Rome, Petrus Damiani who was a Brother Cardinal with him
describes him as a person of the greatest pride and insolency imaginable in a
letter to Pope Alexander 2. and Hildebrand his Archdeacon, Petr. Damiani
Epistol. l. 1. c^. 16.
wherein he calls him, Sanctum Satanam, a holy Devil, and says, that his
venerable pride had plowed his back with such severe stripes that he was able
to endure them no longer: and in another Letter to himself alone, he says, L.
1. Epist. ad Card. Ep. 8.
that he could not get so much as a good word from him, though he wishes he had
served God and St. Peter as heartily as he had served him: and that he followed
no other Canons but his Will: and his judgment did not follow his own thoughts
but his. This had been very fair toward another man; but none of his fellow
Bishops are matches for him, being Pope he cares for meddling with nothing
under Crowns and Scepters, and those he takes upon him to dispose as freely as
his predecessor did, when he said, All these things will I give thee, only
fall down and worship me: For this was the indispensable condition with him. I
shall give a brief account of the affairs of the Empire in his time, chiefly
from Sigonius who cannot be suspected for an Henrician Heretic, Sigonius de
regno Italico l. 9. in Hen. 3. A. D. 1074.
(as some of the German Historians are called: only for asserting the just
Authority of their Prince against the Popes Usurpations) the first thing Pope
Hildebrand began with was the business of investitures; and at a Council in the
Lateran he Decreed that in case any one received investiture from a Lay person,
both he that gave and he that received it should be both excommunicated, to
which he adjoined a Decree against the Marriage of Clergymen, which was no
sooner published by his Legates in Germany, but all the Clergy were in an
uproar, and charged the Pope with contradicting S. Paul, and that by this means
he made way for all manner of uncleanness, Lambert. Schasnabu^g. histor. German.
and that they would rather part with their places than submit to it; A. D.
1074. p. 201 Sigebert. Gembloc. Chron. A. 1074.
and when the Archbishop of Mentz was prevailed with to publish this Decree at
Erford, the Bishops were so enraged, that the Archbishop fearing his life
dismissed the Assembly: the like opposition was made at Milan against
Erlembaldus, Matt. Paris in Gul. 1. Aventin.
who was there killed with Luitprandus the only person who submitted to him:
the Pope highly incensed, Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 564.
excommunicates all the Bishops who sided with the Emperor, and forbids the
people to communicate with any Clergy men who had Wives; but not satisfied with
this, he summons the Emperor, very Magisterially, to appear before him; and in
case of neglect, that he should be excommunicated. Henry instead of appearing
calls a Council of Bishops who pronounce him an unlawful Pope, to which they
all subscribed; which message was sent to the Pope before his Council could
meet, but Hildebrand encouraged himself by the examples of his Predecessors,
Gregory 2. and 3. (who took away the remainder of the Empire from Leo) and
published a Bull wherein he deprived the Emperor of his Authority, and
absolved all his Subjects from their Allegiance, and forbad any to own him for
their Prince; upon which a Rebellion in the Empire followed, only they allowed
him time to make his peace with the Pope, within the year, before they would
choose a new Emperor. The poor Emperor finding so general a revolt is fain to
go into Italy without money or retinue, till the Bishops of Milan and Ravenna
and Lombardy, who held faithful to him furnished him with both. The Pope
hearing that, stops his journey into Germany and returns to Canusium, a strong
place belonging to his dear Mathildis, who out of great kindness never parted
from him; thither came the German Bishops first, and beg their pardon barefoot;
the Pope puts them severally into Cells and there feeds them with bread and
water; but at last upon promise never to discourse with the Emperor before he
had given him satisfaction, (unless it were to persuade him to it) they are
dismissed. The Emperor now draws near to Canusium, and gets Mathildis and two
more of greatest interest with the Pope to intercede for him; but all they
could prevail with him for, was, that this servant of servants, this follower
of St. Peter, even the humble minded Pope Hildebrand, admits him within the
second wall of the Town, where casting off his Royal habit, he was, barefooted
in the midst of Winter to wait for the Popes answer, in which posture he
continued three days together, on the fourth the Pope very graciously sends
him word he might come into his presence. If Lucifer himself had sat in the
Chair, he would not have denied him so much courtesy as his Vicar showed him;
who after submission to his own terms, and at his feet begging absolution, he
absolved him. But the mean carriage of the Emperor herein, extremely
disobliged the Italians his friends, who began to slight and contemn him for
it, and to say he was unworthy the Empire, and therefore would choose his Son
in his room: Henry finding himself in this condition, returns to his old
friends, who declared the terms null which the Pope had forced upon him; the
Pope finding the Emperor resolved to defend his power; sends away two Legates
into Germany who met the Princes at the Diet in Forcheim, Constitut. Imperial.
Tom 1. p. 238.
in which by the approbation of the Legates. Henry is deposed and Rodolphus of
Suevia chosen Emperor. Baron. Annals Eccles. A. D. 1077. ^. 40.
Baronius charges Helmoldus and Albertus Stadensis with falsehood in saying that
Greg. 7. transferred the Crown to Rodolphus and sent it with the known verse
upon it; but whatever becomes of the verse, it seems strange from Baronius his
own story that any one should question the thing. For was not his
excommunicating Henry the cause of the first defection from him? Did not he
absolve the people from their allegiance? and after his absolution, when he
found Henry resolved to maintain his power, did not he send his Legates on
purpose into Germany with instructions to the Princes to take care of the
Empire? Were not his Legates present at all the proceedings and approved them?
How could then the Pope have no hand in it? unless it were that he did not put
the Crown upon his head himself. But says Baronius, Gregory (...) an Epistle
of his calls Peter and Paul to witness that he did not know of their choosing
Rodolphus: but he does not deny that they proceeded to a new choice because
Henry did not keep his terms with him; he had intimations enough given him who
was likest to be the man, and therefore he need not care any more, than to have
a new election; and in the instructions given to his Legates, wherein he
pretended to Umpire the business between them (after Rodolphus had sent his Son
as hostage for his fidelity to the Pope) he gave them express commands that
which soever of them should not obey his will, that they should resist him to
the death, and excommunicate all that adhered to him, because forsooth, it was
the sin of Idolatry to contemn the Apostolic See: and concludes his Letter
with that abominable hypocrisy, that herein he did not seek his own things,
but the things of Jesus Christ. A way of abusing Scripture he had taught his
friend Mathildis, when she used St. Paul's words in a Letter to the Pope to
express her love to him, Baron. ad A. 1074. n. 10.
that neither tribulation, nor distress nor persecution, nor famine, nor
nakednes^, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor principalities, etc. should be
able to separate her from the love of St. Peter in Christ Jesus our Lord; whom
she meant by St. Peter is very easy to understand, according to the constant
dialect of this Pope, whose Bulls and Anathema's against Princes ran in St.
Peter's name. But we leave Baronius admiring the Providence of God, that when
Princes and Bishops forsook the Church of Rome, he raised up Agnes the
Emperors Mother, against her own Son, and Beatrix and Matilda, of near kindred
to the Emperor, to support the Pope against him; and not long after we find
him acknowledging that Rodolphus was confirmed by the P^pe, Ad A. D. 1080. n.
8. 14.
and Henry again excommunicated by him; in the form of which excommunication
extant in Baronius, he desires all the World to take notice that it is in the
Popes power to take away Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dutchies,
Marquisates, Earldomes, and the possessions of all men from them, and give them
to whom he shall think fit. But does Baronius in the least go about to explain
or mitigate this? N. 1^.
no, but instead of it, he complains of the prosperity of the wicked, because
Henry obtained after this a signal victory over Rodolphus in his fourth Battle,
wherein he was wounded in his right hand, Helmoldi Chron. Slavorum l. 1. cap.
29. Abbas Ursperae. ad A. D. 1080.
and (say the German Historians) acknowledged therein the just judgment of God
being near his death, that being the hand wherewith he had sworn fidelity to
the Emperor; and then told his friends (whatever the Pope did swear by St.
Peter and St. Paul) that the Popes command made him break his Oath, and take
that honor upon him which did not belong to him; and he wished they who had
put him upon it would consider how they led men to their eternal damnation by
such courses; which having said with great grief of mind, says Helmoldus he
dyed. And the Pope himself did not escape much better, for the Emperor marches
into Italy with a great Army, takes in all the Towns which opposed him, deposes
Hildebrand by the Bishops of his party, as the cause of all the War and
Bloodshed, and sets up Gibert of Ravenna under the name of Clement 3. besieges
Rome, Sigebert. Chron. ad A. D. 1085.
and the Pope not trusting the Citizens who soon left him, secures himself in a
Castle, Florent. Wigorn. ad A. 1084.
from whence escaping to Salerno he not long after there dies. The only good
thing we read of him is that which Sigebert and Florentius Wigorniensis, Matt.
Paris Histor. Anglic. A. 1087.
and Matthew Paris report of him, from the testimony of the Bishop of Mentz,
that he called, when he was dying, one of his Friends to him, Aventin. Annal.
Boior. l. 5. p. 581.
and confessed that it was through the instigation of the Devil that he had
made so great a disturbance in the Christian world. Whether they who applaud
and admire him in the Roman Church, as particularly Baronius, Sentent. Cardin.
Baronii super excomun. Venet.
(who recommended him as a pattern to Paul 5. and rejoiced, to see a man of his
spirit to succeed him) will believe this or no, we matter not, since there is
so apparent evidence for the truth of the thing. But we not only see, the whole
Empire put into a flame under pretense of this authority of the Pope, and Italy
laid wast by it to so great a degree says Sigonius, Sigon. de regno Ital. l.
9. ad A. 1084.
that Mothers devoured their Children for mere hunger; but we may find him as
busy though not with equal success with other Princes of Christendom. He
threatens the King of France to deprive him (if he did not submit to him) and
that his Subjects should certainly revolt from him, Baron. Annal. ad A. D.
1073. n. 65.
unless they would renounce their Christianity; which are the words of his Bull
in Baronius: but finding no amendment the next year he sends another, wherein
he tells him, that if according to his hard and impenitent heart, Id. ad A.
1074 n. 53.
he did treasure up the wrath of God and St. Peter, by the help of God he would
excommunicate him and all that should obey him: the same year he excommunicates
in Italy Robert Duke of Apulia, Prince of the Normans, Id. ib. n. 32.
and Gilulphus Prince of Saierno, and sends an army against them. He threatens
Alphmsus King of Spain with the Sword of St. Peter; Id. ad. A. 1080. n. 48. Id.
A. 1078. n. 15.
he excommunicates Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople; he not only deprived
Boleslaus King of Poland of his Kingdom, but puts the whole Kingdom under an
interdict, Mart. Cromer. de gestis Polon. l. 4. ad sin.
and forbids the Bishops anointing any for King but whom he should appoint. Of
all the Princes of Christendom I find none so much in his favor as our
William the first of the Norman Race, for he coming into a Kingdom, where he
found no interest but what his Sword made him, keeps a fair correspondency with
the Pope, Baron. ad A. D. 1074. n. 5.
receives his Decrees, refuses to enter into an alliance against him, which so
pleased him whom all other Princes hated, that he sends to him in his distress
to come to his assistance to divert the Emperor, Id. ad A. D. 1080. n. 45.
and calls him the Jewel of Princes, and says that he ought to be the rule of
obedience to all other Princes; but yet William himself could not escape his
threatenings, when he forbad the Bishops of his Kingdom to go to Rome, and
utterly denied taking any oath of fidelity to the Pope which he pressed upon
him by his Legate; Id. A. 1079. n. 20.
although Baronius make him to submit to the Pope upon the receipt of his
letter, whereas the letters of Lanfranc and the King produced by himself,
expressly contradict it. This we are sure of, that William all his time
practiced that right of investiture of Bishop by a staff and a ring, Eadvier.
prefat. ad hist. Novorum.
which had been the first cause of the quarrel between the Emperor and the
Pope; and which he had (...) severely forbidden in several Councils a Rome,
thereby to maintain his own authority by taking off the Bishops of several
Kingdoms from any aknowledgement of dependence on their own Sovereign Princes;
which was the truest cause of all the quarrels of Christendom raised and
somented by this Hell-brand as the Centuriatours according to their Dialect
call him.

And although Onuphrius in his life confess that this Popes designs if they had
taken effect would have quite overthrown the Majesty of the Empire, Of the
quarrels of his Successors. Onuphrius in vit. Greg 7.
and that he was the first Pope who ever attempted such things, yet he having
now started so fair a game, though he dyed in the pursuit of it, his
successors retrieved it and followed it with all their might and skill; thence
we read that Urban being made Pope by Hildebrands faction in opposition to the
Emperor, Sicebrct. G^mblac ad A. D. 1088. Helmold. Chron. Slav. l. 1. c* 30.
Urspergens. Cirron. p. 235.
renews the sentence of excommunication against him, and in the Council at
Piacenza not content barely to excommunicate him (in the presence of Agnes or
Adelais the Emperors wife) he uttered says Vrspergensis, very reproachful
speeches against him: but he had been no fit successor for Hildebrand who
could content himself with bare words, Baron. Annals ad A. D. 1088. n. 3.
especially having declared his resolution to follow the steps of so worthy a
predecessor, and so he did to purpose when he set up Conradus the Emperors
Son in Rebellion against his Father. Aventin. Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 590.
This Baronius would fain shift off as not arising from the Popes instigation
but some private discontents, Baron. A. D. 1093. n. 3.
for which he quotes Dodechindus; but Sigonius who follows the same Author,
says expressly, Sigon. de regno Ital. l. 9. A. 1093.
that he took upon him the Kingdom of Lombardy against his Father by the
Authority of Urban himself: Bar. ad A. D. 1095. n. 8.
and Bertholdus, whose testimony is afterward produced by Baronius, mentions
not only their meeting at Cremona, but that Conradus there took an oath of
fidelity to the Pope, and the Pope in requital solemnly promised him to give
him all the advice and assistance he could for the obtaining the Kingdom and
Empire of his Father. What is somenting and encouraging Rebellion in the
highest degree if this be not? And the sentence of deposition of Conrade in the
Diet at Aken, A. D. 1096. expressly mentions, as the cause of it, his adhering
to Pope Urban against the Emperor his Father, and there his Son Henry declared
his successor, and solemnly swears never to Rebel against his Father.
Constitut. Imper. Tom. 1. p. 247.
But notwithstanding this Oath, Conrad being dead, this Son is likewise
prevailed upon by the Popes instruments to Rebel against his Father: for
Pascal 2. succeeding Urban, had again excommunicated Henry 4. and at a Council
called by him in Rome he made all the Bishops present by particular
subscription to Anathematize the Emperors heresy (as they were pleased to
call it) and to promise obedience to Paschal and his Successors, Abbas
Ursperg. Chron. p. 241.
and to affirm what the Church affirmed, and condemn what she condemns. Having
by this means secured the Bishops from adhering to the Emperors party, there
wanted not Agents to solicit his Son to take away his Crown from him. And the
first thing he did upon his rebellion was to Anathematize his Fathers heresy
(which was keeping the Empire in spite of the Popes) and to promise obedience
to the Pope as the Bishops had done at Rome: and in the Diet at Northausen,
Ursperg. ib. Baron. ad A. D. 1105. n. 4.
A. D. 1105. he calls God to witness that it was no desire of the Empire which
made him take his Fathers Government from him; but if he would obey the Pope he
would presently yield himself to him and become his Slave. And when the Son had
in a perfidious manner seized on the Person of his Father, and he addressed
himself to the Popes Legate for his safety, Avent. Annal^s Boior. l. 5. p. 597.
he plainly told him, he must look for none unless he would publicly declare
the justice of Hildebrand and his own unjust persecutions of the Roman See.
But, which is the most evident testimony of all others in this case, Constitut.
Imp^r. Tom. 3. p. 318.
Henry 4. a little before his death A. D. 1106. at Liege (whither he was forced
to retire by his Sons rebellion) sends an account of the whole quarrel to
Philip of France; Baron ad A. 1106. n. 2. etc.
wherein he declares, that he had offered all reasonable satisfaction to the
Pope, only preserving the authority of the Empire; but this not being accepted,
in a most unnatural manner, they had armed his most beloved Son, his Absalom
against him, who by their instigation and council had most perfidiously dealt
with him: but we need not so much proof of this since Baronius confesses; that
the Son had no greater cause of rebelling against his Father than that he was
excommunicated by the Pope; Id ad A. D. 1105. n. 6.
and afterward very freely delivers his mind, that in case the Son did it
sincerely, Id ad A. D. 1106 n. 14.
as he pretended, i. e. out of obedience to the Sea of Rome, it was, says he,
an act of great piety in him to be thus cruel to his Father: and that his only
offense was, that he did not bind him faster till he was brought to himself, i.
e. to the Popes beck. O the admirable doctrine of obedience at Rome! What an
excellent commentary is this upon the fifth Commandment, and the thirteent to
the Romans! What mighty care has the Church of Rome always taken to preserve
peace and unity in the Christian Church! Aventin. Annal Boior. l. 5. p. 562.
The Historians who report the passages of this time, tell us, there was never
known so dismal an age as that was, Siceberti Chronic. ad A. D. 1074.
for Wars and Bloodshed, for Murders and Parricides, for Rapines and
Sacrilege, for Seditions and Conspiracies, for horrible Schisms and Scandals
to Religion, the Priests opposing the Bishops, the People the Priests, and in
some places not only robbing the Churches, burning the Tithes, but trampling
under foot the holy Eucharist that was consecrated by such whom Pope Hildebrand
had excommunicated. And must we after all this believe that the Roman See is
the fountain of Unity in the Catholic Church, that all Wars and Rebellions
arise from casting off such subjection to the Popes, who have been the great
fomenters of Rebellion ever since Hildebrands time and the disturbers of the
peace of Christendom? For we are not to imagine that this quarrel ended with
Henry 4. for it was revived again in Henry the fifth's time between Pope
Paschal and him, and the Pope grants him the privileges which his Father
contended for; but afterward revoked his own grant (perjury being no sin at
Rome in so holy a cause) and raised a Rebellion in the Empire against him, and
notwithstanding several agreements made between him and the successive Popes,
could enjoy no lasting peace in his time upon their account, and dyed at last
without issue, going to suppress a new Rebellion. After his death, Conradus
being to succeed as Sisters Son to Henry 5. Lotharius by the arts of the Court
of Rome, was set up in opposition to him: he was fain to part with the rights
of the Empire to satisfy the Pope, who made him receive the Imperial Crown at
his feet. In the time of Conradus who succeeded Lotharius, the Pope encouraged
Guelfo the Duke of Bavaria in a Rebellion against him (from whom the two loving
factions of Guelphs and Gibellines had their beginning) It would be endless to
relate the disturbances of the Christian world which arose from the contentions
of several Popes, about their Authority with Frederick Barbarossa, Philippus
Suevus, Otho 4. Frederick 2. Ludovicus Bavarus and other Emperors till such
time as the Majesty of the Empire was lost in Carolus 4. or if we should give
an account of all the Wars, and Rebellions, and Seditions, and Quarrels which
happened merely upon pretense of the Papal Authority in our own Nation, or in
France, or elsewhere. But these may, at present, suffice to give testimony,
what an excellent instrument of Peace to the Christian world, the Authority
challenged by the Bishop of Rome has been: and that Authority still vindicated
and asserted in the Court of Rome.

. 6. 2. But although such civil disturbances have happened by the contentions
about the Papal authority, Of the Schisms in the Roman Church.
yet they may say, the Church has had its unity still as long as they were
united in the same Head: For this they look on as the great foundation of
Unity; for say they, the unity of the body consists in the conjunction of the
members with the head, and then with one another: and although there may be
many other sorts of Unity in the Church, yet the essential Unity of the Church,
Bellarm. de rotis Eccles. l. 4 c. 10 De Eccles. mil^t. l 3 c. 5.
they tell us, lies in conjunction of the members under one Head. But what
becomes then of the Unity of the Roman Church, in the great number of Schisms,
and some of long continuance among them? Were they all members united under one
Head, when there were sometimes two, sometimes three several Heads? Bella^mine
in his Chronology, confesses twenty six several Schisms in the Church of
Rome, but Onuphrius a more diligent search^r into these things reckors up
thirty, whereof some lasted ten years, some twenty, one fifty years. And it
seems very strange to any one, that hears so many boasts of Unity in the Church
of Rome above others, to find more Schisms in that Church than in any
Patriarchal Church in the World. We should think, if the Bishop of Rome had
been designed Head of the Church and the fountain of Unity, that it was as
necessary that Church should be freed from intestine divisions on that account,
as to be secured from errors in faith if it had the promise of Infallibility;
for errors are not more contrary to infallibility, than divisions are to
Unity: and the same Spirit can as easily prevent Schisms as Heresies. But as
the errors of that Church are the clearest evidence against the pretense of
infal^ibility, so are the Schisms of it against its being the fountain of
Unity; for how can that give it to the whole Church which so notoriously wanted
it in it self? I shall not need to insist on the more ancient Schisms between
Cornelius and Novatianus and their parties; between Liberius and Felix, between
Damasus and Vrsicinus, between Bonifacius and Eulalius, between Symachus and
Laurentius, between Bonifacius and Dioscorus, between Sylverius and Vigi^ius,
and many others. I shall only mention those which were of the longest
continuance in that Church, and do most apparently discover the divisions of
it. I begin with that which first brake forth in the time of Formosus who was
set up A. D. 821. against Sergius, whom the faction of the Marquess of Tuscany
would have made Pope; but the popular faction then prevailing, Sergius was
forced to withdraw, and Formosus with continual opposition from the other party
enjoyed the Papacy four years and six months, not without the blood of many of
the chief Citizens of Rome slain by Arnulphus in the quarrel of Formosus. After
his death Boniface 6. intruded, says Baronius, into the Papal See, but was,
after fifteen days dispossessed by Stephanus 7. who in a Council called for
that purpose, nulled all the acts of Formosus, deprived all those of their
orders who had been ordained by him, and made them be Re-ordained; and not
content with this, he caused his body to be taken out of the Grave, and placed
it in the Popes Chair with the Pontifical habits on; where after he had
sufficiently reviled him, that could not revile again, he caused the three
Fingers to be cut off, with which he used to give Benediction and Orders, and
the body to be thrown into Tiber. This last part Onuphrius would have to be a
fable, Onuphr. Annot in Plat. vit Formosi. Victorel add. ad cia^co^. de vit.
Pontif.
and Andreas Victorellus from him; but Baronius says, they are mistaken who
say so; for not only Luitprandus, who lived in that Age, expressly affirms it,
(although, he attributes it to Sergius upon whose account, Baron. Annal. ad A.
D. 897 n. 2, 3.
the Schism begun:) but the acts of the Roman Council under John 9. extant in
Baronius make it evident: and Papirius Massonus cites other ancient Historians
for it. Papir. Masson. de Episcop u. b. l. 3. p. 151.
Upon this nulling the Ordinations of Formosus, a great dispute was raised in
the Church, for many of the Bishops would not submit to reordination, and
particularly Leo Bishop of Nola, to whom Auxilius writ his Book in defense of
the Ordinations of Formosus, a short account whereof is published by Baronius
from Papy^ius Masso; but the whole Book is now set forth from ancient
Manuscript by Morinus; Morinus de Sacris Eccles. ordinat. par 2 p. 348.
by which we understand the controversy of that time, much better, than we
could before. Two things were chiefly objected against Formosus his
Ordinations. 1. That against the Canons of the Church he was translated from
one See to another; being Bishop of Porto before he was made Bishop of Rome. 2.
That having been degraded by John 8. (although restored by his successor
Marinus, and absolved from his Oath) he was not capable of conferring Orders.
Against the first of these Auxilius shows that translation from one See to
another cannot null Ordination, from the testimony of Pope Anterus, the example
of Greg. Nazianzen, Perigenes, Dositheus, Reverentius, Palladius, Alexander,
Meletius, and many others. That the Nicene Canon against translations, was
interpreted by the Council of Chalcedon so as not to extend to all cases, and
it was so understood by Pope Leo and Gelasius; and however that only nulls the
translation and not the ordination. Against the second he pleads, that
supposing it not to be lawful to remove from one Episcopal See to another, yet
the Ordination may be valid; for Formosus was not Consecrated again himself but
only reconciled by Marinus, that the Popes Gregory and Leo had declared against
Reordination as much as against Re-baptizing, that the Canons of the Apostles
had forbidden it, that the Ordinations by Acacius were allowed by Anastasius,
that the Bonosiaci though Heretics had their Orders allowed them, that the
Cathari were admitted to the Churches Communion by the Council of Nice only
with imposition of hands, that though Liberius fell to the Arian Heresy, yet
his Ordinations afterward were not nulled; neither those of Vigilius although
he stood excommunicated by Silverius, and added Homicide to it: that the
nulling these Ordinations was to say in effect, that for twenty years together
they had been without the Christian Religion in Italy: that none but Heretics
could assert these things; that if any Popes themselves speak or act against
the Catholic faith or Religion, they are not to be followed in so doing. This
is the substance of the first Book of Auxilius, which things are more largely
insisted upon in the second. But by that Book it appears most evidently that
the Barbarous usage of the body of Formosus was most true, it being expressly
mentioned therein and justified by him in the Dialogue that pleads for
Reordination. And now says Baronius, Baron. Annal. ad A D. 897. n. 8, 9.
began those most unhoppy times of the Roman Church which exceeded the
persecutions of Heathens or Heretics: but he out of his constant good will to
civil Authority lays the fault altogether upon the power of the Marquesses of
Tuscany, who had then too great power in Rome; but he strangely admires the
providence of God in keeping the Heads of the Church from Heresy all that
time. Alas for them! they did not trouble themselves about any matters of faith
at all, but were wholly given over to all manner of wickedness as himself
confesses of them; when Theodora that Mother of the Church of Rome ruled in
chief, and her daughter Marocia's Son by Pope Sergius came to be Pope himself;
Platina in vit. Steph. 6.
when as Platina says it grew to be the custom of Popes to null all that
their predecessors had done. Were not these goodly heads of the Church the
mean time? and did not they keep the Church in great Unity under their
agreeable conduct? Methinks the providence of God, is as much concerned to
preserve holiness and peace as faith in the world; and were not these excellent
instruments for doing it! Baronius grants the acts of Stephanus to be such as
the most barbarous Nations could not endure to hear of, and are too bad to be
believed: and all the following Age he calls Iron for its rust and barrenness,
Ad. A. D. 900. n. 1.
and leaden for its badness and dullness; and confesses that Monsters of
impurity then reigned in the Apostolical See, that infinite evils sprung from
thence, and horrible Tragoedies, and mischiefs not to be spoken of. And yet a
very Catholic faith, and the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace must be
supposed to be there infallibly all this while; but if all their faith and
unity be of such a kind as was in the 10 Century in the Roman Church, I should
think Baronius might have said more in admiration of the providence of God in
preserving the Catholic faith and Unity among the Devils in Hell! for the
Scripture tells us they believe and tremble, and our Savior says, that the
Devils Kingdom cannot stand if it be divided against it self; and these are
clearer and stronger testimonies than can be brought of the faith and Unity of
the Roman Church, when such horrid wickedness is acknowledged to have had
Dominion in it, and that Church was therein unlike the Devils Kingdom that it
was divided against it self: In the very beginning of this Century Pope Stephen
is cast into Prison, and there strangled, N. 6.
as Baronius proves from his Epitaph; and now the Roman faction prevailing,
they make one Romanus Pope, the first and only thing he did, was to condemn all
that Stephen had done, as Platina, Onuphrius, and Ciacconius all agree; but he
continued not much above four months; after him Theodorus who held out about
twenty days and followed the steps of Romanus; to him succeeded John 10. (as
Platina calls him) of the same faction, who set all Formosus his Acts to rights
again, condemning all that Stephen had done in a Council at Ravenna; whither he
was driven by the prevalency of the faction at Rome against him; where in the
presence of seventy four Bishops, the Acts of the Council under Stephen were
burnt, in which the Ordinations of Formosus were nulled; and Sergius,
Benedictus, and Marinus were Anathematized for being instruments in the Acts
against Formosus. The next Pope Benedict escapes without any thing, but a dull
Epitaph; but Leo his successor had not been above forty days in the place, but
he is cast into Prison, by one of his servants, who is made Pope in his place,
and seven months after he is served the same way by Sergius who now at last
recovered the Popedom, and the greatest thing he did was to condemn Formosus
again, and all who had appeared for him: so that now as Sigebert says, nothing
was talked of so much as ordinations and exordinations, and superordinations;
by the contrary Acts of these Popes to one another. Baronius confesses this
Sergius to have been a man of a most infamous and dissolute life: Baron. A.
908. n. 3.
after his death Theodora was not at rest till she had gotten her Gallant to be
Pope under the name of John 11. and what manner of Cardinals, A. D. 912. n. 14.
says Baronius, may we imagine such a Pope would make? But Marozia her
daughter was not so well pleased with him, for by her order, his Brother was
killed in his presence, and he put into prison and there smothered. A. D. 928.
n. 2.
After him, says Luitprandus, her own Son by Pope Sergius is made Pope;
Luitprand. hist. l. 3. cap. 12.
who was cast into Prison by his Brother Albericus; who being not pleased with
Stephen who followed him, Baron. ad A. 933. n. 1.
he was set upon and so wounded and deformed thereby, that he durst not let his
face be seen; and the seditions, says Platina, continued so high in his time,
that he could do no great thing. At last, Alberic's Son called Octavianus got
possession of the Sea under the name of John 13. (or 12. as others besides
Platina call him) who was such a Monster for all wickedness, that Otho the
Emperor was called into Italy to displace him, who called a Council, wherein
he was accused for ordaining a Deacon in a Stable, Baron. A. D. 963. n. 15.
and making a Bishop of ten years of age; but these were small faults to his
Adulteries, Sacrilege, Cruelties, drinking healths to the Devil; and at Dice
calling upon the Devils for help. When these accusations were sent to him from
the Council, he only threatened to excommunicate them all, if they chose another
Pope against him: but they not regarding his threatening depose him, and choose
Leo 8. N. 27, 28, etc.
in his place. Here Baronius storms unreasonably, that a Council should take
upon it to depose a Pope, though so abominably bad, as he confesses this man
to have been; N. 33.
and makes them guilty of an intolerable Error and Heresy in so doing,
because it implies their believing that the power of the Keys did depend on the
worth of the person: and therefore he detests Leo as a Schismatical Pope. And
to make sure of a Schism after the infamous death of John 13. being killed in
the act of Adultery, the opposite faction in Rome chose Benedict 5. to succeed
him, who was carried away prisoner by Otho into Germany; but before his death
John 13. called a Council, wherein he nulled all the Acts of the other Council,
A. 964. n: 7.
and pronounced them Schismatics, and decreed that all that were ordained by
them must be re-ordained. Is not here now a most admirable Unity in the Roman
Church? After Leo another John is chosen by the Emperors party, but, as
Platina says it being now grown customary to depose Popes, they drive him away
by seditions against him, being first imprisoned by Rotfredus and then expelled
the City. But they suffered sufficiently for it, by the severity of Otho
against them. -- The next Pope, Benedict 6. was cast into Prison by the other
faction, and there strangled or famished. John 14. came to his end after the
same manner, dying in Prison, by the faction of Ferrucius the Father of
Boniface 7. who was driven away from Rome after his being made Pope; after whom
Benedict 7. was set up, and John succeeding him, Boniface's faction recovering
again, he was for a few months restored to the Popedom. Against Greg. 5. the
faction of Crescentius set up one Ioh. 17. who by the power of the Emperor was
deprived of his eyes and the Popedom together, and a little after of his life.

But these factions in Rome did not end with this Century, for in the next, A.
D. 1044 we find a new Schism breaking out on the account of them. We are
contented to take the story as Baronius relates it in that year. Benedict 9.
was made Pope by the faction of the Counts of Tusculum (Frascati) out of
opposition to which and dislike of Benedict, the people of Rome deposed him and
set up Sylvester 3. who got the Popedom by Simony, and enjoyed it but three
months, when (the Tusculan faction again prevailing) Sylvester was deposed and
Benedict restored, but finding himself hateful to the people he resigns to John
(called Greg. 6.) or as Platina says, some affirm; sold it to him. Otto
Frisingensis, says, these three sat together in the City of Rome, and all of
them led very bad lives, as he heard himself at Rome. But Baronius will not
have Greg. 6. to be the same with John one of the Schismatical Popes, but
Gratian who by fair offers (not to be called Symony) persuading the other three
to part with their places got the possession of the Popedom alone. Alphons.
Ciacconus follows Onuphrius in saying that his name was Ioh. Gratianus, but not
one of the three Anti-Popes sitting together; wherein neither Baronius nor he
can sufficiently clear themselves. If he were distinct there must be five Popes
at the same time; for this Greg. 6. was deprived with the rest by a Council
called by the Emperor, Henry 3. at Sutrium. For Baronius is very much mistaken
in saying that the other three Popes were all deprived two years before, for
his own Author Hermannus asserts that the cause of the false Popes was there
diligently discussed, and Greg. 6. deprived for Simony as Ciacconus expressly
says after other Authors, (however Baronius strives to vindicate him out of
kindness to his name sake and Disciple Greg. 7.) and Clement 2. is there made
Pope, who enjoyed it but a little time, being poisoned says Platina by Damasus
2. who succeeded him; but after the death of both these Benedict 9. got into
possession of the Papacy again, and the fifth time after the death of Leo 9. in
whose time a great controversy arose again about Reordination, viz. of such
who had been ordained by Simoniacal persons, and although Leo had determined in
Council, that upon forty days penance, they might perform the duties of their
function, yet it appears by an Epistle of Petrus Damiani, extant in Baronius,
Baron. An* ad A. D. 1052. n. 6.
that this Controversy remained still, and they thought all actions done by
such persons, no other than if they had been done by Laymen; but we find
nothing done in it to suppress this heresy as he calls it, although he
earnestly desires the Pope to condemn it. We are now fallen into the times of
Hildebrand, who caused Benedict 10. to be deprived of the Papacy, before he
came to it himself; for he called together the discontented Cardinals at Siena,
where they discarded Benedict and chose Nicolaus 2. The Schism that happened
in his own time, I have already spoken to, which I shall therefore pass by, as
likewise the others that followed upon the opposition between the Popes and
Emperors, although it is not to be imagined that there could be greater
divisions among men than were upon the account of those two factions,
especially after they came to be distinguished by the names of Guelphs and
Gibellines, it being ordinary for them to murder each other wherever they met,
for a mighty demonstration of the peace and unity of the Roman Church.

I shall only now enquire, whether all these Schisms and Factions happened
among them only on the account of the differences between the Popes and
Emperors; and we shall find, that the agreement among themselves was only from
that external opposition, and when that ceased, new factions and Schisms brake
forth among them. Of which Italy was so full, that the elections of Popes
became the work of years, by reason of the heats which were among them; but I
meddle not with these factions in elections, although they are no great
indications of the presence of the Holy Ghost among them. But I shall only
touch at the greatest Schism for continuance ever they had among them, (as
their Historians reckon it) which lasted with great animosities for fifty years
together, in which all the Princes of Christendom were concerned, and one
party condemning the other with the greatest bitterness, and condemning all the
acts done by the other; and pronouncing them null and void. This was begun upon
the election of Urban 6. at which the Cardinals, declaring a force by the
Soldiers and people of Rome, when they were withdrawn from thence to a place
of safety; chose another Pope, viz. Clem. 7. who sat in France, as Urban and
his Successors did in Rome, he made twenty seven Cardinals, and Petrus de Luna
or Benedict 13. succeeded him; and notwithstanding all the endeavors could be
used to suppress this Schism it still continued, and the means for that end did
rather increase it, as the Council of Pisa, which instead of two Popes made
three, setting up Alexander 5. besides Greg. 12. and Benedict. 13. and after
him John 23. was chosen at Bononia: and although afterward the Council of
Constance deprived John 23. and Benedict 13. and chose Martin 5. yet Benedict
never yielded; and after his death, the Cardinals that were with him chose
Clem. 8. against Martin 5. who were so far from yielding him to be true Pope,
that they rather chose to rot in Prison, as they did; and so says Ciacconius
This Schism was ended after fifty two years, A^hors. Ciaccoa. vit. Pontif in
Clem. 7.
which had given so great disturbance to the whole Christian World. One might
have imagined now, when Councils were called for that purpose, that an end
should thereby be put to these Schisms among them, but it was so far otherwise,
that we find another Schism begun in that Church not long after by the
Authority of the Council of Basil which chose Felix 5. in opposition to
Eugenius 4. where there was not only Pope against Pope, but Council against
Council too, Eugenius sitting at that time with the Council of Florence. In the
time of Julius 2. we find Council against Council again, that at Pisa, and the
Lateran at R^me, both called General Councils, and condemning each other. By
which we see how far the Church of Rome is from being free from dangerous
Schisms in it self; and therefore has no cause to object them to others. The
only thing pleaded in answer to this charge of their numerous Schisms, is, that
these were most of them Controversies concerning elections of Popes, (which is
all the salvo Molanus has for it at the end of Onuphrius his Chronology) but
what is that to the purpose? since the Question was, which of them was the Head
of the Church with whom the members were to be united? and all those who were
not united with him whom they account the true Head, must be as much in Schism,
as they who renounce all subjection to the Pope. For are not those as much in
Rebellion who set up an Usurper against their lawful Prince; as they who deny
him to be their Prince, and to have any authority over them, because they look
on themselves as a free State? There can be but one lawful Head of the Church
by their own principles, and only they are truly united to the Church, who are
in conjunction with the lawful Head, and therefore it follows, upon their own
principles, that they must be in a State of Schism, who are united with any
other than the true Head. What then signify the boasts of Unity in the Roman
Church, if they cannot prevent the falling of their members into such dangerous
Schisms? To what purpose is it to tell us of one Head of the Church to whom all
must submit, if there have been several pretenders to that Headship, and the
Church has been a long time divided, which of them was the true? Unless all
their Unity comes to this at last, that they have an excellent Unity among them
if they could all agree: And such an Unity may be had any where. But if all
were agreed, what need any means of agreement by one universal Head? or what
can that universal Head signify to making Unity, when his title to his
Headship becomes a cause of greater divisions? May not we say upon better
grounds, that taking away the Popes authority would tend much more to the peace
of the Church, since that has been the cause of so great disturbances in the
world and is to this day of one of the greatest differences between the several
parts of the Catholic Church? For as things now stand in the Christian World,
the Bishop of Rome is so far from being the Fountain of Unity, that he is much
rather the Head of Contention and the great cause of the divisions of the
Christian Church.

. 7. 3. The differences have been as great in the Roman Church as out of it, Of
the differences in the Roman Church about matters of Government.
both as to matters of order and doctrine.

(1. For matters of Order and Government; Have not the controversies between
the Regulars and Seculars among them even here in England been managed with as
much heat and warmth, as to matter of Episcopal jurisdiction, as between those
of the Church of England and the dissenters from it? Neither is this any lately
started controversy among them, but has continued ever since the prevalency
of the Mendicant Friars and their pretenses of exemptions from Episcopal
jurisdiction, and encroaching upon the office of the Parochial Clergy. For no
sooner did the Friars begin publicly under pretense of privileges to take
upon them to Preach, without license from the Bishops, where they pleased, and
to take other offices of the Parochial Clergy out of their hands, but great
opposition was made against them, by all the learned men who were friends to
the Episcopal power, and the peace of the Church. Which being a matter of
concernment for us to understand, I shall give a faithful account of it, from
the best Writers of their own Church. As Soon as the Monastic orders were found
to be very serviceable to the Interests of the Court of Rome, it was thought
convenient to keep them in an immediate dependence upon the Pope in whatever
Country they were. From hence came the great favor of Popes to them, and
their willingness to grant them almost what privileges they desired, because
receiving them only from the plenitude of the Popes power, they were obliged to
maintain and defend that from whence they derived them. At first, when they led
a more properly Monastic life, the privileges granted them seem to be nothing
else but exempting them from some troubles which were inconsistent with it,
either relating to their persons or the estates they enjoyed. After this, they
began to complain of the numbers of people flocking to their Churches as
inconsistent with their private and retired life; from hence we first read that
public Masses by the Bishop were forbid in Monasteries, Gregor. l. 4. Epist.
43.
to prevent a concourse of people and especially of Women to them. But a long
time after this they lived in subjection to the Bishops, and meddled no more in
Ecclesiastical than in Secular matters. Carol^. M. Capitular. l. 5. n. 25.
So Charles M. in his Capitular, commands them to keep within their
Monasteries, to be subject to their Bishops, and to meddle in no Ecclesiastical
matters without the express command of the Bishop. But as the Popes increased
their authority, the Monks enlarged their privileges, and procured exemptions
from Episcopal jurisdiction; which yet was not pleasing to those who valued the
Churches peace above the privileges of the Monastic orders. These exemptions
are therefore highly condemned by St. Bernard, Bernard. Epist. 42 ad Hen. Senon.
though a Monk himself, as tending to the dissolution of the Ecclesiastical
Government, and by Ivo Carnotensis, who says, De consider. l. 3. c. 4
he grew weary of his Episcopal Government by reason of them. Petrus Blesensis,
has an Epistle written to Pope Alexander 3. in the name of Richard Archbishop
of Canterbury, Ivo Car^ot. Ep* 29. and 276. Petri Blesens. Ep. 68.
against the Abbot of Malmsbury, who refused subjection to the Bishop of
Salisbury, and being cited by the Archbishop to appear before him for his
contempt; he declared he would be subject to none but the Pope, and said, they
were pitiful Abbots who did not wholly exempt themselves from the Bishops
power; when they might for an annual pension to the Pope obtain an absolute
exemption. Therefore the Archbishop says, it was time for them to complain,
because this contagion did spread it self far, and the Abbots set themselves
against their Bishops and Metropolitans: and the Popes by indulging these
things, did command disobedience and Rebellion, and arm the Children against
their Fathers; but these and many other complaints signified nothing in the
Court of Rome as long as their profit and interest were advanced by it. And
although we read of many affronts which the Monks put upon the Bishops, before
the time of the Mendicant Friars, yet their insolency grew the highest when
they took upon them to Preach in Parochial Churches and hear Confessions
without the Bishops leave. Thence the University of Paris, published the Book,
De periculis novissimorum temporum, which although written by S. Amor, went
abroad in the name of all the Divines there, as appears by the beginning of it:
wherein a Character is given of those persons, who should make the last times
so troublesome, De periculis noviss. temporum. p. 18.
they should be lovers of themselves, not enduring reproof, covetous both of
riches and applause, high-minded, because they would not be in subjection to
the Bishops, Cap. 2.
but be set before them: and therefore disobedient to their spiritual Fathers.
And such as these are said to creep into houses, which the ordinary Gloss
expounds of those who enter into the houses of those who are under another
charge: these enter not by the door as the Rectors of Churches do, but steal
into them like Thieves and Robbers, and leading captive silly women, is their
setting them against the Bishops, and persuading them to a Monastic life.
These are likewise false teachers, who though never so learned and holy, teach
without being sent; and none are duly sent, but such as are chosen and
authorized by the Church; such as Bishops and Presbyters are, the one
succeeding the Apostles, the other the 72 Disciples, and afterward they deny
that the Pope himself can give any power to others to meddle in the charge of a
Parish or in Preaching among them, but where they are invited to it; because
Bishops themselves cannot otherwise act out of their own Dioceses; and that the
Pope in this case does injury by violating the rights of others: and if he
should go about to destroy what the Prophets and Apostles have taught, he would
err in so doing. Besides, say they, if these Praedicant Friars have a liberty
to Preach where they please, they are all universal Bishops; and because
maintenance is due to all who Preach, the people will be bound to pay
procurations to them, which will be an unreasonable burden upon them. Many
other Arguments they use against this new sort of Itinerant Preachers, and
represent the dangers that came to the Church by them at large: wherein they
describe them as a kind of hypocritical Sectaries, Cap. 3.
that abused the people under a fair show and pretense of Religion, having, as
they say, a form of Godliness, but denying the power of it: and that the
persecution of the Church by them would be equal, to what it was, by Tyrants
and open Heretics; because they are familiar enemies, and do mischief under a
show of kindness. And that one of the great dangers of the Church by them would
be, their possessing Princes and people with prejudices against the Government
of the Church by the Bishops, Cap. 4.
which, having done, they can more easily lead them into errors both against
faith and a good life. That their way of dealing is first with the women, Cap.
5.
and by them seducing the men, as the Devil first tempted Eve and by her Adam;
and when they have once seduced them, they tie them by oaths and vows, not to
hearken to the counsel of their Bishops, or those who have the care of their
souls* That the Bishops ought to suppress these, and call in the public help
to do it, and to purge their Dioceses of them: Cap. 9.
and that if they do it not, Cap. 10.
the blood of the people will be required of them, and destruction will come
upon them for it: and though Princes and people had taken their part, Cap. 11.
that ought not to discourage them: but their folly ought to be made manifest
to all men. Cap. 12.
After this, they lay down the means to be used for suppressing them, and the
signs for their discovery; saying, that they are idle persons, busy bodies,
Cap. 13.
wandering beggars, against the Apostles express command, Cap. 14.
who would have all such excluded the Church as disorderly livers: and
therefore conclude with an earnest exhortation to all who have a care of the
Church to rise up against them; as the pernicious enemies of its peace and
welfare. All these things which are only summarily comprehended in that Book,
are very largely insisted upon by Gul. de Sancto Amore in another Book
entitled, Collections of Holy Scripture, which is wholly upon this subject.
The Mendicant Friars being thus assaulted, endeavored to defend themselves as
well as they could, and made choice of the best wits among them for their
Champions, such as Bonaventure, and Aquinas then were, who undertook their
cause; and were fain to shelter themselves under the plenitude of the Popes
power; by which means they were sure to have the Pope on their side; but his
Authority was here no means of Unity, for the controversy continued long
after, and was managed with great heat on both sides.

. 8. Upon the great complaint of the privileges and exemptions which the
Monastic orders had obtained from the Popes, Of the insufficiency of the Popes
authority for ending this Controversy.
Clement 5. promised to have this business discussed in the Council of Vienna;
and to that end gave order to several learned men to write about it, among whom
particularly Durandus Mimatensis writ a large discourse (not mentioned by
Possevin) but Printed A. D. 1545. wherein he persuades the Pope to revoke all
such exemptions, because they were contrary to the ancient Canons of the
Church, whereby from the Apostles times, all places and persons whatsoever were
immediately under the jurisdiction of the Bishops; and that the Pope neither
ought, nor could change this order of the Church. Because the order of Bishops
being appointed to prevent Schisms in the Church, it could not attain its end,
if any persons were exempted from their jurisdiction. And if it were in the
Popes power to grant such exemptions, it were by no means expedient to do it;
because the order of the Church would be destroyed by it, the Bishops
contemned, and the Church divided; and if the Monastic Orders paid no
obedience to the Bishops, the people would soon learn by their example to
disobey them too. And supposing it had been expedient before, it could not be
so then, because though the Monastic orders were founded in a state of
poverty, yet now those who were in them were arrived at such a height of
intolerable pride and arrogance, that not only their Abbots and Priors, but the
Friars thought themselves equal to Bishops, and fit to be preferred before
other Ecclesiastical persons. Thus far Durandus: and Aegidius Romanus at the
same time writ a Book against the Exemptions of Friars; Against both of them
Iacobus the Abbot of the Cistercians writ a defense of Exemptions, which was
published in Vienna in the time of the Council. This matter was hotly debated
in that Council, but the Pope would not yield to the revocation of them: but
renews a Bull of Boniface 8. for qualifying and composing the differences that
had happened to the great scandal of the Church about them: Clementin. l. 3. c.
2.
wherein he takes notice of several Bulls before, which had taken no effect (so
excellent an instrument of peace is the Popes Authority) and that of a long
time a most grievous and dangerous discord had been between the Bishops and
Parochial Clergy on one part, and the Preaching Friars on the other. Therefore
the Pope very wisely considering, how full of danger, how prejudicial to the
Church, how displeasing to God so great a discord was; and resolving wholly to
remove it for the future, by his Apostolical authority does appoint and
command, that the Friars should have liberty to Preach in all Churches, Places,
and public Streets at any other hour but that wherein the Bishops did Preach,
or did command others to Preach, without a particular license to Preach then: A
greater instance of the discords which have been in the Roman Church, nor of
the insufficiency of the Popes Authority for the cure of them can hardly be
produced than this is. The Popes were forced to say and unsay, and retract
their own grants, to mitigate and qualify them and all to no purpose, for the
differences continued as great notwithstanding them. The first Pope who
interposed in this quarrel was Gregory 9. who upon complaint made by the Friars
of the Bishops exercising their jurisdiction over them in several things
mentioned as grievances by them, Gregor. decret. Epistol. l 5. n. 31. c. 16, 17.
he publishes two Bulls or decretal Epistles to forbid the Bishops doing it for
the future: upon this the Friars openly contemn the Bishops, and Preach where
they please, and hear confessions, and bury the dead in spite of them; and the
Parochial Clergy. Innocent 4. finding how necessary their help was to him in
the Controversies between him and the Emperor, Matthew. Paris. A. D. 1235. p.
419.
confirms the same privileges to them: by which they grew so insolent, that
they called the Parish Priests, as Matthew Paris relates, Idiots, Dunces,
Drunkards, Blind guids; and would make the people believe that all knowledge
and sanctity was only among them: Petrus de Vineis epistol. lib. 1. ep. 37.
insomuch that in Petrus de Vineis who lived in that Age and was Chancellor to
the Emperor, we read a miserable complaint of the Parochial Clergy against the
Friars, viz. that by these means they were brought under the greatest contempt
to the general scandal of Religion; they expressing the most bitter hatred
against them imaginable, reproaching their lives, and lessening their dues so
as they were brought to nothing by it; and they were made a laughing stock to
all people; that they took away the main of their employment from them, and
drew away the People from the Churches to the Convents, teling them the word of
God was to be heard only among them. That they had nothing now left to do but
to pull down their Churches; in which they had scarce any thing left besides a
Bell and an old resty Image, but these holy Friars, while they had nothing,
possessed all things, and professing poverty were extremely rich. But Innocent
4. a little before his death being wearied by the complaints of the Bishops and
Clergy, revoked the privileges which he had so largely granted to the Friars,
and confined them within certain limits, forbidding them to draw away the
people from their Parish Churches upon Sundays and Holy Days, or admitting
any to penance who had not first confessed to their Parish Priest: Seculum
quintum Universit. Paris. p. 271.
but the Friars were as far from being pacified by this, as the Clergy were by
the former; for therein the Pope upbraids them with violating the rights of
others, with blaspheaming Religion by such actions, displeasing God, and
drawing the souls of the faithful to perdition: but he dying as soon as they had
notice of this Bull, they said, it was a just judgment of God upon him for
revoking their privileges. And Alexander 4. was no sooner settled in his Chair
but they procured another Bull from him to call in that of Innocent 4. and
immediately to suspend all execution of it; but this did not satisfy them, for
they boasted they had killed Pope Innocent by their Prayers, and that the V.
Mary, every time they invocated her name; turned to her Son and said, Son hear
them: upon which Innocent was presently struck with a Palsy and dyed; from
whence arose a saying in the Court of Rome, from the Friars Letanies good Lord
deliver us. This is related as true by Bzovius, ad A. D. 1254. but is looked on
as a fable of the Friars, by D'attichy, D'attichy hist. Cardinal. Tom 1. vit.
nibaldi. Rainald. ad A. D. 1254. n. 73.
Raynaldus, du Boulay and others of any judgment among them. But this Bull of
Alexander, nor all the rest he made for their sakes could make the Bishops and
the Clergy give up their rights; for in the time of Martin 4. the Friars
procured another Bull for hearing Confessions without license from the Bishops,
Boulay. histor. universit. Paris. tom. 3. p. 176.
upon which the contention increased between the Bishops and the Friars;
insomuch, that not waiting the Popes revocation of his grant which he was
inclined to by the persuasions of the Bishop of Amiens, Id. p. 462.
they called a Synod of the Gallican Church at Paris, A. D. 1284. wherein the
Archbishop of Bourges being president, declared to them, that being Pastors of
the flock, they ought to lay down their lives for their sheep, and not to
suffer the encroachments were made upon them by the Friars; by whom all things
were brought to confusion in the Church: that they had used all fair ways of
prevailing with them by the entreaties of the King and Nobles, to forbear such
intrusions into their offices as they were continually guilty of; but all to no
purpose, they still defending themselves by Papal privileges; whereas there
had been contrary Bulls to another granted at Rome. And it was then agreed
among them, that they should maintain their own office against the Friars
encroachments, by which the contention increased to so great a height, that
many invectives, Meyer. Annals Flandr. l. 10. ad A. D. 1285.
Apologies, and libels were published one against another, to the great
disgrace (says Meyerus) of the whole Ecclesiastical Order. Upon which Pope
Martin endeavored an accommodation by another Bull wherein he required, that
all Parishioners should Confess to their own Parish Priest at least once a
year. But this was as far from making peace as any before; therefore from
Boniface 8. the Friars procured a new Bull of privileges, which absolutely
nulls all the former Bulls of restriction and limitation, and by the fullness of
his Apostolical power does exempt them from all manner of power or jurisdiction
of the Bishops, or any other Ecclesiastical persons, and decrees that they were
immediately subject to the Pope and to none else. And yet this Pope himself not
many years after, retracted this Bull, and set forth that, which Clement 5.
renewed in order to the composing this difference, which had now to the great
demonstration of their Unity and the Popes Authority continued with great
violence above fifty years: and was far from being ended by this Bull; for
Benedict 11. in another published on the same occasion, Extravagant. commun. l.
5. tit. 7. c. 1.
says, that instead of peace troubles arose by it, instead of unity and
concord, greater divisions and disturbances: and by cutting off one head of the
Hydra, seven more came into its room. Are not the Popes great Peacemakers the
mean while! Therefore he resolves to try what the other way would do, and again
inlarges the privileges of the Friars, which being sound as unsuccessful as
ever; Clement 5. resumes the Constitution of Boniface which this Pope
condemned, and to as little purpose as the other had done before. And now let
us soberly consider whether there has not always been an admirable Unity in
the Roman Church, or if divisions have arose, a ready means to suppress them?
Here we have the Popes interposing, by Bull after Bull, and so far from ending
the differences that occasioned them, that they begot more, which made the
Popes contradict one another, nay the same Pope to contradict himself, and so
the differences became greater than they were at first. And after all these
Bulls we find the very same Controversy at as great a height in England and
Ireland as ever it had been in France or Germany; Wadding. Annal. Minorum ad A.
D. 1357.
Wadding says, it went so high that the Bishops and Clergy here would not
suffer the Friars to enjoy any of the privileges granted them by the Popes:
which caused an appeal to the Pope made by the Friars, to whom in behalf of the
Clergy was sent Richard Fitz-Ralph the learned Bishop of Armagh, best known by
the name of Armachanus, who there with great smartness opposed the Friars to
the Popes face in a long and set discourse still extant; Rich. Armach. Defensio
Curat.
wherein he gives an account that coming to London about some business of his
See, he found great disputes about the privileges of the Friars; and being
desired to Preach, he made seven or eight Sermons wherein he declared his mind
against them, both as to their Order and Privileges; in which he followed the
doctrine of the Divines at Paris, above an hundred years before delivered by
them upon the like occasion, asserting it not to be in the Popes power to grant
such privileges which destroy the rights of the Parochial Clergy, or the
jurisdiction of the Bishops. Bulae. hist. universit. Paris tom 4. p. 337.
The Friars charge him with Heresy, as they are wont to do those who are wiser
than themselves, says Boulay: Armachanus dyed at Avignon, but so did not the
Controversy with him; although the Friars seem to have had the better there,
they being the Popes Ianisaries and ready in all places to serve his turn:
Walsingham hist. Angl. in Adv. 3. p. 173.
yet Walsingham says, it was not without corrupting the Popes Court by great
bribes given by the Friars, that they obtained the confirmation of their
privileges; yet seven years after, Harpsfield says, this Controversy was
referred to the Parliament to be determined. Very strange! that a Parliament in
England should be thought a more likely means for Unity in the Church than the
Authority of so many Popes, who had interposed in it for putting an issue to
this difference. After Armachanus, Wickliffe undertook this quarrel against the
Friars, and made use of the same arguments against them, which those who
defended the Clergy had done before. Ioh. Wickliffe against the Orders of
Friars. c. 10. p. 28.
For in his Book against the Orders of Friars, he particularly insists upon
this, That they for pride and covetise had drawn fro Curats there Office and
Sacraments, in which lain winning or worship, and so maken dissension betwixt
Curats and there Ghostly Childer. Which are his own words. But Wickliffe and
his Disciples carrying the Controversies much farther to points of doctrine and
other practices in the Roman Church, made the other parties more quiet out of
opposition to these whom they looked on as their common enemies. It may be
therefore they will say, that although the Popes Pastoral power may not always
cure their divisions, yet the opposition of Heretics makes them run together
like a flock of sheep; if this were true, it seems they are more beholding to
Heretics for their Unity, than to the Popes Authority: but we shall find that
neither one nor the other of these, nor both together, can keep them from
divisions, and those managed with as great animosity as we have ever found in
the most differing Sects.

. 9. Witness the proceedings between the Jesuits and the Secular Priests begun
in Wisbich Castle in the latter end of Q. Elizabeth's Reign; Of the differences
between the regulars and seculars in England.
when it came to a separation from each other, about the authority of the
Archpriest. And they mutually charged each other with being guilty of a
horrible Schism, Watsons Reply to Parsons his Libel. p. 2.
maintained says Watson, by the Jesuits and Arch Priest, with infinite
violence, much infamy for the time, and innumerable particular wrongs thereupon
not unknown to the meanest Catholic in England. The secular Priests finding
themselves unjustly accused, as they said, to the Pope, published a Book in
Latin which they Dedicated to his Holiness, called declaratio motuum and
turbarum, which says Parsons in his answer called, A manifestation of the
great folly and bad spirit of certain in England calling themselves secular
Priests, is made up only of invectives, and passionate words, injurious, and
manifest false slanders; they in their Reply charge Parsons with folly and
madness, and the highest degree of impudency. If any one has a mind to
furnish himself with all the terms and phrases of scolding reproach and infamy,
he may find them in the Books they then writ against each other; or if he
thinks that too great a trouble, he may meet with a goodly parcel of them put
together out of Fa. Parsons his own writings by Watson at the end of the Reply
to Parsons's Libell. The short account of the breach among them was this; all
the loud talk they made abroad concerning their cruel persecution, could not
hinder ambition, and envy from having its effects among them; from these first
arose misunderstandings, and then quarrels between the secular Priests and the
Jesuits: from thence the Priests proceed to the framing a sodality, (as they
called it) among themselves, the better to strengthen themselves against the
Jesuits; which they understanding prevail with one of the number of the
associated Priests to betray their Councils, him they send to Rome, who in the
name of all the Priests in England desired for the preventing differences for
the future, and the curing those that were already, that there might be a
Government and subordination settled among them. Fa. Parsons being then at Rome
follows the matter close, and represents to the Pope the necessity of it,
because of the great discords which were among them in England. Whereupon the
Pope according to Fa. Parsons desire, referrs the whole business to Cardinal
Cajetan their Protector. Who being governed by the Jesuits pitched upon a
person wholly at their devotion (as the seculars thought) which was Blackwell a
man swayed altogether by Garnet Provincial of the Jesuits; (well known for his
zeal in the Catholic cause by suffering as one of their Martyrs in the
Gunpowder Treason) and one of the Arch-Priests instructions was, in all matters
of moment to be advised by the Provincial of the Jesuits. The Secular Priests
finding themselves thus overreached by the cunning of the Jesuits, and that
they designed hereby wholly to govern their affairs, make many demurrs to his
Authority, both concerning the manner and the substance of it: and desire a
Breve from the Pope, and then promise to submit. Parsons procures one to their
purpose, and an appearance of peace was for a little time among them, and they
mutually promised not to charge the Schism upon each other; but within a month
or six weeks, the flame brake out with greater fury than ever; the Archpriest
sending his directions into all parts, that none of the Seculars should be
admitted to the Sacraments without acknowledging themselves Schismatics. So
that the Popes Breve was so far from ending the difference, that it increased
it; Fa. Parsons charging them, (and the Seculars not denying it) that after it
they were farther from obeying the Archpriest than they were before. So
unhappy have the Popes been, when they have gone about to use their Authority
for composing differences, among those who are in their own Church?

But we leave this and come to a later controversy among them, about the same
matters of Order and Government. Richard Smith titular Bishop of Chalcedon was
invested with the Authority of Ordinary over their English Clergy by Urban 8.
Febr. 4. A. D. 1625. not long after he comes into England, and was received
with so great kindness by their party here, as made the Jesuits (who are
friends to none but themselves) soon to become his enemies, especially when he
began to exercise his Episcopal jurisdiction here in laying restraints upon the
Regulars; which the Jesuits with other Regulars grew so impatient of, that they
soon revived the old quarrel concerning the authority and jurisdiction of
Bishops, and managed it with so great heat and fierceness, that the titular
Bishop was fain to leave the field and withdraw into France. The bottom of the
quarrel was, they found the kindness of their party to them abated since the
Bishops coming, who before had swayed all, and lived in great plenty and
bravery, when the poor Seculars got scarce bread to eat, as Watson very sadly
laments in his answer to Parsons; but now the necessary support of the dignity
of a Bishop, made the charity of their party run in another channel, which the
Provincial of the Jesuits complains of in a Letter to the Bishop of Chalcedon.
Therefore they endeavor all they can to make a party against him, among the
people too; which they did so effectually, as amounted to his withdrawing, (a
more civil word for his exile.) And now both parties being sufficiently heated,
the battle begins, in which not only England and Ireland, but France and
Flanders were deeply engaged. The first who appeared was Dr. Kellison,
Professor of Doway, in a Book in Vindication of the Bishops Authority, to whom
Knot then Vice-Provincial of the Jesuits returned his Modest and brief
discussion, etc. under the name of Nicholas Smith a Jesuit then dead. Soon
after came out another written to the same purpose under the name of Daniel of
Jesus, whose true name was John Fluide (which the other, writing Ioanes for
John, was the Anagram of,) he was a Jesuit too, and Professor at St. Omars:
which Books were first censured by the Archbishop of Paris, then by the
Sorbonne, and at last by the Bishops of France in an Assembly of them at Paris:
but the Jesuits were so far from giving over by this, that they new set forth
their Books in Latin with large approbations of them; and publish a
Remonstrance against the Bishop of Chalcedon, in the name of the Catholic
party in England, which was disowned by the greatest number of them, and cast
wholly upon the Jesuits: the same year, 1631. three Books were published by the
secular Clergy here in opposition to the Jesuits. Who were so far from quitting
the Field by the number of their enemies, that they begin a fresh charge
against both the Sorbonne Doctors and the French Clergy, under the fained name
of Hermannus Loemelius, whose chief Author was the forenamed Jesuit Lloyd
with the assistance of his Brethren, as the diversity of the style shows: and
another Book came out against the Faculty of Paris in Vindication of Knot or
Nicholas Smith, with many approbations of Bishops, Universities, and private
Doctors: and in Vindication of the Propositions of Ireland (likewise censured
at Paris) another Book came forth, under the name of Edmundus Vrsulanus, whose
true name was Mac-mahone, Prior of the Franciscan Convent in Lovain About the
same time the Jesuits published their Censure of the Apostolical Creed in
imitation of the censures at Paris against their Doctrine (as though their
Doctrines were as certain as that, and themselves as infallible as the
Apostles:) wherein they charge the Bishops their enemies with reviving old
Heresies and broaching new ones. The Jesuits having now done such great things,
triumph unreasonably in all places, as having utterly overthrown their enemies,
and beaten them out of the field: when in a little time after Hallier and le
Maistre two Doctors of the Sorbonne undertake the quarrel against them; but
none was so highly magnified and infinitely applauded by the French Clergy as a
person under the disguised name of Petrus Aurelius, whose achievements in this
kind they celebrate next to those of the Pucelle d' Orleans, and Printed all
his Works together at their own charge: and writ a high Elogium of him which is
prefixed before them. And the secular Clergy of England sent him a letter of
Congratulation for his Triumphs, subscribed by John Colleton Dean of the
Chapter, and Edmond Dutton Secretary, wherein they sadly lament the discords
that have been among them here, and the Heresies broached by their Adversaries
by occasion of them. The main of-this Controversy did concern the dignity,
necessity, and jurisdiction of the Episcopal Order, as appears by the Censures
of the Bishops of France, and by Aurelius, Petri Aurelii opera tom. 1. p. 62.
who says, that although the Dispute began upon occasion of the Bishop of
Chalcedon, and the English Clergy, yet it was now carried farther, whether the
Episcopal Order was necessary to the Being of a particular Church? Whether it
was by divine right or no? Whether confirmation might be given without Bishops?
Whether the Episcopal Order was more perfect than the Monastical? Whether the
Regulars were under the jurisdiction of Bishops? And therefore the Jesuits are
charged by their Adversaries with a design to extirpate and ruin the whole
Order of Episcopacy. Have not these men now great reason to insult over us,
that some of these questions have caused great differences among us, when the
Jesuits in England had laid the foundation of them by their quarrels of the
same kind but a little before, and furnished the enemies to Episcopacy and the
Church of England with so many arguments to their hands to manage their bad
cause with? But what becomes of the Court of Rome all this while? do the Pope
and Cardinals only stand still to see what the issue of the Battle will be,
without ever offering to compose the difference between the two parties? No.
The Jesuits finding how hard they were put to it, make their address to Rome as
their greatest Sanctuary, and A. D. 1633. obtained a Decree of the Sacred
Congregation for suppressing the Books on both sides, without judging any thing
at all of the merits of the cause, or giving any censure of the authority on
either side? And is not now the Popes authority an excellent remedy for all
divisions in the Church? When in so great a heat as this was, the Pope durst
not interpose at all in the main business, for fear of losing either side;
which is a plain argument that they themselves look on his Authority as so
precarious a thing, that they must by no means expose it, where it is like to
be called in Question. Were not here Controversies fit to be determined? To
what purpose is that authority, that dare not be exercised when there is most
need of it? and when could there be greater need than in such a time when the
Church was in a flame by these contentions? And yet so timorous a Decree as
this was, could find no acceptance. For at Paris immediately comes out a
disquisition upon it, showing the unreasonableness of it in suppressing Books
without enquiring into the merits of the cause, in a matter of so great
consequence as that was, that this would give great occasion of triumph to the
Heretics, when such scandalous and seditious Books as those of the Jesuits
are, meet with the same favor at Rome with the censure of the Bishops of
France: that their profane and Atheistical Censure of the Apostles Creed must
have no mark of disgrace put upon it: nor such sayings of theirs wherein they
call the Bishops and Divines of France by most contumelious names, and say they
are the enemies of the truth and piety. The Jesuits instead of defending
themselves against Aurelius, write a pitiful defense of this Decree of
suppressing the Books on both sides; and so all the means which the Court of
Rome durst use to extinguish this flame proved, but an occasion of adding to
it. And whether this Controversy be yet at an end among them, let all the
heats in France and England of late years concerning the Jesuits give testimony.

. 10. I shall not now insist any longer upon them, Of the Jesuits particular
opposition to Bishops and their Authority.
but only produce some late passages of things (which though they happened at a
greater distance, are yet sufficiently attested) to show what spite the
Iesuitical Order bears to the Authority of Bishops, what arts they have used to
enervate it, what power to affront their persons, and expose them to all the
contempt that may be when they go about to stop their proceedings, or exercise
any jurisdiction over them. The great occasion of the Controversy between the
Bishops and them was, that the Jesuits took upon them to Preach, and hear
Confessions, etc. without any permission from the Bishop of the Diocese. So
they did in the Philippine Islands, whereupon the Archbishop of Manille, Don
Hernando Guerrero called a Synod, wherein it was resolved that the Archbishop
ought to bring the Jesuits to account for what they did, which he did, Moral
practice of the Jesuits. p. 328.
and all the satisfaction he could get from them was, that they had
privileges; the Archbishop not satisfied with this, proceeds against them;
they name a Conservator an enemy of the Archbishops, (For the Popes to keep
the Bishops in awe, have allowed them by a Bull for that purpose, Bull. Romans
Tom. 2. p. 361. Bull. 1. Greg. 13.
liberty in case of difference between the Bishops and them to choose a
Conservator to defend their privileges against them) this Conservator proceeds
against the Archbishop, and the Jesuits procure the Governor to join with
him, who without giving leave to him to make his Defense resolve to banish him.
The Archbishop understanding their resolution to send him away, goes with the
Clergy about him into his Chapel, and there to secure himself from the
insolency of the Soldiers in his Pontifical habit, holds the Eucharist in his
hand: notwithstanding which they came and dragged out all the Friars who took
the Archbishops part, and afterward the old Archbishop himself, who fell
down in the crowd with the Pix in his hand and wounded himself in the face.
Such exorbitances made that impression on one of the Soldiers that he drew his
Sword, and falling upon it said, He had rather dye by his own hands than see
such enormities among Christians. At last the Archbishop was forced to let go
his Pix, and was presently carried away out of the City, and put into a little
pitiful Barque unprovided of all things, without permitting any food to be
given him or any of his servants to accompany him; and was conveyed by five
Soldiers into a Desert Island, where he had not so much as a Cabin for
shelter; and there he was kept till he yielded to their terms. O the admirable
unity, peace, and submission to Bishops in the Roman Church! But we have yet a
more remarkable instance of this kind, in the notorious case of the difference
between the Bishop of Angelopolis in America, and the Jesuits; which was heard
at Rome, and several Bulls published by Innocent 10. in it. I shall give an
account of it from the Popes Bulls, and from the letter which the Bishop
himself sent to the Pope about it, A. D. 1649. which is extant in the
Collection of the end of Mr. S. Amors Iournal, Collection of Tract. p. 11.
which he had from Cosimo Ricciardi Sub-librarykeeper of the Vatican, who
received it immediately from the Bishops Agent. The controversy began there
upon the very same grounds, which it had done in the Philippine Islands, for
the Jesuits would acknowledge no subjection at all to the Bishop, but would
Preach and hear Confessions without any license from the Bishop, which
difference grew so high, that the Jesuits chose Conservators against the
Bishops authority; as the Popes Bull granted, May 14. A. D. 1648. does declare;
and not only so, but these Conservators very fairly excommunicated the Bishop
and his Vicar General: upon this the Bishop sends an Agent to Rome, and the
Jesuits appear in behalf of their Society; the Pope commits the cause to a
particular Congregation of Cardinals and Bishops, who upon the hearing of both
sides give sentence in favor of the Bishop, Apr. 16. A. D. 1648. But the
Jesuits (as appears by the Bishops letter bearing date, Ian. 8. A. D. 1649.)
were resolved not to wait for the Popes resolution, but finding that the people
contemned their censures and adhered to the Bishop, were so enraged at it, that
they resolved to imprison him: to that end they bribe the King of Spains
Viceroy, the Bishops particular enemy, with a great sum of money; and by that
means clapped up most of his Friends, and threatened them with worse, if they
would not obey the Conservators; the Bishop himself they had appointed
Soldiers to seize upon on Corpus Christi day, (the better day, the better
deed) who understanding their minds, sent commissioners to treat with them to
prevent the tumults and disorders were like to follow on these differences; but
they used them with contempt and would hear of no terms, unless the Bishop
would submit himself and his jurisdiction to them and their Conservators, but
instead of peace they proceed to more open acts of hostility, by imprisoning
his Vicar General, and using all manner of insolences among the People, who
joined with the Bishop to defend him against them. The good Bishop seeing
things in so bad a posture, thought it his greatest prudence to withdraw to the
mountains, thinking himself safer among the Serpents and Scorpions there, than
in the City among the Jesuits. There he continues for twenty days, almost
famished, and afterward for four months lay hid in a pitiful Cottage, the
Jesuits in the mean time offering great sums of money to those who should
bring him alive or dead. But not finding him, they bring the excommunicated
Conservators with great pomp into the City, and erect a Tribunal or, in the
language of the late times, a High^Court of Justice among them, where according
to their pleasure they fine, banish, imprison as many as they thought their
enemies; and there solemnly declare what mighty injury the Bishop had done the
Jesuits, in forbidding them to Preach without licenses from him, or till such
time as they produced those which they had from his predecessors: then they
declare the Bishops See to be vacant; and caused it to be published in the
Churches, that the Jesuits did not need any license from the Bishop, they null
all censures against them, recall all Orders published by the Bishop for the
good Government of his Diocese. The Bishop in the mean time privately sends
monitory letters to the people, to bear the present persecution with patience,
but by no means to associate with, or to hear those excommunicated persons, who
had offered such affronts to his authority and jurisdiction; by which means,
the people not being prevailed upon, they with a great sum of money procure
some secular Judges to form a judicial process against the Bishop for
Sedition, to which end they suborn witnesses against him, but could make
evidence of nothing tending to sedition but forbidding the Jesuits to Preach.
This not taking, they attempt another way to expose him to contempt, upon the
Sacred day of their holy Father Ignatius, they put their Scholars in Mascarade,
and so personating the Bishop and his Clergy, they make a procession through
the Town in the middle of the day, and sung the Pater noster and Ave Maria as
they went, with horrible blasphemies perverting both of them to the abuse of
the Bishop and his party, instead of saying libera nos a malo, they said libera
nos a Palafox, which was the name of the Bishop: and others had the Episcopal
staff hanging at a Horses tail, and the Miter on their stirrups, to let them
see how much they had it under their feet: others sung Lampoons against the
Bishop, others did such things which are not fit to be repeated: Which were
parts of this glorious triumph of the Jesuits over the Bishop and his
Authority. But in the midst of this excessive jollity, the King of Spains Navy
arrived, wherein the Kings commands were brought for removing the Viceroy, who
was the great Friend of the Jesuits; the news of this, abated their heat, and
the Bishop secretly conveys himself into his Palace, which the people hearing
of, ran with incredible numbers to embrace him, for several days together;
upon which the Jesuits complain to the old Viceroy of a sedition, and obtained
from him a command to the Chapter not to yield to the Bishops jurisdiction;
which caused a great division among them, one part adhering to the Bishop, and
another to the Jesuits; The Bishop therefore seeing the differences to rise
higher, and the Schism to be greater, and the miserable condition the Church
was in among them; was fain to submit and promise to innovate nothing, but to
wait the Popes decision. Not long after, another Ship arrived from Spain, with
an Express from the King, wherein the Viceroy was commanded immediately to
surrender his Government, and was severely rebuked for assisting the Jesuits
against the Bishop, and all the acts in that matter were nulled by the Kings
authority; but the Jesuits according to their usual integrity, gave out just
the contrary to the Orders received, and framed letters on purpose which they
dispersed among the people. But these arts never holding long, when the
Viceroy's Successor was established, the truth brake forth; and the Bishop
returned to the exercise of his former Authority.

But notwithstanding the Kings declaration, and the Popes Breve was now
published among them, the Jesuits persisted still in their obstinate
disobedience; and although excommunicated by the Bishop, yet continued to
Preach and act as before. And hereby we have a plain discovery what a mighty
regard the Jesuits have to the Papal See, if it once oppose their designs; and
what an effectual instrument of Peace and Unity the Popes Authority is; for
they presently found ways enough to decline the force of the Popes Bull. For,
(1.) They said, it could have no force there, because it was not received by
the Council of the Indies, it seems, pasce oves, and dabo tibi claves, etc.
signify nothing in the Indies, unless the Kings Council pleases, or rather,
unless the Jesuits please to let it do so. (2.) They pleaded bravely for
themselves, that the privileges granted them by the Popes were in
consideration of their merits, and so were of the nature of contracts and
Covenants; and therefore could not be revoked by the Pope. (3.) That the Popes
constitutions in this matter were not received by the Church, and Laws which
are not received are no Laws: But as the Bishop well urges against them, if
these ways of interpreting the Popes Bulls be allowed, his Authority will
signify nothing, and all his Constitutions shall have no more force than those
against whom they are directed be pleased to yield to them; and it will be
impossible to preserve peace in the Church, if it shall be in the power of
offenders to declare whether the Laws against them are to be received for Laws
or no. But this, says he, is the inspiration and illumination of the Jesuits,
and their method of interpreting the Papal constitutions; which he heard very
often from their own mouths in the frequent conferences he had with them about
these matters; But they had another way to decline the Kings Authority, for the
King and his Council being all Laymen, they had nothing to do in
Ecclesiastical matters. By which means (as the Bishop says,) they make
themselves superior both to King and Pope, and free from all jurisdiction
either spiritual or temporal. And I dare appeal to the most indifferent person,
whether any Doctrine broached by the greatest Fanatics among us, ever tended
more to the dissolution of Government, the countenancing sedition, the
perpetuating Schisms in the Church, than these of the Jesuits do? And therefore
the Bishop says, that he had rather lay down his life, than by yielding up his
jurisdiction expose his Authority to Contempt, and the Church to the continual
danger of Schisms; and by many weighty arguments persuades the Pope, if he
truly designed the peace and flourishing of the Church, speedily and
effectually to reform the whole Order of the Jesuits; without which, he says,
it is impossible, especially in those remoter parts, for the Bishops to
preserve any Authority. And besides other corruptions among them, he tells
strange stories of their ways of propagating Christian Religion in China, and
other neighbor Nations; which they boast so much of at this distance; but, he
says, they who are so much nearer and understand those things better, have
cause to lament the infinite scandals which they give to the Christian Religion
in doing it. The account which he gives of these things, this Bishop protests
he sends to the Pope, only to clear his own Conscience, that he might not be
condemned at the day of judgment for concealing that which he so certainly
knew to be true by those who were eyewitnesses of it. Their first work is, to
hinder all persons of any other Order whatsoever from coming among them; and if
they do come by one means or other, they are sure to procure their banishment
and persecution; to this end, they assist and counsel the Infidels themselves
in it, and make use of their hands to whip and imprison them, and so to make
them weary of being there. When they are left alone, they have the liberty of
telling their own stories, and no one can disprove them; but they were not so
watchful, but some of the other Orders were sent as Spies upon them, and
although they knew, they hazarded their lives in it, yet they made full
discovery of the Jesuits way of converting Infidels. And they discovered such
horrible things in the Catechisms they gave to their new Converts, that they
complained to the Pope of them, but, as appears by the event, to very little
purpose^; for although the Jesuits could not d^ny the things they were charged
with, and the Congregation, de pr^paganda fide, at Rome, S^pt. 12. A.D. 1645 in
seventeen Decrees condemned them, yet the Rector of the Jesuits College in the
Philippines in a Book of 300 pages, opposed those Decrees, which was in the
hands of the Bishop of Angelopolis, and he gave it to a Dominican to answer,
who had been in those parts himself, who fully proved the matter of fact, and
answered the Jesuits arguments, both which the Bishop says, were in his
custody. The short of their instructions to their Converts was this, to speak
little of Christ Crucified, but to conceal that part of Christian Doctrine as
much as may be, to use all the same customs that the Idolaters did, only
directing all their worship to Christ and the Saints; not to trouble themselves
about Fasting, Penance, Confession, and participation of the Eucharist, or the
severity of Repentance and Mortification. They designed to recommend, as easy
a Religion to them as may be, the better to invite them to embrace it; and
therefore as the Bishop observes, we read of no Martyrs among them: the poor
Dominicans and Franciscans are whipped, and imprisoned, and banished; but the
Jesuits who Preach only a glorious Christ, without his passion and cross, have
far better and easier entertainment among them. But these things the Bishop
there gives a larger account of: I return to the Controversy between the
Bishop and them: An Agent was sent to Rome by the Bishop with this letter to
negotiate his business there against the Jesuits, a man intelligent, S. Amors
Iournal. p. 5. chapter 15.
vigorous and undaunted, says Mr. S. Amor of him; who followed his business
so close, that after long solicitation and address, he obtains another Decree
against the Jesuits, which is extant at large in the Lions Edition of the
Bullarium: but which ought to be observed, is since prohibited by the Index
Expurgatorius of Alexander 7. Index Alex. A.D. 1658.
by whose means that was procured is easy to conjecture, when we consider with
what difficulty the Decree was obtained; and for above a year after the passing
it, the coming of it forth was hindered by Cardinal Spada underhand, who was a
great Friend to the Jesuits. And when it did come forth, the Jesuits bought up
all the Copies of it they could, S. Amors Iournal. p. 7. chapter 5.
on purpose to abolish the memory of it: which made them obtain the prohibition
of the Bullarium, till that part were purged out of it. But if the Popes had
any real kindness for the Authority of Bishops, they would never suffer such
encroachments to be made upon them, as they do, nor show so much favor to the
contemners of it. But this is one of the grand Intrigues of the Roman Court, to
keep the Bishops down by the privileges of the Regulars who are immediate
dependents on the Popes; only at some times when they cannot help it, they must
seem to curb them, but yet so as to keep them in heart enough to bait the
Bishops, when they begin to exercise their Authority as they ought to do in the
reformation of abuses and disorders. But by these heats and controversies among
them about matters of Government and Order, it appears that they have no cause
to upbraid us with our dissensions about them: And that they have no more
effectual means to suppress them than We.

. 11. 2. As to matters of doctrine. Of their differences in matters of doctrine.
The least thing any one could imagine by all the boasts of Unity among them,
and upbraiding others with their dissensions, is, that they are all of one mind
in matters of doctrine; but he must believe against common sense and experience
that can believe this. For we know their divisions well enough, and that it is
as easy a matter to compose all the differences among us as among them. We may
as soon persuade the Quakers to Uniformity, as reconcile the Dominicans and the
Jesuits; and all our Sects will agree as soon as the factions of the Thomists
and Scotists; the Presbyterians and Independents will yield to Episcopal
jurisdiction, as soon as the Monastic Orders will quit their privileges; the
Arminians and Calvinists will be all of a mind when the Iansenists and
Molinists are: and we are apt to think that our Controversies about Ceremonies
are not altogether of so great importance as theirs about infallibility. But it
is a very pleasant thing to see by what arts they go about to persuade
credudulous people, that what would be called divisions any where else, is an
admirable Union among them; they might as soon persuade them that the seven
Hills of Rome are the bottomless pit; or that contradictions may be true. For
either the Pope is infallible or he is not, either the supreme Government of
the Church is committed to him alone as S. Peter's Successor, or to the
representative Church in a Council, either he has a temporal power to command
Princes, or he has not; either the V. Mary was conceived with Original sin, or
she was not; either there is a Pre-determination, or there is not; either Souls
may be delivered out of Purgatory, or they may not: Dare any of them say they
are all of a mind in the Church of Rome about these points? I am sure they dare
not. But what then? do they not differ from one another? do they not write, and
Preach, and rail against each other as much as any Sectaries can do? are there
not factions of long continuance among them upon these differences? where then
lies their Unity they boast off? Alas! we speak like Ignorant persons, and do
not consider what artificial men we have to deal with; who with some pretty
tricks and slights of hand make all that which seems to us shattered and broken
in pieces to appear sound and entire without the least crack or flaw in it. It
will be worth the while to find out these arts, for I do not question but by a
discreet managing them, they may serve us as well as them, and our Church will
have, (though not so much splendor) yet as much Unity as theirs. They tell us
therefore that it is true they are not all of a mind, and it is not necessary
to the Unity of the Church that they should be: but, they have the only way of
composing differences; and they do not differ in matters of faith from each
other; and their differences lie only in their Schools, and do not disturb the
peace of the Church. This is the utmost I can find their best wits plead for
the Unity of the Roman Church; and if these be sufficient, I believe they and
we will be proved to be as much at Unity, as they are among themselves.

1. They say the Unity of the Church does not lie in actual Agreement of the
members of it in matters of Doctrine; but in having the best means to compose
differences and to preserve consent; which is, submission to the Popes
Authority. Greg. de Valent. Analys. fid^i l. 6. c. 4. 9.
So Gregory de Valentia explains the Unity of their Church; for actual consent,
he grants, may be in other Churches as much as theirs, and there is nothing
singular or peculiar attributed to their Church, supposing they were all of a
mind, which it is plain they are not; but therein, says he, lies the Unity of
their Church, that they all acknowledge one Head in whose judgment they
acquiesce: and therefore they have no more to do but to know what the Pope
determines. If this be all their Unity, we have greater than they, for we have
a more certain way of ending Controversies than they have: which I prove by an
argument like to one in great request among them, when they go about to
persuade weak persons to their Religion, viz. that it must needs be safer to be
in that Religion wherein both parties agree, a man may be saved; than in that
where one side denies a possibility of salvation; so say I here, that must be a
safer way for Unity which both parties agree in to be infallible, than that
which one side absolutely denies to be so; but both parties agree the
Scriptures to be infallible, and all Protestants deny the Pope to be
infallible; therefore ours is the more certain way for Unity. But this is not
all, for it is far from being agreed among themselves that the Pope is
infallible; it being utterly denied by some among them, and the asserting it
accounted Heresy: as is evident in some late Books written to that purpose in
France and England: What excellent means of Unity then is this among them;
which it is accounted by some no less than Heresy to assert?

. 13. But supposing they should yield the Pope that submission which they deny
to be due to him, yet is his definition so much more certain way of ending
Controversies than the Scriptures? The insufficiency of the Popes Authority for
ending these differences.
Let them name one Controversy that has been ended in their Church merely by
the Popes Decrees; so as the opposite party has declared, that they believed
contrary to what they believed before on the account of the Popes definition.
We have many instances to the contrary, wherein controversies have been
heightened and increased by their interposing, but none concluded by them. Do
they say the Scripture can be no means of Unity, because of the various senses
which have been put upon it? and have they no ways to evade the Popes
definitions? Yes, so many, that his Authority in truth signifies nothing, any
farther than they agree that the upholding it tends to their common interest.
But when onces he comes to cross the interest of any party, if they do not in
plain terms defy him, yet they find out more civil ways of making his
Definitions of no force. Either they say the Decree was procured by fraud, and
the Pope made it by misinformation, which is the common way, or he did not
define it as a matter of faith sitting in Cathedra, or the sense of his
definition is quite otherwise than their Adversaries understand it; or
supposing that be the sense, the Pope is never to be supposed to define any
thing contrary to the Scriptures and Fathers and ancient Canons: Of all which
it were no difficult task to give late and particular instances; but no one who
is acquainted with the history of that Church can be ignorant of them, and the
late proceedings in the point of the five Propositions are a sufficient
evidence of these things to any one who reads them. For when was there a Fairer
occasion given to the Pope to show his Authority for preservation of the
Churches unity, than at that time when the matter of the five Propositions was
under debate at Rome: The same controversy was now revived which had disturbed
their Church so often and so much before. In the time of Clement 8. the heats
were so great between the Jesuits and Dominicans, that the Pope thought it
necessary for the peace of the Church to put an end to them, to that end he
appointed Congregations for several years to discuss those points, that he
might come to a resolution in them. This Pope at first was strangely prepossest
by the arts of the Jesuits against the Dominicans, but sending for the General
of the Dominicans, he told him what sad apprehensions he had concerning the
peace of the Church, by reason of the disputes between the Jesuits and them;
and therefore charges him that those of his Order should no longer molest the
Jesuits about these things; to whom he replied, that he assured him with as
great Protestation as he was able, that it was no mere Scholastical dispute
between them, S. Amors Iournal p. 3. chapter 10.
but it was the cause of faith that was concerned; which he discoursed largely
upon to the Pope, and made such impressions upon him, that the Dominicans
verily believe, Iournal p. 6. chapter 26. -- P. 3. chapter 8.
that had that Pope lived to the Vespers of Pentecost that year he dyed in
March, he had published a Bull against the Jesuits in presence of the College
of Cardinals, and created F. Lemos Cardinal. After his death the congregations
were continued in the time of Paul 5. but at last were broken up without any
decision at all. If the Popes determination be such an absolute Instrument of
peace in the Church, it is the strangest thing in the world, it should be made
so little use of in such cases where they all acknowledge it would be of
infinite advantage to their Church, to have an issue put to such troublesome
controversies as these were. But they know well enough, that the Popes
Authority is the more esteemed the less it is used, and that it has always
been very hazardous to determine where there have been considerable parties, on
both sides; for fear the condemned party should renounce his Authority, or
speak plainer truths than they are willing to hear. And therefore it was well
observed by Mons. S. Amor, Iournal p. 1. chapter 9.
that they are very jealeus at Rome of maintaining the Authority of the decrees
which issue from thence, and that this consideration obliges the maker of them
to look very well to the compliance and facility that may be expected in their
execution before they pass any at all. Which is a most certain argument they
dare not trust the Popes infallibility, nor all the promises they pretend
Christ has made to their Church; but govern their affairs wholly by the rules
of humane Policy. And on this account when the heats brake forth in France
about Iansenism; and both parties made application to the Court of Rome, the
Pope could never be prevailed with to suffer the main controversies to be
touched, or any decree to pass about them, but at last condemned some ambiguous
Propositions as taken out of Iansenius his book; which both parties condemned
according to their different senses, and they were left to dispute it out,
which sense it was the Pope meant them in. And therefore the Iansenists
Advocate who was well versed in the practices of the Court of Rome, gave them
the truest account of the intentions of that Court in their affair, Iournal p.
6. ch 3.
which was, to delude both the one side and the other; and that Cardinal
Ginetti had told him that either nothing would be done, (...) 6. ch^ (...)
or if any thing that which would do neither good not hurt. And therefore in
stead of ending the controversies, the Popes definition only produced more,
viz. whether the Propositions condemned were in Iansenius or no? whether the
Pope might not err in matter of fact? the Iansenists affirming this, the
Jesuits denying it and charging each other with no less than Heresy about it.
For upon the Jesuits asserting October. 12. A.D. 1661. that the Pope has the
same infallibility that Jesus Christ has, not only in Questions of right but
in matters of fact, and that thence those of their Church are bound to believe
with a divine faith, that the 5. condemned Propositions are in Iansenius: the
Iansenists publish a charge of heresy against the Jesuits and such as was
never broached in the Church before: being not only a solitary error or simple
heresy, but a whole source of errors, or rather an universal heresy which
overthrows all Religion. Which they go about at large to prove by showing,
that this builds men's faith on the word of man and not on the word of God,
because it concerns a thing neither revealed nor attested by God, as to know
whether Propositions are really an Authors of this last Age; and (as he goes
on) to make the Popes word equal with the word of God, is not only heresy but
horrid impiety and a species of Idolatry: for this is giving to man the honor
due only to God: because such an entire submission of our mind and of all our
intellectuals comprehended in the act of our faith is that Adoration which we
pay to the prime verity it self. And I dare now leave any one to Judge, whether
upon so late an experiment of the Constitutions of two Popes Innocent 10. and
Alexander 7. in order to the ending so great a Controversy as this was, it be
not apparent, that the Popes Authority signifies no more to the ending
Controversies, than the parties who are concerned are willing that it should i.
e. as far as they do consent to obey them and no farther?

. 14. But it may be said, The insufficiency of Councils to end Controversies.
that it is true there are differences among them about the Popes power and
infallibility, and therefore he may not be so fit to end Controversies, but
there is no dispute among them, about Pope and Council together, therefore in
that case they are all agreed, that they ought to submit. These are fine things
to be said, and appear plausibly to those who do not search into them; but
those that do, will easily find this as ineffectual a remedy as the other. For
if we examine but the ways used by the several parties among them to avoid the
decisions of some Councils against their particular opinions, we may see how
little the decrees of Councils can bind those who have no mind to be tied up by
them. Either they say the decision depended on a matter of fact, which the
Council was not sufficiently informed in, and they believe a Council may err
in a matter of fact, or else it did not proceed after the way of a Council, or
it was not general, or its decrees were not received by the Catholic Church,
or though some were received yet not all, or however, the infallibility of a
Council is not absolute; but supposing that it proceeds according to the
constant tradition of the Church, which unavoidably leaves the matter as much
under debate as if the Council had never meddled with it.

But if they do in earnest believe, that the Pope and Council can put an end
to all Controversies among them when they please, I would fain know why they
have not done this hitherto? Is not unity desirable among them? if not, why do
they boast of it? if it be, why have they not obtained it, since they can so
easily do it? what made them so extremely cautious in the Council of Trent of
meddling with any thing that was in Controversy among themselves? or was it,
that they were all so much of a mind that they had nothing to do, but to
condemn their enemies? which was so far from being true, that there were very
few things which came into bebate, that they were agreed in, and therefore they
were put sometimes to strange shifts to find out general and ambiguous terms
which might not displease the dissenters, and yet leave the disputes as great
as ever. They could not agree so much as about the Title of the Council,
History of the Council of Trent. l. 2. p. 138.
many of the Bishops were for adding to the Title of the most holy Council,
Representing the Church Universal, which was eagerly opposed by the Italians,
and with much ado avoided by the Legates; being no small controversy about
words, but of very great consequence about the power and authority of Pope and
Council, if they had been suffered to go on in it. But the Pope hearing of
this dispute at the beginning, sent word to the Legates, not to broach any new
difficulties in matter of faith, P. 149.
nor to determine any of the things controversed among Catholics, and to
proceed slowly in the Reformation. Excellent instructions for the advancement
of Peace and Holiness! Whoever will for that end peruse that incomparable
history of the Council, will find how high the Controversies among themselves
were between the Bishops and the Regulars about privileges, between the
Dominicans and Francise^ins in many weighty points, between the Italian Bishops
and others about Residence and the extent of Episcopal power, between the
Divines in most of the matters of doctrine, as might easily be showed at large,
if I loved the pains of transcribing; but I had rather refer the Reader to
that excellent history it self. But I only renew my demand, why must no
controversies among Catholics be ended in the Council? could they be better
decided any where else? if so, then the Council is not the best means of Unity;
if not, then it seems there is no necessity of ending controversies among them,
but they have Unity enough without it. And in truth, it is Interest and not
Unity they look after, all such who hold opinions contrary to their Interest
must be proceeded against and condemned; but for others, let them quarrel and
dispute as long as they will, they let them alone if they touch not the Popes
Authority, nor any of the gainful opinions and practices which are allowed
among them. And supposing their Interest be kept up, which the Inquisition is
designed for, the Court of Rome is as great a Friend to toleration as may be,
only what others call different persuasions, they call School points, and what
others call divisions, they call disputes; the case is the same with their
Church and others, only they have softer names for the differences among
themselves, and think none bad enough for those who cast off the Popes
Authority and plead for a Reformation. Here then lies the profound mystrey of
their Unity, that they are all agreed against us, though not among themselves;
and are not we so against them too? May not we plead for the Unity, that they
have on the same grounds? We are all agreed against Popery, as much as they are
against Protestants; only we have some Scholastic disputes among us about
indifferent things, and the Episcopal Authority, as they have; we have some
zealous Dominicans, and busy and factious men such as the Jesuits among them
are; but setting aside these disputes we are admirably well agreed, just as
they are in the Roman Church.

. 15. 2. They say, Their differences are in matters of faith.
they do not differ in matters of faith. But this is as true as the other; for
are they agreed in matters of faith who charge one another with heresy? as we
have already seen that they do. But if they mean that they do not differ in
matters of faith, because those only are matters of faith which they are agreed
in; they were as good say, they are agreed in the things they do not differ
about: for the parties which differ do believe the things in difference to be
matters of faith; and therefore they think they differ from one another in
matter of faith. But they are not agreed what it is which makes a thing to be a
matter of faith; and therefore no one can pronounce that their differences are
not about matters of faith; for what one may think not to be de fide, others
may believe that it is; we see the Popes personal infallibility is become a
Catholic doctrine among the Jesuits, and declared to be plain heresy by their
Adversaries. The deliverance of souls from Purgatory by the prayers of the
living is generally accounted a matter of faith in the Roman Church; but we
know those in it who deny it, and say it was a novel opinion introduced by
Gregory 1. against the consent of Antiquity. It is a matter of faith, say the
Dominicans and Iansenists to attribute to God alone the praise of converting
grace, and that grace efficacious by it self, was the doctrine of Fathers and
Councils and the Catholic Church; and is it not then a matter of faith in
their opinion, wherein the Jesuits and they differ from each other? To which
purpose it was well said by the author of a Book printed at Paris A. D. 1651.
containing essays and reflections on the state of Religion, that because of
the Controversies between the Iansenists and the Jesuits, it might with more
reason be affirmed now than in the time of Arrianism it self, that the whole
Church seems to become heretical. For admitting, says he, what is most certain
that the Church has decreed Calvinism, Pelagianism and Semipelagianism to be
heresies, and that the Doctors are those who sit in the Chair to be consulted
withal upon points of Religion, all Catholics are reduced to a most strange
perplexity. For if a man shall address himself to those of the Iansenian party,
they will tell him that those who are termed Molinists are Pelagians or at
least Semi-pelagians, and on the other side the Molinists will bear him down
that their Adversaries are Calvinists or else Novatians. Now all the Doctors of
the Catholic Church (a very few excepted) are either of the one or the other
party. I leave you then to consider to what prodigious streights men's minds are
reduced, since this is held as a general Maxim, that whosoever fails in one
point of faith, fails in all. It is a matter of faith, say the Dominicans, that
all persons, Christ only excepted, were born in sin; and therefore the
contenders for the immaculate conception must in their judgment differ in a
point of faith from them. But if this distinction should be allowed to preserve
the unity of their Church, why shall it not as well cure the divisions of ours.
The most considerable in all respects of the dissenters from the Church of
England, declare that they agree with us in all the articles of doctrine
required by our Church; will this be enough in their opinion to make us at
unity with each other? if not, let them not plead the same thing for themselves
which they will not allow to us. I cannot understand that the controversies
about Ceremonies (considered in themselves) among us, are of any greater
weight, than the disputes among the Friars concerning their habits have been;
and yet this controversy only about the size of their hoods lasted in one
Order almost an Age together, and was managed with as great a heat and
animosity, as ever these have been among us, and was with very much ado laid
asleep for a time by the endeavors of 4. Popes successively. But if this
signifies nothing to unity, to say, that the matters are not great about which
the Controversies are, if the disturbances be great which are caused by them,
that will reflect more sharply on their Church than on ours, which has so many
differences which they account not to be about any matters of faith. But if
these differences in point of doctrine among them prove to be none in matters
of faith, it would be no difficult task upon the same grounds to show that they
have no reason to quarrel with us for breaking the unity of their Church,
because then we may differ from them as little in matters of faith, as they do
from one another. This I need not take upon me to show at large, because I find
it already done to my hand by F. Davenport, al. Sancta Clara in his
paraphrastical exposition of the 39. articles of our Church: about half of them
he acknowledges to be Catholic, as they are without any further explication.
The first he meets with difficulty in is that, about the number of Canonical
books point blank against the Council of Trent, but he acknowledges that
Cajetan and Franciscus Mirandula fully agree with our Church in it, who quote
Hierom, Ruffinus, Antoninus, and Lyra of the same opinion, as they might have
done many others; but because our Church does not cast them wholly out of the
Canon, he dares not say it is guilty of heresy simply; and the rather because
Waldensis and Driedo do hold that it is only in the power of the whole Church
successively from the Apostles, to declare what books are Canonical and what
not. For the 11. article about justification, he says the Controversy is only
about words, because we are agreed that God alone is the efficient cause of
Justification, and that Christ and his passion are the meritorious cause of it;
and the only question is about the formal cause, which our Church does not
attribute to the act of faith as he proves by the book of Homilies. but only
makes it a condition of our being justified, and they believe that by faith we
obtain our righteousness by Christ; so that he can find no difference between
them and us in that point. He says, the Controversy about merit may be soon
ended according to the doctrine of our Church, for they deny as well as we
article 1. 3. that any works done before the Grace of Christ, and Inspiration
of his Spirit, can merit any thing, and when we say, article 12. that good
works which follow justification, are pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ;
if by that we mean, that they are accepted by Christ in order to a reward, by
virtue of the promise of God through Christ, that is all the sense of merit,
which he or the school of Scotus contends for. For works of supererogation
article 14. he says our Church condemns them upon that ground, that men are
said to do more by them than of duty they are bounden to do, which being
generally understood they condemn, he says, as well as we; because we can do
no good works which upon the account of our natural obligation we are not bound
to perform, though by particular precept we are not bound to them. In the 19
article where our Church says, that the Church of Rome has erred not only in
their living and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of faith; he
distinguishes the particular Church of Rome from the Catholic Church, which
is frequently understood by that name, and he says it is only a matter of
faith to believe, that the Catholic Church has not erred, and not that the
particular Church of Rome has not. In the 20. article our Church declares,
that the Church ought neither to decree any thing against holy writ, so besides
the same it ought not to enforce any thing to be believed of necessity to
salvation; this he interprets of what is neither actually nor potentially in
the Scriptures, neither in terms nor by consequence; and so he thinks it
orthodox, and not against traditions. Article 21. wherein our Church determins
expressly against the infalibility of general Councils, he understands it only
of things, that are not necessary to faith or manners; which he says is the
common opinion among them. The hardest article one would think to bring us off
in, was the 22. viz. that the Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons,
worshipping and adoration as well of Images as of Relics, and also Invocation
of Saints is a fond thing, vainly invented and grounded upon no warranty of
Scripture. But we need not despair as long as one bred up in the Schools of
Scotus designs our rescue; he confesses it to be a difficult adventure, but
what will not subtilty and kindness do together? He observes very cunningly,
that these doctrines are not condemned absolutely and in themselves, but only
the Romish doctrine about them; and therein we are not to consider what the
Church of Rome does teach, but what we apprehend they teach, or what we judge
of their doctrine, i. e. that they invocate Saints as they do God himself,
that Purgatory destroys the cross of Christ, and warms the Popes Kitchen; that
Pardons are the Popes bills of Exchange, whereby he discharges the debts of
what sinners he pleases; that they give proper divine worship to images and
relics; all which, he says, are impious doctrines, and we do well to
condemn them. So that it is not want of faith, but want of wit, this good man
condemns us for; which if we attain to any competent measure of whereby to
understand their doctrine, there is nothing but absolute peace and harmony
between us. This grand difficulty being thus happily removed, all the rest is
done with a wet finger: for what though our Church, Art. 24. says, that it is
a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God, and the custom of the primitive
Church to have public prayer in the Church, or to Minister the Sacraments in a
tongue not understood of the people. Yet what can hinder a Scotist from
understanding by the Scripture, not the doctrine or command of it, but the
delivery of it, viz. that the Scripture was written in a known tongue? nay he
proves that our Church is for praying in Latin by this Article, because that
either is a known tongue or ought to be so, it being publicly lickly taught
every where: and if it be not understood, he says, it is not per se but per
accidens that it is so; I suppose he means the Latin Tongue is not to blame
that the people do not understand it; but they that they learned their lessons
no better at School. But what is to be said, for Women who do not think
themselves bound to go to School to learn Latin? He answers very plainly, that
S. Paul never meant them, for he speaks of those who were to say Amen at the
Prayers, but both S. Paul. and the Canon Law, he tells us, forbid women to
speak in the Church. The case is then clear, S. Paul. never regarded what
language the Women used; and it was no great matter whether they understood
their Prayers or not. But what is to be said to the Council of Trent, which
pronounces an Anathema to those who say, that Prayers are to be said only in a
known Tongue? This does not touch our Church at all he thinks, because in some
Colleges the Prayers are said in Latin: but although that be a known tongue
there, it is no matter, as long as the Council of Trent has put in the word
only, that clears our Church sufficiently. Besides the Council of Trent speaks
expressly of the Mass, which our Article does not mention, but only public
Prayers: and the Council of Trent speaks of those who condemns it as contrary
to the institution of Christ, but our Church only condemns it as contrary to
the institution of the Apostle; but all the commands of the Apostles are not
the commands of Christ, therefore our Church declares nothing against faith in
this Article. Are not we infinitely obliged to a man that uses so much subtlety
to defend our Church from errrour in faith? But that which is most considerable
is, what he cites from Canus, that it is no Heresy to condemn a custom or Law
of the Church, if it be not of something necessary to salvation; especially if
it be a custom introduced since the Apostles times, as most certainly this
was. For the five Sacraments rejected by our Church, Art. 25. he says, they
are not absolutely rejected as Sacraments, but as Sacraments of the same Nature
with Baptism and the Lords Supper, which they yield to. For Transubstantiation,
which is utterly denied by our Church, Art. 28. he very subtly interprets it
of a carnal presence of Christ's Body, which he grants to be repugnant to
Scripture, and to destroy the nature of a Sacrament, but they do believe
Christ's Body to be present after the manner of a Spirit; and so our Church does
not condemn theirs. As to communion in both kinds, asserted by our Church, Art.
30. he says, it is not condemned by the Council of Trent therein, which only
Anathematizes those who make it necessary to Salvation, which our Church
mentions not: and however we condemn communion in one kind, Canus proves him
not to be guilty of Heresy, who should say that the Church has erred therein.
The 31 Article condemns the Sacrifice of the Mass, i.e. says he,
independently on the Sacrifice of the Cross, which is propitiatory of it self,
and the other only by virtue of it. The 32. of the lawfulness of Priests
Marriage, he understands of the Law of God; in respect of which it is the most
common opinion among them, he says, that it is lawful. The 34. about
Traditions, he interprets of those which are not Doctrinal. The Book of
Homilies approved Art. 35. he understands as they do Books approved by their
Church, not of every sentence contained therein, but the substance of the
Doctrine; and he grants there are many good things contained therein. For the
36. of consecration of Bishops and Ministers, he proves from Vasquez, Conink,
Arcudius, and Innocent 4. that our Church has all the essentials of Ordination
required in Scripture: and if the difference of form of words did null our
Ordinations, it would do those of the Greek Church too. The last Article he
examins is, Art. 37. Of the Civil Magistrates power in opposition to the Popes
Authority; and he grants, that the King may be allowed a Supermacy, i.e. such
as may not be taken away by any one as his Superior: and that by custom, a
sufficient right accrues to him over all Ecclesiastical causes: and that by
divine and natural right he has jurisdiction over all Ecclesiastical persons,
so far as the public good is concerned. And withal he grants that we yield no
spiritual jurisdiction to the King, and no more than is contended for by the
French, and the Parliament of Paris. That part which denies the Popes
jurisdiction in England, he says, may be understood of the Popes challenging
England to be a Fee of the Roman See; but if it be otherwise understood, he
makes use of many Scholastic distinctions of actus signatus and exercitus,
etc. the sense of which is, that it is in some cases lawful for a temporal
Prince to withdraw his obedience from the Pope; but leaves it to be discussed
whether he had sufficient reason for doing it. But there can be no Heresy in
matter of fact: it remains then according to the sense put upon our Articles by
him with the help of his Scholastic subtleties, we differ no more from them in
points of faith, than they do from one another. For such kind of distinctions
and senses are they forced to use, and put upon each others opinions, to excuse
them from disagreeing in articles of faith; and there is no reason that we
should not enjoy the benefit of them as well as they: so that either they must
be guilty of differing in matters of faith, or we are not.

. 16. 3. They plead, Their differences not confined to their Schools.
that their differences are only confined to their Schools, and do not disturb
the peace of the Church. But there is as little truth in this, as there is
Unity in their Church: as plainly appears by what has been said already. Was
the Controversy about the Popes temporal power confined to the Schools? did
not that make for several Ages as great disturbances in the Church, as were
ever known in it upon any quarrel of Religion? Were the Controversies between
the Bishops and the Monks confined to their Schools, about the extent of the
Episcopal jurisdiction in former times, or in the renewing of this Hierarchical
War (as one of the Iansenists calls it) in France? But these things are at
large discovered already; I shall only add one thing more, which seems more
like a dispute of the Schools between the several Orders among them about the
immaculate conception; and it will easily appear that wherever that dispute
began, it did not rest in the Schools, if we consider the tumults and
disturbances which have been made only on the account of it. This Controversy
began in the Schools about the beginning of the 14 Century, when Scotus set up
for a new Sect in opposition to Thomas Aquinas, and among other points of
Controversy, he made choice of this to distinguish his followers by; but
proposed it himself very timerously, as appears by his resolution of it in his
Book on the Sentences; Scot. in 3. lib. sent. did. 3. q. 1. n. 10.
however his followers boast, that in this blessed quarrel he was sent for from
Oxford to Paris, Apolog. p^o vita and morte. Ioh. D^ns Scoti.
from Paris to Cologne to overthrow all Adversaries, and that he did great
wonders every where. But however this were, there were some not long after him,
who boldly asserted what he doubtfully proposed, of whom Franciscus Mayronis is
accounted the first; after him Petrus Aureolus, Occam and the whole order of
Franciscans. But the great strength of this opinion lay not in the wit and
subtilty of the defenders of it, nor in any arguments from Scripture or
Antiquity, but in that which they called the Piety of it, i. e. that it tended
to advance the honor of the B. Virgin. For after the worship of her came to be
so public and solemn in their Church, I do not in the least wonder, that they
were willing to believe her to be without sin. I much rather admire they do not
believe all their Canonized Saints to have been so too; and I am sure the same
reasons will hold for them all. But this Opinion by degrees obtaining among the
people, it grew scandalous for any man to oppose it. So Walsingham says
toward the latter end of this Century, Walsin^ham hist. circa A. D. 1389.
the Dominicans Preaching the contrary opinion against the command, first of
the Bishops in France, and then of the King and Nobles; they were outlawed by
the King, and absolutely forbid to go out of their own Convents for fear of
seducing the people: and not only so, but to receive any one more into their
Order, Sext. Seculum Universit. Paris. p. 618.
that so the whole Order might in a little time be extinguished. The occasion
of this persecution arose from a disturbance which happened in Paris upon this
Controversy, one Ioh. de Montesono publicly read against the immaculate
conception, at which so great offense was taken, that he was convented before
the Faculty of Sorbonne, but he declared that he had done nothing but by advice
of the chief of his Order, and that he would defend what he had said to death.
His propositions were condemned by the Faculty and the Bishop of Paris, upon
which he appeals to the Pope, and goes to Avignon to Clem. 7. where the whole
Order of Dominicans appears for him, and the University against him by their
Deputies of whom Pet. de Alliaco was the chief. The assertions which he was
condemned for, relating to this matter were these following, as they are
written in a Manuscript of Petr. de Alliaco from which they are published by
the late author of the History of the University of Paris.

1. To assert any thing to be true which is against Scripture, is most expressly
contrary to faith. This is condemned as false and injurious to the Saints and
Doctors.

2. That all persons, Christ only excepted, have not derived Original sin from
Adam, is expressly against faith. This is condemned as false, scandalous,
presumptuous, and offensive to pious ears. Which he affirms particularly of the
B. Virgin, and is in the same terms condemned.

3. It is as much against Scripture to exempt any one person from Original sin,
besides Christ, as to exempt ten.

4. It is more against Scripture, that the B.V. was not conceived in Original
sin, than to say that she was both in Heaven and on Earth from the first
Instant of her Conception or Sanctification.

5. That no exception ought to be allowed in explication of Scripture, but what
the Scripture it self makes. All which are condemned as the former.

Against these Censures he appeals to the Pope, because therein the doctrine of
St. Thomas which is approved by the Church is condemned, and that it was only
in the Popes power to determine any thing in these points. Upon this the
University publishes an Apologetical Epistle, wherein they declare that they
will rather suffer any thing, than endure Heresy to spring up among them, and
vindicate their own authority in their Censures; and earnestly beg the
assistance of all the Bishops and Clergy in their cause, and their care to
suppress such dangerous doctrines; this was dated Febr. 14. A. D. 1387. But
being cited to Avignon, thither they send the Deputies of the University, where
this cause was debated with great zeal and earnestness about a years time; and
at last the Universities Censure was confirmed, and Ioh. de Montesono fled
privately into Spain. But the Dominicans did not for all this give over
Preaching the same doctrine, upon which a grievous perfecution was raised
against them as appears not only by the testimony of Walsingham, V. Mey^r.
A^^al. Fla^dr. l. 14. A. 1388.
but of the continuer of Martinus Polonus, who says, that insurrection were
every where made against them, and many of them were imprisoned, and the people
denied them Alms and Oblations, and they were forbidden to Preach, or read
Lectures, or bear Confessions, in so much that they were made, he says, the
scorn and contempt of the people: and this storm lasted many years, and there
was none to help them: because their enemies believed in persecuting them, they
did honor to the B. Virgin. Nay the Kings Confessor the Bishop of Eureux was
forced to recant for holding with the Dominicans, and to declare that their
opinions were false and against faith; and they made him upon his knees beg the
King that he would write to the King of Arragon and the Pope, that they would
cause Ioh. de Montesono to be sent prisoner to Paris, there to receive condign
punishment. The next year, A. D. 1389. they made Adam de Soissons, Prior of a
Dominican Convent publicly recant the same Doctrine before the University; and
Stephen Gontier was sent Prisoner to Paris by the Bishop of Auxerre as
suspected of Heresy, because he joined with his Brethren in the appeal to the
Pope: and another called Johannes Ade was forced to recant four times for
saying that he favored the opinions of Ioh. de Montesono. But these troubles
were not confined only to France, for not long after, Cavelli Rosar. B. Mariae
test. 14. s^cul.
A. D. 1394. John King of Arragon published a Proclamation that no one under
pain of Banishment should Preach or Dispute against the immaculate Conception:
Wadding. Legatio de Concept.
and in Valenci^ one Moses Monerus was banished by Ferdinand on that account,
Sect. 3. tract. 12. S. 1.
because the tumults could not be appeased without it. Lucas Waddingus in his
History of the Embassy about the immaculate Conception, gives a short account
of the Scandals that have happened by the tumults which have risen in Spain and
elsewhere on this Controversy, which he dares not relate at large, he says,
because of the greatness of them: such as happened in the Kingdom of Valencia,
A. D. 1344. in the Kingdom of Aragon, A. D. 1398. in Barcelona, A. D. 1408. and
1435. and 1437. In Catalonia, A. D. 1451. and 1461. In all which drawn from the
public Records, he says, the Princes were forced to use their utmost power to
repress them for the present, and prevent them for the future: So in the
Kingdom of Murcia, A. D. 1507. in Boetica or Andaluzia, A. D. 1503. in Castile,
A. D. 1480. The like scandals he mentions in Germany and Italy on the same
account, and withal he says, that these continued notwithstanding all the
endeavors of Popes, Princes, Bishops and Universities; but the tumults, he
says, that happened of later years in Spain, were incredibly turbulent and
scandalous, and drawn from the authentic Registers which were sent by the
several Cities to the King, and by the King to the Pope, which were so great,
that those alone were enough to move the Pope to make a Definition in this
Controversy. Especially considering that the same scandals had continued for
300 years among them, and did continue still, notwithstanding Paul 5.
Constitution. Which is no wonder at all, considering what the Bishop of Malaga
reports, that the Jesuits persuade the people to defend the immaculate
conception with sword and fire, Moral practice of the Jesuits. page 383.
and with their blood. And I now only desire to know whether these be mere
disputes of the Schools among them o^ no, and whether they have not produced as
great disorders and tumults among the people, as controversies about points of
faith are wont to do? So that upon the whole matter, whether we respect the
peace of the world, or factious disputes in Religion, I see no advantage at all
the Church of Rome has above others; and therefore reading the Scriptures can
be no cause of divisions among us; since they have been so many and great among
those, who have most prudentially dispensed, or rather forbidden it: Which was
the thing I intended to prove.

CHAP. VI. An Answer to the Remainder of the Reply.
The mis-interpreting Scripture does not hinder its being a rule of faith. Of
the superstitious observations of the Roman Church. Of Indulgences; the
practice of them in what time begun, on what occasion, and in what terms
granted. Of the Indulgences in Jubilees, in the Churches at Rome, and upon
saying some Prayers. Instances of them produced. What opinion has been had of
Indulgences in the Church of Rome: some confess they have no foundation in
Scripture, or Antiquity, others that they are pious frauds: the miserable
shifts the defenders of indulgences were put to: plain evidences of their fraud
from the Disputes of the Schools about them. The treasure of the Church
invented by Aquinas and on what occasion. The wickedness of men increased by
Indulgences acknowledged by their own Writers: and therefore condemned by many
of that Church. Of Bellarmins prudent Christians opinion of them. Indulgences
no mere relaxations of Canonical Penance. The great absurdity of the doctrine
of the Churches Treasure on which Indulgences are founded, at large manifested.
The tendency of them to destroy devotion proved by experience, and the nature
of the Doctrine. Of Communion in one kind; no devotion in opposing an
Institution of Christ. Of the Popes power of dispensing contrary to the Law of
God in Oaths and Marriages. The ill consequence of asserting Marriage in a
Priest to be worse than Fornication, as it is in the Church of Rome. Of the
uncertainty of faith therein. How far revelation to be believed against sense.
The arguments to prove the uncertainty of their faith defended. The case of a
revolter and a bred Papist compared as to salvation: and the greater danger of
one than the other proved. The motives of the Roman Church considered; those
laid down by Bishop Tailor fully answered by himself. An account of the faith
of Protestants laid down in the way of Principles: wherein the grounds and
nature of our certainty of faith are cleared. And from the whole concluded,
that there can be no reasonable cause to forsake the communion of the Church of
England and to embrace that of the Church of Rome.

. 1. HAving thus far Vindicated the Scriptures from being the cause (by being
read among us) of all the Sects and Fanaticisms which have been in England, The
misinterpreting Scripture does not hinder its being a rule of faith.
I now return to the consideration of the Remainder of his Reply. And one thing
still remains to be cleared concerning the Scripture, which is, whether it can
be a most certain rule of faith and life, since among Protestants it is left to
the private interpretation of every fanciful spirit: which is as much as to
ask, whether any thing can be a rule, which may be mis-understood by those who
are to be guided by it? or, whether it be fit the people should know the Laws
they are to be governed by, because it is a dangerous thing to mis-interpret
Laws, and none are so apt to do it as the common people? I dare say, St.
Augustine never thought that Heresies arising from misunderstanding Scriptures,
were a sufficient argument against their being a Rule of faith, or being read
by the people, as appears by his discoursing to them in the place quoted by
him. For then he must have said to them to this purpose, S. August. tract. 18.
in Job. cap. 5.
Good people, ye perceive from whence Heresies spring, therefore as you would
preserve your soundness in the faith, abstain from reading the Scriptures, or
looking on them as your rule; mind the Traditions of the Church, but trust not
your selves with the reading what God himself caused to be writ: it cannot be
denied that the Scriptures have far greater excellency in them than any other
writings in the world; but you ought to consider the best and most useful
things are the most dangerous when abused. What is more necessary to the life
of man than eating and drinking; yet where lies intemperance and the danger of
surfeiting, but in the use of these? What keeps men more in their wits than
sleeping, yet when are men so liable to have their throats cut as in the use of
that? What more pleasant to the eyes than to see the Sun, yet what is there so
like to put them out as to stare too long upon him? Therefore since the most
necessary and useful things are most dangerous when they are abused; my advice
must be that ye forbear eating, sleeping and seeing, for fear of being
surfetted, murdered or losing your sight; which you know to be very bad things.
I cannot deny but that the Scriptures are called the bread of life, the food of
our souls, the light of our eyes, the guide of our ways; yet since there may
be so much danger in the use of food, of light, and of a Guide, it is best for
you to abstain from them. Would any man have argued like St. Augustine that
should talk at this rate? yet this must have been his way of arguing, if his
meaning had been to have kept the people from reading the Scriptures, because
Heresies arise from misunderstanding them. But all that he inferrs from
thence, is what became a wise man to say, viz. that they should be cautious in
affirming what they did not understand; and that hanc tenentes regulam
sanitatis, holding this still as our rule of soundness in the faith, with great
humility; what we are able to understand, according to the faith we have
received, we ought to rejoice in it as our food, what we cannot, we ought not
presently to doubt of, but take time to understand it; and though we know it
not at present, we ought not to question it to be good and true: and afterward
says, that was his own case as well as theirs. What, S. Augustine a Guide and
Father of the Church put himself equal with the people in reading and
understanding Scriptures! In which we not only see his humility, but how far he
was from thinking, that this argument would any more exclude the people from
reading the Scriptures than the great Doctors of the Church. For I pray, were
they the common people who first broached Heresies in the Christian Church?
Were Arius, Nestorius, Macedonius, Eutyches, or the great abettors of their
Doctrines, any of the Vulgar? If this argument then holds at all, it must hold
especially against men of parts and learning, that have any place in the
Church, for they are much more in danger of spreading Heresies by
mis-interpreting Scriptures than any others are. But among Protestants, he
says, Scripture is left to the Fanciful interpretation of every private
Spirit. If he speaks of our Church he knows the contrary, and that we profess
to follow the unanimous consent of the primitive Fathers as much as they, and
embrace the doctrine of the four General Councils. But if there have been some
among us, who have followed their own Fancies in interpreting Scripture; we can
no more help that, than they can do in theirs; and I dare undertake to make
good, that there have never been more absurd, ridiculous, and Fanciful
Interpretations of Scripture, than (not the common people, but) the Heads of
their Church have made, and other persons in greatest reputation among them.
Which though too large a task for this present design, may ere long be the
subject of another.

For the authority of Henry 8. in the testimony produced from him, when they
yield to it in the point of Supremacy; we may do it in the six articles or
other points of Popery which he held to the last. But we think it an advantage
to our cause in the matter of Supremacy, that they who were Papists, in other
points as well as this against reading the Scriptures, yet contended so
earnestly against the Popes Authority as Henry 8. and Stephen Gardener, Bonner,
and the rest did. Does he imagine that Henry 8. is owned by us to be Head of
our Church as the Pope is with them, so as to think him infallible? He would be
Head of the Popish Church in England in spite of the Pope, but he never
pretended to be Head of the Reformation, any farther than the Supremacy went;
and if they will not believe him, when he was influenced, as they think, by
Cranmer, neither are we to be tied to his opinion when he was guided by Stephen
Gardener or any other, who were not greater enemies to Cranmer than to the
Reformation.

. 2. The next thing, Of their superstitious observations.
wherein I said the sincerity of devotion is much obstructed in their Church
was by the multitude of superstitious observations never used in the primitive
Church, as I said I was ready to defend; to this, his answer is very short. 1.
That I should have said to prove; but so weak was I as to think the Affirmative
was to be proved and the Negative defended. 2. He denies any such to be used in
their Church. I desire then to know his opinion of baptizing bells, with
Godfathers and Godmothers holding the rope in their hands, being buried in a
Monks habit, Pilgrimages to images of Saints, sprinkling holy water, spittle
and salt in baptism, their rites of exorcism, Agnus Dei's, the Pageantry of
the Passion-week, the carrying about of the Host, the numbering of Ave Marias
and Pater Nosters to make Rosaries and Psalters of the B. Virgin, the burning
tapers at noon day particularly on Candlemas day with great devotion, the
incensing of images, with many others which might be mentioned: and if he can
vindicate these from superstition, it will be no hard task to vindicate the
Heathens in the ceremonies of their devotion; and to prove that there can be no
such thing as Superstition in the world.

. 3. I now come to the gross abuse of people in Pardons and Indulgences, Of
Indulgences.
by which I said the sincerity of devotion was much obstructed among them: he
tells me, as an eyewitness, that there is great devotion caused by them in
Catholic Countries; there being no Indulgence ordinarily granted, but enjoins
him that will avail himself of it to confess his sins, to receive the
Sacraments, to pray, fast and give alms, all which duties are with great
devotion, he says, performed by Catholic people, which without the incitement
of an Indulgence had possibly been left undone. I will not be so troublesome to
enquire what sincerity of devotion that was, he was an eyewitness of, which
was caused by Indulgences, nor what sort of persons they were who were thus
devout at receiving them. I think it will be sufficient for my purpose to
prove, that no persons in the world, who understand what Indulgences mean, in
the Church of Rome, can be excited to any devotion by them; but that on the
contrary they tend exceedingly to the obstructing of it: which I shall do by
showing, that either they are great and notorious cheats, if that be not meant
by them which is expressed in them; or if it be, that nothing could be invented
that tends, more to obstructing their own way of devotion than these do. 1.
That they are great and notorious cheats, if that be not meant by them which is
expressed in them. For which we are to understand first what has been
expressed in their Indulgences. 2. What opinion those of their own Church have
had concerning them.

. 4. 1. What has been expressed in their Indulgences; The practice of
Indulgences.
the eldest Indulgences we meet with are those which were made by the Popes, to
such who undertook their quarrels against their enemies; and the first of this
kind I can meet with is, that of Anselm Bishop of Luca Legate of Gregory 7.
which he gave to those of his party who would fight against the Emperor Henry
4. which Baronius relates from his Poenitentiary, in which was promised
remission of all their sins to such who would venture their lives in that Holy
War. And Gregorius 7. Baron. ad A. D. 1084. n. 15.
himself in an epistle to the Monks of Marscilles who stuck close to him
promised an Indulgence of all their sins. Gr^g. 7. l 6. Ep. 15.
The like Indulgence with remission of all their sins, was granted to those who
would fight against the Saracens in Africa by Victor, who succeeded Gregorius
7.; Leo Casin. hist. l. 3. c. 71.
after him followed Urban 2. who granted an Indulgence to all who would go in
the War to the Holy Land, of all their sins, Gul. Tyrius l. 1. hist. Orient.
and as Gul. Tyrius says, expressly mentioned those which the Scripture
says, do exclude from the Kingdom of God, as murder, theft, etc. and not only
absolved them from all the penances they deserved by their sins, but bid them
not doubt of an eternal reward after death, as Malmsbury says; Will. Malms. l.
4. c. 2.
the like is attested by Ordericus Vitalis in whose younger days this
Expedition began: Ord^r. Vitalis hist. Eccl^s ad A. D. 1095.
upon which he says, all the thieves, Pirates, and other Rogues came in great
numbers and listed themselves, having made confession of their sins; and if we
believe S. Bernard, Bernard. Exhort. ad milit. t^mpli c. 5.
there were very few but such among them; which he rejoices very much in: and
says, there was a double cause of joy in it, both that they left the Countries
where they were before, and now went upon such an enterprise which would carry
them to Heaven. This way of Indulgences being thus introduced, was made use of
afterward upon the like occasions by Callictus 2. A. D. 1122. by Eugenius 3.
A. D. 1145. by Clem. 3. A. D. 1195. and others after them, who all promised the
same Indulgences that Urban 2. had given. And it is well observed by Morinus,
Morinus de Sacram Poenit. l. 10. c. 23.
that these Indulgences cannot be understood of a mere relaxation of Canonical
penances; because such a remission of all sins is granted, upon which eternal
life follows, and therefore must respect God and not barely the Church: and
because absolution was to be given upon them, which says he, according to the
discipline then in the Church ought not to be given, but till the Canonical
Penance had been gone through, or at least the greatest part of it. cap. 23.
But therein he is very much mistaken, when he says, that the Popes never
granted these plenary Indulgences, but only to encourage an Expedition to the
Holy Land: For Gelasius 2. A. D. 1118. granted the same to the Christian
soldiers at the siege of Saragoza, as appears by the Bull it self in Baronius.
Baron. ad A. D. 1118. n. 31.
Honorius 2. in the quarrel he had with Roger of Sicily gave the same to all,
Id. ad. A D. 1127. n. 5.
who having confessed their sins should dye in the War against him; but, if
they chanced to escape with their lives, but half their sins were pardoned.
Alexander 3. Id. ad. A D 1177. n. 8.
gave to his Friends at Ancona who should visit the 12. Churches and their own
Cathedral all Lent Fasting, as full an Indulgence as if they went to
Jerusalem; and besides this every first Sunday in the month as great an
Indulgence, (i. e. I suppose for as many days) as a man could take up sands in
both hands. Id. ad. A D. 1177. n. 76.
This Baronius thinks a little too much: and therefore rejects it as fabulous,
because the same Pope in an Indulgence given to the Church of Ferrara grants
but a year of criminals and a seventh part of venials; but he does not consider
that the case of Ancona was peculiar, because of the great friendship that city
had shown to the Pope in his distress, and this Indulgence was transcribed from
a very ancient Manuscript, and better attested than many other things which he
never disputes. But if it be a cheat let it pass for one; and it is no great
matter to me whether it were a cheat of the Popes, or the Church of Ancona. Ad
A. D. 1179. n. 7.
But he does not at all question the Indulgence granted by the same Pope to
those who would take up arms against the Albigenses, which to those who dye in
that cause, is not only pardon of all their sins, but an eternal reward: but
such that refused to go, no less than excommunication is denounced against
them. And Honorius 3. Bzov. ad A. D. 1219. 3.
in the same cause, granted an Indulgence in the same terms as to those who
went to the Holy Land: and Gregorius 9. to all who should take his part against
the Emperor Frederic 2. Id. A. D. 1239. n 8.
which Bzovius confesses to be usual with the Popes, to give to those who
would fight against Saracens, Ad A. D. 1208. n. 5.
heretics or any other enemies of theirs.

This practice of Indulgences being once taken up was found too beneficial to
be ever let fall again; and private Bishops began to make great use of it, not
in such a manner as the Popes, but they were unwilling not to have as great a
share as they could get in it; thence they began to publish Indulgences to
those who would give money toward the building or repairing Churches or other
public works, for this they promised them a pardon of the 7. or 4. or 3. part
of their sins according as their bounty deserved. This was first begun by
Gelasius 2. for the building of the Church of Saragoza A. D. 1118. and was
followed by other Bishops; Morinus de Poenitent. l. 10. c. 20.
in so much that Morinus is of opinion, that Mauricius Bishop of Paris built
the great Church of Nostredame there in that manner; and he says, he can find
no ground for this practice of Indulgences before the 12. century; and answers
Bellarmins arguments for a greater antiquity of them, and proves all his
testimonies from Gregory's Stations, Ludgerus his epistle, and Sergius his
indulgence in the Church of S. Martin at Rome produced by Baronius to be mere
impostures. But the Bishops of Rome, finding how beneficial these Indulgences
were, Baron. ad A. D. 847.
soon resolved to keep the keys of this Treasury of the Church in their own
hands; and therefore quickly abridged other Bishops of this power; and made
great complaint that by the indiscreet use of Indulgences by the Bishops, the
keys of the Church were contemned and discipline lost; so Innocent 3. in the
Council of Lateran, can. 62.; and therefore decrees that in the dedication of a
Church, though where there were several Bishops together, they should not grant
any Indulgence above a year, nor any single Bishop above 40. days. But we are
not to imagine that the Popes ever intended to tie their own hands by these
Canons; but they were too wise to let others have the managing of so rich a
stock as that of the Church was; which would bring in so great a harvest from
the sins of the people. Thence Boniface 8. first instituted the year of Iubilee
A. D. 1300, Extravag. Commun. l. 5. tit. 9. c. 1. Bzov. ad A. D. 1300. n 1.
and in his Bull published for that end, grants not only a plenary, and larger
but most plenary remission of sins to them that (if Romans for 30, if strangers
for 15. days in that year) should visit the Churches of the Apostles. This was
brought afterward by Clem. 6. to every 50. years, and since, to 25. or as
often as his Holiness please: but in all of them a most plenary remission of
sins is granted. It were worth the while to understand the difference between a
plenary, larger and most plenary indulgence: Bell. de I^d^l. l. 1. c. 9.
since Bellarmin tells us, that a plenary Indulgence takes away all the
punishment due to sin. But these were the fittest terms to let the people know
they should have as much for their money as was to be had, and what could they
desire more? And although Bellarmin abhorres the name of selling Indulgences,
yet it comes all to one, the Popes gives Indulgences and they give money; or
they do it not by way of purchase but by way of Alms: But commend me to the
plain honesty of Boniface 9. who being not satisfied with the oblations at
Rome, sent abroad his Jubilees to Colen, Magdeburg, and other Cities, but
always sent his Collectors to take his share of the money that was gathered,
and inserted in them that Clause porrigentibus manus Adjutrices, which in plain
English, is to those who would give money for them: without which no Indulgence
was to be had, as Gobelinus Persona says. Gobelin. Pe^so^a Cos^odr^aet. 6. c.
86.
Who likewise adds this remarkable passage, that the preachers of the
Indulgences told the people to encourage them to deal for them, that they were
not only a poena but a culpa too, i.e. not merely from the temporal punishment
of sin, but from the fault it self which deserved eternal; this made the people
look into them, and not finding those terms but only a most plenary remission,
they were unsatisfied because they were told that the fault could be forgiven
by God alone; but if they could but once find that the Pope would undertake to
clear all scores with God for them, they did not doubt but they would be worth
their money. Whereupon he says those very terms were put into them: then the
wiser men thought these were counterfeit and made only by the Pardonmongers;
but upon further enquiry they found it otherwise. How far this trade of
Indulgences was improved afterward in the time of Alexander 6. and Leo 10. the
Reformation which began upon occasion of them, will be a lasting monument which
was the greatest good the world ever received by them.

. 5. But we are not to think, Of I^d^lgences at Rome.
since Indulgences are such great kindnesses to the souls of men, that they
should be only reserved for years of Iubilee; for what a hard case may they be
in who should chance to die but the year before? Therefore the Popes (those
tender Fathers of the Church) have granted very comfortable ones to many
particular places, and for the doing some good actions, that no one need be in
any great perplexity for want of them. Other places it is probable a man may
go to Heaven as soon from as Rome, but there is none like that for escaping
Purgatory; if a man confess his sins and but stumble into one of the 7.
Churches, it is a hard case if he does not escape at least for one thousand
years. I need not reckon up what vast Pardons are to be had there at easy
rates; since they have been so kind at Rome to publish a Catalogue of them in
several books; Hen. Foulis preface to the History of Romish usurpations. Bell.
de Indulg. l. 2. c. 20.
an extract out of which is very lately set forth in our own language. Those
who have gone about to compute them, have found that Indulgences for a million
of years are to be had at Rome on no hard terms: Bellarmin would seem to deny
these pardons for so many years, as far as he durst, as though they were not
delivered by Authentic writers; but I desire no more than what Cnuphrius has
transcribed, On phrius de 7. urbis Eccles^^s. Caesar Raspon de Basilica
Latera^ensi. l. 2. c. 14. p. 204.
from the Archives of the Churches themselves; and we may judge of the rest by
what Caesar Rasponi a Canon of the Lateran Church and a present Cardinal has
written lately of that one Church, in a book dedicated to Alexander 7. He tells
us therefore there is so vast a bank of the Treasure of the Church laid up
there, that no one need go any further to get full pardon of all his sins; and
that it is impossible for any one to reckon up the number of the benefits to be
had there by it. In the Feast of the Dedication of that Church, at the first
throw, if a man be well confessed before, he gets if he be a Roman a pardon of
a 1000. years, if a Tuscan 2000; but if he comes from beyond sea 3000. years;
this is well for the first time. The like Lottery is again at that Church on
C^ena Domini. But Boniface 9. would never stand indenting with men for number
of years, but declares, if men will come either for devotion or pilgrimage, (no
matter which) he shall be clear from all sin: and what would a man have more?
But besides this, there are other particular seasons of opening this Treasury,
and then one may take out as much as they can wish for: As when the Image of
our Savior is shown, all that come thither, have their sins pardoned
infallibly: and many other days in the year, which the Author very punctually
reckons up, and are so many that a Canon of that Church may dispose of some
thousands of years, nay plenary remissions, and yet escape Purgatory at last
himself. But besides what belongs to the Church it self, there is a little
Oratory or Chapple belonging to it called the Holy of Holies, Raspon. de Basil.
^ater. l 4. c. 19.
where it is impossible for any man to reckon up the number of Indulgences
granted to it. These vast numbers of years then are no fiction of
Pardon-mongers, as Bellarmin is sometimes ready to say; unless he will have the
Popes called by that name, or charge the Holy Churches at Rome with so gross
impostures. Of Indulgences for saying some prayers.


. 6. But suppose it should be a man's fortune never to see Rome (as it has many
a good man's) must he be content to lie and rot in Purgatory, or trust only to
the kindness of his Friends? no, we that live at this distance, have some
comfort left: there are son good prayers appointed for us to use, which will
help us at a need; or else the book of the hours of the B. Virgin secundunm
usum Sarum is strangely mistaken; but herein I am likewise prevented by the
autho^^ of the preface lately mentioned; but my edition being elder than either
of those mentioned by him seems to have something peculiar to it or at last
omitted by him.

As when it says of the Prayer Obsecro te Domina Sancta Maria, Horae B. V.
Mariae. s^cundum usum Sarum. p. 38.
etc. Tho all them that be in the state of Grace, that daily say devowteli this
prayer before owre blessed Lady of pity she wolle show^ them her blessed
vysage, and warn them the day and owre of death, and in there last end the
Angels of God shall yield there sowles to heaven, and he shall obtayn 5
hundredth years and so many Lenttis of pardon granted by 5 holy Fathers Popes
of Rome. That is pretty well for one prayer!

But this is nothing to what follows to a much shorter prayer than that.

Our Holy Father Sixtus 4. Pope has granted to all them that devoutly say
this prayer before the Image of our Lady in the sone eleven thousand years of
pardon. Page 42.
A prayer said to good purpose! I confess I can hardly stoop now to those that
have only days of pardon promised them; yet for the sake of the procurer I
will mention one.

Our Holy Father Pope Sixtus has granted at the Instance of the highmost and
excellent Princess Elizabeth late Queen of England and wife to our Sovereign
liege Lord King Henry the 7th. God have mercy on her sweet soull and all
Christian soulls that every day in the morning after 3 tollinges of the Ave ^ell
say 3 times the hole salutation of our Lady Ave Maria gratia that is to say, P.
45.
at 6 the klock in the morning 3 Ave Maria at 12 of the klock at none 4 Ave
Maria and at 6 a klock at even, for every time so doing is granted of the
spiritual treasour of holy Church 3 hundredth days of parden totiens quotiens.
To which is annexed the pardon of the two Archbishops and nine Bishops, forty
days a piece, three times a day, which begun, A. D. 1492. the seventh year of
Henry 7. And the sum of the Indulgence and pardon for every Ave Maria is 800
days totiens quotiens.

But if a man thinks himself well provided already, and has a mind to help his
Friends, there is nothing like the 15 O.s of St. Brigitt:

This be the 15 O. Os. the which the holy Uirgin S. Brygytta was woente to say
dayle before the holy rode in S. Paul's Church at Rome, P. 50.
who so says this a year he schall deliver 15 soulles out of Purgatory of his
next kyndred, and convert other 15 sinners to good life and other 15 righteous
men of his kind shall persevere in good life. And wat ye desire of God ye schall
have it, if yt be to the salvation of your soul.

Not long after we find a better endowment with number of years than any we
have yet met with.

To all them that before this Image of pytie devoutly say 5 Pater Noster and 5
Aves and a Credo, P. 54.
pityously beholding these Arms of Crystys passion, are granted thirty two
thousand seven hundred and fifty years of pardon; and Sixtus the 4. Pope of
Rome has made the 4 and the 5 prayer, and has doubled his foresaid pardon.

The Prayer with Boniface 6. his Indulgence of ten thousand years pardon will
hardly down with me now: P. 58.
much less that niggardly grant of John 22. of a hundred days pardon. What
customers does he hope to find at such sordid rates?

Sixtus 4. for my money; witness this Indulgence.

Our holy Father Sixtus 4. granted to all them that beyn in state of Grace, P.
61.
sayeing this prayer following ymmediately after the elevation of the body of
our Lord clean remission of all their sins perpetually enduring. And also John
the 3 Pope of Rome at the request of the Queen of England has granted unto
all them that devoutly say this prayer before the Image of our Lord Crucified
as many days of pardon as there were wounds in the body of our Lord in the time
of his bitter passion, the which were 5365.

It is well Sixtus came after him, or else his market had been spoiled, the
other so much out-bid him.

Next to clean pardon, John 22. offers fair; only the task is somewhat harder,
it being for three Prayers.

This 3 prayers be wrytton in the Chappelle of the holy cross in Rome
otherwise called S^cellum sanctae Crucis 7 Romanorum, P. 66.
whoo that devoutly say them shall obtayn 90000 years of pardon for dedly sins
granted by our holy Father John 22. Pope of Rome.

Methinks he should have come to a full hundred thousand, when his hand was in!

But there is one odd condition employed in some of these prayers, called being
in a state of Grace, the want of which may hinder the effect of them; but
although due confession with absolution will at any time put a man into it, yet
is there no remedy without it? we will try once more for that, and end these
Indulgences. And I think the prayer of S. Bernardine of Siena will relieve us.

This most devoutly prayer said the holy Father S. Bernardine daily kneeling
in the worship of the most holy name Jesus. P. 72.
And yt is well to believe that through the invocation of that most excellent
name of Jesus, S. Bernard. obtained a singular reward of perpetual consolation
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this prayer is written in a Table that hangs at
Rome in S. Peter's Church nere to the high awter, there as our holy Father the
Pope duly is wont to say the office of the Mass. And hoo that devoutly with
a contrite heart daily say this Oryson if he be that day in the state of
eternal damnation, than this eternal pain shall be changed him in temporal
pain of Purgatory, than if he has deserved the pain of Purgatory, yt shall
be forgotten and forgiven through the infinite mercy of God.

This is enough of all reason.

And so much shall serve to set forth what the practice of Indulgences has
been in the Church of Rome and what is expressed in them.

. 7. 2. I now come to give account what opinion has been had of these
Indulgences in their own Church, What opinion has been had of Indulgences in
the Roman Church.
wherein some have freely confessed they have no Foundation in Scripture or
Antiquity, others that they are only pious frauds, and those who have gone
about to defend them, have been driven to miserable shifts in the defense of
them.

1. Some have confessed that they have no foundation in Scripture or Antiquity.
Durandus says, Durand. in sentent. l. 4. did. 20. q. 3.
that very little can be affirmed with any certainty concerning Indulgences,
because neither the Scripture speaks expressly of them, and the Fathers Ambrose,
Hilary, August., Hierome speak not all of them: and therefore he has no more
to say, but that the common opinion is to be followed herein. Ioh. Major in
sent. l. 4. did. 20.
The same is said by another School-man, who adds this, that though it be a
Negative argument, yet it is of force, because in the time of those Fathers
they were very much skilled in the Scriptures, Cajetan opusc. de Indulgent.
init.
and it were very strange if Indulgences were to be found there that they did
not find them. This is likewise affirmed by Cajetan, Dominicus Soto, Soto in
sent. l. 4. did. 20.
and all those who assert that the use of Indulgences came into the Church upon
the relaxing the severity of the primitive discipline, Greg. de Valent. de
Indulg. c* 4. Estius in sent. l. 4. did. 20* ^. 2.
which they say continued in use for a 1000 years after Christ. But the most
express testimonies in this case are of Bishop Fisher, Morinus de paenitent. l.
10* c. 20. ^. 9.
who says that the use of Indulgences came very late into the Church; and of
Polydore Virgil following his words, and of Alphonsus a Castro, R^ff. c. Luther
art. 18. Polyd. V^rgil. de Iavent. l. 8. c. 1.
who ingenuously confesses, that among all the controversies he writes of,
there is none which the Scripture or Fathers speak less of, than this; but
however, Al^hons. a Castro adve^s. haeres. l. 8. v. Indulg.
he says, though the use of them seem to have come very late into the Church,
they ought not to be contemned, because many things are known to latter ages,
which the ancient writers were wholly ignorant of; for which he instanceth in
Transubstantiation; procession from the Son, and Purgatory. But he ought to
have remembered what himself had said before in a chapter of finding out
heresies, Alphons l. 1. c. 12.
that, the novelty of any doctrine makes it of it self to be suspected, because
Christ and his Apostles did give sufficient instructions for attaining eternal
life; and after the Law given by Christ no other Law is to be expected, because
his Testament is eternal. Let this be applied to his own confession of these
doctrines, and the consequence is easily discerned. And it is an excellent
saying of Bellarmin, Bellar. de am^ss^gratiae l. 6. c. 3. resp. ad ^bj. 6.
that, in things which depend on the will of God, nothing ought to be affirmed,
unless God has revealed it in the H. Scriptures. Therefore according to the
opinion of these persons who assert the doctrine of Indulgences to have no
Foundation in Scripture or Antiquity, it can be no other than a notorious Cheat.

2. Some in the Church of Rome have called them pious frauds. This appears by
the Controversies which arose upon Indulgences, at the same time when they
began to grow common. Aquin. s^pplement. sum. q. 25. art 2. Bonavent. in sent.
l. 4. did. 20. q. 6.
For Aquinas and Bonaventure tell us, that there were some in the Church who
said, that the intention of the Church in Indulgences was only by a pious fraud
to draw men to charitable acts, which otherwise they would not have done; as a
mother which promises her Child an apple to run abroad, which she never gives
him, when she has brought him to it. Which is the very instance they used,
Greg. de Valent. de Indulg. c. 2.
as Gregory de Valentia confesses. But this Aquinas rejects as a very
dangerous opinion, because this is in plain terms to make the Church guilty of
a notorious Cheat; and as, he says, from St. Augustine, if any falsehood be
found in Scripture, it takes away the authority of the whole; so if the Church
be guilty of a cheat in one thing, she will be suspected in all the rest. This,
says Bonaventure, is to make the Church to lie and deceive, and Indulgences to
be vain and childish toys. But for all these hard words, they had a great deal
of reason on their side: for the Indulgences were express for the remission of
the sins of those who did such and such things, as the giving a small sum of
money toward the building of a Church, or an Hospital; they therefore asked
whether the Indulgences were to be taken as they were given or no? if they
were, then all those had full remission of sins on very easy terms; if not,
then what is this else but fraud and cheating, and can be only called pious
because the work was good which they did? This put the defenders of Indulgences
very hard to it; Praepositivus, one of the eldest of the Schoolmen confesses
that it looks a little oddly for a man to be absolved from all his sins for
three pence, Apud. Morin. l. 10. c. 20. n. 5.
given in three several places; and that the rich by this means have a mighty
advantage over the poor: but he resolves it all into the power of the Church.
Petrus Cantor confesses the difficulties great, Ib. n. 7.
but only for the Churches Authority; and especially in those general
Indulgences which are pronounced without any distinctions. Therefore he says
Greg. 4. as he calls him (Morinus thinks Greg. 8.) in the Dedication of the
Church of Benevento, told the people it was much safer for them to undergo
their penance than to receive an Indulgence from him of any part of it: and
another Bishop, being desired an Indulgence would give it but for two days;
but if any one asks, whether the remission of sins were presently obtained
after Indulgence, or only when they are incapable of penance, viz. after death;
for his part, he says, he desires them to consult the Pope or the Bishop that
gives the Indulgence, whether of these opinions is true; and when the Bishop of
Paris showed him the magnificent Church he had built by virtue of Indulgences,
Cantor told him, he had done much better if he had let them alone, and
persuaded the people to undergo their penance.

But because the form of Indulgences ran in such large and general terms; it
grew to be a great Question among the Schoolmen, Whether the validity of
Indulgences was as great as the words of them? which in other terms is whether
the Church did cheat or not in giving them? for if they were not to understand
them according to the plain words of them; what is this but a gross imposture
to abuse the credulous people, and laugh in their sleeves at them for their
simplicity. For while the people have so good an opinion of their Church as to
believe the truth of what she declares, and to take Indulgences according to
the sense of the words; if their meaning who give them be otherwise than is
expressed, it is one of the most abominable cheats that ever was invented by
men. For picking purses, forging deeds, or betraying men are tolerable things
in comparison; but to abuse and ruin their souls under a pretense of pardoning
their sins, is the utmost degree of fraud and imposture. Let us now see how
these Hucksters defend their Church in this case; for the Question has been
debated among the Schoolmen ever since Indulgences came up. Some resolve it
thus, that Indulgences do signify as much as the Church declares, Guil.
Altissiodor. sum l. 4. tract. 6. c. 9.
but with these conditions, that there be sufficient authority in the giver,
necessity in the receiver, that he believes the Church has power to give them,
that he be in a state of grace, and give a sufficient compensation, which is to
overthrow what they said, unless those conditions were expressed in the
Indulgences. Some say that common Indulgences held only for sins of Ignorance,
Morin. l. 10. c. 21. n. 3
others for venial sins, others for penances negligently performed, others for
Purgatory pains. Some again said that these could signify no more than a
relaxation of Canonical Penance, whatever the words were, and that they were
introduced for no other end; and they do not reach any farther than the
Churches Canonical power or judgment does, and not to the judgment of God.
But this opinion, Greg. de Valent. de Indulg. c. 2.
says Greg. de Valentia does not differ from the Heretics; and withal, he
says, upon this principle, Indulgences do more hurt than good; for if it were
not for them; the sinner by his penance might take away some part of his
punishment, but now he relyes upon his Indulgence and does no penance, and so
undergoes his whole punishment. Albertus M. says, Albert. M. in sent. l. 4.
did. 20. art. 17.
they are much mistaken who say that Indulgences are to be understood as large
as their words are, without any farther condition; and that this is to enlarge
the Court of Gods mercy too far; and says many conditions are to be
understood, which are not expressed in them. This gave the first occasion to
the Treasure of the Church, invented by Aquinas to satisfy this argument of
Albertus concerning the mercy of God being extended too far by Indulgences; for
hereby what punishment is taken away from one is made up by the punishment of
another, which is reckoned upon his account. And therefore, he says, the cause
of the remission of punishment is not the devotion, work, or gift of the
receiver, but the Treasure of merits which was in the Church which the Pope
might dispense; and therefore the quantity of the remission was not to be
proportioned to the acts of the receiver, but to the stock of the Church? This
rich Banck of the Churches Stock being thus happily discovered, they do not
question now but to set all accounts even with it; and therefore Aquinas
confidently affirms, that Indulgences are to be understood simply as they are
expressed; for God, says he, does not need our lie or deceit; which he grants,
must have been if Indulgences had not been meant as they were expressed; and
all men would sin mortally who Preached Indulgences, Yet to obtain the
Indulgence, he says, that every man must give according to his ability; for
the objection being put, concerning an Indulgence being given to three several
places, that whosoever gives a penny toward the building of a Church in every
one of these places, shall for each of them have the third part of his sins
forgiven him, so that for three pence a man gets a plenary remission; he
answers, that a poor man may indeed have it so, but it is to be understood that
a rich man ought to give more. For it is all the reason in the world that a
rich man should pay greater Use for the stock of the Church, than a poor man
can do: and it is reasonably to be presumed that he had more sins to be
pardoned than the other, and therefore whatever the general terms are, there
must be some reserve to hook in more from the rich than was expressed in the
first bargain. But if the rich man should plead Law in the case, and cry out it
was Covin and Fraud, to demand more than the first Contract was; I am not
skilful enough to determine what action the Church can have against him. But
there is another shrewd objection mentioned by Bonaventure, which is, that a
man gets by sinning, as suppose two men to receive the remission of a third
part of their sins by an Indulgence, one owes but it may be 90 years penance
for his sins, and another has run upon the score so far that he owes 900
years, both receive a third part Indulgence; in which case we see plainly the
greater sinner has mightily the advantage of the other, and where one gets but
30. the other gets 300. And therefore Bonaventure is fain to run back again and
to say, that Indulgences are not to be understood as they are expressed, and
that they are not equal to all; but it was not fit to express it so, because
this would hinder peoples esteem of the Indulgence. Which in plainer terms is,
that it is necessary to cheat the people, or else there is no good to be done
by Indulgences. Petrarch. ep. 5.
Thence Petrarch called them nets wherein the credulous multitude were caught;
and in the time of Boniface 9. the people observing what vast sums of money
were gathered by them cried out they were mere cheats and tricks to get money
with, Gob^l Persona^aet. 6. c. 68.
upon which Paulus Langius (a Monk) exclaims. Paul. Largii Chronic. Citizens.
ad A. D. 1395.
O God, to what are these things come! Thou hold thy peace, but thou will
not always, for the day of the Lord will bring the hidden things of darkness
to light. U^sp^rg. Chron. p. 307.
Conrad. Vrspergensis says, that Rome might well rejoice in the sins of the
people, because she grew rich by the compensation which was made for them: Thou
have (says he to her) that which thou have always thirsted after, sing and
rejoice, for thou have conquered the world, not by religion, but by the
wickedness of men. Which is that which draws them to thee, not their devotion
and piety. Platina in Bonif. 9.
Platina says, the selling Indulgences brought the Ecclesiastical Authority
into contempt, and gave encouragement to many sins. Ursperg. Chron. p. 322.
Vrspergensis complains, that plenary Indulgences brought more wickedness into
the world; for, he says, men did then say, Let me do what wickedness I will,
by them I shall be free from punishment, and deliver the souls of others from
Purgatory. Gerson says, Gerson. de Indulg. co^sid. 8.
none can give a pardon for so many years as are contained in the Popes
Indulgences but Christ alone: therefore what are they but cheats and
impostures? In Spain, Indulgences were condemned by Petrus de Osma a Divine of
Salamanca and his followers, Bull. Romans Tom. 1. Sixth. 4. Co^st. 17.
as appears by the Popes Bull against them, A. D. 1478. In Germany by I^hannes
de Vesalia a famous Preacher of Mentz; S^rrar. Rerum Mo^untiac. l. 1. c. 34.
for Serrarius reckons this among the chief of his opinions, that Indulgences
were only pious frauds and ways to deceive the people, and that they were
fools who went to Rome for them. About the same time flourished Wesselus
Groningensis incomparably the best Scholar of his Age, and therefore called Lux
mundi, he was not only skilled in School Divinity (almost the only learning of
that time) but in the Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee and Arabic, having traveled into
Greece, Egypt, and been in most Universities of Europe, and read the most
ancient Authors in all kinds of learning; on the account of his learning he was
much in favor with Sixtus 4. and was present and admired at the Council of
Basil; but he was so far from being a friend to Indulgences, Wesseli Groaning.
oper. p. 867, etc.
that in his Epistles he says, that no Popes could grant an Indulgence for an
hour, and that it is a ridiculous thing to imagine that for the same thing
done, sometimes an Indulgence should be granted for 7 years, sometimes for 700,
sometimes for 7000, and sometimes for ever by a plenary remission; and that
there is not the least foundation in Scripture for the distinction of remitting
the fault and the punishment, upon which the doctrine of Indulgences is
founded. That the giving them was a design of covetousness, and although the
Pope once swear to the King of France's Ambassador, that he did not know the
corruptions of the sellers of Indulgences, yet when he did know them he let
them alone, and they spread farther. That God himself does not give plenary
remission to contrition and confession, and therefore the Pope can much less do
it: But if God does forgive, how comes the Pope to have power to retain? and if
there be no punishment retained when God forgives, what has the Pope^ to do to
release? Against him writes one Iacobus Angularis, Iac. Angular.in ep. Wesseli.
he confesses there is nothing in Scripture or Antiquity expressly for
Indulgences; but that ought to be no argument, for there are many other things
owned in their Church as necessary points which have as little foundation as
this, viz. S. Peter's being at Rome, and Sacramental confession; and therefore
at last he takes Sanctuary in the Popes and Churches authority. To this
Wesselus answers, that Indulgences were accounted pious frauds before the time
of Albertus and Thomas; that there was a great number of Divines did still
oppose the errors and practices of the Court of Rome in this matter; that
supposing the Church were for them, yet the authority of Scripture is to be
preferred before it, and no multitude of men whatsoever is to be believed
against Scripture: that, he had not taken up this opinion rashly, but had
maintained it in Paris thirty three years before, and in the Popes
poenitentiary Court at Rome; and was now ready to change it, if he could see
better reason for the contrary. That the doctrine of Indulgences was delivered
very confusedly and uncertainly, by which it appeared to be no Catholic
doctrine: that it is almost impossible to find two men agree in the explication
of them, that the doctrine of Indulgences was so far from being firmly believed
among them, that there was not the strictest person of the Carthusian or other
orders that should receive a plenary Indulgence at the hour of death, that yet
would not desire his Brethren to pray for his soul: which is a plain argument
he did not believe the validity of the Indulgence: that many in the Court of
Rome did speak more freely against them than he did. That, the Popes authority
is very far from being infallible; or being owned as such in the Church; as
appeared by the Divines at Paris condemning the Bull of Clement 6. about
Indulgences, wherein he took upon him to command the Angels, and gave plenary
remissions both from the fault and punishment. Which authentic Bulls, he
says, were then to be seen at Vienne, Limoges and Poictou. It is notorious to
the world what complaints were made in Germany after his time of the fraud of
Indulgences, before any other point of Religion came into dispute; and how
necessarily from this, the Popes authority came to be questioned, that being
the only pretense they had to justify them by: and with what success these
things were then managed, it is no more purpose to write now, than to prove
that it is day at Noon. The Council of Trent could not but confess horrible
abuses in the sale of Indulgences, yet what amendment has there been since
that time? Bell. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 12.
Bellarmin confesses, that it were better if the Church were very sparing in
giving Indulgences: I wonder why so; if my Adversaries experience and
observation be true, that they prove great helps to devotion and charity. Can
the Church be too liberal in those things which tend to so good an end?

. 8. But Bellarmin would not have the people too confident of the effect of
Indulgences; Of Bellarmins prudent Christian.
for though the Church may have power to give them; yet they may want their
effect in particular persons; and therefore, says he, all prudent Christians
do so receive Indulgences, as withal to satisfy God themselves for their
sins, i. e. in plain terms, that all prudent Christians are too wise to believe
them, and none but Fools do rely on them. For if there were any thing but fraud
and imposture in them, why may not a prudent Christian trust a Church which he
believes infallible? If the Head of the Church publishes an Indulgence, wherein
he remits to all that are confessed and contrite, upon doing such actions of
charity and piety the remaining temporal punishment of their sins: I desire to
know why a prudent Christian of that Church may not, yea ought not to rely upon
his word? Does he suspect the Head of his Church may cheat and abuse him? if he
does, what becomes of infallibility? if he verily believes that the Pope cannot
err and will not deceive, why must not his word be taken? and how can his word
be taken for the remitting of a debt, when they take as much care of payment as
if he had said nothing? I know not how those things pass among the prudent
Christians of that Church, but to me they look like the greatest suspicion of a
cheat that may be. As suppose a great person out of kindness to one that is in
danger of lying in Prison for debt, gives him a note under his hand, that upon
the acknowledgment of his debt to his Attorney, and paying him his Fees, he
will see his debt wholly discharged; and a Friend of the Prisoner tells him
openly, he ought to receive that Favor in an extraordinary manner with all
thankfulness; for that person is one who can never fail of his word; and he
need not question his ability for he has a vast treasure in his hands, to be
disposed of for such uses; can we otherwise think, but that the poor man would
be strangely surprised with joy at it; and if he has any money left, he will
be sure to give it to the person employed in so good a work? But withal if he
should secretly whisper him, that he advises him as a Friend, that he would
look out all other ways imaginable to satisfy his Creditours, and that all
prudent persons in his case had taken the same Course; what must the thoughts
of such a man be of such a large and noble offer? Truly, that the Gentleman was
a great Courtier, but a man must have a care of believing him too far; and his
Friend understood the world, and that one thing was to be said and done in show
not to disoblige so great a person, but for all that, a man must mind his own
business, or he may be choused at last if he trust too far to such large
promises. This is just the case of Indulgences in the Roman Church; a man is
affrighted with the dreadful Prison of Purgatory, as the temporal punishment of
his sins, which God will certainly exact from him, either here by satisfactions
and penances, or there in the pains of that state; while the man considers with
himself the hardness of his condition, he hears of Indulgences to be had; and
after he has enquired the meaning of them is very well satisfied, that if he
can get one of them, he shall do well enough. For he is told that his Holiness
is infallible, and that he cannot cheat or lie, or deceive like other men, and
therefore of all persons in the world he would soonest trust him; but because
many others are in the same condition with him, he may a little question,
whether his stock will hold out or no: here his Friends assure him the Treasure
of the Church, (of which the Pope has the Keys) is so large, that if it were a
thousand times more, he need not fear it; only he must confess his sins and
have contrition for them, and do some charitable acts, and pay some customary
fees and duties, and he shall have a total discharge. Well, says the man in a
transport of joy, this is the bravest Church in the world for a man to sin in,
if he may escape thus: and what need I question, since the Pope is infallible,
and the treasury of the Church is inexhaustible? how am I freed now, not only
from the fears of Hell and Purgatory, but from crabbed and hateful penances?
that honest and kind-hearted Gentleman the Pope has struck a tally for me in
his Exchequer, and I shall have my share in my course and order; without
lashings, and whippings, and fastings, and mumblings, and I know not how many
odd tricks besides: but soft and fair, says Bellarmins prudent Christian to
him, be not too confident of your ease and discharge, you must use as great
severities with your self, and undergo as many penances, and say as many
Prayers as if you had no Indulgence at all. Say you so, I pray what benefit
then have I, says he, by this which you call an Indulgence? what is it an
Indulgence of? Is there not a full remission of sins contained in it; and I
have been always told by that is meant the discharge of the temporary
punishment due to sin either here or in Purgatory? Shall I be discharged, or
shall I not upon it? if I shall, what do you tell me of that which I am
discharged from? if not, the Indulgence is a spiritual Trapan, and the Pope and
Infallible Cheat. I cannot see how a man can think otherwise, that made such
account of the great benefit of Indulgences, and at last finds they come to
nothing but deceiving the people and getting money.

. 9. By this we see already, The absurdity of the doctrine of Indulgences, and
the Churches Treasure.
what miserable shifts they are put to, who defend Indulgences but as an honest
contract, but they who will justify them as containing something divine and
satisfactory for the punishment of men's sins, are fain to build the doctrine of
them upon such absurd and unintelligible notions, that it is almost as hard to
understand as to believe it. It cannot be denied, that there are some in the
Church of Rome whose doctrine of Indulgences is easy enough, Cassander in
consult. art. 12.
but then it marrs the whole Markett, Barns Cathol. Romans Pacific. S. 9.
and this doctrine is therefore condemned by others as heretical in sense.
Which is, that Indulgences are nothing else but a relaxation of the ancient
severity of Church discipline, White de medio anim. statudem. 26.
according to the old Penitential Canons; which does not respect the justice of
God, but the Discipline of the Church over offenders. This is a doctrine we
have nothing to complain of the difficulty of understanding, but we know not to
what purpose, (if this be all) any particular Indulgences are ever given, since
there is so general an Indulgence by the practice of the whole Church among
them, wherein they cannot pretend to observe any of the old Penitential Canons.
And to give a man an Indulgence to omit that, which no body requires and is
wholly out of use, would be like the Kings giving a man a Patent not to wear
Trunk-hose and Ruffs, when it would be ridiculous to use them. And if this were
all intended, why is it not so expressed if they meant honestly? but they know,
if their Pardons ran so, no one would give a farthing for them. What need any
talk of the Churches Treasure for this? which Clement 6. made the ground of
Indulgences in his Bull: and has been asserted by the most zealous defenders
of them. This way of explaining Indulgences then, though it be easy and
intelligible, yet it is not reconcilable with the practice of the Church of
Rome, nor with the suppositions on which that practice is built. We are
therefore to enquire what they can make of it, who go about to defend it as it
is practiced and generally understood among them. To this end they tell us,
that although the fault be remitted upon the Sacrament of Penance, yet the
temporal punishment of sin remains, which God must be satisfied for: that this
temporal punishment is either to be undergone here or in Purgatory, that every
man must have undergone it himself, if there had not been a treasure of the
Church made up of the satisfactions of Christ, and the Saints, to make amends
to God for every one to whom that Treasure is applied. That, the dispensing of
this Treasure is in the hands of the Pope, who gives it out by Indulgences,
which being applied to any person upon the condition required, he is thereby
discharged from the debt of temporal punishment which he owed to God.

This is the received doctrine of Indulgences in the Roman Church; which holds
together till you touch it, and then it presently flies in pieces like a Glass
drop, or vanishes into smoke and air. It is of so tender a composition that it
can endure no rough handling; if you like it as it is, much good may it do you,
but you must ask no Questions: But however I shall, to show the monstrous
absurdities of this Doctrine.

1. Why if the Indulgence only respects the punishment and not the fault, the
terms of the Indulgence do not express this, that the people may not be
deceived? Why in all Indulgences since this doctrine is so explained as in the
Jubilees of Clement 8. Clem. 8. constable. 58. To. 3. Bull. U^ban 8. constable. 16. To.
4.
and of Urban 8. (the former of whom is applauded by Bellarmin for a reformer
of Indulgences) the most general expressions are still used of most plenary
Indulgence, remission and pardon of all their sins? why is it not said only of
the temporal punishment due to sin, the fault being supposed to be remitted?

2. How punishment does become due, when the fault is remitted? if the
punishment be just, it must have respect to the fault, for to punish without
respect to the fault, is all one as to punish without fault; if it have respect
to the fault, how that fault can be said to be remitted which is punished? So
far as a man is punished, it is nonsense to say he is pardoned, and so far as
he is not pardoned, his fault is charged upon him.

3. Suppose temporal punishment remain to be satisfied for; whether all or only
some one kind? whether diseases, pains, and death be not part of the temporal
punishment of sin, and whether men may be freed from these by Indulgences?
whether from the effects of the justice of God in extraordinary judgments? if
not, how can a man be said to be freed from the temporal punishment of sin that
is as liable to it as any one else?

4. If only one sort of the temporal punishment of sin, why is not that one
sort declared what it is, that all men may be satisfied from the Pope himself,
whom some believe infallible, in his Indulgence? Others we find are not agreed
about it; some say it is only the punishment due to sin above the Canonical
penance; some, that it is only the Canonical penance and not that which is due
from the justice of God, some that it is for both, some only for negligence in
performing penance, some that it is only for enjoined penance, and others that
it is for all that may be enjoined. In this diversity of opinions what security
can any man have what punishment he is to be freed from?

5. If it be from Canonical Penance whether a man is wholly freed from the
obligation to that or no? if he be, what power has the Priest to enjoyne
penance after? if he be not free, what is it he is freed from? and in what
tolerable sense can this be called a most full remission of sins, which neither
remits the fault, nor the natural or divine punishment, nor so much as the
Canonical Penance enjoined by a Priest?

6. Although there needs no treasure where nothing is discharged; yet since so
great a one is spoken of for this purpose, wherein the satisfaction of Christ
bears the greatest share; it were worth the enquiring why the satisfaction of
Christ might not as well remit the temporal punishment when the fault is
remitted on the account of it, as afterward by Indulgences?

7. How the parts of Christ's satisfaction come to be divided into that which
was necessary, and that which was redundant; so as the necessary satisfies for
the fault, and the redundant for the temporal punishment? whether Christ did
any more than God required? whether any thing which God required can be said to
be redundant? if there be, how one part comes to be applied and the other cast
into a treasure? what parts can be made of an infinite and entire satisfaction?
and if so little were necessary, and so much redundant, how the least part
comes to satisfy for the fault and eternal punishment; and the greatest only
for the temporal punishment?

8. Whether all the satisfaction of Christ taken together were not great enough
to remit the eternal punishment of the whole world? if it were, whether all the
redundant parts of that, be cast into a treasure too? and who has the keeping
of it, and what use is made of so much more useful a treasure than that which
serves only to remit the temporal punishment? What account can the Pope give of
suffering so vast a part of the Churches Treasure to lie idle and make no use
of it for the benefit of those that need it?

9. May not the Pope, if he thinks of it, gather another mighty Treasure of the
absolute Power of God which is never used, as for making new worlds, etc? may
he not by the help of this deliver souls out of hell, as well as by the other
out of Purgatory? and if this be so much the greater kindness, he ought to
think of it and employ this treasure for these purposes. Why may he not think
of another treasure of the light of the Sun that is more than enough for the
use of the world, and to lay it up in store for the benefit of the purblind and
Aged?

10. If the satisfaction of Christ be so redundant; how comes it not to be
sufficient for so poor an end as Indulgences serve for; but the satisfactions
of the Saints must make up a share in this Treasure too? Is not this worse,
than to light a Candle to help the Sun, to suppose Christ's satisfaction so
infinite, as to be sufficient to redeem more worlds, and yet not enough to
deliver from temporal punishment without the satisfactions of the Saints?

11. How come the Saints to make such large satisfactions to the justice of
God, if the satisfaction of Christ were of so infinite a nature? and if they
did make satisfactions, were they not sufficiently rewarded for them? if they
were, how come those satisfactions to help others which they were so abundantly
recompensed for themselves?

12. If the satisfaction of Christ does only obtain grace for the Saints to
satisfy themselves for the temporal punishment of their sins; how can the
application of this satisfaction by Indulgences free any from the temporal
punishment of their sins? Or have the satisfactions of Saints being joined with
Christ's greater power now in common penitents, than the satisfaction of Christ
alone in the greatest Saints?

13. Why the satisfaction of Christ may not serve, without the Saints to remit
only the temporal punishment of sins; when it was sufficient alone to remit
both eternal and temporal in the Sacrament of Baptism? or was the force of it
spent then, that it needs a fresh supply afterward? but if then it could be
applied to a higher end, without any other help, why not where it is to have
far less efficacy?

14. If satisfaction be made to God for the temporal punishment of penitents by
Indulgences; I desire to know when and by whom the payment is made to God? If
it was made by the persons whose satisfactions make the Churches treasure, for
that end, what has the Pope to do to dispense that which God has accepted
long ago for payment? If it be made by the Pope, in what way does he make it?
does he take out so much ready cash of the Churches treasure and pay it down
upon the nail, according to the proportion of every ones sins? or does he only
tell God where such a treasure lies and bid him go and satisfy himself, for as
much as he discharges of his d^bt?

15. How came this Treasure of the Church into the Popes Keeping? who gave him
alone the Keys of it? if there were any such thing, methinks those who are
trusted with the greater treasure of Christ's necessary satisfaction for the
remitting of eternal punishment, as every Priest is by their own doctrine in
the Sacrament of Penance: should not be denied the lesser of the Superfluities
of Christ and the Saints sufferings for the remitting only temporal punishment.
When I once see these questions satisfactorily answered, I may then think
better of this doctrine than I do at present; for the best I can think of it
now is, that there never was a doctrine more absurd in the ground of it, or
more gainful in the practice than this of Indulgences in the Roman Church; and
therefore ought to be accounted one of the most notorious cheats that ever was
in the Christian world.

. 10. But let us suppose it otherwise, The tendency of Indulgences to hinder
devotion.
and then we are to enquire, whether this would tend to promote or obstruct
that very way of devotion, which is most in request in the Roman Church? there
are but two ways to judge of this, either by experience or the nature of the
doctrine it self. For experience my Adversary alleges his own, and that he
has seen great devotion caused by them: but by his favor the question is not,
what outward acts of devotion may be performed by some ignorant and silly
people, who are abused by great hopes of strange benefits by Indulgences, and
therefore prepare themselves with some show of devotion to receive them
especially when they are unusual; but the question is, whether they have these
effects upon those who understand the nature and design of them and the
doctrine of their Church about them. D^^and. in sentent. l. 4. did. 20. q. 4.
For as Durandus resolves it, the validity of the Indulgence does not depend on
the devotion of the receiver, for then says he, the Indulgence would contain a
falsity in it, which is, that whosoever does such a thing, as going to the 7.
Churches, shall have plenary remission of his sins; therefore says he, whoever
does the thing, shall have the whole benefit of the Indulgence, or else the
Indulgence is false. And to his experience I shall oppose, that of greater
observers of the world than he has been. I have already mentioned the
testimony of Vrspergensis and others concerning the effects of plenary
Indulgences in their times, how men encouraged themselves to sin the more
because of them. Polyd, virg. de invent. rer. l. 8. c. 1.
Polydore Virgil observes, that when Indulgences were grown common, many men
did abstain less from doing evil actions. The author of the book called Onus
Ecclesiae says, Onus Ecc^^. c. 14. 8. 28.
that they take men off from the fruits of repentance, and are profitable only
to the idle and wicked. The Princes of Germany in the Diet of Norimberg among
the grievances represented to the Pope, Centum gravamina act. 3. 4.
by the consent of them all; upon the mention of Indulgences reckon as the
least bad consequence of them, that the people were cheated of their money by
them; but that they say was far more considerable, that true Christian Piety
was destroyed by them; and that all manner of wickedness did spring from
thence; and that men were afraid of committing no kind of sin, when at so cheap
a rate they could purchase a remission of them. But setting aside the
experience of these things, let us consider what the nature of the doctrine it
self tends to, to those who believe it. The least benefit we see allowed them
is a freedom from enjoined penances; and what are these penances accounted
among them, but fruits of true repentance, a severe mortification, fasting,
frequent prayers and Alms? so that the short of this doctrine is, that men by
Indulgences are excused from doing the best parts of their Religion, and if
this be a way of promoting devotion I leave any one in his senses to judge.

. 11. I proceed now to the denying the Cup to the Laity, Of communion in one
kind.
contrary to the practice of the Church in the solemn celebration of the
Eucharist for a thousand years after Christ. To which he answers 3. ways (1)
that the receiving in one or both kinds was ever held a matter of liberty in
the Church. (2) that it was as much in the Churches power to alter it after a
1000. years, as in the first or second century. (3) that the believing whole
Christ to be present in one kind tends more to excite devotion than receiving
both elements without that belief. This is the substance of his answer.
Vindication of Archbishop Land. Part. 3. chapter 3. 8. 14. 15. 16. 17.
But I have else where at large proved, and need not repeat it here, that the
Institution of Christ, as to both kinds, was of an universally obligatory
nature, not only from the will of the first Institutor, but from the universal
sense of the Church concerning the nature of that Institution. And there I have
largely answered those very testimonies produced by him, and showed that they
are so far from proving the use of one kind in the Catholic Church, that Leo
in that very place shows, that it was the token of an heretic not to receive
in both kinds; and the other Instance in the Greek Church is only of a woman in
whose mouth the bread turned into a stone, that she had not patience to stay to
receive the Cup. So very pittyful are the proofs brought against the use of
both kinds for a 1000. years after Christ, which being supposed and
acknowledged by some of the most learned and ingenuous of their own Church, I
wonder what authority the Church afterward can have to alter, what was always
looked on before as an obliging Institution of Christ? Might it not as well
alter any other Institution on the same grounds? and wholly forbid the bread to
the Laity as well as the cup; and I do not at all question but as substantial
reasons might be brought for one as the other. I had thought the Gentlemen of
the Roman Church had pretended a mighty reverence to Apostolical Traditions,
and the Practice of the Catholic Church, for a thousand years after Christ.
But it seems this signifies nothing to them, when it is contrary to their
present doctrine and practice. Then it makes a great noise as he says but
nothing else: Thus we Protestants have at last gained Antiquity of our side, it
is now yielded that though the Church were for us, for a thousand years, yet if
it now decree or act otherwise, this is enough for them. And we are contented
to have Christ and his Apostles and all the Primitive practice, for so long a
time on our side; and to leave them to enjoy the satisfaction that follows,
taking the part of the Church of Rome against them all. But however their
opinion tends more to devotion? Alas for us! we do not account it any piece of
devotion to believe nonsense, and contradictions such as the doctrine of
transubstantiation implies: we know not what devotion there can be in opposing
a plain Institution of Christ, and not merely in leaving the people at liberty
to receive in one or both kinds, but in prohibiting the far greatest part of
Christians to receive as Christ appointed; we know not what devotion there can
lie in worshipping a piece of bread for the Son of God; and believing that when
a wafer is taken into our mouths, that God himself is personally entered under
our Roof. O horrible devotion and detestable superstition! to give the same
adoration to a wafer which we do to the Eternal God; and to believe Christ to
go down as personally into our bellies, as ever he went up and down when he
was upon earth.

. 12. That which follows is, Of the Popes power of dispensing.
the Power of a Persons dispensing in oaths and marriages contrary to the Law
of God, which I therefore made a hindrance of the sincerity of devotion because
it is apt to possess men's minds with an apprehension that Religion is only a
Politic Cheat, if any person shall be thought able to dispense with those
things which are universally received among Christians as the Laws of God. That
which I meant, was the Popes taking upon him to dispense with oaths of
allegiance to Princes, and the incestuous marriages of some great Princes. And
now let any one consider what his Answer signifies: he says, that some kinds
of oaths may be judged in some circumstances to be hurtful and not fit to be
kept: and the dispensation in them is no more than to judge or determine them
to be so: and for Marriages, he adds that the Church may dispense in some
degrees of Affinity and consanguinity, but in nothing contrary to the Law of
God. But this does not at all reach to the business; for dispensing in this way
may as well be done by a Casuist as the Bishop of Rome; but the Question lies
here, whether those things which otherwise would be sins by the Law of God, do
therefore cease to be so, because of the Popes Power to discharge that
obligation of conscience which lay upon the Person, either in oaths or
marriages? Let him answer directly to this; for the other is shuffling and not
answering. As, it is granted that a subject has an obligation of conscience
upon him to obey his Sovereign by virtue of the Law of God; and the universal
sense of the Church has been that there are some degrees of consanguinity and
Affinity which it is Incest to marry within: I desire to know whether the Popes
power can make disobedience lawful in one case and marriage in another, which
without that Power were utterly unlawful? This he could not but know was the
thing meant, but not fit to be answered.

. 13. The last Instance is, The ill consequence of asserting marriage in a
Priest to be worse than Fornication.
making disobedience to the Church in disputable matters, more heinous than
disobedience to the Laws of Christ in unquestionable things, as marriage in a
Priest to be a greater crime than Fornication. To this he answers. 1. That the
Law of the Church being supposed forbidding the marriage of a Priest, that is
no disputable matter: but it is out of Question by the Law of God, that
obedience is to be given to the commands or prohibitions of the Church. 2. That
marriage in a Priest, the prohibition of the Church being supposed and a
voluntary vow against it, is no better than Adultery in the language of the
Fathers, and therefore worse than Fornication. 3. That the state of single life
is much more convenient for Priests, than the married state is. This last
answer is nothing at all to the purpose, for in matters of convenience not
determined by any Law, every one is left to be his own chooser; but the case I
put, was not between a married life and single life, for we know no harm,
either in one or the other of these, but every one is to judge as most tends to
the comfort of his life and the ends of his calling; which has now far
different circumstances from the Apostolical times, which is a sufficient
answer to the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 7. 32. having a particular respect to the
state of the Christian Church in that time of unfixedness and persecution: but
the opposition was between marriage in a Priest and Fornication, whether the
former were not by them made a greater crime than the latter, and whether this
were not dishonor to the Laws of Christ to make the breach of a constitution
of the Church, in a matter left at liberty by the Law of Christ, a greater
crime than the violation of an indisputable Law of his? And S. Paul has given
a general rule which equally holds in all ages of the Church, If they cannot
contain let them marry, 1 Cor. 7. 9.
for it is better to marry than to burn. So that if S. Paul may resolve the
case he makes no question, that where there is but danger of Fornication,
marriage is so far from being a greater crime than that, that it becomes a duty
to such a one. But hold, say they of the Church of Rome to S. Paul, this is
only meant of those whom the Church allows to marry, but if the Church once
forbid it to any they are not to marry, let their case be what it will. Here
then lies the dispute between S. Paul and them; S. Paul says, to avoid
fornication a man ought to marry; they say, that to marry after the prohibition
of the Church is worse than Fornication: S. Paul might it may be ask, what
authority their Church had to determine contrary to what he had done in this
case; Or men to make vows, against the most proper remedy of some of the
Infirmities of humane nature, and which God has not promised to any to keep
them from: If obedience to the Church be indisputable, it is only in such
things which God has not antecedently determined by his own Law; but in the
case between marriage and fornication God himself has given a Law before hand,
which no Church in the world can reverse. And however indifferent a thing in
the general it be to marry or not, yet when it comes to that point, either
marriage or Fornication, I wonder at the confidence of any, who dare upon any
account whatsoever, make marriage a greater crime than Fornication.

But, he says, it seems strange to them who either cannot or will not take the
word of Christ, that is his counsel of chastity, that marriage in a Priest
should be a greater sin than Fornication. It does, I assure you seem strange to
us, because we are desirous to keep the Commands of Christ, and we are sure
marriage is against none of them, but Fornication is. Does that man take
Christ's counsel of chastity, that rather chooses to commit Fornication than
marry? What admirable chastity is that? and what a beastly institution must
marriage be, if Fornication be a less crime than that? But what a reflection is
this the mean while, on the author of it, and that state of innocence and
purity wherein it was first appointed: They must needs think themselves very
holy men, who look on that state as too impure for them, which was allotted to
man in his greatest Innocence. But although the first Ages of the Christian
Church were so full of hardship and difficulties, that if ever it should have
been required of the Governors of the Church to have been above this state, it
should have been at that time; yet we find no such thing in the Apostolical
times or afterward, when the necessities of affairs would most have required
it. But when the Christian Church came to have settlement in the world, and by
degrees persons were fixed with endowments to particular places, and some care
of affairs of the world was necessarily joined with those of the Church; there
was far less reason to make such a prohibition of marriage to the Clergy than
ever was before. And the scandals were so abominable where those restraints
were most in force, that on that very account the wisest men (though as fond as
any of the Churches authority) thought there was more reason to give liberty to
Priests to marry, than ever there had been to restrain them from it. I am not
bound to defend all the extravagant and indiscreet passages which fell from
some of the Fathers concerning marriage; but I am sure the Church preserved her
liberty in it notwithstanding them, as I might easily prove if it were suitable
to my present design. And S. Cyprian speaking of those Virgins, Cyprian. ep.
62.
who came nearest to vows of virginity as Rigaltius observes, says, that it
were better for them to marry, than to fall into bell by their sins, when they
either will not or cannot keep their promise; the same thing is said by S.
Augustine, August. de San. Virginit. 1. c. 34.
by Epiphanius, by the author of the epistle ad Demetriadem as Bishop Jewel
has long since proved; Epiph. c. haer. 61.
and need not here be repeated.

Two things he objects to prove marriage worse than fornication after a vow of
continency; Hieronym. ep adv. demetriad. Jewels defense of the Apology part. 2.
p. 174.
one from the authority of S. Paul, who says the younger Widows that marry
after the dedicating themselves to the service of the Church, do incur
damnation, because by so doing they made void their first faith, i. e. as the
Fathers expound it, the vow they had made. But does he really think, that they
did not break their first faith and incur damnation by Fornication as well as
by Marrying? If they did, how can this prove marriage worse than Fornication? I
grant, that by their first faith has been understood the promise made to the
Church, and who denies the breach of promise to be a bad and scandalous thing,
which is that S. Paul means by damnation; and is not Fornication much more so,
where a thing in it self evil is committed besides the breach of the promise?
Can any one think that is not more waxing wanton against Christ, than mere
marrying is? Therefore S. Paul would have the younger Women to marry and not
make any such promises; ^ Tim. 5. 14.
which they would be in danger of breaking; he would have none admitted into
the condition of Church-widdowes but those that were 60. years of ages, v. 9.
and so in reason to be supposed passed the temptations to Fornication. Whereby
he shows what rule ought to be observed in all such promises, and that none
ought to be brought under them, but such as are to be supposed past the common
temptations of humane nature in those things. But his second authority is more
to his purpose, (if it were good for any thing,) which is the 104. Cannon of
the 4. Council of Carthage as it is called; but he might have found in
Iustellus his preface to the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae; Bibliotheca
furis Canoni^i. p. 317.
that this 4. Council of Carthage is of no Authority at all; and we need not be
concerned for any Canon contained therein, which is not in the Code of the
African Church as this is not; but seems taken out of some Decretals of the
Popes, as will appear by comparing the 101. Canon in the Collection of
Cresconius with the 104. of this Council. And it would be very strange if S.
Augustine were present in this Council, that he should herein oppose what he had
said elsewhere; for he determins, that the marrying again of the widows that
had vowed continuance in that state was no Adultery, but a lawful marriage; and
that husband and wife ought not to be separated from each other upon such
marriages, August. de bono viduitat. c. 9. 10. 11.
and by that means make the husbands truly Adulterers, when they separate from
them and marry other wives: and therefore, says he, that which the Apostle
condemns in them, is not so much their marrying as their will to marry whether
they do or no, whereby they break their first faith, So that it is not
marriage but lust which the Apostle condemns; from whence it appears that S.
Austin could never, if he spoke consonantly to himself, condemn marriage after
a vow of continency to be worse than Fornication. Indeed, he says, that this
falling from that holy chastity which was vowed to God, may in some sense be
said to be worse than Adultery; but he never imagined such a construction could
be made of his words, as though the act of Fornication were not a greater
falling from it, than mere marriage could be.

So much shall suffice for the Instances produced in the Roman Church, of such
things which tend to obstruct a good life and devotion.

. 14. The 3. argument I used to prove the danger a person runs of his salvation
in the communion of the Roman Church, Of the uncertainty of faith in the Roman
Church.
was because it exposes the faith of Christians to so great uncertainties;
which he looks on as a strange charge from the Pen of a Protestant. As strange
as it is, I have at large proved it true in a full examination of the whole
Controversy of the Resolution of faith between us and them; Vindication of
Archbishop Laud part. 1. chapter 5. 6. 7. 8 9.
to which I expect a particular Answer before this charge be renewed again. To
which I must refer him for the main proof of it, and shall here subjoyn only
short replies to his Answers; or references to what is fully answered already.

1. His distinction of the authority of the Scripture in it self and to us,
signifies nothing; for when we enquire into the proofs of the Authority of
Scripture, it can be understood no otherwise than in respect to us; and if the
Scriptures Authority as to us is to be proved by the Church, and the Churches
Authority as to us to be provved by the Scripture, the difficulty is not in the
least avoided by that distinction. And as little to the purpose is the other,
that it is only an argument ad hominem, to prove the Infallibility of the
Church from Scriptures, for I would fain know upon what other grounds they
build their own belief of the Churches Infallibility than on the Promises of
Christ in the Scripture? These are miserable evasions and nothing else. For the
trite saying of S. Austin, that he would not believe the Gospel, etc. I have at
large proved that the meaning of it is no more than that the Testimony of the
Universal Church from the Apostles times is the best way to prove the
particular books of Scripture, c. 7. sect. 9.
to be authentical and cannot be understood of the Infallibility of the present
Church; and that the testimony of some few persons as the Manichees were was
not to be taken in opposition to the whole Christian Church. Which is a thing
we as much contend for as they; but is far enough from making the Infallibility
of our faith, to depend on the Authority of the present Church; which we say is
the way to overthrow all certainty of faith to any considering man.

2. To that of overthrowing the certainty of sense in the doctrine of
transubstantiation; he says, that divine revelation ought to be believed
against the evidence of sense. To which I answer (1.) that divine revelation in
matters not capable of being judged by our senses, is to be believed
notwithstanding any argument can be drawn from sensible experiments against it;
as in the belief of God, the doctrine of the Trinity, the future state of the
soul, etc. (2.) that in the proper objects of sense to suppose a Revelation
contrary to the evidence of sense, is to overthrow all certainty of faith where
the matters to be believed depend upon matters of fact. As for Instance, the
truth of the whole Christian doctrine depends upon the truth of Christ's
resurrection from the dead: if sense be not here to be believed in a proper
object of it, what assurance can we have that the Apostles were not deceived,
when they said they saw Christ after he was risen?

If it be said there was no revelation against sense in that case: that does
not take off the difficulty, for the reason why I am to believe revelation at
any time against sense must be, because sense may be deceived, but revelation
cannot; but if I yield to that principle that sense may be deceived in its most
proper object, we can have no infallible certainty by sense at all, and
consequently not in that point, that Christ is risen from the dead. If it be
said, that sense cannot be deceived, where there is no revelation against it: I
desire to know how it comes to be deceived supposing a revelation contrary to
it? Does God impose upon our senses at that time? then he plainly deceives us;
is it by telling us we ought to believe more than we see? that we deny not: but
we desire only to believe according to our senses in what we do see; as what
we see to be bread, that is bread; that what the Apostles saw to be the body of
Christ was the body of Christ really, and substantially, and not merely the
accidents of a body. Besides, if revelation is to be believed against sense;
then either that revelation is conveyed immediately to our minds, which is to
make every one a Prophet that believes transubstantiation; or mediately by our
senses, as in those words this is my body: if so, than I am to believe this
revelation by my senses, and believing this revelation, I am not to believe my
senses: which is an excellent way of making faith certain. All this on
supposition there were a revelation in this case, which is not only false, but
if it were true would overthrow the certainty of faith.

3. To that I objected, as to their denying to men the use of their judgment
and reason as to the matters of faith proposed by a Church, when they must use
it in the choice of a Church; he answers, that this cannot expose faith to any
uncertainty, because it is only preferring the Churches judgment before our
own: but he does not seem to understand the force of my objection which lay in
this. Every one must use his own judgment and reason in the choice of the
Church he is to rely upon; is he certain in this or not? if he be uncertain,
all that he receives on the Authority of that Church must be uncertain too: if
the use of reason be certain, then how comes the Authority of a Church to be a
necessary means of certainty in matters of faith? And they who condemn the use
of a man's reason and judgment in Religion must overthrow all certainty on
their own grounds, since the choice of his Infallible Guide must depend upon
it. Now he understands my argument better, he may know better how to answer it:
but I assure him I meant no such thing by the use of reason, as he supposes I
would have, which is to believe nothing, but what my reason can comprehend; for
I believe an Infinite Being, and all the Doctrines revealed by it in Holy
Scriptures, although I cannot reconcile all particulars concerning them to
those conceptions we call reason. But therefore to argue against the use of
men's judgments in matters of faith, and the grounds of believing, is to
dispute against that, which all wise men ever did, and will do to the worlds
end.

4. I proved they made faith uncertain, by making the Churches power to extend
to the making new articles of faith. This he grants to be to the purpose, if it
were true: but he says, the Church never owned any such power in her General
Councils, (which does not hinder but that the Heads of their Church have
pretended to it and in case it be disputable among them, whether the Pope be
not infallible, that unavoidably leaves faith at uncertainties.) Yet he yields
what I contend for, which is, that it is in the Churches Power to make that
necessary to be believed which was not so before: for whether it be by
inventing new Articles, or declaring more explicitly the Truths not contained
in Scripture and Tradition; it is all one to my purpose, as long as men might
be saved without believing them before and cannot afterward; which is to make
the conditions of salvation mutable according to the pleasure of the Church;
which is the greatest inconveniency of inventing new doctrines.

5. I showed, they made faith uncertain by pretending to infallibility in
determining Controversies, and yet not using it to determine those which are on
foot among themselves. The force of the argument did not lie in this as he
imagines, as though faith could not be certain, unless all controversies were
determined, which was far from my thoughts, but that pretending there can be no
faith without infallibility in their Church to end Controversies, they should
give such great occasion to suspect that they did not believe themselves by
employing that Infallibility in ending the great Controversies among
themselves; of which I have spoken already, and to this he gives no answer at
all.

Thus much in Vindication of the third Argument, I made use of to prove, that
all those who are in the Communion of the Roman Church, do run so great a
hazard of their salvation, that none who have a care of their souls ought to
embrace or continue in it.

. 15. I now come to the third answer to the first Question, The case of a
revolter and a bred Papist compared.
which was, that a Protestant leaving the Communion of our Church, does incur
a greater guilt, than one who was bred up in the communion of the Church of
Rome, and continues therein by invincible Ignorance, and therefore cannot
equally be saved with such a one. Three things he objects against this Answer.
1. That this makes them both damned, though unequally, because the Converted
Catholic more deeply than he that was bred so. 2. That this reflects as much
upon St. Austin as them, who rejected the Communion of the Manichees, and
embraced that of the Church of Rome upon their grounds. 3. That it is contrary
to our distinction of points fundamental and not fundamental. To which I Reply:

1. That the design of my Answer was not to pass the sentence of damnation on
all who dye in the communion of the Roman Church; but to show that they who
forsook a better Church for it do incur greater guils, than those who are
always bred up in it and live and dye in the belief of its being the true
Church, and therefore are not in an equal capacity of salvation with them. I
shall make my meaning more plain by a parallel Instance or two; many in the
Church of Rome have asserted the possibility of the Salvation of Heathens
(though some Bigots have denied it to Protestants) suppose this question were
put concerning two persons: Whether a Christian having the same motives to
become a Heathen, which one bred and born and well grounded in Heathenism has
to remain in it, may not equally be saved in the profession of it? and a third
person should answer, that a Christian leaving the communion of the Christian
Church does incur a greater guilt, than one who was bred up in Heathenism and
continues therein by invincible Ignorance: does this answer imply that they
must both be damned though equally? or rather does it not yield a greater
possibility of salvation to one than to the other? Or suppose, (to come nearer
our case) the question were put, concerning one that revolted from the Church
of Judah to the ten Tribes, (which were guilty of Idolatry, though not of the
highest kind,) whether he were equally capable of salvation with one who was
bred up in the communion of the Church of Israel all his days? I should make
no question to pronounce his condition more dangerous than the other; and yet
not therein damn them both, but only imply that it was much harder for to
escape than the other. For he that was bred up in the Church of Israel,
believing it was the true God he served, and in a right manner, and looking on
the Church of Judah as a Schismatical Church, and seeing the greater number of
Tribes on their side, and wanting that instruction which was in the Church of
Judah, might in the sincerity of his heart serve God in a false way, and pray
to him to pardon all his errors and corruptions, and have a general repentance
of all sins, though not particularly convinced of the Idolatry of the ten
Tribes, I dare not say, but God will accept of such a one that thus fears God
and works Righteousness in the simplicity of his heart: but I cannot say the
same of one who revolts from Judah, where the true God was worshipped in a true
manner, where he had sufficient means of instruction, and either wilful
Ignorance, or temporal ends, or unreasonable prejudices makes him deliberately
choose a worse and more impure Church before a better, for that very sin makes
his case much more dangerous than the other. Our business is not to enquire
into the salvation or damnation of any particular persons; for that depends
upon so many circumstances as to the aggravation or extenuation of their
faults, the nature and sincerity of their repentance, the integrity and
simplicity of their minds; which none but God himself can know: but to find out
the truest way to salvation, and to reject whatever Church requires that which
is in it self sinful; for though God may pardon those who live in it in the
simplicity of their minds, yet their hopes lying in their Ignorance and
repentance, none who have a care of their souls dare venture themselves in so
hazardous a state. Setting aside then the consideration of the danger common to
both, I say the case of a Revolter from us to the Church of Rome is much worse
than of one who was always bred up in it, because he might far more easily
understand the danger he runs into, and wilful Ignorance only keeps him from
it, and he does upon deliberation choose a state of infinite hazard before one
of the greatest safety.

2. This does not reflect on St. Austin or the Church in his time, which was as
far different from theirs as the Churches of Judah and Israel were from each
other: neither can it destroy the distinction of Fundamentals and not
Fundamentals, for the possibility of salvation allowed to any in their Church
is built upon the supposition that they have all that is fundamentally
necessary in order to it, though there are many dangerous errors and
corruptions in that Church whose communion they live in.

. 16. The Answers to the first Question being thus vindicated; The motives of
the Roman Church considered.
there remains little to be added concerning the second. For he tells me, that
he agrees so far with me, that every Christian is bound to choose the communion
of the purest Church. But which that Church is must be seen by the grounds it
brings to prove the doctrines it teaches, to have been delivered by Christ and
his Apostles. And to be even with him, I thus far agree with him in the way of
proof of a Churches purity, viz. by agreement with the doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles; and that that Church is to be judged purest which shows the
greatest evidence of that consent; and that every one is bound to enquire which
Church has the strongest Motives for it and to embrace the communion of it.

Being thus far agreed, I must now enquire into what motives he offers on
behalf of their Church; and what method he prescribes for delivering ours. For
the former, he produces a large Catalogue of Catholic Motives (as he calls
them) in the words of Dr. Taylour, Liberty of Prophecy, Sect. 20. And I do not
know a better way of answering them, than in the words of the same eminent and
learned Person, which he uses upon a like occasion to his demonstrating Friend
I. S. But now in my Conscience, Preface to the second part of his dissuasive.
(says the Bishop) this was unkindly done, that when I had spoken for them
what I could, and more than I knew they had ever said for themselves, and yet
to save them harmless from the iron hands of a tyrant and unreasonable power,
to keep them from being persecuted for their errors and opinions, that they
should take the arms I had lent them for their defense, and throw them at my
head. But the best of it is, though I. S. be unthankful, yet the Weapons
themselves are but wooden Daggers, intended only to represent how the poor men
are couzened by themselves, and that under fair and fraudulent pretenses even
pious well meaning men, men wise enough in other things may be abused. And
though what I said, was but tinsel and pretense, imagery and whipped Cream, yet I
could not be blamed to use no better than the best their cause could bear: yet
if that be the best they have to say for themselves, their probabilities will
be soon out-ballanced by one Scripture-testimony urged by Protestants, and thou
shall not Worship any graven Images will outweigh all the best and fairest
imaginations of their Church. -- But then I. S. might, if he had pleased, have
considered, that I did not intend to make that harangue to represent that the
Roman Religion had probabilities of being true, but probabilities that the
Religion might be tolerated, or might be endured: and if I was deceived it was
but a well meant error, hereafter they shall speak for themselves, only for
their comfort, this they might have also observed in that Book, that there is
not half so much excuse for the Papists, as there is for the Anabaptists, and
yet it was but an excuse at the best. But since from me, says he, they borrow
their light Armor, which is not Pistol-proof; from me if they please they may
borrow a remedy to undeceive them, and that in the same kind and way of
arguing; for which he referrs to a letter written by him to a Gentlewoman
seduced to the Church of Rome; out of which I shall transcribe so much as may
overbalance the probabilities produced elsewhere by him.

After directions given rather to enquire what her Religion is than what her
Church is, Polemical discourses p 705. etc.
for that which is a true Religion to day, will be so to morrow and for ever,
but that which is a holy Church to day, may be Heretical at the next change, or
may betray her trust, or obtrude new Articles in contradiction to the old, etc.
and showing the unreasonablness of believing the Roman to be the Catholic
Church; he descends thus to particulars. You are now gone to a Church that
protects it self by arts of subtlety and arms, by violence and persecuting all
that are not of their minds: to a Church in which you are to be a subject of
the King so long as it pleases the Pope: In which you may be absolved from your
Vows made to God, your Oaths to the King, your Promises to Men, your Duty to
your Parents in some cases: a Church in which men Pray to God and to Saints in
the same Form of words in which they Pray to God, as you may see in the Offices
of Saints, and particularly of our Lady; a Church in which men are taught by
most of the principal Leaders to Worship Images with the same Worship with
which they Worship God or Christ, or him or her, whose Image it is, and in
which they usually picture God the Father and the Holy Trinity to the great
dishonor of that Sacred mystery, against the doctrine and practice of the
primitive Church, against the express doctrine of Scripture, against the honor
of, a divine Attribute; I mean the immensity and spirituality of the divine
nature: You are gone to a Church that pretends to be infallible, and yet is
infinitely deceived in many particulars, and yet endures no contradiction, and
is impatient her Children should enquire into any thing her Priests obtrude.
You are gone from receiving the whole Sacrament to receive it but half, from
Christ's Institution to a human Invention, from Scripture to uncertain
Traditions, and from ancient Tradition to new pretenses, from Prayers which ye
understood to Prayers which ye understand not, from confidence in God to rely
upon Creatures, from entire dependence upon inward-acts, to a dangerous
temptation of resting too much in outward ministeries in the external work of
Sacraments and Sacramentals. You are gone from a Church whose Worshipping is
simple, Christian and Apostolical, to a Church where men's Consciences are
laden with a burden of Ceremonies, greater than that in the days of the
Jewish Religion (for the Ceremonial of the Church of Rome is a great Book in
Folio.) You are gone from a Church where you were exhorted to read the Word of
God, the Holy Scriptures, from whence you sound instruction, institution,
comfort, reproof, a treasure of all excellencies, to a Church that seals up
that Fountain from you, and gives you drink by drops out of such Cisterns as
they first make and then stain and then reach out: and if it be told you, that
some men abuse Scripture, it is true, for if your Priests had not abused
Scripture, they could not thus have abused you; but there is no necessity they
should, and you need not unless you list; any more than you need to abuse the
Sacrament or Decrees of the Church, or the messages of your friend, or the
Letters you receive, or the Laws of the Land, all which are liable to be abused
by evil persons, but not by good people and modest understandings. It is now
become a part of your Religion to be Ignorant, to walk in blindness, to believe
the man that hears your Confessions, to hear none but him, not to hear God
speaking but by him, and so you are liable to be abused by him, as he please,
without remedy. You are gone from us, where you are only taught to worship God
through Jesus Christ, and now you are taught to Worship Saints and Angels, with
a Worship at least dangerous and in some things proper to God; for your Church
Worships the V. Mary with burning Incense and Candles to her, and you give her
presents which by the consent of all Nations used to be esteemed a Worship
peculiar to God, and it is the same thing which was condemned in the
Collyridians, who offered a Cake to the V. Mary. A Candle and a Cake make no
difference in the Worship; and your joining God and the Saints is like the
device of them that fought for King and Parliament, the latter destroys the
former. To which he subjoynes, that the points of difference between us and the
Church of Rome, are such as do evidently serve the ends of Covetousness and
Ambition in them: and that very many of her Doctrines are very ill Friends to a
good life, and that our Religion is incomparably beyond theirs in point of
safety: as in point of Praying to God alone and without Images, relying on God
as infallible, which are surely lawful; but it is at least hugely disputable
and not at all certain that any man or society of men can be infallible, that
we may put our trust in Saints, or Worship Images, etc. From whence he
concludes; So that unless you mean to prefer a danger before safety,
temptation to unholiness before a severe and holy Religion, unless you mean to
lose the benefit of yours prayers by praying what you perceive not, and the
benefit of the Sacrament in great degrees by falling from Christ's Institution,
and taking half instead of all; unless you desire to provoke God to jealousy
by Images, and man to jealousy in professing a Religion in which you may in
many cases have leave to forfeit your faith and lawful trust; unless you will
choose a Catechism without the second Commandment, and a faith that grows
bigger or lesser as men please, and a hope that in many degrees relyes on men
and vain confidences, and a Charity that damns all the world but your selves,
unless you will do all this, that is, suffer an abuse in your Prayers, in the
Sacrament, in the commandments, in faith, in hope, in Charity, in the Communion
of Saints, and your duty to your Supreme, you must return to the bosom of your
Mother the Church of England, and I doubt not but you will find the comfort of
it in all your life, and in the day of your death, and in the day of Judgment.

Thus far that excellent person, and I leave you now to judge between the
Motives on both sides, as they are laid down by him whom my Adversary appeals
to, and I must thank him for the kindness of mentioning him against me, without
which I had wanted so good a representation of the Motives of either side, and
so full an Answer to the pretenses brought for the Church of Rome. The other
Motives which he adds of Fathers, Councils and Tradition, he knows are utterly
denied by us; and I wonder he should insist upon them, since in the matters of
our debate, Antiquity is so evidently of our side, as against Worship of Images
and Saints, against Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Prayers in an unknown
tongue, and he thinks it no great matter to allow us a thousand years against
communion in one kind; and yet all this while Scripture, Fathers, Councils, and
Tradition are all on their side. For the testimony of the present Church; we
deny that S. Austin speaks of it as of it self sufficient; and though he did,
that concerns not the Roman Church any more than other parts of the Catholic
Church; and he may as soon prove Tyber to be the Ocean, or S. Peter's at Rome to
have been before the Temple at Jerusalem, as prove the Roman Church to be the
Catholic Church, or the Mother of all others.

. 17. But I must conclude, The says of Protestants reduced to Principles.
with the method he prescribes to you for satisfaction from me; which is not to
meddle with particular disputes, (which we know very well the reason of) but to
call upon me for a Catalogue of our grounds, and to bring things to Grounds and
Principles (as they have learnt to Cant of late) and then, he says,
Controversy will soon be at an end. I should be glad to see it so;
notwithstanding his Friend I. S. accounts it so noble a Science, unless he has
changed his mind, since for so many years now, he has failed in the Defense of
his Demonstrations. But to satisfy the men of Principles, and to let them see
we can do more than find fault with their Religion, I shall give an account of
the faith of Protestants in the way of Principles; and of the reason of our
rejecting their impositions, which is all we can understand by Negative Points;
and if we can give an account of the Christian faith independently on their
Churches Authority and Infallibility it evidently follows that cannot be the
foundation of faith; and so we may be very good Christians without having any
thing to do with the Church of Rome. And I know no other Answer necessary, not
only to this present demand, but to a Book called Protestants without
Principles, the falsity of which will appear by what follows.

Principles Agreed on both sides.
1. THat there is a God from whom man, and all other Creatures had their Being.

2. That the notion of God does imply that he is a Being absolutely perfect,
and therefore Justice, Goodness, Wisdom, and Truth must be in him to the
highest degree of perfection.

3. That man receiving his Being from God, is thereby bound to obey his will,
and consequently is liable to punishment in case of disobedience.

4. That in order to man's obeying the will of God, it is necessary that he know
what it is; for which some manifestation of the will of God is necessary, both
that man may know what he has to do, and that God may justly punish him if he
do it not.

5. Whatever God reveals to man is infallibly true, and being intended for the
rule of man's obedience may be certainly known to be his Will.

6. God cannot act contrary to those essential Attributes of Justice, Wisdom,
Goodness and Truth in any way which he makes choice of, to make known his will
unto man by.

These thing being agreed on both sides, we are now to inquire into the
particular ways which God has made choice of for revealing his will to
mankind.
1. AN entire obedience to the will of God being agreed, to be the condition of
man's happiness no other way of Revelation is in it self necessary, to that end,
than such whereby man may know what the will of God is.

2. Man being framed a rational Creature, capable of reflecting upon himself,
may antecedently to any external Revelation, certainly know the Being of God,
and his dependence upon him; and those things which are naturally pleasing unto
him, else there could be no such thing as a Law of Nature, or any principles of
Natural Religion.

3. All supernatural and external Revelation, must suppose the truth of natural
Religion; for unless we be antecedently certain that there is a God, and that
we are capable of knowing him, it is impossible to be certain that God has
revealed his will to us by any supernatural means.

4. Nothing ought to be admitted for Divine Revelation which overthrows the
certainty of those Principles which must be antecedently supposed to all Divine
Revelation. For that were to overthrow the means whereby we are to Judge
concerning the truth of any Divine Revelation.

5. There can be no other means imagined, whereby we are to judge of the truth
of Divine Revelation, but a Faculty in us of discerning truth and falsehood in
matters proposed to our belief, which if we do not exercise in Judging the
truth of Divine Revelation, we must be imposed upon by every thing which
pretends to be so.

6. The pretense of Infallibility in any person or Society of men, must be
Judged in the same way, that the truth of a Divine Revelation is, for that
Infallibility being challenged by virtue of a supernatural assistance, and for
that end to assure men what the will of God is, the same means must be used for
the trial of that, as for any other supernatural way of Gods making known his
Will to men.

7. It being in the power of God to make choice of several ways of revealing
his will to us, we ought not to dispute from the Attributes of God the
necessity of one particular way to the Exclusion of all others, but we ought to
enquire what way God himself has chosen: and whatever he has done, we are
sure cannot be repugnant to Infinite Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth.

8. Whatever way is capable of certainly conveying the will of God to us, may
be made choice of by him for the means of making known his will in order to the
happiness of mankind; so that no Argument can be sufficient a priori to prove,
that God cannot choose any particular way to reveal his mind by, but such which
evidently proves the insufficiency of that means for conveying the Will of God
to us.

9. There are several ways conceivable by us, how God may make known his Will
to us, either by immediate voice from Heaven, or inward inspiration to every
particular person; or inspiring some to speak personally to others, or
assisting them with an infallible spirit in Writing such Books, which shall
contain the Will of God for the Benefit of distant Persons and future Ages.

10. If the Will of God cannot be sufficiently declared to men by Writing, it
must either be because no Writing can be intelligible enough for that end, or
that it can never be known to be Written by men infallibly assisted; the former
is repugnant to common sense, for words are equally capable of being
understood, spoken, or written, the latter overthrows the possibility of the
Scriptures being known to be the Word of God.

11. It is agreed among all Christians that although God in the first Ages of
the World did reveal his mind to men immediately by a voice or secret
inspirations, yet afterward he did communicate his mind to some immediately
inspired to Write his Will in Books to be preserved for the benefit of future
Ages, and particularly that these Books of the New Testament which we now
Receive were so Written by the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ.

12. Such Writings having been received by the Christian Church of the first
Ages as Divine and Infallible, and being delivered down as such to us by an
universal consent of all Ages since, they ought to be owned by us as the
certain rule of faith; whereby we are to Judge what the Will of God is in order
to our Salvation, unless it appear with an evidence equal to that whereby we
believe those Books to be the Word of God, that they were never intended for
that end, because of their obscurity or imperfection.

13. Although we cannot argue against any particular way of Revelation from the
necessary Attributes of God, yet such a way as writing being made choice of by
him, we may justly say, that it is repugnant to the nature of the design, and
the Wisdom and Goodness of God to give infallible assurance to persons in
Writing his Will, for the benefit of Mankind, if those Writings may not be
understood by all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them
in all such things as are necessary for their salvation.

14. To suppose the Books so Written to be imperfect, i. e. that any things
necessary to be believed or practiced are not contained in them, is either to
charge the first Author of them with fraud, and not delivering his whole mind,
or the Writers with insincerity in not setting it down, and the whole Christian
Church of the first Ages with folly, in believing the Fullness and Prefection of
the Scriptures in order to Salvation.

15. These Writings being owned as containing in them the whole Will of God so
plainly revealed, that no sober enquirer can miss of what is necessary for
salvation; there can be no necessity supposed of any infallible society of men
either to attest or explain these Writings among Christians, any more than
there was for some Ages before Christ of such a Body of men among the Jews, to
attest or explain to them the Writings of Moses or the Prophets.

16. There can be no more intolerable usurpation upon the faith of Christians,
than for any Person or Society of men to pretend to an assistance, as
infallible in what they propose as was in Christ or his Apostles, without
giving an equal degree of evidence, that they are so assisted as Christ and his
Apostles did, viz. by miracles as great, public, and convincing as theirs
were, by which I mean, such as are wrought by those very persons who challeng
this infallibility, and with a design for the conviction of those who do not
believe it.

17. Nothing can be more absurd than to pretend the necessity of such an
infallible commission and assistance to assure us of the truth of these
writings, and to interpret them, and at the same time to prove that commission
from those writings, from which we are told nothing can be certainly deduced,
such an assistance not being supposed; or to pretend that infallibility in a
body of men, is not as liable to doubts and disputes as in those books from
whence only they derive their infallibility.

18. There can be no hazard to any person in mistaking the meaning of any
particular place in those books, supposing he use, the best means for
understanding them, comparable to that which every one runs, who believes any
person or society of men to be infallible who are not: for in this latter he
runs unavoidably into one great error, and by that may be led into a thousand,
but in the former God has promised either he shall not err, or he shall not
be damned for it.

19. The assistance which God has promised to those who sincerely desire to
know his will, may give them greater assurance of the truth of what is
contained in the books of Scripture, than it is possible for the greatest
infallibility in any other persons to do, supposing they have not such
assurance of their infallibility.

20. No man's faith can therefore be infallible merely because the Proponent is
said to be infallible; because the nature of Assent does not depend upon the
objective infallibility of any thing without us, but is agreeable to the
evidence we have of it in our minds; for assent is not built on the nature of
things but their evidence to us.

21. It is therefore necessary in order to an infallible assent, that every
particular person be infallibly assisted in Judging of the matters proposed to
him to be believed, so that the ground on which a necessity of some external
infallible Proponent is asserted, must rather make every particular person
infallible, if no divine faith can be without an infallible assent, and so
renders any other infallibility useless.

22. If no particular person be infallible in the assent he gives to matters
proposed by others to him, then no man can be infallibly sure that the Church
is infallible; and so the Churches infallibility can signify nothing to our
infallible assurance without an equal infallibility in our selves in the belief
of it.

23. The infallibility of every particular person being not asserted by those,
who plead for the infallibility of a Church, and the one rendering the other
useless (for if every person be infallible, what need any representative Church
to be so) and the infallibility of a Church being of no effect, if every person
be not infallible in the belief of it, we are farther to inquire what certainty
men may have in matters of faith, supposing no external proponent to be
infallible.

24. There are different degrees of certainty to be attained according to the
different degrees of evidence, and measure of divine assistance; but every
Christian by the use of his reason, and common helps of Grace may attain to so
great a degree of certainty, from the convincing arguments of the Christian
Religion and authority of the Scriptures, that on the same grounds on which men
doubt of the truth of them, they may as well doubt of the truth of those things
which they Judge to be most evident to sense or reason.

25. No man who firmly assents to any thing as true, can at the same time
entertain any suspicion of the falsehood of it, for that were to make him
certain and uncertain of the same thing: it is therefore absurd to say, that
those who are certain of what they believe, may at the same time not know but
it may be false, which is an apparent contradiction and overthrowes any faculty
in us of judging of truth or falsehood.

26. Whatever necessarily proves a thing to be true, does at the same time
prove it impossible to be false; because it is impossible the same thing should
be true and false at the same time. Therefore they who assent firmly to the
doctrine of the Gospel as true, do thereby declare their belief of the
Impossibility of the falsehood of it.

27. The nature of certainty does receive several names, either according to
the nature of the proof or the degrees of the assent. Thus moral certainty may
be so called, either as it is opposed to Mathematical evidence, but implying a
firm assent upon the highest evidence, that Moral things can receive: or as it
is opposed to a higher degree of certainty in the same kind; so Moral certainty
implies only greater probabilities of one side than the other; in the former
sense we assert the certainty of Christian faith to be moral, but not only in
the latter.

28. A Christian being thus certain to the highest degree of a firm assent
that the Scriptures are the word of God, his faith is thereby resolved into the
Scriptures as into the rule and measure of what he is to believe, as it is into
the veracity of God as the ground of his believing what is therein contained.

29. No Christian can be obliged under any pretense of infallibility to believe
any thing as a matter of faith, but what was revealed by God himself in that
book wherein he believes his will to be contained, and consequently is bound to
reject whatsoever is offered to be imposed upon his faith, which has no
foundation in Scripture, or is contrary thereto; which rejection is no making
Negative Articles of faith, but only applying the general grounds of faith to
particular instances, as because I believe nothing necessary to salvation, but
what is contained in Scripture, therefore no such particular things which
neither are there nor can be deduced thence.

30. There can be no better way to prevent men's mistakes in the sense of
Scripture, (which men being fallible are subject to) than the considering the
consequence of mistaking in a matter wherein their salvation is concerned: And
there can be no sufficient reason given why that may not serve in matters of
faith, which God himself has made use of, as the means to keep men from sin in
their lives: unless any imagine that errors in opinion are far more dangerous
to men's souls, than a vicious life is, and therefore God is bound to take more
care to prevent the one than the other.

It follows that,
1. There is no necessity at all, or use of an infallible Society of men to
assure men of the truth of those things, which they may be certain without, and
cannot have any greater assurance, supposing such infallibility to be in them.

2. The infallibility of that Society of men, who call themselves the Catholic
Church, must be examined by the same faculties in man, the same rules of trial,
the same motives by which the infallibility of any divine revelation is.

3. The less convincing the miracles, the more doubtful the marks, the more
obscure the sense of either what is called the Catholic Church or declared by
it, the less reason has any Christian to believe upon the account of any who
call themselves by the name of the Catholic Church.

4. The more absurd any opinions are and repugnant to the first principles of
sense and reason, which any Church obtrudes upon the faith of men, the greater
reason men still have to reject the pretense of infallibility in that Church as
a grand imposture.

5. To disown what is so taught by such a Church, is not to question the
veracity of God, but so firmly to adhere to that, in what he has revealed in
Scriptures, that men dare not out of love to their souls reject what is so
taught.

6. Though nothing were to be believed as the will of God, but what is by the
Catholic Church declared to be so, yet this does not at all concern the Church
of Rome, which neither is the Catholic Church, nor any sound part or member of
it. This may suffice to show the validity of the principles on which the faith
of Protestants stands, and the weakness of those of the Church of Rome. From
all which it follows, that it can be nothing but willful Ignorance, weakness
of Judgment, strength of prejudice, or some sinful passion, which makes any
one forsake the Communion of the Church of England, to embrace that of the
Church of Rome.

The End.

