OCCASIONAL SERMONS Preached by the Most Reverend Father in God WILLIAM
SANCROFT, Late Lord Archbishop OF CANTERBURY.

With some Remarks of his Life and Conversation; in a LETTER to a FRIEND.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Thomas Bassett, at the George near St. Dunstan's-
Church in Fleet Street, MDCXCIV.

To my Honored Friend, R. T.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter, and am extremely well pleased with your
Intentions of Publishing the Sermons of that most Reverend Prelate, Dr. William
Sancroft, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, which he long since Preached,
and made Public to the World. Each of them in the Front of the Title, signify
to the View of the Reader, the remarkable Occasions upon which they were
Preached; and being through Length of Time become very scarce and difficult to
be obtained, the Impression of each of them, being worn out, I do not doubt but
it will be an Acceptable Service to all who not only Love Learning in general,
but likewise the Memory of that Great Prelate, who had so great a share of it
himself, and daily Encouraged and Promoted it in others.

The first of these Discourses was Preached at St. Peter's Westminster on the
first Sunday in Advent, 1660. just after the Restitution of our Government in
Church and State, wherein the Honor of our Church, and of Episcopacy is most
Learnedly asserted, against all the unreasonable and weak Pretenses and
Arguments of the Adversaries of Both; and this at the Consecration of Six Right
Reverend Bishops; who very well deserved the Honors were bestowed upon them by
that Excellent Prince, King Charles the Second, not only for the Eminency of
their Lives and Conversations, but of their Writings, and other Public Services
they did for the Preserving and Defending our Established Church and Monarchy
in these Realms in that Long Rebellion, which had endeavored the utter Ruin
and Extirpation of Both. And whoever peruses this Sermon, will find he has
handled it, as the Argument of it requires, and the Greatness of the Auditory,
then expected from him: And herein he gave an Early Taste, not only of his
Abilities and Learning on this Subject, but of what he even then deserved, and
afterward arrived to, the Greatest our Church could give him, and his Prince
bestow upon him.

The second was a Sermon, which he Preached before the King at Whitehall,
October 10. 1666. on that Solemn Fast, which the Government had appointed to
bewail the Astonishing Judgment of Almighty God upon the City of London, by
that Prodigious Fire, which laid it in Dust and Ashes: Wherein he shows himself
to be a great Master of Devotion and Piety, by exciting the same in others, and
Encouraging the whole Nation to a real Sense of those Evils they had suffered,
and to a serious and timely Repentance of all their Sins, least a worse thing
fell upon them.

The third Discourse was Delivered likewise before the House of Peers on the
13th. of November, 1678. being the Fast Day appointed by His Majesty to implore
the Mercies of Almighty God in the Protection of his Majesty's Sacred Person
and his Kingdoms, from the Attempts and Machinations, that were then on Foot by
the several Partisans of the Church of Rome.

All of which Discourses were extorted from him, and made Public by the Request
and Authority of those, before whom he Preached, contrary to the Inclination of
his Mind, and singular Modesty, which was indeed Peculiar to him, having ever
affected a great Privacy in his Thoughts and Writings, being resolved never to
appear in Print, if he could with any Decency avoid the Importunity or Commands
of those, who requested the Publishing of them.

But I shall say nothing more concerning these Discourses, but leave them to
the Perusal of the Judicious Reader, as you desire.

All that I have now to do is only to give you a short Character of this
Excellent Person: Though, I am very Conscious to my self, that my Abilities are
not equal to this Attempt, which I have at your request undertaken; and
therefore I have rather chosen to Sacrifice my little Reputation to your kind
Importunity and the Public Censure, then that this little Volum of Sermons
should go unpraefac'd to the World. I am exceeding sensible of the Boldness
herein of the most ingenious Designer, to draw his Picture, as it ought to be,
and the most skilful Hand would be at a Loss for the true Features and
Lineaments of this Great Man; but the best, though the most difficult,
Enterprise, ought not to meet with any Discouragement, when it is designed
well; and not only for a Private but a Public Good too.

His Life was the Transcript of those excellent Endowments and Virtues, which
usually Adorned the Lives of the Primitive Bishops; and as no one could know
more what belonged to the Character of a true Prelate, so no one Practiced it
better. He Gradually Arrived to his Greatness, by early Notices in the World:
And, while a Youth, and under the Government of his Parents, he was always
addicted, through the Pregnancy of his Genius, to a great Sense of Piety and
Goodness, and out-striped the great Care and Education of his Masters, by the
large Steps and Progress he daily made in Learning and Religion. Cambridge was
the Place he came to, when he at first appeared in the World, and so became the
happy Mother of this Renowned Prelate, in the very Bloom of his Years: Which is
a just Honor to that great Seat of Learning, and which any other University I
am sure would justly boast of. He was settled in Emmanuel College, and no
sooner there, but he gave the World those Early Hopes of him, as he made good
presently after in many of the great Actions of his Life.

His Accomplishments in Human Literature were very surprising, and within a
very little while after his being there, he became Master of the whole Circle
of it: Which upon all Occasions in Public as well as in Private, showed it self
very remarkably. In this he had a peculiar Talent, being an admirable Critic in
all the Ancient and Classic Knowledge, both among the Greeks and Romans. He had
thoroughly digested all their Learning in Poetry and History, and this without
the least Affectation of Vanity, or Ostentation of Learning. He attained to
that Perfection in it, that as it was his Divertion, so he made it an
Advancement to his other Studies. He made it subservient to the carrying on his
unwearied Labors in Theology. In this he spent the greatest part of his Time,
and cultivated the Soil, in which it was planted to so great a height, that it
became exceeding Fruitful; and I do not doubt, within a short space of Time,
but that the Learned World will be the better for many Noble Fruits and
Productions of it. Were there only these, which we now Present you with, it
would be sufficient to Demonstrate the Greatness of the Person, and the
Excellency of his Learning.

The Great Men of that Time, who were justly Celebrated for Learning, and
Honored with those Rewards in the Church, that might make them Public Benefits
and Examples to the World, quickly took Notice of Him, as a Person, who was
growing into Greatness, and whose Extraordinary Parts and Abilities would soon
Ripen him for the Greatest Employments his Profession could Entitle him too. He
was intimately Known to all the Learned Bishops of that Age, and particularly
to the Most Reverend Doctor John Cosens, Lord Bishop of Durham, who had singled
him out to be his Chaplain, and (which was a far greater Honor to him) His
Friend and Confident; He was most entirely Beloved by all the Great Ones, both
in Church and State, and so might have commanded whatever he could have desired
in the Church, from those, who had so many excellent Preferments in their
Donations: But Privacy and a retired Life, was the only thing he Coveted; and
preferred to all the greatest Employments they could bestow upon Him. Because
this did best Improve his Mind, as it gave him the largest Opportunities of
laying in the greatest Stock and Treasure of Knowledge and Wisdom: Which he
esteemed above all the Honors and Wealth in the Kingdom. He never did desire
either to be Rich or Great, but to be as Knowing as he could be; which he
thought could never be obtained, but by Ease and Quietness, and by Pains and
Study, which are very much Interrupted by Public Business and Employments. And
being therefore blessed with admirable natural Parts, and Qualifications of
Mind, he resolved to take this Course, to obtain the End he Aimed at, of
gaining as much Learning as he could, to render him every way Serviceable to
his Profession and to the World.

He had an Understanding that was extended to all the Parts of useful
Knowledge, and this improved by Travel and Foreign Conversation. He spent some
Years in France and Italy, amongst the most Learned Personages that those
Countries could boast of. Here he prosecuted his Studies with an Indefatigable
Industry, Courted and Beloved by every one, for the singular Modesty and
Affability of his Mind and Temper, and for his great Seize in all manner
of Knowledge, that could render him not only an Honor to his Country and
Profession, but highly Acceptable to all Learned and Ingenious Persons.

Some time before the Restoration of our Government, he returned to his Native
Soil, and lived in that Privacy and Retirement, which was so suitable to his
Temper, till the Place of his Education in the University, became the Scene of
his Government: Wherein that College may justly boast of it is Happiness, by
reason of the great Prudence and Wisdom, which was Visible to every one of the
Fellows, by his Careful Management of their Affairs, giving every day Instances
of his great Understanding, and clear Insight in the Nature of Business, and in
his most Obliging Deportment to every Member of that Society; Who were
encouraged by his great Example to Laborious Study, and to the Prosecution of
the Greatest Attempts in Learning.

Here he staid not long, but was by that Wise and Discerning Prince, King
Charles the Second, Recommended to the Deanary of St. Paul's; St. Paul's being
through Length of Time, and a Barbarous Rebellion, become very much Decayed and
Ruined; it was necessary that so Charitable a Person should be fixed in that
Post, in order to contrive VVays for the Repairing of her Breaches, and the
Decays She then lay under. None I am sure had a larger Heart for such an
Undertaking, and a more eager Inclination to endeavor all he could to Restore
her to her former Beauty: And in Order hereunto, while he sat in this Chair,
no one could have Husbanded her Revenues with a more frugal, and yet decent
Economy, in order to Advance her to her Greatness, wherein She appeared in
former Ages. But while he was carrying on this Noble Design, it fell a
Sacrifice to that dismal Conflagration, and had Burning instead of Beauty.
However this fatal Judgment which befell this Renowned City, and Noble Structure
which had been the Honor of our Nation, and the Admiration of all the World,
for many Ages, did not lessen his singular Zeal for the House of God. His
Labors and Solicitations in order to the Re-building of it, were unwearied,
and he was as diligent to raise this Reverent Pyle out of its Ashes, as he had
been before to support it in it is Ruin.

Here he continued for many Years, Adorning the Post he was in, by Re-building
the Deanary, and Improving its Revenue, and carrying on his great Resolution of
doing all the Good he could to the Church in General, and to his Own in
Particular: While this was the daily Object of his Thoughts, and Actions, he
was unexpectedly, and without the least Inclination in Himself, Advanced to the Sea of Canterbury. This Promotion, as it was an Act of Grace, which flowed from
the Great Benignity of his Prince; so it was the Effect of that Judgment in his
Majesty, which all the World acknowledged to be remarkable in him. And indeed
it was not possible for him to lie long hid, though He Industriously sought it,
and seemed rather to be earnestly compelled to the Acceptance of it, than
through any natural Desire after Greatness disposed toward it. No sooner that
the World knew of his Nomination to the Sea, but his Advancement thither met
with an Universal Joy and Satisfaction. Every one were sensible of what happy
Days this truly Primitive and Apostolical Church of England would enjoy under
his Zealous Patronage, and how much Learning would flourish in these Kingdoms
under his Auspicious Influence and Protection: And so indeed it has, He being
generally known to be a hearty and faithful Friend to all that had any Merit to
expect his Favor, or desire it. He carefully sought out such Persons for the
Service of the Church in those Preferments, that fell within his Gift, as were
of approved Abilities, of great Learning, and of Exemplary Lives and
Conversations. He had a Heart enlarged to the greatest Hospitality that could
be, and his Charity was Diffusive to all manner of Objects relating thereunto.
He was a constant Friend to Learning, to Religion, and to our Established
Church, and designed to wear away the Remains of his Life, his Estate, and his
Interest for the Encouragement and Preservation of them. He had for many Years
been Collecting a Useful Library of the best Books in every Science, but
Particularly Philology, History and Divinity; and all these of the best
Editions, which he at first Designed for the Public Library at Lambeth; but
afterward he altered his Intentions, and sent this Noble Present to his own
College, where they Design an Honorable Apartment to their Library in
Commemoration of so useful and generous a Benefaction.

He was a great Admirer of the Excellency of our Liturgy, in the last
Alterations of which, just after the Restitution of our Government in Church
and State, as he was very much concerned, so he was a constant Attender upon
the Public Worship of GOD, both in Private and in Public. His Behavior was
always exceeding Grave, and Composed, and whenever present at the Public
Service of the Church, he had not only a Habit of Seriousness, visibly dwelt
upon his Mind and Spirit, but a Reverend and Profound Humility, which appeared
in the great Devotion of his Heart. In a Word, he had all the Virtue and
Qualification, both of a Great and of a Good Man; he was a Wise Prelate, a most
Learned Divine, an Universal Scholar, a Just Man, a Faithful Friend, an
Excellent Councellor, a Kind and Tender Master to his Servants, a great
Benefactor to others, a Thankful Beneficiary, where he was obliged, himself a
Zealous Asserter of his Religion, against Popery on the one side, and
Fanaticism on the other, and (in short) all the single Perfections that make
many Men Eminent, were United in this Primate, and rendered him Illustrious.

Thus I have ventured in have to give you my Thoughts of this most Reverend
Prelate, while he lived, and I am confident you earnestly expect at the same
Time, I should say something how he Died. All that I shall observe, is, that
his Retirement into the Country was wholly in order thereunto, that he might
lay his Remains in the very same Soil, where he first received his Being. His
Time was spent most in Preparation for his great Change, which he expected with
the same Joy and Pleasure of Mind, as others are wont to do their Advancements
to Honor and Greatness. The World was what he never Loved, but only for those
Opportunities it gave him of doing Good. He parted with his Life with the same
Submission to Divine Providence, as the Christians of Old did, with an humble
Cheerfulness and Resignation of Spirit. He spent most of his Time in Private
Devotion and Charity, in daily Prayers to God, for Himself and the whole World,
in Reading and Meditations, and whatever Duties are necessary for a Good Man,
and a Dying Christian. He was some Months before he Dyed, seized with a Fit of
an Ague, which confined him to his Bed for many Weeks. The third Fit proved so
exceeding violent, that it was in great Likelihood to have Mastered his Nature
and Constitution, and Carried him off; every one about him thinking, and His
Grace likewise finding, His Strength so far gone, that it seemed impossible for
him to have Grappled with another. However, it was diverted, though against his
Inclinations, by the Cortex Peruvianus, being more desirous to Dye than Live.

He was, for many Days in Prospect of Death, which he saw as it approached, and
felt it come on by Degrees; and to the very last Minute of his Expiring Breath
(having placed Himself in a posture of Dying, and Ordering the Recommendatory
Prayer in the Service of the Visitation of the Sick to be read to him: He
immediately Resigned his Spirit to Almighty God) and thereby gave all that were
about him great Cause to Admire his Faith toward GOD, his Zeal to his Church,
his Constancy of Mind, his Contempt of the World, his Universal Charity to all
Mankind, and his Cheerful Hopes of Eternity.

He Dyed on the Twenty Fourth of November, between Twelve and One of the Clock,
and was Buried on the Twenty Seventh, between Eight and Nine, very Privately
(as He himself Ordered it) in Fresingfield Churchyard, on the South Side, as
near the Wall, as they could Lay Him. A Place indeed of his Own Choosing,
Sixteen Years Since, at which Time, he was Nominated to the Sea of CANTERBVRY:
But before his Instalment, he took a Journey down into SVFFOLK, to see his
Relations, and his Native Place, and then told his Friends, they should Bury
Him There, in Case He should Dye in that Country. Though afterward he Changed
his Intentions, and made a Place for his Interment in his own Palace at
LAMBETH: But upon his Deprivation, and Return to the Place of his Nativity, he
Reassumed his former Resolutions, and Disposed of his Body as above mentioned,
and his SOUL into the Arms of his Dearest SAVIOR*

What then Remains for Us, but to Preserve the Memory of his Great Virtue
always fresh in our Minds, and Express as far as we are able, the Copy of them
in our Practice; for this will be the best Way of Remembering the Dead, which
brings in most Advantage to the Living, and the truest Way to Honor Him, is to
Imitate what was so good, and highly Commendable in Him: When the Piety and
Humility, the Justice and Charity, and all the other Excellent Endearments of
this Great Person, are kept Alive, and shown in the Conversation of those that
Survive Him. It is only these Virtues, which have Carried those that have gone
before Us, and which can Carry Us too, in the End, to a joyful Resurrection.

Thus, Worthy Sir, I have at your Request, ventured to give you a brief Account
of this most Excellent Prelate, and am very Conscious to my self, the Character
I have given you of Him, is Infinitely short of his Extraordinary Merit. I
might have insisted upon many Peculiar Passages of the Life and Actions of this
Great Man, which would have been more Honorable to him, there being no Way so
Advantageous of drawing out Excellent Persons, as by showing the Draught which
they have made of themselves, their own most Commendable Actions making them
more truly Illustrious, than all the Paint and Varnish of an abstracted
Eloquence: Especially, because this is of more Use, and a better Help to
Imitation.

But I have chosen rather to give you my Thoughts of Him, in the General, not
doubting but some more Perfect and Larger Account will in due Time be Published
concerning Him. However, I have this Satisfaction, that you will, I am sure,
Accept of my poor Endeavors herein, having obeyed your Command with the same
Cheerfulness, and Readiness, wherewith you are wont to Oblige

Sir, Your Most Humble and Obedient Servant, M. M.

A SERMON PREACHED In S. Peter's Westminster, on the first Sunday in Advent, at
the Consecration of the Right Reverend Fathers in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of
Durham, WILLIAM Lord B. of S. David's, BENJAMIN Lord Bishop of Peterb. HUGH Lord
Bishop of Landaff, RICHARD Lord Bishop of Carslile, BRIAN Lord Bish. of
Chester, and JOHN Lord Bishop of Exeter.


By the Most Reverend Father in God, William Sancroft, Late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Apoc. 1. 20. Septem Stellae Angeli sunt Septem Ecclesiarum LONDON, Printed by
T. B. 1694.

REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI, AC DOMINO, Dno. JOHANNI EPISCOPO DUNE^MENSI, EOQUE
NOMINE JURA

HABENTI COMITIS PALATINI SACRAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSORI VETERIS SCRIPTURARUM
CANONIS ADSERTORI, ET VINDICI ECCLESIAE PETROBURGENSIS EX DECANO, DVNELMENSIS
DECANO DESIGNATO DIU CANONICO, JAM ETIAM (...), ANGLIC. ET FILIO, ET PATRI
OPTIM^ ROMANAE HODIERNAE, ET NUPRAE, OPPUGNATORI STRENVO VETERIS, ET PRIMITIVE,
UT and CATHOLICAE DMIRATORI PERPETUO CVLTORI DEVOTISSIMO, (...)

VIRO, Qvl, INUTRIUSQUE FORTUNAE SEU DURIS, SEU LUBRICIS EODEM ANIMI TENORE
USUS, NONDUMPAR ANIMO PERICULUM INVENIT: Cvl, BONAE, MALAEQ; FAMAE MEDIO
PERGENTI, NEC AB EA, QUAM FIXERAT ECCLESIA, VERITATIS LINIA RECEDENTI USPIAM,
(UTPOTE NEC HUJUS CONVITIIS. TERRITO, NEC ILLIUS ILLECEBRIS DELINITO;) UBIQ;
SUI SIMILI UNDIQ; (...), CESSIT TANDEM CALUMNIA, NON VICTA SOLUM, SED ET
TRIUMPHATA, ET, QUANTUMUIS GARRULA, OBMUTUIT:

HANC CONCIUNCHLAM, EIVS
JUSSU CONCEPTAM, NATAM AVSPICIIS, HORTATU, ET MANDATO IN LUCEM EDITAM Ne ijs
quidem omissis, quae, prae fuga temporis, viva vox exequi non potuit.



PERPETUAE OBSERVANTIAE PIGNUS, and (...), L. MQ. D. D. CQ. GUILHELMUS
SANCROFT, PRESBYTER INDIGNUS, PATERNITATI EJUS A SACRIS.

TIT. 1. 5. (...).

For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in order the
things, that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee.


THis Epistle is one of the three, not unfitly styled the Hierarchical
Epistles, de statu Ecclesiastico compositae, as Adv. Marcion. l. 5. in fine.
Tertullian speaks: being so many Rescripts Apostolical to Timothy, and Titus
(the One desired by St. Paul to stay at Ephesus, Primate of Asia; the Other
left in Creet.) Metropolitan of that, and Vide S. Hieron. in Catalog. Script.
Eccles.
the neighbor Islands;) directing them, 1 Timothy iii. 15.
how they ought to behave themselves in the House of God, which is the Church
of the living God. True and genuine Decretal Epistles; not like that
counterfeit Ware, which Vide D. Blondelli
Isidore Mercator, under venerable Names, has had the hardiness to obtrude
upon the World; Pseudo-Isidor.
but of the right stamp, and alloy; and such, as St. Augustine says, De Doct.
Christian. l. 4. c. 16.
a Bishop ought always to carry in his Hand, and to have before his Eyes.

The Verse, I have read to you, following immediately upon the Salutation,
begins the Body of the Epistle it self; and, like an ingenious, and
well-contriv'd Perspective, give us, from the very Front, a fair Prospect into
the Contents of the whole. It is, as it were, a kind of Magical Glass; in which
an Eye, not blind with Ignorance, nor blear'd with Passion, may see distinctly
the Face of the Primitive Church, in that Golden Age of the Apostles; the
Platform of her Government; the beautiful Order of her Hierarchy; the
Original, and Derivation of her chief Officers, and their subordination both to
one another, and to Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 25*
the great Bishop of our Souls, in the last Resort; together with the Manage,
and Direction of the most important Acts of the Government, both in point of
Ordination and Jurisdiction too. For here we have (...) Elders, that is Bishops
(as shall be showed in due time) disposed of City by City in every City One:
these Bishops both ordained, and ordered, constituted, and corrected; created,
and governed by Titus alone; and so He, in right of the Premises, no other,
than Vide Reverend. Armachan. de Orig. Metropolis. page 71, 72.
Metropolitan, or Archbishop there; the Angel, or the Archangel rather of the
whole Church of Creet. If you ask, who fixed him the Intelligence of so large
an Orb; 'twas St. Paul himself, (You have that too in the Text) For this Cause
left I thee in Creet. If yet higher, your Curiosity will needs see the
Derivation of St. Paul's Power too; He opens his Commission, verse 1. and
spreads it before You, styling himself a Servant of God, and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, One sent abroad into the World by his Commission, acted, and
assisted by his Spirit, to plant, and to govern Churches after this Scheme, and
Model. So that my Text, like II. O.
Homer's Symbolical Chain, consists, you see, of many Links; but the Highest is
tied to the Foot of Jupiter's Throne: or rather, like Jacob's Mysterious
Ladder, the Foot of it stands below in Bethel, the House of God, Genesis xviii.
12. Versio. Lxx.
(...), the Head of it is in Heaven, and God himself stands at the top of it,
and Ib. v. 13. Vulg. Et Dominum innix. um scalae. Lxx. (...)
leans upon it, and keeps it firm; Angels Ascending and Descending upon it in
the intermedial degrees; the Bishops of the Church, like those blessed
ministering Spirits, incessantly bringing down the Commands of God to the Church
in their Doctrine, and carrying up the Prayers of the Church before God's
Throne, in their Holy Offices, and Intercessions. So that, you see, this holy
Psalm. cxxxiii. 2.
Oil, which without measure was shed upon the Head of our great High Priest,
Matthew. xxviii. 18.
(all Power being given to Him, both in Heaven, and Earth;) runs down in full
stream upon the Beard, (for, Joh. xx. 21.
As my Father sent me, says he to his Disciples, even so send I you;) and so
by, and through, them to their Successors, holy Bishops, and Presbyters, even
down to the Skirts of his Garment: For in this comely and exquisite Order, we
find it in my Text, For this Cause I (Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ,) left
thee (Titus) in Creet, that thou should set in order (or, correct) the
things, that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee.

In which Words we have these three Parts.

First, The Erection of a Power in the Person of Titus, a Metropolitical Power
over the whole Island of Creet: I left thee in Creet.

Secondly, The end of this Institution, or the Use, and Exercise of this Power,
in a double Instance, (...), to Order, and to Ordain; to Correct and
Constitute; to make Bishops, and to govern them Theophyl. ^n Hypoth.
(...), as the Greek Scholia have it: For this cause -- that thou should set
in order what was wanting, and ordain Elders in every City.

Thirdly, The Limitation of All to Apostolical Prescript, and Direction; both
Ordination, and Jurisdiction too, the whole Office must be managed, (...), As I
had appointed thee. These are the Parts.

Of which that I may so speak, and you so hear, and all of us so remember, and
so practice, that God's holy Name may be glorified, and we all built up in the
knoledge of that Truth, which is according unto Godliness; We beseech God the
Father, in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, to give us the assistance of his
Holy Spirit.

And in these, and all other our Supplications, let us always remember to pray
for Christ' s Holy Catholic Church, i. e. for the whole Congregation of
Christian People, dispersed through the whole World; That it would please
Almighty God to purge out of it all Schism, Error and Heresy, and to unite all
Christians in one Holy Bond of Faith and Charity; that so at length the happy
Day may draw upon us, in which all that do confess his Holy Name, may agree in
the truth of his Holy Word, and live in Unity, and godly Love. More especially
let us pray for the Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland: That the God of
Peace, who makes Men to be of one Mind in a House, would make us All of one
Soul, and of one Spirit, that again we may meet together, and praise Him with
one Heart and Mouth, and worship him with one Accord in the Beauty of Holiness.
To this end, I am to require you most especially to pray for the King' s most
Excellent Majesty, our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Supreme
Governor in these His Realms, and in all other his Dominions and Countries,
over all Persons, in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal: That God
would Establish His Throne in Righteousness, and His Seed to all Generations.
Also for our gracious Lady Mary the Queen Mother, for the most Illustrious
Prince, James Duke of York, and for the whole Royal Family: That God would take
them all into His Care, and make them the Instruments of His Glory, and the
good and welfare of these Nations. Further, let us pray for the Ministers of
God' s Holy Word and Sacraments, as well Archbishops, and Bishops, as other
Pastors and Curates; for the Lords and others of his Majesty's most Honorable
Council; and for all the Nobility and Magistrates of the Realm: That All, and
every of these, in their several Callings, may serve truly and painfully to the
Glory of God, and the edifying, and well governing of his People, remembering
the account that they must make. Let us also pray for the Universities of this
Land, Cambridge and Oxford: That God would water them with his Grace, and still
continue them the Nurseries of Religion and Learning to the whole Land. Let us
pray for the whole Commons of this Realm: That remembering at last from whence
they are fallen, they may repent, and do the first works, living henceforth in
Faith and Fear of God, in humble Obedience to their King, and in Brotherly
Charity one to another. Finally, let us praise God for all those that are
already departed out of this Life in the Faith of Christ, and pray unto God we
may have Grace to direct our Lives after their good Examples; that, this Life
ended, we may be made partakers with them of the glorious Resurrection in the
Life Everlasting. For which, and for all other needful Blessings, let us say
together the Prayer of our Lord, who has taught us to say, Our Father, etc.

For this Cause left I thee in Creet, etc.

The Erecting of the Power, that is the first; I left thee in Creet. Where we
have these Particulars: The Original of this Power, in Ego; the subject of it,
in Te, Ego Te; the Conveyance in Ego Reliqui; and the Extent, in Reliqui
Cretae, or in Creta.

I. I left thee; I the Apostle of Jesus Christ (verse. 1.) left thee Mine:
There Is the Source, and the Stream; the Original and the Derivation of All;
'twas from our Lord, by his Apostle: I did it, his Commissioner.

(1.) And therefore, First, Not a Suffragan of St. Peter, as some of the Romish
Partisans would fain have it: Suar. adv. fect. Angl. l. 3. c. 12. f. Bellarm.
de R. Pont. l. 1. c. 11. f. c. 23. Magal. in l. Tim. Proaem. Sect. 11. and 13.
Who, to serve the over-high pretenses of that Court, are not content to
Dogmatize, That St. Peter was the Prince, and Sovereign of the Apostles; and
his very Successors superior to the Apostles, that survived Him; and That, they
being once All Dead, there was never since any Power in the Church, but in
Succession to him, and by Derivation from him; dare yet higher, and with
strange confidence pronounce, That the Apostles themselves were all ordained by
St. Peter, and He alone by Christ: And That, when the Holy Ghost said Act. 13.
2.
Separate me Barnabas, and Saul, for the work, whereunto I have called them;
they were thereupon sent up to Jerusalem, to be ordained by St. Peter.
Affirmations so very strange, that I know not what can be more; unless this be
that they should think them passable with us, upon the Authority of Hist. Act.
Ap. c. 70.
Petrus Comestor, the Scholastic Historian, and those suspected Anacleti,
Felicis I. Inn. I.
Decretals of the false Merchant, I mentioned at the beginning. Whereas for the
Imposition of Hands upon Barnabas and Saul (were it a Blessing, or were it As
our Church seems to have determined. See the Exhortation before the Litany in
the Consecration of B. B.
an Ordination) it is plainly inferred, verse 3. to have been performed upon the
Place by the Persons mentioned, verse 1. And St. Paul, for his particular, in
the Front of every Epistle, enters his Protestation against all this, as if he
had foreseen it; still qualifying himself 2 Timothy 1. 1.
an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God; Gal. 1. 1.
an Apostle, not of Men, nor by Man, but 1 Timothy 1. 1.
by the Commandment of God our Savior; Chap. 1. 11.
v. 12.
v. 15, 16.
and accordingly you may see him contesting it to the height, both against
Peter, and the rest, Gal. 1. and 2. Chapters throughout* That the Gospel he
Preached was not of Man, the Apostleship he exercised was not from Man: but the
one by immediate Revelation, the other by Assignation from Heaven it self. So
that, having received his Mission thence, and his Instructions too, he thought
it unnecessary to confer with Flesh and Blood, v. 16.
to apply himself to any Mortal Man, for the enhancing of either. v. 18.
He went up indeed to Jerusalem to visit Peter three Years after his
Conversion; and yet once again Chap. 11.
fourteen Years after, v. 1.
he returned thither, v. 6.
and had Conference with James, v. 9.
and Cephas, and John; but these Pillars added nothing to him; neither
established his A^thority, nor advanced his Knowledge: And Titus himself was
present at the enterview, v. 1.
and so an Eyewitness, that in nothing he came behind the very chiefest
Apostles; for they all gave him the right hand of Fellowship, v. 9.
far from exacting the right hand of Pre-eminence: And so Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, not a Deputy of the Apostolical College, much less a Suffragan of
St. Peter, or his Legate a latere, as was pretended. But,

(2.) Not a Disciple of Gamaliel. For there is a Disputer of this World, who
having laid it down for a Principle with himself (indeed his (...)) That all
pretense of Ecclesiastical Power, as from Christ, is but an Imposture, is
thereupon obliged to give such an account of the Appearances of it in the New
Testament, as may suit with this Postulatum: And accordingly, for the
particular of Imposition of Hands for Ordination of Elders De Synod. lib. 1.
cap. 14. p. 509. etc.
will have it only the pursuance of a Jewish Custom, which St. Paul learned at
the Feet of his Master Gamaliel, under whom he Commenced Elder, before he was
Christian, and thereupon, after, thought good to create his own Disciples to
the same Dignity (according to Page 571. Vnusquisque rite creatus potest
Discipulos suos rite creare.
the Law of those Schools) and Titus amongst the rest, whom he left in Creet,
to do the like, and to Constitute his Scholars Elders too, in all the Cities,
where he should Preach. A Discourse so loose, and incoherent, that it is not
worth your while to stand by, and see it fall in pieces, which it would quickly
do (were it not already done See Dr. H. H. Letter of Resolut. etc. Quer. 5.
to our hands) upon a gentle Examination. I shall only remind you of what was
said before upon the former Particular, and so leave it in Compromise to any
Indifferent; Whether St. Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, who so stoutly
refuses to Releve of St. Peter himself, or the rest of the Apostles, as owing
his whole Commission to Heaven alone, would yet acknowledge to hold it of R.
Gamaliel, the unconverted Jew, as Usher of his School, or Graduate in a
Rabbinical Academy.

(3.) (Yet further, to vindicate our Selves) An Apostle of Jesus Christ, not a
Delegate of the Civil Magistrate. For Advers. Sect. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 8. number.
12.
Suarez, the Spanish Jesuit, that he may have something to confute in the
English Sect (as he will needs call us) says confidently, That the Power of
Order with us is nothing else, but a Deputation of certain Persons by the
Temporal Magistrate to do those Acts, which he himself much more might do; made
indeed with some kind of Ceremonies, but those esteemed Arbitrary, and
unnecessary to the Effect, which would follow as well without them, by the
King's sole Deputation. A Calumny, which the whole Business of this Day most
solemnly refutes: a kind of a second Nag's-Head Fable, a Fill of the same Race,
both Sire, and Dam, begotten by the Father of Lies upon a slanderous Tongue,
and so sent post about the World, to tell false Tidings of the English; as
credible, as that our Kings Excommunicate, or that Queen Elizabeth Preached.
Would they have been just, or ingenious, they should have laid the Bra^ at the
Physicians door, who was the Father of it: Not the beloved Physician, though
his Name comes nigh; (Erastus, but not (...)) no, his Praise was not in the
Gospel, but a Physician in Geneva, learned, and eminent enough. It Is
remarkable, that, in the same Place, and much about the same Time (so unlucky
an Ascendent has Error, and Mistake, upon some Persons!) should three
Conceits be hatched concerning Church Government, which, like three Furies,
have vexed the quiet of the Church ever since. For the Consistorial, and
Congregational, Pretenses were Twins of the same Birth; though the Younger
served the Elder, and, being much over-powred, sunk in the stream of Time, till
it appeared again in this unhappy Age, amongst the Ghosts of so many revived
Errors, that have escaped from their Tombs, to walk up and down, and disturb
the World. And not long after this Physician too, would needs step out of his
own Profession, to mistake in two other at once, Policy and Divinity, running a
risque of setting ill-Understanding betwixt them, had not Abler, and Wiser
Heads than He, stepped in, and so evenly cut the thread, so exactly stated the
Controversy, and asserted the very Due on either side; that there remains now
no Ground, either of Jealousy among Friends, or, one would think, of Slander
from Enemies. And yet, even some of our own too (which we have reason more
deeply to resent) would needs bear the World in hand, when Time was, That the
Claim of Episcopal Power, as from Christ, and his Apostles, was an Assault upon
the Right of our Kings, and tended to the Disherison of the Crown. As if the
Calling might not stand by Divine Right, and yet the Adjuncts and Appendages of
it by Human Bounty: As if the Office it self might not be from Christ, and yet
the Exercise of it only by, and under, the Permission of Pious Kings: Or, As if
the Church might not owe the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven both that of Order,
and that of Jurisdiction too (purely Spiritual, I mean, and without any
Temporal Effect) to the Donation of Christ, and yet, at the same time, owe all
the Coactive Power in the External Regiment (which is one of the Keys of the
Kingdoms of this World, for the enforcing of Obedience by constrain^) to the
Political Sanction. These things thus clearly distinguished, I cannot see why
we may not with some Consequence infer the Apostolical, and (...), in
Consequence thereupon, the Divine Right of our Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, how
harsh soever it sounds, either at Rome or Geneva; and though the Hills about
Vide Hist. Council. Trid. lib. 7.
Trent resounded loud with the Echo of that Noise, and stiff Debate, which
past upon that Argument within the Walls of that Council. However they like it,
on this side the Hills, or beyond. St. Paul stands firmly by us and voucheth
the Grand Charter of his Apostolate for all: Me me, adsum qui feci -- 'Twas I,
the Apostle of Jesus Christ, that left Titus to ordain Elders in Creet; and
what (...) will be found for this Argument? 'Twas the Holy Ghost, that made you
Bishops, says the same Apostle Act. xx. 38.
to the Elders at Miletus; so that these are no Milesian Fables, but Acts xxvi.
25.
the Words of Truth, and Soberness, a part of the Holy, and Divine (...), the
real Acts, and Gests of the Apostles of Christ, nay the Act, and Deed of Christ
himself by his Apostle according to that Rule of the Hebrews, (...) Talm. in
Kidduschin. fol. 41. 2.
Apostolus, cujusque est, ut quisque. And so much for the Original of the Power.

I go on (II) to the Subject, and that is Titus: Ego. Te, I left Thee.

(1.) Thee first, mine Host, and of the whole Church. For, when the Jews, at
Corinth, Acts xviii. 6.
contradicted, and blasphemed the Doctrine, delivered by St. Paul, he shook his
Raiment, and v. 7.
departed into the house of one Justus (so we read it after the Greek Copies)
one that worshipped God, and dwelt by the Synagogue; v. 11.
and there he abode eighteen Months. But the Syriack. Version says, it was the
House of Titus, (and so (...).
St. Chrysostom seems, by his Preface to this Epistle, to have found it in
some Copies:) and the Vulgar Latin, and Arabic, reconciling both, The House
of Titus Justus, or of Titus the Son of Justus. If you give credit to this
Tradition, thus fairly derived; 'twill return you this Lesson; That no man
serves God in vain; that none opens the Doors of God's House, nor the Doors of
his own, to receive God's Church in, that loses his Reward. Obadiah, that
secured, and fed an hundred Prophets in Persecution, received a Prophet's
Reward, and Vide Munst. Vatabl. and alios in Obad.
(though but a Proselyte) was himself made one of the Twelve. The House of
Obed-Edom, the Gittite, and all that pertained to him, was blessed, for the Ark
of God's Sake, that occasionally turned in thither. And Titus, a Gentile, who
received St. Paul into his House, not only gains thereby the Lights of Faith,
and the Incomparable Advantages of Religion; but is himself introduced into the
Church, which is the House of God, and set amongst the Princes there; being
singled out to this special Honor from amongst the many, that attended St.
Paul in his Journeyings. Hear this you Noble, and Generous Souls, who, in this
time of Calamity, have spread your Wings over the persecuted Prophets of God,
and had a Church in your House, when they made a Stable of the Church. Believe
it, God, and his Church pay their Quarters, wheree're they come, and there is
not One of you shall miss of his Reward.

(2.) Thee, who were so exceedingly Dear, so highly Useful to me, 2 Cor. ii. 12.
Titus my Brother, Tit. 1. 4.
mine own Son after the common Faith; two very endearing Titles: And then, so
necessary to me; That 2 Cor. 11, 12, 13.
when I came to Troas, to preach Christ's Gospel, and a door was opened unto me
of the Lord; I had no rest in my Spirit, because I found not Titus my Brother:
but taking my leave, went thence into Macedonia. Upon which place, with some
others 2 Cor. 7. 6
St. Jerome Epist. 150. ad Hedib. qu. 11.
has sounded his Conjecture, That Titus was St. Paul's Interpreter to the
Grecians. For though the Apostle understood the Greek Language, and wrote it
too elegantly enough; yet Divinorum sensuum Majestatem digno non poterat Graeci
el^quii explicare sermon. S. Hieron. ibid. Vide and Baron. Tom. 1. Ann. 45. n.
32, ^c.
there might be something of Uncouth, and Barbarous in his Pronunciation, which
rendered it not so smooth, and passable to a common Greek Ear: (which Josephus
also, though Photius. (...).
a spruce Greek Writer, Antiq. l. 20. c. ult. (...).
complains of as both his own, and the general infelicity of his Nation.) But,
though Titus was so needful to St. Paul in this, or some such respect, and so
Dear, and Precious in many others; yet the Apostle, most resolvedly, leaves him
behind in Creet; as He, who knew most cheerfully to Sacrifice all his own
Advantages, and the tenderest, and inmost of his Affections to the Benefit of
Christ's Church, and the Interest of Religion Let us go, and do likewise.

(3) But Thirdly and principally; Thee, a single Person; not a Consistory of
Presbyters, or a Bench of Elders. But this Observation, together with the next
Particular, (III) The Extent of this Power, as it reaches the whole Island of
Creet, I shall have occasion to resume by and by; and so pass on at present.

There is nothing behind of the first Part of the Text, but (IV) the Conveyance
of the Power couched, or supposed, in Ego Reliqui. I l^ft Thee. A close
Conveyance, by a word, in which there may be much more understood, than
expressed; viz. A Derivation, or Transmission of Power from St. Paul to Titus,
inabling him for the Discharge of that Work, he was entrusted with. Reliquit
vice sua as Haymo In locum.
well. As if St. Paul had said, I left thee in Creet, my Deputy, and
Vicegerent there, to water, what I had planted; to build up, what I had
founded; to perfect, what I had begun. I left Thee, to reside in Creet, (as I
besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, (...),) to be Resident there, as fixed,
and ordinary Governor of that Church, while I went on still to preach the
Gospel in other Regions, where the Name of Christ had not been heard. In fine,
For this Cause was he left, that he should perform such special Acts, (ordain
Elders, and reform what was amiss) and therefore certainly left Commissioned,
and Authorized after the Apostolical Guise, to do those Acts, viz. by
Imposition of Hands, and Episcopal Ordination: which is a true Gloss, though of
a Pseudo Ambrose In Titum.
Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum: and backed by Theophylact, and others
amongst the Grecians, (...).

But it will best appear, what the Power was in the Conveyance (and
consequently what the Conveyance it self) by taking notice, what it was to be
in the Exercise of it: II.
and so I go on to the Second Part of my Text, in which we find it designed to
a double Act, to Order, and to Ordain; (...).

1. In the first there will be some Variety. For (...), being properly to Vide
Sulteti Obss. in Tit. 1. c. 2.
Correct, or make Strait that which is Crooked; (not that, which is wanting, to
which it seems not to have so just a Rapport;) and (...), being, in the next
Notion, those things which are wanting (and therefore not so aptly said to be
corrected, as supplied or added:) For the according of the Terms, I cannot see,
why the Participle may not have as powerful Influence upon the Verb (to
qualify That,) as That upon the Participle; and shall therefore make this
advantage of the Doubt, to take in the Consideration of both Senses, and
suppose, that Titus is here commissioned, both to supply, what was Wanting; and
to correct, what was Amiss.

First, To supply, what was Wanting. And then the Nerve, and Emphasis of the
Verb will lie in the Preposition; (...), to do something Additionally, and by
way of Supplement to what was done before, but was not sufficient. (...), as S.
Chrysostom Homil. 1.
to fill up the Vacuities, and Defects, that were left, which probably were not
a few, in Creet, especially, a Church, so lately Founded (but Vide Baron. Ann.
58.
the year before) and in which S. Paul stayed so short a time, in which long
Works could not be brought about. Neither let any Church, though of longer
Continuance, flatter, and sooth up it self, with Laodicea, Apoc. 3. 17.
as if it needed nothing. The Ship of the Church is never so perfectly rigged
but something may be added. It Is seldom, or never, but some pin, or other is
lacking, even in God's Tabernacle, while it sojourns here below, Just as in the
Material Church; it is scarce known, but either the Roof is open, or the
Pavement uneven, the Windows broken, or some part, or other of the Wall
mouldring, and dropping away: So in the Spiritual, either the Light is not
good, or the Walking is not answerable; it is well if the Foundation stands
firm, and sinks not; but the Superstructions, most commonly, want something,
that must be supplied. And therefore, methinks, the Inference is strong.
There Is need of a Bishop in every Church, that must Isid. Pelus. lib. 1. Ep.
149. (...)
learn his Office in his Name, and look about him, be (...) (as Isidore
Peleusiote appositely) and, like a wise Master builder, have a careful Eye,
ever awake, upon all parts, to see what is wanting, and to supply it. That Is
the first.

But Secondly, To correct what is amiss; Things, that are faulty, and
defective, and want something, (sc. of their due Rectitude, and Conformity to
the Rule;) for so perhaps the (...) may signify, (...) and Hesychius Hesych.
(...) Lege (...). and (...).
shall warrant me that Gloss. Or else (...), things, that leave their Rank, and
start out of their place; and so to be reduced and set in Order again. And of
this sort also there was but too much in Creet. For, to say nothing of the evil
Beasts with the nimble Tongues, and Tit. 1. 10.
slow Bellies, we find also in this Chapter Jewish Leaven to be purged out, and
as some Dr. H. Hammond in c. 1. 9, 16.
have thought, Gnostick Impurity to be resisted, v. 10.
unruly, and vain talkers, and deceivers, v. 11.
Subverters of whole Houses; teachers of things, they ought not, for filthy
lucre's sake; v. 16.
Men that profess to know God, but in works deny him, being abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. So that, for ought we see, they
might well enough deserve the black Character, the Proverb brands them with,
amongst the (...), the three (...) --
very infamous Nations, that began with C. for such a superfluity of
Naughtiness. St. Paul here designs a proportionate Corrective, and sends Titus,
and his Elders, amongst them to bring them into better Order, by a threefold
Instrument, Vita, Doctrina, Censura; all in this Epistle, and in this Chapter.

(1) Vita first, by the Example of his holy Life. Chapter 11. 7.
In all things showing thy Self (...), a pattern of good Works. For, as S.
Ambrose Lib. 10. Epist. 82. ad Eccles. Vercel.
excellently, In Episcopo vita formatur omnium; the Life of the Prelate is, as
it were, a Form, or Mold, in which the Conversation of others is Shaped, and
Modeled: Or, as Lib 1. Epist. 319. (...).
Isidore Pelusiot conceits it, like a Seal well cut, which stamps the common
Christians under his Care, as Wax, with the like Impressions. And therefore S.
Paul, who well understood this twice within two Verses of my Text, requires it
a Qualification in a Bishop, that he be blameless, Inaccusabilis: Cajetan.
(...), One that cannot be accused which yet Innocence it self, you know, may
be; nay, but a Bishop must be void of Suspicion too, as well as Crime. Ay,
that is the way to set all right indeed: For so fair a Copy, placed in so good a
Light, teaches it self; and every one, that runs by, will read it, and strive
to write after it.

(2) But Secondly, Doctrina; by speaking the things, that become sound
Doctrine. Chapter 11. 1.
For a Bishop must be able both Chapter 1. 9.
to exhort, and to convince the Gainsayers: Chapter 11. 7, 8.
In Doctrine showing Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that
cannot be condemned, that he, that is of the contrary part, may be ashamed, etc.

(3) Censura, That must not be forgotten, as being chief in the Eyes of the
Text. No; the Garden of God must be weeded sometimes, or, like the Sluggard's
Vineyard, Prove. xxiv. 30, 31.
'twill soon be overgrown with Nettles, and Thorns. Even Christ's Vine must be
pruned too, or 'twill run out, and spend it self in fruitless Luxury. The Lamps
of the Temple will burn faint, and dim, if they be not trimmed, and dressed, and
snuffed now, and then. And therefore, though the Tables of the Law, and the Pot
of Manna be in the Ark; yet it is not a perfect Emblem of the Church, unless
the Rod of Aaron be there too: and without Jurisdiction, and Discipline, we
shall quickly find, the Word, and Sacraments will not have so powerful an
Influence upon a loose, and a debauched World. Epiphanius Contra Haeres. lib.
1. c. 1. Contra Aerian.
observes, That Moses was sent into Egypt, (...). Some while after he
instituted the Passover, and received the Law, and consecrated Aaron, and his
Sons, to the Priesthood; but he carried the Rod of God with him in his Hand.
No bringing up the Israel of God out of Egypt without it. And it is that Rod
therefore, which S. Paul here puts into Titu's Hand, when he bids him Correct
what is amiss, in the Text; and Rebuke evil doers (...).
sharply, and severely, v. 11. and Stop the mouths of such, as teach, what they
ought not; v. 13. Nay, and Rebuke them (...).
with all Authority, not suffering his Monitions to be slighted by any: Let no
man contemn thee; Chapter 11. v. 15.

Nay, if Corrigas will not serve the turn, be a Word too low, S. Jerome, upon
the place, and, after him, Cardinal Cajetan, have added a Cubit to its Stature,
and advanced it into Super-corrigas, which yet perhaps arrives not the full
Altitude of the Greek. For (...) is a Decompound, and, if (...) be to make
strait, or right, (...) is thoroughly to do it, and (...) to do it, not only
exactly, but over and over again. S. Chrysostom and S. Ierom In locum.
both take notice of this Emphasis, and state it thus; That, whereas S. Paul
had corrected some Things, and so far; Titus should go on, where he left, and
complete what he had begun; bringing them yet to another Test, till they came
forth, like Gold, more than once tried in the Furnace.

An Hint, which will perhaps be too greedily caught at by those, to whose
Advantage it was never intended. A sort of Men, that are all for
Super-corrigas, but it is still on the wrong side, and of that, which is not
amiss. The Reformers of the World, and Syndios of all Christendom; Men but of
yesterday, yet wiser, and better than all the Fathers, that Over-correct, and
Over-reform every thing* correct Magnificat it self, before they be out of
danger of the rest of the Proverb: Correct, not the Cretans, and their Amisses;
but Titus, and his Elders, serving all Antiquity, and Patterns of Primitive
Government, as (...). Plut. in Theseo.
Procrustes did his Guests, who still reduced them to the Scantling of his
Beds. So these, either cutting them short, or forcing them out longer, till
they apply to the just Model they have fancied to themselves, and would impose
upon others. Thus Titus must be screwed up into an Extraordinary, and so a
Temporary Officer, an Evangelist, or a Secondary Apostle, (as Walo Messalinus,
and others not a fixed, and Ordinary Governor of the Church of Creet, lest
that come cross to their Designs: and, on the other side, the Elders of the
Text must be degraded into common Presbyters, lest we should have Bishops here
of S. Paul's Titus's own Creation: with how little reason in either, we go on
to consider in.

11. The second Act, to which this Power is here designed, and that is (...),
to Ordain Elders in every City.

Concerning which Elders, whether of the first or second Rank, I know well,
what variety of Opinion has past, even amongst my own Mother's Sons. Nor shall
I be nice to acknowledge it; as counting it our Advantage, that we have more
than a single Hypothesis, to salve the Phoenemena, and some choice of Answers,
each of them sufficiently securing us from the Contradiction of the Gainsayers:
to whose Pretensions these Elders will be for ever useless, whether understood
Bishops, or common Presbyters, always ordained, and governed, either by the
Apostles themselves, or by Bishops of their appointment, as they drew off. But,
not to leave it wholly in the Clouds, I will not doubt to profess mine own
sense too, with due Submission; That the Elders in the Text were very Bishops,
appointed One for every City, and the Suburbicarian Region thereof.

Exposition of the Ancient Church, (the best Comment, when all is done, upon
doubtful places of Scripture.)

Context also, which expressly calls them Bishops, in the seventh Verse. Were it
not for this, and what follows in the next Particular, we were perhaps at
liberty to leave the World at large in its general acception, as it takes in
both Orders, both useful in every City, and so both to be supplied by Titus, in
which Argum. in Tit. (...).
Oecumenius has gone before us, affirming, that Titus was left in Creet, to
ordain Clerks in every City? But we are determined: For, though at present I
demand not, that (...), wherever it occurs, in the New Testament, should
signify a Bishop; yet, that (...), does so, I shall not doubt to affirm, till
I see the Text produced, that attributes it to some Person, otherwise evinced
to have been no more, then a single Presbyter.

And Thirdly, and Lastly, most agreeable also to the Text it self, and the
Distribution of these Presbyters by Citys, the Peculiar Seat of Bishops,
according to the Scheme of the Ancient Church, and the Method the Blessed
Apostles thought good to use in the planting, and modelling of it. For, that
they preached the Gospel not only in Citys, (...) Act. xiii. 49. and xiv. 6, 7.
but in the Countries adjoining; yet planted Churches in Cities still, and
settled single Persons their Successors there, to govern both the Cities, and
the Regions round about, (from whence a City, and a Church come to be
equipollent Terms, even in the Apostolical Writings, and (...) in the Acts Act.
xiv. 24 and xvi. ^, 5.
the same with (...) in the Text) and yet further, That they left the Churches
of inferior Cities, and their Bishops in dependence upon the Metropoles, which
were the Chief according to the civil Division (and that the only true Ground
of the Superiority of one Church above another) has been rendered as manifest,
as any thing almost in the Ecclesiastic Antiquity, against all Adversaries
(both those of the Hills, and those of the Lake too) by the Learned, and well
placed Labors of those Excellent Persons in both Pages of the Dip^ychs, whom I
shall not need to name, since their own Works praise them in the Gate. Now, I
would ask the Question, If these be common Presbyters, why appropriated to
Cities? Were there to be none of this sort in the Villages, or in the Country
about? Or, since limited to Cities, why should we not pronounce them Bishops?
the City being the Bishop's proper Seat, and He the Star of that Orb; the
Angel, and the Intelligence of that Sphere. A Truth so Visible, that Calvin,
and Beza, and many others after them (so far may Persons otherwise of great
Learning be Transported, (...)) to avoid the Inconvenience, were concerned to
Translate (...) here Oppidatim, (Elders in every Town:) not, as some others,
less Interessed Persons, may, perhaps, be thought to have done, to gain the
advantage of that distributive Termination, which no Adverb from Civitas, or
Urbs, could afford them: but, See Mr. Hooker's Preface.
I fear, for some other Design perhaps, to make the Interpretation of the Text
(a practice too usual with them, and other) to lacquay it to the espoused
Opinions, and to serve the (...), and so to whip Thealogie with Grammar's Rods;
but so loosely bound up, that at the first stroke they fly in the Air and prove
ineffectual; every Alphabetarian knowing, well, that the Latin of is Urbs, or
Civitas: and Oppidum in the precise propriety of Language (which ought in such
cases to be kept) (...) at the most, in middle state betwixt a City and a Drop;
and in the ancient Glosses Glos. Philox and Cyrilli.
no more then (...), Civitatula at the Highest.

And now, I shall not take upon me as some have done, to number the Cities
under Titas's Jurisdiction, It Is true, in Homer's Time Creet was (...), Centum
urbium clar^ fama. Plin. lib. 4. cap. 12*
famous for its Hundred Cities: But in Ptolomy's Age they arose not to half the
Number; and Pliny, having named about forty, says plainly, that of the other
sixty memoria extat, nothing remained but the Memory. In the Times of the Greek
Empire, they were about twenty Suffragan Bishops, under four Archbishops, as
Magnius In (...) page 183. ^
reckons them up; but, at this day, under the Venetian, not half so many of
either sort. So variable are these Proportions, according to the Fate of Citys,
and the daily Change of the Civil Partition, Who would look now for the Throne
of a Primate in Caer-Leon upon Usk? or rake in the Ruins of Carthage for St.
Cyprian's- Mitre? He that should undertake a Pilgrimage to Creet, to visit
Titus his Metropolis, would in vain enquire for the once-Famous Gortyna, and
not find so much of its Dust together, as would suffice to write its Name in.
That renowned Septenary of Asia, of old, not only Episcopal, See the Learned
Primates' s Excellent Discourses of the Original of Metrop. and the Proc^nsular
Asia.
but Metropolitical Churches, where are they? Cities may fail, and Bishops Sees
with them: Stars have their Vicissitudes; may rise, and set again: Candlesticks
are moveable Utensils, and may be carried from Room to Room: But (...) is the
standing Rule, and fails not; a City, and a Bishop, generally adequate to one
another. For as, on the one side, an Universal Bishop, with the whole World for
his Jurisdiction, is a proud Pretense, and too vast for Humanity to grasp; so
on the other side, Rural Bishops too is a poor, and a mean Design, and not only
retrives the Italian Episc^pelli, so scorned at Trent; but worse. As he divided
the Stream into so many Rills, that it lost its Name, and Being; so these, by a
too minute Division would Cantonize the Dignity, and degrade it into nothing at
the last; as the Roitelets, and petty Kings of Ivedo^, do but diminish Majesty,
and take it down into contempt* Council. Laodic. Sar^ic. Tolet. 12.
(...). Non in vicis, aut villis, aut q. d. Non in oppid^.
modica civitate; No Bishops there, Ne vilescat nomen Epi^copi.
lest they gr^w contemptible, so run the Canons of the Ancient Church, both
Greek and Latin. And therefore the twelfth Council of Toledo Ann. 716.
unmitered one Convildus, formerly an Abbot in a little Village, and dissolved
the Bishopric, which Or v^amba.
Bamba, the Gothic King had violently procured to be erected there; and that
by Authority of this Rule of the Church, and the very (...) of my Text,
Imprimis ex Epistola (...), ut Episcopes per civitates constituere debeat,
praecepit. etc. Council. Merlin. Tom. 1. page 135. ^.
which they actually plead in the Front of their Decree, to justify their
proceedings.

Amongst these so many Cities in Creet, Gortyna was then the Civil Metropolis,
as Solinus, Cap. 17. Centum constipa^i vebibus quarum principatus est penes
Gor^y.
who lived in that Age, informs us, and in the next Age, we are sure, the
Ecclesiastical Metropolis too; there being still extant, in the Eusebius. l. 4.
cap. (...).
Church Story, the Inscription of an Epistle, that plainly infers it. For
Dionysius, that renowned Bishop of Corinth, who flourished about the middle of
the second Century, and stands so highly commended in Eusebius for his
Catholic Epistles, (seven of them being there mentioned) to several Churches,
and their Bishops, or, as St. Ierom In Catalago S^ript. Eccles.
has it more distinctly, Ad aliarem Urbium, and Provinciarum Episcopos (some
of them being written to inferior Citys and Bishops, others to Mother-Citys,
and their Metropolitans, and so to whole Provinces) amongst the rest sent two
into Creet, the One of the former sort, to Pinytus Gnossioe urbis Episcopum, as
S. Jerome, or as Eusebius, (...).
To the Gnossians, and Pinytus, Bishop of that Diocese only: the Other, of the
later sort, and in a different Style, (...)
To the Church about, (or, belonging to) Gortyna, together with the rest of the
Diocesses in Creet, and in it acknowledges Philip their Bishop, that is, not
only of that Church of Gortyna but of all those Dioceses, ((...), not (...))
whom therefore S. Ierom significantly qualifies Episcopum Cretensem, hoc est
urbis Gortynae, Bishop of Gortyna, and eo nomine of all Creet too. Enough to
make Evidence, that Gortyna was the Metropolis of Creet, even in the Christian
Account, very early, and long before the Council of Nice, (whatever has been
pretended to the contrary,) and probably in the Epoch of the Text it self;
since even then it was certainly such in the Civil Style, most confessedly the
Ground of the Christian Establishment (for sure, it was not Chance, or Lottery,
that produced a perpetual Coincidence) both there, and elsewhere the World over.

And, now, let me lead you up to the top of Mount Ida, the proudest Height in
Creet; from whence Geographers tell us, we may descry both Seas, and see all
the Cities, like a Crown, in Circle about it. There let us make a stand a
while, and look about us, and consider holy Titus, with those numerous
Plantations, and Nurseries of Primitive Christianity, distributed, as it were
(...).
Areolatim, like so many distinct Beds, and Knots in the Eden of God, planted,
and watered, and dressed by Apostolical Hands, all under his care, and custody.
Consider him (by way of Recollection) under the Variety of Circumstance,
wherein the Text has hitherto presented him to our Meditations, Consider him a
single Person; no Colleagues, no Compeers, no Co-ordinates. For, as our Lord
promised the Keys, (and doubtless, so gave as he had promised them) not to a
College, but to single Persons Matthew. xvi. 19.
Tibi dabo -- and quodcunque (Tu) ligaveris: So the Apostles, at the next
remove, St. Paul here, I am sure, for One entrusts all, not to Communities, and
Consistories, but to Individuals; for so runs the Style, Ego Te-ut Tu sicut ego
Tibi, all Personal, and Particular. Consider him determined to a fixed, and
constant Residence, left, and settled in Creet, the Ordinary, and perpetual
Governor of that Church. For we ought to have more regard to Reason, and the
true Nature of things, than to pronounce him an Extraordinary Officer; who, for
ought appears, is empowered to none, but Acts of Ordinary, and continual
Importance to the Church: And more Reverence for the blessed Apostle, than to
think, he would issue a Commission, full fraught with Rules of Perpetual Use,
to a Temporary Delegate, who was perhaps next day to be exa^ctorated, and never
to have any Exercise of them. Consider him, yet further, invested with a
Plenitude, and Sufficiency of Power (not only to Preach, and Baptize, and so to
beget Sons to God, and the Church, which is the Presbyter's, and, for ought I
know, the whole of the Evangelist's Office; but also) both to Ordain Elders in
all the Cities under him, and so to beget spiritual Fathers too, as Epiphunius
Contra Haeres. lib. 3. contr. Aerium.
distinguishes; and then, (as, in the old Paternal Dominion, they ruled whom
they had begotten) to govern, and regulate whom he had thus ordained, even all
the Bishops of those numerous Cities. Whence the Question of our Reverend and
Learned (...)
Jewel most naturally proceeds, Having the Government of so many Bishops,
what may we call him but an Archbishop? (And I add) of so many Cities, what
but a Metropolitan? I say, Consider all this soberly, and maturely, and you
will not disavow me, if, I say, That whosoever shall drive us out of this
Creet, thus strongly Garrisoned by S. Paul, and his Disciples, and flight and
dismantle so many Strengths, and Fortresses of the Episcopal Cause, as there
were Cities in that Island, and extort out of our Hands this great Instance of
so many Bishops, ordained and governed by their own Metropolitan, so high in
the first Age; will be a very Pyrgopolinices indeed, Plaut. in Milite.
qui legiones Spiritu difflat, and deserve the Sur-name of Creticus, better
than Metellus the Roman, that subdued the Island.

For our parts, we are not ashamed of our Conformity to so Primitive a Pattern;
nay, we glory in so handsome, and innocent a Syncretism: For we are not better,
then our Fathers; nor wiser, than the Apostles of Christ himself. And, had we
been of their Counsel, who not long since pretended to reform us according to
the best Examples, we might have bespoke them, as once S. Paul did those over
hasty, and unruly Mariners (who would needs put to Sea, when Sailing was
dangerous, and thrive accordingly, being quickly forced to abandon the Helm,
and to let the Ship Act. xxvii. 15.
drive, being not able to bear up against the Wind Verse. 21.
(...). Sirs, you should not have parted from Creet in the Text, and so have
gained Ibid. (...).
harm, and disgrace. If really you be in quest of the best Examples of
modelling a Church, you may certainly find here as fair, and as pure Ideas, and
as well worth your Imitation, as the more Modern Platform can afford you; which
See Mr. Hooker's Preface.
I have reason to believe the famous Author of it intended not at first a
Pattern to other Churches, but an Expedient to serve the present Exigent of his
own, in a Iuncture scarce capable of any thing better, and which, I am
persuaded, the learned, and wisest, and most Pious of his Followers would
gladly relinquish for something more Perfect, and Primitive; would the
Necessities of their present Condition (which have no Law, but much of Excuse
for those, that really lie under them) permit them the Happiness of so blessed
an Exchange. Which God in Mercy send them.

And so much of the Second Act, to which the Power is here designed, and that
is the Ordaining of Elders, together with the Distribution of them (...), In
every City one.

I have but three Words to add of the Third Part of my Text, and that was, the
Limitation of these Acts to the Apostles Prescription; All must be so done,
even as he had appointed. So, in regard of the Variety of the Offices
themselves, and their several Subordinations; So in regard of the choice of the
Persons, and their requisite Qualifications; and so also, in regard of the
Rites, and Ceremonies, and Manner of ordaining them: still, (...). All, as I
had appointed thee.

And now, if any demand, where these (...), these Constitutions Apostolical,
are to be found; I shall not send them to Clemens ^his Book, that bears that
Name, but to the Universal Practice of the Ancient Church, in which they are
still in great part Visible; and thence handed over to Posterity by Tradition,
and conformity of Practice; and by Degrees inserted into the Canons of the old
Councels, as occasion was offered, and into the Ordinals of several Churches.
Or, if a readier, and more present Answer be required, I know not where to
design it you nearer hand, or more full to your satisfaction, than by
dismissing you, to attend the great Action, that is to follow. In which you
will see All so Grave, and Solemn; so Pious, and Devout; so Primitive, and
Apostolical; and so exactly up to the Level of the Text, and the (...) of S.
Paul here: that I know not where to point you out so pregnant, and full a
Comment upon my Text, nor what better Amends to make you for my own failings
upon it.

And yet, having thus hastily run it over, with all its Parts, and Branches;
(Some few Sands still remaining of that Heap, the Bounty of your Patience
allows me) I Will crave leave briefly to take a Second View of it in the Auditory
it self, and read it over again in the Face of the Assembly. For the better
part of it, your own Thoughts have already prevented me; and every Eye has
singled out our most Reverend Titus, (...), a Genuine Son, and Successor of the
Apostles, upon the very Act of Constituting (...), more, than a whole Province
of Elders at once: Men, able to abide, and pass with Honor the dreadful Test,
that follows upon my Text, as being both, for Life, Blameless, Sober, Just,
Holy Temperate; and in Doctrine Sound, holding f^st the Faithful Word, as they
have been taught; notwithstanding all the Discouragements, they have met with,
from the sad Condition of our Common Mother.

But then for the rest; I wish it were not so easy a Task, to find Creet in
England, with all its Want^s, and all its Amisses. For, to say nothing of those
more innocent, and less important Resemblances, in which we Symbolize; (both
Islands lying in a kind of Magin. page 182. 38.
Trigon betwixt three Points, or Promontories; both styled The Happy Islands by
Ancient Writers* ((...) Solin. cap. 17.
and Insulae Fortunatae Camd. Brit. page 3. ex Lycoph. Cassand.
for the Temper of the Air, and Fertility of the Soil; both denominated from
those white, and Creta, ab Insula Creta, ubi ^elior est. Isidor. lib. 16. cap.
1.
Chalkie Cliffs, which bound them on one side, Magin. page 182. 38.
Candia a Candidis, as Albion ab albis rupibus, both famous for their Just
Laws, and Ours no less to be valued, than those of Rhadamanthus, and Minos, had
we but the Wisdom, to comport our selves to the Obedience of them, as we
ought:) I say, to let all this pass, I wish we had not too much of Creet
amongst us, whether Morally considered, in regard of their Vices; or
Historically, in regard of their Imperfect Condition.

I would not be mistaken, as One, that delights to Libel a whole Nation at
once, (especially mine own) but St. Chrysostom has dressed an Apology for St.
Paul in this Particular, by distinguishing, In Tit. Hom. 1.
(...). He did it not to injure any, but out of Kindness, and pure Love to
reform them: Just as our Blessed Lord (...), says the same Father, a thousand
times reproached the Scribes and Pharisees: not because they had wronged Him;
but least they should harm and destroy others. And so St. Paul, with the same
Affections about him, cries Gal. iii. 1.
O insensati Galatae! to one Church; Are you such Fools? and here, v. 12.
(...).

That Poet was, I think, a Prophet indeed (otherwise, than St. Paul meant him)
and sang of us too: and in that Verse the present Age may see its Face, and
Blush. I appeal to your better Observation, if we have not outvyed the very
Cretans themselves in the first Particular; and in a worse kind too lied for
God's Sake, and Jo^ xiii. 7.
talked deceitfully for him. What pious Frauds, and holy Cheats? What
slandering the Footsteps of God's Anointed, when the Interest was to Blacken
Him? What false accusing of^ our Brethren, ay, and of our Fathers too? That we
might devour the Man more righteous than our Selves? Pliny Lib. 8. cap. 58.
has observed it. Nullum animal maleficum in Creta; and Solinus Cap. 17.
adds, Nec ulla Serpens: But they should have excepted the Inhabitants; for
they were (...) (and v. 13.
this Witness, I am sure, is true;) not only Evil Beasts, as we translate it,
but Venomous too: and I wish there were no other Island could show Vipers too
many, that have eat out the Bowels of their Common Mother, and flown in the
Face of their Political Father, without whose benigner Influence their chill
and benumbed Fortunes had not Warmth enough, to raise them to so bold an
Attempt. It Is unwillingly, that I go on to the rest of that Character: but your
own Experience shall justify me, if I say, that the (...), that remains, has
been since exemplified in some other Sense; and our Idleness, and Fullness of
Bread, those Sins of Sodom, have, I fear, long since, proclaimed it to our
Faces. And now I cannot wonder, if it be observed from the Records of History,
(as In Tit. ii^ 1.
Grotius assures us, who knew them well) that the Cretuns were (and I wish,
there were no other such) a mutinous, and a seditious People; and had but too
much need to be put in mind by Titus, to be subject to Principalities, and
Powers, and to obey Magistrates: For Jud. ix. 27.
the Men of Sechem eat, and drink, and (then most naturally go on to) curse
Abimelech; (Ay, and David, they would have done, had they lived in his Time,
and the Flagon held out) for when our Bellies, and our Heads, are full, then Woe
be to our Governors; and Wealth, and Ease, and having nothing to do, makes us
ripe for any thing, that is Evil. There were, amongst the new Converts of
Creet, some false Brethren v. 10.
of the Circumcision; for the stopping of whose Mouths, as some have thought,
and St. Chrysostom amongst the rest, St. Paul in chief designed this Epistle.
And I should be glad to be assured* that there are not some amongst us, who
though they love not to Bleed, yet I am afraid, are too prone to Iudaize in
some other Instance, and to retrive some other part of the Mosaical Paedagogie,
which perhaps, suits no better with that Gal. v. 1.
Liberty, to which Christ our Lord has called us, and in which we ought to
stand fast. It Is with much Reluctance (could I balk it so full in my way) that
I show you the Cretan Labyrinth, that not long since, I am sure, was amongst us
(God grant it be not still) that inextricable, and endless Maze of Errors and
Heresies, that every day opened it self into new Paths and Allies; dividing,
and subdividing into never ending Mistakes, till they had abased, and almost
destroyed Religion with abominable Heterogeneous Mixtures, and left the little
Semblance of Christianity, was left amongst them, an hideous Monster, or
Minotaur, Semibov^mque virum, Semivirumque bovem: -- Jerusalem, and Rome, party
per pale; with Geneva, and Gracovia, if you will have it quarterly, Ay, and Mecca
too, I fear, in chief, to embellish the Scutcheon.

But, is there no Theseus, no generous Hero, to attaque this Monster? No
courteous, and charitable Ariadne, that will lend a Clew, and help us to
disentangle the ruffled Scain, and to evade these perplexed wanderings? Has our
Creet no Dictamnus in it to expel the Arrow, which so long has galled our
sides? No Counter-poison for so many Mischiefs? Or rather, in the Prophetical
Scheme, Jer. viii* 22.
Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Yes; there is: And
therefore let us hope well of the healing of the Wounds of the Daughter of our
People, since they are under the Cure of those very Hands; upon which God has
entailed a Miraculous Gift of Healing, as if it were on purpose to raise up our
Hopes into some Confidence, that we shall owe one day to those Sacred Hands,
next under God, the healing of the Church's and the People's Evils, as well as
of the King's. Blessed for ever be that God, who has restored us such a
Gracious Sovereign, to be the Isa. lviii. 12.
Repairer of the Breach, and the Nursing Father of his Church: and has put it
into the King's Heart, to appoint Titus, as this Day, to Ordain Elders for
every City, to supply all, that is wanting, and to correct, whatever is amiss.
Blessed are our Eyes, for they see that which many a Righteous Man (more
Righteous, than we) desired so much to see, and has not seen It. And Blessed
be this Day, Jo^. iii. 4.
(Let God regard it from above, and a more than common Light shine upon it!) in
which we see the Phoenix arising from her Funeral Pile, and taking Wing again;
our Holy Mother, the Church standing up from the Dust, and Ruins in which she
sat so long, taking Isa. lxi. 3.
Beauty again for Ashes, and the Garments of Praise, for the Spirit of
Heaviness; remounting the Episcopal Throne, bearing the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven with her, and armed (we hope) with the Rod of Discipline; her Hands
spread abroad* to Bless, and to Ordain, to Confirm the Weak, and to Reconcile
the Penitent; her Breasts flowing with the sincere Milk of the Word; and girt
with a Golden Girdle under the Paps, tying up All by a meet Limitation, and
Restriction to Primitive Patterns, and Prescripts Apostolical. A sight so
Venerable, and August, that me thinks, it should at once strike Love, and Fear
into every Beholder, and an awful Veneration. I may confidently say it, 'Twas
never well with us, since we strayed from the due Reverence, we ought to
Heaven, and Her; and it is strange, we should no sooner observe it, but run a
Madding after other Lovers, that ruined us, till God Hos. ^i. 6, 7.
hedged in our way with Thorns, that we could no longer find them, and then we
said, I will go, and return to my former Husband; for then was it better with
me then now.

Well; Blessed be the Mercies of God, we are at last returned; and Tit^s is come
back into Creet; and there are Elders ordaining for every City. But, Hic
Rhodus, hic Saltus. Reverend Father, this is your Creet, adorn it, as you can.
The Province is hard, and the Task weighty, and formidable, even to an Angel's
Shoulders. That we mistake not; Titus was not left behind in Creet, to take his
Ease, or to sheep out the Storm, which soon after overtook St. Paul at Sea; he
might well expect a worse at Land (Naufragium terrestre) and a more tempestuous
Euroclydon. Believe it, a Bishop's Roab is Tunica pu^ire molesta; Juvenal. Sat.
8.
Tunica molesta (as the Vide Baron. Tom. 1. Ann. 66. n. 4.
Martyrs pitched Coat was called of Old) and sits, perhaps, more uneasy upon
the Shoulders. The Miter is not (...), to render invisible, or invulnerable;
but rather exposes to Enemies. The Rotchet, and the Surplice, Emblems of
Innocence indeed, but Marks of Envy too: and it is in those Whites, that Malice
sticks all her Darts. And therefore St. Paul was fain to entreat Timothy into
this Dignity; 1 Timothy ^. 3.
For this cause besought I thee, to abide at Ephesus: for there were Beasts to
be fought with there; and the Apostle had tried them, 1 Cor. xv. 32.
both Tooth, and Paw. So that I cannot wonder, if our Bishops say, Nolo
Episcopari, in good Earnest: and if any of our Genes. xxxviii. 28, 29.
Zaras thrust forth a hasty Hand, and be laid hold on, and the Scarlet Thread
cast about his Finger; it is not strange, if he draw back his Hand, and refuse
the Primogeniture; choosing rather to lie hid in Obscurity, quam vinctus Purpura
progredi, as the great Cardinal Baron. Epist. ad Papam Clem. viii. T. 7.
wittily, alludes. As in Creet new Founded, so in England new Restored, there
must needs be many things wanting, and much amiss, not so easily to be
supplied, or amended.

When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion, they made their thankful
acknowledgments, and said in the Psalm, Psalm. cxxvi. 3.
The Lord has done great things for us already, whereof we will be glad. But
then it follows immediately in the next Verse, v. 4.
Turn again our Captivity, O Lord, as the Rivers in the South. It seems their
Captivity (I am sure Ours) is still to turn again, even after it is returned.
For there are Relics of it still behind, and the sad Effects remain, (an Age
will hardly be able to^ Efface them;) and, which is the saddest of All, we are
still, I fear, in Captivity to the same Sins, that occasioned that; and they
are able to bring upon us Ten Thousand Captivities, worse than the former.
Plainly, there are Riddles in our Condition, (and whose Heifer shall we plow
with Judge. xiv. 18.
to unfold them?) Returned, and not returned: Restored, and yet not so ^ully
restored: -- in fine, with them in the Psalm, Psalm. cxxvi. 1.
We are like to them, that dream. With St. Peter, Act. xii. ^, etc*
the good Angel has rouzed us, indeed, and our Chains are fallen off; we have
bound on our Sandals, and begin to find our Legs again; and we are past the
first, and the second Ward: But, methinks, the Iron Gate, that leads to the
City, is not over-apt to open to us of its own accord, so that we wish not
well, if it be True, and Real, that is done by the Angel; still apt to think we
see a Vision; still like to them that dream. We have Jerusalem ('it is true) and
the Hill of Sion in our Eyes: Yet many look back to Babel, and multitudes sit
Captives still by those Waters increasing them with their ^^ars. If any have
taken down their Harps from those Willows, they are not strong, nor well in
Fune: and we scarce find how to sing the Lord's Songs, even in our own Land.

And therefore let me advise you, now, in the Close of All; Give not over, but
ply your Devotions still; and whenever you sing* In Convertendo Dominus, in the
midst of those Doxologies, forget not to insert one Versicle of Petition,
Converte, Domine, Converte: Turn again, what remains of our Captivity, and
perfect our faint beginings. Ay, that is the way, if we would succeed; Vot a
dabunt, quae bellae negarunt. For God will hear the Prayers of his Church,
especially for his Church; as he did those of David, Psalm. cxxxii. V. 9.
Let^ thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness; that is the Petition: And what
says the Answer of God, a few Verses after. V. 16.
(I my self) will cloth her Priests (with Righteousness? Ay, and) with
Salvation (too) Let the Saints shout for joy; says the Psalmist: Her Saints,
says God, Shall shout aloud for joy: So that there is more granted in both
parts, than was asked. St. Paul knew well, that this was the Method: And
therefore, before he took forth his Son Titus, the great Lesson of my Text, he
first imparts his Apostolical Benediction; V. 4.
To Titus, mine own Son Grace, and Mercy, and Peace from God the Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, our Savior. St. Chrysostom, and Theophilact have
observed it to my hand, that he bestows upon so great a Bishop the same common
Blessing that he is wont to give to All ((...)) Grace, and Mercy, and Peace:
Ay, and no Man, as they go on, has more need of it, than He, Not of Grace; for
who has more Burdens, to bear? More Difficulties, to go through with? Not of
Mercy: For who in greater danger of offending either God, or Man? Not of Peace;
having so many Enemies on all sides, and so many Troubles of every sort. Only
In ^ocum.
St. Ier^me adds, that here is no Multiplicitur, as in other 1 Pet. i. 2. 2 Pet.
i. 2.
Apprecations. Common Christians may have their Peace multiplied. Peace within,
and Peace without; Peace with God, and Peace with Men too; But Titus's Peace is
sine Multiplicatione. The Bishops, and Governors of the Church must look for
none, but Peace with Heaven, and their own Consciences; (and for that single
Pearl, Matt. xiii. 4^.
likewise Merchants, they sell all, that they have;) As for the rest, (...) 2
Cor. vii. 5.
that is their Lot, and that is their Motto too: They must look for Fightings
without St. Paul, in that Divine Valedictory to the Bishops of the Province of
Ephesus (Act. xx.) though, as he says, for the space of three years together
he had not ceased to warn every one of them, night and day, with Tears (as
knowing well both the burden and the danger, they stood under;) yet (a tender
Affection having never said enough) he resumes the Argument (verse 8.) Take
heed to your selves, and to all the Flock; For I know, that, after my departing
shall grievous Wolves enter in amongst you ((...) he had almost said (...)
Weet-Wolves, Loups-garons.
Mankind Wolves) that will neither spare the flock* nor You; but, by a witty
and compendious Malice, attaq^e the Shepherd first, that the Sheep may be
seattered, and so gleaned up at^leisure. And therefore, Take heed to your
selves in the first place, in whose Welfare that of the Flock is so closely
bound up. And yet, after all these Caveats, and very seasonable Advertisements,
he cannot yet believe them safe, unless he leaves them under a better Guard,
than His, or their Own: And therefore, in fine, he kneels down, and prays with
them, and for them all, recommending them to God* and to the Word of his Grace.
And I know not where better to leave you, than in the Practice* and actual
Exercise of a Duty so fairly recommended: And shall therefore desire you, to
turn your wearied Eyes from Me, and lift them up to Heaven (from whence every
good, and perfect Gift descends) to seek from thence the Smoothing of all
Difficulties, the Solving of all Doubts, the Calming of all Animosities, and
the Uniting of all Affections: And to beg of that Father of Mercies, and God of
all Consolations, That he will (every day more, and more) Turn again our
Captivity, like the Rivers in the South; that they, who sow in Tears, may reap
in Joy: That he would send forth his good Spirit, to move upon the Waters of
our Massah, and Meribah, to digest that Chaos, and Confusion, and Strife of
Opinions into one beautiful, and Harmonious Composure: And finally, That He,
who, by the hand of his holy Apostle, founded this Church of Creet in Titus,
and his Elders, in a meet, and decent Imparity, and Subordination, would
maintain his own Ordinance amongst us also* and justify his Institutions to
the utmost against all Gainsayers; That the Rod of Aaron may again bud, and
blossom, and bring forth fruit amongst us; That his Urim and his Thummim, may
be with his Holy Ones; That he would bless their Substance, and accept the Work
of their Hands, and smite through the Loins of them, that hate them, that they
rise not again: That so there may never want a Succession of Holy Bishops, and
Priests, to shine as Lights in the World, holding forth the Word of Life; till
we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God,
unto that Perfection and Fullness of the everlasting Kingdom: To the which, God
in Mercy bring us all, through the Merits of his dear Son. To which most
blessed Father, and Son, with God the Holy Ghost; be ascribed by all the
Creatures in Heaven, and Earth, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, both now
and for evermore AMEN.

(...).
LEX IGNEA: OR, The School of Righteousness.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the KING, October. 10. 1666.

At the SOLEMN FAST appointed For the late FIRE in LONDON.

By the Most Reverend Father in God, William Sancroft, D. D. Late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Dean of St. Paul's.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. 1694.

ISAIAH xxvi. ver. 9. -- When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants
of the World will learn Righteousness.
THIS Chapter with the two next before, and that which follows, are all four
parts of the same prophetic Sermon, (as appears by those words so often
repeated in them, In that Day, fixing and determining All to the same Epoch,
and Period of Time;) belong All to the same subject Matter, sc. the Destruction
of Judah and Jerusalem, whether by the Babylonians, or the Romans, or both. So
that the Earth (or as we may rather translate, the Land, Ver. 1. and. 3.
or the Country) wasted, and utterly spoiled, and turned upside down, Chap.
xxiv. is doubtless the Land of Iewry: And the World that languisheth, and
fades away, Ver. 4. of that Chapter, not much wider; that, and the
neighboring Regions, with whom the Jews had commerce, (...) and(...), and (...)
and intercourse of Peace and War, Moab, and Egypt, and Babylon, in a word,
the Jewish World; (for so both the Hebrew and Greek words usually translated
the Earth and the World, are often in Scripture Language contracted and limited
by the Matter in hand:) And consequently the City of Confusion, which is broken
down, a City turned Chaos again, as the Hebrew imports, Chap. xxiv. 10. the
City turned into a Heap, or a Ruin, nay, in tumulum, as the Vulgar Latin, or
(...), as LXX. translate it, into one great Sepulcher to it self, buried in its
own Rubbish, Chap. xxv. 2. The lofty City laid low, even to the Ground, and
abased in the very Dust, Chap. xxvi. 5. The City desolate, and forsaken, and
left Wilderness, and desert all over, Chap. xxvii. 10. are but so many
variations of the Phrase, and signify all the same thing, the burning of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, or Titus, or (as some will have it) by both.

This sad Devastation the Prophet first beholds in speculo prophetico, sees it
from far in his prophetic Telescope, as clearly, and distinctly, as if it were
before his Eyes, and describes it here and there the whole Sermon throughout,
but chiefly, Chap. xxiv. in so lofty a Language, that many have mistaken it for
the End of the World, and the Consummation of all things. But then to sweeten
so sad a Theme, he assures them, it shall not be a (...), God will not make a
final End now: No, a Remnant shall be left, as the shaking of an Olive Tree,
and as the Gleaning Grapes, when the Vintage is done, Chap. xxiv. 13. Nor shall
they be only preserved, Lacryma^ Vulg.
but restored too; The Lord God will in time wipe away every Tear from off all
Faces, and at last, swallow up this Death too in Victory, Chap. xxv. 8. He Will
turn their Captivities, and rebuild their City, and their Temple too; and all
this shall be as it were Life from the Dead, Romans xi. 19.
as the Apostle calls it, so miraculous a Re-establishment, at a Juncture so
improbable, when they are destroyed out of all Ken of Recovery, that it shall
be a kind of Resurrection; Ezekiel. xxx* (...) Dan. xii.
and so like the great One, that it is described in the very proper Phrases of
that, both by the other Prophets, and by Ours too a little below the Text, Thy
Dead shall live again; Ver. 19.
My dead Bodies shall arise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in the Dust, etc. And
then (which is of nearest Concern to us, and to ou^ present Business) the
Prophet directs the Remnant that should escape, how to behave themselves under
so great a Desolation; and he contrives his directions into a threefold Song
(that they may be the better remarkt and remembered) tuned and fitted to the
three great Moments of the Event.

The first, to the time of the Ruin it self, Chap. xxiv. where having set
before their Eyes the sad prospect of the holy City, and House of God in
Flames; When thus it shall be in the midst of the Land, says he, there shall
be a Remnant, and they shall lift up their voice, and sing for the Majesty of
the Lord, saying, Glorify ye the Lord in the Fires, V. 15. And this is (...) a
Song of Praise.

The second is (...) a Song of Degrees or Ascensions, fitted to the time of
their Return, when All shall be restored and rebuilt again; and that we have
Chap. xxvii. 2. In that Day sing ye unto her; A Vineyard of Red Wine: I the
Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it
Night and Day.

The third (of which my Text is a principle strain) belongs to the whole middle
interval between the Ruin and the Restoration, in this xvi. Chap. In tha^ Day
shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah, We have a strong City; Salvation
will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks, etc. As if he had said; Though our
City be Ruined, yet God is still our dwelling place; our Fortresses dismantled,
and thrown down, but Salvation will he appoint us for Walls and Bulwarks; Our
Temples in the Dust, but God will be to us himself, Ezekiel. xi. 1^.
as a little Sanctuary. And this is (...) a Song to give Instruction, teaching
them, and in them us, how to demean our selves, while the Calamity lies upon
us: sc. to make God our Refuge, ver. 4. to wait for him in the Way of his
Judgments, ver. 8. and in this 9. ver. earnestly to desire him from the very
Soul in the Night (in the Darkest, and Blackest of the Affliction;) to seek him
early, when it begins to dawn toward a better Condition; and in the mean time,
as it is in the Text, to improve all this severe Discipline, as he intends it,
for the advancing us in the knowledge of Him; and of our selves, and of our
whole Duty; For when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn Righteousness.

A Text you see; that supposes Judgments in the Earth, or upon a Land (as its
Occasions) and so suitable to our sad Condition: A Text too, that proposes our
Learning, as its End and Design, and so suitable (one would think) to our
Inclination too. The Character, and Genius of the Age we live in, is Learned:
The pretense at this day so high, and so universal, that He is Nobody now, who
has not a new Systeme of the World, a new Hypothesis in Nature, a new Model of
Government, a new Scheme of God's Decrees, and the greatest Depths in Theology.
We are many of us acute Philosophers (that must not be disputed us;) most of us
grand Politics and Statesmen too; All of us (without exception) deep Divines:
-- will needs be wiser than our Neighbors, but however wiser than our Teachers
and Governors, if not wiser than God himself. A kind of Moral Rickets, that
swells, and puffs up the Head, while the whole inner Man of the Heart wastes and
dwindles. For like the silly Women, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
Disciples to the old Gnostics, while we are thus ever Learning (pretending to
great Heights, and Proficiencies) we come never to the Knowledge of the Truth
(the Truth which is according unto Godliness;) In fine, amongst so many
Learners they are but few that learn Righteousness: -- And therefore, God
himself here opens us a School; erects a severe Discipline in the Text; brings
forth his Ferulas, when nothing else will serve the Turn. For he has indeed
four Schools, or rather four distinct Forms, and Classes in the same great
School of Righteousness; the last only (that of his Judgments) express in the
Text, but the rest too supposed at least, or covertly implied.

For whether we look upon the latter Clause of the proposition. The Inhabitants
of the World will learn; -- We find our selves there under a double Formality;
As Learners, and as Inhabiters. As Learners first, and so endued with Schola
Cordis in Domo interiori, the School of the Heart, God's first School in the
little World within us. Secondly, as Inhabitants of the Schola Orbis, in which,
He takes us forth continual Lessons of Righteousness -- Seque ipsum inculcat,
and offert, Ut been cognosci possit; and that both from the Natural World, and
from the Political; whether Schola Regni, or Schola Ecclesiae. Or if we return
to the former Branch of the Text, When thy Judgments are in the Earth. This
when they are, supposes another time, when they Are Not in the Earth, and that
time is the Time of Love (as the Prophet speaks) the Season of Mercy; Ezekiel.
xvi. 8.
Schola Miseri-cordiarum, the School of God's render Mercies inviting us,
gently leading, and drawing us with the Cords of a Man, Hos. xi. 4.
with And lastly, when nothing else will serve, here is Schola Iudiciorum, the
School of God's severe Judgments driving us to Repentance, and compelling us to
come in and learn Righteousness. A provision (you see) every way sufficient,
and abundant for our Learning, were not we wanting to our selves.

But alas! We may run by the Text, and easily read in it these three things, as
so many very Natural Deductions, and Born like a wild Asse's Colt, Job. xi. 12.
as Zophar speaks; and then to our Natural we add affected Ignorance too: So
that we are much to seek, and to learn Righteousness it must be taught us.
Secondly, God's infinite renewed unto Knowledge after the Image of him, Col.
iii 10. Ephe^. iv. 24.
that created us in Righteousness, as the Apostle speaks. And Thirdly, Our
Versio^s with so many Limitations and Aba^ements (as we shall see by and by)
that we may well give it up as the sum and up-shot of all, that our
All-merciful God omits no Means or Methods of our Improvement; but we (supinely
negligent, and prodigiously stubborn as we are) render them all ineffectual.

That we may do so no longer, but rather make good the profession, with which
we have dared to appear this Day before God, of humbling our selves under his
Almighty Hand; Let us, before we pass on any further, lift up our Hands and our
Hearts to Him in the Heavens, beseeching him by the Power of his Mighty Grace
so to sanctify to us All, both the Sense of his present Judgment, and all our
Meditations and Discourses thereupon, that by all we may be promoted in
learning Righteousness.

THe Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness or Justice: What Is that?
Is there such a thing in the World? Or is it a Name only, and a glorious
pretense? Is it not only another word for Interest or Utility, and so nothing
just, V. Lactant. lib. v.
but what is profitable; Carneades his infamous Assertion retriv'd and owned
with open face by Christians? Is it not the taking of a party, or the espousing
of a Faction, and appearing for it with heat and animosity; and a savage
condemning and destroying All that are not of it? Is it not the Profession to
believe such a Systeme of Opinions, what life soever is consequent thereupon?
An airy invisible Righteousness, that never embodies or appears in our Actions,
but hovers in the Clouds, in speculations and fancies, where no Man can find it?

The Truth is, there is no piece of Unrighteousness more common in the World,
than thus to weigh Justice it self in an unjust Balance; while every one
contrives his Hypothesis, so as to salve the Phenomenon, so declares his
Notion, as may best suit and comport with his own unrighteous practices. But
the Righteousness we are to learn in God's School, must not be a self-chosen
Righteousness: We must not pay God our Sovereign, the Tribute of our Obedience
in Coin of our own stamping; it must be such as will abide the Touchstone of
his Word, and the Balance of his Sanctuary. To make short, Righteousness or
Justice, though elsewhere a single Virtue, yet here it is virtually All: --
(...), and said the Prophet; and the Philosopher after him, (...), not a part,
but all Virtue: And so often but in Scripture, and Fathers, comprehensively all
Religion, Theogn. Ethic. v.
the whole Duty of Man, (...), says St. Chrysostom: Omnes Virtutum species
uno Iustitiae nomine, says St. Jerome. Not a particular Star, nor a single
Constellation, but a whole Heaven of Virtues, an entire Globe of Moral and
Christian Perfections; an Universal Rectitude of the Will, consorming us in all
Points to God's Righteous Law, Hom. 12. in S. Matthew.
the Rule of our Righteousness, Or if you will in two words, it is Suum cuique
to give every one his Due; Suum Deo first, and then Suum proximo; give God his
Due, and your Neighbor too: These are the integral parts of it. So that
Righteousness, as the great Rule of it, has two Tables, or, if you will two
Hemispheres, the upper and the nether: Both so vast, that we cannot measure
them in a Span (the Span of time allotted me;) I shall therefore contract them
to the occasion, and give you only some of those particular Lessons of
Righteousness, which this present Judgment of God upon our Land seems most
clearly to take us forth, both into relation to God himself, and to our
Neighbors; and then call you, and my self to a serious Scrutiny, how well we
have learned them, and so an end.

And first we begin (as we ought) in giving God his due; in rendering to God the
things that are Gods. To limit this wide Universality too, and render it more
proper, and peculiar we may reduce all to that first of Esai's three Songs
mentioned at the beginning, Glorify ye the Lord in the Fires; C. xxiv. 15.
giving him upon this sad Occasion the Glory of that great Trinity of his
Attributes; the Glory of his Power, and Majesty; the the Glory of his Justice
and Equity; the Glory of his Goodness and Mercy.

Give him the Glory of his Power Singing for the Majesty of the Lord, Chap.
xxiv. 15. or Beholding the Majesty of the Lord, when his Hand is lifted up, in
the verse after my Text. How great and glorious our God is, who is in himself
incomprehensible, appears best by the glorious greatness of his Works. If he
builds, it is a World, Heaven and Earth, and the Fullness of both. If he gives,
it is his only Son out of his Bosom, the Brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person. If he rewards, it is a Crown, it is a whole Heaven
of Glories. If he be angry, he sends a deluge; opens the Cataracts of Heaven
above, and breaks up the Fountains of the great Deep below, and pours forth
whole Floods of Vengeance: Salvian.
Or else he rains down Hell out of Heaven, and in a moment turns a Land like a
Garden of God into a dead Sea, and a Lake of Brimstone. If he discover himself
by any overt expression of his Power, though the Intention be mere Mercy, and
loving Kindness, Mortality shrinks from it, and cannot bear it. When his Glory
descends on Mount Sinai, the People remove, and stand afar off, and Let not God
speak with us (say they) lest we die: Ex. xx. 18, 19.
And Depart from me, O Lord, says St. Peter, Luc. v. 8.
amazed at that miraculous draught of Fishes: How much more should the
Inhabitants of the World tremble before him, when his great and sore Judgments
are in the Earth: Ps. cxiv. 7, 8.
Tremble thou Earth, the presence of God (says the Psalmist) even when he
improves the hard Rock into a Springing Well: Much more when a fruitful Land he
turns into barrenness, Ps. cvii. 34.
or a stately City into Ashes, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
Ps. cxix. 53.
I am horribly afraid, says David, for the ungodly that forsake thy Law; Hebr.
xii. 21.
and I exceedingly fear, and quake, said Moses, at the giving of it: But when
our Lord shall come again to require it, The Powers of Heaven shall be shaken
too; Mat. xxiv. 29.
the Angels themselves (as St. Crysostome interprets) though pure and innocent
Creatures shall tremble ((...)) to see the severity of that Judgment. Hom. 77.
in Matthew.
How much rather ought we, wretched Creatures that we are, conscious to our
selves, of Dust, and sin, to tremble and quake at the Wrath of this dread Lord
of the Universe; at whose Voice alone, the great Emperor Caligula runs under
the Bed, Sueton. l. v. n. 51.
Dan. v. 6.
and the mighty Bel-shazzar's Lions are Loosed, and his Knees knock one against
another, when God but writes bitter things against him on the Wall.

It were a vain Affectation, to attempt a Description of the greatness of our
late horrible Devastation. This were to be Ambitiosus in Malis, to chew over
all our Wormwood, and our Gall again: This were Rogum ascipolire, which the
xii. TABLES forbad, to carve and paint the Wood of our Funeral Pile. I shall
only call back your thoughts to stand with me upon the prospect of that horrid
Theater of the Divine Judgments, Ps. xivi. 8.
and say, Come hither, and behold the Works of the Lord, what Desolation he
has made in the Earth; and then who will not join with me to say upon so
convincing an occasion? We humble our selves under the Almighty Hand of God,
the Lord of all the World; We adore his Power and Majesty in lowly
prostrations; before whom all the Nations of the World are as a Drop of the
Bucket, Isa. xl. 15.
the Globe of the Earth, as the small Dust of the Balance, and who takes up
the Isles (even our Great Britains too, as we call them) as a very little
thing. Apoc. xv. 3, 4.
Great and marvelous are thy Works, O Lord God Almighty! Who would not fear
thee, and glorify thy Name, when thy Judgments are thus manifest? Thou have
brought them down that dwell on high, and laid the lofty City low, even to the
Ground; the Joyous City of our Solemnities, the Royal Chamber, the Emporeum of
the World, the the Mart of Nations, the very Top-Gallant of all our Glory in
the Dust. Even so Holy Father, Matthew. xi. 26.
for so it seemed good in thy sight. We say not to our God, What do thou?
Wherefore has the Lord done thus to this great City? We reply not, we answer
not again: The Lord has spoken; let all the Earth keep silence before him. We
acknowledge thy Hand in it, O our God; we submit to thy good pleasure in it; we
wait for thy Comfort, and thy Salvation in it. We meekly kiss the Rod that
strikes us: Heb. xi. 21.
With dying Jacob we desire to worship (...), with perfect Resignation as we
are able, leaning and reposing upon the top of this thy severe Rod. For shall
we receive Good at the Hand of our God, Jo^. ii. 10.
and shall we not receive Evil? It Is the same Blessed Hand that distributes and
strikes; and with equal Reverence and Affection we adore it, whether he opens
it wide in Bounty, or contracts it close in severity: The one the Divine
Rhetoric to persuade us to learn Righteousness; the other his more irrefragable
Logic to convince and constrain us. And therefore, we charge not our Maker
foolishly; but meekly accept the punishment of our Iniquity. And having thus
adored his Power (which was the First) we go on in the next place to
acknowledge his Justice too; saying with holy DAVID, Ps. cxix. 137.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy Judgments: The second part of
God's Due.

Give him the Glory of his Justice also; and if you learn no other
Righteousness in his School, at least learn His, and frankly confess it too.
For though God's Judgments may be secret, yet they cannot be unjust: Psalm.
xxxvi. 6.
Like the great Deep indeed, an Abyss unfathomable; But though we have no
Plumb-line of Reason, that can reach it, our Faith assures us, there is Justice
at the Bottom. Clouds and Darkness are round about him, Ps. xcvii. 2.
says the Psalmist; but, as it follows, Righteousness and Judgment are the
Habitation of his Throne: So much we may easily discern through all the Veils
and Curtins that invelop him, that Justice stands always fast by his
Judgment Seat. And therefore though it be a nice, and a delicate point to
assign the particular sins, for which God has thus sorely afflicted us; yet
must we declare (as we are waranted by sacred Authority) That God has laid his
heavy Judgment upon us All, The King's Declaration.
as an Evidence of his Displeasure for our Sins in general.

Not to engage in that Common Theme; we may clear it a little by the Light of
our own Fires (the particular Instrument of our Calamity) in two or three
Reflections upon that. God spoke his Righteous Law at first out of the midst of
the Fire, Exodus xix. 18. And he shall appear from Heaven again in flaming Fire,
2 These. i. 8.
taking vengeance on them that obey it not, says the Apostle. Now as the
Prophet Amos argues from another circumstance of Terror, wherewith the Law was
given, the sound of the Trumpet, the first Trumpet certainly, we over read of,
in any Record in the World, 1 Cor. 15. 52.
as the last Trumpet (the Apostle tells us) shall be that of the Archangel to
summon us to account for it) Shall a Trumpet be blown (and so say I, Amos iii.
^.
shall a Fire be kindled) in the City (nay, a whole City become but one great
Fire) and the People not be afraid; We not reflect upon our own Guiltiness
before God, who came at first with a Fiery Law in his Right Hand to teach us
our Duty, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 2.
and shall come again at last with Fiery Indignation at his left to devour all
those that perform it not? Heb. x. 27*
Again, Fire and Water are the two great Instruments of God's double Vengeance
upon the World of the Ungodly: The One long since past recorded for our
Instruction; the other yet to come, the Matter (it ought to be, I am sure) of
our continual Terror. 2 Pet. iii. 6^7^
The World that then was, perished by Water (says St. Peter) and the World
that is now, is reserved unto Fire: In the mean time, Fire and Water, things of
commonest Use with us, are also the standing Metaphors almost in every verse of
Scripture, to express God's Judgments of all sorts: Is it not on purpose to
remind us, when ever we hear the sound, or make use of the things, or feel the
smart of either, to reflect upon the heavy wrath of God against Sin in his so
solemn expressions of it? Once more, Fire is the Tyrant in Nature, the King of
the Elements, the mighty Nimrod in the Material World. God has given us this
Active Creature for our Servant, and we degrade him to the meanest Offices, to
the Drudgery of the Kitchen, and the labor of the Furnace. But God can
infranchize him when he pleases, and let him loose upon us; and for our sins,
of an useful Servant, make him to us a rigorous, and a Tyrannical Master. You
saw him the other Day, when he escaped from all your Restraints, mocked all
your Resistance, scorned the Limits, you would have set him: Winged with our
Guilt, he flew triumphant over our proudest Heights, waving his curled Head,
seeming to repeat us that Lesson which holy S. Austin taught us long since,
That the inferior Creatures serve us Men, only that we may serve him, who made
both us and them too. If we rebel against Heaven (...), Wisd. v. 20.
says the Wiseman; The World shall rise in Arms upon us, and fight with him
against the Unwise. Even the Holy Fires of the Altar too, though kindled from
Heaven on purpose to propitiate an angry Deity, proved often through Men's
provocations the Instruments of his Fury; the Mercy-seat became the Arsenal of
Vengeance, and from the presence of God himself went forth those Flames that
devoured his Adversaries? And all to teach us this Lesson, That it is Sin puts
the Thunder into God's Hand, and turns Flames of Love into a consuming Fire.

And therefore dream no longer of Grenades or Fireballs, or the rest of those
witty Mischiefs; search no more for Boutefieus or Incendiaries, Dutch or
French: The Dutch Intemperance, and the French Pride and Vanity, and the rest
of their Sins, we are so fond off, are infinitely more dangerous to us, than
the Enmity of either Nation; for these make God our Enemy too. Or if you will
needs find out the Incendiary, look not abroad; Intus hostis, intus periculum,
says St. Jerome. Turn your Eyes inward into your own Bosoms; there lurks the
great Makebate, the grand Boutefieu between Heaven and us. Trouble not your
selves with Planetary Aspects, or great Conj^nctions* but for your own
Oppositions direct and Diametrial to God, and his Holy Law. Fear not the Signs
of Heaven, but the Sins on Earth, which has made a separation between you and
your God. It Is injurious to the sweet Influences of the Stars, to charge them
with such dire Effects, as Wars, and Pestilences and Conflagrations: Divinae
Iustitiae opera haec, sunt (says the Father) and humanae injustitiae. These
are the Products of God's Righteousness upon our Unrighteousness. Wherefore
glorify we God in these our Fires, saying with the Prophet, Dan. ix. 7.
Righteousness belongs to thee, O Lord, but unto us confusion of Faces, as it
is this day, because of our manifold Trespasses that we have trespassed against
thee.

If yet it be expected I should be more particular, in assigning the very Sins
that have occasioned this heavy Judgment, it is a slippery place, and hard to
keep firm footing in it. The mysterious Text of God's Holy Providence (as I
said before) is dark and obscure; and so much the more, because there are so
many Interpreters, (for though there be no infallible Judge of the Sense of it,
yet all Fingers itch to be doing;) their Conjecture so various, and full of
contradiction, so tincted and debaucht with private prejudice, that they do but
(...), wrest it unskilfully, as they do the other holy Text, Convertunt in
mentem suam (as the Aethi^pic turns that place in St. Peter) torture, 2 Pet.
iii. 16.
and torment it, till it confess their own Sense. As for the many spiteful and
unrighteous Glosses upon the sad Text of our present Calamity (on which every
Faction amongst us has a Revelation, has an Interpretation;) I will not
mention, much less Imitate them. P. o. xviii. 17.
Iustus Accusator sui, says the Wiseman. It Is a righteous thing for every Man
to suspect himself, to look first into the plague of his own Heart, and to be
ready to say with the Disciples, Master, is it not I? We are all over-apt to
charge one another foolishly enough; to take St. Peter's counsel, (...), to be
kind and favorable to our selves in our Interpretations and Censures; but God
methinks, at present seems to accuse us All.

When a Judgment is particular and reaches but a few, we have a savage
promptness in condemning the Sufferers, with, This is God's just Judgment for
such a thing, which we, it seems like not, though perhaps God himself does. So
long as the Thunderbolt flies over our own Heads, we hug our selves, and All
is well; it is our dear pastime, and a high voluptuousness to sit and censure
others, and flatter our selves, that we are more righteous than they. To meet
with this ill Humor, God has reached us now an universal stroke that comes
home to every Man: So that it is as our Prophet states it in the beginning of
this Sermon, As with the Prince and the Priest, Cap. xxiv. 2.
(for (...) is both) so with the People, as with the Master, and the Mistress,
so with the Servant, as with the Buyer, and the Borrower, so with the Seller
and the Lender. In fine, He is no Englishman that feels not this Blow: And
therefore as the Judgment is Universal, let us give Glory to God, and confess,
that the Sin is so too; saying with the good Nehemiah, Cap. ix. 32, 33.
Thou art just, O God, in All that is brought upon us; on our King, and on our
Princes; on our Priests, and on our Prophets; on our Fathers, and on all thy
People; For thou have done Right, but we have All done Wickedly. God give us
Grace to take every one the shame that belongs properly to himself, and to join
heartily together in a full Chorus at the last, repeating that excellent
Exomologesis of holy David, with which I began this point, and shall now
conclude it, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy Judgments. But there
is another yet behind --. 3.


Lastly, S. Ambrose, Suo jure omnibus Dei op^ribus super ingreditur and
supernatat.
give God the Glory of his Mercy too; that must in no wise be forgotten. It Is
the privilege and prerogative of Mercy, that it mixeth it self in all God's
Works; even in Justice it self too. Psalm. cxxxv. 7.
He sends forth Lightnings with the Rain (says the Psalmist) he brings the
Winds out of his Treasuries. Strange furniture, one would think for a Treasury,
Storms and Tempest! But there is so very much of Mercy even in God's Judgments
too, that they also deserve a place amongst his Treasures, ay, and amongst ours
too. For he licenseth not a Wind, or a Storm, lets not fly a flash of
Lightning, or a Ball of Fire, but a Mercy goes along with it; comes flying to
us (if we miss it not by our Negligence or Inadvertency) upon the Wings of that
Wind; and discovers it self to us even by the Light of those Fires. And
therefore turn not away your Eyes in Horror, but study the late Conflagration:
And even in the Dust and Ashes of our City, if we sift and examine them well, we
may find rich Treasures of Mercy hidden.

Mercy first, that God spared us, and for his Will's sake alone they were and
are created. He carries Nature always in his Bosom, fostering and cherishing
her; and that not only as she came out of his own hand, and bears the Impresses
of his Infinite Wisdom and Power; but as we have transformed and disguised her
by our petty skill; as she is fettered and shackled by our silly Artifices:
Even the World of Fancy too, the Poor Attempts and Bunglings of Art, our Houses
of Dirt and Clay (which we call Palaces and so please our selves in) would
quickly fall asunder, and moulder all into the Dust they consist of, did not an
Almighty Hand uphold them. If we keep not the House and the City, in vain the
Builder builds, and the Watchman wakes, and the Sentinel stands perdu. And
therefore give we him the Glory of his Mercy, saying, Thanks be to the Lord,
Psalm. xxxi. 23.
who so long showed us marvelous great Kindness, I say not with the Psalm, in a
strong City (though the strongest without him is weakness) but in a very weak
One: A City in the Meanness of the Materials, the Oldness of the Buildings, the
Streightness of some Streets, the ill Situation of others, and many like
Inconveniences, so exposed to this dismal Accident, that it must needs have
been long since in Ashes, had not his miraculous Mercy preserved it, who, so
long as he pleases (and that is just so long as we please Him) continues the
Fire to us useful and safe, serviceable and yet innocent, with as much ease as
he lays it asleep, and quite in the Bosom, of a Flint.

Mercy again, That he afflicts us at all; Ps. xciv. 12.
that he has not quite given us over, and turned us out as unteachable and
incorrigible. Felix cui Deus dignatur irasci, `H (...).
says Tertullian; in David's Language, Blessed is the Man whom thou ch^stnest,
O Lord, and teach him in thy Law: send'st him thy Judgments, and learn'st
him thy Righteousness. But to sin, and not be punished, is the sorest punishment
of all, says St. Chrysostom. Psalm. lxxxi. 13.
Dimisit eos secundum desideria Cordis, He suffered them to walk after their
own Heart's Lusts, that is a dreadful portion: Let them alone, Isa. i. 5.
Why should they be stricken any more? Prove. i. 32.
That Is the prosperity of Fools that destroys them, Psalm. xi. 6.
as Solomon; or as David phraseth it; This is for God to rain Snares upon the
ungodly: A horrible Tempest indeed! As he there calls it, and worse than the
Fire and Brimstone in the same Verse.

given us over unto the Will of our Adversaries. The hand of an Enemy poisons
the Wound: Ps. xxvii. 14.
His Malice or his Insolence doubles and trebles the Vexation. The Malignity of
the Instrument may invenom a Scratch into a Gangrene. But the Blessed Hand of
God, even when it strikes, drops Balsom. His very Rods are bound up in Silk and
Softness, and dipped before hand in Balm: He wounds that he may heal, and in
wounding heals: Una, eademque Manus Vulnus, opemque -- And therefore may we
never be beaten by the hand of a cruel and insulting slave: But let our
Righteous Lord himself smite us, Ps. cxli. 5.
and it shall be a kindness; let him correct us, and it shall be an excellent
Oil. O let us still fall into the Hands of God (for great are his Mercies) but
let us not fall into the hands of Men. 2 Samuel xxiv. 14.


the Burning. And therefore, why should a living Man complain? Say we rather as
Abraham did in the Case of Sodom, when he had that horrible Scene of Vengeance
now in his Eye, Genesis xviii. 27.
We are but Dust and Ashes. Not only Dust in the course of ordinary Frailty,
but Ashes too in the merit of a far sharper Doom; deserve, that God should
bring us to Dust, nay, even turn us to Ashes too, as our Houses. Lam. iii. 22.
It is of the Lord's Mercies, that We our selves also are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not; that any part of our City is still remaining; that
God has left us yet a holy Place to assemble in, solemnly to acknowledge (as
we do this Day) his most miraculous Mercy: That when all our Wit was puzzled,
and all our Industry tired out, when the Wind was at the highest, and the Fire
at the hottest, and all our hopes were now giving up the Ghost, Then He, whose
season is our greatest extremity; He, who stays his rough Wind in the Day of
the East Wind, Chapter xxvii. 8.
as it is in the next Chapter; He, who alone sets Bounds to the Rage of the
Waters; restrained also on the sudden, the Fury of this other merciless and
unruly Element, by the Interposition of his Almighty Hucusque, hitherto shall
thou go, and no further. Ay this deserves indeed to be the Matter of a Song,
Joy in the Lord upon so great an Occasion, upon so noble an Experience, sits
not unhandsom on the Brow of so sad a Day as this is. It shall be said in that
Day, Cap. xxv. 9.
(says our Prophet, and let us all say it; say it with Triumph, and Jubilee
too,) Lo, this is our God, we have waited for Him, and He has saved us; This
is the Lord, we will be glad, and rejoice in his Salvation: -- The Third and
last part (we shall mention) of God's Due, the Glory of his Mercy.

Ut ducatur Rivus Iustitioe de font Pietatis, as St. Gregory speaks: It must
not be a Fountain sealed or shut up within it self; (Religion is not, as some
would have it, a Supersedeas to common Honesty; the performing our Duty toward
God, no Discharge of our Duty to Man:) In the next place it should run Down
like a River, Amos. v. 24.
in mighty Streams of Righteousness to all our Neighbors round about us; the
other great Branch, the second Table, or (if you will) the other Hemispere in
this great Globe of Righteousness. And here, Ecce novas Hyanas, aliumque Oriona
-- So many new Asterisms and Constellations of Virtues appear, that the time
will not give leave to number them, or call them all by their Names: I can only
touch lightly the greater Circles, some of the more comprehensive Lines and
Measures of them in these few Generals, and so pass on.

It Is Righteousness Indefinitely First, Moses did) and content our selves with
some sorry Fragment: No, Whatever goes under the common Style of Universal
Justice; whatever falls within the large Bosom of that comprehensive Epitome,
into which our Lord himself abridg'd the Law and the Prophets, All things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, Matthew. vii. 12.
do even so to them; Whatever comes within compass of that (...), as St James
calls it, the Royal Law, Jam. ii. 8.
(the latter part of the holy Institutes, the other Tome of the Christian
Pandects, the second great Commandment like the first, as our Savior Styles
it) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; Matthew. xxii. 38, 39.
Even all the Offices and Instances of Duty between Man and Man; (Reverence and
Obedience to our Superiors, Courtesy and Humanity to our Equals; Kindness and
Condescension to our Inferiors; Gratitude and Thankfulness to our Benefactors;
Justice and Uprightdealing toward All; Truth in our Words, and Faithfulness in
our Trusts, and Constancy to our Promises, and Candor, and Sincerity and
Honesty in all our Actions: And yet further and higher, for it is a
Righteousness improved and heightened, or at least interpreted by our Lord into
Love, and so obliges us beyond the strict Measures of Common Justice, and not
only renders, what is legally due, but gives and forgives beyond it;) Equity
and Moderation to those, that are any ways obnoxious to us; Mildness and
Gentleness to those that have any way offended us; Sympathy and Compassion
toward them that suffer; Mercy and Bounty to them that need; Goodness and
Peaceableness, and Charity to all the World: These are all parts of this great
Lesson, and whatever else may help to denominate us The Righteous Nation that
keeps the Truth (as it is in the second verse of this Chapter) or the City in
which dwells Righteousness.

But then as it is Righteousness indefinitely, the (Commandment exceeding
abroad, Ps. cxix. 96.
as David speaks, wide in the Extension; so it is also as deep in the
Intention,) it is Righteousness Internally and Spiritually too; as being a
Righteousness taught us by God's, and not by Man's, Judgments only, and
consequently must have an Effect proportionable: It Is when thy Judgments are in
the Earth, Men will learn -- As the Jews, while their Fear toward God was
taught them by the Precepts of Men, drew near to him, and honored him with
their Mouth, only, but removed their Hearts far away from him, Isai. xxix. 13.
Upon the same Ground, our Righteousness will never exceed the Righteousness of
Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, must needs prove Noise, and appearance
only, a mere and vain Semblance, if we learn it in no higher School than Man's;
take it forth from the XII. Tables only, not from the Two, and have no other
Tutor in it than Solon, or Lycurgus, or Justinian. For the Derivation can
return no higher than the Fountainhead; and what is taught us only by the
Statutes of Omri, or at Caesar's Iudgment-seat, will never come up to what the
perfect Law of God requires. While we are under this lower and external
Discipline only, if we can but skulk and shift, and play least in sight, and
seem to be righteous, though we are not so; Recti in Curia, though not upright
in Heart: Or if we be discovered and impleaded too, if we can, whether by Power
or Artifice, break through the venerable Cobweb, and run under the miserable
shelter of a Temporal Indemnity at these lower Bars: Why, All is well; Prove.
30. 20.
with Solomon's Wanton we wipe our Mouths, and are suddenly very Virgins again,
not only safe, but innocent too. But though Humane Laws exact only outward
Compliances, assume not to themselves to judge the Heart, because they cannot
discern it, nor take Cognizance of secret Thoughts and Purposes, further than
they are declared by overt Acts: Yet God is a Spirit, and a Discerner of the
inmost Thoughts and Intentions; and his Law Spiritual too, and given to the
Spirit; and the Righteousness taught in his School, is not a Carcass, nor an
Outside only, but a living Soul, and a Spirit of Righteousness: and by
consequence it stays not in the outward Act, (the proper Object of Human Laws
and Provisions;) restrains not only open violences (such as the Judgment Seat
of Man condemns, and the Schaffold, or the Gibbet take notice of;) not only
smooths and polisheth the outward Garb, to render that plausible in the eyes of
the World: But goes yet further and deeper, even to the Heart; composeth the
whole Inner-Man too, and labors to approve that to the Righteous Judge, who
sees not as Man sees; and, in fine, calls us up to that glorious height of the
Primitive Christians in Justin Martyr, who obeyed indeed the Municipal Laws of
their Country, but outlived them too, and surmounted them far, (...), as he
speaks; they contented not themselves with so scant Measures, but flew a higher
and a nobler pitch, aiming at a more refined and perfect Righteousness, the
worthy Effect of God's Judgments, and not of Man's only; taught in his School
alone, and not at our Tribunals. And then,

Lastly, It Is Righteousness Positively and Affirmatively too. For though the
Decalogue is almost all over Negative in in the Style and Form of it; yet, our
Lord, by reducing all the Precepts of it to one Affirmative (Love,) and also by
his Affirmative Glosses or Additions to it in his Sermon on the Mount, seems to
have authorized the Rule of their Exposition, received generally by Christian
Divines, That the Negative still infers the Affirmative, and that there are
many Yeas concealed in the Bosom of every such No. So that however it is indeed
a part of our Duty, not to Murder, and not to Slander, and not to Cover, and
the like, (an Obligation consequent upon God's prohibition; and he takes it
well, when for his sake we abstain from the Evil we are inclined or strongly
solicited to, and so accepts graciously our very Nothing, as I may call it,
our not doing amiss; thus giving us leave to enclose, as it were, a part of our
Waste, and to raise some Revenue upon it:) Yet this is so much short of the
Height of the Lesson we are to learn in God's School, that it is only the
unlearning something that might obstruct it; so far from making us truly
Righteous, that it can only Style us Innocent, and set us Extra vitia rather
than Intra virtutem. We must not then content our selves with a Negative
Righteousness; nor confine, and limit it within the sorry bounds of the
Pharisaical Boast, That we are not, Luc. xxiii. ii.
as other Men are, Extortioners or Unjust: In some Cases he is unjust too, Ps.
cxii. 9. Isai. lviii. 7, 8.
that gives not his own, as well as he that takes away what is another: In the
Sacred Dialect, Alms-Deeds are Justice too; Even Acts of Mercy, and Bounty to
those that need them, stricti Iuris, a part of our Righteousness sometimes so
indispensable, as not to be omitted without Sin. And therefore glorify thy
self no longer, that thou do harm to no Man: -- Cum dicis stultum, Iuvenal.
(...) xiv.
qui donat Amico; Qui pauperaqtem levat, attoli^q^e propinqui, Et spoliare
doces -- could the Heathen Poet say: He robs his Neighbor, that relieves him
not: He spoils his Friend, that in some Cases does not supply him. 2. Cor. vii.
2.
And though it is well (a good Decree) if we can say with S. Paul, I have
wronged no Man; yet he only is perfectly blameless in this kind, Qui ne in eo
quidem ulli noceat, quo prodesse desistat, Lib. 1. Epist. 14. ad (...)
as St. Ierom excellently; who does not this Evil to his Neighbor, that he
omits to do him all the good he can. Thou did not burn thy Neighbor's house
(a strange piece of uncouth Righteousness!) But do thou receive him into thy
own, now he is harborless? Thou have not oppressed, or impoverisht thy Brother;
It Is well: But is thy Abundance the supply of his Want in this present Exigent?
Thy Superfluity the Ransom and Redemption of his extreme Necessities? If not,
remember, that Dives is in Torments, not for robbing Lazarus, Matthew. xxxv.
but for not relieving Sin: And the dreadful Decretory Sentence proceeds at the
last Day, not for oppressing the Poor, but for not feeding, not clothing, not
visiting them: A reflection very common indeed; yet never more proper or
seasonable then at this time, when God presents us an Object of Charity, the
greatest, I think, and the most considerable that was ever offered to this
Nation, and when Heaven and Earth expect, that something extraordinary should
be done.

I have now opened the Book, and laid it before you, and given you a short
Draught of this very important Lesson: a Lesson so considerable, that our Wise
and Good God thinks it worth his while to rout Armies, and sink Navies, to burn
up Cities, and turn Kingdoms upside down; to send Wars, and Plagues, and
Conflagrations amongst us; to set open all his Schools, and ply all his
severest Methods to teach it us the more effectually. Think now, that he looks
down this Day from Heaven to take Notice of our Proficiency; to see how far we
are advanced by these his Judgments in learning Righteousness. And is it
possible, we should stand out any longer? Can we still resist so powerful a
Grace? Are not the parts of the Text by this time, happily met together? And
the Truth of it accomplished, and exemplified in us to the full? -- God's
Judgments on us, and his Righteousness in us? Who would not think and hope so?
But as St. Ierom complains of his Age (which was indeed very calamitous) Orbus
Romanus ruit, and tamen Cervix nostra non flectitur: The World sinks and cracks
about our Ears, and yet our Neck as stiff, and the Crest of our Pride as lofty,
and as erect as ever. How few are they that repent in Dust and Ashes, even now,
that God has laid our City in Dust, and our Houses in Ashes! Look we first
upon the Text, and then upon our Selves* and we must ingenuously acknowledge,
that whatever Abatements or Diminutions to the Height of the designed event of
God's Judgments upon us the Text, or any Version of it note, or imply, our
wretched evil Lives do but too plainly express and justify. For --

1. Who are they that are said here to learn Righteousness in the Text? Not
always the Afflicted themselves, it seems; but some others that stand by and
look on. For it is not to be omitted, that the Phrase manifestly varies in the
parts of the Proposition: Judgments in the Earth, or upon the Land, some
particular Country; and the World at large, or some few in it learn
Righteousness. Thus Tyrus shall be devoured with Fire, says the Prophet: Zach.
ix. 4, 5.
Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza and Ekron shall be very sorrowful: But
not a word how Tyrus her self is affected. God forbid it should be so with us!
May it never be said, that any of our Neighbors make better use of our
Calamities, than we our Selves! Have we any so hard-hearted amongst us, that
can look upon so sad a Spectacle, as if they sat all the while in the Theater,
or walked in a Gallery of Pictures; little more concerned, then at the Siege of
Rhodes, or the Ruins of Troy? Shall any Neighbor-city say wisely -- Mea res
agitur, jam proximus ardet Ucalegon --? Shall our Enemies themselves (the sober
and the Wise amongst them, at the least) tremble at the Relation, and we
continue stupid, and senseless? Shall Constantinople and Alexandria resent it,
and we not regard it as we ought? Nay, shall China and Peru (it may be) Surat
and Mexico, both the Indies hear, and be affected with it, and we our selves
insensible? Shall the Inhabitants of the World abroad warm themselves at our
Fires, with kindly and holy Heats; while in the mean time our Repentings are
not kindled, nor our Charity inflamed, and our Devotion as cold and frozen as
ever? Shall our Mountain (which we said in our jolly pride should never be
removed) be fulminated, and thunder struck, but the blessed shower that
follows, the Instruction, that descends after, like the Rain, slide off to the
Valleys, to Others, that are round about us? Our Lord wept over Jerusalem, Luc.
xix. 41.
because she knew not then (at forty years distance) the time of her
Visitation; for the Days will come, says He, when there shall not be left one
Stone upon another: But Woe is me! Our Day is come already, and our Visitation
now actually upon us; and yet I fear, we will not know it, as we ought. For, --

2. Reflect a little upon the Tense of the Verb, how that varies too in the
parts of the Proposition: The Judgments Are in the Earth, and the Inhabitants
Will learn -- (So the Vulgar Latin and the English:) It Is still per verba
de^futuro. For we li^t not to handfast our selves to God Almighty, to make our
selves over to him by present Deed of Gift; but would fain, forsooth, bequeath
our selves to him a Legacy in our last Will and Testament. Ay but In
necessitatibus nemo Liberalis: It Is not a free or a noble Donation, which we
bestow, when we can keep it no longer our selves: For such a Bequest we may
thank Death, rather than the Testator, says St. Chrysostom. But we are all
Clinicks in this point; (...) Hom. xviii. in Ephesians.
would fain have a Baptism in Reserve, a Wash for all our Sins, when we cannot
possibly commit them any more. Like Felix the unjust Governor, Acts xxiv. 25.
when St. Paul reasons of Righteousness, our Heads begin to ache, and presently
we adjourn, with, Go thy way for this time, (...), (as he pretended) when we
have Time and Opportunity, and convenient Leisure, (which we read not, that he
ever found) in plain English, when we have nothing else to do, or can do
nothing else; then we will take forth this Lesson; -- Learn Righteousness, as
Cato did Greek, Iam Septuagenarius, just when we are a dying; -- Begin then to
con^our part, when we are ready to be hist off the Stage, and Death is now
pulling off our Properties. But take we heed in time: He may prove a false
Prophet, tha^ promises himself to die the Death of the Righteous, when he has
loved, and pursued the Ways, and Wages of Unrighteousness all his Life long:
Who thinks if he can but shape the last faint Breath he draws into a formal
pretense of forgiving all the World, and a sly desire of being forgiven; Upon
these two hangs the whole stress of his Righteousness, he goes out of God's
School upon fair Terms, and thinks to render a plausible Account of himself.
No, no; the great Lesson of the Text is harder and deeper than so: It Is that we
must sweat for, it is that we may bleed for: It Is all that Adam lost, and All
that Christ came to recover: It Is the Business of our whole Life, and it is
desperate Folly and Madness to defer to learn it till Death, when God now calls
us to account for it. Though the Verb in some Versions be Future (as I said)
yet still it is Descent Habitatores, we must learn it while we dwell here in the
World, and who can secure us that beyond the next moment? When once we remove
hence, there is no School beyond: The Platonic Eruditorum in ORIGIN (a place
under Ground, I know not where, in which separated Souls are supposed to learn
what they mist of, or neglected here) as very a Fable as the Platonic
Purgatory. Eccles. ix. 10.
As there is no Work, nor Labor; so no Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in
the Grave. The Schools are all in this World: All beyond is Prison, and
Dungeon, and place of Torment, for such as learn not their Duty here; Fire
without Light, and utter Darkness.

3. Again, They did learn (so the Syriac, and the Interlineary Latin) when thy
Judgments were in the Earth: For there is an Ellipsis in the Original of the
former clause, and the Verb Substantive may be supplied either way, when thy
Judgments Are or Were in the Earth: And the Conjunction may seem to stand fair
for the latter (...) in quantum, or juxta quod; (...) (as R. David glosseth it)
qua mensura, aut modo; and so the Syriac, Qualia Iudicia, talem Iustitiam
dedicerunt: So much Judgment, so much Justice; Righteousness they did learn,
just while God's Rod was over them, and no longer. Thus while God's Plagues lay
heavy upon Pharaoh, even that stiff neck bowed, and that hard heart was
softened; As Iron in a quick Fire relents and melts; but take it out of the
Furnace, and it grows hard again, nay worse, Churlish and Unmalleable: And so
he, When he saw that there was Respite, says the Text, or a breathing time, He
hardened his Heart, Ex. viii. 15. And do not we all the same? Like teeming
Women, while the pangs are upon us, Joh. xvi. 21.
we have sorrow; when some great Affliction give us a smart Visit, strikes
home, and deep, we seem to be a little sensible, Ay but the Throws once over,
(...), says our Lord, the Woman remembers them no more; and so we, If but for
a little Space Grace be showed us, if God gives us but a little Respite in our
Bondage, like Israel newly returned from Babel, we straight forget his
Commandments; which made the good Ezra ashamed, and blushed to lift up his Face
to Heaven; Ezra, Cap. ix. Verse 8, 10.

Happy We, Lib. 7. Ep. 27*
if, as Pliny advises his Friend Maximus, Tales esse sani perseverimus, quales
futuros profitemur infirmi; if we continue such in Health, as we promise to be
upon our Sick-Beds. But alas! Ps. lxvi. 14.
C^^^^uit; Mansit, ut ante. How few with David pay the Vows which they speak
with their Mouths, when they were in Trouble? Do not the engagements on the
sick Bed vanish, like the Dreams of the Sick, forgotten, as if they had never
been? I appeal to your own Bosoms; though affected at first with this late
dismal Accident, does it not prove to you a nine-days Wonder, and your Thoughts
though much startled at first, by degrees reconcile to it? Do not your
Devotions begin to grow cold with the Fires; raked up, like those dying Sparks
in dead Ashes, and buried in the Dust; -- Ignes ^^ppositi Cineri doloso? Just
as our Prophet states it here, While thy Judgments were upon them, they
learned; But as it follows immediately, Verse 10.
Fiat Gratia Impio, Let Favor be showed to the Wicked, the least Intermission
or kind Interval, and he will not learn Righteousness, says the Text expressly;
he soon lays by his Book, and gives over. But,

4. Lastly, What is it that we learn? Or, to what good end or purpose? The
Chaldee Paraphrast interposeth here a very Material and Operative word, Descent
Operari, they will learn (...) to do, or to work Righteousness. And this
Addition shows us another of our Defects; cuts off, I fear, above half the Roll
of our Learners at once. We live (as I said) in a learned Age: But in all this
Crowd and Throng of Learners, how few put themselves in good earnest into God's
School? And of them that do, how much fewer yet take forth their Lesson aright?
-- Learn any thing else they will, but not Righteousness; and if that, any
thing, but to do it? But this is not (...), rightly to divide; this is to
mangle the Text, and to saw Isaiah asunder again. Would learning or talking, or
pretending serve the turn, We might find Righteousness enough in the World: We
can define it, and distinguish it, criticize upon the Word, and dispute of the
Thing without end: We stuff our Heads with the Notion, and tip our Tongues with
the Language, and fill the World with our pretenses to it: But Little Children,
says St. John (O ye World of Learners) Be not deceived (Let no Man seduce you
into this piece of Gnosticism, 1 John iii. 7.
as if to learn, or to know, were sufficient; No,) (...)* He that Does
Righteousness, he is Righteous. Non forti^ loquimur, sed vivimus, says St.
Cyprian; The life of Religion is Doing. What we know, Phil. iii. 16.
we must practice too; Whereto we have already attained, we must walk in it,
says the Apostle. They, that followed Christ, Acts xi. 26.
were first indeed called Disciples, that is, Learners (for there we must
begin;) But they soon after commenced Christians at Antioch, Anointed to
Action, as the word implies; and this Name sticks by them still, as the more
essential. Their Oil must not be spent all in the Lamp, In Schola Sapientiae,
that they may shine by Knowledge; they must do their Exercises too, In Gymnasio
Iustitiae, be anointed to the Agon, and to the Combat (as the Champions of
old;) and if they expect the Crown of Righteousness, must not only learn
Righteousness; but learn to do it.

AND therefore (to shut up All, and to enforce it a little upon such Topics, as
the Text, and the sad Face of things amongst us suggest;) Let us no longer
trifle with God Almighty, now we find to our cost, that He is in good earnest
with us. Be not deceived; God, I Am sure, is not mocked. It Is not our fasting
and looking demure a little, and hanging down the Head, like a Bull^ush for a
Day; It Is not a few Grimaces of sorrow, a sad word or two, or a weeping Eye
will serve the turn: -- Our Hearts must bleed too, our Souls must be afflicted,
and mourn for our old Unrighteousnesses, and forsake them too, and renounce
them all for ever; and yet further, take forth new Lessons of Righteousness in
all holy Conversations and Godlinesses, 2 Pet. iii. 11.
as St. Peter speaks, even in all the Instances of Piety, and Justice, and
Charity, ye heard of even now, or all this holy Discipline of God is lost, and
spent in vain upon us. Cap. xxvii. 9.
For this is all the Fruit, says our Prophet, to take away sin: If that remain
still in us, Adversity is a bitter Cup indeed. To keep our sins, and hold them
fast, even when God's Judgments are upon us for them, this is with Copronymus,
to pollute the Fountain that should wash us, to defile the salutary Waters of
Affliction, to profane the holy Fires of God's Furnace, and to pass through
the Fire to Moloch, to some reigning and domineering Sin, some Tyrant-lust, or
Mistress-passion. Correction without Instruction, this is the Scourge of Asses,
not the Discipline of Men, nor the Rod of the Sons of Men. To suffer much, and
not to be at all the better for it, it is certainly one of the saddest portions
that can befall us in this World; if not the fore-boding and prognostic of a far
sadder yet to come, the very beginnings of Hell here* the Fore-tasts of that
Cup of bitterness, of which the Damned such out the Dreggs.

And will thou after all this hide the sweet Morsel under thy Tongue, when thou
sensibly perceiv'st it already turning into the Gall of Asps? -- Still long for
the delicious portion, consecrated, and snatch it greedily from God's Altars,
though thou see thy. Fingers burn, and thy Nest on Fire with it? -- Still
retain the old Complacence in thy sparkling Cup, though thou feel'st it already
biting like a Serpent, and stinging like an Adder? Prove. ix. 17.
-- say still. Stolen Waters are sweet, though like those bitter Ones of
Jealousy, thou perceiv'st them carry a Curse along with them into thy very
Bowels? 1 Cor. x. 22.
Dare we thus provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are we stronger than He? Job.
xxviii. 3.
Gird up now thy loins like a Man, thou stoutest, and gallantest of the Sons of
Earth. Isa. xxxiii. 14.
Have thou an Arm like God? Or can thou thunder with a Voice like him? Will thou set the Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness against him in Battle Array?
Romans ii. 4.
Or can thou dwell with everlasting Burnings? Or despisest thou the Riches of
his Goodness and Forbearance; 2 Pet. iii. (...).
not knowing (refusing to know) that the Long-suffering of our Lord is
Salvation, and that his Goodness leads thee to Repentance? If not, know
assuredly, that thy Hardness and Impenitent Heart, do but treasure up for thee,
yet a fiercer, and a more insupportable Wrath.

And therefore let us not flatter our selves, nor think that God has now
emptied his Quiver, and spent all his Artillery upon us; Let us not come forth
delicately with the foolish Agag, 1 Samuel ^v. 32*
saying, Surely the Bitterness of Death is past: No, the Dregs of the Cup of
Fury are still behind; God grant we be not forced at last to drink them, and
suck them up. Great Plagues remain for the ungodly, says the Psalmist. Vae
unum abiit; Psalm. xxxii. (...).
Ecce duo veniunt. One Woe is past, but behold there come two Woes more; for the
rest of Men that were not killed by the former Plagues, repented not, Apoc. ix.
12, 20. When God's Rods and his Ferulaes (the Discipline of Children) are
contemned, he has a lash of Scorpions to scourge the obstinate. When the ten
dreadful Plagues are spent all upon a stubborn Egypt without effect, there is a
Red Sea yet in Reserve, that at last swallows all: And if our present
Afflictions reform us not, that we sin no more; take we heed, lest yet a worse
thing befall us. Remember, that when the Touch of God's little Finger did not
terrify us, he soon made us feel the stroke of his heavy Hand. If the more
benign, and benedict Medicines will not work, nor stir us at all, he can
prepare us a rougher Receipt, or a stronger Dose; retrive and bring back his
former Judgments in a sharper Degree, or else send upon us new ones, which we
never dream of.

The Devil of Rebellion and Disobedience, which not long since possessed the
Nation, rent and tore it till it fom'd again, and pined away in lingering
Consumptions; that cast it oft-times into the Fire, and oft-times into the
Water (Calamities of all sorts) to destroy it; is now through God's Mercies
cast out, and we seem to sit quiet, and sober at the Feet of our Deliverer,
clothed, and in our right Minds again. But yet this ill Spirit, this restless
Fury (this unquiet and dreadful Alastor, the eldest Son of Nemesis, and Heir
apparent to all the Terrors and Mischiefs of his Mother) walks about day and
night, seeking rest, and finds none; and he says in his Heart I will return
some time or other to my House from whence I came out. O let us take heed of
provoking that God, who alone chains up his Fury, least for our Sins he permit
him to return once more, with seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and
so our last Estate prove worse than the former.

The Sword of the Angel of Death, which the last year cut down almost a hundred
thousand of us, may seem to have been glutted with our Blood, and to have put
up it self into the Scabbard. Jer. xivii. ^.
Quiesce and ^ile, as the Prophet speaks: God grant it may rest here, and be
still. But, as it follows there, How can it be quiet, if the Lord give it a new
Commission against us? Methinks I see the Hand still upon the Guard, and unless
we prevent it by our speedy Repentance, it may quickly be drawn again more
terrible than ever, new furbisht, and whetted with the keener edge, and point,
our wretched Ingratitude must needs have given it. The Sun of Righteousness was
ready to rise upon us, with healing in his Wings, to clear our Heaven again,
and to scatter the Cloud of the last years unhealthiness. But yet, methinks,
this slow-moving Cloud hangs still over our Heads, hovers yet in view, with God
knows how many Plagues and Deaths in the Bosom of it: And without our serious
Amendment we have no Rainbow to assure us, that we shall not again be drencht
in that horrible Tempest. Though the best Naturalists say, Di^merbr. de p^ste
Noviomag.
That great public Fires are a proper Remedy for the Plague, Yet God, if he be
Angry, can send a ruffling Wind into the very Ashes of our City, blow them into
the Air, and turn them as those of the Egyptian Furnace, into a Blain, and a
Botch, and a Plague Sore upon us. Exodus ix. 8, 9.


Nay, even out of those dead Ashes, can He raise yet a fiercer Flame, to
consume what still remains. As the Lightning comes out of the East, says our
Lord, and shines even unto the West, so shall my coming be (sc. to destroy
Jerusalem,) and where ever the Carcass is, will the Eagles be gathered
together, Matthew. xxiv. Fire is the Eagle in Nature; nothing in the Elementary
World mounts so high to its place, and stoops so low to it is prey: The two
properties God himself ascribes to that Bird, Job xxxix. 27, 30. And if we
still refuse obstinately to be gathered, like Chickens under our Lord's Wing,
he can again let loose this Bird of Prey, this Eagle of Heaven upon us; and
from the East, where it began before, fly it home like Lightning (...), even
to the utmost West, to seize, and to devour where ever there is the least
Quarry remaining.

Or if this move us not, let us remember that we have another City upon the
Waters, a floating Town of moveable Forts and Castles, the Walls and Bulwarks
of the Nation; stronger than those of Brass, the Fable speaks of. As we desire
that God would ever fill their Sails with prosperous Gails, and still bring
them home with Honor and Victory, and good Success, Let us take heed that we
fight not against them too. Our Sin, like a Talent of Lead, may sink them to
the Bottom; our Lusts, and Passions, and Animosities may fire them; our
Drunkenness, and deep Excesses may drown them; our Vollies of Oaths and
Blasphemies may pierce them; nay, our Seditious Murmurings, and Privy
Whisperings may blow them over. For God is Piorum Rupes, Reorum Sco^ulus; a
Rock to found the Just upon, but a shelf to shipwreck, and confound the
Unrighteous.

And yet all these are but the common Roads, and ordinary Instances of God's
Displeasures: But he has also, besides, and beyond all these, unknown
Treasures of Wrath, vast^ stores of hidden Judgments (for who knows the Power,
Psalm. xc. ii.
or the extent of his Anger?) laid up in those secret Magazines where his
Judgments are, when they are not in the Earth, reserved as his dreadful
Artillery against the time of trouble, against the day of Battle and War, as he
speaks himself, Job xxxviii. 23. Oh let us take heed of treasuring up to our
selves Wrath against that day of Wrath, Romans 1. 5.
and the Revelation of his Righteous Judgments.

And now what shall I say more, if all that has been said hitherto, prove
ineffectual? (...), etc.
The Text affords yet one Expedient as the Chaldee Paraphrast may seem to have
understood it: Because thy Judgment, says he (not (...) as in the Hebrew, but
(...) or (...) as the Jews call it, and St. Jude from them, ^ude 6.
The Judgment of the great Day) because that Judgment, though not as yet in the
Earth, is yet fixed, and appointed, and prepared for all the Earth (...) in the
Hebrew it self too, for rather than in the Earth) therefore most certainly, if
at all, or for any thing, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness.

But if they put far from them this evil day too, as if they had made a
Covenant with Death and with Hell; if they finally refuse to come under God's
Discipline, and to take forth to themselves Lessons of Righteousness here, they
shall then be made themselves great Lessons, and dreadful Examples of God's
Righteousness to all the World. If they will not glorify God in these Fires,
as they ought, nor walk in the light of them; let them remember that there are
Fires without Light, where none glorify him, but by suffering the Eternal
Vengeance of their Sins. There must they learn by saddest experience, who
obstinately refuse the more gainful Method, (...), That it is a fearful thing
to fall into the Hands of a living God. For our Enemies here must die, and our
storms at last blow over, and our Fires, you see, though never so great, in
time go out and vanish: But God lives; has a Worm too, that dies not (for
those that live not as they ought) and a Fire that is not quenched: The
Babylonian Furnace, seven times hotter than usual, a cool walk to that; all our
Vulcans and Aetnas, our Heclas and Andes faint Types and shadows of it; the
great Conflagration, we so lately trembled at, and still bewail, but a spark to
that infernal Tophet, but a painted Fire to that dreadful Mongibel; even
Everlasting Burnings. From which, God of his tender Mercy deliver us All; and
give us Grace in this our Day, (the Day of his Judgments) so to learn
Righteousness, and so to do it, that at the last, and great Day of Judgment,
when he shall come again to Account with us for all our Learning, and for all
our Doings, we may through his Mercy receive the Crown of Righteousness, for
his sake alone, who so dearly bought it for us, even Jesus Christ the
Righteous: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed by us, and
all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power,
henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

(...). FINIS.
Die Jovis 24 Octobris, 1678.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury be, and is, hereby Appointed to Preach before
the House of Peers, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, on Wednesday the
Thirteenth Day of November next; being the Day appointed by His Majesty for
Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, to implore the Mercy and Protection of God
Almighty upon the King's Majesty and His Kingdoms.

IO. BROWN. Cleric. Parliamentorum.

A SERMON PREACHED To the House of Peers, November 13th. 1678.

Being the FAST DAY Appointed by the KING TO Implore the Mercies of Almighty
GOD in the Protection of His MAJESTY'S Sacred Person, and His Kingdoms.

By the Most Reverend Father in God, William Sancroft, Late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. 1694.

Die Iovis 14 Novembris, 1678.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Thanks of this House be given to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for his
Pains in Preaching before the House of Peers, in the Abbey-Church Yesterday,
being the Day Appointed by His Majesty for Solemn Fasting and Humiliation; and
that His Grace be desired to Print and Publish his Sermon then Preached.

IO. BROWN. Cleric. Parliamentorum.

A SERMON PREACHED To the House of Peers.
PSALM Lvii. ver. 1. In the Shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until
these Calamities be over-past.
WHat St. Hierom observed long since concerning this Book of Psalms, Titulos
esse Claves; that the Title is usually the true Key of David, to set open the
Psalm to us, and to let us into the true Understanding of it; he learned
probably from a former Author (with whose Writings he was in his younger years
much delighted) Origin I mean: Orig. Philocal. p. 59.
Who in his Tomes upon the Psalms, discoursing of some Obscurities in Holy
Scripture, and the proper Remedies thereof, gives us yet a more ancient
Tradition, which he received (as he says) from a learned Jew; That the whole
Body of Scripture is like a great House, in which are several Appartments, and
therein many Rooms shut up, and in them again many Cabinets, and Boxes locked
down: Nor hangs the proper Key at every Door, but they lie scattered here, and
there, and counter-chang'd; so that it requires some pains, and skill to find
them out, and apply them aright. Thus the Key of the Prophetic Scripture lies
in the Historical, where we often find both the Occasion of the Prophecy, and
the Event too; and that proves usually the best Interpreter. Thus the Acts of
the Apostles, which contain the Peregrinations, and Gests of St. Paul, are a
great Master-Key to open his Epistles, and to unlock to us many things, hard
otherwise to be understood in them. And thus in the present Instance, David's
History is the proper Key to David's Psalter; and so the Books of Samuel, the
Kings, and Chronicles, the best, and most authentic Commentary upon the Psalms.

For this now before us, lest we should mistake, the Spirit of God has hung
the Key at the Door, or at least pointed us whence to fetch it: And while the
Title dates it from the Cave, we are plainly directed to 1 Samuel xxiv. There we
find the holy Man in a great streit of Affliction; wandering like an Exile, or
Bandito in the Wilderness of Engedi; the few Men he had, straggling, and
shifting for themselves upon the Rocks of the wild Goats; implacable Saul in
the mean time with five times his Number so closely pursuing him, that he is
forced to take shelter in the Cave: And there being shut up from the Sight of
Heaven, and Light of the Sun, and as it were buried alive in that obscure
Dungeon, surrounded with Danger on every side, and little Hope left him of
escaping with his Life; it is then that he sighs out his Al-taschith (as this,
and the two following Psalms are entitled) Oh destroy me not utterly (so the
Word signifies) but let me live to praise thy Name; it is then, that by a
vigorous Faith he flies to the tender Mercies of God, as to his only City of
Refuge: And reposing himself in the Bosom of the Divine Goodness by Acts of
Faith, and Devotion, and of Perseverance in both, he does exactly, and
precisely that which We all are enjoined to do this Day: He implores the
Mercies of God in the Protection of himself, and in him of those that belong to
him; Be merciful unto me, O God (says he) be merciful unto me, for my Soul
trusts in thee; yea, in the shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until
these Calamities be overpast.

So that, the proper business of this Day being visibly stamped in great Letters
upon the Forehead of the Day, and that by the Hand of Sacred Authority it
self; and the Lines of the Text too running so parallel all along, and so
commensurate to those of the Day (upon which Ground the whole Psalm was very
pertinently selected as one of the proper Psalms for the Office of the Day:) I
may hope in some Degree to discharge my Duty to both of them, by treating of
those two things; What God's Protection is; and What we are to do, that we may
be qualified, and prepared aright, successfully to implore the Mercy of that
Protection. In Order whereunto, I will consider the Text in a twofold Reference.

I. As it looks down from God to usward in gracious and powerful Protections:
And so it speaks our great Honor, and Happiness, the high, and glorious
Privilege of pious Kings, and their Kingdoms, that they are under the Shadow of
God's Wings.

II. As it looks up in another Aspect from Us to God again; and so it contains
our necessary, and indispensable Duty; and calls aloud for our suitable
Deportment; which is resolvedly to put our selves under the Divine Protection,
or to seek, and make our Refuge under the Shadow of his Wings.

I. I begin with the high and glorious Privilege of all holy Souls, but
especially of pious Kings, and their Kingdoms; They are under the shadow of
God's Wings. The expression frequently occurs in Scripture, and may seem to
speak these three things, or some of them; which together will give you, I
think, the full extent of the shadow of God's Wings, the adequate Importance of
this illustrious Metaphor.

(1.) Safeguard and Defense from Calamities, that they come not. Or,

(2.) Speedy Help, and Deliverance out of Calamities, when they are come. Or
however.

(3.) Comfort in the mean time, and Refreshment in Calamities, while they are
upon us.

(1.) The Privilege of Safety, and Protection from Calamities stand first in
our Method; intimated here in a threefold Expression; A Refuge, a Shadow, and
the Shadow of Wings.

(1.) And what is a Refuge, (which is the first,) but a place of Security,
either in regard of its Secrecy to hide us, or its strength to defend us, to
which we fly, when Calamity threatens us? And such is God to his People; a
City of Refuge, an inviolable Sanctuary; an Altar of Mercy, to which we may
fly, and be safe, and from the Horns whereof no bold Calamity shall dare to
pluck us, without his special Commission. Or in another Reference, a place of
Refuge is a Covert from Storm and Rain, Es. IV. 6. and as it follows there in
the same Verse,

(2.) A Tabernacle for a Shadow too in the Daytime from the Heat, which is the
second Expression. The Emphasis whereof is far better understood in those
intemperate Climats, where the Sunbeams are scorching, and the Heats
insufferable. Nothing there more desirable, than a shady Grove, or a deep Grot,
the Sun never looks into, or the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Which
Protections, because the Pilgrim- Israelites wanted in the Wilderness, God
supplied it to them, by spreading a Cloud over them for a Covering in the
Daytime (as the Psalmist speaks,) Ps. CV. 39.
and God was in that Cloud; so that for forty years together they marched, and
encampt under his shady Wings, I had almost said, without a Metaphor. And still
whenever the Son of Persecution, Jac. I. 11*
or other Calamity arises upon us with burning Heat, God can exempt, whom he
thinks good, and send them times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord:
so that, while the World is all on fire about them, they journey through that
torrid Zone, with their mighty Parasol, or Umbrella over their Heads, and are
all the while in the Shade.

And yet every Shade is not a safe Protection. Umbra aut Nutrix, aut Noverca
est, L. 17. c. 1^.
says Pliny: And all the Naturalists tell us, that the shadow of some Trees is
unwholesome; of others deadly. Ay there is a shadow of Death too in Scripture
Language; and you have heard of the Shades of Hell it self. And therefore to
distinguish this benign, and saving Protection from those black and dismal
Shades, here is yet a further, and a higher Emphasis;

(3.) It Is in the third place Umbra Alarm, a Shadow of Wings: An Expression
borrowed from Birds and Fowls, that brood, and foster their young Ones under
them. The Wing of the Dam is both the Midwife, and the Nurse; it brings forth
the Chickens, and it brings them up too. So Providence is both the Womb, that
bare us, and the Paps, that give us suck. The Wing is not only; as the Shade, a
protection from the Heat; but a more Universal Defense against all the
Injuries, and Inclemencies of the Air. Is it too hot? The Wing casts off a cold
Shade. Or is it too cold? The Wing affords a warm Covering. Are the Younglings
frighted with a Storm? The Wing is a ready Shelter. Does the Kite, or Hawk, the
Tyrants, and Freebooters of the Air, hover over and threaten? The Wing is a
safe Retreat. And thus in sacris Domini Defensionibus, as Cassian speaks; in
God, and his holy Protections we have All.

That our Troubles are not long since grown too hot for us, it is because He
cools, and allays them. That our Comforts do not grow cold, and die away in our
Bosoms; it is because he warms, and reinforceth them. That we have heard it
bluster abroad for so many years together in a formidable Tempest, which has
drenched, and drowned so great a part of Christendom in Blood, and yet the
Storm has hitherto flown over us: That the Clouds have been gathering at home
too, and so long hung black over our Heads, and yet not power'd themselves
forth in showers of Vengeance: That Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, and the
Rest; that Hell, and Rome, and their Partisans, our Enemies on all Hands, both
foreign, and Domestic, have been so long confederate against us, saying, Come,
and let us root them out, that they be no more a People, that the Name of the
Reformed Church of England may be no more in Remembrance; that they have so
often looked grim, and sour, and roared, and rampt upon us, and yet not been
able to seize us; to what can we justly ascribe all this, but to the gracious
protections of God's shady Wings spread over us?

It Is pity, Brethren, we are not more deeply apprehensive of it, since so it
is. We sit continually in the Lap, and Arms of Providence: She is at once our
Fortress, and our Storehouse: It Is to her we owe both our Defense, and
Supplies; our Safety, and our Abundance: That we ever had any good thing in
this World, whether Personal, or National, it is because we have sucked the
Breasts of her Consolations: And that we keep, and enjoy any thing, (while our
Soul is among Lions, while we dwell in the midst of Cruel, and Blood-thirsty
Men, as holy David complains a little below my Text;) it is because we sit under
the shadow of her Wings. And since we are for all this so over apt to forget
her, and to pride our selves in Bulwarks of our own projecting; God has seemed
oftentimes, and now again of Late, to be about to dismantle all, and to teach
us this Lesson at the dearest Rate, if we will not learn it better cheap, That
we cannot be safe out of his protection; that the shadow of his Wings is our
best, nay our only Refuge: And that whether we take a Refuge for the protection
of Secrecy, or for the protection of Strength. Of which much might be said,
would the time permit it: But so much briefly of the first Privilege, that of
Safeguard, and protection from Calamities, that they come not upon us. I have
to the second;

(2.) If Calamities do come, (and who is wholly exempt from that common Tax,
and Tribute of Mortality?) the Expression speaks Assistance too, and timely
Deliverance out of them. Wings in the common Notion of the World signify
Speed, and Activity; (...), In (...) 1^. 8. and 18. 10.
as Theodoret speaks; God's speedy, and efficacious Providence, and Appearance
in time of Need to deliver his People. It Is therefore, that we give the Winds
Wings, and the Angels too; as being the swift Messengers of God, the nimble
Mercuries of Heaven. It Is therefore too, that when God appears seasonably to
deliver his afflicted People, Ps. xviii. 10.
he is said in the Psalm to mount a Cherub, and to fly, or to come flying to
them upon the Wings of the Wind, or to carry them off into safety on the Wings
of an Eagle. Birds do not only cover their young Ones under their Wings within
the Neast: If the Seat prove dangerous, they take them up too on their Wings,
and carry them off to a safer Station.

Ye have seen, what I have done for you (says God to the Jewish Nation) how I
bear you upon Eagles Wings, Ex. xix. 4.
and brought you to my self. As if he had said, When you were in actual
Bondage, I rescued you; not only brooded you under my Wings in Egypt, and
preserved you by my Providence, while you were yet in the Egg; but I hatched
you, as it were, even in the Iron Furnaces of Memphis, into Political Life, and
National being; and then brought you out safely, openly, triumphantly (as the
Eagle does her Young) and brought you off too into a more prosperous Condition.

And may not God bespeak us too, the People of England, in the same Language?
When we were enslaved at home (and so in worse than Egyptian Slavery) and our
Pharach, and his proud Taskmasters made even our Lives bitter to us in hard
Bondage, in Mortar, and in Brick, to build up their own proud Babels; when they
had now killed, and also taken possession, and divided the Spoil, and said in a
Frolic of their lusty Pride, We have devoured them, and there is no Hope for
them in their God: Then on the sudden, as an Eagle stirs up her Neast, and
fluttereth over her Young, and spreads abroad her Wings, (as Moses speaks in
his admirable Song) thus awakening, (...)
and exciting their natural Activity, and emboldening them to use it to the
utmost; and when that will not do, takes them up her self, and bears them
away upon her own Wings; So here, The Lord alone did lead us, and there was no
Other with him; that is Moses's own Reddition: When our own Pinion proved too
weak, and all our faint Flutterings to no purpose; then by a Miracle of Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, he took us up to that gallant, and wonderful Flight, even
up to a higher pitch, than we durst look, and made us to ride upon the high
Places of the Earth, and set our Neast again amongst the Stars.

And now, when restless, and unquiet Men (the true Spawn of him, whose Tail
drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, Rev. xii. 4.
and cast them to the Earth) would fain by their Hellish Plots, and
Contrivances bring us down again from thence, even down to the very Ground, and
lay all our Honor in the Dust: When by their secret Machinations they are at
work on all Hands to hurry us back into the old Confusions; in Hope, that out
of that disordered Mass they may at length rear up a new World of their own;
(But what a World? A World made up of a new Heaven of Superstitions, and
Idolatries; a new Earth too of Anarchy first, and pretended Liberty, but of
Tyranny insufferable at the next Remove:) In such a dangerous State of Affairs
as this, whether should we rather (nay whether else can we) run for Help, and
Deliverance, but under his Protections, the Stretching out of whose Wings fills
the Breadth of thy Land, Es. viii. 8.
o England! He can make all these Cockatrice Eggs, on which this Generation of
Vipers (that eat out the Bowels of their Mother) have sat so long abrood, windy
at last, and addle; and he will do it: So that out of the Serpent's Root shall
never come forth an Adder, to bite us, or a fiery flying Serpent, to devour us.
He will confound these Babel builders, with their City, and their Tower, or
Temple, (their Foreign Polity, and their strange Worship; their novel Modes,
and Models of Government in Church, and State) and scatter them abroad from
hence upon the Face of all the Earth. Like as a Dream, when one awaketh; so
shall he despise their Images, and their imaginations too, and cause them to
vanish out of the City; and make the whole Bulk of their vast Contrivance to
consume away like a Snail, and become like the untimely Fruit of a Woman, which
shall never see the Sun. He that at first made all things with an Almighty
Word, said only, Let it be, and it was so; can with the same Facility unmake,
and annihilate those Worlds of Wickedness, which these great Architects of
Mischief have been so long projecting, and building up. It Is but for him to
say, It shall not pr^sper, or This shall not be, and behold the mighty Machin
cracks about their Ears, and sinks into Ruin, into Nothing; leaving no Effect
behind it more real or conspicuous, than a more firm, and lasting Establishment
of that, which God's own Right Hand has planted amongst us.

When the Earth at first was without Form, Genesis 1. 2.
and void, and Darkness hovered over the Face of the Deep; the Spirit of God
(says the Text) moved upon the Waters. (...)
The word in the Original (as St. Hierom tells us from the Hebrew Traditions)
implies, that the Spirit of God sat abrood upon the whole rude Mass, Greek
Schol. on Aratus.
as Birds upon their Eggs, (...), (as a Greek Author speaks elegantly) and
hatch the Chaos into World; by degrees digesting, and in the mean time
preserving, and susteining it by kindly Heats, and vital Incubations. And to
the like benign, and gracious purposes does God still spread the Wings of his
good Providence over his People, and their Affairs in calamitous times, such as
this is; when he may seem to stretch out upon the Political World the Line of
Confusion, and the Plummet of Emptiness, (Tohu, and Bohu, the very Words, which
describes the first Chaos,) as it is Es. XXXIV. 11. And if hereupon we put our
selves (as we ought) under the saving Influences of his Wings; he will either
digest our Confusions into greater Order, and Beauty than before; or at least
support, and cheer us, while we lie under them; which is the third, and last
Privilege employed in this Expression.

(3.) Comfort, and Refreshment in Calamities, while they are upon us. For the
Wing is not only the Retreat of Safety from Calamities, as in the first
particular; Nor only the Instrument of Deliverance, out of Calamities, as in
the second: It Is also the Seat of Comfort, and Fountain of Refreshment, when
they lie heaviest upon us.

And here I might spend the Hour with much Delight; for the Prospect is fair,
and large before me. But I am sensible, that I have already staid too long upon
the first Head of Discourse propounded; and so perhaps complied too much with
the common Humor, which loves rather to be tickled, and amused with high
Privilege, than instructed in necessary Duty. I shall therefore make have to
seize what remains of the Time, and improve it, to let you see, That All, I
have said hitherto, and the Much more I might have said, upon that first Head
of Privileges, signifies nothing at all, is all blank, and Cipher to them, that
go not on cheerfully to the Second, that of Duty.

II. They that would be safe under God's Wings, must not only please themselves
with the general Speculation, that Safety, and Protection is there to be had:
They must also make their Refuge there, they must put themselves under the
Shadow of those Wings by their special Act, and Deed; must deliberately choose,
and effectually place their last Resort there; and if they will partake the
Benefits, must comply with the Obligations of such a State. God is our Refuge,
and our Strength, says holy David, most devoutly, and most Methodically too:
(...) LXVI. 1
For we must first make him our Refuge by flying to him, before we can hope,
that he will be our Strength. In vain do they dream of God's saving
Protections, that turn their Backs upon his Precepts, and cast his Laws behind
them. It Is true, God's Altars are our Sanctuary; an inviolable Asylum in our
Sufferings, and in our Sorrows, in our Calamities, and in our Dangers, for our
Ignorances, and for our Infirmities: But are our Crimes too privileged, and
protected there? That were indeed to turn God's Temple into a Den of Thieves,
and Murderers, (the notorious Abuse of the modern Sanctuaries;) and to set up
the Wing of Abominations (spoken of by Daniel the Prophet) even in the Holy
Place. Nay but pluck them from mine Altars, (says God) or slay them there,
that sin^ presumptuously, and with a high hand. God will not be so merciful to
those, that offend of malicious Wickedness, as to receive them, with all their
Sins about them, under that sacred, and saving Protection. The holy Dove broods
not a Kite, or a Vulture: They are Birds quite of another Feather. If in good
earnest we would be fostered, and cherisht under God's Wings; we must first be
hatched into his Likeness, and Similitude, be renewed after his Image, and be
made Partakers in some Measure of the Divine Nature.

To hover no longer in Generalities; the fruitful Metaphor of the Text, as you
have distinctly seen it big with our Privilege; so to qualify us for that,
it is as remarkably pregnant with our Duty also. Among the Rest, it clearly
suggests to us in three noble Instances of our Duty so many apt, and proper
Qualifications, to fit, and prepare us for God's Wing. (1.) A pious Trust, and
Confidence in God. (2.) A fervent Devotion toward God, and his holy Worship in
his Temple. And (3.) A constant unwearied perseverance in both the former; for
it is Donec transierint, until these Calamities be overpast. And

(1.) For Trust, and Affiance in God; it is visible, That to fly under God's
Wings, and to make him our Refuge, and to trust in him, are parallel Phrases,
which expound one another; and differ only, as the same Sense clad in Metaphor,
and stripped of it again. And therefore some Vers^ons, both Ancient, and Modern,
translate the Text, Under the shadow of thy Wings will I trust. Chald. Engl.
Genesis
'Twere happy for us, were this Duty of Trust in God but as visibly transcribed
into our practice, as it is originally legible in the Text. We all pretend high
indeed, and put on a fair Semblance here too, I believe in God is our daily
Language: But, as one says well, Non est strepitus Oris, sed Fervor, and
Devotio Cordis: Lip-labor will not serve the turn; it must go deeper, even to
the Ground of the Heart. Would we put in then for David's share in the
Privilege, God's Mercy, and Protection to our King, and to our Selves? We must
labor then for a Trust like David's: Be merciful to me O God, (says he) for
my Soul trusts in thee.

To bring you to the Test then; The Trust that may be trusted to, and that will
stand us instead, when Calamities invade, or threaten us, must have these Three
Properties: It Is founded, and prepared in Self-Diffidence; It Is carried on, and
exercised in active Diligence; And lastly it is consummate in full, and perfect
Resignation.

First, It Is founded, and prepared in deep Self-Diffidence, and Distrust; in a
clear Abrenunciation of our selves, and all worldly Dependences. The Chickens
are weak, and helpless in themselves; and as if they knew it too, stay not to
combat the Kite, nor stand the dreadful shock, when the Hawk hovers over, and
is ready to stoop upon them; but run nimbly under the Dam's Wing for shelter.
The very Instincts of Nature have taught all Weak things, to seek their Support
out of themselves, in some Retreat, where they may be safe. Thus the Firr-Trees
are a Refuge for the Stork; Psalm. CIV. 18.
the high Hills for the wild Goats, and the Rocks for the Conies. The Hare has
her Covert too, and the Foxes their Holes or Dens. Even the weaker, and
grovelling Plants (as Vines, and the like) have their Tendrils, certain pliant
Strings, wherewith they naturally clasp, and twine themselves about the
Supporters, they are to climb by. In fine, all Nature is wholly Adjective, and,
as if 'twere conscious to it self of its inability to stand alone, is ever in
busy quest of its proper Substantive, that may uphold it. Man, as the only bad
Grammarian, makes still false Syntax, and false Construction; apt to seek his
Refuge, where it is not to be had: As if he were under that Curse upon David's
Enemies, Psalm. cix. 10.
not only in case to beg his Bread, which he finds not at home, but to seek it
also out of desolate places.

Thus Jonah sits under his Gourd with overmuch Delight; till the Worms smites
it at the Roots, and it withers. Rebellious Israel trusts in the shadow of
Egypt (the Land shadowing with Wings, Esa. xxx. 3.
as the Prophet speaks) and it proves their Confusion: And we have heard of
Cedars of Lebanon, that degraded themselves into the Protection of a Bramble;
till Fire came out of that Bramble, and devoured them. We laugh at the
Babel-builders, who designed a Tower up to Heaven, above the Reach of Divine
Vengeance, or any Deluge of Wrath, that could come on them. But he had Reason,
that said, Totus Mundus est plenus Turrium Babylonicarum: Not only the Plains
of Shinar; the whole World is full of such Towers. We all are apt to build
Castles in the Air, some (...), or other, some City of Cuckows in the Clouds,
like that in the Greek Comedian. Aristop.
We have all of us our Gourds, and our Brambles to trust in; apt to Canonize
our own Sanctity, and Integrity; to Idolize our own Strength, and Activity; to
Deifie our own Wit, and Policy.

But if in good earnest we look toward the Covert of God's Wings, and would put
in there, We must begin Negatively; first moult, and cast all our sick
Feathers, and clip the Wings of all our Carnal Confidences, upon which we are
apt to soar too loftily, before we can make good our Flight. Confringes
Ascellas (so the vulgar Latin reads that Text, Levit. i. 17.) The Sacrifice of
Birds is not accepted, till the Wings be broken, that is (says St. Cyril of
Alexandria) till our Pride be mortified. De Ador^^. lib. 16.
God will take us off our false Dependences, and will have us clearly quit All
(namely as to Trust in any of them) and run naked under his Defense; and then
we are fit for his Wing. Say not then, this great Nation is a Wise, and an
Understanding People, We have Counsel, and Strength for the War; We are fenced,
and moated in from the rest of the World with the vast Ocean: Our Island sits a
Queen in the Heart of the Four Seas; she shall dwell in safety alone, and know
no sorrow, Let not the mighty thus glory in their Might, nor the Wise in their
Wisdom; but he that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

And of this Holy David stands here before us a great Example. He trusts not in
the Wings of his Army, but in the Lord of Hosts, and Battles; not in the shadow
of his Cave, but in the shadow of God's Wings; not in the height of his Rock,
but in the Rock of Ages. Though being a Man of War, he well understood the
grand Importance of a Castle well seated, and fortified; of a Mount, or Rock
inaccessible; of a Cave in that Rock capacious, and defensible (such as Strabo
tells us there were many in Palestine; and such were probably the Cave of
Adullam, and the strong Holds of Engedi, and the rest, which we meet with so
often in David's story:) yet severed, and abstracted from the Divine
Protections, he slights all these, as Paper-walls, and Cobweb-fortifications:
And knowing he could not be safe on this side Omnipotence, he styles God almost
in every Psalm, his Rock, and his Castle, his Fortress, and his Strong-Hold,
his High-Tower, and the Hill of his Defense; that is the first property of his
Trust, it begins in great Self-diffidence: But,

Secondly, It goes on in active Diligence. The Young one has its last Retreat
indeed under the Dam's Wing: Yet the little Wing it has of its own, it imploys
to bring it thither. The Eagle in Moses's Song, as I noted before, not only
bears its Eaglets on her own Wings; but stirs up her Nest too, and provokes
them first to do their uttermost.

Though David resolved well, Psalm. xliv. 6. -- xxxiii. 16.
I will not trust in my Bow; yet he used it sure. It was not Goliah's Sword,
that could save him; yet gladly he girt himself with it, when the High Priest
reached it him. There is no King, says he, that can be saved by the Multitude
of an Host, yet he refused not the Volunteers, that came to List themselves
under him. He fled from Saul with all Diligence into the Cave; though he had
still a Refuge beyond it. Though he sets up his Rest under God's Wings; Psalm.
lv. 6.
yet Oh, (says he) that I had the Wings of a Dove too, that I might fly away
to my Rest.

The Moral, and the Reddition of All is but thus much. We all of us have Wings
of our own too; Faculties, and Abilities, that must be used (Why else were they
given us?) Though they must not be trusted in. The most excellent Father Paul
of the Servi of Venice was Libelled in the Holy Office (as they call it) for
advising one that pretended to immediate Inspirations, See his Life.
and Assistances, to use human Means and Industries, and so to expect God's
Blessing. But the Inquisitors were for once so wise, as to absolve him without
Examination.

Our Psalmist states the matter well. Trust in the Lord, Psalm. xxxvii. 3 -- 5.
says he, but be doing Good too, and so verily thou shall be fed. Commit thy
way unto the Lord, and He shall bring it to pass: But walk in it thy self; how
is it else thy way? Commit he keeping of thy Soul, 1 Pet. iv. ult.
(says the Apostle, and so, commend the keeping of the public too) to God: But
still (...), in well-doing, in doing thy Duty in thy Station in all the
instances of it.

In the Age of Miracles indeed, when the Sea divided, and suddenly turned green
Meadow; and when an Angel went forth, and dispatched so many Thousands in a
Night: Well might the watchword be, Stand still and see the Salvation of God;
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall do nothing. But the season is
changed, and it is now, Come forth, and help the Lord against the Mighty; and
work out your own Salvation, (and so the Salvation of the Nation too) because
it is God that Works; that is St. Paul's Logic.

We must not presume to use our Lord, as Herod did; call for him, when we
please, to Work us a fine Miracle; neglect our Assairs, and leave them
embroiled, and ruffled on purpose, that he may come down (...), to disentangle
them. The Glory of God descends not visibly now adays upon our Palaces, as of
old upon the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to rescue our Moses and Aaron from
being massacred by a desperate Knot of Mutineers: Nor does the Earth open her
Mouth any longer, to swallow up our Rebels and Traitors alive. It Is a Scepter
of ordinary Justice, not a Rod of Wonders, that fills the Hand of our
Governors. We must not expect, that a good Cause should work alone of it self
by Way of Miracle: Believe it, it must be prudently, and industriously managed
too, or it must at last miscarry.

For Instance, (the Instance of the present time:) The Devils of Sedition, and
Faction of Treason, and Rebellion, those Familiars of Rome, and Rhemes, and St.
Omers, (the Jesuits I mean, that have so long possessed and agitated a
wretched part of this Nation;) will never go out from hence, and leave us at
quiet, no not by Prayer and Fasting only. Nay, the best Laws we have, the best
you can make, (if they be not steddily, and severely executed) will prove too
slight a Conjuration for these sturdy evil Spirits of Disobedience. There is
another and a better Flagellum Daemonum, than that of Hieronymus Mengis, and
his fellow Exorcists. Holy Water is a Trifle; and holy Words will not do it.
There is no such thing as Medicina per Verba: Words, and Talk will never cure
the Distempers of a Nation. Deaf Adders refuse all the Voice of the Charmer,
charm he never so wisely. If in good earnest we would be rid of this Legion,
and say, as our Lord to the deaf and dum Spirit, Go out, and enter no more;
(What shall I say? -- In short,) Prove. xix. 29.
Solomon' s Rod for the back of Fools, that grow troublesome, or dangerous (as
it may be prepared, and managed) is a very powerful and effectual Exorcism.
Untamed Horses, and skittish Mules, that will have no Understanding, are not
edified at all by calm reasonings, and Instructions and meek Remonstrances; nor
in any other method so well as by David's Expedient; Psalm. xxxii. 9.
In Fraeno, and Como; their Mouths must be kept in with Bitt and Bridle, that
it may not be possible for them to fall upon you; and so ye may be secure of
them.

But the fitting up of David's Bridle, and Solomon's Rod, and the right Use of
both, is the Business of another Place. I shall resume the general Thesis, and
so shut up this Particular. I say then; They trust not in God, they presume,
and tempt him, who work not together with him, but receive his Aids in vain,
and look, that He should bring about in extraordinary manner, what they take no
care of themselves; but lie flat upon their Backs looking upward, and will stir
neither Hand nor Foot, to help themselves. Ps. xxxi. 24.
Nay but Viriliter agite, and confortabit Cor, as it is in the Psalm; play the
Men your selves, Do All that you can or ought to do, within your proper Sphere;
and so God will strengthen your Hearts, all ye, that put your Trust in the
Lord. Wings as they are the Covert of Safety, so also the Emblems of Diligence,
and the Instruments of Activity: And as they show us our Privilege, may teach
us also this part of our Duty, -- to trust only in God's Wings, but to use our
own too; that is the progress of David's Trust; It goes on in active Diligence.

Thirdly, It is consummate (as in the last Act) in clear, and perfect
Resignation to God's good pleasure in the Event, whatever it be. They trust not
in God entirely, and as they ought, that rely only on his Power, and dare not
submit to his Wisdom also; that would gladly engage Omnipotence on their side
(and can you blame them?) but then they would manage it their own Way, and in
Methods of their own Contriving, and to Ends, it may be, far distant from what
God has appointed: As if he would work Journey-work under them, and leave them
to be Masters of the great Shop of the World. No; but as Luther said well, when
his Friend Melanchthon troubled himself overmuch at some cross Events; Desinat
Philippus esse Rector Mundi: It Is God alone, who sits in Heaven, and does
whatever pleases him. If we be not content with the Portion he allots us, but
will needs be carving for our selves elsewhere, or otherwise: Or if we be not
satisfied with his Conduct of the Affairs of the World, but think with the
great Alphonso, that we could mend the System: What is this but in Effect to
turn our Backs upon God, and to set up for our selves upon our own wretched
Stock, and implicitly at least to renounce the shadow of his Wings, and all the
privileges of it? Pulli non prospiciunt, says One: Young Birds have no
Designs, or Forecasts of their own, but are wholly under the Dams Conduct. And
if we are allowed to have any our selves, be they never so deeply laid, or so
wisely contrived; so skilfully managed, or so vigorously pursued; We must at
last entirely submit, and sacrifice them all to that Sovereign Wisdom, and
Power, which rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and orders them in all things
according to the good pleasure of his Will.

To sum up then this whole great Duty of Affiance in God, with all the Parts,
and Branches of it: He trusts Regularly in God, that trusts in Nothing else
first: And yet secondly does every thing he can, or is obliged to do by his
Duty: And thirdly, when he has done All, sits down at last under the shadow of
God's Wings, and waits the Success in Faith, and Hope, with perfect Resignation
to God's wise and just Appointment in all things; That is the first Duty
implied in the Expression a pious Trust, and Confidence in God. The (2d) Is an
ardent and flaming Devotion toward God, and his holy Worship, and Service in
his Temple: Under the shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge; it is certainly
an Allusion to the Holy of Holies, where was the Ark of the Covenant, the
Symbol of God's gracious presence; over which the Cherubim of Glory stretched
forth their Wings on high, (...). xxv. 20. ^^^ix. 5.
and shadowed the Mercy-seat: Between which Wings was God's Dewlling Place, his
Shekinah, or Majestatique Presence. And therefore when Ruth the Moabitess
became Proselyte to the Jewish Religion, and Worship; she is said to come to
trust under the Wings of the God of Israel, Ruth ii. 12.

There are also Alae Ecclesiarum, which we meet with in Church-writers; as we
corruptly call them the Isles of Churches; and in the Gospel it self (...),
Penacles, or (if we will render it close, and just) Wings of the Temple: From
the saving Covert and Protection whereof, as it is the Devil's Business to
tempt, and withdraw us, and so to cast us down from one of our noblest Heights,
and Defenses: So on the contrary, holy David's great Example here, and the
clear Importance of the Words of my Text, lead us directly thither (that is the
last, and most illustrious Resort of the Expression) and bring us up with
Boldness to seek, and make our Refuge even under the Wings of the Cherubim of
Glory.

And indeed, Where can we find on Earth so safe, or so comfortable a Retreat,
when Calamities assail, or threaten us, as here in the House of our God? Does
not his Cross stand over it on purpose, to direct us hither, when we are ready
to sink under the Burden of our own? When God's Judgments are abroad in the
World, and the Avenger of our Sins pursues us; More particularly, When the Land
is moved, and divided; when the Pillars thereof shake, and tremble, and the
Foundations are ready to be cast down; when all things are in Ferment, and in
Commotion round about us, and Men's Hearts ready to fail them for Fear, and for
looking after those things which are coming upon the Earth: Where should we
rather take Sanctuary, where can we more probably find Help, and Redress, than
at the Altar of the God of Mercy, and under the shadow of the Wings of his
Mercy-seat?

This was holy David's steady Resolve, when his Heart was overwhelmed, as he
speaks, Psalm. lxi. 2. I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever; I will trust
(or, I will make my Refuge) in the Covert of thy Wings, ver. 4. And when his
Afflictions put him beside that Guard, set him at Distance from those happy
Opportunities, took him down from those blessed Heights: Yet still, even at the
lowest, Psalm. cxxi. 1.
I will lift up mine eyes, says he, to the Hills; (at least cast a long Look
toward Sion) from whence comes my Help. This was the Sting of all his Sorrows,
as it were the Calamity Royal he so groans under, almost in every Psalm; not
that Saul, or Absalom had driven him from his own, but from God's House. Though
the Holy Land was of no large Extent: Yet as if he had been banished to the
Antipodes; From the Ends of the Earth; says he, have I cried unto thee, Psalm.
lxi. 2. Though his Devotion consecrated every place he came into; turned the
Cave into a Chapel, and the Wilderness of Judah into Holy Ground; and I had
almost said, even Gath of the Philistines into a Holy City; (for we have Psalms
dated from every One of these;) Yet still he sighs, Oh restore me, Oh bring me,
Oh set me up upon a Rock that is higher than I: He means without Doubt the Hill
of Sion, the Pico of Iewry, where God's House was established upon the tops of
the Mountains, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. ii. 2.

Men, and Brethren, you that make up the more popular part of this mixed
Audience; Let me freely speak to you of the Patriarch David, and of your
selves. Blessed be the Mercies of God, you lie under no such Restraint, or
Interdict, as he did: You are not banished into the Wilderness, nor shut up in
the Cave: The Doors of God's House stand open to you, if you please; and the
Wings of his Mercy are stretched out wide to invite, and receive you; would you
but come in, and put your selves under the shadow of them. Let it not be said,
that your Curiosity, or some worse Humor leads you quite another way: That you
are over-careful, and troubled about many things, which belong not to you,
while you neglect the one thing necessary, the great Duty of this, and of every
Day; namely to implore God's Mercy, and Protection upon the King and his
Kingdoms, and his Direction, and Blessing upon the public Counsels. Let my
Counsel, I pray, be acceptable unto you. Study to be quiet, and to do your own
Business: And that lies not in the Court, or in the Palace, but here in the
Temple. It Is not to listen at the Doors of the two Houses of Parliament, or to
Eves-drop the Council Chamger; but to wait in your proper Stations with
Modesty, and Patience, what Avisoes, and Commands are sent you from thence, and
to comply with them. Instead of thronging, and pestering the Galleries, and
Avenues of those places, where Matters of State are upon the Table; what a
blessed Appearance were it in times of Danger, such as this is, to see the
Church Doors always open, and the great Stream, and Shole of People continually
flowing thither; and to find some of you always upon the Floor there, Weeping
between the Porch, and the Altar, and saying, Spare thy People, Oh Lord, and
give not thy Heritage to Reproach. Thou have brought up a Vine out of Egypt:
Thou have cast out the Heathen, and planted it. Let not the Wild Boar out of
the Wood root it up, nor the Wild Beast of the Field devour it. Let thy Hand be
upon the Man of thy right Hand, whom thou have made so strong for thy self.
Keep him, as the Apple of thine Eye. Hide him under the shadow of thy Wings.
Let his Days be many, and his Reign prosperous; and under his shadow let both
Church and State long flourish: And let them be confounded, and driven backward
as many as have Evil Will at Sion.

To furnish out an Office for such daily Devotions, it is but to take your
Psalter along with you in your Hand, which is full of them. But especially let
me commend to you that Decad of Psalms, which begins with the 54 th. and so on:
which may seem to have been put together on purpose for such an Occasion. This
would be indeed effectually to transcribe holy David's Copy, in this his
Exemplary, and ardent Devotion: which is the second Duty required in the Text,
to prepare us for the protection of God's Wing. There is but one more behind;
and that is

(3.) Constant Perseverance in both the former.

In the two former you have seen Holy David putting himself under the shadow of
God's Wings, and making good his Refuge there, by Acts of Faith and Devotion.
And being once there, no Storm shall beat him off, no Discouragement shall
drive him away, no Delay shall weary him out. If God kills him, it is all one,
he will trust in him still, and die in his Arms: For here he has set up his
Rest, and Donec transierin^t, he is steddily resolved; his Refuge is, and shall
be, here, till these Calamities are over-past.

But here we must take heed of a great Mistake. There are, that hold the Donec
in the Text too hard, and stiff; are too punctual, and precise with God in it:
who will trust in him, it may be, and ply their Devotions just so long, as till
the Calamity be past: But then on the sudden their Trust grows feeble, and
their Devotion cold, and heartless: No sooner delivered, but like old Israel,
they forget God at the Sea, even at the Red Sea; -- (...).
Use him like Themistocle's Planetrees, under which Men run for shelter in
Storm, but the Shower once over, they pluck off the Branches, turn their Backs,
and away.

Nay, but there is in Scripture Language an infinite and an interminable Donec,
Matthew. i. ult.
which never expires. He knew (...) not, till she brought forth; Nay he never
knew her. In spite of Helvidius (...), (as the Greek Church style her) A
Virgin before, and in, and after the Birth of our Lord, and for ever. Ay,
that is the Virgin's Soul indeed, that keeps ever close to her heavenly Spouse:
Not only runs under his Wings for Shelter, when Calamities affright her,
saying, Spread thy Skirt over me, and then strays away again, as soon as ever
the flattering Calm, and Sunshine of Prosperity tempts her abroad. As our Lord
has given us an everlasting Donec: Lo I am with you, says he, till the end of
the World: (Not that he will leave us then, but take us yet nigher unto
himself, and so we shall ever be with the Lord, 1 These. iv. 17.
as the Apostle speaks:) So must we also have One for him of the same Latitude,
and Extension. For ever under the Shadow of his Wings; till this single
Tyranny, as in the old Translation; till these Calamities, as in the New; or as
the Hebrew implies, till all, and every of our Calamities be overpast; Both
before, and in, and after Calamities, still under the Shadow of God's Wings.
While they last, it is In the Shadow of thy Wings will I trust: and when they
are past, it is In the Shadow of thy Wings, will I rejoice; that is all the
Difference. As the Scenes shift, our Devotion must improve, and Advance too;
till our Prayer be heightened into Praise, (as I trust e're long it will be)
our Hope swallowed in Enjoyment, and our Trust sublimated, and made to flower
up into Joy, and Triumph: When the same God, that raised David from the Cave to
the Throne, shall translate us also from the Shadow of his Wings into the Light
of his Countenance: To the Beatifical Vision whereof he of his Mercy bring us,
who has so dearly bought it for us, Jesus Christ the Righteous: To whom with
thee, O Father, and God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed of us, and all the
Creatures in Heaven, and Earth, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, both now,
and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF SOME BOOKS,
Printed for, and are to be Sold by, Thomas Bassett, at the George near St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
A Practical Discourse concerning Christian Conversation, purposely Written to
Vindicate and Improve the Religious Societies of late Years, erected in the
Cities of London, Gloucester, etc. By Philopatris and Philadelphus, Members of
the Church of England.

Now in the Press, An Essay, concerning Human Understanding, with large
Additions, By Mr. John Lock.

Newly Reprinted in Folio, A Collection of Cases and other Discourses, lately
Written, to the Communion of the Church of England, by some Divines of the City
of London; to which is prefixed a Catalogue of all the Cases and Discourses,
with the Authors Names; together with three Tables: containing, 1. The Contents
of each Discourse. 2. The Scriptures Illustrated and Occasionally explained. 3.
The several Authors cited and examined.

The English Examiner; Or, A Spelling Book: Containing, 1. Rules for Spelling,
Reading, and Pronouncing of our English Tongue, by way of Question and Answer.
2. Words from One to Six or Seven Syllables, both common Names, and also
proper, divided according to the Rules. 3. Words alike in Sound, but of
different Sense and Signification. 4. Numeral Letters and Figures; the Names of
the Books in Scripture; the Months and Quarters in the Year; English words
contracted, and the Use of great Letters. Lastly, is added the Practice of
Reading, or the way of Teaching to Read by Verses, that have Words therein only
of one Syllable. By Richard Brown, late English Writing-Master of Rugby, in the
County of Warwick, but now of the City of Coventry.

An Enquiry into the Causes of Diseases in general, and the Disturbances of the
Humors in Man's Body; wherein the Nature of the Blood, of the Air, and of a
Pestilential Constitution, are briefly considered; together with some
Observations, showing wherein the Venom of Vipers, particularly, that of the
English Adder, does consist. By Sanford Walferstan, M. A.

Remarks made in Travels through France and Italy, with many Public
Inscriptions: Lately taken by a Person of Quality.

An Essay of Transmigration in Defense of Pythagorus: Or, a Discourse of
Natural Philosophy. By Mr. Bulstrode.

The Young Clerks Tutor, Enlarged: Being a most useful Collection of the best
Presidents of Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of
Sale, Warrants of Attorneys, etc. As also all the Names of Men and Women, in
Latin, with the day of the Date, the several Sums of Money, and the addition of
several Trades and Employments, in their proper Cases, as they stand in the
Obligations; together with directions of Writs of Habeas Corpus, Writs of
Error, etc. to the inferior Courts in Cities and Towns; Likewise the best
Presidents of all manner of Concords, of Fines, and Directions how to Sue out a
Fine, with many Judicious Observations therein, with many other things very
necessary, and readily fitting every Man's Occasion; as by an exact Table of
what is contained in this Book, will appear. To which is Annexed several of the
best Copies, both of Court and Chancery Hands, now extant. By Edward Cocker.

Regula Placitandi: A Collection of special Rules, for Pleading from the
Declaration to the Issue, in Actions real, Personal and mixed with the
distinction of Words to be used therein, or refused. Also Directions for laying
of Actions, of the Time of bringing them, and of the Persons to bring the same:
Together with some Remarks and Observations, touching Averments, Notice,
Request or Demand, Justifications, Innuendos, Protestando, Traverse, Averment,
double Pleas, Abatements, Demurrers, Trials, Verdicts, Judgments, Writs of
Error, Estoppels and Conclusions; with diverse Precedents Illustrating and
Explaining the same: Very useful and necessary for Clerks, Attorneys, and
Solicitors, etc. The second Edition Corrected.

The Works of Ben. Johnson, which were formerly Printed in two Volums, are now
Reprinted in one, to which is added a Comedy, called, The New Inn, with
Additions, never before Published.

Now in the Press, a Catalogue of the Common and Statute Law Books of this
Realm, with Additions.

The Principles and Duties of natural Religion, Two Books: By the Right
Reverend Father in God, John late Lord Bishop of Chester; to which is added, a
Sermon Preached at his Funeral. By William Lloyd, D. D. Dean of Bangor, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

FINIS.

