KALOS PPOESTOTES, OR, A VIEW OF Church Government: WHEREIN, The proper
Church-Governors are demonstrated; THEIR Office, Duty, Work and Employment,
With the Object thereof is declared, and the Necessity of Obedience to them
asserted: IN A SERMON PREACHED At WEST-MALLING, at a Visitation held there by
the Lord Bishop of Rochester, for one Part of his DIOCES: September. 16. 1662.

By JOHN STILEMAN M. A. Minister of the Gospel, and Vicar of Tunbridge in Kent.

Imprimatur.

November. 17. 1662. M. Franck. S. T. P. R. P. D. Epis. Land. a sacr. Dom.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Thomas Peirpont at the Sun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1663.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN By Divine Providence Lord Bishop of
ROCHESTER: My most honored Diocesan.
May it please your Lordship,
IT would be a Confidence very easy to be convicted of too arrogant
presumption, should I be so vain as to imagine any thing of mine worthy, either
of your Honors hands, or the public view. But your Lordship having enjoined
me, the meanest of my Brethren, to preach before so learned an Auditory upon so
solemn an occasion; and my labors finding acceptance beyond their worth, some
of my Brethren (who have set a value upon them, above what I dare conceive to
be in them) earnestly soliciting Copies of me, (that I might both satisfy
their importunities, and withal ease my self of the trouble of Transcribing) I
have adventured them to the Press; which being emitted, must now come under the
various Censures of the world, wherein I can never hope that they should relish
well with every Palate; nor can I expect, (such are the different humors of
men) that they should generally find such candid Readers, as in the Pulpit they
were blessed with judicious and ingenuous Hearers: And therefore they dare not
go abroad, unless sheltred under the wings of some honorable Patron. Pardon me
therefore (my Lord) if I presume to send them forth under the Vmbrage of your
Reverend Name; Whose many expressions of Grace and Kindness to my unworthy
self, have encouraged me to this Address; And who may by right, claim a special
interest, both in all my labors, as mine Ordinary, to whom I am bound to be
accountable for all my service in the Church; and peculiarly in these, as being
performed by your Lordships special command. And if they shall be approved in
your Lordships eye (which all, that know you, know to be most clear and
piercing) I shall not have cause to suspect the Censures of any that are
judicious; and others I shall not need to value. The Sermon (I confess) comes
forth somewhat larger then it was preached, but not a jot altered in any
material point; those who heard it, and shall now read it, will find it the
same, though increased in some expressions and explications, which were
prepared, but the streights of time would not permit to be then spoken. In this
and all my labors, my whole aim and design is, Ephesians. 4.15.
to Follow the Truth in love, and to assert it with sobriety. It will be the
rejoicing of my soul to see every one in their stations, the Clergy especially
to maintain the honor of their places by an holy, humble, peaceable and
blameless conversation, which is the main thing this Sermon drives at. The
Government and Discipline of the Church of England, must be acknowledged
excellent in its Constitution, and for the main and substance of it, exactly
agreeable to the Primitive Pattern: It would revive me to see every particular
Act and Exercise of it as blameless in all the subordinate Officers hands;
Piety and Peace having their full encouragement; and all Sin and Impiety,
Schism and Profaneness meeting with their proper Censures; that the Churches
Judicatories may be revered of all, and despised of none.

It has been a sorrow to my soul to see sometimes that high Censure of
Excommunication so abused on slight and very trivial occasions, until I
considered how an offense small in the beginning, was increased much by a
superadded Contumacy, and the Ecclesiastical Court had no other way to
vindicate it self from the contempt of such contumacious spirits, or to compel
men to obey: And yet has not this of late proved a sufficient remedy against
the frowardness of perverse men, who slight even this, so far, as that by their
own voluntary separations they prevent the Churches Censures, that the Church
(as it may seem) shall not need to excommunicate them, who are (...) Tit. 3.11.
and do excommunicate themselves. It is my great expectation and hope, that
when the right reverend Fathers of the Church, the Bishops of the upper, and
the Reverend Clergy of the nether House of Convocation shall again assemble,
some such effectual course will be found out to reduce men to, and preserve
them in Peace and Order, that by a prudent exercise of Discipline in all parts
thereof the honor of the Churches Judicatories may be preserved, and yet so
high a Censure may not be debased to secular ends, nor on low and light
occasions; that even those who have evil will at Sion, may see, and be forced
to acknowledge, that the Churches aim, is the spiritual and eternal Advantage
of her Members, and not the worldly advantage of her Officers and Governors,
whose eyes look not so low, as to a secular profit to themselves; and whose
pious souls are cordially affected to, and only zealous for the real and proper
interest of Christianity, viz. Piety and Peace in the Church.

My Lord, I have only this one thing to beg, that you would not judge me in
this, so vain as to presume to teach or direct so venerable Fathers; but only
accept of this Address as a faithful expression of mine high observance of your
Lordship; to whose judicious and paternal Censures, I readily submit my self,
and all my labors And as the Lord, who is the Dan. 7.9.
Ancient of days, has already adorned your head with that, which the wisest of
mere men did deservedly call, Pro. 16.31.
A Crown of Glory, Gray hairs found in the way of Righteousness: So that he
would add to your days a Nestors years, that this little Diocese may be still
happy under your Lordships prudent and grave inspection: and when the time
shall come that you must be gathered to your Fathers, that He will then
translate you from your Throne in the Church on earth to a far more glorious
Throne in the highest heavens, is, and shall still be the unfeigned Prayer of

Your Lordships in all humble and due Observance, JOHN STILEMAN.
From my Vicaridge at Tunbridge, November. 10. 1662.
(...).
Heb, XIII. XVII. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.


WHen I consider the work, and occasion of this meeting, I cannot but with
confidence presume that we are all assembled with the voice of Joy and Praise;
rejoicing in this day, that now through the goodness of God we see again the
face of a Church in the beauty of Order.

It was a sad time with the Disciples, Mat. 8.24, 25.
when they were sailing; the winds raging, a storm increasing; and yet the
Pilot sleeping. Such a dreadful time, such a furious storm has this poor
Church felt; when her Pilots were not sleeping, but by a popular fury thrown
out of the stern; and not the Hierarchy only, but the whole order of Ministry
been forced to strugle with the most impetuous billows, and to encounter with
those strong oppositions, which have arisen. 1. Partly, from a Spirit of
profaneness, because men love not to be controuled, and therefore Amos 5.10.
hate those, who reprove in the gate. And 2. Partly, from a Spirit of pride
schism and arrogance, because men scorned to be taught. When the Devil would
overthrow the Church, or Religion, it is his first work to oppose her Bishops
and Priests, as Antichristian, useless, and what not.

But (Blessed be God) Christ our Master sleeps not; but is awake to our help,
has rebuked the wind, and the seas, and restored a Calm: Now are the Pilots
at the Helm, and what remains, but that we (as Mariners) observe their
commands, obey them in their, and be diligent in the works of our own places,
viz. That we observe the steps of the Church, the footsteps of the stock; that
we attend on, and feed by the shepherds tents. And if ye wait there, ye are to
bring not your body only, but your Soul; not the ear, but the Heart to receive
and obey their word. And such is the Command of the Apostle here in the text;
Obey them that have the Rule over you, etc.

Our Apostle does in this Chapter (as in the close of his Epistle) heap up many
exhortations to diverse duties of several natures, which have no necessary
connection: they are not like Flori serta, flowers bound up in a posie, but as
growing severally in a garden: not like Pearls on a string; but as laid loose
upon a table, any one to be taken, as occasion requires: we have therefore no
need to look for a dependence. They are an entire exhortation to a Christian
carriage toward those, who rule over us in the Church (for of these
ecclesiastical officers does he here speak.)

Obey them that rule over you, and submit your selves, etc. In which words, The
Division of the text.
I shall observe these two generals, I. A Command, or exhortation to a duty.
And therein 1. An Act required, and that is double, 1. (...), Obey, be
persuaded by, and assent to their Words, Doctrins, and Commands. 2. (...),
Yield, Submit, to Romans 6.17.
Obey from the heart that (...), to be molded, or framed by it; it is a
spiritual obedienceto a spiritual word.
2. The Object, (...), Your Guides, or Rulers; qui gregi praesunt, and
praeeunt, ut Pastores.
II. The Motives or Reasons enforcing the duty. Taken 1. Ab Officio. (...).
Their care is for your Souls, they Watch ever and for them. 2. A Necessario.
(...). They must give account; of their pains with you, of your carriage to
them. 3. A Commodo. (...). Your obedience is their comfort, and they shall then
give account with Joy. 4. Ab Incommodo. If they must with grief say (as in the
Isa. 49.4.
prophet) We have labored in vain, we have spent our strength in vain and for
naught; This will be 1. A Grief to them. (...). As not For the use of the word,
see 2 Cor. 5.2. Romans 8.23. Mar. 7.34.
groaning under a burden, (viz. of sorrow) for your sins and miscarriages; and
though it be no other danger to them, for Isai. 49.4.
their work is with the Lord, and their reward with God. Yet it will be 2. A
Damage to you. (...). Unprofitable, it will not quit cost: it is a (...), or
Litotes, ye will be much damnified by it. Signifying, Mar. ex Call.
non sine propriae salutis jactura pastoribus nos esse molestos, and
immorigeros: The disobedience of People is an heart-grief to their Pastors; but
the Damage is their own.




These are the particulars; and now you see I have a large field to walk in,
more before me then the time will allow me to speak to; yea such as my
stammering tongue and too weak wit (I fear) is not able to handle as the matter
deserves: but being enjoined this Task, I shall labor to answer those
commands, and your expectations, so far as God shall enable me, and the time
and your patience shall give leave; and suitably, I hope, in some measure to
this present Assembly.

I shall begin with the

1. General, The Duty required, 1. General.
Obedience to Governors in the Church: Obey them that have the rule over you.
Here I shall crave leave to handle the latter branch first: to find out the
Government and Governors, their office, work, and employment: and this will
help us better to understand our duty, Obedience to them. (...).

1. Observe A Government in the Church asserted.
There is then in the Church a Government, and Governors. Officers set there
by God that must be obeyed: and it is indeed a kind of rebellion against God to
deny or oppose them. Obey those that Rule. Where? in Politicis? yes, but that
not of this place: but in Ecclesiastic is, such as watch not for your estates,
liberties, lives; but your souls, who take care of your spiritual concerns:
those Rulers mentioned Romans 12.8. (for civil Rulers come after, Chapter 13.) which
1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set in his Church: those 1 These. 5.12.
(...): that are over you, that lead in the van, that command, and admonish,
those 1 Timothy 5.17.
(...): it must be thus, for 1. God is a 1 Cor. 14.33. God a God of Order.
God not of confusion but of Peace, and will have therefore an Order in his
house. Want of Government is the spring of Confusion, when some set up one way,
some another: it is so in the civil state. The poor Levite Judge. Chapter 17, 18, 19.
sound it so in Israel he has no justice, till the whole land is in
combustion; and all this for want of Government, There was no King in Israel:
and that the like is the case of the Church without her Rulers, our late days
have given us too sad experience. 2. The Church a City.
The Church is a City, a Family, an Army, a Body; it is (I say) 1. A City,
state, or Commonwealth; Psalm. 87.3.
the City of God; the Ephesians. 2.12.
Commonwealth of Jsrael. We are Ephesians. 2.19.
Fellow Citizens, and our life here is Phil. 3.21.
(...). Now Government is the soul of such a state; take away this the whole is
ruined. 2. A Family, the Ephesians. 2.19.
Household of God: the Gal. 6.10. A Family.
Household of faith, there must be rulers in a family, (if any where)
Aequalitate nihil inaequalius: when Lycurgus was urged by one to establish a
Democracy in Sparta, Fac primum (says he) in Domotua, Begin at home, there
would men soon see the mischief both of Anarchy, An Army.
and a parity; and I am sure much more in Gods house. 3. An Army, They go from
strength to strength. Psalm. 84.7.
Heb. (...) Ab acie ad aciem. Thy people shall be willing Psalm. 110 3
In the day of thy power, when there seems to be an allusion to the mustering
of an Army, and that in Decency and Order: In the beauty of holiness, such is
Jerusalem, Cant. 6.4.
an Army, a well marshalled army, with banners, and there we know is the
straitest discipline; most absolute commands; and every one strictly enjoined
his place and station. It is Order makes an Army terrible? This makes the
enemies labor so much against the Governors and Ministers in the Church; for
they know, A Body.
Destroy this order, and the Church is ruined. 4. A Body, which the Apostle
briefly hints in that, to the Romans, Romans 12.4.5.
There are many members in one body yet all have not the same office; so we
being many are one body in Christ. Which he more largely handles in his Epistle
to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 12.12.
There we have Head, and Members, and among the parts, some to direct, as the
eye; some to be directed as the hands, and feet, etc. Thus in the Church, the
Body of Christ, some have one office, and place, some another. 3. And the
Censures to be exercised, Censures necessary in the Church.
which the Church is commanded, 1 Cor. 5. ult.
put away from among you, (i. e.) Cut of by excommunication, that wicked
person: and for which she is commended, 1 Cor. 1. The neglect of them reproved.
and willed again to restore the Penitent; these evidence, that there must be
Officers to dispense them. 4. Neither would there be ground for those sharp
reproves to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.2.
for not casting out the incestuous; of the Angel of Pergamus Rev. 2.15.16.
for tolerating the Balaamites, and Nicolaitans, or of Thyatira v. 19.
for suffering that seducing Prophetess, had not God set up such Governors in
his Church, and given them power to Rule; and order the affairs thereof.


Foxes creep into the vineyard, and the Wild Boar destroy the Vine? Nature it
self teaches, that in every society, Sacred or Civil, there must be Order and
Government: yet such is the corruption of men, that when the Yoke (though never
so easy) is put upon them, their hearts rise against it, they would not be
ruled. Whence is this frowardness and aversion? but either, 1. From a
Self-love, a love to base lusts, men are 2 Timothy 3.2.
lovers of themselves (i. e.) of carnal sensual self, and then disobedient to
Parents, hate all Governors, because unwilling their lusts should be reformed:
2. or Self-conceit, every one thinks (as he in the Comic) Consilii satis est
in me mihi; they are proud, and scorn to be taught; think that they know more,
and can do better themselves, like Solomon's fool, Prove. 26.16.
Wiser in their own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason. 3. or,
Self-will, they say we are our own, Psalm. 12.4.
who shall control us. Luke 19.14.
Nolumus hunc regnare, We will not have such rule over us, We will not, and all
the reason is, because We will not. 4. or Self-respect: Men look at a vain
repute to themselves, Phil. 2.21.
Most men seek their own things, and not the things of Christ. They would be
Rulers, Governors, and Commanders themselves; and take it as a discredit, that
others should not so account them, when yet they have never well learned to
hear, or to obey. But

Isa. 1.26.
He has restored our judges as at the first, and our Governors as at the
beginning. Though the Reins of Discipline have been broken, and the bands of
Government loosed; yet are they now repaired, and these Reins put into the
proper hands. Now we see again the face of a Bishop visiting his Church and
Clergy: Now we see the Ministers encouraged in their work that they may in
peace watch over the Souls of the flock, and dispense the mysteries of heaven
to them.

Ordinances of God, the Administrations of grace, God having ordained special
Administrators for special Administrations; for special Ordinances, special
Officers. 2. A fence to Religion, to keep out Errors and Heresies. 3. A
Preservative of Purity, and Scourge of profaneness. 4. An Hedge to the Church,
to preserve the bands of Unity, and to make Psalm. 122.3
Jerusalem as a City that is compact together, and keep off Schism and
Division. We may look and tremble at the sad and dismal wracks of the Church,
since this Union was broken: Some men glory in the name of Separation; but did
they know and consider what it is, they would look upon it as Res tremenda and
horrenda; when there cannot be found any one of the separate Congregations of
England of a little standing, but which have fallen into most monstrous
opinions, and innumerable subdivisions: hence Arrians, Socinians, Anabaptists,
Familists, Quakers, and what not? No wonder that so great a sin as Schism,
should be accompanied with so fearful Plagues.

1. We have now seen a necessity of Government and Governors in the Church. 2.
We are now to enquire, 1. Who are these Governors, The Governors Who?
and 2. What is their office and work.
1. The Officers and Governors to be obeyed, are called here (...) in other
places Romans 12.8. 1 These. 5.12. Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.28. 1 Timothy 5.17.
(...); sometimes (...), sometimes (...). The word is different; but, in the
main, the persons and office are the same.

1. The first and Primary Governors are the Bishops of the Church, these are
the Episcopi, and these the Presbyteri, the Primary and proper Elders. In the
beginning called Apostles, and (because they continued not in their persons but
their successors) Apostolical men in the first age, and Bishops in the
succeeding ages of the Church. These are they to whom St. Peter writes, 1 Pet.
5.1.
(...). Such Elders then were they, as St. Peter himself was, he was but a
fellow-Elder, such as they and no more then they, in that part of his
Aposolical office, which was of standing and perpetual use in the Church, their
work, as well as his, was, (...), 1 Pet. 5.2.
to oversee, to Rule as Bishops over the flock, and there the Apostle seems to
make an evident distinction, and imparity in the Evangelicall Ministry? some v.
2.3.
(...), not so much in Age, as in Office, whose work was to feed, and Govern,
(...), and (...): some v. 5.
(...), which by Analogy to the former verses, I conceive, may well be
interpreted to be, (not young in Age, or Novices in Christianity, but) Juniours
in regard of Place and Office, who were (...), to be under, or obey the Bishop
in the Church, so that clearly there must be in the Clergy, both the (...), or
Praepositi, The Bishops, or by what other name so ever they may fitly be
called, for we stand not upon names but things; and the (...), or Subditi, or
Subordinati, the Subordinate Pastors, Priests, or Ministers (call them as you
please) who in their places are to Govern and feed their peculiar flocks, yet
to be under and obey their Bishop. The (...) then in the text, in the first
notion, are (as the learned Grotius in another place notes) Gro'. in Live. 22.2.
Qui in Ecclesia sublimiorem caeteris consecuti sunt gradum, ut Apostoli; and
post eos Episcopi.

Particular Pastors of the several Congregations. Presbyters and Particular
These are also the standing officers in the Church, though to be under the
Bishop, yet to Feed, Govern, and lead their flocks, and their work is also
(...), and (...), as the Scriptures evidence. Both these in their places and
stations must be included under the (...) in the text. These have their place
by Divine and Apostolical institution.

Pastors. Others used by the prudence of Church.
yet the Wisdom of the Church has found them requisite, and at least
Prudentially necessary for the assistance of these undoubted Pastors, and for
the convenience of the several administrations; which being established in an
authority by the Law of the Church, or Kingdom, of which we are (such as
amongst us the Chancellor, Archdeacon, etc. or other like officers in other
Churches) they must by us be reckoned among these (...) and accordingly are to
be obeyed in their places.

2. Having found the Officers, The office of Governors.
we are next to enquire their Work and employment. And the text will show us
several particular worth noting, both 1. in their office, and 2. in the object
of it.

1. In their Office, we have these four things remarkable, Four things
considerable in the work and office.
viz. their Eminence, Precedence, Observance, Governance.

Eminence, They are over you, a degree above ( viz. in relation to matters of
the Church.) Eminence.
So are all Rulers over the Ruled: it is so in the State, Number. 27.16.
let the Lord set a man over the Congregation, says Moses: it is so in the
Church, Luke 12.42.
who is the wise steward, whom the Land shall make Ruler over his house? though
they are all servants to the Lord of all, net are some in Eminency over the
rest; as the (...), and (...) before mentioned. Yea even the Deacons are said
to have some degree of Eminency, they purchase to them elves (...), a good
degree, unless this be rather to be understood that by their faithful
diligence in that lower, they come to gain a higher degree in the Church. But
however this is clear in the Place of Governors, there is an Eminence.

1. Which must engage us inferiors to yield that just Reverence that is due to
our Superiors for their place sake? Use Engaging. 1. Reverence in inferiors.
And 2. For us (my Brethren of the Clergy) As we are (...) to our flocks, 2.
Exemplary piety in the Governors.
and so have a degree of Eminency in that regard above them; so are we by this
engaged to a care to preserve the dignity, of our office and Ministry: to walk
worthy of our high calling, not by the vain pomp of the world, but an holy
exact conversation; walking so much the more watchfully and warily, as much as
we are above others in place, so must it be our ear to be better in life.
For,)
Ye know the maxim in Law. In dignitate qui peccat, peccat amplius: thus was
Elies sin aggravated by the eminence of his place, 1 Samuel 2.27.29.
I Chese thy fathers house -- took thee to be my Priest -- Why spurn Ye at my
sacrifices? etc. And ye know also?

Quo major dignitas, eo major deformitas. Sin in a Minister, is like a Wenn not
on the foot, or hand, but in the face or over the eyes. Seeds Summa, et vita
ima, are ill-matched.

And we certainly have more eyes upon us, our faults are more conspicuous then
any; as a black spot upon a white robe, (...). In a valley, things may be hid,
and not seen until we come upon them: but ye Mat. 5.13.14
(if any) are the light of the world; a City set upon an hill cannot be hid.
Soli latere si licet, Regi (add Episcopo, Clero) licet. And besides all this,

We may be sure, our faults will be more observed then all our abilities,
pains, and good actions whatsoever. The glory and brightness of the Sun
passes all the year little noted: but one Eclipse calls the eyes of all to
behold and observe it.

Thus the general holy example, eminent preaching of Ministers may be seen, but
is little observed: but every one is ready to take notice of the least
aberration; that they may have something, wherewith to put off our rebukes; or
by our example encourage and sooth up themselves in their sins; or take
occasion to blaspheme or reproach our function. As therefore we are in place of
Eminence, so let it be our care to maintain the honor of our place by an holy
and blameless conversation.

Precedence to go before, Precedence.
and to lead the flock: for this is (...) it is vox castrensis: but used of
Public persons, whether in the Camp, City, or Church: and this (...) (ye know)
answer to the Heb: (...) Dux, Praesul, Antistes. As the Prince has Precedence
in Civil things; the Captain in Military: So the Priest in Sacred. The Bishop
as Leivetennat General under Christ, who alone is Heb. 12.2.
(...) the Cheif-Captain: and the Presbyters, as inferior Captains, and
subordinate leaders, who are to set themselves in the Front or Fore-ward of
their several Charges, and manfully marching before the Church, encouraging all
to follow with like valor and diligence in the Christian Warfare against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

We have also in the Scripture another Metaphor much to the same purpose, Number.
27.16.11.
let the Lord of the spirits (says Moses) set a man over the Congregation,
that he may go out before them and come in before them; to lead them out, and
to bring them in; that they may not be as sheep having no sheephard: alluding
to the Custom of those Eastern Countries, not (as with us) to drive the sheep,
but to go before and lead them, to which custom also our Savior alludes, 1
John 10.8.
the sheep hearing, and knowing the voice of their own shepherd do follow
him. Thus Rulers are Leaders; it is so in Isa. 3.12.
Political, it is so in Ecclesiasticals, Prophets, Bishops, Priests, are such
Leaders, Pastors. Guides, as the Scriptures in many places show. Which
Precedence is not so much in Civil respects, Mat. 28.6.7
taking the upper hand, etc. as a going before others in a way of Doctrine,
Direction, Circumspect Walking, and the example of an holy life: this is the
only way to vindicate both our persons and Ministry from contempt, and to gain
a Credit, and a Repute to both, by being 1 Timothy 4.12
examples in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit in Faith and Purity,
Tit. 2.7.
Paterns of good Works, 1 Pet. 5.3.
not as Domineerings Lords (for it is not the Title of (...) but the abuse of
power, (...) which is there condemned) but as ensamples to the flock.

This Precedence now must teach us a double duty.

Diligence in study, to know the way, Use. Engaging.
works and will of God. To get our own eyes enlightened, and to keep them open:
Our selves must first learn, and be sufficiently furnished with a stock of
divine knowledge, Diligence in study.
ere we can teach and instruct others. It is sad with the Church, when men will
undertake to be teachers, who themselves have not learned the mysteries of
faith, and principles of this Doctrine of God, and prius effundere, quam infundi
volunt. If we undertake to be guides, be sure first that we see well, Mat.
15.14.
if the blind lead the blind, ye know the danger of both. Let us not then be
strangers to our studies, but be earnest by Study, Meditation and Prayer to
gain an higher measure of knowledge, a deeper and farther insight into the
mysteries of the Gospel. Those who are to teach others; should know more then
others, we must be (...), 2 Timothy 2.24
apt and ready to teach, that is our office; then we must be (...) learned,
that we may be able to perform it 1 Timothy 4.13.
give attendance first to Reading, then to Exhortation, and Doctrine. Holiness
of life.
Holiness of life, if we are Guides, we must take the more care that we go not
out of the way, least by our miscarriage we draw others into perdition. True it
is, our examples are no Rule for others to follow in evil courses, Si been
dixerimus vestrum est si male vixerimus nostrum est. Aug.
nor will it be a plea for any to justify sin, here Christ's rule must hold
Mat. 23.3.
do as they say, but do not after their evil works. Yet when men are so prone
exemplo vivere, especially by the examples of their Leaders; who (as Seneca
observes) plus exemplo quam peccato nocent, there cannot but be by our evil
examples too great occasion of sin to the flock. And it will be a sad account
that we shall make, when God shall say, Isa. 3.12.
Qui ducunt te, seducuut te; and it shall appear that we not only fall our
selves, but like the Devil, or first falling Angel (to which there seems to
be an allusion in the Rev. 12.3.
Apocalypse) draw thousands also down after us. Are we Guides? then it must be
our care that we turn not to the right hand or to the left, but Prove. 4. last
keep our feet from evil. We must be examples in faith, Charity, Purity, etc.
If examples, then must we strive to be the best, and most perfect, in a more
refined life, and higher purity of Conversation. As we are by our places
brought nearer to God; so in our lives should we strive to be more like unto
God.
Greg.Nazia. in Apologet.
Gregory; (...) -- When we are entrusted with this place and office by God,
it is not enough, that we are not wicked (for this is to be abhorred in the
lowest of the people) but it must be our endeavor to be more above them in
piety and goodness, then we are in place and office: to account it nothing
that we excel them in dignity; but to account it our shame and loss, if we in
all things answer not that honor, place and employment, to which we are called:
we must not think (...), the same measure fits every person; there is not the
same age or strength of all nor the same nature of every Creature, nor the same
quality of every Earth; nor the same beauty and luster of every star, etc. It
is the sin of private and the meanest Christians to do that which is evil; but
of the Minister, Guide, and Leader in the Church it is required, (...), to be
the best, and to preceed still, and proceed in that which is good.

Observance.
or (according to the word in the text) (...), Watching, or Observance, and
oversight. (...) Insomnem noctem ducunt vigiles: the word is Emphatically, as
if they took (...) not a wink of sleep. The Metaphor is easy, their work is
the work of Watchmen Ezekiel. 3.17.
Son of man (says God) I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel; and
this Metaphor shows their work. 1. They are (...), to stand in the
VVatch-Tower, as Sentinels, to prevent danger from without, to declare when the
enemy comes. 2. (...) to Oversee the flock, to prevent their carelessness
within; that men sleep not, or neglect their duty. Both these does the Apostle
mean in that charge which he gives in his last far-well at Miletum, to the
Elders or Bishop of Ephesus. viz. to Timothy the then Bishop (as may well be
judged) of that Metropolis, and the other inferior Bishops under him: and if
particular Presbyters were there, the charge is the same to them in their
several stations. Act. 20.28.29.30.
Wolves will enter in, therefore watch and take heed to your selves and to all
the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you, (...), Bishops, (i. e.)
inspectors, or overseers. And now this Watch is.

A watch for the flook: in a careful foresight, to prevent the danger that
might acrew to their souls by any that come among them, whether by error, or
profaneness, In a watch for the flock.
that they may avoid them. As Watchmen, if they see a Ezekiel. 33.1-5.
Sword coming in judgment from God, they must blow the Trumpet and warn men,
that they may repent of sin and avoid the stroke. If they see Act. 20.28, --
Wolves enter the fold, Heretics enter the Church, they must give notice, and
take care of the Church against them. Hirelings Joh. 10.12, 13.
fly when the wolf comes; but it is the Pastors work to watch, and defend the
fold; they must attend, that Foxes creep not into the vineyard; nor weeds grow
in the Garden; nor Schism, Heresy, or Profaneness in the Church of God. A
watch over the flock, and so much is also signified in this (...), A watch over
the Flock.
a careful Oversight, to look to them, and keep them awake in their duties,
that they sleep not in sin or security, but awaken by Repentance, and keep
awake. It is the work of the Pastors, to take notice of the lives and
conversations of the people. As Physicians are to observe bodies and diseases:
so is the Minister to observe souls and sins, that they may apply suitable
remedies: for this reason it is, among others, ( viz. that there may be this
careful inspection, and the single Pastor not being able to take notice, of or
a personal inspection into every particular) that the wisdom of the Church
has thought fit to join others, in the respective Parishes, to assist the
Minister, (the Churchwardens, I mean, who, did they conscientiously discharge
their places, and perform the works which the Church has put upon them, there
would be no place for, or want of such an officer as a Lay-Elder in every
Church, which some of late have so much stickled for) These by their constant
dealings with the people, having more and better opportunities to look into
their lives, are then to acquaint the Bishop, or the Proper Governors, and
Pastors with them, that they may act as becomes watchmen. It is every
Christians office, in charity, to consider one another, to provoke to love, and
to good works, it is theirs, in Duty; that the watchmen may see, that men live
as becomes Christians. The end of which Inspection is, not to exercise a
Dominion for the honor or profit of our selves, The end of this watch.
but for the edification and advantage of the flock, viz.
To prevent sin.
To prevent sin, to keep men awake: as persons set to watch a sick man after
some Potion, where sleep would be dangerous. Sin is the Ephesians. 5.14.
sleep of the soul; we are then to warn, that men sin not: or if they sin, then

2. To awaken and rouse men from sin. By repentance men awake: and it is the
watchmans work, by Doctrine, Exhortation, To Raise from sin, by Repentance.
Admonition, Rebuke, Discipline and Censures to bring men to Repentance, that
they may be saved. Bishops are the Angels of the several Churches, who as they
must be Revel. 3 2.
watchful, and rouse up themselves; so must they quicken others also, and so
strengthen the things that are ready to dye. Gal 6.1.
If any be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, (i.e.) who have
attained to greater measures, especially if in place and office, Take, Raise,
Restore such a man: (...).
This also must teach us,

A care for our selves. How can we watch over, Use. To engage.
or for others, if we keep not our own souls awake. That command of Christ,
which is given to one, is given Mar. 13. Uit.
to all, A care for themselves.
VVatch; but especially in our places. Who will set a drowzy spirit to watch
others: Why sleep ye? says Christ to his Disciples. We are Shepherds, if we
sleep, who shall look to the Flock? or how can we keep others waking? Our first
care then must be for our selves. Act. 20.28.
Take heed to your selves first, then to the flock: first 1 Timothy 4.12.
to thy self, then to thy doctrine, and this is the way to save both our selves
and them that hear us. Otherwise, though by our doctrine, we may be a means to
save others; yet by our works we shall damn our selves: and (as Nazianzen
makes the comparison) prove but as the Water used in Baptism, a seal of life
to others, but itself afterward running into the sink. This made St Paul so
careful of himself, 1 Cor. 9. Uit.
To keep down his body, so that, When he preached to others, himself might not
become a castaway: this done, our next care must be

A tender care of the Flocks under our charge. A care for the Flock.
Their souls lie at stake: if the shepherd be careless, the sheep must
perish: if the sentinels sleep, the city will be surprised: if we be idle, not
diligent in the works of our place, to watch and warn, the enemies get
advantage; Heretics creep into the Church; sin steals upon the souls of men;
and People dye for want of knowledge: if they sin, and continue, and die, they
dye in their own sin; but if in it they perish through our neglect, their Ezekiel.
33.1^ 10.
blood will lie on our heads, and be required at our hands; but if we warn them
and do our duty, whatsoever the event or success be to them, we have Delivered
our own souls. This is our third work Inspection, and Observance.

Governance.
The fourth and last considerable in this office is (...): Governance:
Hierarchia, A sacred jurisdiction; they are (...), to be obeyed and submitted
to. I need not cite those many texts Romans 8.12. 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy 5.17. Et
passim.
wherein they are called (...) and (...): words of Rule and Authority. There is
a Governance, in the Venerable Bishops, who are (...) to have the rule and
oversight as, of the flock, so of the (...), the Clergy also, (as the
Antithesis in St. Peter must infer,) 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
(...). A Government, which is not Despotical, or Magisterial, for the benefit
of themselves; not Lordlike or Domineering; no, they claim it not, they
exercise it not: but, Paternal, and Pastoral, for the benefit of the Church,
and salvation of souls: not as Jam. 3.1.
Lords or Masters over them; but, as Pastors, Brethren, Fathers, over the
several Presbyters, and people. Under these, The Presbyters also (though
subordinate to the Bishops, as Subjects, shall I say, nay rather as Sons, or
Brethren in subordination to obey them as Fathers; yet) to Govern their
respective flocks; not Commanding with Dominion; but Feeding, Teaching; so
Ruling 1 Cor. 16.14.
with Charity, and all possible 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
Meekness, and Gentleness, with all 2 Timothy 4.2.
Long-suffering and patience, and yet with an holy Tit. 2 15.
Authority also, (...). Now though we consider the Bishop as Distinct from,
because in this point of Government superior to other Presbyters; yet the
happiness of a Church very much consists in the sweet harmony and consent
between these two; the one Ruling as a Father, the other obeying as sons and
Brethren, and yet Both together exerciseing a Government in the Church; A
Reverend Episcopacy praesiding, assisted with a pious subordinate Presbytery,
which the scriptures Warrant, the laws of our Church establish; (nor do any,
that I know, claim any other Authorty) I shall not divide them, but only
consider where this Government, which they thus exercise, does consist, viz.
Chiefly in these four things.

1. Admonition, this is one of their works, they labor, This excercised 1. In
Admonition.
and are over -- 1 These. 5.12.
(...) and admonish; it is an Apostolical charge: If any obey not -- 2 These.
3.10.
Mark such a man, yet count him not presently an enemy, but (...), Admonish
him as a brother. And there must proceed, (...), Tit. 3.10.
One and another Admonition, before there be a passing to severer Censures.
Such mild and meek ways being first to be used; as Surgeons are not to use
Corrasives, or Causticks, where gentler Remedies will serve the turn. The first
work is (...), Gal. 6.1.
gently and tenderly To bind up the broken joint, and restore the dislocated
member: but if this Admonition prevails not, then must be added, 2. Sharp
Reprehension: 2. Rebuke.
When gentle Plasters do no good, Causticks and sharper Remedies must be
applied: Gal. 6.1.
(...), if any be overtaken, or surprised, use him in such a case with all
possible lenity: but, (...), if a man overtake sin, there must be another
course: Jud. 22, 23.
Use some tenderly, (...), with all compassion, distinguishing between sinners;
but others save, (...), pluck them out by an holy severity, that they may be
afraid to sin. (...), Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them sharply, or cuttingly, in love to their souls, that they may be
saved. And if such Rebukes prevail not, the Church must put forth her power in,
3. Ecclesiastical Censures: 1 Timothy 5.20.
When men sin openly, 3. Censures.
rebuke them before all, that others may fear. When there is an open Scandal,
there must be a public Censure. 2 These. 3.14.
(...), Note that man; set a brand upon him, that he may be brought to shame.
When Private Rebukes avail not, a public Censure must succeed; and if this
prevails not, it makes way for, 4. The last, Cutting off, 4. Excision, or
Excommunication.
or Casting out of the Church by Excommunication: This is the highest Censure,
and the last which the Church must, or can use, and that but in the highest
Cases. Men cut not off a limb for a light spot, or little irregularity; nor
should the Church cast out and excommunicate for trivial offenses: Nor do they
cut off a member, when it may be otherwise cured; but when gangrened, or there
is no hope; when apparent danger, -- Ne pars sincera trahatur: so, in the
Church, would any means else reform a soul, it would be high uncharitableness
to cut him off. Were I worthy to advice our Venerable Fathers, who sit at the
Stern, I should make it mine earnest Request for the Church, that no Court
might pass this Censure, but upon very great cause, when this sin is
notoriously scandalous to deserve it, and there is no means else to reform it,
and with the greatest regret and sorrow for the sinner, as we would mourn for
the death of a Brother, or be afflicted at the cutting off a limb from our
bodies. When upon every light occasion the Church shall proceed to Abscission;
it will make her Courts ridiculous, her Censures scorned, and the enemies of
the Church to slight that, which if well managed, would fill them with shame
and horror, and awaken them to seek her peace. But when the Scandal is
notorious, (and it is so, not only, when the sin is highly enormous at the
first, but when it grows to it by degrees: The sin may be light in the
beginning, and the offense small at first, yet when men shall either persist
notwithstanding all fair means to reform them; or shall despise the power of
the Church, and to their first offense add a proud presumptuous Contumacy,
against the Laws of the Church, this now grows highly scandalous, which before
might have been passed over with a light hand) when (I say) the Scandal is thus
notorious, (whether from the nature of the crime, or by a superadded Contumacy)
the Church is offended; when it is matter of ill example, and danger to others;
when all means of Admonition, Rebuke, and other Censures are used, and none do
good, but the sinner remains incorrigible; then let him be Cast out, for the
humbling of himself, and cleansing the Church. If one and a second warning will
not reclaim an Heretic, then (...), Tit. 3.10.
Cast him out: if there be an Incestuous Corinthian, and he continue so: (...),
1 Cor. 5. ult.
Cut off, ( vix. By Excommunication) That wicked person from among you. Even
nature teaches this, in the body natural, Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum
--; In Politic bodies, there is a power to take in, and cast out of civil
Societies: The same reason holds in the Church, where the sin and danger is so
much the greater, as much as the Concerns of the Soul, are above the Concerns
of the Body. If a private person, after all means, may estrange himself from
such an one, Mat. 18.16, 17
as an Heathen or Publican; much more may a Church, where the Offense is
greater, as much as a wrong done to a Community, transcends an Injury to a
private person. Yea there is an higher end in Excommunication, The ends of
Excommunication.
then there can be in cutting off a natural member, or throwing one out of a
civil society: For in either of these the end is but to preserve the Body from
death, or the Society from ruin. 1. To cleanse the Church.
But in this, as it is, 1. To free the Church from Infection, because 1 Cor.
5.6.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; and thereby Heb. 12.15
Many others might be defiled,
Grex totus in agris unius scabie cadit. And, 2. 2. To vindicate Christianity.
To vindicate the Churches Purity and Christianity from the Reproaches of her
Enemies, that the world may see, that neither does the Church own such rotten
members, nor our Religion countenance a wicked life. So, 3. It mainly looks to
the sinner himself, for though it be a Censure of the greatest severity, 3. To
humble, und to save the sinner.
excluding the sinner from the Communion and Blessings of the Church, yea from
Heaven too, until he repent: What being thus bound on earth, Clave non errante,
Mat 18.18. John 20.23.
being as certainly bound in Heaven: Yet it carries in it the greatest Charity
to the sinners Soul, the end being not to destroy, but to save: that as by a
dreadful thunderbolt he may be stricken with fear and horror and awakened to
Repentance; and by this means, being sensible of his desperate condition, learn
to sin no more. For this end are 1 Timothy 5.20.
H^m^neus and Alexander delivered unto Satan, (...), That they may learn (as
being by this instructed) not to blaspheme. The end being no other, but that
through the sinners Repentance, (x) The Spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus.

This also may teach us, My Brethren of the Clergy, a double Duty: I. Use To
engage Governors.
We are as Governors of the Flock in our places to Admonish, Rebuke, etc. How
careful should we be then to keep our selves free from that which we reprove in
others? 1. To be holy themselves.
Quod dictum vis alteri, dic prius tibi. How can we hope that others should
hear us admonish them, when we shall be as the Lute, making sweet Music to
others, but will hear nothing our selves? Unde tibi facies? With what face can
we reprove, when our selves are more, or equally guilty? When we do well, and
preach by our Lives, as well as our Doctrine, we may gain 1 Timothy 3.13.
(...), great bolduess, and use freedom of speech in any Reproof, when we can
challenge the world, as Christ does the Jews; John 8.48.
Which of you can convince me of Sin? And as Samuel, when he would effectually
reprove the ingratitude of Israel, 1 Samuel 12.3.
begins with a testification of his own Integrity, challenging them to say any
thing against him, if they could; Behold here am I, witness against me before
the Lord. -- But if that Proverb may be cast in our teeth, (...), When we
undertake to reprove, our own bad life will take off the edge and efficacy of
it: If we come to reform men, we had need bring Digitos mundos. He that comes
to wipe off a spot on the face, with foul fingers, will make it worse Remember
then that charge of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.22.
Keep thy self pure. II. 2. The exercise Government to its proper end.
Let it not be esteemed Presumption, if I beseech the Reverend Fathers of the
Church; yet I need not, they are, I am confident, of themselves more ready to
do the same; but, let me obtest and adjure all those, who are called to manage
the Government under them, that they zealously exercise it in all things to its
proper en^^^; The Glory of God, and the real good of the Church: that Innocence
may appear with boldness, and all Vices tremble at the presence of their
Courts. Let the Churchwardens conscientiously present the enormities of their
Precincts; Let All officers strive, not to enrich themselves, but to reform
sins, and make men better. In the managing of all Ecclesiastical Censures, be
careful to make men see themselves, confess and forsake sin. In matters of
inferior nature, use all meekness; and unto Persons, the tenderness of
Brethren: But in case of high enormities, wherein the life of Christianity, or
the peace of the Church is nearly concerned, proceed with all just severity.
Then will the Church be freed of her enemies, honored of strangers, beloved of
her friends, and reverenced of her children; and the world shall see, that her
Courts are kept, and Visitations held, not only of course and custom, but to
the effectual reformation of Offenders, restoring of Penitents, encouraging of
the pious and peaceable; to bring sinners to a sight of, and sincere sorrow for
sin: And in a word, (contrary to the too just complaint of some of old, and
taken up by some as a reproach against the Church, I hope unjustly still) Non
nummorum, sed morum gratia, not to empty men's purses, but to reform their
manners:


I have done with the Office or Employment: Let me crave leave for a word or
two of,

2. The Object: the Souls of men: (...), 2 The Object of this Government, The
Souls of men. Which shows,
They watch for your souls; not to get from you, nor indeed to preserve for
you, your lands, goods, estates or lives; these are of secular concernment; but
for your souls, for the furtherance and advancement of your spiritual good,
your consolation and salvation: And this shows the Nature, Worth and Weight of
this work.

1. The Nature of our work, it is spiritual, 1. The nature of their Works, it
is spiritual,
to look not (...), about the things of this life, or secular concerns, but
(...), about souls and spiritual things. Christ is called (...), 1 Cor. 6.3.
1 Pet. 2.25.
the Bishop of our souls; his Oversight as Mediator, and Governor of his
Church, consists not in judging Lawsuits, or Division of Inheritances: Man
Luke 1^.1^.
says he, who made me a judge? etc. This was not the end of his coming; but to
teach, lead and rule, for the spiritual and eternal welfare of men, the
recovering and saving the souls that were lost: So under Christ, the Government
of Bishops, Elders, Ministers in the Church is not to meddle with political, or
civil matters, as such: in this case, 1 Cor. 6.4.
set up others to judge: but in things pertaining to God, and the eternal
advantage of men's precious souls. Even their severest Censures, Excision by
Excommunication tends to this, That the soul may be brought home to God, and
the 1 Cor. 5.5.
Spirit saved in the day of Christ, (as I have already shown.) 2. 2. In worth
and excellency.
It is a work about Souls; then a work of Worth and Excellency, to encourage
fit persons to it, when God has given Abilities for it, and brings men by a
regular Call unto it: They should not be unwilling to undertake it: He that
desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a good work. It is a precious
Employment, A watching over, and for the precious soul. 3. 3. The weight of the
Employment.
A work of Weight: It is Opus and onus tremendum Angelis. They are to be
employed about Souls: Wherein, as for the encouragement of Ministers, they may
be a means to Jam. 5. ult.
save a soul from death; and, (in the language of the Philosopher) Hierod.
(...), as much as may be to make a god of man, that is, of a Sinner to make a
Saint, or, (in the language of the Scripture,) 2 Pet. 1.4.
Partaker of the Divine nature, which is the greatest and noblest work that man
can do: So, to keep off those, who Jer. 23.21.
run, and are not sent; it is such an employment, as (if considered well) will
make the best of men astonished at it. To be a Steward in a noble Family, is a
work too weighty for every shoulder: But to be a Steward of God in the Church,
a Dispenser of heavenly Mysteries, (...), 2 Timothy 2.15.
To divide the word aright, and Luke 12.42.
to give the proper portion in due season to the souls of men, is much more:
And the miscarriage in this is woefully dangerous in the loss of souls, which
are more Mat. 16.26
worth then the whole world besides; being things, which the whole world could
not, only the 1 Pet. 1.16.18.
precious blood of Christ was able to redeem. The Employment then about these,
and the Government of them, must needs be a work of worth and weight, The Art
of Arts Greg. Naz. in Apologet.
(...), etc. as that holy Nazianzen does excellently express it.
This, as 1. Use. 1. To engage. Fidelity in Governors.
as it may encourage us to the work and engage us to all care and fidelity in
our charge: so

Obedience and Submission. Which is the Act required, Obedience in all that are
under them.
(the first particular named in the Analysis, though here handled last) Obey,
and Submit your selves. We have seen a Government in the Church; the Governors,
and their office, and the End thereof, the Profit of Souls: Let all Christians
then learn to Obey. 1 These. 5.12
Prize them for their works sake. Let them have their Double honor, 1 Timothy
5.17
especially they laboring in the Word and Doctrine.

Obey them, for their place and Authority sake. 1. 1 Reason.
Reason requires it; to what end is their office, 2 Religion requires Obedience
to Rulers.
or do they Rule, if they are not obeyed? 2. Religion requires it. They are
some of the Fathers whom God in his Law, [ viz. precept 5.] has commanded us
to honor. Every Authority both in Church and State is an 1 Cor. 12.28 Romans
13.1, 2.5.
Ordinance of God, and to be obeyed for Conscience sake. We are not only to
look on them as Neighbors and Members; or reverence them only as Reverend
pious men; but to Obey them as Fathers and Governors. They are Men, and as men
they have their personal faults; but as he that gave to a bad man, said, Dedi
non homini, sed humanitati: so in this case of Obedience, it is not yielded, as
to the men, but as to them in such a place or office. Obedience we must yield
to their [not Commands as Princes, but] Counsels as Leaders; Directions, as
Guides; Censures, as Governors: to follow their Doctrine, to reform upon their
Rebukes 1 Cor. 11.1.
so to follow them, as they follow Christ: Yield your selves to be Romans 6.17.
(...).
Molded according to their Word and Doctrine, as those who Watch for your
souls. This is indeed to Cant. 1.8.
Feed your selves by the shepherds tents.

And for us [my Brethren of the Clergy] would we find a just obedience to our
Word and Doctrine, to our Admonitions and Reproofs in our respectives charges;
let us show an example of just Obedience in our Carriage and submission to our
Superiors. As we are over our flocks: so must we remember, that we are as the
Centurion in the Gospel, Mat. 8.9.
Men under Authority also. When we shall contend for a Parity, and deny a
Subordination; and usurp a power, which we have not, by the Laws of God or the
Land, we make a fearful Schism in the Church. When we shall presume to reject
our Bishops, we teach people to reject us also; yea and we show the way to
ruin both. While we are divided, we are neither safe: but united, the Bishop
with his Presbyters; A Venerable Episcopy, presiding, and principally ruling,
assisted by a subordinate Presbytery, these together, through Gods mercy, shall
be invincible.

Let us then in our places learn and yield Obedience, in duties which are in
themselves necessary, I presume none will scruple it: but in Matters of
Indifferency, Circumstance, and Order we shall also find Obedience necessary.
Some things there are which Christ and his Apostles have already prescribed to
be observed in all Churches in the World; and to such, as these, we are
Obliged, whether they are again Commanded us or no: and yet the command of our
Superiors being added, lays a farther obligation to obey in these. But
besides these, there are also many other things fit and Convenient to be done
in the Church; yea at least Prudentially necessary for the beauty of Order, the
Decency of Administration; wherein our Governors have power to Command, and we
are obliged to obey. Such are (...), Tit. 1.5.
Things that are wanting, or left to the prudence and discretion of the Church:
in which the Apostle made no particular or express rules; but left order to
Titus in Creet; and consequently to the Bishops and Governors of the Church in
their several Provinces, Diocesses and Jurisdictions, (...), To settle and
order them, as should be most for the benefit, Unity. Peace, and edification of
the Church. Whatsoever then is Lawful, (though we may judge it not so
Convenient) and enjoined by those, who (and not we) as Governors of the Church
are only Judges, we must submit unto, and for Peace, Order, and Edification,
and avoiding of Offense. Yield your selves;

And to yield this honest and just obedience we are sufficiently engaged and
excited by

General part of the Text, the Motives, General. The Motives.
or Reasons added to enforce the Duty; and these taken, 1 Ab Officio. They
Watch for your souls, Ab Officio.
this is their work and duty: you must then be content to be Watched over. They
are placed in this office by God; and for this purpose made Act. 20.28.
Overseers by the Holy Ghost. They Act by a Divine Warrant, and to disobey them
is to Act. 7.51.
Resist the Holy Ghost. Their aim is your advantage, not as those against
Jeremy, Jer. 20.10.
to watch for your halting, to take advantage against you? but to reform,
reclaim, and save your Souls. It is too sad a sign that men love their Sins,
when they are loath, that their Pastors should observe their Ways. A
Necessario. They must do so, it is their Duty. A necessario.
As They, that must give Account. It would be much for the Ease of your
Governors to be confined to their Study and Pulpit, and have no farther Charge
laid upon their shoulders: but this Charge they must take of you, and be
accountable to God for you: viz. of their Labors with you; and of your Lives
and Carriages under their Ministry. Stewards, they are of the house of God, and
must give account to the Master of the Family. They are Shepherds, but the
Act. 20.28.
Flock is God's: and they must give account of the Sheep to Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 2.15. 1 Pet. 5.4.
the shepherd of your souls. Who is (...), and whose sheep ye are: Which 1
Must engage us in our places to all fidelity and care, Use. To engage 1 In
Ministers, Fidelity.
that we consider seriously of the burden upon our shoulders; useing all
diligence that we may give up a good account of our Charge. If Hos. 4.6.
People perish for want of knowledge; and we have not entrusted them: if they
sin, and we neglect to admonish, rebuke, and to use the means and power in our
hands to reform them: They dye; but we must answer for them Ezekiel. 3.19.
with our own blood. Therefore In People an humble submission.
Let not people think much of our care. Say not, that we are busybodies,
when we preach unto you, and inquire after you, for we must Watch, and give
account. But here are we in a great straight: we are in danger apud homines,
loquendo; apud Deum, silendo. If we faithfully discharge our duty in a just
reproof of men, Amos 5.10.
they hate us: if we deal plainly with men, when they fall into erroneous
opinions; 2 Pet. 2.1. (...).
Schismatic and pernicious ways; or dangerous sins: we are accounted Enemies,
Gal. 4.16.
and for no other reason, but because we tell them the Truth. And when they
should 1 These. 5.13
prize and love, they hate us even for our Works sake. But there is a far
greater danger in our Silence; we are in danger of Gods displeasure (and that
is Heb. 10.31.
fearful, for Heb. 12. ult.
Our God is a Consuming fire,) if we discharge not our duty toward your souls.
Speak then and Admonish and Rebuke, etc. we must; and you must be content to
hear and obey: the good, and eternal salvation of your souls depends upon it. A
Commodo.
A Commodo. That they may do it (...). when ye obey we can With Joy, give up
our accounts to God. It is a Joy to the shepherd when his flocks thrive; to
the Minister, when his labors are successeful 1 These. 2.19, 20.
What is our joy, and Crown of Rejoicing? Are not even ye in the Presence of
Christ, at his comeing? Yea are our glory, and our joy. And again 1 These.
3.7.8, 9.
We are comforted over you in all our affliction --, by your faith; whatsoever
we want or suffer, [we live if ye stand fast in the Lord], thus St. Paul; and
he goes on, [What thanks shall we render to God for the joy, wherewith we joy
for your sakes before our God.] The like we read in St. John 3 John 4.
I have no greater joy, then to hear that my Children walk in the truth. They
are 1 These. 2.7, 8
Nurses and Foster-Fathers, and bear tender affections toward you, and rejoice
as much, as your natural Parents can do, in the stirring of your souls.



This if any thing, Use. To engage people, to returns of love and obedience.
should engage in people returns of love and obedience. They have heavy burdens
on them, and but weak shoulders: we are frail men, and discouraged much by the
cross carriages of people: we need all helps, (as Moses Exodus 17.12.
had Aaron and Hur to hold up his hands,) there is no way so good as this. By
your holy life and conversation, by your love, Humility, pious, peaceable, and
obedient carriage you will revive us. By this argument the Apostle wooes, and
by this let me prevail for this holy obedience. Phil. 2.1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love -- fulfill ye
our joy, etc.

Ab Incommodo. Peoples sin.
Ab Incommodo: and this is double, if ye will not obey as ye are here required,
so that we cannot give up our account with joy.

Grief and Sorrow will be ours, The Pastors sorrow.
when people are taught, admonished, etc. and yet will be still untractable,
this is a grief of heart to their pious Pastors. This 2 Pet. 2 7.
vexed Lot, though he had no such charge over Sodom: much more will it those,
whose care and charge they are. Is it not matter of sad sorrow, that we should
see our labor lost, and that we still Am. 6.12.
plough on the rocks, and sow among thorns? that we must still complain (as it
is in Jer. 6.29, 30.
the Prophet) The bellows are burnt, and the founder melts in vain, there is
no good done, for Reprobate silver they will still be? this makes the Prophet
cry, Isa. 24.16.
My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me: and as with David Psalm. 119.136.
so is it with them, Rivers of water run down their eyes because men keep not
the Law of their God. Is it not matter of deepest sadness, that we should be a
means to Damn them, whom we are sent to, and desire to save? for the word which
we bring, will be as, where it is received and obeyed, 2 Cor. 2.16.
the Savor of life unto life; so where it is rejected, as certainly and
infallibly the Savor of death unto death, if we be not as Math. 13.30
Reapers togather you, as good Corn, into the barn, we shall be as Binders up,
as of Tares and weeds in bundles to be thrown into the fire: [as it is in the
Parable.] Quinquam tunc (^c. ad consu^mationem seculi) extrema^ manum purgandae
ecclesiae aponet, (Deus sc.) per A^gelos, idem tamen nunc facere incipit per
pios Doctores. Calv. in Mat. 13.39.
God beginning to do that by his Ministers here, which he will perfectly do by
his Angels at the end of the world.

2. The Peoples own Damage.
But though the Grief will be ours, there is matter of Danger to you that obey
not, and to you only, for

1. The faithful Pastors shall sustain no loss by the peoples disobediedce:
for Curam sucsip mus, non curationem, we are charged with the Care, but not the
Cure. The Physician suffers not for the Patients death, (...) he resist or
refuse his medicines: 1 Cor. 3.8.
Our re^ard is not (...), but (...), according to our work and labor, not
fruit or success. Men that till the ground shall be paid, though the seed
miscarry; and the Reapers shall be rewarded, though the corn be not worth it.
But

3. A disobedient people shall suffer. The Parents displeasure will be the
childrens disprofit: it will be (...), unprofitable, damage to you: For 1. Your
sins are aggravated, Joh. 15.22.
if the word had not come to you, ye had not had sin: [^^e.] Comparatively,
viz. your sin had been nothing so great as now it is, for now ye have no cloak
no colorable excuse for sin: and then 2. Your Judgments will be increased,
(...) will it be Mat. 11.20.
for Sodom or Gomorah, then for you, who have heard, and seen, but obeyed not:
Quanta Damnatio a Damnatis damnari? Sad is the condition of sinful men when
the Gospel of peace and life, Mat. 24.14.
shall be a witness against them. Joh. 12.47.
If any man hear, and believe not (and he believes not, who obeys not) I
judge him not [saith Christ] what? will not Christ judge? who else can? has
not God Joh. 5.22.
Committed all judgment to the Son? True, but he will not judge, [he saith]
well we are secure now, may the sinner think, we fear non else: but stay sirs,
Pater ad Filium, Eilius ad Verbum. The Father has committed all judgment to
the Son; and the Son to the Word. The son shall not need to judge such an one,
the word shall do it. Joh. 12 48.
The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. The
Lord Jesus Christ is a Heb. 2.17.
compassionate high Priest, and He came to save; and to make Reconciliation for
sins. Here a sea of Comfort and Hope, True, but let not the sinner presume and
continue disobedient: for he is the Author of this eternal salvation only to
Heb. 5.9.
such as obey him. To these only will he extend his mercies and enlarge his
compassions.

Me thinks these meditations might strike terror into the souls of men and
even force them to an holy obedience. Use. To encourage Ministers in their work
howsoever their labors succeed with men.


But whatsoever People do, Here is Comfort and encouragment enough to Gods
faithful Ministers: Howsoever their labors succeed with men; yet they are
accepted with God. Let us (my Brethren) be faithful and diligent in our
places, blameless in our lives; ensamples to the flock in Holiness, Faith,
Patience, Peace, Humility, and Obedience: And in our Doctrine showing
Incorruptnesse, Gravity, Sincerity: Let us Teach, Exhort, Rebuke, with all
long-suffering and Patience: then, though to our sorrow, we may complain for
want of success, that we have all this while Isa. 49.4.
Labored in, vai and spent our strength in vain and for naught, yet let us be
encouraged to go on, and we may be assured for our comfort that ibid.
Our work is with the Lord and our labor with our God: and he will reward us.

What now remains? but that we turn this Sermon into Practice: And now every
one in our places set our selves to the serious exercise, and faithful
discharge of these Duties, whether of Governing or Obedience, which God in his
word requires of us,

Yea and turn the Sermon into a prayer [for 2 Cor. 3.5.
all our sufficiency is of God] in the words of our Apostle, but a verse or two
below the Text.

Heb. 13.20 21.
O God of peace, Thou who broughtest again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
Make us (Governors and governed, Pastors and Flock, even make us) every one
perfect to do thy will; in our several Offices, Ministries, Places and
Stations,) working in us that which is well pleasing in thy sight: through
Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, Three persons, but
One Eternal, Invisible, only wife God, be All Glory and Power, Praise and
Dominion for ever and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

