THE MYSTERIES OF The Christian Faith ASSERTED and VINDICATED: IN A SERMON
Preached at S. Laurence-Jewry in London, APRIL the 7th. 1691.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1691.

A SERMON Preached at S. Laurence-Jewry, APRIL the 7th. 1691.
1 TIMOTHY I. 15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief.


IF these Words were to be understood without any Restriction or Limitation
that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, they would overthrow the
great Design of the Gospel, and make its Excellent Precepts Useless and
Ineffectual. For, to what purpose should men be put upon the severe Practice of
Repentance, Mortification and a continued Course of a Holy Life, if the mere
being Sinners did sufficiently qualify them for Salvation? This indeed would
be thought a Doctrine worthy of all Acceptance by the greatest Sinners; but it
could not be a faithful saying, being not agreeable either to the Nature of
God, or Revelation of his Will by Christ Jesus. But S. Paul speaks of such
Sinners as himself had been; i. e. such as had been great Sinners, but had
truly and sincerely repented. Of whom I am chief. What then? Must we look on
him as the Standard and Measure of such Sinners whom Christ Jesus came to save?
What will then become of all those who have been Sinners of a higher Rank than
ever he was? It Is true in the Verses before the Text, he sets out his Sins, as
a humble Penitent is wont to do, with the worst Colors and deepest
Aggravations, Ver. 13.
Who was before a blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious; but yet he adds,
that he obtained Mercy because he did it ignorantly, in unbelief. How then is
S. Paul the Chief of Sinners? Are Sins of Ignorance and Mistake the greatest of
Sins, for which Christ died? Is there no Expiation for any other by Jesus
Christ? What will become then of all such who sin against Knowledge and
Conscience, and not in Ignorance and Unbelief? Can none of these hope for Mercy
by Christ Jesus, although they do truly Repent? But the Blood of Christ is
said elsewhere to cleanse us from all Sin; 1 John 1.7.
not, while we continue in them, but if we repent and forsake them. Chapter 2. v. 2.
And Jesus Christ is said to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours
only, but for the Sins of the whole World. And therefore this Expression of S.
Paul notes his great Humility and deep Sense of his own Sins; but does not
exclude others from the hopes of Pardon whose Sins have other Aggravations than
his had. For, if we leave out the last words as peculiar to his Case, yet the
other contain in them a true Proposition and of the greatest Importance to
Mankind; This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the World to save sinners.

This, you may say, is a matter out of all doubt among all such who hope for
Salvation by Christ Jesus; for all are agreed, that one way or other we are to
be saved by him. But there is great Difficulty as to the Way of saving sinners
by Christ Jesus; whether by the Doctrine and Example of the Man Christ Jesus,
by the Power he attained through his Sufferings; Or, by the Eternal Son of
God's assuming our Nature, and suffering in our stead in order to the
Reconciling God to us and making a Propitiation for our Sins. These are two
very different Hypotheses or Notions of Christ's coming to save Sinners; and
the former seems more Easy to be understood and believed; and the other seems
to have Insuperable Difficulties in point of Reason; and to run our Religion
into Mysteries, which expose our Faith and make Christianity appear
Contemptible to Men of Sense and Understanding. Is it not therefore much better
to embrace such a Scheme of it, as will have the least Objection against it,
that so Men of Reason may not be tempted to Infidelity, and Men of Superstition
may not under the Color of Mysteries bring in the most Absurd and Unreasonable
Doctrines?

These are plausible Insinuations, and would be apt to prevail on considering
Men's minds, if they were to form and make a Religion that might be most
accommodated to the Genius and Humor of the Age they live in. And truly no
Men (by their own Authority) can pretend to a Right to impose on others any
Mysteries of Faith, or any such things which are above their Capacity to
understand. But that is not our Case; for we all profess to believe and receive
Christianity as a Divine Revelation; and God (we say) may require from us the
belief of what we may not be able to comprehend, especially if it relates to
Himself, or such things which are Consequent upon the Union of the Divine and
Human Nature. Therefore our business is to consider, whether any such things be
contained in that Revelation which we all own; and if they be, we are bound to
believe them, although we are not able to comprehend them.

Now here are two Remarkable Characters in these Words, by which we may examine
these different Hypotheses concerning the way of Salvation by Jesus Christ.

I. It is a faithful saying, and therefore must be contained in that
Revelation which God has made concerning our Salvation by Christ.

II. It is worthy of all Acceptance; i. e. most useful and beneficial to
Mankind.

Now by these two I shall proceed in the Examination of them. I. Which is most
agreeable to the Revealed Will of God. II. Which does offer fairest for the
Benefit and Advantage of Mankind.


I. Which is most, agreeable to the Revealed Will of God. For that we are sure
is the most faithful saying; since Men of Wit and Reason may deceive us, but
God cannot. When the Apostles first preached this Doctrine to the World, they
were not bound to believe what they affirmed to be a faithful saying till they
gave sufficient Evidence of their Authority from God, by the wonderful
Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But now this faithful saying is contained in the
Books of the New Testament, by which we are to judge of the Truth of all
Christian Doctrines. And when two different Senses of Places of Scripture are
offered, we are to consider, which is most Reasonable to be preferred. And
herein we are allowed to Exercise our Reason as much as we please; and the more
we do so, the sooner we shall come to Satisfaction in this matter.

Now according to Reason we may judge that Sense to be preferred,

(1.) Which is most plain and easy and agreeable to the most received Sense of
Words; not that which is forced and intricate, or which puts improper and
metaphorical Senses upon Words which are commonly taken in other Senses;
especially when it is no Sacramental thing, which in its own Nature is
Figurative.

(2.) That which suits most with the Scope and Design not only of the
particular Places, but of the whole New Testament; which is, to magnify God
and to depress Man; to set forth, the Infinite Love and Condescension of God in
giving his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins; to set up the Worship of one
true God in Opposition to Creatures; to Represent and Declare the mighty
Advantages Mankind receive by the Sufferings of Christ Jesus.

(3.) That which has been generally received in the Christian Church to be the
Sense of those places. For, we are certain, this was always looked on as a
matter of great Concernment to all Christians; and they had as great Capacity
of understanding the Sense of the Apostles; and the Primitive Church had
greater Helps for knowing it than others at so much greater Distance. And
therefore the Sense is not to be taken from modern Inventions, or Criticisms,
or pretenses to Revelation; but that which was at first delivered to the
Christian Church and has been since received and embraced by it in the several
Ages; and has been most strenuously asserted, when it has met with
Opposition, as founded on Scripture and the general Consent of the Christian
Church.

(4.) That which best agrees with the Characters of those Persons from whom we
receive the Christian Faith; and those are Christ Jesus and his holy Apostles.
For, if their Authority be lost, our Religion is gone; and their Authority
depends upon their Sincerity and Faithfulness, and Care to inform the World
aright in matters of so great Importance.

(1.) I begin with the Character which the Apostles give of Christ Jesus
himself; which is, that he was a Person of the greatest Humility and
Condescension, that he did not assume to himself that which he might justly
have done. For let the Words of S. Paul be understood either as to the Nature,
or Dignity of Christ, it is certain that they must imply thus much, that when
Christ Jesus was here on Earth, he was not of a vain assuming humor, that he
did not boast of himself, nor magnify his own Greatness, but was contented to
be looked on as other Men; although he had at that time far greater and Diviner
Excellency in him than the World would believe. Less than this, cannot be made
of those Words of the Apostle, Who being in the form of God, Phil. 2.6, 7.
he thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
Reputation and took upon him the form of a Servant.

Now this being the Character given of him let us consider what he does affirm
concerning himself. For although he was far from drawing the People after him,
by setting forth his own Perfections; yet upon just Occasions, when the Jews
contested with him, he did Assert such things, which must favor of Vanity and
Ostentation, or else must imply that he was the Eternal Son of God. For, all
Mankind are agreed that the highest degree of Ambition lies in Affecting Divine
Honor, or for a mere Man to be thought a God. How severely did God punish
Herod for being pleased with the Peoples folly in crying out, the Voice of God
and not of Man? Act. 12.22.
And therefore he could never have born with such positive Assertions and such
repeated Defenses of his being the Son of God in such a manner as implied his
being so from Eternity. This in his Disputes with the Jews he Affirms several
times, Joh. 6.32, 33.
that he came down from Heaven, not in a Metaphorical but in a proper Sense, as
appears by those words, 38.50.58.62.
What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before? In
another Conference he asserted, Joh. 8.58.
that he was before Abraham. Which the Jews so literally understood, that
without a Metaphor they went about to stone him; v. 59.
little imagining that by Abraham the calling of the Gentiles was to be
understood. But above all, is that Expression which he used to the Jews at
another Conference, I and my Father are one; Joh. 10.30.
which they understood in such a manner that immediately they took up stones to
have stoned him. v. 31.
What means all this Rage of the Jews against him? What? for saying that he had
Unity of Consent with his Father? No certainly. But the Jews misunderstood him.
Let us suppose it; would not our Savior have immediately explained himself to
prevent so dangerous a Misconstruction? But he asked them, what it was they
stoned him for? They answer him directly and plainly, v. 32, 33.
because that thou being a man make thy self God. This was home to the
purpose. And here was the time for him to have denied it, if it had not been
so. But does he deny it? Does he say, it would be Blasphemy in him to own it?
No; but he goes about to defend it; and proves it to be no Blasphemy for him to
say that he was the Son of God; i.e. so as to be God, v. 36.
as the Jews understood it. Can we imagine that a mere Man knowing himself to be
such, should Assume this to himself; and yet God to bear witness to him not
only by Miracles but by a Voice from Heaven, Matt. 3.17.
wherein he was called his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased? Could God
be pleased with a mortal, finite, despicable Creature, as the Jews thought him,
that Assumed to himself to be God and maintained and defended it among his own
People, in a solemn Conference at a very Public Place in one of the Portico's
of the Temple? And this he persisted in to the last. For, when the High Priest
adjured him by the living God to tell, Matt. 26.63.
whether he were the Christ the Son of God, (for he, no doubt, had heard of the
Result of this Conference in Solomon's Porch) Jesus said unto him, v. 64.
Thou have said. S. Mark, Mark 14.62.
more expressly, Jesus said I am. And this was the Blasphemy, for which they put
him to death; v. 64.
as appears by the Evangelists. So that this ought to be a Dispute only between
Jews and Christians; Matt. 26.66.
since it was the very point, for which they condemned him to death. And in his
last most divine Prayer just before his Suffering, he owns the Glory which he
had with the Father before the World had a being. Luke 22.71.
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with the glory which I had with thee, Joh.
17.5.
before the World was. Was this nothing but the Glory which God had designed to
give him? This is so far from being peculiar to Christ, that it is common to
all whom God designs to glorify; and takes away the distinction between the
Decree and the Execution of it.

(2.) As to the Apostles, the Reason we believe their Testimony is, that they
were Men of great Sincerity and Plainness, and of great Zeal for the Honor and
Glory of God. And according to this Character, let us examine what they say
concerning Christ Jesus.

He that was most conversant with him, and beloved by him, and lived to see his
Divinity contested by some, and denied by others, is most ample in setting it
forth in his Admirable, Sublime, and Divine Introduction to his Gospel. Joh.
1.1, 2, etc.
Which all the Wit of Mankind can never make tolerable Sense of, if they deny
Christ's being the Eternal Son of God; and it is he, that has preserved those
Conferences with the Jews, wherein he asserts his own Divinity.

S. Paul was a Stranger to him while he lived; but at the same time when he was
so zealous to persuade the Gentiles to the Worship of God and not of Creatures,
he calls him God, Romans 9.5.
over all blessed for evermore. And when he says, that the Eternal Power and
Godhead are known by the Creation of the World, he attributes the Creation of
all things to Christ, Romans 1.20.
Col. 1.16.
applying to him those words of the Psalmist, Heb. 1.2, 10.
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth and the
Heaven, the Work of thy hands. Which cannot be understood of any Metaphorical
Creation.

And after the strictest Examination of Copies, those will be found the best,
which have that Reading on which our Translation is grounded. And without
Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the Flesh. So that God's being manifest in the Flesh is
made a great Part of the Mystery of Christianity.

But here arises a Difficulty, which deserves to be considered; i. e. If there
were nothing in the Christian Doctrine, but the Way of Saving sinners by the
Doctrine and Example of Christ, there would be little Objection to be made to
it; since the obtaining Eternal Life is certainly the best thing can be
proposed to Mankind, and the Precepts of Christ are Divine and Spiritual, Plain
and Easy to be Understood, and Agreeable to the Reason of Mankind; but many
other things are imposed on Men as necessary to be believed concerning Christ
Jesus, as to his Divinity, Incarnation, and the Hypostatical Union of both
Natures, which perplex and confound our Understandings; and yet these things
are not only delivered as Mysteries of the Christian Faith; but the Belief of
them is required as necessary to the Salvation of Sinners; whereas, if they are
Revealed they are no longer Mysteries; and if they are not Revealed, how come
they to be made Articles of Faith? The Scripture knows of no other Mysteries of
Faith but such as were hidden before the Revelation of them, but since they are
Revealed they are plain and open to all men's Capacities; and therefore it is a
great Injury to the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel to impose such
incomprehensible Mysteries, as Necessary Articles of Faith; and it is Abusing
the Credulity of Mankind, to make such things necessary to be believed, which
are impossible to be understood. But those who have ever loved to Deceive and
Abuse the rest of the World, have been always fond of the Name of Mysteries;
and therefore all such things are to be suspected, which come under that Name.
For, all such Points which will not bear Examination, must be wrapped up and
Reverenced under the Name of Mysteries, that is, of things to be swallowed
without being understood. But the Scripture never calls that a Mystery which is
Incomprehensible in it self, Discourse of the Word Mystery, etc. p. 5.
though never so much revealed.

This is the main force of the Objection, which I shall endeavor to remove by
showing,

(1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we
cannot comprehend.

(2.) That which way soever the Way of Salvation by Christ be explained, there
will be something of that Nature found in it; and that those who reject the
Mysteries of Faith run into greater Difficulties than those who assert them.

(3.) That no more is required as a Necessary Article of Faith than what is
plainly and clearly Revealed.

(1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we
cannot comprehend. It is to very little purpose to enquire whether the Word
Mystery in Scripture be applied to such particular Doctrines, whose Substance
is Revealed, but the manner of them is incomprehensible by us; for why may not
we make use of such a Word whereby to express things truly revealed, but above
our Comprehension? We are certain the Word Mystery is used for things far less
difficult and abstruse; and why may it not then be fitly applied to such
matters, which are founded on Divine Revelation, but yet are too deep for us to
go to the bottom of them? Are there not Mysteries in Arts, Mysteries in Nature,
Mysteries in Providence? And what Absurdity is there to call those Mysteries,
which in some Measure are known, but in much greater unknown to us? Although
therefore in the Language of Scripture it be granted, that the word Mystery is
most frequently applied, to things before hidden, but now revealed, yet there
is no Incongruity in calling that a Mystery, which being revealed, has yet
something in it which our understandings cannot reach to. But it is mere
Cavilling to insist on a Word, if the Thing it self be granted. The chief thing
therefore to be done is, to show that God may require from us the belief of
such things which are incomprehensible by us. For, God may require any thing
from us, which it is reasonable for us to do; if it be then reasonable for us
to give Assent where the manner of what God has revealed is not comprehended,
then God may certainly require it from us. Has not God revealed to us that in
six days he made Heaven and Earth and all that is therein? But is it not
reasonable for us to believe this, unless we are able to comprehend the manner
of God's production of things? Here we have something revealed and that plainly
enough, viz. that God created all things, and yet, here is a Mystery remaining
as to the manner of doing it. Has not God plainly revealed that there shall be
a Resurrection of the dead? and must we think it unreasonable to believe it,
till we are able to comprehend all the changes of the Particles of Matter from
the Creation to the General Resurrection? But it is said that there is no
Contradiction in this, but there is in the Mystery of the Trinity and
Incarnation. Observations on Dr. Wallis his four Letters, p. 4
It is strange Boldness in Men to talk thus of Monstrous Contradictions in
things above their Reach. The Atheists may as well say, Infinite Power is a
Monstrous Contradiction; and God's Immensity and his other unsearchable
Perfections are Monstrous Paradoxes and Contradictions. Will Men never learn to
distinguish between Numbers and the Nature of Things? For three to be one is a
Contradiction in Numbers; but whether an Infinite Nature can communicate it
self to three different Subsistences without such a Division as is among
Created Beings, must not be determined by bare Numbers, but by the Absolute
Perfections of the Divine Nature; which must be owned to be above our
Comprehension.

For let us examine some of those Perfections which are most clearly revealed
and we shall find this true. The Scripture plainly reveals, that God is from
everlasting to everlasting; Psalm. 90.2. Revel. 1.4. c. 11. v. 17.
that he was and is and is to come; but shall we not believe the Truth of this
till we are able to fathom the Abyss of God's Eternity? Bifterfield. c. Grell.
p. 50.
I am apt to think (and I have some thoughtfull Men concurring with me) that
there is no greater Difficulty in the Conception of the Trinity and
Incarnation, Pet^v. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 9.. 15.
than there is of Eternity. Not, but that there is great Reason to believe it;
but from hence it appears that our Reason may oblige us to believe some things
which it is not possible for us to comprehend. We know that either God must
have been for ever, or it is impossible he ever should be; for if he should
come into Being when he was not, he must have some Cause of his Being; and that
which was the first Cause would be God. But, if he was for ever he must be from
himself; and what Notion or Conception can we have in our Minds concerning it?
And yet, Atheistical men can take no Advantage from hence; because their own
most absurd Hypothesis has the very same Difficulty in it. For something must
have been for ever. And it is far more Reasonable to suppose it of an Infinite
and Eternal Mind, which has Wisdom and Power and Goodness to give Being to
other things, than of dull, stupid and senseless Matter, which could never move
it self, nor give Being to any thing besides. Here we have therefore a thing
which must be owned by all; and yet such a thing which can be conceived by
none. Which shows the narrowness and shortness of our Understandings, and how
unfit they are to be the Measures of the Possibilities of things. Vain men
would be wise; they would fain go to the very bottom of things, when alas! they
scarce understand the very Surface of them. They will allow no Mysteries in
Religion; and yet every thing is a Mystery to them. They cry out of Cheats and
Impostures under the Notion of Mysteries; and yet there is not a Spire of Grass
but is a Mystery to them; they will bear with nothing in Religion which they
cannot comprehend, and yet there is scarce any thing in the World which they
can comprehend. But above other things the Divine Perfections, even those which
are most Absolute and Necessary are above their Reach. For let such Men try
their Imaginations about God's Eternity, not merely how he should be from
himself, but how God should coexist with all the Differences of Times and yet
there be no Succession in his own Being. I do not say there is such Difficulty
to conceive a Rock standing still when the Waves run by it; or the Gnomon of a
Dial when the Shadow passes from one Figure to another; because these are gross
unactive things; but the Difficulty is far greater where the Being is Perfect
and always Active. For, where there is Succession there is a passing out of not
being in such a duration into being in it; which is not consistent with the
Absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature. And therefore God must be all at once
what he is, without any Respect to the Difference of Time past, present or to
come. From whence Eternity was defined by Boethius to be a perfect and complete
Possession all at once of everlasting Life. De Consol. l. 3.
But how can we form any Conception in our Minds of that being all at once,
which has such different Acts as must be measured by a long Succession of
Time? As, the Creating and Dissolving the Frame of the World; the Promising and
Sending the Messiah; the Declaring and Executing a general Judgment; how can
these things be consistent with a Permanent Instant, or a Continuance of being
without Succession? For, it is impossible for us in this Case, as to God's
Eternity, to form a clear and distinct Idea in our Mind, of that which both
Reason and Revelation convince us must be. The most we can make of our
Conception of it is, that God has neither Beginning of Being, nor End of Days;
but that he always was and always must be. And this is rather a necessary
Conclusion from Reason and Scripture, than any distinct Notion or Conception of
Eternity in our Minds. From whence it evidently follows, that God may reveal
something to us, which we are bound to believe, and yet after that Revelation
the Manner of it may be incomprehensible by us, and consequently a Mystery to
us.

Has not God Revealed to us in Scripture the Spirituality of his own Nature?
That he is a Spirit and therefore will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth;
For, S. Joh. 4.24.
that is a true Reason why Spiritual Worship should be most agreeable to him.
Now, if we could have a clear, distinct positive Notion in our minds of God's
Spiritual Nature, we might then pretend that there is nothing mysterious in
this, since it is revealed.

But let such men Examine their own thoughts about this matter; and try, whether
the utmost they can attain to, be not something Negative, viz. because great
Absurdities would follow if we attributed any thing Corporeal to God; for, then
he must be compounded of Parts, and so he may be dissolved; then he must be
confined to a certain place, and not everywhere present; he cannot have the
Power of Acting and Self-Determining which a a mere Body has not. For the
clearest Notion we can have of Body, is, that it is made up of some things as
parts of it, which may be separated from each other, and is confined to a
certain place, and has no Power to Move or Act from it self. But some of these
men who cry down Mysteries and magnify Reason, to show how slender their
pretenses to Reason are, have asserted a Corporeal God, with Shape and Figure.
It was indeed, well thought of by those who would make a Man to be God, to
bring God down as near to Man as might be. But how to Reconcile the Notion of a
Body with Infinite Perfections, is a Mystery to me, and far above my
Comprehension. But if it be no Mystery to such Men, they must either deny God's
Infinite Perfections or show how a bodily Shape can be capable of them. But
some men can confound Finite and Infinite, Body and Spirit, God and Man, and
yet are for no Mysteries; whereas these things are farther from our Reach and
Comprehension, than any of those Doctrines which they find fault with. But to
proceed.

If we believe Prophecy, we must believe Gods foreknowledge of future Events:
For, how could they be foretold if he did not foreknow them? And if he did
foreknow those which he did foretell, then it was either because those only
were revealed to him which is inconsistent with the Divine Perfections; or that
he does foreknow all other Events and only thought fitting to Reveal these:
But how can they Solve the Difficulties about Divine Prescience? Is there no
Mystery in this? Nothing above their Comprehension? What then made their great
Master deny it, Socin. Prael. c. 11.
as a thing above his Comprehension? Because nothing can be fore-known but what
has a certain Cause, and therefore, if evil Actions be foretold God must be
the Cause of them, and Men will not be free Agents in them. And yet it is most
certain, that the Sufferings of Christ by the Wickedness of Men, were
foretold. What then? Must we make God the Author of Sin? God forbid. Will the
righteous Judge of all the Earth, punish Mankind for his own Acts, which they
could not avoid? Then we must yield, that there is something in the manner of
the Divine Prescience, which is above our Comprehension. And the most Searching
and Inquisitive Men have been forced to yield it at last, as to the Connection
between the Certainty of Prescience and the Liberty of human Actions. Is it not
then much better to sit down quietly at first, Adoring the Infiniteness of
God's incomprehensible Perfections, than after all the huffings and disputings
of Men to say, Cajetan. in 1. q. 22. art. 4.
In Ignorantia sola quietem invenio, as the great Schoolman did? Surely then,
here is something plainly revealed, and yet the manner of it is still a Mystery
to us.

I shall not now insist on any more of the particular Attributes of God, but
only in general I desire to know, whether they believe them to be finite or
infinite? If to be finite, then they must have certain bounds and limits which
they cannot exceed; and that must either be from the Imperfection of Nature, or
from a Superior Cause, both which are repugnant to the very Being of God. If
they believe them to be Infinite, how can they comprehend them? We are
strangely puzzled in plain, ordinary, finite things; but it is madness to
pretend to comprehend what is Infinite; and yet if the Perfections of God be
not Infinite they cannot belong to Him.

I shall only add, in Consequence to this Assertion, That if nothing is to be
believed, but what may be comprehended, the very Being of God must be rejected
too. And therefore I desire all such who talk so warmly against any Mysteries
in Religion to consider whose Work it is they are doing; even theirs who under
this pretense go about to overthrow all Religion. For, say they, Religion is a
Mystery in its own Nature; not this or that, or the other Religion; but they
are all alike, all is Mystery; and that is but another Name for Fraud and
Imposture. What were the Heathen Mysteries but tricks of Priestcraft; and such
are maintained and kept up in all kinds of Religion. If therefore these men,
who talk against Mysteries understand themselves, they must in pursuance of
their Principles reject one God, as well as three Persons; For, as long as they
believe an Infinite and Incomprehensible Being, it is Nonsense to reject any
other Doctrine, which relates to an Infinite Being, because it is
Incomprehensible.

But yet these very Men, who seem to pursue the Consequence of this Principle
to the utmost, must assert something more incomprehensible than the Being of
God. For, I appeal to any man of common Understanding, whether it be not more
agreeable to Reason to suppose Works of Skill, Beauty and Order to be the
Effects of a Wise and Intelligent Being, than of Blind Chance and Unaccountable
Necessity; whether it be not more agreeable to the Sense of Mankind to suppose
an Infinite and Eternal Mind endued with all possible Perfections to be the
Maker of this visible World; than, that it should start out from it self,
without Contrivance, without Order, without Cause? Certainly such men have no
Reason to find fault with the Mysteries of Religion because they are
incomprehensible, since there is nothing so Absurd and Incomprehensible, as
their darling Hypothesis; And, there is nothing which can make it prevail, but
to suppose Mankind to be as Dull and Insensible as the first Chaos.

Thus I have shown that it is not unreasonable for God to require from us the
Belief of something which we cannot comprehend.

(2.) I now come to consider, whether those who are so afraid of
incomprehensible Mysteries in our Faith, have made it so much more easy in the
Way they have taken. And notwithstanding all the Hectoring talk against
Mysteries and things incomprehensible in Religion, I find more insuperable
Difficulties in point of Reason in their Way than in ours. As for instance,

(1.) It is a more Reasonable thing to suppose something Mysterious in the
Eternal Son of God's being with the Father before the World was made by him;
(as S. John expresses it in the beginning of his Gospel) than in supposing that
although John the Baptist were born six Months before Jesus Christ; that yet
Christ was in Dignity before him. What a wonderful Mystery is this? Can Men
have the Face to cry down Mysteries in deep Speculations, and matters of a high
and abstruse Nature, when they make such Mysteries of plain and easy things?
And suppose the Evangelist in profound Language and lofty Expressions to prove
a thing, which was never disputed, viz. that although Christ Jesus were born
six Months after John, yet he was in Dignity before him? Yet this was a
Mystery, which, as I remember, Faustus Socinus glories in that his Uncle
Laelius obtained by Revelation.

(2.) It is a more Reasonable thing to suppose that a Divine Person should
assume human Nature, and so the Word to be made Flesh; than to say, that an
Attribute of God, his Wisdom or Power is made Flesh, which is a Mystery beyond
all Comprehension; There may be some Difficulties in our Conception of the
other, but this is a thing beyond all Conception or Imagination; For an
Accident to be made a Substance is as absurd, as to imagine it to subsist
without one.

(3.) It is more Reasonable to suppose that the Son of God should come down
from Heaven and take our Nature upon him, than that a man should be rapt up
into Heaven, that it might be said that he came down from thence. For in the
former Supposition we have many other places of Scripture to support it, which
speak of his being with God, and having Glory with him before the World was;
whereas there is nothing for the other, but only that it is necessary to make
some tolerable Sense of those words.

(4.) It is more Reasonable to believe that God should become Man by taking our
Nature upon him, than that Man should become God. For in the former, there is
nothing but the Difficulty of conceiving the Manner of the Union, which we all
grant to be so between Soul and Body; but in the other there is a Repugnancy in
the very Conception of a Created God, of an Eternal Son of Adam, of Omnipotent
Infirmity, of an Infinite finite Being. In the former Case, an Infinite is
united to a Finite; but in the other a Finite becomes Infinite.

(5.) It is more Reasonable to believe that Christ Jesus should suffer as he
did for our sakes than for his own. We are all agreed that the Sufferings of
Christ were far beyond any thing he deserved at God's hands; but what Account
then is to be given of them? We say that he made himself a voluntary Sacrifice
for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind; and so there was a great and noble End
designed, and no Injury done to a willing Mind; and the Scripture as plainly
expresses this, as it can do in Words. But others deny this, and make him to
suffer as one wholly Innocent; for what Cause? To make the most Innocent
Persons as apprehensive of Suffering as the most Guilty; and the most righteous
God to put no difference between them, with Respect to Suffering?

(6.) It is more Reasonable to suppose such a Condescension in the Son of God
to take upon him the Form of a Servant for our Advantage; than that a mere Man
should be Exalted to the Honor and Worship which belongs only to God. For, on
the one side, there is nothing but what is agreeable to the Divine Nature, viz.
Infinite Love and Condescension and Pity to Mankind; on the other, there is the
greatest Design of Self-Exaltation that ever was in Human Nature, viz. for a
mere Man to have the most Essential Attributes and Incommunicable Honor which
belongs to God. And whether of these two is more agreeable to the Spirit and
Design of the New Testament, let any man of understanding judge. For as it is
evident, that the great Intention of it is to magnify the wonderful Love of
God in the sending of his Son; so it is as plain that one great End of the
Christian Doctrine was to take Mankind off from giving Divine Worship to
Creatures; and can we then suppose that at the same time it should set up the
Worship of a mere Man with all the Honor and Adoration which belongs to God*
This is to me an incomprehensible Mystery indeed, and far beyond all that is
implied in the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation. For it Subverts the
very Foundation of the Design of Christianity as to the Reforming Idolatry then
in being; it lays the Foundation for introducing it into the World again; for
since the Distance between God and his Creatures is taken away, in the matter
of Worship, there is nothing left but the Declaration of his Will; which does
not exclude more Mediators of Intercession but upon this Ground, that the
Mediation of Redemption is the Foundation of that of Intercession. And it is
far more easy for us to suppose there may be some things too hard for us to
understand in the Mystery of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, than that at the
same time it should be both a Duty and a Sin to worship any but the true God
with proper Divine Worship. For if it be Idolatry to give it to a Creature,
then it is a great Sin; for so the Scripture still accounts it; but if we are
bound to give it to Christ who is but a Creature, then that which in it self is
a Sin, is now become a Necessary Duty; which overthrows the Natural Differences
of Good and Evil, and makes Idolatry to be a mere Arbitrary thing. And I take
it for granted, that in Matters of Religion, Moral Difficulties are more to be
regarded than Intellectual; because Religion was far more designed for a Rule
of our Actions, than for the Satisfaction of our Curiosity. And upon due
Examination we shall find that there is no such frightfull Appearances of
Difficulties in the Mystery of the Incarnation, as there is in giving Divine
Worship to a Creature.

And it ought to be observed, that those very Places which are supposed to
exclude Christ from being the true God; S. Joh. 17.3.
must, if they have any force, exclude him from Divine Worship. 1 Cor. 6.6.
For they are spoken of God as the Object of our Worship; but if he be not
excluded from Divine Worship, then neither is he from being the true God;
Socin. ad Eutrop. p 96 c. Wick. c. 11. Catech. Racov. p. 65.
which they grant he is by Office but not by Nature.

But a God by Office who is not so by Nature is a new and incomprehensible
Mystery. A Mystery hidden from Ages and Generations as to the Church of God;
but not made known by the Gospel of his Son.

This is such a kind of Mystery as the Heathen Priests had, who had Gods many
and Lords many, as the Apostle says, i. e. many by Office although but one by
Nature. 1 Cor. 8.5.
But if the Christian Religion had owned one God by Nature and only one by
Office, the Heathens had been to blame chiefly in the Number of their Gods by
Office, and not in the divine Worship which they gave to them. But S. Paul
blames the Heathens for doing Service to them which by Nature are no Gods; not
for doing it without Divine Authority, Gal. 4.8.
nor for mistaking the Person who was God by Office, but in giving Divine
Worship to them who by Nature were no Gods; which he would never have said, if
by the Christian Doctrine, Divine Worship were to be given to one who was not
God by Nature.

But these are indeed incomprehensible Mysteries how a Man by Nature can be a
God really and truly by Office; how the Incommunicable Perfections of the
Divine Nature can be communicated to a Creature; how God should give his Glory
to another, and by his own Command require that to be given to a Creature,
which himself had absolutely forbidden to be given to any besides himself. It
is said by a famous Jesuit (I will not say how agreeably to their own Doctrines
and Practices about Divine Worship) that the Command of God cannot make him
worthy of Divine Worship, Smiglec. de Divin. Verb. Incarn. Not. p. 45.
who without such a Command is not worthy of it. And it is very absurd to say,
that he that is unworthy of it without a Command, can become worthy by it; for
it makes God to command Divine Honor to be given to one who cannot deserve it.
Nova Monstra, etc. p. 42.
(For no mere Man can deserve to be made God.) But it is more agreeable to the
Divine Nature and Will not to give his Honor to a Creature.

(3.) But after all the Invectives of these Enemies to Mysteries, we do not
make that which we say is Incomprehensible to be a Necessary Article of Faith
as it is Incomprehensible; but we do assert that what is Incomprehensible as to
the Manner, may be a Necessary Article as far as it is plainly Revealed. As in
the Instances I have already mentioned of the Creation and Resurrection of the
Dead; would they in earnest have Men turn Infidels as to these things till they
are able to comprehend all the difficulties which relate to them? If not, why
should this suggestion be allowed as to the Mysteries which relate to our
Redemption by Jesus Christ? If it be said, the Case is not alike for those are
clearly Revealed and these are not; this brings it to the true and proper Issue
of this matter, and if we do not prove a clear Revelation, we do not assert
their being Necessary Articles of Faith; but my present business was only to
take off this Objection that the Mysteries were Incomprehensible and therefore
not to be received by us.

II. And so I come to the second Way, by which, we are to Examine the several
Senses of Christ Jesus coming to save Sinners: Which of them tends more to the
Benefit and Advantage of Mankind; or which is more worthy of all Acceptance.

And that will appear by considering these things; (1.) Which tends most to the
raising our Esteem and Love of Christ Jesus. (2.) Which tends most to the
begetting in us a greater Hatred of Sin. (3.) Which tends most to the
strengthening our Hope of Salvation by Jesus Christ.


(1.) As to the raising in us a greater Esteem and Love of Christ. We are
certain that the Infinite Love and Condescension of Christ Jesus in under^aking
such a Work as the saving of Sinners makes (...) most worthy of all
Acceptance. Some Men may please themselves in thinking that by taking away all
Mysteries they have made their Faith more easy, but I am certain they have
extremely lessened the Argument for our Love, viz. the Apprehensions of the
wonderful Love and Condescension of Christ in coming into the World to save
Sinners. And yet this is the great Argument of the New Testament to persuade
Mankind to the Love of God and of his Son: Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. This is indeed
a mighty Argument of Love, if by the only begotten Son be meant the Eternal Son
of God, who came down from Heaven, as S. John speaks just before; v. 13.
but if no more be meant but only that God made a mere Man to be his Son, and
after he had preached a while here on Earth and was ill used and crucified by
his own People, he Exalted him to be God and gave him Divine Attributes and
Honors; this were an Argument of great Love to the Person of Christ, but not
to the rest of Mankind. But Gods Love in Scripture is magnified with Respect to
the World in the sending of his Son. In this was manifested, says the Apostle,
the Love of God toward us, 1 John 4.9.
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World that we should live
through him. v. 10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son
to be a Propitiation for our Sins. The great Love we still see is toward us,
i. e. toward Mankind, but according to the other Sense it must have been,
Herein was the Love of God manifested to his Son, that for his Sufferings he
exalted him above all Creatures. He that spared not his own Son, says S. Paul,
Romans 8.32.
but delivered him up for us all. If he were the Eternal Son of God who came to
suffer for us, there is a mighty force and Emphasis in this Expression, and
very apt to raise our Admiration and our Love; But what not sparing his own Son
is there, if nothing were meant but that he designed by Sufferings to Exalt
him? For not Sparing him supposes an Antecedent Relation of the highest
Kindness, but the other is only designing extraordinary Kindness for the sake
of his Sufferings. Therefore, the Argument for the Love of God is taken from
what his Son was, when he delivered him up for us all; he was his own Son; not
by Adoption as others are; S. John calls him, John 1.14. chapter 3. v. 16. Luke
3.22.
his only begotten Son; and God himself, his beloved Son in the Voice from
Heaven; and this before his Sufferings, immediately after his Baptism, when as
yet, there was nothing extraordinary done by him, as to the great Design of his
coming. Which shows, that there was an Antecedent Relation between him and the
Father; and that therein the Love of God and of Christ was manifested, that
being the only begotten Son of the Father, he should take our Nature upon him
and for our sakes do and suffer what he did. This is indeed an Argument great
enough to raise our Admiration, to excite our Devotion, to inflame our
Affections; but how flat and low does it appear, when it comes to no more than
this, that there was a Man, whom, after his Sufferings, God raised from the
dead and made him a God by Office? Does this carry any such Argument in it for
our Esteem and Love and Devotion to him as the other does upon the most serious
Consideration of it?

(2.) Which tends most to beget in us a greater Hatred of Sin. For that is so
contrary to the Way of our Salvation by Jesus Christ, that what tends most to
our Hatred of it, must conduce most to our Happiness; and therefore be most
worthy of all Acceptance. It is agreed on all hands, that Christ did suffer
very much both in his Mind and in his Body. In his Mind, when it is said, that
he was troubled in Spirit; Joh. 13.21. Matt. 26.37, 38.
that he began to be sorrowful and very heavy; and soon after, My Soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. S. Luke says, Mark 14.33, 34.
that he was in an Agony; wherein he not only prayed more earnestly, but his
sweat was as it were great Drops of Blood falling to the Ground. Luke 22.44
What made this Amazement, and dreadful Agony in the mind of the most innocent
Person in the World? Was it merely the Fear of the Pains of Death which he was
to undergo? That is impossible, considering the Assurance which he had of so
glorious a Reward so soon following after; when so many Martyrs endured such
exquisite Torments for his sake without any such Disturbance or Consternation.
But the Apostles give us another Account of it. S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24.
says he, was to bear our Sins in his own body on the tree; that Christ
suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust. 3.18.
S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that God made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Hereby we understand how so innocent a Person came
to suffer; he stood in our Stead; he was made Sin for us; and therefore was to
be treated as a Sinner; and to suffer that on our Account, which he could not
deserve on his own. If he suffered on his own Account, this were the way to
fill our Minds with perplexity concerning the Justice of Providence with
Respect to his dealings with the most innocent and holy Persons in this World;
If he suffered on our Account, then we have the Benefit of his Sufferings, and
therein we see how displeasing to God sin is, when even his own Son suffered so
much by taking the guilt of our Sins upon him. And what can tend more to the
begetting in us a due hatred of sin, than to consider, what Christ himself
suffered on the Account of it? What can make us have more dreadful thoughts of
it, than that the great and merciful God, when he designed to Save sinners,
yet would have his own Son to become a Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind?
And unless we allow this, we must put force upon the plainest Expressions of
Scripture; and make Christ to suffer merely to show God's Power over a most
innocent Person, and his Will and Pleasure to inflict the most severe
Punishment without any Respect to Guilt. And surely such a Notion of God,
cannot be worthy of all Acceptance.

(3.) Which tends most to strengthen our Hope of Salvation by Christ Jesus. If
we believe that he suffered for our Sins, then we have great Reason to hope for
the Forgiveness of them; although they have been many and great, if we
sincerely Repent; because the most prevailing Argument for Despair will be
removed; which is taken from the Justice of God, and his declared Hatred of Sin
and Displeasure against Sinners. If God be so much in earnest displeased with
the Sins of Mankind, and his Justice be concerned in the Punishment of Sinners,
how can they ever hope to escape, unless there be a way for his Displeasure to
be removed, and his Justice to be satisfied? And this the Scripture tells us is
done by Christ, who died that he might be a Sacrifice of Atonement to Reconcile
us to God by his Death; Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.19. Heb. 9.15.
as S. Paul expressly affirms. And by this means, we may have strong Consolation
from the Hopes of Forgiveness of our Sins. Whereas, if this be taken away,
either Men must believe that God was not in earnest displeased with the Sins of
Mankind; which must exceedingly lessen our Esteem of the Holiness and Justice
of God; or if he were so displeased, that he laid aside this Displeasure,
without any Atonement or Sacrifice of Expiation. And so, as many as look on
God's Justice and Holiness as necessary and essential Attributes of God, will
be in danger of sinking into the Depths of Despair, as often as they Reflect
seriously on the Guilt of their Sins. But on the other side, if we believe that
while we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; then
we may have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; and have Reason to
believe that there will be no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus by
a lively Faith and sincere Repentance; then they may with Comfort look up to
God as a Reconciled Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediator; then they may
with inward Satisfaction look beyond the Grave, and steadfastly hope for that
Salvation which Christ purchased on Earth and will at last bestow on all such
as Love and Obey him. To which God of his Infinite Mercy bring us all through
Jesus Christ. For, This is a faithful Saying and worthy of all Acceptance,
that he came into the World to save Sinners.

FINIS.
Lately Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, Febr. 22. 1688/9. upon 1.
Pet. 14. verse 18.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at White Hall, March the 23d.
1689/90. upon Ecclesiastes 11. verse 9.

Christian Magnanimity: A Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church at Worcester,
at the Time of the Assizes, September 21. 1690. upon 2 Timothy 1. verse 7.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, March the 1 st. 1690/1. on
Luke 6. v. 46. All Four by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop
of Worcester.

The Bishop of Worcester's Charge to the Clergy of his Diocese, in his Primary
Visitation, begun at Worcester, September. 11. 1690. Quarto.


