THE Jesuits Loyalty, Manifested in Three several TREATISES Lately written by
them against the OATH of ALLEGIANCE: WITH A PREFACE, SHOWING The Pernicious
Consequence of their Principles as to Civil Government.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, 1677.

TO THE AUTHORS Of the following TREATISES.
Gentlemen,
I Hope you will forgive me the not setting your Names before this Address,
although I am not wholly a stranger to them: for however it be against the
usual custom, yet you have reason to take it more kindly from me. I assure
you, my design is, not to do any injury to your Persons, but only to let you
and the world know, we are not altogether unacquainted with your present
Principles, or Practices. And although, like the Plague, you walk in darkness,
and do mischief; yet I intend only to set such marks and characters upon you,
that when others see them, they may take the wind of you, and avoid the
Infection. It may be, men of your retirement and modesty may be somewhat
surprised, to see themselves in print against their wills: but I hope you will
pardon this presumption, and absolve me as soon as I have confessed my fault.
For it is very agreeable to your Casuistical Theology so to do, without
staying for the performance of Penance; and the contrary Doctrine is accounted
one of the Heresies of Iansenism, which I know you love as little as the Oath
of Allegiance. I find in a Supplication to the late Pope Clement X. Supplicatio
ad Clem. X. per Francisc Simonis Mogunt. A.D. 1675.
That to assert the necessity of Penance before Absolution, is to charge the
Church with a dangerous Error for four or five of the last Ages, and to revive
an Opinion condemned by the Head of the Church. (Which are the very same
Arguments used in the First Treatise, for the Pope's Power of deposing
Princes.) You need not therefore wonder, if it be with me as it is with
thousands of others, that when Absolution may be had at so easy a rate, I
presume to offend. If I may be said to offend, in obtaining that for you, which
you sometimes sadly complain of the want of, viz. a Liberty of printing your
Books. You may by this see how frankly we deal with you, in that we do not
only suffer, but procure the coming abroad of your most mischievous Treatises.

It may be you will be ready to ask me, if I account these Treatises such, why
I venture to publish them. Because some Poisons lose their force when they are
exposed to the open air: And it may do good to others, to let them understand
what Doses you give in private to your Patients. We are to hear of nothing from
you, but Professions of the utmost Loyalty and Obedience to Government; and
that it is nothing but a little squeamish Scrupulosity of Conscience which
makes any of your stomachs check at the Oath of Allegiance: the Ingredients are
a little too gross and fulsome for you to get it down; but if they were neatly
done up in Pills and gilded over, to prevent the nauseousness of them, you
could swallow them all, and they would work kindly with you.

We have been told over and over, that you only stick at some inconvenient
Phrases and Modes of expression; but for what concerned any real Security to
the Government, you would be as forward and ready to give it, as any of His
Majesty's Subjects. If this really were the Case, you deserved both to be
pitied and considered. But we thank you, Gentlemen, for the pains you have
taken in these Treatises, to make us understand that this is not your Case. For
it is easy to discern by them, what lies at the bottom of all, viz. the
unwillingness to renounce the Pope's Power of deposing Princes. Which the
Author of the First Treatise, like an open plain-hearted man, avows and
maintains: and the other two more craftily insinuate. I shall therefore deal
freely with you in this matter, by endeavoring to prove these two things.

1. That if you do not renounce the Pope's Power of Deposing Princes, and
Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, you can give no real Security to the
Government.

2. That if you do renounce it, you have no reason to stick at the Oath of
Allegiance.

1. That if you do not renounce the Pope's Power of Deposing Princes, and
Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, you can give no real Security to the
Government. I shall not insist on any of the beaten Topics to prove this; but
only make use of this Argument, That it is allowed by all Friends to our King
and His Government, that the Commonwealth-Principles are destructive to it, and
that none who do own them can give sufficient Security for their Allegiance. If
I therefore prove, that all the mischievous Consequences of the Republican
Principles do follow upon the owning the Pope's Power of deposing Princes, I
suppose you will grant I sufficiently prove what I intend.

Now the Mischief of the Commonwealth-Principles lay in these things: 1.
Setting up a Court of Judicature over Sovereign Princes; 2. Breaking the Oaths
and Bonds of Allegiance men had entered into; 3. Justifying Rebellion on the
account of Religion. Every one of these I shall prove does naturally follow
from the Pope's Power of deposing Princes.

1. Setting up a Court of Judicature over Sovereign Princes; or, if you please,
a Spiritual High Court of Justice at Rome; where Princes are often condemned
without being heard, because they have no reason to acknowledge the
Jurisdiction of the Court.

It is no satisfaction, in this case, to distinguish of a direct and indirect
Power: For however the Power comes, the effect and consequence of it is the
same: as a man may be as certainly killed by a back blow, as by a thrust or
downright stroke. But the Question is not, how the Pope came by this Power,
which, I easily grant, was indirectly enough; but whether he has any such
Sovereignty over Princes, as to be able by virtue thereof to depose them. And
the Commonwealths-men do herein agree with you. For they do not say, that the
People have a direct Power over their Princes; (which were a contradiction in
it self, for Subjects to command their Sovereigns;) but only, that in case of
breach of Trust, the People have an indirect Power to call their Princes to an
account, and to deprive them of their Authority. But are the
Commonwealth-Principles the less mischievous to Government, because they only
assert an indirect Power in the People? Why then should the same distinction be
of less pernicious consequence in this case? The main thing to be debated is,
that which does immediately concern the just Rights of Sovereignty, Whether
Sovereign Princes have a Supreme and Independent Authority inherent in their
Persons or no: or whether they are so accountable to others, that upon
Maladministration they may be deprived of their Government. This is the first
and chief Point: and the Republicans and Asserters of the Pope's Deposing power
are perfectly agreed in the Affirmative of the latter Question, and only
differ as to the Persons in whom the Power of calling Princes to an Account
does lie; whether it be in the Pope, or the People.

And even as to this, they do not differ so much as men may at first imagine.
For, however the Primitive Christians thought it no Flattery to Princes, to
derive their Power immediately from God, and to make them accountable to him
alone, as being Superior to all below him, (as might be easily proved by
multitudes of Testimonies:) yet, after the Pope's Deposing Power came into
request, the Commonwealth-Principles did so too, and the Power of Princes was
said to be of another Original, and therefore they were accountable to the
People.

Thus Gregory VII. that holy and meek-spirited Pope, not only took upon him to
Depose the Emperor, and absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance; but he
makes the first constitution of Monarchical Government to be a mere Usurpation
upon the just Rights and Liberties of the People. For he says, That Kings and
Princes had their beginning from those, who, Quis nesciat, Reges and Duces ab
iis habuisse principium, qui, Deum ignorantes, superbia, rapinis, perfidia,
homicidiis, postremo universis pene sceleribus, (Mundi Principe, Diabolo viz.
agitante,) super pares, sc. homines, dominari caeca cupiditate, and
intolerabili praesumptione, affectaverunt?

Greg. VII. l. 8. ep. 21.
being ignorant of God, got the power into their hands over their equals,
(through the instigation of the Devil,) and by their pride, rapine,
perfidiousness, murder, ambition, intolerable presumption, and all manner of
wickedness. This excellent account of the Original of Monarchical Government we
have from that famous Leveller Gregory VII. that most Holy and Learned Pope,
who, for his Sanctity and Miracles, was canonized for a Saint; as the Author
of the First Treatise notably observes. Page 4.


Did ever any Remonstrance, Declaration of the Army, or Agreement of the
People, give a worse account of the beginning of Monarchy then this Infallible
Head of the Church does? What follows from hence, but the justifying all
Rebellion against Princes, which, upon these Principles, would be nothing else,
but the People's recovering their just Rights against intolerable Usurpations?
For shame, Gentlemen, never upbraid us more with the pernicious Doctrines of
the late Times as to Civil Government. The very worst of our Fanatics never
talked so reproachfully of it, as your canonized Saint does. Their Principles
and Practices we of the Church of England profess to detest and abhor: but I
do not see how those can do it, who have that Self-denying Saint Gregory VII.
in such mighty veneration. I pray, Gentlemen, tell me what Divine Assistence
this good Pope had, when he gave this admirable Account of the Original of
Civil Government: and whether it be not very possible, upon his Principles, for
men to be Saints and Rebels at the same time.

I have had the curiosity to enquire into the Principles of Civil Government
among the fierce Contenders for the Pope's Deposing power; and I have found
those Hypotheses avowed and maintained, which justify all the Practices of our
late Regicides, who when they wanted materials, and Examples of former Ages,
when they had a mind to seem learned in Rebellion, they found no Smith in
Israel, but went down to the Philistines, to sharpen their fatal Axe. Else, how
came the Book of Succession to the Crown of England to be shred into so many
Speeches, and licensed then by such Authority as they had, to justify their
Proceedings against our late Sovereign of glorious Memory? Wherein the main
design is, to prove, That Commonwealths have sometimes lawfully chastised their
lawful Princes, though never so lawfully descended, or otherwise lawfully put
in possession of their Crowns: and that this has fallen out ever, or for the
most part, commodious to the Weal-publick; and that it may seem that God
approved and prospered the same, by the good Success and Successors that
ensued thereof.

These were the Principles of the most considerable men of that Party here in
England at that time. For it is a great and common mistake in those that think
the Book of Succession to have been written by F. Parsons alone. For he tells
us, that Card. Allen, Sir Francis Inglefield, An Apology in defense of
Ecclesiastical Subordination in England, page 187. col. 2.
and other principal persons of our Nation, are known to have concurred to the
laying together of that Book, as by their own hands is yet extant; and this to
the public benefit of our Catholic Cause. First, that English Catholics
might understand what special and precise Obligation they have to respect
Religion, in admitting any new Prince, above all other Respects humane under
heaven. And this is handled largely, clearly, and with great variety of
learning, reasons, doctrine, and examples, throughout the First Book.

This was purposely intended for the Exclusion of His Majesty's Royal Family,
K. James being then known to be a firm Protestant: and therefore two Breves
were obtained from the Pope to exclude him from the Succession; which were sent
to Garnet, Provincial of the Jesuits. One began, Dilectis Filiis, Principibus,
and Nobilibus Catholicis; the other, Dilecto Filio, Archipresbytero, and
reliquo Clero Anglicano. In both which the Pope exhorts them, not to suffer any
person to succeed in the Crown of England, how near soever in Blood, Rog.
Widdrington Supplicat. ad Paul. 5. p. 133.
unless he would, not barely tolerate the Catholic Faith, but promote it to
the utmost, and swear to maintain it. By virtue of which Apostolical Sentence
Catesby justified himself in the Gun-powder-Treason: For, says he, if it were
lawful to exclude the King from the Succession, it is lawful to cast him out
of Possession; and that is my work, and shall be my care.

Thus we see the Pope's Deposing power was maintained here in England, by such
who saw how necessary it was for their purpose to defend the Power of
Commonwealths over their Princes, either to exclude them from Succession to the
Crown, or to deprive them of the Possession of it.

The same we shall find in France, in the time of the Solemn League and
Covenant there, in the Reigns of Henry III. and IV. For those who were engaged
so deep in Rebellion against their lawful Princes, found it necessary for them
to insist on the Pope's Power to depose, and the People's to deprive their
Sovereigns. Both these are joined together in the Book written about the just
Reasons of casting off Henry III. by one who was then a Doctor of the Sorbon:
De justa Abdicatione Henrici Tertii e Francorum Regno. Lugd. A. 1591. l. 1. a
c. 5. ad c. 9.
wherein the Author begins with the Power of the Church; but he passes from
that, to the Power of the People. He asserts a c. 9. ad c. 25.
the Fundamental and Radical Power to be so in them, that they may call Princes
to account for Treason against the People; which he endeavors at large to
prove by Reason, by Scripture, by Examples of all sorts, foreign and domestic.
And he adds, l. 4. c. 1. ad c. 6.
That in such cases they are not to stand upon the niceties and forms of Law;
but that the necessities of State do supersede all those things. lib. 4. c. 23.
If this man had been of Counsel for the late Regicides, he could not more
effectually have pleaded their Cause.

The next year after the Murder of Henry III. by a Monk, acted and inspired by
these Rebellious Principles, came forth another virulent Book against Henry IV.
under the name of Rossaeus; but written by W. Reynolds, De justa Reip.
Christianae in Reges Impios and Haereticos Authoritate. Antw. A.D. 1592.

Responce de vrays Catholics Francois a l'advertisement des Catholics
Anglois pour l'exclusion du Roy de Navarre de la Couronne de France. A. D. 1588.


a furious English Papist, who, with his Brethren, contributed their utmost
assistence to the Rebellious Leaguers in France; as appears by the Books then
written. This man proceeds upon the same two Fundamental Principles of
Rebellion, the Power of the People, and the Deposing power of the Pope. He
makes all Obedience to Princes to be so far conditional, that if they do not
their duty, their Subjects are free from their obligation to obey them: and
says, Iuramentum populi non eum astringit ad obediendum Regi, nisi Rex
legitime and Christian imperet. Rossae. c. 2. n. 6. p. 68.
that the contrary opinion is against the Law of Nations, and the common Reason
of Mankind. And with great vehemence he pleads for the Supreme Power over
Princes to lie in the Body of the People, c. 2. n. 7. p. 82.
or their Representative: Which he endeavors to prove by the consent of
Nations. And it is observable, that he makes the Right of Succession by
nearness of Blood to be a Calvinistical Doctrine. c. 2. n. 4.
For, he says, Those pretended Catholics who pleaded for the Right of the
King of Navarre, Apology Catholic, etc. part. 2. p. 111, 112. A. 1585.
though of a different Religion, had only the name of Catholics, but were in
truth impudent Calvinists. The good Catholic Doctrine which he asserts, c. 8.
n. 14.
is, that no Obedience is due to an Heretical Prince: Which he goes about to
prove with more then fanatic zeal. But whereas the Fanatics had only the
Power of the People to justify themselves by; c. 8. de Rege Haeretico
excommunicando. Pi^s. de Script. Angl. A. 1594.
he calls in the Deposing Power of the Pope too; upon which he largely insists.
Yet this is the Book so highly commended in France by Clement VIII5 Nuncio, the
Cardinal of Placentia. By which we see, how well the Republican Principles do
agree with the Pope's Deposing power.

Which may be better understood, when we consider, that these were the common
Principles of the whole Party of the League; as might be proved from several
authentic Testimonies, if it were needful. And he is a mighty stranger in
History, that does not know how that Party was encouraged and abetted by the
Court of Rome; and how Sixtus V. made a Fanatic Oration in the Consistory at
Rome, upon the Murder of Henry III. by a Iacobin Friar, De justa Abdicat.
Henr. 3. l. 4. c. 23.
after eight days fasting and prayer to prepare himself for so holy an Act, and
celebrating Mass, and commending himself to the prayers of others; as one
tells us who well knew all the circumstances of that horrid Murder. This
Oration is now stoutly denied by persons of greater zeal then knowledge; but
Will. Warmington, Catholic Apology p. 336.
a Romish Priest, not only assures us that he had seen the Copy printed at
Paris 1589. the year of the King's death, A Moderate Defense of the Oath of
Allegiance* A. 1612. p. 127.
with the Approbation of 3 Doctors of the Faculty of Paris, (whereof one, viz.
Boucher, was the Author of the Book of The just Abdication of Henry III.) but
he says, that being then at Rome, he sent it to William Reynolds, (the Author
of the other Treatise,) who looked on it as an Approbation of the Frier's fact;
and said, he could not have been gratified by any thing more, then by sending
him the Approbation of the Sea Apostolic, because he was then writing his
Book. This Speech was published from the Notes of Card. Allen, as Warmington
says, p. 148.
who was then one of his Chaplains, employed by him in transcribing it; and the
Pope himself acknowledged it to be his own Oration. Let the World then judge,
whether the Regicides Doctrine does not very well agree with the Maxims of the
Roman Court. So true is that saying of Spalatensis, Illud unum sciant Reges,
nihil magis cordi esse Pontifici and ejus asseclis, quam ut Regiam potestatem
vilem reddant, infirmam, imbecillem and abjectam. Ortel. error. Suarez. c. 3.
n. 1.
that the Popes and their followers make it their business to lessen the
Authority of Princes, and to make it as mean and contemptible as they can.

And the countenancing the Proceedings of the Covenanters in France against
Henry IV. by the successive Popes was so open and notorious, that the necessity
of his Affairs drove him to the Change of his Religion: but because he was not
a Persecuter of Heretics to that degree they desired, after several attempts
upon his Person, by men of these Principles, we all know it cost him his Life
at last. And I have it from a very good hand, that Ravilliac himself confessed,
that the Reason which induced him to murder his Sovereign was, because he did
not think him obedient enough to the Pope.

Thus we find the most mischievous Commonwealth-Principles have been very well
entertained at Rome, as long as they are subservient to the Pope's Deposing
power. But if we enquire farther into the Reason of these Pretenses, we shall
find them alike on both sides. The Commonwealths-men, when they are asked, how
the People, having once parted with their Power, come to resume it; they
presently run to an implicit Contract between the Prince and the People, by
virtue whereof the People have a Fundamental Power left in themselves, which
they are not to exercise but upon Princes violation of the Trust committed to
them. The very same Ground is made the Foundation of the Pope's Deposing power,
viz. an implicit Contract that all Princes made when they were Christians, to
submit their Scepters to the Pope's Authority. Which is so implicit, that very
few Princes in the world ever heard of it, unless they were such who took their
Crowns from the Popes hands, after they had resigned them to them; which few
besides our King John were ever so mean-spirited to do.

I read indeed that Albertus, Archduke of Austria, in late times accepted the
Government of Flanders with Isabella Clara Eugenia, Th. Graswinckel, Dissertat.
upon these terms, That if any of their Posterity were declared Heretics by
the Pope, they should lose all their Right to those Provinces; and that the
People should be no longer bound to obey them, but to take the next Successor.
De praelud. justit. and juris, page 257.
This is a very unusual Condition, and I leave it to the Politicians to dispute
how far such a Condition can oblige a Sovereign Prince; since it is declared in
the case of King John, that the Resignation of the Crown to the Pope is a void
Act: and so consequently will the imposing any such Condition be as
inconsistent with the Rights of Sovereignty.

But in the general case of Princes, nothing is pleaded but an implicit
Contract, where by Princes being Excommunicated by the Pope, must lose all that
just Authority over the People which they had before. But who made such
Conditional Settlements of Civil Power upon Princes? Who keeps the ancient
Deeds and Records of them? For all the first Ages of the Christian Church, this
Conditional Power and Obedience was never heard of. Not when Emperors were
open and declared Infidels or Heretics. What reason can be supposed more now,
then was in the times of Constantius and Valens, that were Arian Heretics? Yet
the most learned, zealous and orthodox Bishops of that time never once thought
of their losing their Authority by it: as I could easily prove, if the design
of this Preface would permit me.

Suppose there were an Escheat of Power made, how comes it to fall into the
Pope's hands? If it be by virtue of Excommunication, every Bishop that has
Power to Excommunicate, will likewise have Power to Depose Princes: and what a
fine case are Princes in, if their Power lies at the mercy of every insolent or
peevish Bishop? If it be not by the Power of Excommunication, by what Power is
it that the Prince is Deposed by the Pope? Is it by virtue of Pasce oves, and
Dabo tibi Claves? That Prince's case is extremely to be pitied, that has no
better Security for his Power, then what the Pope has for his from those
places, in the judgment of the most ingenuous persons of the Roman Communion.
And it seems a very hard case, that Princes should lose their unquestionable
Rights for the sake of so doubtful an Authority, at best, as that of the
Popes, especially over Princes, is. And it is so much the more hard with them,
because no private person loses his Estate by Excommunication; and yet Princes
must lose their Kingdoms by it.

This is indeed no Court Holy Water, nor a design to flatter Princes; but such
horrible Injustice and Partiality, that it is a wonder to me, the Princes of
Christendom have not long since combined together to dethrone him, who thinks
it in his power to depose them, thereby making himself the Caliph of the
Western Babylon. And so, no doubt, they would have done, had it not been for
the difference of Interests among Christian Princes, that have made some
therefore side with and uphold the Papal Monarchy, because others opposed it;
and every one hopes, at one time or other, to make use of it for his own turn.
But yet methinks it is their common Interest, to secure themselves against the
prevalency of this dangerous Doctrine on their own Subjects: for all those who
believe it, are but Conditional Subjects to their Princes, for their Obedience
depends on the Will and Pleasure of another, whom they think themselves bound
absolutely to obey, and yet not bound to believe he did right in
Excommunicating and Deposing their Prince. For they dare not say he is
Infallible in his Proceedings against Princes: so that right or wrong they must
obey the Pope, and disobey their lawful Sovereign. If the Pope through Pride,
or Passion, or Interest, or Misinformation, thunder out Excommunication against
a Christian Prince, (all which, they say, he is capable of in pronouncing this
dreadful Sentence,) then all his Subjects are presently free from their
Allegiance, and they may do what they please against him. And what a miserable
condition were Sovereign Princes in, if all Christians were such Fools, to
think themselves bound to obey an unjust Sentence of the Bishop of Rome against
their just and lawful Prince? For upon these Principles, though the Popes be
never so much Parties, they must be the only Judges in this case. And what
redress is to be expected there, where it is so much the Interest of the person
concerned, to have it believed he cannot err?

If these were really the terms of Princes being admitted to Christianity, it
would make the most considerable Argument to persuade them to Infidelity. For
what have they to do to judge them that are without? But Princes have no cause
to be afraid of being Christians for the sake of this Doctrine: For if Christ
and his Apostles were the best Teachers of Christianity, this is certainly no
part of it. For the Religion they taught never meddled with Crowns and
Scepters, but left to Caesar the things that were Caesar's, and never gave the
least intimation to Princes of any Forfeiture of their Authority, if they did
not render to God the things that are God's. The Christian Religion left
mankind under those Forms and Rules of Civil Government in which it found them:
it only requires all men, of what rank or order soever, to be subject to the
Higher Powers, because they are the Ordinance of God; and bids all Christians
pray for them in Authority, that under them they may lead quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty. Thus far the Christian Religion goes in
these matters, and thus the Primitive Christians believed and practiced, when
their Religion was pure, and free from the Corruptions and Usurpations which
the Interests and Passions of men introduced in the following Ages. And how
then come Princes in these latter times to be Christians upon worse and harder
terms then in the best Ages of it?

But how does it appear that Princes do become Christians upon such Conditions,
that if the Pope Excommunicate them, they lose their Crowns? What Office of
Baptism is this contained in? Did their Godfathers and Godmothers undertake
this for them? No, that is not said, but that it is implied in the nature of
the thing. How so? Is it because Dominion is founded in Grace? No, not that
neither. But in my mind there is very little difference, between Dominion being
founded in Grace, and being forfeited for want of it. And so we are come about
to the Fanatic Principles of Government again; which this Deposing power in
the Pope does naturally lead men to.

But this is not all the Mischief of this Doctrine; For,

2. It breaks all Bonds and Oaths of Obedience, how sacred and solemn soever
they have been. That we may the better apprehend the pernicious consequence of
this Doctrine, we are to consider, (1.) That there is a mutual Duty owing
between Princes and Subjects, on the account of the Relation between them, such
as does naturally arise from it, and antecedently to their embracing the
Christian Religion. For without an obligation to Obedience on the Subjects
part, the Authority of a Prince is an insignificant thing, and the public good
of the Society cannot be obtained. (2.) That when Subjects are Absolved from
their Oaths of Allegiance by the Pope, they are thereby declared free from that
natural Duty they were obliged to before. For Allegiance to Princes does not
flow from the Relation between them and the People as Christians, but as
Members of a Civil Society; and therefore the Absolving Subjects from that, is
in plain terms nulling the Obligation to a natural Duty, and taking away the
force of Oaths and Promises. (3.) That all mankind are agreed, that it is a Sin
to break a lawful Oath; and the more solemn and weighty the Oath is, the
greater the Perjury: but in case of the Pope's Absolving Subjects from their
Oath of Allegiance, it must be said, that that which otherwise would be a Sin,
becomes none; and a notorious Crime becomes a Duty, because done by virtue of
the Pope's Authority.

This is that now we are to understand, if possible, what Authority that is in
the Pope which can turn Evil into Good, and Good into Evil; that can make Civil
Obedience to Princes to be a Crime, and Perjury to be none. This is an
admirable Power, and greater then the Schoolmen will allow to God himself,
where there is intrinsic Goodness in the nature of the thing, and inseparable
Evil from the contrary to it. Suarez de Legibus l. 2. c. 15. n. 4.16, etc.
Azor. Instit. Moral. l. 6. c. 1. dub. 4.
For, say they, Divine Providence being supposed, God cannot but forbid those
evil actions which natural reason discovers to be evil: for how can the Hatred
of God, or a wilful Lie, be any other then evil? The same I say of
Disobedience to Parents, and violation of Oaths lawfully made; which are things
evil in their own nature. The Question now is, whether the Pope can do that
which they say God himself cannot, viz. make Perjury not to be a Sin. For an
Oath of Allegiance cannot be denied to be a lawful Oath, and a lawful Oath
lays an obligation on Conscience to the performance of it, and gives another a
just right to challenge that Allegiance as a Duty by virtue of his Oath; and
wherever there is a necessary Duty, Aqu. 1.2. q. 100. art. 8.
God himself, says Aquinas, cannot dispense: for then* he would act contrary
to the Rule of Eternal Righteousness; which he can never do.

It is true, they grant, that God, in regard of his Supreme Dominion, can alter
the matter or circumstances of things; as in Abraham's sacrificing his Son upon
God's particular Command, which in those circumstances was not Murder: but
this, they say well, is no Dispensation with the Law, nor any act of
Jurisdiction as a Legislator; but only an act of Supreme Power. But our
Question is only, about Dispensing with the force and obligation of a Law of
Nature, such as keeping our Oaths undoubtedly is. And since God himself is not
allowed the Power of dispensing, it seems very strange how the Pope should come
by it; unless it were out of a desire to exalt himself above all that is called
God. 2.2. q. 89. art. 9.
Thomas Aquinas says, that there can be no Dispensation to make a man do any
thing against his Oath; for, says he, keeping an Oath is an indispensable
divine precept: but all the force of a Dispensation lies in altering the matter
of an Oath, which being variable may be done.

To clear this, in every Oath are three things to be considered: (1.) the
Obligation upon the person to perform what he swears to; (2.) the Right which
the person has to challenge that performance to whom the Oath is made; (3.)
the interest which God has, as Supreme Judge, to see to the performance, and
to punish the breakers of it. Now which of these is it the Pope's Dispensation
in a promissory Oath does fall upon? Surely the Pope does not challenge to
himself God's Supreme Power of punishing or not punishing Offenders; so that if
men do break their Oaths, if they have the Pope's Dispensation, they do not
fear the punishment of Perjured persons. I am willing to believe this is not
their meaning. It must therefore be one of the former. But then how comes the
Pope to have power to give away another man's natural Right? A man swears
Allegiance to his Prince, by virtue of which Oath the Prince challenges his
Allegiance as a sworn Duty: and so it is according to all Rules of common
Reason and Justice. The Pope he dispenses with this Oath, and absolveth the
person from this Allegiance; i. e. the Pope gives away the Prince's Right
whether he will or no. Is not this great Justice, and infinitely becoming God's
Vicar upon earth? But how came the Pope by that Right of the Prince which he
gives away? The Right was a just and natural Right, belonging to him on a mere
civil account: what Authority then has the Pope to dispose of it? May he not
as well give away all the just Rights of men to their Estates, as those of
Princes to their Crowns?

The very plain Truth is, the Defenders of the Pope's indirect Power are forced
to shuffle and cut, and make unintelligible distinctions, and in effect to talk
nonsense about this matter. The only men that speak sense are those who
assert the Pope in plain Terms to have a direct Temporal Monarchy, and that all
Kings are their Subjects and Vasalls; and therefore they may dispose of their
Crowns, and do what they please with them. We know what these men would have;
and if Princes be tame enough to submit to this Power, they own the Pope as
their true Sovereign Lord, and must rule, or not rule, at his Pleasure. But it
is impossible for those who contend only for Spiritual Jurisdiction in the
Pope, to defend his Power of Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance to
Princes, since this Power of altering the matter is not an act of Jurisdiction,
but of mere Power, as was said before as to God himself in the case of Abraham.
Therefore those who contend only for the Pope's dispensing with Oaths of
Allegiance on the account of his Spiritual Jurisdiction, can never justify the
giving away the natural Rights of Princes; for that is an act of Power, and not
of Jurisdiction. Cajetan. in 2.2. q. 89. art. 9.
And Cajetan well observes, that the relaxation of an Oath by altering the
matter, is an act of direct Power, because the thing it self is immediately
under the power of the person; as in a Father over his Son, or a Lord over his
Vassal: and therefore the Dispensing with the Oath of Allegiance cannot be by
the alteration of the matter, unless a direct Power over Princes be asserted.

Cajetan lays down a good Rule about Dispensing with Oaths, that in them we
ought to see that no prejudice be done to the person to whom and for whose sake
they are made: and therefore, he says, In juramentis oportet respicere ad
praejudicium hominis cui factum est, and in cujus favorem factum est. Id. ib.
the Pope himself has not that Power over Oaths, which he has over Vows. And
yet Maldonat says, that neither the Pope, nor the whole Church, can dispense
in a solemn Vow: Maldonat. Summul. qu. 12. art. 7. q. 15. art. 21.
and that a Dispensation in such cases is no less then an Abrogation of the Law
of God and Nature. Dominicus a Soto says, that although the Pope may dispense
in a Vow, Enimvero quamvis Papa dispensare valeat in Voto, quod est majus, non
tamen in Iuramento, quod est minus. Haud enim relaxare potest Iuramentum quod
homo homini pr^stitit, Id solvendi quod ei debeat. Soto De iustit. and jure l.
8. q. 1. art. 9.
yet he cannot in an Oath. For, says he, the Pope cannot relax an Oath which
one man has made to another of paying to him what he owes him* which arises
from the nature of the Contract which is confirmed by an Oath. The Pope having
not the Power to take away from another man that which does belong to him*
cannot do him so much injury as to relax the Oath which is made to him. And in
the loosing of Oaths, care ought to be taken that there be no injury to a third
person. Afterward he puts this case, whether if the Pope dispenses with an
Oath without just cause, that Dispensation will free a man from Perjury. Which
he denies, for this Reason, because a Dispensation cannot hold in the Law of
God or Nature. Therefore since it is a Law of God, that a man should perform
what he swears, although that Bond does arise from the will and consent of the
party, yet it cannot be dissolved without sufficient Reason. But what reason
can be sufficient, he determines not. However, we have gained thus much, that
the Pope cannot take away the Right of a third person; which he must do, if he
can Absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to their Prince, which is as much
due to him, as a sum of money is to a Creditor.

I grant, after all this, that Cajetan and Soto both yield to the common
Doctrine of their Church, about Dispensing with Oaths made to Excommunicated
persons, by way of punishment to them: but they do not answer their own
Arguments. And Cajetan says, that caution is to be used, lest prejudice be
done to another by it: i. e. they durst not oppose the common Opinion, although
they saw sufficient Reason against it.

Cardinal Tolet seems to speak home to our case, when he says, that an Oath
made to the benefit of a third person cannot be dispensed with, Quando autem
est juramentum in alicujus tertii utilitatem* non potest absque voluntate
tertii etiam a Papa dispensari; sicut nec Papa potest auferre rem alterius.
Tolet. Summa Casuum l. 41 c. 23. n. 1.
no not by the Pope himself, without the consent of that person; as the Pope
cannot take away another man's goods. One would have thought this had been as
full to our purpose as possible; and so it is as to the Reason of the thing.
But he brings in after it a scurvy exception of the case of Excommunicated
persons, without offering the least show of Reason why the common Rules of
Justice and Honesty ought not to be observed toward persons censured by the
Church: Nor does he attempt to show, how the Pope comes by that Power of
Dispensing with Oaths in that case, which he freely declares he has not in any
other.

Clavis Regia Cas. Consc. l. 6. c. 11. n. 11.
Gregory Sayr thinks he has nicked the matter, when with wonderful subtilty
he distinguishes between the free act of the will in obliging it self by an
Oath, and the Obligation following upon it, to perform what is sworn. Now,
says he, the Pope in Dispensing does not take away the second, viz. the
Obligation to perform the Oath, the Bond remaining, for that were to go against
the Law of God and Nature; but because every Oath does suppose a Consent of the
will, the Dispensation falls upon that, and takes away the force of the Oath
from it.

If this Subtilty will hold, for all that I can see, the Pope may dispense with
all the Oaths in the world, and justify himself upon this Distinction: for,
Azor. Instit. Mor. l. 6. c. 1. Quarto quaeritur.
as Azorius well observes, if the Reason of Dispensing be drawn from the
Consent of the will, which is said to be subject to the Pope, he may at his
pleasure dispense with any Oath whatsoever. Sayr takes notice of Azorius his
dissatisfaction at this Answer, but he tells him to his teeth, that he could
bring no better; yea, that he could find out no Answer at all. Azorius indeed
acknowledges the great difficulty of explaining this Dispensing power of the
Pope as to Oaths; and concludes at last, that the Bond of an Oath cannot be
loosed by the Pope, but for some Reason drawn from the Law of Nature; which is
in effect to deny his Authority: for if there be a Reason from the Law of
Nature against the obligation of an Oath, the Bond is loosed of it self.

Others therefore go the plainest way to work, who say, that all Oaths have
that tacit Condition in them, If the Pope please. But Sayr thinks this a little
too broad; because then it follows evidently, that the Pope may dispense as he
pleases without cause; which, he says, is false.

Others again have found out a notable device of distinguishing between the
Obligation of Justice* and of Religion, Widdrington Disp. Theolog. c. 6. sect.
3. n. 1, 2, 3.
in an Oath; and say, that the Pope can take away the Religious Obligation of
an Oath, though not that of Justice. This Widdrington says was the Opinion of
several grave and learned Catholics in England; and therefore they said they
could not renounce the Pope's Power of absolving persons from the Oath of
Allegiance. But he well shows this to be a vain and impertinent Distinction,
because the intention of the Oath of Allegiance is, to secure the Obligation of
Justice; and the intention of the Pope in Absolving from that Oath is, to take
it away: as he proves from the famous Canons, Nos Sanctorum, and Iuratos. So
that this Subtilty helps not the matter at all.

Theolog. Moral. l. 4. tr. 3. c. 11. n. 5.
Paul Layman confesses, that a promissory Oath made to a man cannot ordinarily
be relaxed without the consent of the person to whom it is made: because by
such an Oath a man, to whom it is made, does acquire as just a right to the
performance, as he has to any of his Goods, of which he cannot be deprived.
But from this plain and just Rule he excepts, as the rest do, the public Good
of the Church; as though Evil might be done for the Good of the Church,
although not for the Good of any private person: whereas the Church's Honor
ought more to be preserved by the ways of Justice and Honesty.

Woe be to them that make good evil, and evil good, when it serves their turn;
for this is plainly setting up a particular Interest under the name of the Good
of the Church, and violating the Laws of Righteousness to advance it. If men
break through Oaths, and the most solemn Engagements and Promises, and regard
no Bonds of Justice and Honesty, to compass their ends, let them call them by
what specious names they please, the Good Old Cause, or the Good of the Church,
(it matters not which,) there can be no greater sign of Hypocrisy and real
Wickedness then this. For the main part of true Religion does not lie in
Canting phrases, or Mystical notions, neither in Specious shows of Devotion,
nor in Zeal for the true Church: but in Faith, as it implies the performance of
our Promises, as well as belief of the Christian Doctrine; and in Obedience, or
a careful observance of the Laws of Christ, among which, Obedience to the King
as Supreme is one: Which they can never pretend to be an inviolable Duty, who
make it in the power of another person to Absolve them from the most solemn
Oaths of Allegiance; and consequently suppose, that to keep their Oaths in such
case, would be a Sin, and to violate them may become a Duty: which is in effect
to overturn the natural differences of Good and Evil, to set up a Controlling
Sovereign Power above that of their Prince, and to lay a perpetual Foundation
for Faction and Rebellion; which nothing can keep men from, if Conscience and
their solemn Oaths cannot.

3. Therefore the third Mischief common to this Deposing power of the Pope and
Commonwealth-Principles, is, the Justifying Rebellion on the account of
Religion. This is done to purpose in Boucher and Reynolds, the fierce Disputers
for the Pope's and the People's Power.

Boucher says, De justa Abdicat. Henr. 3. l. 1. c. 3. n. 4.
that it is not only lawful to resist Authority on the account of Religion;
but that it is folly and impiety not to do it, when there is any probability
of success. And the Martyrs were only to be commended for Suffering, because
they wanted Power to resist. Most Catholic and Primitive Doctrine! And that
the Life of a Wicked Prince ought not to be valued at that rate as the Service
of God ought to be: That when Christ paid tribute to Caesar, he did it as a
private man, and not meddling with the Rights of the People: That, if the
People had not exercised their Power over the lives of bad Princes, there had
been no Religion left in many Countries. c. 18. p. 33, 34.
And he finds great fault with the Catholics in England, that they suffered
Heretical Princes to live; c. 25. p. 51, 52, etc.
and says, that they deserved to endure the miseries they did undergo, because
of it: that there is no juster cause of War, then Religion is: that the Prince
and People make a solemn League and Covenant together to serve God, and if the
Prince fail of his part, the People ought to compel him to it. And he accounts
this a sufficient Answer to all Objections out of Scripture, If he will not
hear the Church, (how much more if he persecutes it?) let him be to thee as a
Heathen or a Publican. And he brings all the Examples he could think of to
justify Rebellion on the account of Religion. c. 26, 27, 28.


Ross. De justa Reip. Christian. Author. in Reges impios and haeret. c. 9. n. 1.
Rossaeus proves, that Heretics, being Excommunicated, lose all Right and
Authority of Government; and therefore it is lawful for their Subjects to rise
up against them; and that no War is more just or holy then this. Which he
endeavors at large to defend, and to answer all Objections against it. And the
contrary Opinion, he says, was first broached by the Calvinists in France,
page 604, 608.
when they had the expectation of the Succession of Henry IV. which Doctrine he
calls Punick Divinity, n. 7. p. 616.
and Atheism, and the New Gospel. The truth is, he does sufficiently prove the
Lawfulness of resisting Princes on the account of Religion to have obtained
together with the Pope's Power of deposing Princes.

And there can be no other way to justify the Wars and Rebellions against
Henry IV. of Germany, and France, and other Princes, after their
Excommunications by the Pope, but by stiffly maintaining this Principle, of the
Lawfulness of resisting Authority on the account of Religion. And therefore
this cannot be looked on as the Opinion of a few factious spirits, but as the
just consequence of the other Opinion. For the Pope's Deposing power would
signify very little, unless the People were to follow home the blow, and to
make the Pope's Thunder effectual, by actual Rebellion. And the Popes
understand this so well, that they seldom denounce their Sentence of
Excommunication against Princes, but when all things are in readiness to pursue
the design; as might be made appear by a particular History of the several
Excommunications of Princes, from the Emperor Henry IV. to our own times. If
they do forbear doing the same things in our Age, we are not to impute it to
any alteration of their minds, or greater Kindness to Princes then formerly,
but only to the not finding a fit opportunity, or a Party strong and great
enough to compass their ends. For they have learnt by experience, that it is
only loss of Powder and Ammunition, to give fire at too great a distance; and
that the noise only awakens others to look to themselves: but when they meet
with a People ready prepared for so good a Work, as the Nuntio in Ireland did,
then they will set up again for this Good Old Cause of Rebellion on the account
of Religion.

And it is observable, that Cardinal Bellarmin, among other notable Reasons to
prove the Pope's Deposing power, De Romans Pontif. l. 5. c. 7. tertia Ratio.
brings this for one; Because it is not lawful for Christians to suffer an
Heretical Prince, if he seeks to draw his Subjects to his Belief. And what
Prince that believes his own Religion does it not? And what then is this, but
to raise Rebellion against a Prince, whenever he and they happen to be of
different Religions?

But that which I bring this for, is to show, that the Pope's Deposing power
does carry along with it that mischievous Principle to Government, of the
Lawfulness of resisting Authority on the account of Religion. And from this
Discourse I infer, that there can be no real Security given to the Government,
without renouncing this Deposing power in the Pope.

But that which is the present pretense among them, is, that it is not this
they stick at; but the quarrel they have at the Oath of Allegiance, as it is
now framed. I shall therefore proceed to the Second thing, viz.

II. That if they do renounce the Pope's Deposing power in good earnest, they
have no reason to refuse the Oath of Allegiance. And now, Gentlemen, I must
again make my Address to you, with great thanks for the satisfaction you have
given me in this particular. I have seriously read and considered your
Treatises; and I find by them all, that if you durst heartily renounce this
Doctrine, all the other parts of the Oath might go down well enough. The
Author of the First Treatise is so ingenuous, First Treatise, p. 1.
as to make the following Proposition the whole Foundation of his Discourse;
viz. That it is not lawful to take any Oath or Protestation renouncing the
Pope's Power, in any case whatsoever to Depose a Christian Prince, or Absolve
his Subjects from their Allegiance. And in my mind he gives a very substantial
Reason for it, Because the holding that he has no such Power is Erroneous in
Faith, Temerarious, and Impious. What would a man wish for more against any
Doctrine? Whatever P. W. and his Brethren think of this Deposing power, this
Piece does charge them home, and tells them their own; and that they are so far
from being sound Catholics that deny it, that, in one word, they are
Heretics, damnable Henrician Heretics. What? page 5.
would they be thought Catholics that charge the Church, for so many Ages*
page 2.
with holding a damnable Error, and practicing mortal Sin? as their Church
has done, if the Pope has no Deposing power. For this honest Gentleman
confesses, That it is a Doctrine enormously injurious to the Rights of
Princes, and the cause of much deadly Feud betwixt the Church and Secular
States, of many bloody Wars of Princes one against another, and wicked
Rebellions of Subjects against their Princes. O the irresistible power of
Truth! How vain is it for men to go about to Masquerade the Sun! His light will
break through, and discover all. It is very true, this has been the effect of
this blessed Doctrine in the Christian world; Seditions, Wars, Bloodshed,
Rebellions, what not?

But how do you prove this to have been the Doctrine of the Church of Rome?
How? say you; by all the ways we can prove any Doctrine Catholic Popes have
taught it from Scripture and Tradition, and condemned the contrary as Erroneous
in faith, Pernicious to salvation, wicked Folly and Madness, and inflicted
Censures on them that held it. Have they so in good sooth? Nay then, it must be
as good Catholic Doctrine as Transubstantiation its own self; if it has been
declared in Councils, and received by the Church. Yes, say you, that I prove by
the very same Popes, page 3, 4, 5.
the same Councils, the same Church, and in the same manner that
Transubstantiation was. And for my part I think you have done it, and I thank
you for it. I am very well satisfied with your Proofs, they are very solid, and
much to the purpose. But above all I commend your Conclusion, page 13.
That if this Doctrine be an Error, the Church of Rome for several Ages was a
wicked and blind Church, and a Synagogue of Satan: and if it were no Error,
they that now call it an Error are wicked Catholics, and in damnable Error.
Nor though all the Doctors of Sorbon, all the Parliaments and Universities of
France, page 14.
all the Friars or Blackloists in England or Ireland, all the Libertines,
Politicians and Atheists in the world, should declare for it, could it ever be
an Authority to make it a probable Opinion. Bravely spoken, and like a true
Disciple of Hildebrand!

Hear this, O ye Writers of Controversial Letters, and beware how ye fall into
these men's hands. You may cry out upon these Opinions as long as you please,
and make us believe your Church is not concerned in them: but if this Good man
may be credited, you can never find Authority enough to make your Opinion so
much as Probable. A very hard case for Princes, when it will not be allowed so
much as probable, that Princes should keep their Crowns on their Heads, if the
Pope thinks fit to take them away; or that Subjects should still owe Allegiance
to Princes, when the Pope absolves them from it! Very hard, indeed, in such an
Age of Probable Doctrines, when so small Authority goes to make an Opinion
Probable, that this against the Pope's Deposing power should not come within
the large sphere of Probability.

Hear this, Cathol. Apology, page 121, 122.
ye Writers of Apologies for Papists Loyalty, who would persuade us, silly
people of the Church of England, that this Doctrine of the Pope's Power of
deposing Princes is only the Opinion of some Doctors, and not the Doctrine of
your Church; when this Learned Author proves, you have as much Reason and
Authority to believe it, as that Transubstantiation is the Doctrine of it; and
Father Caron's 250 Authors cannot make the contrary Opinion so much as
Probable; Page 13.
this having been for some Ages (one at least) the common Belief, Sense and
Doctrine of the Church, as our Author says. From whence it follows, it must
have been always so; or else Oral Tradition and Infallibility are both gone.
For how could that be the Doctrine of one Age which was not of the precedent?
What? did Fathers conspire to deceive their Children then? Is it possible to
suppose such an alteration to happen in the Doctrine of the Church, and yet the
Church declare to adhere to Tradition at that time? If this be possible in this
case, then, for all that we know, that great Bugbear of Transubstantiation
might steal in in the dark too. And so farewell Oral Tradition. But how can
Infallibility stand after it, when the Church was so enormously deceived for so
long together, as this Author proves it must have been, if this Doctrine be
false? If the Blackloists in England and Irish Remonstrants do not all vanish
at the appearance of this Treatise, and yield themselves Captives to this smart
and pithy Author, I expect to see some of them concerned for their own
Vindication, so far, as to answer this short Treatise: but I beseech them then,
to show us the difference between the coming in of Transubstantiation and this
Deposing doctrine, since the same Popes, the same Councils, and the same
Approbation of the Church, are produced for both.

This is all I have to say of this First Treatise, whose Author I do highly
commend for his plain dealing; for he speaks out what he really thinks and
believes of this Doctrine of the Pope's Power of deposing Princes. But I am no
sooner entered upon the Second Treatise, Treat. 2. p. 2.
but I fansy my self in Fairy-land, where I meet with nothing but fantastic
Shows and Apparitions: when I go about to fasten upon any thing, it is
immediately gone; the little Fairy leaps up and down, and holds to nothing,
intending only to scare and affright his party from the Oath of Allegiance;
and when he has done this, he disappears.

The Substance of the Oath (says the Author of the Questions, whom he
pretends to answer,) is, the Denying and Abjuring the Pope's Power of deposing
Princes. This is plain, and home to the purpose; what say you to this? Is this
Doctrine true, or false? may it be renounced or not? Hold, say you; For my
part, it is as far from my thoughts, as foreign to my present purpose, to speak
any thing in favor of this Deposing power. Is it indeed foreign to your
purpose, to speak to the Substance of the Oath? No, say you, the Substance of
the Oath is contained in this Question, Whether a Catholic may deny by Oath,
Page 3.
and universally abjure, the Pope's Power to depose Princes: not, Whether he
may deny it, but, Whether he may deny it by Oath. And the great Argument to
prove the Negative is, that it has been a Question debated for 500 years, Page
4.
and no clear and authoritative Decision of the Point yet appears, to which
both sides think themselves obliged to stand and acquiesce.

Where are we now? Methinks we are sailing to find O Brasil. We thought our
selves as sure as if we had got the Point, in the First Treatise, a good firm,
solid, substantial Point of Faith; and now, all of a sudden, it is vanished
into clouds and vapors, and armies fighting in the air against each other. Is
it possible for the Sense, Belief and Doctrine of the Church, as the First
Author assures us it was, to become such a Moot-point, always disputed, never
decided? First Treatise, p. 13.
This has been the common received Doctrine of all School-Divines, Casuists,
Canonists, from first to last, (before Calvin 's time,) in all the several
Nations of Christendom, yea even in France it self; and neither Barclay, nor
Widdrington, nor Caron, nor any other Champion for the contrary Tenet, has
been able yet to produce so much as one Catholic Author, (before Calvin 's
time,) that denied this Power to the Pope absolutely, or in any case
whatsoever. Thus the Author of the First Treatise. Second Treat. p. 4*
Since it is but more undeniably evident then all good men have cause to wish,
and that Experience, the easiest and clearest of Arguments, puts it too sadly
beyond dispute, that this grand Controversy, Whether the Pope has any Power
or Authority to depose Princes, for any cause, pretense or exigency whatsoever,
has been for diverse Ages, from time to time, disputed in the Schools by
Speculative men, and is to this day, among Catholic Controvertists, and
Catholic Princes too; as the Author of the Second Treatise confesses.

What shall I say to you, Gentlemen, when you thus flatly contradict each
other? How come you to be so little agreed upon your Premises, when you join
in the same Conclusion? There is some mystery in this, which we are not to
understand. This I suppose it is. Among those who may be trusted, this is an
Article of faith, and for such the First Treatise was written. But for the sake
of such who would see too far into these things, we must not own it, for fear
we lose some Residences, and Patrons of the Nobility and Gentry: therefore
among these we must not own it as an Article of faith, but as a Controverted
Point. How then, say some of the Fathers of the Society, shall we keep them
from taking the Oath of Allegiance? and if we do suffer them to do that,
farewell to our Interest in England; P. W. and the Blackloists will prevail.
Come, come, says Father W. never fear, I have a Topic will scare them all,
though we own it as a Controverted Point. What is that? say they with great
Joy. Let me alone, says he to them, I will prove them all guilty of Perjury,
if they take the Oath, because it is a Controverted Point. Excellent! they all
cry, this will do our business in spite of them.

Let us now come near, and handle this mighty Argument, that we may discern
whether it be a mere Spectre, Page 5.
or has any flesh and bones. The Oath of Allegiance is a mixed Oath, partly
assertory, and partly promissory. In an Assertory Oath it is essentially
requisite, that what we do swear be undoubtedly and unquestionably true. Very
well; but suppose a person does in his conscience believe that the Pope cannot
Depose Princes, nor Absolve Subjects from their Allegiance; may not such a man
swear it without Perjury? No, Page 6.
says our good Father; A man may swear against his Conscience, not only when
he doubts, but when he has just cause to doubt. How is that? good Sir; when
other men see that he has cause to doubt, or when himself sees it? If he sees
himself that he has cause to doubt, he does not believe in his Conscience that
to be so as he swears it is; for how can a man firmly believe that, which he
sees cause to doubt? If he sees none himself, what is that to his Conscience,
if others think they do; if he does not think his Conscience bound to be swayed
by their Authority?

But the Mystery of this Iesuitism is, that no Gentlemen ought to have
judgments of their own in these matters, but to be swayed by the extrinsick
Authority of their Teachers. And therefore if they say, they have cause to
doubt, they must doubt, whether they do or no. If Gentlemen of freer
understandings and education allow themselves the liberty to enquire into these
matters, they presently see through all this Tiffany Sophistry, and find the
thing still carried on is mere blind Obedience; although in following the
conduct of such self-interested Leaders they run themselves into continual
Difficulties. If a man be satisfied in his Conscience, the Pope has no
Deposing power, according to the Rules of their own best Casuists, he may
lawfully abjure it.

The truth required in an Oath, says Cardinal Tolet, Summa Cas. lib. 4. c. 21.
n. 3.
is, that by which a man speaks that which he thinks in his heart; and to swear
falsely is, to swear otherwise then one thinks. And to swear otherwise then a
thing really is, provided he think it to be so, is neither mortal nor venial
sin; but (1.) in case a man has not used diligence to enquire; and to this he
does not require the utmost, but only some and convenient diligence: (2.) if
he be doubtful in his mind when he swears, and yet swears it as certain: (3.)
when he is ready to swear, although he knew the thing to be otherwise.

Suarez De virtut. Relig. To. 2. tract. 4. l. 1. c. 9. n. 4.
Suarez says, that in an Assertory Oath, the Truth confirmed by it lies in the
conformity of the Assertion to the mind of the Speaker, rather then to the
Thing it self; so that if a man thinks it false which he swears, although it be
really true, he is guilty of Perjury: and so on the contrary, if a man swears a
thing really false, which he invincibly thinks to be true, he is not guilty of
Perjury, but swears a lawful Oath, according to the doctrine of S. Augustine
and S. Thomas. By invincibly, Suarez means no more then Tolet does by thinking
so after convenient diligence. l. 3. c. 5. n. 3.
For Suarez lays down this Rule afterward, that, When a man swears what is
really false, but he thinks it true, if his thinking be joined with sufficient
care, and a probable opinion of the truth, (mark that) he is free from the
guilt of Perjury. This he says is the common and express Doctrine, and built
upon this ground, Because the Truth and Falsehood of an Oath does not so much
relate to the Matter sworn, as to the Mind and Conscience of him that swears.

Soto De justit. and jure l. 8. quaest. 2. art. 3. concl. 6.
Dominicus Soto determines this case very plainly: If a man swears that to be
true, which he thinks so, after due enquiry, though it be false, he does not
sin at all. And the measure of diligence he proportions to the nature and
quality of the Thing, which is therefore left to prudence and discretion.

Iacobus de Graffiis has this Assertion; Jacob. de Graffiis decis. aure. l. 2.
c. 16. n. 8.
He that swears a thing to be true, which he thinks so, although it be really
false, sins not, unless he neglected to use that diligence which he was bound
to use: and according to the greatness of that neglect, the measure of his sin
is to be taken.

Greg. Sayr says, Sayr Clav. Reg. lib. 5. c. 4. n. 2.
that to a lawful Assertory Oath no more is required, then the agreement of
what a man says with the inward sense of his mind, according to the reasonable
judgment a man passes upon what he swears. Greg. de Valentia Tom. 3. Diss. 6.
quaest. 7. punct. 3. Vasquez 1. 2. Disp. 127. c. 3. Layman Theol. Mor. l. 4.
tr. 3. c. 14. n. 4, 5.
Which words are taken out of Gregory de Valentia.

Qui non videt, vel dubitat esse falsum quod jurat, perjurus non est, says
Vasquez; He that does not see, or doubt that to be false which he swears, is
not guilty of Perjury. Which words are quoted and approved by Layman; because
all Perjury must have its foundation in a Lie. And, says he, he that swears in
an Assertory Oath, does not affirm the certainty of his own knowledge, but
directly the very thing which he swears. Nay he farther says, that where the
Matter sworn is capable of no more then Probability, a man may lawfully swear
the truth according to that degree of certainty which the thing will bear;
although it should happen to be otherwise then he thinks.

So that, according to the common and received Doctrine of their own Casuists,
the foundation of this Second Treatise is false, (as might be showed by many
more testimonies, if these were not sufficient,) which is, That since this
Doctrine about the Pope's Deposing power has no infallible certainty in it, a
man cannot attest the truth or falsehood of it by an Oath.

Which was the more surprising to me, considering how usual it is among your
selves, to swear to such Opinions of which you cannot pretend to infallible
certainty by any evidence of Faith, or authoritative Decision of the Church.
What think you of the Doctrine of Thomas Aquinas? are there no mere Opinions,
undecided by the Church, in his Works? is there infallible certainty in of all
them? I do not think any Jesuit in the world will say so, for a reason every
own knows; because his Order holds the direct contrary in some Points. And yet
the Dominicans swear to maintain S. Thomas his Doctrine. What think you of the
Immaculate Conception, which so many Universities have sworn to maintain,
Legatio de Concept. Virg. Mariae tract. 13.
as Luc. Wadding has showed at large? and yet all these Oaths were made before
any authoritative Decision of the Church.

One of you has found out an evasion for this, by saying, Third Treatise par.
65. and 68.
that it is one thing to swear to maintain a Doctrine as true, and another to
swear to it as true. I cry you mercy, Gentlemen: I had thought no persons would
have sworn to maintain a falsehood; or to defend that as true, which at the same
time they believed or suspected not to be true. Why may not you then swear that
you will maintain, the Pope has no Power to depose Princes, when your Prince
requires it, as well as swear to maintain the Immaculate Conception, when the
University requires it, whatever your private Opinion be? Wadding p. 402.
But to prevent this subterfuge, Wadding says from Surius, that the University
of Mentz would admit none to any degree in Divinity, without swearing that he
would neither approve nor hold in his mind any other Opinion. What think you
now of swearing to the truth of an Opinion not decided by the Church, upon the
best probable reasons that can be given for it? And therefore all this outcry
about Perjury, was only to frighten and amuse, and not to convince, or satisfy.

The rest of that Treatise consists of impertinent Cavills against several
Expressions in the Oath of Allegiance; which ought to be understood according
to the intention of the Lawgivers, the reason and design of the Law, and the
natural sense of the words: and if they will but allow these as the most
reasonable ways of interpreting Laws, all those Exceptions will be found too
light to weigh down the balance of any tolerable judgment, and have been
answered over and over from the days of Widdrington to the Author of the
Questions; and therefore I pass them over, and leave them to any who shall
think it worth their pains to make a just Answer to them.

The Third Treatise is written by a very Considering man, as any one may find
in every Page of it. He bids his Readers consider so much, as though he had a
mind to have them spend their days in considering the Oath, without ever taking
it. As he had, that desired time to consider the Solemn League and Covenant;
and when he was asked, how long time he would take for it, he told them, but a
little time; for he was an old man, and not likely to live long.

But what is it which this person offers, which is so considerable? His main
Argument is, Third Treatise, p. 46, etc.
from the Pope's Authority prohibiting the taking this Oath expressly, at
several and distant times, and after the most ample information, and the
Writings on both sides: it being a thing belonging to the Pope's Authority, as
Spiritual Governor, and not to the Civil Power, to determine. This is an
Argument I must leave to those to answer, who think themselves obliged to
justify the Pope's Authority, and to disobey it at the same time.

Warmington's Moderate Defense, page 44.
To this some answer, That the Pope's Prohibition proceeding on a false
Supposition, and a private Opinion of his own, viz. that there are some things
in the Oath repugnant to Faith, they are not bound to obey it; because it
belongs not to the Pope, without a Council, to determine matters of Faith: That
the Popes have sometimes required very unjust and unreasonable things, of which
Warmington gives some notable instances of his own knowledge: That Obedience to
all Superiors is limited within certain bounds, which if they exceed, men are
not bound to obey them: That the very Canonists and Schoolmen do set bounds to
the Pope's Authority: as (1.) when great mischief is like to ensue by his
Commands; so Francisc. Zabarell, Panormitan, Sylvester, and others: (2.) when
injury comes to a third person by it; so Card. Tolet, Panormitan, Soto, etc.
(3.) when there is just cause to doubt the Lawfulness of the thing commanded;
so Pope Adrian, Widdrington advers. Schulken. p. 194, etc.
Vasquez, Navarr, and others cited by Widdrington: (4.) when he commands about
those things wherein he is not Superior; so Tolet determins, A man is only
obliged in those things to obey his Superior, wherein he has Authority over
him. Now, say they, we having just cause to doubt, whether the Pope may command
us in things relating to our Allegiance, and apparent Injury coming to Princes
by owning this Doctrine, and much Mischief having been done by it, and more
designed, as the Gunpowder-Treason, the true Occasion of this Oath: it is no
culpable Disobedience to take the Oath of Allegiance, notwithstanding the
Pope's Prohibition. And upon the very same Grounds and Reasons which made the
King's Royal Ancestors, with their Parliaments, to limit the Pope's Authority
in England, in the ancient Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire, His Majesty's
Grandfather might, Reflections on the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, n. 98.
with his Parliament, enact that Law which requires the taking of the Oath of
Allegiance: and how comes such Disobedience in Temporals, say they, to be now
more repugnant to Catholic Religion, then it was in those days? Nay, in those
times it was good Doctrine, that when a Dispute arose, whether a thing did
belong to the Civil or Ecclesiastical Power to judge, the Civil Power has made
Laws, and determined it, and the Subjects did submit to the Civil Authority.

This and much more might be said to show the inconsequence of this Argument,
upon which the stress of the Third Treatise lies: but I leave the full Answer
to those that are concerned. The plainest, shortest and truest Answer is, That
the Pope has no Jurisdiction over us, either in Spirituals or Temporals. But
this is sufficient to my purpose, to show, that if they would renounce the
Pope's Deposing power, there is nothing else, according to the Principles of
their own Religion, could hinder them from taking the Oath of Allegiance.

Which is in effect acknowledged at last by this Author of the Third Treatise,
Third Treatise par. 50.
when he offers a new Form of an Oath, rather more expressive of Civil
Obedience then the Oath of Allegiance. Are not Princes mightily obliged to you,
Gentlemen, that take such wonderful care to have a more express Oath then this
already required by Law? How comes this extraordinary fit of Kindness upon you?
Do you really think the Oath of Allegiance defective in this point? No, no. We
know what you would have: If we can get but this Oath out of the way, the same
interest which can remove this, will prevent another; as some argue about other
matters at this time.

Well, but what Security is this which you do so freely offer? First, You are
ready to swear, without any Mental reservation, that you acknowledge our
Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second to be lawful King of this Realm, and of all
other His Majesty's Dominions. A wonderful Kindness! While the old Gentleman
at Rome pleases, you will do this: but suppose he should declare otherwise,
what think you then? Will you then own him to be lawful King, in spite of the
Pope's Excommunication, and Sentence of Deposing? Speak out, Gentlemen; why do
you draw in your breath, and mutter to your selves? will you? or will you not?
If you will, why do ye stick at the Oath of Allegiance? If you will not, is not
His Majesty much obliged to you, that you will own Him to be lawful King as
long as the Pope pleases?

But you go on, That you renounce all Power whatsoever, Ecclesiastical or
Civil, domestic or foreign, repugnant to the same. What does this same relate
to? to his being lawful King, or to your acknowledgment of it? If you meant
honestly without reservation, why could ye not speak plainly, in saying, that
ye renounce all Power of the Pope as to the Deposing the King, and Absolving
His Subjects from their Allegiance? If this be not your meaning, it is a
falsity to say, you swear without any Mental reservation, when in the mean time
you reserve the Pope's Power to depose the King, and then he is no longer a
lawful King to you. So that till you in plain terms renounce this Power of the
Pope, all other Forms are mere shuffling, and full of tricks and equivocations,
on purpose to amuse the unwary Reader.

But you would have us think you come home to the point in the last Clause,
wherein you declare that Doctrine to be impious, seditious and abominable,
which maintains, that any private Subject may lawfully kill or murder the
Anointed of God, his Prince. Now, say you, let any one judge, Protestant or
Catholic, whether these forementioned Clauses are not more, at least as
expressive of Civil Allegiance, as the ordinary Oath is.

Not too fast, good Sir; the world is not so easily cheated as it has been.
Would you indeed have us believe this to be as good Security as the Oath of
Allegiance, when some of the greatest Defenders of the Deposing power would say
as much as this comes to, that it is impious and abominable for a private
Subject to kill or murder his Prince? But when the Pope has Deposed a Prince,
those that were Subjects before, according to your Opinion, cease to be so: and
the same person may lawfully kill or murder his Prince, although not the same
Subject, because the relation is altered, by virtue of the Pope's Sentence.
Besides, this reaches only to the case of a private Subject, and not to the
Power of the People or the Pope. That may be thought unlawful to be done by a
private person, without power and commission, which may be thought lawful when
he does it by Authority derived from others. So that this Form can give
satisfaction to none but such as will be satisfied with any thing. For it does
not at all touch upon the main business; but is in truth an equivocal,
deceitful and sophistical Form. For, as the Author of the Reflections says
very well, Reflections on the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, n. 110.
Princes are little advantaged by such an Oath, wherein the Swearers say,
Princes may not be murdered or killed by their Subjects, unless they say
withal, they may not be Deposed (by the Pope:) For whosoever has a Supreme
just Right upon any pretense whatsoever to Depose Princes, has thereby Right
to cause them to be killed, in case they by arms oppose the execution of the
Sentence. And can it be imagined, that any Prince, judged an Heretic or
otherwise guilty by the Pope, and by him sentenced to be Deposed, will
thereupon quietly descend out of his Throne, and yield up his Scepter to one of
a contrary Religion? Or rather, is it not most certain, that they will not,
but, on the contrary, bring with them many thousands of their armed Subjects,
to resist the execution of such a Sentence, all which together with them must
be killed or murdered, before it can have its full effect?

But this is not the only thing wherein you design to put tricks upon your
Readers; it would take up too much time for a Preface to lay them all open; yet
some of them are too gross to be passed by. As when the Author of the First
Treatise would have his Reader believe the Publisher of the Fasciculus rerum
expetendarum and fugiendarum to have been a Protestant; First Treatise, p. 5.
when any one that looks into the Book may find, it was set forth by Ortwinus
Gratius, a known and fierce Papist: and when the Authors of the two other
Treatises both assert, Second Treatise, page 32. Third Treat. p. 88.
that Sanctarellus his Book was condemned at Rome before it was condemned at
Paris. I stood amazed at the impudence of this assertion, when I read it in the
Second Treatise; but much more when I saw it confirmed in the Third. I looked
once and again on the Roman Index Expurgatorius, and examined the Decrees of
the Congregation; but I could find no Sanctarellus ever condemned there. But
looking into Sanctarellus himself, I found the Book so far from being
condemned, that it came forth with the Approbation and special License of
Mutius Vittelescus, then General of the Jesuits Order, bearing date at Rome May
25. 1624.

I pray mark it, Gentlemen; the General of the Jesuits at that time gave this
License to a Book written by one of that Order, wherein he shows, that Princes
may be Deposed, not only for Heresy, but for other Faults, for Negligence, if
it be Expedient, if they be thought Insufficient, if Unuseful, or the like.
And yet you would bear us down, that your Order, many years before, Third
Treat. p. 130.
was prohibited writing or teaching any thing about this matter. Some such
temporary Order is talked of in the time of Claudius Aquaviva, when the
clamours were so great against the Jesuits for asserting this Doctrine. Yet
that Prohibition extended no farther, then to teaching it to be lawful for any
person to kill Princes under a pretense of Tyranny. What is this but mere
artifice and collusion? It is not to be taught; but they may think as they
please: not lawful for any person; but it does not deny it to be lawful to
persons authorized by the Pope, after he has Deposed them. So that there never
was any Prohibition of teaching the Pope's Deposing power as to Princes. But
suppose there were, you very well know of how little force such an Order is,
when that General is dead, and another succeeds; as appears by this very
License of Mutius Vittelescus. Have a little pity upon us, Gentlemen, and tell
somewhat more probable Untruths then this, that your Order is forbidden to
meddle with these Points. So it seems indeed by the Author of the First
Treatise, who was under some very strict Prohibition, without doubt, which made
him, out of the crosseness of humane nature, so free to vent his opinion.

But to give you a little more satisfaction about this Book of Sanctarellus: It
was not only approved by the General of the Jesuits, but by Alexander
Victricius and Vincentius Candidus, and printed by Order of the Master of the
Pope's Palace. Call you this the Condemning of it at Rome?

But for all this, the Author of the Third Treatise quotes Spondanus for it.
The plain truth of the story is this: Sanctarellus his Book coming to Paris,
met with so ill reception there, that it was condemned by the Sorbon, burnt by
Order of the Parliament, and the Jesuits hard put to it upon very strict
Examinations, wherein they shuffled and showed all the Tricks they had: but
these would not serve their turn, they are commanded to disown and confute this
Doctrine. Pierre Coton, upon whom the main business lay, being too hard set,
made a shift to escape the difficulty of his Province by dying. Notwithstanding
this, the Doctors of Sorbon would not let the business die with him, but
renewed it the beginning of the next year: upon which the King sent the Bishop
of Nantes to them, to let them know they had done enough in that matter, the
Book being condemned, and the Pope having forbidden the sale of the Book at
Rome. A very wonderful Condemnation of it, that a Book should be forbidden to
be sold, and at Rome too, and that so long after the publishing of it, and when
all that had a mind to it were provided already; without any Censure upon the
Author or Doctrine! Who dares talk of the Severity of the Court of Rome? Could
any thing be done with greater Deliberation, and more in the spirit of
Meekness, and to less purpose, then this was? But after all, this does not to
me look any ways like the Condemning of it at Rome, before it was burnt at
Paris; and I suppose upon second thoughts you will be of my mind.

But you will tell me, you did not expect to hear of these things in print.
That may be, for we live in an Age wherein many things come to pass we little
thought of. For I dare say, you never thought these Papers would have come into
my hands: but since they did so, I could not envy the public the benefit I
received by reading of them; hoping that they will contribute much to the
satisfaction of others, at least in this one point, that you hold the very same
Principles about the Pope's Power of deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance, that ever you did. And therefore I conclude, it would be
great weakness to recede from our Legal Tests against the men of such
Principles, for any new Devices whatsoever.

Feb. 13. 1676/7*
THE JESUITS LOYALTY.
THE FIRST TREATISE AGAINST THE OATH of ALLEGIANCE.
The Conclusion to be proved.
It is not lawful to take any Oath or Protestation, renouncing the Pope's
Power, in any case whatsoever to depose a Christian Prince, or absolve his
Subjects from their Allegiance.

The Proof.
MY Reason is, Because the Opinion that the Pope has no such Power is
Erroneous in faith, Temerarious, and Impious. Which I prove thus.

That Opinion which must suppose that the Church has at some time been in a
damnable Error of Belief, and Sin of Practice, is Erroneous in faith,
Temerarious, and Impious. But this Opinion is such. Ergo.
The Major, I suppose, will not be denied by any Catholic: because that were
to suppose that the Church has at some time ceased to be a Catholic and Holy
Church: which were Heresy to suppose possible.

The Minor is proved.

If the Church at some time has believed, and supposed as certain, that the
Pope has such a Power in some case, and upon that belief and supposall has
exercised it in her supremest Tribunals; and if her Error (supposing she erred
in it) was a damnable Error, and her Practice (if unlawful) a mortal Sin:
then this Opinion must suppose, that the Church has, etc. But the Church has
at some time so believed and practiced, and (if amiss) it was a damnable Error
and Practice. Ergo.
The Sequel of the Major is evident in terminis.

The second part of the Minor is likewise evident: because it was a Doctrine
enormously injurious to the Right of Princes, (to withstand which is a damnable
sin, Romans 13.) and cause of much deadly feud betwixt the Church and Secular
States, of many bloody Wars of Princes one against another, and wicked
Rebellions of Subjects against their Princes.

For the first part of the Minor, if I show,

1. That Popes have taught it as sound Doctrine, proving it from Scripture, and
Tradition; and condemned the contrary, as erroneous in faith, pernicious to
salvation, wicked folly and madness, and inflicted Censures on them that held
it:

2. That Popes have, in the highest Tribunals of the Church, deposed Sovereign
Princes, and absolved Subjects from their Allegiance; and this with the advice
and assent of their Councils, and not only Patriarchal, but sometimes even
General:

3. That Popes, and General Councils by them confirmed, have denounced
Excommunication to such as should obey their Princes after such Sentence of
Deposition, and Absolution of their Subjects from their Allegiance:

4. That a General Council, confirmed by the Pope, has made a Canon Law,
regulating the manner of Deposing Princes in some case, and Absolving their
Subjects from their Allegiance:

5. That all Catholic Divines and Casuists that have treated of it, from the
first to the last, (before Calvin's time) in all the several Nations of
Christendom, have asserted this Power of the Pope, without so much as one
contradicting it in all that time:

6. That all Catholic Emperors, Kings, (yea even they that were deposed,)
States, Magistrates, and Lawyers, and finally all the Catholics in the world
for the time being, have (by tacit consent at least) approved and received this
Doctrine of Popes, Divines, and Casuists, and these Censures, Canons, and
Practices of Popes and General Councils:

I say, if I show all this, I hope it will be granted a sufficient Proof, That
the Church has at some time so believed, taught, and practiced.

Now to show this, among a multitude of Instances, I shall name some few of the
principal. As,

1. In Anno 1074. S. Gregory VII. (a most holy and learned Pope Vir in Sacris
literis eruditissimus, and in tota Ecclesia omni virtutum genere celeberrimus.
Lambertus, a Writer of that Age. Nos S. R. E. Cardinales elegimus nobis in
Pastorem, Virum religiosum, geminae scientiae prudentia pollentem, aequitatis
and justitiae praestantissimum amatorem, bonis moribus ornatum, etc. Registr.
Greg. 7. in init.
, who, for his Sanctity and Miracles was canonized for a Saint Gratia
miraculorum, and prophetiae, erat omnibus admirabilis. Binius in Vit. Greg. 7.
Eundem, sicut in vita, ita and post mortem claruisse miraculis, Bibliothecarius
ejus temporis absque ulla dubitatione confirmat. Baron. ad ann. 1085. n. 11. In
album Sanctorum relatus, universali memoria nomine celebri perseverat. Id. ib.
,) threatened Philip the French King, that unless he abstained from his
Simoniacall selling of Bishoprics, he would excommunicate him, and all his
Subjects that should obey him as King; which he counted none would, after such
Sentence, but Apostates from Christianity Aut Rex ipse, repudiato turpi
Simoniacae haereseos mercimonio, etc. aut Franci pro certo (nisi fidem
Christianam abjicere maluerint) generalis anathematis mucrone percussi, illi
ulterius obtemperare recusabunt. Greg. 7. l. 1. ep. 35. Si in perversitate
studiorum suorum perseveraverit, Nos in Romana Synodo, a corp^re S. Ecclesiae
ipsum, and omnes quicunque sibi Regalem honorem vel obedientiam exhibuerint,
sine dubio sequestrabimus. Id. l. 2. ep. 18.
. And that King hereupon submitted to the Pope, and amended his fault
Significasti nobis per literas and legatos tuos, te B. Petro devote ac decenter
velle obedire, etc. Id. l. 1. ep. 36.
.

2. In Anno 1076. the same holy Pope, in a Patriarchal Council of Rome, wherein
were present 110 Bishops, with the advice, and upon the importunity, of the
whole Synod Pontifex habito cum 110 Episcopis consilio, in eundem Regem
Excommunicationis sententiam protulit. Author Vit. S. Ansel. Luc. a Writer of
that Age. Cunctis qui convenerant Episcopis id fieri decernentibus, Regem
excommunicat. Lambert. Cunctis acclamantibus ne talis contumelia inulta
remaneret, omnium consilio and consensu, Henricum, Synodali judicio damnatum,
Regisque honor and nomine privatum, anathematis gladio percussit. Bruno
Histor. belli Saxon* a Writer of that Age.
, deposed Henry IV. King of the Germans, and absolved his Subjects from their
Oath of Allegiance to him Henrico Regi omnem potestatem and dignitatem Regiam
tollo, totiusque Regni Teutonicorum and Italiae gubernacula contradico; and
omnes Christianos a vinculo juramenti quod sibi fecere absolvo. Greg. 7. l. 3.
ep. 6.
. And did it ex Cathedra, as Vicar of Christ, and Successor of S. Peter, in
virtue of the Power of binding which Christ gave to him in S. Peter B. Petre,
mihi tua gratia est potestas a Deo data ligandi atque solvendi in coelo and in
terra. Hac itaque fiducia fretus, ex part Omnipotentis Dei, Patris, and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti, per tuam, B. Petre, potestatem and authoritatem, Henrico
Regi, etc. ut supra.
.

And this Sentence he published in a Breve, to all the Princes, Prelates, and
people of the Empire Greg. 7. l. 4. ep. 23.
. And it was published by his Legates in several Nations of Christendom Baron.
ad ann. 1084. n. 10. and ad ann. 1094. n. 17, etc.
; and confirmed afterward in diverse National Councils Triburiense,
Quintiliniburgense, Ostionense, Claromontanum, Roman. 7.8.10.
. And after his death, was confirmed by the three Popes that succeeded him,
during that King's life Victor III. Urbanus III. Paschalis II.
. And the Catholic Subjects of that King obeyed it; and such as denied the
Pope's Jurisdiction to depose the King, were by the Catholics called Heretics
and Schismatics, and had the name of Henriciani Adversarii nostri, quamvis
ipsi exiverint a nobis, non nos ab ipsis, tamen dicere solent, Nos Catholici
sumus, nos in Vnitate Ecclesiae sumus. Vnde Scriptor illius Epistolae appellat
eos qui sunt in part sui Gregorii, Catholicos; nos, Schismaticos, Haereticos,
and Excommunicatos. Vercellens. de Unit. Eccles. a Bishop of the King's party.
Hoc decretum (Synodi Quintiliniburg.) contra Henricianos, qui fideles S. Petri
(meaning the Catholics) constringere voluerunt, ut Excommunicationem D. Papae
una cum illis retractare praesumerent. Bertold. a Writer of that Age.
. Yea, even the King himself, in his Letter to the Pope, wherein he complained
of the Sentence, denied not the Pope's Jurisdiction to depose him if he had
been an Heretic; but pleaded he was no Heretic, in which case alone the
tradition of holy Fathers (as he said) allowed the Deposition of Kings by the
Pope Me quoque quem Sanctorum Patrum traditio soli Deo judicandum docuit, nec
pro aliquo crimine, nisi a fide (quod absit) exorbitaverim, deponendum censuit,
etc. Epist. Henr. 4. ad Greg. 7. set out by a Protestant, in Fascic. rerum
expetendarum.
. Nay, and even that Cardinal Villain, Beno, (Ringleader of the Schismatics)
in that Libell against the Pope, wherein he raked together all the matters he
could to make him odious, and particularly accused his deposing the King, yet
accused it not for being done without Jurisdiction, but only that he did it
contra ordinem juris Imperatorem, (so his own party called him) in nulla Synodo
Canonice accusatum, praecipitanter excommunicavit; in qua Excommunicatione
nullus Cardinalium subscripsit, etc. Beno de Vit. Hildebrand. in the aforesaid
Fasciculus.
. Finally, in a Diet of the Empire, called on purpose to decide, by the Canons
of the Church, which had the juster cause, the Pope or the King, where met the
wisest of the Princes and Prelates of the German nation, of both parties, the
Archbishop of Saltzburg (Prolocutor of the Pope's party) alleged, and showed
by the Canons, that the Deposition was just. To which was answered by the
Archbishop of Mentz, (Prolocutor of the King's party) that the Pope and Princes
had done the King injury, in that he being at Rome, performing his penance
enjoined him by the Pope, they had set up another King (Rodulph) against him.
And he added, that by the Canons, the King being spoliatus, could not be
condemned, or cited, till he were restored to possession Eodem anno, (1080.)
condicto, tam ab inimicis quam amicis Imperatoris, alloquio, in Thuringia,
conveniebant ex utraque part quicunque sapientissimi de Optimatibus
judicabantur, Canonum authoritate probaturi, cui parti justitia faveret;
Imperatore tamen absente; sic enim ipse consensit. Electis, hinc Wecilone
Moguntino, illinc Gebehardo Saltzburgensi, disputatio coepta est. Affirmat
Gebehardus, ( proponente hoc prius Wecilone) Imperatorem non injusto judicio,
tam Regno, quam Communione, Apostolici Sententia, privatum. E contra Wecilo,
Dominum suum, praejudicium non minus a Papa quam a Principibus passum,
contendit, dum ipso ad Canusium in satisfactione posito, imo jam a Papa in
communionem recepto, alterum super se Regem elevarent. Adjecit etiam, quod
Imperator, diu jam a Saxonia depulsus, and regnandi copia, etiam ab illa
dissensione quae ante Podolphum facta describitur, spoliatus, nec vocari, nec
judicari Canonice debuisset, etc. Ursperg. ad ann. 1080.
. So here was no plea then against the Pope's Jurisdiction, no not by the
King's own Advocates.

3. The same holy Pope did not only believe, and suppose this Doctrine to be
most certainly true and sound, (as he showed by his practice of it;) but did
formally teach it to the Church, by Canons published in a Patriarchal Council
at Rome Dictatus Papae, in Council. Roman. 3. ann. 1076. 1. Quod Papae liceat
Imperatorem deponere. 2. Quod a fidelitate iniquorum Subditos potest absolvere.
, and to the German Prelates that consulted him of it, and prove it to them
from Scripture and Tradition Quod postulasti, te nostris scriptis quasi juvari,
and communiri, etc. non adeo necessarium nobis videtur, cum hujus rei tam multa
ac certissima documenta in Sacrarum literarum paginis reperiantur, etc. citing
the Scriptures. L. 8. ep. 21. Eos qui dicunt, Regem non oportet excommunicari,
etc. ad Sanctorum Patrum dicta vel facta mittimus. Legant itaque, etc.
Considerent cur Zacharias Papa Regem Francorum deposuerit, and omnes
Francigenas a vinculo juramenti quod sibi fecerant absolverit. In Registro B.
Gregorii, etc. l. 4. ep. 2.
; and by S. Peter's authority, exhorted and required all Subjects of the
Empire, to obey and execute the Sentence, by resisting the deposed King:
putting them in mind, that it is a sin as bad as Idolatry, to disobey S.
Peter's See B. Petri authoritate, ei (Henrico Regi) resistite, and totius Regni
gubernacula contradicendo, etc. illud semper habentes in memoria, quia scelus
Idololatriae committit, qui Apostolicae Sedi obedire contemnit. L. 4. ep. 23.
: and termed it no less then wicked and damnable folly and madness, to deny
that Power to be in the Pope Contra eorum insaniam, qui nefando ore garriunt,
Authoritatem Apostolicae Sedis non potuisse Regem Henricum excommunicare, nec
quenquam a Sacramento fidelitatis ejus absolvere...... Neque enim credimus eos,
qui, ad cumulum suae damnationis, veritati impudenter de^rahunt and
contradicunt, haec ad suae defensionis audaciam, tam ignorantia, quam miserae
desperationis vecordia, coaptasse. Id. ibid. Eos qui dicunt, Regem non oportet
excommunicari, licet pro magna fatuitate, nec etiam eis respondere debeamus;
tamen ne impatienter eorum insipientiam praeteriisse videamur, etc. L. 4. ep.
2. Si B. Gregorius, Doctor utique mitissimus, Reges qui Statuta sua super unum
xenodochium violarent, non modo deponi, sed etiam excommunicari, atque in
aeterno examine damnari decrevit: quis nos, ipsius matris Ecclesiae, quantum in
ipso est, conculcatorem, deposuisse and excommunicasse reprehendat, nisi forte
similis ejus? L. 8. ep. 21.
.

4. In Anno 1215. the Council of Lateran (an undoubted General Council, and the
greatest for number of Prelates that ever was) settled a Rule to be observed in
the deposing of Princes, and absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance, in
case they be negligent in purging their Land from Heretics Moneantur seculi
potestates, etc. Si vero Dominus temporalis requisitus, and monitus ab
Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit ab hac haeretica faeditate, per
Metropolitanum and Comprovinciales Episcopos Excommunicationis vinculo
innodeturm, Et si satisfacere contempserit infra annum, significetur hoc Summo
Pontifici, ut extunc ipse vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denunciet absolutos, and
terram exponat Catholicis occupandam, qui eam, exterminatis Haereticis, sine
ulla contradictione possideant; salvo jure Domini principalis, dummodo super
hoc ipse nullum praestet obstaculum. Eadem nihilominus lege servata circa eos
qui non habent Dominos principales. Cap. 3. de Haeret.
. And the Canon was made in the presence, and with the consent of both the
Emperors, ( Greek and Roman) and the greatest part of the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, and of the Ambassadors of the rest.

Answ. 1. Those that go under the name of the Canons of this Council, were not
decreed by the Council, but only published for Canons of it by Gregory IX.

Repl. It is against reason to imagine, that Holy and Learned Pope would commit
so gross a forgery, and in matters of that high concern, and at a time so soon
after the Council, as the greatest part of the Prelates that assisted at it
were living, to confute it, and protest against it; the Decretals of that Pope
being published within twelve years after that Council.

Answ. 2. All Historians of those times testify, no Canons were made in that
Council, except one or two about the Recovery of the Holy Land, and the
Subjection of the Greek Church to the Roman.

Repl. Not one Historian testifies any such negative.

Answ. 3. This Decree was not found among the other Acts of the Council for 300
years.

Repl. It was always among the other Canons in the Decretals of Gregory IX.
published within twelve years after the Council: and in the first Copy that was
printed of the Canons of that Council, this was one; and Cochleus, that sent
the Copy of it to the Printer, said, it had been long ago written out of an
ancient Book Mitto Decreta Concilii Lateranensis olim ex antiquo descripta
Codice. Jo. Co^hl. ep. ante Council, Lateran. ap. Crab.
.

Answ. 4. This Canon names not Sovereign Princes, but Lords only.

Repl. It names Lords, qui non habent Dominos principales, which can be none
but Sovereign Princes.

5. In Anno 1245. Pope Innocent IV. in a General Council at Lions, by a formal
definitive Sentence, published in the Council, and approved by all the
Prelates, deposed the Emperor Frederick IId. and absolved all his Subjects
from their Oath of Allegiance: and not only that, but by his Apostolic
authority, inhibited them to obey him as Emperor or King, and not to advise or
aid him as such, under pain of Excommunicatio latae sententiae. And he grounded
his authority for it upon that Text, Quodcunque solveris, etc Nos cum fratribus
nostris and sacro Concilio deliberatione praehabita diligenti, cum Jesu Christi
vices teneamus in terris, nobisque in B. Petri persona sit dictum, Quodcunque
solveris, etc. memoratum Principem, suis ligatum peccatis, and abjectum,
omnique honor and dignitate privatum a Domino ostendimus, denunciamus, ac
nihilominus sententiando privamus: omnes qui ei juramento fidelitatis tenentur
astricti, a juramento hujusmodi perpetuo absolventes: authoritate Apostolica
sirmiter inhibe^d^, ne quisquam ei de caetero tanquam Imperatori vel Regi
pareat; and decernendo quoslibet, qui deinceps ei velut Imperatori aut Regi
consilium aut auxilium praestilerint, ipso facto Excommunicationis vinculo
subjacere, etc. In Actis Council.
. And it was afterward inserted into the Canons of the Church. And it was not
given precipitately, or in passion, but upon consult first had with diverse of
the most able Divines, that were at the Council, and after mature debate in
diverse Consistories, in which some of the Cardinals pleaded as Advocates for
the Emperor, and others answered them; insomuch as the Pope could not remember
that ever any cause was discussed with more exactness and longer deliberation.
And they proceeded to the Sentence with much unwillingness, and forced by
necessity, (because they saw no other way, without offending God, the Church,
and their own consciences,) and condoling his misery that was sentenced. All
which the Pope himself wrote in a Letter to the Cistertian Abbots here in
England Matthew. Paris. in Henrico 3.
. And when the Pope objected in Council to the Emperor the Crimes for which he
proceeded against him; the Emperor's Advocate (a wise and eloquent man,
Doctor of both Laws, and Judge in the Emperor's Court) pleaded to it, (not
that the Pope had no Jurisdiction to depose the Emperor, but, which
acknowledged the Jurisdiction) that the Emperor was not guilty of the Crimes
objected, and namely, not of Heresy: and prayed respite for the Emperor, to
make his defense in person. And the Ambassadors of the Kings of France and
England seconded his Petition, (which also was an acknowledging by them of the
Pope's Jurisdiction to depose the Emperor:) and thereupon two weeks respite
was granted. And when the Emperor heard of it, he refused to appear, (not
because they had no Jurisdiction in the cause, but) because they appeared to be
his Adversaries Video quod ad confusionem meam aspirat Papa,..... nec Sacrum
decet Imperium maxim adversanti judicio sisti Synodali. Id. ibid.
. And upon that and other pretexts, appealed from that, to the next more
General Council Id. ibid.
. And this Sentence was (as I said) published with approbation of all the
Prelates present in the Council, (which were to the number of 140 Archbishops
and Bishops.) And in token of their concurring thereunto, after it was
pronounced, all the Prelates lighting their Tapers, held them downward, and so
put them out, and threw them on the ground. And every one of them set his hand
to the Bull of the Sentence Id. ibid.
. And there were present at it, the other Emperor (of Constantinople,) the
Ambassadors of France and England, and of most other Christian States: and not
one of them, no not the Emperor's own Advocate, opened his mouth against the
Jurisdiction of the Court; only he put in his Appeal from it, to the next more
General Council; which is an acknowledging the Jurisdiction. Yea, and the
Emperor himself, when the Sentence was reported to him, though he slighted it
as unjust and frivolous Trithem. in Chron. Hirsang.
, yet he never excepted to it as given a non Iudice. And the King of England,
and the French King ( Lewis IX. afterward Canonized for a Saint,) and their
Nobles, justified the Sentence Matthew. Paris. in Henrico 3.
; and the French King took upon him the protecting of the Pope's cause against
the Emperor Paul. Aemil. in Vit. S. Ludov.
.

6. In the same General Council of Lions was made a Canon In 6. Cap. 1. de
Homicid.
, That whatever Prince should cause any Christian to be murdered by an
Assasin, he should ipso facto incur the Sentence of Excommunication, and
Deposition.

7. In Anno 1606. Pope Paul V. by a Breve written to the English Catholics,
declared, and taught them as Pastor of their Souls, That the Oath of Allegiance
established by Parliament 3. Iac. salva Fide Catholica, and Salute animarum
suarum, praestari non potest, cum multa contineat quae Fidei ac Saluti aperte
adversantur. Now there are not in it multa to which this Censure is possibly
applicable, unless this be one, That the Pope has no Power to depose the King,
or absolve his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance. Therefore this
Proposition was condemned by that Pope, as contra Fidem and Salutem animae.

8. In Anno 1648. Pope Innocent X. censured the Subscribers negatively to these
Propositions. 1. The Pope, or Church, has power to absolve any persons from
their Obedience to the Civil Government established, or to be established, in
this Nation, in Civil affairs. 2. By the command or dispensation of the Pope,
or Church, it is lawful to kill, or do any injury to, persons condemned or
excommunicated for Heresy or Schism. 3. It is lawful, by dispensation at least
from the Pope, to break Promise or Oath made to Heretics, to have done
unlawfully, and incurred the Censures contained in the holy Canons and
Apostolic Constitutions, contra negantes Pontificiam authoritatem in causis
Fidei. Now there is none of these Propositions to which this Censure can
reasonably be fastened, but the first only; therefore that was thus censured.

9. This very last year, the now Pope, being consulted touching the lawfulness
of taking the late Irish Protestation, in which is renounced this Power of the
Pope, declared, That, instar repullulantis Hydrae, it did contain,
Propositiones convenientes cum aliis a Sede Apostolica olim reprobatis,
signanter a fell. mem. Paulo V. per Constitutionem in forma Brevis, and nuper
anno 1648. in Congregatione specialiter commissa ab Innocentio X. etc. Se
graviter indoluisse, quod per exemplum Ecclesiasticorum, tracti sint in eundem
errorem Nobiles Seculares ejusdem Regni Hiberniae; quorum Protestationem ac
Subscriptiones pariter reprobat; idque ad eximendas Catholicorum conscientias a
dolo and errore quo circumveniuntur.

10. That this has been the common received Doctrine of all School-Divines,
Casuists, and Canonists, from first to last, (before Calvin's time) in all the
several Nations of Christendom, yea even in France it self, yea even of those
French Divines that were most eager for their Temporal Princes against the
Pope, (as Occam, Almain, Ioann. Parisiens. Gerson, etc.) you may see abundantly
proved by that admirable man Cardinal Peron, in his Oration made in the name of
all the Bishops of France to the Third Estate of Parliament. And it is
convinced by this, That neither Barclay, nor Widdrington, nor Caron, nor any
other Champion for the contrary Tenet, has been yet able to produce so much as
one Catholic Author, (before Calvin's time) that denied this Power to the Pope
absolutely, (or in any case whatsoever:) as will appear by examining their
quotations.

To conclude then.

This having been for some Ages (One, at least) the common Belief, Sense and
Doctrine of the Church, according to which she has frequently and avowedly
practiced and proceeded in her highest Courts, and inflicted her highest
Censures upon the Opponents of it: If it be an Error, the Church was at that
time a wicked and blind Church, a Synagogue of Satan; the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, and with it the whole Fabric of Faith and Religion, shook and tottered.
If it were no Error, they that now call it an Error, are wicked Catholics,
and in damnable Error. Nor, though all the Doctors of Sorbon, all the
Parliaments and Universities of France, all the Friars or Blackloists in
England or Ireland, all the Libertines, Politicians and Atheists in the world,
should declare for it, could it ever be an Authority to make it a probable
Opinion.

THE SECOND TREATISE AGAINST THE OATH of ALLEGIANCE.
Some few Questions concerning the Oath of Allegiance, which have now been
public for diverse years, reduced to one principal Question, concerning the
Substance of the said Oath.

CHAP. I. The Occasion and State of the present Question.
IN the year 1661. was published a small Treatise under this Title, [ Some few
Questions concerning the Oath of Allegiance, which were proposed by a Catholic
Gentleman in a Letter to a Person of Learning and Honor.]

A late officious hand has now in the year 1674. as he speaks.
thought it seasonable to re-publish this short and judicious Treatise, for the
satisfaction of such as are at present either concerned, or curious.

The Author's professed design in these Questions concerning the Oath was, to
propose his sense by way of Quaere's; wherein he hopes not to be accused of
presumption, whilst he only seeks what he professes not to know: And yet is
so knowing, that though he could heartily wish for a more condescending form of
Oath, he in his Preface.
sticks not to affirm, and he is positive in it, that if the manner of
expression were a little changed, every syllable of the substance might be
entirely retained. Now if you ask him what he means by the Substance of the
Oath, he expressly tells you, that page 14. page 30.
the Substance of the Oath is, the Denying and abjuring the Pope's power to
depose Princes.

For my part, it is as far from my thoughts, as foreign to my present purpose,
to speak any thing in favor of this Deposing power: nor shall I at all play
the critical Interpreter of the Oath, nor concern my self with raising any
artificial and learned obscurities, such as the Publisher hints at, about any
inconvenient phrase, nor boggle at the form and dress; but closely apply my
reason to the Substance of the Oath, taking for the measure of its Notion the
rule and standard the Author of the Questions has already given us, saying
that the Substance of the Oath is the Denying and abjuring the Pope's power to
depose Princes.

Here then lies the grand Case, here is the principal Question, Whether a
Catholic may (I do not say barely deny, but) deny by Oath, and universally
abjure, the Pope's power to depose Princes.

Concerning which Question, first, as I meet with nothing either in the Author
or Publisher of the Questions which in my judgment does in the least evince
the affirmative: so, secondly, I think enough is said by both to conclude
manifestly for the negative, to wit, That no Catholic can safely admit of and
take the Substance of the Oath, even as the case is understood, and stated in
the Author's own terms.

This I shall endeavor with all possible clearness and brevity to make out in
the first place; and afterward set down and answer the Grounds the Author of
the Questions proceeds on, which are principally three. 1. The Censure of many
famous French Universities, denying, rejecting and condemning the Doctrine of
the Pope's Deposing power, as new, false, erroneous, contrary to the Word of
God, pernicious, seditious, and detestable. 2. The Subscription of the French
Jesuits to two of the most remarkable of these Censures. 3. The Practice of the
Clergy, the religious and the wiser sort of the Laiety in other Countries, when
the Pope makes war, or any other way contends with their Sovereign Princes or
States.

All which being put together, to the end it may appear how far the Argument
even in its full and united strength is from reaching our Case, let it be once
more remembered, that the state of our Question is not, Whether a Catholic may
deny, reject, censure and condemn the Pope's Power to depose Princes, (which
yet is the utmost that can be proved by warrant of these foreign Precedents;)
but, Whether he may safely deny, reject, censure, and condemn by his Oath, and
universally abjure, this Deposing doctrine: This is that which the Author of
the Questions affirms; that which he calls the very Substance of the Oath; and
that for which I am sure no French University, quoted by him, no Subscription
of the Jesuits, no Practice of the Clergy, the religious and the wiser sort of
the Laiety in other Countries, afford us so much as any single instance.

CHAP. II. Why it cannot be safe either to swear to the Deposing doctrine as
true, or to abjure it as false.
SInce it is but even more undeniably evident then all good men have cause to
wish, and that experience, the easiest and clearest of arguments, puts it but
too sadly beyond dispute, that this grand Controversy, (Whether the Pope has
any Power and authority to depose Princes for any cause pretense, or exigency
whatsoever,) has been for diverse Ages from time to time disputed in the
Schools by speculative men in their subtle and notionall way of reasoning: And
what Trithemius in Chron. historic. ad ann. 1106.
Trithemius recorded to posterity above 500 years ago, (that Scholastici
certant, and adhuc sub Iudice lis est, utrum Papa posset Imperatorem deponere,)
may, for ought we know, 500 years hence be as much a question, and as far from
ending, as now it is; whereas even in our days the Controversy finds but too
many stir Champions and Abettors to maintain the quarrel, and keep life in
the debate by their warm and smart contests* no clear and authoritative
decision of the Point yet appearing to which both sides think themselves
obliged to stand and acquiesce: Since likewise, when a Point is thus in dispute
amongst Catholic Princes, (some of them peremptorily denying and hotly
opposing what others as positively assert and vigorously maintain, and this
openly, avowedly, and in the face of the world,) no one can determinately swear
to either side of the point in dispute as true, nor warrantably abjure the
other as false; for this were to swear a thing as true, or to abjure it as
false, which is confessedly in dispute whether it be so or no, which is never
lawful:

From hence I conceive, that for the deciding of our Question, (Whether a
Catholic may lawfully abjure the Pope's Deposing power and authority,) there
needs no more then barely to suppose, that it is a Question whether the Pope
has any such Power and Authority or no. For here one Question resolves the
other: grant this second to be a Question, the first will be none. For if it be
a Question whether the Pope has any such Power and Authority or no, no man can
safely swear, that without all question he has none; I say, without all
question, because what we swear as true ought to be unquestionably such,
otherwise we fall under the guilt and sacrilege of Perjury.

For a more full evidence and farther clearing of this so important a Truth,
(namely, That the swearing or abjuring a controverted doctrinall Point
unavoidably draws upon us the execrable guilt of Perjury,) let us consider the
difference of Oaths in general, and the different parts of the Oath of
Allegiance in particular. Of Oaths some are assertory, others promissory. An
assertory Oath is, when we positively say such or such a thing is true or
false, and then bind this saying of ours with an Oath: A promissory Oath is
that whereby we engage to do what we promise, or to leave undone what we
promise not to do, and thereupon give our Oath as a bond of performance. The
Oath of Allegiance is a mixed Oath, partly assertory, (as where it is affirmed
that the Pope has not any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to
authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to
discharge any of his Subjects from their Allegiance, etc.) partly promissory,
(as namely, where the Swearer engages that, notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or to be made against the
King, his Heirs or Successors, he will bear faith and true allegiance to them,
he will defend them to the utmost of his power against all conspiracies or
attempts whatsoever.)

That which here principally falls under consideration is the nature of an
assertory Oath: in which Oath it is essentially requisite, that what we do
swear be undoubtedly and unquestionably true; and all little enough for the
securing us against God's and Truth's sworn enemy, Perjury, which abominable
sin is defined by the Magister in 3. did. 39. En. ann. 10. S. Thom.
Schools to be a Lie confirmed by Oath: And to lie, says S. Aug. lib. de
Mendacio.
St. Austin, is to speak against that which a man thinks in his mind or
conscience, or, as we usually express it, when a man speaks not as he thinks;
viz. when there lies a secret check and contradiction in the breast to what is
uttered by the mouth. Put these two together, and the case stands thus: To
speak contrary to what a man thinks in his conscience, is, according to true
morals, the definition of a Lie* and, to swear contrary to the inward dictates
of his conscience, is that wherein consists the formal notion and malice of
Perjury. Now this Swearing contrary to what a man thinks in his conscience may
happen two ways: not only when he is conscious to himself, and knows that what
he swears is not true; but also when he knows not, and therefore doubts, or
has just cause to doubt, whether it be true or no: in which case if he chance
to swear, it is at the peril of his Soul, and contrary to the secret
information of his Conscience, which must needs check at the act, and inwardly
protest against it. For it is a folly beyond dotage, and carries with it the
prejudice of the highest self-condemnation imaginable, for a man to say, I will
swear such a thing is true, and yet I know not, I doubt, or have just cause to
doubt, whether it be so or no.

CHAP. III. An Objection answered; with a farther display of the former
Evidence.
IF any one shall here pretend, that he for his part is so far from doubting,
that he is already fully persuaded, and thinks verily in his conscience, the
Pope has not any Power or Authority to depose Kings; and why then may not he
safely swear as he thinks, because no more is required of him then only to
swear according to the best of his knowledge? Let him who pretends this please
to remember, that neither is less required of him then to swear according to a
true knowledge; that is, that he be sure or certain, and have no just cause to
doubt of the truth of what he swears. Let Knowledge then signify Knowledge; let
it not be a mere term, or the abuse of a term: let not, I think, but, I know;
not, I am persuaded, but, I am certain, be the ground of his Oath, and he is
secure. But if his knowledge signify no more then his uncertain persuasion and
judgment that the thing is so or so, then the best of his knowledge is to him
no better then ignorance; and to swear according to the best of his knowledge,
will be the same as to swear according to the best of his no-knowledge: And it
is this want of knowledge will arraign, convict and condemn him at the bar of
his own heart for a forsworn man. Thus if a Witness in any public Court of
justice should offer to swear a thing as true, and yet, being asked if he were
sure of it, should answer, No; though we should suppose that he verily thinks
it true, yet if he be not certain of it, it is manifest it may be as well false,
as true, for any thing he knows; for thinking is one thing, and knowing
another. And therefore if upon no better ground then his thinking it to be
true, he should offer to swear it is so, no honest man would stick to say, this
Witness owes a forfeiture to the Pillory, and satisfaction to God and man for
so foul a scandal, in offering to swear a thing to be true, which he knows not
whether it be so or no.

True it is, where an Oath is tendered requiring no more but only to swear a
man's persuasion and judgment, (not absolutely what is or is not true, but
only what he thinks is or is not true,) there indeed a man may swear according
to true knowledge, in regard the familiar converse and intimacy with his own
thoughts may give him a sufficient assurance and certainty of the truth of what
he is to swear; because in this supposition he is to swear no more then what he
thinks: but if any one should go about to transfer this qualifying gloss and
milder exposition to the Oath of Allegiance, as an expedient to prevent the sad
danger and heavy charge of Perjury, in abjuring the controverted Doctrine of
the Deposing power, as if no such abjuring was intended by the Oath; (which yet
the Author of the Questions terms the very Substance of the Oath;) let him who
either makes or values this gloss but cast an eye upon the first, the middle
and the last Branches of the Oath, and he will plainly perceive, this is only
an exchange of one Perjury for another: it alters indeed the mode, but shuns
not the guilt; and by striving to weather out one Rock, splits upon another.

For first, in the beginning of the Oath the Swearer solemnly calls God and the
world to witness the truth of what he is about to acknowledge, profess,
testify, and declare in his conscience; and then, having uttered all he has to
say, (and particularly, in one of the middle clauses, having not only abjured
the Pope's Deposing power, but also abjured it as heretical,) in the end
concludes thus, [ And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge
and swear according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation or mental evasion or secret reservation whatsoever.] By which last
clause he again ratifies and binds afresh all his former asseverations and
already-sworn engagements, by a repeated and reflex Oath looking universally
back upon the premises: And all these things (says he) I do plainly and
sincerely acknowledge and swear. Now amongst all these things which he does
thus plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, the chief and principal of
all others was, That the Pope has not any such Power and Authority as we speak
of. And he farther adds, that he swears this according to the express words by
him spoken, without any equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation;
that is, without any farther gloss or comment upon his own thoughts or words
whatsoever. Whereas on the contrary, if we should suppose, that, whilst he
expressly abjures the Deposing doctrine, and absolutely swears that the Pope has
not any such Power and Authority, he yet reserves in his mind a mental evasion
and secret meaning of his words, ( viz. that he only thinks and is persuaded
he has no such Power and Authority;) then directly he forswears himself in
swearing otherways then what he professes to swear, that is, in swearing not
according to his express words, but according to an unexprest meaning of his
words, which thing he utterly disavowed and renounced by his Oath. And is not
this a remedy as bad as the disease, and a rare expedient to prevent the danger
of Perjury, to make a man forswear himself for fear of being forsworn?

Let us make the best hand of it we can; here is only choice of Perjuries for
the comfort and relief of the Swearer, whether he do or do not abjure the
Deposing power. For if he pretend not to abjure it, this is contrary to his
express words, according to which he professes to swear, and by which he does
expressly swear that the Pope has not any Deposing power; and so he is
perjured, by pretending to swear one thing, and actually swearing another;
which is as much as to swear two Oaths in one, the one directly cross and
contradictory to the other. But if he do abjure, (as absolutely he does, if he
takes the Oath,) this same abjuring is the very charge of Perjury which is now
under my pen, and, as I conceive, inevitable, by reason that the necessary
knowledge, certainty and assurance of the truth of what he swears, or of the
falsehood of what he abjures, (without which every such assertory Oath
necessarily ends in Perjury,) is not to be had nor expected, whilst this
speculative Point remains under dispute; a dispute (as experience too clearly
testifies) not yet effectually determined by any public, nor, I am sure,
determinable by any private authority, as shall appear yet more fully in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. A Continuation of the former Discourse, showing the manifest
unlawfulness, as of Swearing, so of Abjuring the Deposing power.
A Duty we owe to the Pope, (says the page 31.
Author of the Questions,) a Duty to the King; both commanded by God, both
obliging under sin, yet both confined to their proper limits: too much of the
Temporal may be ascribed to Popes, too much of the Spiritual to Kings, too much
may be challenged by both. All which is most true; but the difficulty is, when
these two Supreme Powers contest (as actually they do) concerning Power in
Temporalls, who shall then be Judge? The Pope claims a Deposing power, the King
denies it: if the Pope be Judge, the Deposing power will carry it; if the King,
it will be cast. If we consult or appeal to the authority of the Learned, and
bring the cause to their bar, there is nothing but noise, censures, and loud
disagreements. Bellarmin and Suarez write for the Deposing power, and are
condemned at Paris: Barkly and Withrington appear against it, and are condemned
at Rome: the Censurers all this while on both sides professing a previous,
mature and impartial examination of the Books and Doctrines they condemn.
Caron, the laborious defender of the first Remonstrance, in his loyalty
asserted what betwixt Canonists and Divines, Second Controversial Letter, page
31.
Schoolmen and Fathers, Popes, Councils, Universities and Kingdoms, is said to
have made a catalogue of more then 250 Opposers of the Deposing doctrine. On
the contrary, what number of favorers and abettors there are for it, may
appear by this, that even the Author of the 8th Controversial Letter tells us,
( page 5.) that the face of Authority is on that side; and again, ( page 7.)
that of Learned men, those who write of this subject, write generally in favor
of it: as likewise the Author of the Questions, in his Preface, acknowledges
the Maintainers of the Deposing power to be the more numerous party, and that
he himself sides with the few against the many; and withal grants, ( page
24.) that this act of Deposing Kings has not only been done by Popes, but
approved by Councils. If we step over into France, there we are strangely
surprised with instances on both sides. Behold in the year 1626. Eight
Universities of that Realm declare smartly against the Deposing power: and yet
but a few years before, viz. in the year 1614. in the General Assembly of the
Three Estates, (in which were present 5 Cardinals, 7 Archbishops, and 47
Bishops, besides many other learned Ecclesiastics and Dignitaries of the
Gallican Church,) two parts of three of this great Representative of that
Kingdom were of another mind, and so far from hearkening to or countenancing
the hot Proposalls that were made against the Deposing doctrine, that they left
it in possession, as they found it, of whatsoever right or title it could
pretend to. What now shall the private Christian and loyal Subject do, who
passionately desires to share himself in all humble duty between God and
Caesar? what, I say, shall he do in this unfortunate competition of the two
grand Powers? Shall he by his single sufficiency dare to assume to himself the
right of judicature, and boldly swear either for or against the Deposing power,
and to pass a decisive sentence under Oath, that the Pope has, or has not,
the Power in contest? Were I worthy to offer my advice in this particular, I
should conceive it much more pertinent and proper for him seriously to consider
with himself, whether an act of this nature be not the same, or rather indeed
much worse then if a stander by, upon hearing an Assembly of grave Divines or
Counselors learned in the Law, all of them much above his size and abilities
in their respective professions, warmly debating a perplexed Law-case, or sturdy
knot in Divinity, should by a rash and unlicensed confidence take upon him the
Umpirage of the cause, and without any more ado bluntly swear these men are in
the right, and the other in the wrong, or the others are in the right, and
these in the wrong: And whether he proceed not upon as mere a blind
peradventure, whatever part of the contradiction he swears in this last case,
and that it be not as slippery a piece of pure contingency in him, whether he
hit or miss; as if upon the sight of an handful of Guinnies, he should all at
a venture swear odd or even for a wager; since that he has no true knowledge
for his guidance, nor the least degree of certainty to steer by or fix him.

CHAP. V. A farther confirmation of the premises.
ALL this which I have hitherto discoursed is no more then what is evidently
deducible from and thoroughly grounded in the Principles and Concessions of
those Learned persons who utterly deny the Pope has any Power to depose
Princes; who yet neither do, nor can, make out a title and claim for their
Doctrine to any higher pretense or degree then that of Opinion: and in this, I
presume, I shall speak the sense of all, if I say, it is never lawful, nor
justifiably safe, to swear to an Opinion as true, nor to abjure an Opinion as
false, (speaking, as here I do, of such free and debatable Tenets as are openly
and avowedly held and taught by Catholic Divines, divided amongst themselves
in their private sentiments and School-disputes,) because no one of these
Opinions can sufficiently answer for its own truth, nor secure the officious
Swearer, who lends it his Oath, that he goes Christianly and groundedly to
work, whether side soever of the Opinion he makes choice of to be sworn or
abjured. For it is not in Opinions as in things which we know by clear and
certain evidence, as it happens in those early and fair Notions implanted in us
by nature from the first glimmering of Reason, called First Principles, as,
that Every whole is greater then a part of the whole; It is impossible for the
same thing to be and not to be at the same time, etc. which great Maxims of
Nature sufficiently speak for and evidence themselves, without the help of
Syllogisms, moods, or figure; and are no sooner understood, then readily and
necessarily assented unto. Nor is it in Opinions as in certain scientifical
Deductions and demonstrative Conclusions, partly flowing connaturally by a
train of immediate consequences, partly drawn and hammered out with much pains,
study and speculations from the abovesaid Principles: which Deductions* and
Conclusions are called Sciences, whose chiefest property and richest piece of
satisfaction, whereby they gratify the Understanding of man, is their clear
and convincing Evidence, placed beyond all contradiction from Sense or Reason.
Nor, lastly, is it in Opinions as in those supernatural Truths made known unto
us by Divine revelation, and are of Faith* where there is absolute Certainty,
though without Evidence: for Faith wears a scarf before her eyes, and believes
what she sees not. Both which, to wit Faith and Science, as they justly command
and challenge, so withal they fully secure our assent from all danger, and
suspicion of error, the one by its Evidence, the other by its Certainty; the
one interessing the light and patronage of the First Principles, the other
engaging a Divine and infallible Authority for the truth of their Proposalls.

But in Opinions it fares quite otherwise: for an Opinion having neither the
Evidence of Science, nor the Certainty of Faith, nor indeed any other inferior
degree of Certainty, physical or moral, (as the Schools speak,) but only the
slippery knot of Probability to hold by, leaves the considering Opiner in a
state of suspense and indetermination, not daring, nor indeed knowing how, to
yield any more then a faint and timorous assent to either side of the Tenet,
seeing that neither side is any more then only probably true, or probably
false. And because true, and only probably true, false, and only probably
false, are not the same, but two very different things, and at so great a
distance, that no art or law of consequence can ever bring them together, or
convincingly argue from the one to the other; hence it is, that what is only
probably true, is not therefore true, and what is only probably false, is not
therefore false: from whence it is finally and manifestly concluded, that
neither side of an Opinion is lawfully attestable by Oath as simply true, nor
safely abjurable as simply false.

To come now to the particular Tenet which denies the Pope's Deposing power in
all cases, circumstances and emergencies whatsoever. If we address our selves
to the Maintainers and Abettors of this Tenet, if we consult the Author and
Publisher of the Questions, if we propose the Case to the Sorbon Doctors and
the Faculty of Paris, we shall find all their answers concurring in this, That
their negative Tenet is no more then an Opinion. For, first, the Publisher of
the Questions coming to speak of the difference between the Deniers and
Abettors of this Power, toward the end of his large Preface.
and the nature and quality thereof, plainly professes, that this difference
is no difference of Faith, but only of Opinions: and the Author of the
Questions calls it an Opinion; a safe Opinion indeed, but no more or other
thing then an Opinion: an Opinion also the Sorbon Doctors take it for* nor is
their own Censure or Doctrine any more then their Opinion. Neither do they, nor
indeed could they with any show of reason, or coherence to their own
principles, discourse at any other rate, or ever intend to screw it up any
higher then an Opinion. For it is not to be imagined, that those grave, learned
and prudent Divines, who in their public Articles concerning Papal and Regal
Authority (in the year 1663.) do not own or look upon any Censures, Vide
Articulos Facultatis Parisiensis de Authoritate Pontificia and Regia, Art. 6.
Decrees or Definitions of Rome, (antecedent to, and abstracting from, the
joint consent or acceptance of the Church as inerrable,) would ever go about
to set up an independent or infallible Chair in the Sorbon, and deliver their
Doctrine either as a Point or Article of faith in it self, or as a Rule of
faith to others, but only as a Rule of Opinion, (if you please) and a Judgment
whereby such as were under their charge might remember to frame and regulate
(not their Faith, but) their Opinions: which are the express words of the
Decree it self. Since then the denial of the Pope's Deposing power neither
does nor can pretend any higher then an Opinion, admit that its being the
Opinion of so many Learned Divines might render it safe to hold and embrace it;
yet its being but an Opinion, though of Learned Divines, renders it unsafe to
swear it, and no less unsafe to abjure what is contrary to it. The Reason I
have already given, Because nothing can lawfully be sworn as true which is not
more then merely probable or probably true, that is, which is not either
certain or infallible: now all the Learned know, that a certain or infallible
Opinion is as great a bull as an uncertain fallible Article of faith; so that
to swear to an Opinion as certainly true, is as much as to swear an Opinion is
no Opinion, and the Swearer does thereby at one breath entangle himself in his
own words, his Reason in a Contradiction, and his Soul in Perjury.

CHAP. VI. A particular Danger of Abjuring the Pope's Deposing power according
to the form set down in the Oath of Allegiance.
I Shall here annex a particular consideration of the woeful Snare those souls
run themselves into, and apparent Danger of Swearing they know not what, who
venture to abjure the Deposing power as it lies expressed in its several
Branches in the Oath of Allegiance; whereas those Learned persons who undertook
to defend and explain the Oath render it not only difficult, but next to
impossible, to understand what it is that is to be abjured. I think I may take
it for granted, that no person of integrity and candor can ever conceive it
lawful for him to swear, without first endeavoring to gain a right
understanding of what he is to swear: for to swear what a man understands not,
is blindly to rove at a venture, and to swear he knows not what, wilfully
abandoning the conduct, and slighting the inward upbraidings and reproofs of
his Reason: and, which is worse, it bewraies a feared Soul, a wretched and
sinful preparedness of mind to prostitute an Oath to the attesting of any
thing that comes next to hand, where Self-indemnity or other secular ends and
advantages are proposed as the accursed purchase or reward of Perjury.

In the Oath of Allegiance it is required of us to abjure the Pope's Deposing
power in all and every its respective Branches therein expressed: one of which
Branches is, That the Pope has not any Power to authorize any foreign Prince
to invade or annoy the King or his Countries. Which Branch (by the way) the
Author and Publisher of the Questions in the form of the Oath set down by them
have wholly omitted in both Editions, as well that of the year 61. as the other
of this present year 74. through what mistake or how occasioned I know not. It
is not easily to be conceived what subtle Obscurities and learned Intricacies
Roger Withrington, one of the greatest Champions that ever appeared for the
Oath, and his friend C. I. (who confesses to have compiled his This Book was
printed in an. 1620. and called The New Year's gift, or, A brief and clear
Explication of the Oath of Allegiance.
Book out of Withrington's express Grounds and Doctrine,) plunge themselves
and their reader into, in descanting upon this one point of the Oath.
Withringt. in Apol. n. 99. and in his other books very often. Also C. I. in his
Explication of the Oath of Allegiance, p. 74.
They tell us, that by this clause is not denied the Pope's Authority to
command (but only his Power to authorize) in Temporals, in order to a
Spiritual good; or, to declare that they who have Authority to depose, or to
make war, are bound to use their Temporal Authority, and to draw the Temporal
sword, when the necessity of the Church and Spiritual good of Souls shall
require the same: for that this Authority to declare and command does not
exceed the limits of a Spiritual power. Thus these Learned Persons.

Let me here entreat the courteous Reader to lend me his eyes and attention to
help me out. For if Temporal Princes, as is here supposed, have Power and
Authority to invade or annoy foreign Princes or their Countries, nay to depose
them, when the good of Souls and necessity of the Church shall require it; if
the Pope is to be Judge of this necessity, and to declare when, against whom,
and upon what occasion the Temporal sword is to act its part by invading or
annoying the delinquent Prince his Person or State; if, I say, the Pope has
Power (though not to authorize, yet) to declare, and not only to declare, but
to command the doing of all this, as being in the line of Spirituality, and
within the vierge of an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: truly my opinion is, (and
I think every sober and disinteressed Judgment will upon due reflection
subscribe to the same,) that this Doctrine, as it contributes little to the
Security of Princes, and as little to the satisfaction of intelligent Readers;
so it is not every one can easily understand, or be able to reconcile it to
truth and its self: for, if I mistake not, it foully clashes with both. For,
(since we are here treating of the Legality or Illegality of an Oath, and what
we may or may not safely swear or abjure,) what can seemingly have more of the
Riddle, or less to the purpose in it, then to be gravely told for our
instruction, and the quieting of our Consciences, that we may lawfully abjure
the Pope's Power of Authorizing, but not in any wise abjure his Power of
Commanding a foreign Prince to invade or annoy His Majesty or His Kingdoms?
Again, that we may safely swear the Pope has no Power to Depose Princes, but
that we must not abjure his Power of Commanding others to depose them? Alas!
and is not this a much mistaken favor, a mere mock-pretence of Security to
Crowned heads, and of ease and relief to troubled Consciences, wholly built
upon this nice and ambiguous Distinction, of Authorizing, and Commanding? A
Distinction in this case so subtle, that it is impossible to find where the
difference lies, and is therefore in very deed no Distinction at all; either in
respect of the King, to whom it is all one, (and His peril or ruin
undistinguishably the same,) whether He be invaded and deposed by the Pope's
Authority, or only by his Command. Neither is it any Distinction in respect of
the Swearer, who cannot securely, nor without a self-contradiction, (from which
this Distinction can never clear him,) swear that the Pope has not any Power
and Authority to depose Princes, if he have Power and Authority to command
others to depose them: because this authoritative injunction of his is enough
to entitle him to the fact; and his very Commanding others to depose, both
makes and denominates him the Deposer.

Besides all this, if it be true what these Authors assume, that Temporal
Princes have (when the good of Souls and the necessity of the Church requires
it) Power to depose one another, how can any man, being of this opinion,
lawfully swear the Pope has not any such Power, who, as we all know, is a mixed
person, and as well a Temporal Prince as a Spiritual Pastor? and therefore it
would argue great partiality in this Doctrine, wholly to exclude him, at least
as he is a Temporal Prince, from his share in the Deposing power: from whence
it would finally follow, that the Oath could not be taken without a distinction
of different formalities in the same person, that is, without distinguishing
the Pope as Pope from himself as he is a Temporal Prince; and then also the two
formalities being at odds, the Temporal Prince would be the more powerful Pope
of the two.

These and the like entangled Positions I take to be clearly consequential, and
absolutely necessary inferences from the aforesaid dark and perplexed discourse
of these Authors. Now the use and advantage the Reader may please to make
hereof is this sober and wholesome reflection, That since Withrington, who
bestowed much pains, and since large and learned Comments, upon the Oath, since
he, I say, whilst he pretends to explain one of the Branches of that very Point
wherein the Substance of the Oath consists, (according to the Author of the
Questions,) leads us into such a Labyrinth of thorny and insignificant
Distinctions, cross and thwarting Niceties of words, as that a more then
ordinary clue of reason and attention is necessary to wind us out; what
conscientious and considerate person of less leisure, industry, learning, and
other abilities, then Withrington was, seriously pondering this Oath, shall
hope he understands what he is to abjure, or dare to abjure what he understands
not?

CHAP. VII. The just Plea of Conscience in refusing to abjure the Deposing
doctrine considered with the like reference to the Depositions of Popes as of
Kings.
I Am much taken with the seasonable advice and wholesome caution I find in the
Fourth of the Controversial Letters, which I shall elsewhere have occasion to
quote more at large: Princes and Bishops, says this Gentleman, ( page 8.) are
both sacred; let what belongs to them be so too, and not touched without the
excuse of necessity, or obligation of duty. It was under the warrant of this
apology to my own thoughts, and the confidence of my Reader's candor, that I
first engaged in this Discourse; and that now, for his farther satisfaction,
(to show that there is nothing of any Popishly-affected partiality in the
refusing this abjuring Oath, but that our Recusancy is wholly grounded upon
sound Reason and upright Conscience,) I shall compare the unlawfulness of
abjuring the Pope's Deposing power, with the like unlawfulness of abjuring the
Power of deposing Popes; both these Powers^ being alike controvertible amongst
some of the Learned, whereof diverse do freely and openly teach that Popes may
be deposed as well as Kings, and for the like cause.

For which end I shall here advance and confront in their several instances
two Propositions of a more large and comprehensive nature in relation to the
Deposing power: as first, That there is absolutely no Power or Authority upon
earth, either Spiritual or Temporal, to depose Kings, let the cause or pretense
be what it will; secondly, That there is absolutely no such Power or Authority
upon earth, Spiritual or Temporal, to depose the Pope. The first of these
Propositions is that which in the year of our Lord 1614. the House of Commons
in France, in the General Assembly of the Three Estates, would have been at,
and offered not only to own and swear to it themselves, as a fundamental and
holy Law, but also passionately endeavored that others should be compelled by
rigorous penalties to do the like. But the project was stifled in the birth,
and the abortive Bill laid aside by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who, well
weighing the controverted nature of the case, were more considerate, and tender
of their Oaths, then to venture them upon a foundation which, take whether side
they pleased, must needs fail, and betray the Swearer to an active sin and
shame.

But what shall we say to the second Proposition? may we not strain a little
farther for the Pope then the King? will not Religion bear us out, if we
adventure to swear, that there is not any Power upon earth, Spiritual or
Temporal, to depose the Pope? To which I answer, It is neither Religion,
Veneration, Duty, or Awe to the Sea of Rome, which ought either to persuade or
extort, any more then it can legitimate, such an Oath; which it can never do,
in regard of the public and unreproved disputableness of the case. For whether
we consider matter of fact or right, it is no news amongst Catholic Divines,
that if the Pope should become an Heretic, (and they grant the [ If] to be no
impossible supposition,) he then forfeits his right to the Apostolical Chair,
and thereupon may lawfully be judged and deposed by the Spiritual power of the
Church. And this is a Doctrine which has been long public to the world; a
Doctrine pretending a Canonical Constitution and a Conciliary Act for its
ground and support; Canon de Papa, Distinct. 40. Synod. 8. act. 7.
a Doctrine not unknown to Italy, yet uncensured at Rome, nay, held and taught
by some who lived and wrote even at the Pope's feet.

Where, by the way, our impartial Schoolmen seem at least to clear themselves
from all sinister prejudices of Favor and Flattery, and the stale imputation
of framing and modelling their Doctrines to the humor and interest of the
Court of Rome; whereas we here see that some of them, and those of eminent
note, make as bold with the common Father of the Church, the Pope himself, and
even run him down with their Speculations as confidently, and with as much show
of zeal, as at other times they set themselves to unthrone the meanest Prince
in Christendom, upon the same pretense. And though his Holiness knows that
Popes sit not so fast, nor are so firmly rivetted to their Thrones, but that
diverse of them have been deposed; and sees withal this particular Deposing
doctrine, threatening Popes no less then Princes, taught under his very eyes,
and for the same cause, and that cause Heresy, and that Heresy has even by
Catholics been charged more then once against some of his Predecessors: yet
(notwithstanding this concurrence and complicated pretense of Fears and
Jealousies) he never goes about to establish his Rights, Person and Authority,
by any such assertory Oath as ours is; but chooses rather to trust Providence
with his concerns, then that the Triple crown should owe any part of its
Security to an illegal and unnecessary Oath, or his people be compelled
needlessly to swear away the peace of their Conscience, for securing that of the
Commonwealth.

But to draw the case yet to a nearer parallel, and to close more particularly
with the Oath of Allegiance, wherein we are commanded to swear, that the Pope
neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, nor by
any other means, with any other, has any Power or Authority to depose the
King; (and this to be understood as to comprehend all causes, cases or
pretenses possible.) Let us spell the Oath backwards, and read Pope for King,
and King for Pope; and then suppose we were enjoined to swear, that no King or
Prince, either of himself or by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or
by any other means, with any other, has in any possible case any Power or
Authority to depose the Pope; let us see what the Schools and the public and
currently-allowed Tenets of Divinity will award as to the taking or refusing
this Oath.

It is acknowledged on all hands, there are diverse instances from history of
Depositions of Popes by Temporal Princes, as well as of Temporal Princes by
Popes, which yet our Divines seem to restrain to the common case of Heresy: and
therefore the otherwise-pious and godly Emperor Otho incurred at least the
mild censure and reprehension of such pens as record the fact, for deposing
Pope John the XII. because (though he was one of the worst of Popes, yet) by
the crime of Heresy he was wanting in the black list of his Offenses to fill up
the measure of his crying Misdemeanors, and justify the Sentence and severity
of his Deposition; though even taking the case as it was, not only the pious
Emperor (says Bellarmine) conceived this Pope might be deposed, Bellarm. de
Romans pont. l. 2. c. 29.
but many Doctors thought so as well as he.

But however, nothing is more certain, then that it is a common and allowed
Opinion of diverse Divines, that in case of Heresy the Pope may be judged and
deposed by the Church. Some of which carry it yet a step farther, adding [
ought] to [ may,] that is, that he not only may, but ought to be deposed: and
that this may and ought is not only the Church's right, but her obligation,
and she thereby bound to proceed to due execution thereof, to the utmost of her
power: and if the Pope, who is to be deposed, should chance to resist, oppose
and stand in defiance of the Church's judgment, and she not in a condition to
call his obstinacy to an account, and to turn him out of his Chair by virtue of
her Spiritual arms alone, and yet her duty still supposed incumbent and
pressing upon her, to discharge and free her self and her Children from the
thraldom of an Usurper; then these Authors will tell us, that the Law of
Nature, or that which is a Law to it self, Necessity, (which even in causes
Ecclesiastical takes upon her to justify force, when nothing but force will
serve, for the compassing a just and necessary end,) will prompt the Church, as
is usual in some other cases, to have recourse to the Temporal Power, and call
in the assistence of the Secular arm to her succor. In which juncture, no
doubt, any King, Prince, or zealous Otho, who would please to interest himself
in and espouse the Church's quarrel, might both deserve and receive her
Commission and thanks, to act with authority, as a welcome auxiliary in the
Holy war, even to the Deposing of the Pope, and placing another in his Throne,
in order to the good of Souls, and the just recovery of the Ecclesiastical
liberties and Spiritual rights.

Here then being a Case confessedly possible, and an Opinion which Authority
renders probable, in which Case, and according to which Opinion, Kings and
Princes have, at least by Authority of the Church, and with others, Power and
Authority to depose the Pope, I see no objection offer it self, but the way
open and fairly smoothed to this Resolution of the Case, That no Catholic can
safely take this counter-Oath, nor securely swear, that no King or Prince,
either of himself, or by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any
other means, with any other, has (in any possible case) any Power or Authority
to depose the Pope.

And therefore comparing the two Oaths together, this and the Oath of
Allegiance, I think that, as no man could rightly be accounted a bad Catholic
at Rome, for denying to take this, so neither can he justly be reputed a bad
Subject in England, for refusing the other; because this Recusancy is equally
blamable in either of the two cases, or absolutely unreprovable in both, the
ground of both being one and the same, which indeed is neither favor nor fear
of man, but rather a just fear of incurring God's disfavour, and the inviolable
duty we owe to Truth, and an upright Conscience, which lays an indispensable
tie of Recusancy upon us, so far as never to take any assertory Oath, requiring
of us to swear or abjure any speculative controverted Doctrines, though we
suppose the Oath to be as much in favor of the Pope, as our Oath of Allegiance
is conceived to be of the King.

CHAP. VIII.
Abjuring the Deposing doctrine neither is, nor can be any part of the Oath, as
it is an Oath of Allegiance* and therefore not at all necessary to a true Oath
of Allegiance.

More Allegiance may be sworn, and better Security given to Princes, by
abjuring all Discourses and Disputes in favor of the Deposing doctrine, then
by abjuring the Doctrine it self.

I Have seen, and taken some pains to peruse, a printed at London 1649.
Book of Oaths, and the several terms thereof, (above two hundred in all,) both
ancient and modern, foreign and domestic, out of sundry authentic Books and
Records, wherein, amongst so many Oaths of Fealty, Service and Duty, as are
mentioned there, (which generally run in the promissory strain,) I find not one
that injoyns the swearing or abjuring of any controverted Doctrine, save only
our two Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; which upon that account lie under
the just exception (as I think) of being singular and without precedent in
their kind: wherefore what the Author of the Questions so expressly assumes,
(my self also, for his and the Argument's sake, having been willing hitherto to
go along with him in his own supposition,) viz. that the Abjuring the Pope's
Deposing power is the Substance of the Oath, cannot be strictly made out
without the help and allowance of a distinction, nor regularly understood but
only of the assertory part: for otherwise, if we speak properly, it is so far
from being the Substance, that it is not so much as a Part of the Oath, as it
is an Oath of Allegiance, and a Bond of Duty from the Subject to his Supreme
Lord.

And of this there will need little proof, when it is considered, S. Thomas
2.2. qu. 89. ar. 7.
that the Bond of an Oath is in reference to something which is to be performed
for the future; and therefore cannot appertain to an assertory Oath, (which is
a thing present or past,) but belongs only to a promissory Oath. Wherefore
since it is plain, that this abjuring the Pope's Deposing power is an assertory
Oath, there can be no doubt, that it being in it self, and in the nature of the
thing, no Bond at all, it can be no Bond of Allegiance, and therefore also no
part of the Oath as it is an Oath of Allegiance.

And if the forbearing all Disputes and Discourses any ways favoring the
Deposing power may be (as I think it is) looked upon as part of our Allegiance;
then it follows likewise, that more Allegiance may be sworn by the promissory
Oath, in abjuring all such Disputes and Discourses in favor and defense of the
Deposing doctrine, then by abjuring the Doctrine it self; because this last
Oath of abjuring the Doctrine it self, being purely assertory, contains no
Promise, Bond, or Tie at all: so that in fine it is the promissory Oath alone
that is the true Oath of Allegiance, and the sole Bond of Duty from the Subject
to his Prince.

This I take to be the reason why some learned Catholics, who understood both
themselves, the difference of Oaths, and the nature of Allegiance, full well,
having upon sundry emergent occasions exhibited to the public several Oaths of
fidelity for the quieting of all State-jealousies and fears from the Pope's
Deposing power, have wholly confined themselves to the promissory form. Thus 13
Catholic Priests made a solemn Protestation of their Allegiance to Queen
Elizabeth by a public Instrument the last day of January, and the last year of
Her Majesty's reign, wherein, after having acknowledged the Queen (though
divided from the Church of Rome in Communion) for their true and lawful
Sovereign, they promised that they would yield to Her Majesty all Obedience in
Temporal causes, notwithstanding any Authority or any Excommunication
whatsoever denounced, or to be denounced, against Her Majesty or Her Subjects.

The like Declaration and Acknowledgment Mr. James Haughton, (alias Mr. Thomas
Green,) Professor of Divinity of the holy Order of Saint Benedict, gave under
his hand to the then Lord Bishop of Durham, the 5. November An. 1619. and did
promise and vow to be a true and faithful Subject to His Majesty and His
Successors during his life, notwithstanding any Sentence from the Pope
whatsoever of Excommunication, Deposition, or Absolution of His Majesty's
Subjects from their natural Obedience to Him or His Heirs.

There has of late years been often reprinted a brief Explanation of the Roman
Catholic belief concerning their Church-worship, justification, and Civil
government, in the last clause whereof are these express words: We are (say
they) most strictly and absolutely bound to the exact and entire performance of
our Promises made to any person of what Religion soever, much more to the
Magistrates and Civil Powers under whose protection we live, whom we are taught
to obey by the Word of God, not only for fear, but Conscience sake, and to
whom we will most faithfully observe our Promises of Duty and Obedience,
notwithstanding any Dispensation, Absolution, or other proceedings of any
foreign Power or Authority whatsoever. And this they sincerely and solemnly
professed in the sight of God, History of the Irish Remonstrance first part of
the first Treatise, 3.86.

The Publisher of the Questions in his Preface to the Author himself, page 25.
And the Protestant in the 9. Controversial Letter.


the Searcher of all hearts, without any equivocation or mental reservation
whatsoever.

The Objection which some offer against the sufficiency of these or the like
forms, grounded upon the difference which the Objectours make between [ Will
not] and [ Cannot,] is, in my opinion, wholly groundless: what they pretend
with so much solicitude in behalf of the State being only this, That it is not
enough for a man to swear he Will not, unless he swear also he Cannot be
dispensed with or absolved from his Allegiance. Which to me seems no reason at
all, why Will not may not be as good a Subject, and give as full security for
his Allegiance, as Cannot: his Oath by which he swears he will not ever accept
or make use of any Dispensation or Absolution from his Allegiance, being to him
as indispensably binding, and tying him as fast to his Prince and his interest,
as any Oath can possibly do. For if it be replied, that he who now swears he
will not ever accept or make use of any such Dispensation or Absolution, may
come hereafter to alter his mind; and then what is become of his cobweb-Oath,
and the security he gave for his Fidelity? It may with as much reason and truth
be retorted, that he who now swears he cannot be dispensed with, nor absolved
from his Allegiance, may come hereafter to alter his opinion; and then where is
his cobweb-Oath, and the security he gave for his Fidelity? I answer then for
both, That though Wills and Opinions are flippery things, yet an Oath may fix
both the one and the other; yet with this difference and advantage against the
foresaid Opinion, that Wills may be fixed immediately, Opinions only
mediately, and indeed by no other means then by first fixing of Wills.

First then, that an Oath may immediately fix and restrain the Will, I take to
be a clear case: for he that swears (for example) he will not do such or such
a thing tending to the prejudice of a third person, is without more ado under
as straight and indispensable a ty as any Oath can bring upon him; that is, he
cannot so much as change his Will, nor go back with his Promise, without
Perjury, and proving false to God, his own heart, and his Oath. As for
Opinions, since it has been already proved, that it can never be safe to swear
or abjure an Opinion; and then, (secondly,) though it were, yet such an Oath,
being an assertory Oath, could bring no bond or obligation upon the Swearer, so
much as of not changing his Opinion for the future: hence it plainly follows,
that the way of fixing and restraining Opinions is only mediately, and by
first fixing and restraining the Will, either by a promissory Oath, or by the
severity of the Law, or by both jointly. For instance, take in King Henry the
VIII. his days; upon occasion of the then Six famed Articles of Religion, it
was ordained and enacted by authority of Parliament, H. 8.31.
That if any person or persons within this Realm of England, or in any other of
the King's dominions, did by word, or writing, printing, cyphering, or any
otherwise, publish, preach, teach, say, affirm, declare, dispute, argue, or
hold any Opinion contrary to the foresaid Articles, that then such person or
persons so offending should be liable to such and such particular penalties as
are expressed in the Statute.

Were this pattern copied out by our Age, and that there were a Law now in
force, That if any person or persons within this Realm, or in any other of the
King's dominions, did by word, writing, printing, cyphering, or any other
ways, publish, preach, teach, say, affirm, declare, dispute, argue, or hold
any Opinion in favor of the Pope's Power of deposing Princes, that then such
person or persons so offending should be liable to such and such penal
severities, as the Legislative power of this Nation had in their grave wisdom
thought fit to appoint; were there, I say, such an Act as this in force, he who
would swear to a strict observance thereof, would have no more to answer for
his Opinions in this particular.

But yet again, though there be no such Law extant, let but the good Subject be
admitted to swear, that he will never by word, deed, or any otherwise,
countenance, abett, defend, maintain, preach, teach, or publish any Opinion in
favor of the Pope's direct or indirect Deposing power, and for the rest, that
he will inviolably bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King, notwithstanding
any Dispensation or whatever other proceeding to the contrary, and not only
never act against Him, but also assist, to the best of his power and skill, and
side with Him against any Power whatsoever, that shall at any time act against
Him, or attempt against His Sacred Person, Crown, or Dignity: Questionless, no
Security imaginable can be greater then this; forasmuch as no one can be more
faithfully true to his King, or more securely incapable of proving disloyal to
Him, whilst this Oath is kept. And for security that he will keep it, I
conceive, no good Subject will refuse to swear that he will be content, if ever
he fail in the performance hereof, to be deemed and adjudged a Disturber of the
peace, and an Enemy to his King and Country, a man forsworn before God and the
world; and will therefore freely offer to be punished as in case of Perjury and
Rebellion, that is, to forfeit his Body to the Law, his Soul to the doom and
wrath of the last day, and his Name to scorn and reproach. Were this thoroughly
weighed and duly sworn, I know no Expedient that could more effectually
contribute to the perfect quieting of all just fears of the State, nor more
securely answer for the peaceable disposition and opinions of the Swearer;
whenas even the most hidden thoughts and abstracted notions of the speculative
man, being under unjust restraint, and having for guaranty such an Oath and
sacred Engagement, are sufficiently bound to their good behavior, and secured
from all sacrilegious attempts of breaking enclosure, and showing themselves
abroad, though only by way of public and open discourse.

Wherefore I shall conclude with the Fourth Controversial Letter, in behalf of
the silencing and abjuring all Disputes in reference to the Deposing doctrine,
heartily wishing, as Page 8.
he does, that we may all preserve the majesty of Supreme powers in an awful
distance, and submit to them with the reverence of a quiet Obedience, and not
make them cheap by unreasonable Disputes. Princes and Bishops are both sacred;
let what belongs to them be so too, and not touched, without the excuse of
necessity, or obligation of duty: let every quiet and peaceable spirit say,
Obedience is the duty which God and my condition require from me; and in the
performance of that I will endeavor to be found unblamable, and leave
disputing to those who value the praise of a witty and subtle man, above that
of a faithful and quiet Subject.

CHAP. IX. An Answer to the Author of the Questions as far as concerns our
present Question.
IN the first place I shall speak to matter of fact, relating to the Sorbon
Censures, and the Subscription of the French Jesuits; the clearing of both
which particulars from some unwary misrepresentations and disguises of our
Author shall be the chief subject of this Chapter.

The first and leading Censure was that of the Sacred Faculty of Theology,
which, upon occasion and mature examination of a certain Latin Book printed at
Rome 1625. having in the 30. and 31. Chapters found these Propositions, That
the Pope may with temporal punishments chastise Kings and Princes, depose and
deprive them of their Estates and Kingdoms, for the crime of Heresy, and exempt
their Subjects from the Obedience due to them; and that this custom has been
always practiced in the Church, etc. and on the 4. of April 1626. censured
these Propositions of that pernicious Book, and condemned the Doctrine therein
contained as new, false, erroneous, contrary to the Word of God, rendering
odious the Papal dignity, opening a gap to Schism, derogative of the Sovereign
Authority of Kings, which depends on God alone, retarding the conversion of
Infidels and Heretical Princes, disturbing the public Peace, tending to the
ruin of Kingdoms and Republics, diverting Subjects from the Obedience due to
their Sovereigns, precipitating them into Faction, Rebellion, Sedition, and
even to commit Parricides on the Sacred Persons of their Princes:

The University of Paris in their General Assembly on the 20. of April 1626.
decreed, that this Censure should be publicly read every year; and that if any
Doctor, Professor, Master of Arts, or Scholar, should resist, disobey, or
make any the least opposition against the said Censure, he should immediately
be expelled, and deprived of his Degree, Faculty and Rank, without hopes of
re-admittance.

The like Decrees on the same occasion, the same year, against the same
Doctrine, were made by Seven other Universities of France. Likewise the French
Jesuits subscribed the Sorbon Censures, as the Author of the Questions tells
us. And that this was actually done, he is confident will not be denied: that
it was commanded, we need no farther evidence (says he) then the Arrest it self
of the Parliament of Paris, dated the 17. of March 1626. wherein it is ordered,
that the Priests and Scholars of Clairmont, and of the other two Houses which
the Jesuits have in Paris, should within three days subscribe the Censure made
by the Faculty of Sorbon. This the Author of the Questions; who needed not
have been so confident of this last evidence drawn from the Arrest of the
Parliament, which doubtless must needs be a mistake: for otherwise, (unless we
be resolved to rob the Year 1626. of some more days then were thrown out of
the Year 1582. for the Reformation of the Calendar,) it will be a little hard
to understand, how the Jesuits should be commanded, by an Arrest of Parliament
dated the 17. of March 1626. to subscribe the Sorbon Censures within three
days, whereas the first of these Censures was not made before the 4. of April
1626. and the other not before the 20. day of the same month and year, even
according to his own computation. The occasion and ground of the mistake, I
conceive, was this; In the month of December 1625. the Sorbon issued out a
Censure against another Book, entitled Admonitio ad Regem; and it was the
single Censure against this Book, and not the two other Censures against
Santarellus his Book, (as our Author mistakingly supposed,) which the Jesuits
were commanded to subscribe within three days by an Arrest of Parliament dated
the 17. of March 1626. and looking back to December 1625.

This very quotation and copy of the Censure of the 4. of April is not free
from its mistake, or at least of begetting a mistake in others, and making them
think the Censure more clear and home to the point then possibly it is. For
amongst the Propositions and Doctrines which the Faculty of Theology had found
in the 30. and 31. Chapters of Santarellus his Book, the Author of the
Questions having only set down these, That the Pope may with temporal
punishments chastise Kings and Princes, depose and deprive them of their
Estates and Kingdoms, for the crime of Heresy, and exempt their Subjects from
the Obedience due to them, and that this Custom has been always practiced in
the Church -- here he cuts off what follows, and defeats his Reader of his full
information with an unreasonable [ etc.] as if these Propositions were the
only, or at least the principal, object of the Censure: which yet may justly
be doubted, for the Faculty goes on in the charge against Santarellus, See the
Censure it self, and first Cont. Letter, page 13.
as teaching in the foresaid Chapters, That Princes may be punished and
deposed, not only for Heresy, but for other causes; (1.) for their faults,
(2.) if it be expedient, (3.) if they be negligent, (4.) if their persons be
insufficient, (5.) if unusefull, and the like; and then follows the Censure it
self, not singly and separately upon each Proposition by it self, (which yet is
the usual method of the Faculty,) but upon the whole taken in gross: which puts
a quite different face upon the matter from what our Author had given it, and
renders it doubtful whether the Faculty would have pronounced so severe a
Judgment against the first part of the Doctrine, had not those last
Propositions proved to be the aggravating circumstance (or rather cause) that
deservedly occasioned and sharpened the Censure.

As to the Subscription of the Jesuits, the true account of that action stands
thus: Santarellus his Book had been condemned at Rome, which it was not for our
Author's purpose to take notice of, and his Doctrine generally cried down, and
disavowed by all good men, before ever it fell under the brand of the Sorbon
Censures: all which notwithstanding, such and so eminently singular was the
caution and zeal of France against this (though already sufficiently suppressed)
mischief, that upon the 14. of March 1626. the Principal of the French Jesuits,
with three Superiors, and three other ancient Fathers, being summoned to
appear before the Parliament of Paris, and being asked what they held as to the
Points noted in Santarellus; Father Cotton, the then Provincial, (having in the
name of the rest of his Order disclaimed all singularity of Opinions different
from other Divines,) answered, That the Doctrine of the Sorbon should be
theirs, and what the Faculty of Paris should determine and subscribe, they were
ready to subscribe also. And this indeed may pass for a Subscription to the
Sorbon Censures, even before they were made.

But from this Subscription of the French Jesuits our Author runs into another
mistake, seeming to wonder why the English Jesuits should scruple a downright
Oath, which is exacted of us, any more then the French Jesuits did a simple
Subscription, which was only required of them: And then taking upon him a
sober and grave style to open the mystery of (this particular) Iesuitism, he
attempts it in these very terms.

Now were I demanded a reason, (says he) why so circumspect and wise a Body
should act so differently in the same Cause, but different Countries, I could
only return this conjectural answer, That, being wary and prudent persons,
they could not but see the concerns they hazarded in France, by refusing to
subscribe, far more important then what they ventured at Rome, by subscribing*
whenas in England all they can forfeit by declining the Oath of Allegiance
(being themselves but few, and without the engagements of Colleges and
Foundations,) is perhaps of less esteem with them, then the interest of their
universal Body at Rome, whence so many advantages are continually derived to
the rest of their Society. This is to a tittle his full discourse upon this
subject.

And now were I demanded a reason, why this Gentleman should thus freely let
loose to a weak and mere conjecturall descant upon the very thoughts and secret
intentions of religious men, (as if any temporal interest were or could be more
dear to, or sway more with them then Loyalty to their King and Country,) my
charity would prompt me to ascribe it to something of a too precipitate and
mistaken zeal, or sinister preoccupation of judgment, which is too easily
taken up at unawares in this Age of ours, and oftentimes fostered to the great
prejudice of the innocent, even by persons otherwise of a sober and no
immoderate temper; who might do a great deal of right, no less to themselves
then others, would they be pleased to consider, that this is a great breach of
Christian Charity, and is one day sadly to be reckoned for, when an impartial
and all-knowing Justice shall sit upon the Bench to judge between man and man.

Neither is the strength of the Gentleman's Discourse, nor the depth of his
Politics, such, but that a very common reason and an easy reflection (bating
passion and prejudice) may be Machiavil enough both to fathom and answer him.
For if the Cause of the French and English Jesuits were the same, (as he
pretends it is,) and withal they supposed to be those circumspect, wise, wary,
prudent persons, as he is pleased to character them in this place; then the
English Jesuits must needs see, that by writing after the copy which the French
Jesuits have set them, they could not in any likelihood hazard any of their
public concerns at Rome, nor justly fear the endangering the interest of their
universal Body there, by acting no more then the French had done in the same
Cause without any known check or censure from the Sea Apostolic to this day.
And the Author of the Questions affords me a convincing proof of this in his
second Question, from whose mouth I take the words, and argue thus; That if
there be Reasons enough to turn the eye of Authority quite away from seeing
what the French (Jesuits) so openly avowed in the face of the world, are there
not enough to connive at the English (Jesuits,) who are but a few, and act
privately, and not without the excusing plea of extreme necessity? The Argument
cannot be disliked, because it is perfectly his own. Wherefore if (as he says)
the Cause of the English and French Jesuits be the same, I conceive our Author
was much mistaken in his conjectural answer, as to the reason he assigns of
their different Actings in the same Cause. For if the Cause be not the same,
(as plainly it is not,) then this mistake is much the greater, and his charity
the less. Had he produced a Censure against the Pope's Deposing power (equal to
that of the Sorbon) drawn up, signed and assented to by the generality of
Seculars and Regulars here in England, (for the satisfaction of the State,
demanding as a Test of our Allegiance the Subscription of such a Censure,) and
the Jesuits alone should stand out, and refuse to subscribe and set their hands
to it; or if he had given us an Oath of Allegiance, exactly parallel to ours,
taken by the French Jesuits, and declined by the English; then indeed the Cause
of both had been the same, and their Actings different: but these two
conditions both failing, that is, the French Jesuits having no such Oath of
Allegiance to take as ours, nor the English any such Censure to subscribe as
the French; evidently the Cause of the one and the other is not the same, and
so it will be no wonder to an impartial. Considerer they should act differently
in different Causes: though I shall show afterward, that nothing can
difference either their Principles or Practices, where the Cause will bear it.

Another mistake of the Author of the Questions is, the very reason given by
him why he conceives the distinction between a simple Subscription and a
downright Oath to be a mere unnecessary Scruple; because (says he) no sincere
and generous honesty will solemnly and deliberately attest under his hand, what
he will not in due circumstances swear to be true. How? swear to be true? and
yet this Gentleman knew full well (had he but reflected on it) that the only
Question here is, of Swearing or Abjuring Opinions. Wherefore had this Reason
of his fallen under Montalt's hands, and that he had caught it dropping from a
Iesuit's pen, how he would have answered it I know not: but I am sure, the
daily practice of the Church, in a free and unoffensive Subscribing of
Opinions, abundantly confutes it: for what more usual amongst our greatest
Divines, in resolving Cases of weight and concern, then to deliver and attest
their Opinion under their hand? And was it not thus that the Faculty of
Theology delivered and subscribed their Censure, as a Judgment for others to
remember to frame and regulate their Opinions by? So speaks the Decree itself.
Again, does not our Author himself, in his Preface, reason the case in this
very manner, that if three or four Doctors, nay perhaps one, who has well
studied the point, can make an Opinion safe, how much more where a greater
number and whole Universities engage their Judgment? And if then the French
Jesuits, submitting their own, subscribed to the Judgment of the University of
Paris, and by it were willing to frame and regulate their own Opinions; let any
friend of our Author, or his Principles, speak wherein or what was their
trespass. For if, as he argues, the Authority of so many Catholic Doctors
rendered their Opinion safe; sure it could not be unsafe in the Jesuits to
subscribe it as such. But now, to draw a general consequence from a simple
Subscription to a downright Oath, as our Author does, and to conclude, that a
sincere and generous honesty will oblige a man, in due circumstances, to swear
every thing he attests under his hand to be true; this, in other terms, is to
conclude, that a sincere and generous honesty will oblige a man in some
circumstances to act against Reason and Conscience, by swearing an Opinion to
be true: which kind of Oath is a gross offense both against Logic and
Divinity, and no less then Sacrilege and Self-contradiction, as has been
already proved in the Fifth Chapter.

The last mistake (waving many others) I shall concern my self with at present
is found in the Author's Fourth Question, where he informs his Reader, that
the Jesuits are the strictest of all Religious in maintaining and extending the
Pope's Prerogatives. This he gives and attests under his hand in print: but I
hope his sincere and generous honesty would have been loath deliberately to
swear it to be true: for as I question not but he was too good a Christian
deliberately to swear an untruth* so I think he was too much a Scholar
deliberately to take this for a truth. For let any learned and unprejudiced
person but compare Bellarmine, Suarez, or any other Writer of the Society, not
only with the loose and exorbitant Fantasies of Carerius, Musconius, or
Zecchius, but with other grave Religious men, with Panormitanus, Alvares
Pelagius, Augustinus Triumphas, Bosius, and too many others to be listed here;
and then let him freely judge and speak as he sees cause, which of these
Religious are the strictest in maintaining and extending the Pope's
Prerogatives. I am sure Io. Barkley, Io. Barkley in his Vindiciae, page 106.
one of Bellarmine's greatest adversaries, was yet so just to him, as to let
the world know, that Sixtus Quintus expressed his great displeasure (and it was
near passing to a Censure) against the Learned Cardinal, not for extending,
but rather for clipping the Pope's Prerogatives, by disputing and writing so
much as he did against the direct Power, and so giving less to the Pope then
the Pope himself claimed, and other Religious men asserted as his due. Besides,
how can it be averred with truth, that the Jesuits are the strictest Religious
in maintaining and extending the Prerogative of the Deposing power, who of all
Religious are the only persons that, by especial Precept and Decree, This the
Publisher of the Questions observes.
(which was first made by themselves, and afterward renewed at the instance of
the Parliament of Paris,) have silenced this Doctrine in their Pulpits, shut
their School-doors against it, banished it from their public Disputes, and
suffer not so much as the mention of it to pass under their Pens, unless where
necessity or duty make it a Crime to be wholly silent?

Lastly, how far the Jesuits are from being the strictest in maintaining and
extending the Pope's Prerogatives by any particular Doctrine of their own, and
how ready they are to disavow and renounce all singularity in this kind, both
England and France afford us a fair instance, in a very observable (and, I
think, unexceptionable) harmony of professions and acting between the English
and French Jesuits in point of Allegiance. For as father Cotton, the mouth and
speaker of the rest of his Order in France, freely offered, that the Doctrine
of the Sorbon should be theirs, and that what the Faculty of Paris should
determine and subscribe, they were ready to subscribe also: so in the year
1661. (the very year wherein these Questions concerning the Oath of Allegiance
first came to light) an English Jesuit, in the behalf of the rest of his
Brethren, The Account of the Jesuits Life and Doctrine, page 120.
offered in print, that what Oath of Allegiance the English Clergy and other
Religious should agree upon, that they would most readily take themselves, and
willingly invite all others to take it. An evidence then which I think a
greater cannot easily be given, how far they are from any particular kindness
to any less allowable Doctrine of their own, who show so much of submission and
deference to others Judgments, as best suiting with the modesty and humility of
Religious men.

CHAP. X. The rest of the Answer to the Author of the Questions.
AFter a careful survey, and a no less impartial then particular and due
examination, of his small Treatise, I find the main Question throughout the
whole so generally mis-stated by him, even contrary to his own express
assertions, and the very terms wherein he first proposed, and thereby engaged
to dispute it, (which I set down in the First Chapter, and purposely stated the
principal Controversy out of him, with this previous and particular
Observation, That our present Question was not, Whether a Catholic may safely
deny, but, deny by Oath, (that Denial also being the very Substance of the
Oath,) and universally abjure the Pope's Power of deposing Princes:) which
point he has treated so cursorily, and spoken so little directly to it, that
the only application of my former discourse by way of Answer to his few
proofs, will be all the Answer which the rest of his Book can justly claim, and
the discovery of his Mistakes will be the refutation of his Arguments.

As first, where he endeavors to fetch the parallel over from France to
England, arguing from the Censures and Judgment of the French Divines, and
pressing the Question home, why we may not safely and uncensurably profess as
much as they. To which is answered from the foresaid grounds, That though we
might safely and uncensurably profess as much as they, yet it is one thing to
profess as much as they, and another to swear as much as they profess; and that
though the first might, yet the second cannot be safely and uncensurably done:
and this for the same reason which by repeated instances I have often
inculcated, that where Catholic Divines teach differently, some one way, some
another, there can be no safe ground for an assertory Oath in either way,
because, choose which of the two ways you please, it will still be a Question
amongst the Learned, whether Truth lies in that way or no; and it is this
Questionableness of the Point (till the Church interpose for the decision of
the Case) will rise up in judgment against the Swearer, and make out the charge
of Perjury against him. And truly, were there no more in taking the Oath of
Allegiance, then in Subscribing the Sorbon Censures, I would gladly ask this
Question of the Author or Publisher of the Questions, That whereas the said
Oath has been long since translated, and has now traveled abroad in the
Latin tongue for some more then one or two scores of years, how it comes to
pass that so many famous French Universities, which so unanimously and solemnly
and deeply condemn this Position of the Pope's Deposing power, (and all this,
as the Author of the Questions observes, without constraint, voluntarily
delivering their free Judgment, unmenaced by their King, unconcerned in
Self-preservation,) should not (at least out of a common concern for Religion,
whose credit is at stake, or out of a sense of Compassion to us their suffering
Brethren in England, where our Laws so threatningly command, and our All is so
near concerned) voluntarily deliver their free Judgment, and unanimously
subscribe our Oath, and by their Subscribing encourage us to the taking of it;
if it were really true, that the taking of the said Oath amounted to no more
then the denying or condemning of this Position of the Pope's Deposing power,
or that a simple denying and denying by Oath, or condemning and abjuring, were
all one.

Then for his next Argument, (That however the Deposing power may by some be
held speculatively probable; yet, as to any execution, it is practically no
Power at all against one in possession, and consequently may be abjured as
such;) This, I say, seems too plainly to beg the question, and to take that for
an uncontrovertible truth, which has been already shown (and is necessarily
implied in the very state of the Question) to be the chief, or rather the only
point in controversy, between the Deniers and Assertors of the Deposing power.
For, that this Deposing doctrine has been held by Popes and other Learned
Divines, not only as speculatively probable, but also as safely practicable,
even against one in possession, appears manifestly, not only by their open
pretense and claim, but also by their frequent and public Sentence of
Deposition against several Sovereign Powers, (all of them actually in
possession,) even from the time of the Emperor Hen. IV. to the days of King
Hen. IV. of France, So Onuphrius mentions him, lib. 4. Devaria creat. Romans Pont.
the first and last of Christian Princes who stand as instances upon record,
and sad testimonialls, of Papal Deposition; the one having had the Sentence of
Deprivation passed against him by Pope Gregory VII. the other by Sixtus V.
England in particular has cause to remember and deplore the lamentable effects
of the like Sentence pronounced by Paulus Tertius against King Hen. VIII. and
of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth. Likewise I have already, in the Fourth
Chapter, quoted the testimony and free acknowledgment of the Author of the
Questions, that this act of deposing Kings has not only been done by Popes,
but approved by Councills. All which I do not produce (any more then he himself
does) with the least intention or design to interest my self in the decision of
that Question, or to prove that the Doctrine is in it self practically
probable; but only that it was held so by Popes, Councils, and Learned
Divines; and therefore, as being a controverted Point of doctrine, can be no
due and immediate object of an assertory Oath, nor safely abjurable (even by
those who otherways hold it safely deniable) as practically no Power at all.

There follows another Argument, which the Author of the Questions, in
pursuance of his usual way of arguing, and conformably to the title of his
Work, proposes by way of Quere. Let them tell me, (says he, page 25.) are
they not ready to swear they will faithfully serve their King whiles they live,
and that notwithstanding any Papal Dispensation, or whatever other proceeding
to the contrary? What signifies this but an express renouncing all Obedience to
the Pope in these Points? True, say they, we renounce Obedience, but not the
acknowledgment of his Power: we will adhere to the King, though the Pope should
depose him; but will not say he cannot depose him. What wise and real
difference (as to Government and the practical part of humane life) can we
imagine between these two, I Will swear never to obey my Commander, and, I Will
swear he has no Power to command me?

The sum of the first part of this Discourse (which is quite besides the
Question) in a short word is this, either deny the Pope's Authority, or obey
it: so that if those good Subjects, who are ready to swear they will adhere to
the King, though the Pope should depose him, will but say (though not swear) he
cannot depose him, (which is no more then with the French Divines to deny the
Deposing power,) then the Gentleman and the first part of his Argument are
satisfied. Now to his Question that follows, (which is the second, and indeed
the only pertinent part of his Argument;) what wise and real difference (as to
Government and the practical part of humane life) there is between these two,
I Will swear never to obey my Commander, and, I Will swear he has no Power to
command me; they will easily answer, that the last of these two Oaths is an
assertory Oath, and swears to a disputable piece of Doctrine as to an absolute
Truth, which is downright Perjury, as has been proved already in the 2.3.4.
and 5. Chapters: the other ( I Will swear never to obey my Commander, to wit, the
Pope, in this particular case of Deposing the King,) being a promissory Oath,
and tending wholly to practice, engages not for the absolute truth of any
Doctrine, but only for the Swearer's Allegiance and Loyalty, and therefore
requires no absolute certainty to build on, but only a safe and
practically-probable Opinion, as a sufficiently-strong principle of action,
such as the Author of the Questions everywhere designedly maintains the
Denial of the Pope's Deposing power to be; from whence they will lastly
conclude, that there is as much difference between these two Oaths as between
Perjury and Loyalty: and sure that is difference enough, even as to Government
and the practical part of humane life.

In the last place comes his conjectural proof, or rather his mere affirmative
presumption, That our glorious Ancestors, who refused, and suffered for
refusing, the Oath of Allegiance, would certainly have changed their judgment,
had they but seen, read, perused, examined, and thoroughly considered, all those
many particulars which he dilates upon in a large flourish of words. To all
which my Fifth Chapter may serve for a Reply, and a sufficient evidence, that
had these worthy Predecessors of ours seen the unanimous Judgment of so many
Universities, and the public Subscriptions of so many eminent Regulars, (they
are the words of the Author of the Questions;) had they examined the sense of
Antiquity toward Sovereign Princes, which acknowledge them Supreme in
Temporals, and accountable to none but God; had they read the learned Treatises
composed by Catholic Writers, both of our own and other Nations, where this
King-dethroning Power is absolutely disavowed; had they perused the
Declarations of the Kings in France, and Arrests of Parliaments there; had
they, I say, done all this, and more then this; yet after all, they could have
found the Opinion denying the Deposing power to be no more then an Opinion.
Neither the Judgment of the French Universities, nor the learned Treatises of
both the Barkleys, father and son, nor Withrington's Gloss and Exposition,
together with the Apologetical answer, his Theological Disputation, and
whatever else he wrote against Suarez, Lessius, Fitzherbert and Skulkenius, can
prove it to be any more then an Opinion, in the opinion of the Author and
Publisher of the Questions. And since that enough has already been said to
prove, that an opinionative assent cannot safely ground a conscientious Oath,
asserting the truth or abjuring the falsehood of the thing that is sworn, I
shall now pass to this final conclusion of my Discourse, That whereas it is the
voice and Law of Nature, that Protection claims Allegiance, and that perfect
Subjection to Civil Powers under which we live is the strict injunction no less
then dictate of Reason, whereby it comes to pass that nothing is or ought to be
more inviolably dear to a loyal heart, nor more highly and justly valuable in
it self, then to be and to bear the name of a good Subject; (life and fortunes
are nothing to it:) yet since that to take the Oath as it lies, were to
over-buy that precious title, by making Perjury the price of it, and laying out
our very Souls upon the purchase, whenas it is to be had at a much cheaper
rate, and as with more ease to the Conscience of the Subject, See Chap. 8.
so with no less Security to the Prince; we must conclude upon the whole, that
it can never be lawful thus to rob God of the things that are God's, under
pretense of rendering unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, nor to ground
our Allegiance to the King upon the forfeiture of our Loyalty to the King of
Kings.

THE THIRD TREATISE AGAINST THE OATH of ALLEGIANCE.
Several Considerations proposed for the satisfaction of such Catholics as
desire to be informed concerning the Oath of Allegiance, Enacted Tertio Iacobi,
Capite quarto.

1. COncerning the Lawfulness of an Oath in general; Consider, First, that (as
all do confess) three Conditions are requisite for the Lawfulness of an Oath,
viz. Truth, Justice, and Necessity. So that an Oath wherein any thing
whatsoever contained, though never so little, is either unjust, false, or
doubtful, or if the taking of it be not necessary and effectual to some good
end, is unlawful, and ought to be refused. Secondly, Consider, that any Oath
whatsoever, wherein any of the forementioned Conditions is wanting, is,
according to the constant sentiment of Divines, intrinsecally evil, and such
as cannot be justified in any case possible, though never so great good be
hoped for by taking it, or never so great evil be feared by refusing it.
Thirdly, Consider, that whoever takes any Oath, though in it self never so
just, without a due previous Consideration, swears rashly, and commits a
grievous Sin. To this all do agree. Whence I conclude, That to the end one may
lawfully take this Oath, it is necessary that, after a serious Consideration,
he finds nothing therein unjust, nothing false, nothing doubtful, and that he
judges the taking thereof to be requisite and effectual for some good intent.

2. Concerning the Unlawfulness of this Oath, deduced from the Briefs of Popes
issued forth against it, Consider, First, that the Unlawfulness of this Oath
has been declared by Vide aliud Breve Paul. V. ad D. Georg. Birket 1. Febr.
1608. aliud Urban. VIII. ad Regem Galliae 3. Maii 1626. and aliud ejusdem
Pontis. eodem die and anno ad Episcop. Chalcedonensem.
three several Briefs of Popes. The First was issued forth by Paul the V.
September 21. 1606. the Second by the same Pope September 21. 1607. the Third
by Pope Urban the VIII. May 30. 1626. This neither Protestants nor Catholics
deny.

Secondly, Consider, that several things are contained or involved in this
Oath, the decision whereof appertains only to the Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Court; viz. How far the Spiritual Power extends it self, What
Authority Christ left to the Supreme Spiritual Pastor as such, What are the
effects of an Excommunication, What Propositions are Heretical: and the main
debate about this Oath is, Whether it be Sinful or not. The decision of all
which things, (wherein consists the chief difficulty of this Oath,) according
to the unanimous consent of both Catholics and Protestants, belongs only to
the Ecclesiastical Court.

Withrington, the great Stickler for the Oath, made his Supplic. to Paul V. p.
2.91. Vide etiam Supplic. Thom. Prestoni and Thom. Greeni ad Greg. XV.
humble address to the Pope concerning this matter, representing unto him his
Reasons for the Lawfulness thereof, and earnestly beseeching him, that, laying
aside the Misinformation of others, he would be pleased to give his Judgment
therein according to his own knowledge. Which certainly he would never have
done, had he not been persuaded that there was something contained in this
Oath, the Judgment whereof did appertain to the Pope and to the Ecclesiastical
Court. Moreover, the same Author, with other Catholics who have written in
defense of the Oath, do plainly profess, that, were the Unlawfulness thereof
declared by a General Council, they would think themselves bound to submit. And
yet neither in that case would they be bound to submit, were not the Cause
Ecclesiastical; for such Causes only appertain to Councills.

3. Consider, Thirdly, that the Pope is Supreme Governor in all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical affairs: which no true Catholic can question.

Fourthly, that an exterior Sententia Papae obligat ad non dogmatizandum
contrarium. Gers. Tract. de exam. doctrine. consid. 2. Vide Duvall. in Elencho,
page 106.
Obedience at least is due to the Sentence or Judgment of all Supreme
Governors, in all matters appertaining unto them, and so far as they do
appertain unto them; which all do grant who grant any Government: and
consequently, that an exterior Obedience at least is due to the Orders or
Prohibition of the Pope in all Ecclesiastical matters. And this all must
confess, who confess him to be Supreme Governor in such matters.

Fifthly, Consider, that it is unlawful to deny any Obedience or Compliance
that is due, as is manifest; and by consequence, that it is unlawful to deny
an exterior Obedience to the Orders or Prohibition of the Pope in all matters
appertaining unto him, and no farther then they appertain unto him, or in all
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters.

Sixthly, That the Popes have prohibited this Oath, by reason of the Clauses it
contains relating to the Ecclesiastical Court, and for Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical respects only: viz. for Hujusmodi Iuramentum salva Fide
Catholica and Saluteanima. rum vestrarum praestari non potest; cum multa
contineat quae Fidei and Saluti aperte adversantur. Paul. V. 1. Brev. Urban.
VIII. vocat Iuramentum noxium and illicitum, and addit, authoritatem B. Petri
ea jurisjurandi formula imminui.
containing things contrary to Faith and Salvation; or, for being noxious and
sinful. For such Motives, and no other, are expressed in the forementioned
Briefs. And consequently, that they have prohibited this Oath upon the account
of matters appertaining unto them, and no farther then they do appertain unto
them. Lastly, Consider, that whoever takes this Oath denies an exterior
Obedience to the Pope's Prohibition contained in the Briefs. For he exteriourly
takes an Oath, which the Pope in such Briefs prohibits to be taken; as is
evident.

4. Hence I frame this Argument, to conclude the Unlawfulness of the aforesaid
Oath: Whoever takes this Oath, denies an exterior Obedience to the Pope's
Prohibition in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther then they
appertain unto him. But it is unlawful to deny an exterior Obedience to the
Pope's Prohibitions in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther then they
appertain unto him. Therefore it is unlawful to take this Oath.

5. If it be objected, First, That the Pope's Briefs are of no force here in
England without the King's approbation, (which these Briefs have not,)
according to the Statutes 25. of Edward the Third, and 16. of Richard the
Second, made in Catholic times; and that it cannot be unlawful to deny
Obedience to a Brief where it is of no force; neither is there any reason why
the present Catholics of England should not have the same liberty to refuse
the Pope's Brief, not approved by the King, as the ancient Catholics had:

6. In Answer to this Objection, Consider, First, that what is alleged out of
the forementioned Statutes, does not prove that Briefs brought into England
without the King's license are void and of no force; but only that those who
procure them and bring them hither without the King's approbation, are liable
to a Praemunire, and other Penalties: which is very different. For though it be
punishable to do a thing, yet the thing once done may be valid. Those who
contract a clandestine Marriage here in England are liable to the Penalties
enacted by the Canons in such cases: yet the Marriage so contracted is valid
and obligatory.

7. Consider, Secondly, that should we grant (as we do not) that such Statutes
render the Briefs they speak of void and of no force; they are to be understood
either of Briefs which import an absolute Power in the Pope to defeat and avoid
at his Will the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and consequently touch the
King's Regalities, as the Statute expresses it, and destroy His Sovereignty in
Temporals; which the Briefs we produce do not; for they only enjoin a mere
forbearance of this Oath, which certainly does not dethrone His Majesty of his
Sovereignty in Temporalls; as will appear by what hereafter shall be added: or
else of Briefs Enactive, (as in other Kingdoms the like Statutes are
understood,) whereby some new Law is enacted, or some new thing ordained,
relating to the External Government of the Church; as the Presentiments to
Churches or Benefices, or the Translation of Bishops or Bishoprics, and such
like things which are mentioned in the Statutes: but not of Briefs Declarative,
whereby such a Doctrine is declared Erroneous or Heretical, such an Action
Sinful and destructive to Salvation. As, for instance, the Declarative part of
the Council of Trent, though never admitted in England by public Authority,
does oblige all English Catholics; but not the Enactive part thereof. Now the
Briefs we speak of are not Enactive, as is manifest, but Declarative: For they
do not make this Oath unlawful, but only declare it to be so.

8. Consider, Thirdly, whether, should it be admitted, that these Statutes in
their primary institution did extend to all Briefs whatsoever, it can prudently
be thought, that they were ever intended by the Catholics that made them for
the condition wherein we now are in England; viz. of an open Rebellion against
the Pope and the Church of Rome; when no Brief, though never so just, nor
nothing else that comes from Rome in order to our Spiritual direction, is
admitted by public Authority.

Suppose that before the late Civil Wars it had been enacted by the King and
Parliament, (perhaps there is some such Act,) that no Commission sent by His
Majesty to any particular person should be of force, unless it were delivered
unto him by the Lieutenant of the County where he resided: could we prudently
think, that such an Act was ever intended by loyal Subjects, that voted it, for
the case of a public Rebellion, when all the Lieutenants were manifest Rebels
against the King, and resolved to pass nothing in His favor, and,
consequently, to deprive thereby His Majesty of all Power to send Orders to His
loyal Subjects remaining in England, in a time when He had most need of their
Assistence; or that whoever should refuse to obey His Majesty's express
Commands, under such a pretense, could be esteemed a faithful Subject?

9. Consider, Fourthly, whether, should these Statutes be taken in the latitude
the Opponent pretends, all intercourse between the Pope and the English
Catholics, and all direction from him in order to their Spiritual conduct,
would not be quite cut off in a time when they had greatest need thereof, (such
is the time of Persecution;) and all Dispensations, Indulgences and Faculties,
and all Powers or Prohibitions whatsoever, that come from Rome, (for they all
come in Bulls, Briefs, and such like Instruments,) would not be rendered void
and of no force.

10. Consider, Fifthly, whether this be not against the common persuasion and
practice of the English Catholics, not excepting even those who defend the
Lawfulness of this Oath; who, without any scruple, use their Faculties sent to
them from Rome; who procure thence, as occasion requires, Dispensations,
Indulgences, and other Powers; who make their application to Rome in several
Emergencies, ready to submit to the Pope's Judgment: and whether it would not
be very ridiculous, both for them to procure such things, and for the Pope to
grant them, were it true what this Objection pretends, viz. That no Brief or
Grant brought from Rome without the King's approbation (which in this
conjuncture of affairs cannot be hoped for) is here of any force.

11. Consider, Sixthly, whether it be reasonable that there should be the same
liberty to treat with, (as the Opponent pretends) or the same obligation to
depend of Princes who are out of the Church, as of those who are in the Church,
in order to Ecclesiastical affairs: such is the admission or refusal of the
Pope's Bulls or Briefs: and consequently, whether the present Catholics of
England ought to have the same dependence of their Prince (who is no Catholic)
in order to Ecclesiastical matters, as the ancient English Catholics had of
their Princes, who were Catholics. Certainly no body will say, that we have
the same obligation to depend of Governors who are Rebels in order to Civil
concerns, as of those that are faithful; or that there ought to be the same
liberty to treat with persons infected, as with persons who are not infected.
It was no absurdity for the ancient Catholics of England, to make their
Application to their Catholic Princes, for leave to get such a Grant from the
Pope; whereas now it would seem very absurd, should they make any such
Application to His Majesty. For though we do acknowledge our selves to be as
much bound to obey His Majesty in all Civil and Temporal concerns as the
ancient Catholics were bound to obey their respective Catholic Princes; yet
hence it does not follow, that we are so much bound to depend of His Majesty
that now is (so long as he is of a different Religion from us) in order to
Ecclesiastical Discipline, as the ancient English Catholics did depend of
their Princes.

12. Consider, Lastly, that in the abovementioned Statute of Richard the
Second express mention is made of the Sentence of Excommunication; yet all
Catholics, even those who deny the Pope to have any Power to Depose Kings, do
unanimously grant him a Power to Excommunicate Kings, if they become Heretics,
and remain obstinate: nay, King James refused to oblige His Catholic Subjects
to renounce such a Power in the Pope. Now, according to this Objection, no
Sentence of Excommunication fulminated against any English King (the same is of
any of his Subjects) is of any force here, unless approved and submitted unto
by himself: and if he submits unto it, he is not obstinate, and by consequence
does not deserve to be Excommunicated. So that if what this Objection pretends
be true* the Pope has no power to Excommunicate any Heretical King of England,
unless in a case wherein he deserves it not: which is, to have no power at all
to Excommunicate him.

13. If it be objected, Secondly, That the Pope with a General Council is
above the Pope without it; that with it he is Infallible, without it Fallible*
and that therefore we are not bound, with our own prejudice, to stand to his
Decrees which are issued out without a General Council, as these Briefs are,
nor to forbear taking this Oath, till the Unlawfulness thereof be declared by a
General Council, the Supreme Judge of Controversies, which hitherto has not
been done: That the Pope may be, and was mistaken and misinformed concerning
this Oath, thinking that therein are contained several things repugnant to
Faith and Salvation, though he specifies none of them; and that thereby is
abjured implicitly a Power in the Pope to Excommunicate Princes, and his
Supremacy in Spiritualls; all which is false; and we are not bound to submit to
Briefs grounded upon mistakes and misinformations: That the Pope is a Party in
this Debate, and by consequence ought not to be Judge in his own Cause: That he
must give Sentence according to the Canons or Rules prescribed him by the
Church; which he does not observe in the Prohibition of this Oath: Finally,
That we ought not to take notice of the Prohibitions or Commands of the Pope,
when the Compliance with them may be a cause of great Disturbance in the
Church, or is prejudicial to the Right of others, especially of Sovereign
Princes, and to the Duty due unto them, to which God and the Law of Nations
obliges us; all which Inconveniences intervene in the Prohibition of this Oath:

Excommunicantur in Bulla Coenae qui subterfugiunt judicium Papae, appellando
ad Concilium Generale.
14. Concerning the Superiority of a General Council over the Pope, contained
in the Objection; Consider, First, that though the King and Parliament be above
the King out of Parliament* yet we are bound to submit, even against our own
Interest, to the Orders of the King and His Council in Civil matters, till
the contrary be decreed by Parliament; which at least is enjoined us by such
Parliaments as command us to bear due Allegiance to His Majesty as our
Sovereign in all Civil matters: and that, in like manner, we are bound to
submit to the Pope's Ordinances in Ecclesiastical matters, even against our
Interests, notwithstanding the Superiority of a General Council over the Pope,
till the contrary be defined by such a Council; which at least is asserted in
such Councills, and by such Fathers, as recommend unto us due Obedience to the
Pope, as our Supreme Pastor in Spiritualls. For the Pope is as Supreme in
Spiritualls out of a Council, as the King is in Temporalls out of a
Parliament; and consequently requires the like submission to his Ordinances.

15. Consider, Secondly, that the Reasons one may seem to have either against
the Pope's Decrees out of a Council, or the King's Ordinances out of a
Parliament, cannot justify the refusing an exterior Compliance with them; but
only may give one ground to make his Addresses to the Council or Parliament
when assembled, to have such Decrees or Ordinances repealed: and that what we
require in our present case, is only, that we should forbear the taking this
Oath till the Lawfulness thereof be declared by a General Council, to which we
may apply our selves, when convened, to have this matter declared.

16. Concerning the Fallibility of the Pope, and the Infallibility of a General
Council; Consider, First, that if it be warrantable to refuse an exterior
Obedience to the Pope's Decrees in Ecclesiastical matters, because Fallible;
upon the same account it will be lawful to refuse an exterior Obedience to
the Orders of Kings and Princes in Civil affairs; for doubtless they are all
Fallible, and may be mistaken and misinformed: and so farewell all Government.
Secondly, Consider, that even those Catholics who affirm the Pope to be
Fallible out of a General Council, do notwithstanding confess that an exterior
Obedience is due to his Commands in Ecclesiastical matters: as the like
Obedience is due to the Ordinances of Sovereign Princes in Civil affairs,
though Fallible. And in this present Case no more is required, then a mere
exterior Compliance with the Pope's Prohibition. Thirdly, Consider, that even
Protestants also, who confess their whole Church, and not only the particular
Pastors thereof separately, to be Fallible, do yet affirm, that an exterior
Obedience is due to their Ordinances. And it seems somewhat odd, that
Catholics should deny the Pope that Obedience under pretense of Fallibility,
which Protestants assert to be due to the Pastors of their Church though
Fallible.

17. Lastly, Consider, that the difference between a General Council and the
Pope, supposing the Infallibility of the one, and the Fallibility of the other,
is, that the Decrees and Declarations of the Pope do oblige only to an
Exterior Obedience, but those of a General Council to an Interior Assent also.

18. Concerning the capacity of the Pope of being misinformed, and the
pretended Mistakes in this present matter; Consider, First, that between the
publishing of the first and the last Brief against the Oath, there past Twenty
years: That in this time the present Question concerning the Lawfulness thereof
was canvased on both sides by Learned men, both English and Forreiners: That
Withrington; the chief Defender of the Oath, and who brings all that is
material for it, represented in this interim to Paul the Fifth his Reasons for
the Lawfulness of it, and his Answers to what had been objected against him:
That the Popes, in the forementioned Briefs, use as significant terms to remove
all just suspicion of Misinformation, Mistakes and Inconsiderateness, [as, Motu
proprio, Ex certa nostra scientia, -- Post longam gravemque deliberationem de
omnibus quae in illis continentur adhibitam -- Haec mera, pura, integraque
voluntas nostra est, etc.] as are used in any Briefs or Instruments whatsoever,
in order to that intent. And if this be so, as certainly it is, then Consider,
Secondly, that if all these diligences and preventions be not thought
sufficient to remove all just suspicion of Misinformation, Mistakes, and
Inconsiderateness, what Brief, or what Decree, Ecclesiastical or Civil, is
there that the party therein condemned may not (under pretense of the like
Flaws) reject and disobey? Such liberty as this, to reject the Ordinances of
our Sovereigns, both Spiritual and Temporal, must needs induce a perfect
Anarchy.

19. Consider, Thirdly, that it belongs to the Pope to determine, whether this
Oath does contain any thing contrary to Faith and Salvation, or destructive to
his Sovereignty in Spiritualls, or no. For the determination of such Questions
belongs to the Spiritual Court, as has been above insinuated; as it belongs to
the King, and the Civil Court, to determine whether such a thing be contrary to
the Civil Laws, and public welfare of the Kingdom, or destructive to His
Sovereignty in Temporalls, or not. And since the Popes, after so much diligence
used to be informed of the Truth, have several times declared, that this Oath
contains many things destructive to Faith and Salvation, and upon that account
have prohibited the taking thereof; we are bound to afford at least an
exterior Compliance to this Prohibition.

20. Consider, Fourthly, that as to prohibit a Book, Vide Synod. General. 5.
Can. 5. ubi damnat Origenem aliosque, cum suis scriptis, nullo particulari
errore nominato.
it is not necessary to point out the particular Propositions for which it is
prohibited, as appears by several public Prohibitions of Books and Pamphlets,
issued forth either by Civil or Ecclesiastical Authority; neither would it be
prudence, to design always the particular Propositions for which a Pamphlet is
prohibited, when they are scandalous and offensive: so neither was it
necessary, for the Prohibition of this Oath, that the Pope should assign the
particular Propositions which he looked upon as repugnant to Faith and
Salvation.

The Prohibition of Suarez his Book, made by the Parliament of Paris, Append.
ad prop. Theolog. de Jurament. fidelitatis, initio.
as containing things destructive to the Honor due to the Kings, does not
express, at least as it is related by Withrington, what those particular Things
or Propositions are, contained in that Book, which are destructive to the
Veneration due to Kings: and yet no body upon that account does quibble at such
a Prohibition. Why therefore might not the Pope prohibit this Oath, as
containing things destructive to Faith and Salvation, without setting down in
particular which those Things are?

21. Consider, Lastly, whether, whoever takes this Oath, does not implicitly
deny, either that the Pope has any Power to Excommunicate an Heretical King,
which Power is inherent in the Pope as Supreme Head of the Church; or at least,
that though he should Excommunicate such a King, the Excommunication would have
in the person Excommunicated these Effects, viz. to deprive him of all civil
Communication with others, etc. which are assigned in Scripture, in those
places whence the Power in the Pope to Excommunicate is deduced. 2. Joan. 1.
Neque Ave ei dixeritis. 1 Cor. 5. cum hujusmodi nec cibum sumere. For sure a
King who is deprived of all Civil Communication with others, is deprived of
all Civil Government, in order to the exercise thereof; which is a certain
kind of Deposing. And if some persons, though Excommunicated, are excepted from
these effects, either by the Indulgency of the Pope, or otherwise, whether it
does not belong to the Pope to determine which those persons are; and whether
he has excepted Princes.

22. Concerning the Pope being a Party in this debate, and not proceeding
according to the Canons; Vide Gloss. cap. Cum venissent. De judiciis.
Consider, First, that Supreme Governors, whether Spiritual or Temporal, in
Debates wherein their Prerogatives are concerned, either are not styled
properly Parties; or if they be Parties, they are also Judges. Otherwise we
should not be bound to stand to the Decision of a General Council, in matters
relating to the Authority of the Church or General Councills; nor to the
Determination of the King and Parliament, in matters relating to the Authority
and Prerogatives of His Majesty or His Parliament. Consider, Secondly, that if
the Pope is not to be hearkened unto, when he prohibits the taking of this
Oath, because he is the Party concerned in the not-taking thereof; neither the
King, upon the same account, is to be hearkened unto, when He commands us to
take the Oath, because He is the Party concerned in the taking thereof.

23. Consider, Thirdly, that as Suar. ait, lib. De leg. c. 4. n. 2. Nulla est
data determinata forma verborum in legibus Canonic's ferendis, vel jure Divino
vel Ecclesiastico.
there are Canons and Rules prescribed for the proceedings of Popes; so there
are, in the like manner, Rules prescribed for the proceedings of Kings, of
Councills, and of Parliaments. But as the King, or Council, or Parliament,
must be their own Judges, whether they have proceeded, in such a Decision or
Determination, according to the respective Rules prescribed unto them, and not
any particular person or Subject: so must the Pope be his own Judge, and not
any particular Doctor, whether he has observed, in the Prohibition of this
Oath, the Rules and Canons prescribed unto him in such cases. And since the
Popes have sufficiently declared, that in the Prohibition of this Oath they
have proceeded according to the Canons for such cases, it is not reasonable,
that under pretense that they have not observed such Canons, we should deny an
exterior Obedience to their Prohibitions.

24. Concerning the Disturbance of the Church, which the Opponent pretends may
follow from the submission to the Briefs, and the prejudice created thence, or
pretended to be created, to the Duty and Loyalty due to Sovereign Princes;
Consider, First, that if the Defenders of the Oath would be quiet, we might
enjoy the same peace and tranquillity, in relation to this point, which we have
enjoyed for many years. For the Oppugners of the Oath have not printed any
thing for a long time, contenting themselves with the Sentences which the
abovementioned Popes have been pleased to issue forth in their favor: And
consequently, the Disturbance, if any follow, is rather to be attributed to the
Defenders of the Oath, then to the Oppugners.

25. Consider, Secondly, that if the Pope (whose Office it is to declare the
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of an Action, especially if he be required
thereunto, and the inconsistency thereof with Faith and Salvation) should
forbear to declare such an Action unlawful, for fear of some Disturbance, or
Persecution, by the contrivance of some obstinate and discontented persons:
upon the same account the Council of Nice should have forborne to have declared
against the Arrians, the Consubstantiality of the Son with his Father; and
other General Councills, in the like manner, should have waved the Definitions
of several other Doctrines; because some malicious men, taking occasion
thence, have raised several Disturbances and Persecutions. Nay, our Savior,
and the Apostles, should, upon the same score, have forborne the preaching
Christian Religion, since they foresaw, that many Calamities, Disturbances and
Persecutions would arise, by the malice and obstinacy of men, upon the account
of Christian Religion. And therefore Simeon foretold, that the coming of Christ
would be the occasion of the ruin of many. Ecce hic positus est in ruinam, and
resurrectionem multorum in Israel, and in signum cui contradicetur. Luc. 2.34.

26. Consider, Thirdly, that though it be not the intention, neither of Popes,
nor of General Councills, that their Enactive Decrees, in some extraordinary
and extravagant cases, should oblige, when the compliance with them is very
prejudicial; or at least they are supposed to have dispensed for such cases;
as appears in the precept of Fasting, or such like: yet this cannot reach to
their Declarative Decrees, such as the present Decree against the Oath is. For
it cannot be their intention, neither can they dispense in any case whatsoever,
that we may lawfully do what they have declared, and do declare, to be of it
self unlawful.

27. Consider, Fourthly, whether what the Popes enjoin in the abovementioned
Briefs, can be prejudicial to the Duty and Loyalty due to Sovereign Princes.
For though Popes be as jealous of their Prerogatives, as Kings are of theirs;
yet they do not enjoin us in these Briefs to swear, that the Pope has any Power
or Authority to Depose Kings, or to swear any thing else contrary to any Clause
contained in this Oath: but only not to take the Oath, or not to swear
positively, that the Pope has no such Power; leaving things in the same
condition wherein they were (in order to any such Obligation) before this Oath
was framed. For although as long as there is a debate whether such a thing
belongs to me, or another, I cannot lawfully take the possession of it; yet I
may lawfully hinder my Adversary from taking it. Neither do they prohibit us to
take other Oaths of Allegiance, wherein all Civil Allegiance is contained in
as, or more expressive terms, then in the present Oath; as shall be made appear
hereafter: nay, nor to take those Clauses of the Oath, which do manifestly
contain no more then mere Civil Allegiance. Neither do they in rigor oblige
us to give an interior assent to the Reasons why they prohibit this Oath. For
even the Decrees of General Councills, according to the common sentiment of
Divines, do not oblige us always to believe the Reasons for the framing such
Decrees, inserted in them, to be good and solid. As in the Second Council of
Nice it was declared, That Angels may be painted, because they have Bodies. The
Declaration is good, but the Reason is false. So that though one refuses the
Oath in compliance to the Pope's commands, it does not follow, that he does not
think the Oath in it self, and speculatively speaking, to be lawful: and
consequently, if he thinks that the Acts therein contained do concern mere
Civil Allegiance, he is bound, as long as he remains in such a persuasion, to
comply with those Acts, whether he has taken this Oath or not. For a Subject is
bound to Civil Allegiance by the Law of God and Nature, antecedently to all
Oaths. Finally, the Popes do not forbid us in these Briefs an Act of Loyalty,
or Civil Allegiance: For the taking of this Oath, which is only forbidden us
in these Briefs, is not (properly speaking) any Act of Civil Allegiance, but
only a Security thereof, (and how little trust is to be put in such a
Security, does appear by the sad experience of the late Wars;) as a Bond for
the payment of such a sum of money is no part of the payment, but only a
Security for it, if the Debtor denies it. Nay, a Subject may be obliged to his
Civil Allegiance, and equally punished for his not-complying therewith, or for
being a Traitor, whether he has taken the Oath or not. Whence I conclude,
that, since the Briefs do not forbid us any Act of Civil Allegiance, it is
manifest, that the Compliance with such Briefs cannot be inconsistent with the
Duty and Loyalty due to Sovereign Princes; which reaches no farther then to all
Acts of Civil Allegiance.

28. Consider, Lastly, whether those who reject the forementioned Briefs of the
Popes, published after so long and so serious deliberation, under such
frivolous pretenses as we have already seen, and shall see hereafter, do not
open a way for Subjects to resist, Malosjudices se esse perpessos, vox est
omnium malorum litigatorum, etiam cum manifestissima fuerint veritate convicti.
Aug. Epist. 162.
and disobey the express Commands or Prohibitions (if they be condemned
therein) of their respective Sovereigns, though issued forth after never so
serious a debate, pretending that they were grounded upon Inconsiderateness,
Misinformation, and Mistakes, in thinking, that such a thing was contrary to
the Laws of the Realm, and the Prerogatives of His Majesty; or that the King
did not proceed therein according to the Rules prescribed in such cases; or
that His Majesty was a Party in the debate, and that consequently He ought not
to be Judge; or, finally, that such Prohibitions and Commands are prejudicial
to the Liberty of the people and common Welfare of the Nation, and that they
may be occasion of great Disturbances in the Kingdom. And whether, if such
Exceptions as these be warrantable, and not to be decided by the Sovereigns
themselves, they do not render the Authority of Kings (though our Adversaries,
who make use of them, will needs seem to be stout Champions for Regal Power)
very weak and insignificant, as in effect they do render the Authority of the
Pope.

29. If it be objected, Thirdly, That to refuse this Oath, when we are required
to take it by the King, is sinful, inductive to Schism, and scandalous to our
Religion, as if the Principles thereof were inconsistent with Civil Allegiance
due to Princes; and in such matters no man is bound to obey the Pope's Decrees,
but rather to the contrary: That should the Pope declare it Sinful to bear His
Majesty Civil Allegiance, (which is due unto him by the Law of God and
Nature,) certainly we should not think our selves bound to submit to such a
Declaration: That this Oath contains only a mere Civil Allegiance, as our
Kings have declared, and to them it belongs to declare what is mere Civil
Allegiance, and not to the Pope, whose Jurisdiction extends only to
Spiritualls: That we are bound to obey our Sovereign's Commands in all probable
matters, and which are not manifestly sinful, as the taking of this Oath is
not: That since it is doubtful at least whether the Things contained in this
Oath (wherein the difficulty thereof consists) appertain to the Spiritual or
Civil Court, why should the Pope decide it rather then the King? And since the
King commands us to take the Oath, and the Pope prohibits us to take it, the
thing being of it self doubtful, and not manifestly sinful on either side,
why should we submit rather to the Pope's Ordinance then to the King's? That
the King may confine the Pope's Power, and declare, that he has not a direct
and absolute Power over this Kingdom in Temporalls, or to vacate the Civil
Laws thereof at his pleasure; and consequently, that it is not proper for the
Pope to declare how far his Spiritual Authority does extend it self in all
Causes: Finally, that the like Argument may be made to show the Refusal of
this Oath to be unlawful, as we made above to prove unlawful the Taking
thereof, in this manner; Whoever of His Majesty's Subjects refuses this Oath,
being required thereunto, denies an exterior Obedience to the King's Ordinance
in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther then they appertain unto him:
But it is unlawful to deny such an Obedience to the King's Ordinance, and in
such matters: Therefore it is unlawful for any of His Majesty's Subjects,
when required thereunto, to refuse this Oath:

30. Concerning the Sinfulness of the Refusal of this Oath, objected against
us; Consider, First, whether this Objection be not against all or most of those
Catholics who defend the Lawfulness of this Oath; whose aim only is, to show,
not that it is a Sin to refuse this Oath, but that it is no Sin to take it.
Secondly, Consider, whether the refusal of this Oath can be sinful, unless
the taking thereof be absolutely obligatory: and if not, then consider, whether
there be any absolute obligation to take this Oath, since the taking thereof is
no part of Civil Allegiance, as has been already shown. Neither does His
Majesty absolutely require of us the taking of this Oath, but only
conditionally, if we will enjoy such and such Employments or Privileges; which
we are not bound to accept of. And though those who refuse the Oath in many
circumstances are liable to some Penalties enacted against Roman Catholics;
yet they are punished even in that case, not so much for refusing the Oath, but
because, by refusing it, they are suspected to be Popishly inclined. Whence
therefore can there be proved any absolute obligation to take this Oath,
especially since the Pope has expressly prohibited the taking thereof?

31. Consider, Thirdly, whether, according to the common persuasion of Divines,
we are not bound to obey the Commands of our lawful Superior in probable
matters appertaining unto him, and which are not manifestly Sinful: And
whether it can prudently be presumed, that the mere forbearance of this Oath,
(the thing that is only required of us,) which has been enjoined three
several times, in terms so significant, by Two different Popes, who are the
only competent Judges of what is Sinful, and what not; which has been, and is
still maintained by so many grave, learned and conscientious men, against their
own Interest; which has been authorized with the Imprisonment, or Death, of
several persons, [Fifty eight were put in Prison at York, in the time of
Archbishop Matthews, for refusing this Oath, and Forty of them died in
Prison,] who rather chose to undergo those Punishments then take this Oath; is
notwithstanding manifestly Sinful.

32. Concerning the Schism objected against us; Consider, First, that it is
impossible, that those who refuse the Oath should upon that account, and for
complying therein with the Ordinances of the Supreme Head in Ecclesiastical
matters, become Schismatics; as it is impossible that a Subject, for complying
with the Commands of his King, should become a Traitor or Rebel. For as
Rebellion implies a Disobedience to our Sovereign in Temporal affairs; so
Schism necessarily imports a Separation from or a Disobedience to the Pope,
Supreme Head in Ecclesiastical matters. Hence it follows, that should all the
English Catholics join in taking the Oath, they would not therefore be less
Schismatics, but rather more in number; as the more the Rebels are, they are
not therefore less Rebels.

33. Consider, Secondly, that since Union amongst Catholics here in England,
in order to this Point, may be obtained in either of Two manners, viz. if All
take the Oath, or if All refuse it; it is far more easy to obtain it, and far
more warrantable to procure it, the latter way, then the former: Because those
who refuse it are far more numerous then those who take it; and it is far more
easy, and more warrantable, that the minor part should conform to the major,
then on the contrary; especially whenas by refusing it we unite with our Head,
and Supreme Pastor, and by taking it we separate from him. And there can be no
true Ecclesiastical Union, without a Conjunction with the Ecclesiastical
Head. And sure it is more rational, that the Members should submit to the
Head, then the Head to the Members.

34. Consider, Thirdly, that hitherto the far greater part of English
Catholics have thought it better to conserve an Union among themselves, in
relation to this Point, by refusing the Oath, then by taking it. And certainly,
if ever there was any reason for Catholics to take this Oath, there was more
reason for it heretofore, when it was first enacted, then now. For a little
before had been contrived that horrible Plot of Gunpowder-Treason, whereunto
concurred some Catholics; but it was fathered, though unjustly, upon the whole
Body of Catholics then living. But now there is no Catholic alive that could
be Actour or Contriver in that Plot, or that is suspected to have contrived any
Plot whatsoever against His Majesty, much less such a detestable Plot as that
was: and consequently, the present Catholics of England have far less
obligation (or rather no obligation at all) to wipe off any suspicion of
Disloyalty by taking the Oath, then the ancient Catholics had. Those
Catholics who then lived, had not given so universal and so signal proofs of
their Loyalty to the then present King, as Catholics now alive have done to
His Majesty and His Royal Father: and by consequence, there is less reason why
they should be forced to give in Security, or testimony of their Loyalty by
Oath. Then there had not been issued forth so many several Briefs, and after so
long a deliberation, condemning this Oath, as since have been published, nor
the Question so much discussed (the major part sticking always to the
Negative) as since it has been: which had those Catholics seen who first took
the Oath, very probably speaking, many of them would have refused it. Some of
those Thirteen Priests who in the time of Q. Elizabeth subscribed an Oath of
the like tenor, having seen afterward the Pope's Briefs, refused this Oath;
and two of them, viz. Robert Drury and Roger Cadwallader, were put to death
upon that account.

35. Neither are there now greater Advantages for Catholics who take the Oath
then there were in those times; nay, the convenience now in taking it is so
inconsiderable, that no Catholic is thereby alone rendered capable so much as
to enter into White Hall or St. James's Park. And though the Catholic Lords,
who take the Oath, may sit in the House, and those who refuse it may not: yet
how long will this (besides that it comprehended also those ancient Catholic
Lords,) probably last; seeing that scarce had some Catholic Lords, upon that
account, taken the Oath, when it begun to be agitated in the Parliament, how
another Test might be framed to exclude all Catholics? And the Sitting of the
Catholic Lords in the House, as things now stand, is ineffectual to carry any
thing in favor of Catholics; the far major part being against them, nay and
against their Sitting too in the House. For had the major part effectually
desired the concurrence of the Catholic Lords, it would never have been
carried, that all the Lords should be put to the Oath, if they intended to sit
in the House. For such a Vote would in all probability force all the Catholic
Lords (or at least some of them) to forbear coming to the House. So that, were
not the House against the Sitting of the Catholic Lords, they would never have
Voted, that all those who would sit should take the Oath. And if they be
against their Sitting, though all the Catholic Lords should take it, they will
find out some other way to exclude them. Moreover, if things be well sifted,
perhaps many will find no little convenience in having so handsome an occasion
as this is for any Catholic for not coming to the House, especially since they
are not therefore debarred from Voting by their Proxies. Wherefore if,
notwithstanding the Reasons above alleged, the ancient Catholics of England,
or at least the far greater part of them, as even our Adversaries confess,
preferred to conserve union amongst themselves by refusing the Oath; why should
not the present English Catholics follow, in this point, their Ancestors, and
take the same way of conserving union?

36. Concerning the Scandal objected; Consider, First, whether the Scandal (if
any lies upon Catholics or their Religion in order to Civil Allegiance, after
so many signal proofs given of their Loyalty in the late Civil Wars, (and,
sure, works are better proofs of Loyalty then words,) after so many public
Declarations thereof made by His Majesty in His gracious Speeches, and by many
other Protestants in their public Votes in Parliament, whether, I say, this
Scandal, if any remains,) be not rather acceptum, then datum, like to that
which Christian Religion lay under among the Jews for transgressing their
Ceremonies, and consequently not to be taken notice of.

37. Consider, Secondly, whether should all Catholics concur to take the
Oath, Protestants would not, in all probability, attribute this their
concurrence rather to a desire of their safety, or of some particular Interest,
then to the Principles of their Religion; as they have, and do yet, attribute
the constant and general Loyalty of the Catholics in the late Wars, not to the
Tenets of their Religion, but to the Generosity of their minds, or desire of
their Security, as they have published in their Books and Sermons. Nay, some
(as I hear) have said the same already of Catholics that have taken the Oath.
So that the taking of the Oath is ineffectual for the End pretended; since
Protestants would not therefore have a better opinion of our Religion, but
worse opinion of Catholics who take the Oath, as professing a Religion to
whose Principles, as by Protestants understood, they are ashamed to conform.
And if so, then consider, whether (probably speaking) Protestants are not more
scandalized at Catholics who take the Oath, as not standing (in their opinion)
to the Maxims of the Religion they profess, and as denying an exterior
Compliance with the express Commands of him whom they acknowledge to be their
Supreme Pastor; (which Compliance even Protestants grant to be due to the
Pastors of the Church;) then at Catholics who refuse it: which Refusal
Protestants ascribe not to any want of Loyalty in them, (whereof they have
sufficient proofs already,) but to some scruple of Conscience, or to the
Submission they think themselves obliged to pay to the Ordinances of the Pope.
And one may easily gather, by what is set down in a Letter to a Parliament Man,
lately printed, concerning Peter Walsh, (who, amongst those who profess
themselves to be Catholics, seems now to be the only man, who openly and in
print vindicates the taking this Oath: one may gather, I say, by what is
couched in that Letter,) what opinion Protestants have of such Catholics; who,
though they acknowledge the Pope to be their Supreme Pastor, yet justify the
taking this Oath, against several express Prohibitions of the Pope. So that, by
taking the Oath, the Scandal, if any, is not removed from our Religion, but
rather a new Scandal is fastened upon Catholics that take it.

38. Consider, Thirdly, whether Protestants are not of opinion, that the
Supremacy in Spiritualls is inherent and annexed to the Crown, as has been
declared in Parliament; and consequently, that as long as Catholics refuse the
Oath of Supremacy, (which they must do as long as they will be Catholics,)
they refuse to acknowledge the Supremacy of His Majesty in Temporalls, and His
Crown. For whosoever refuses to acknowledge any thing inherent and annexed to
the Crown, refuses, at least implicitly, to acknowledge the Crown, and his
Loyalty thereunto. So that, as long as we remain Catholics, we shall be
accounted by Protestants not loyal Subjects in our Tenets, whatsoever we be in
our Practices.

39. Consider, Fourthly, whether such Catholics as take the Oath, whilst
ineffectually they pretend to remove the Scandal Protestants have so unjustly
conceived of our Religion, by taking the Oath, do not create a just Scandal in
other Catholics who refuse it, seeing how they slight the express Order of
their Supreme Head in Ecclesiastical matters.

40. Concerning the Case contained in the Objection, wherein the Opponent
supposes that the Pope should forbid us to bear Civil Allegiance to His
Majesty, due unto Him by the Law of God and of Nature, or should declare such
an Allegiance to be Sinful; Consider, First, that supposing (as we do suppose)
that His Majesty is our Sovereign in all Civil and Temporal Concerns, and that
not only in order to the Civil Power, but also to the exercise thereof; to
deny unto Him Civil Allegiance, due unto Him by the Law of God and Nature, is
manifestly Sinful: and in matters manifestly Sinful we are not bound to obey
the Ordinances of our Superiors, whether Spiritual or Temporal. Nay, it would
be Heretical to prohibit a mere Civil Allegiance, in that supposition, or
declare it unlawful: and a Pope that should teach an Heresy, or become an
Heretic, would, according to the common consent of Divines, cease to be Pope;
and consequently, his Orders in that case were not to be obeyed.

41. Consider, Secondly, whether it be reasonable, that, because there may be
feigned a case or cases wherein the Pope, or any other Superior,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, might command a thing manifestly Sinful, and
therefore not to be done; we should, upon that account, deny Obedience to the
Commands of the Pope, or any other lawful Superior, in matters evidently, or
at least probably, lawful: And the forbearance of this Oath (which is only
enjoined us in the forementioned Briefs, as has been shown) is manifestly or
probably lawful, as our Adversaries seem to confess.

42. Consider, Thirdly, that the Popes have been so far from forbidding
Catholics to render Civil Obedience to His Majesty, His Royal Father and
Grandfather, Kings of England, that rather they have several times, and in
terms very significant, charged the English Catholics to render to their
Majesty's all Civil Allegiance and Obedience. Neither have the Popes declared
any of their Majesty's deprived of their Crown. Nay, never any Pope (as some
have well advertised) has declared any Heretical Prince, brought up always in
that Profession, (as the three forementioned Kings were brought up
Protestants,) deprived of their Dominions. Neither do the Popes, in the
abovementioned Briefs, whereby they prohibit the taking of this Oath, declare
in express terms, that they have any Authority to Depose Heretical Princes*
and much less do they oblige us to swear, or to make any acknowledgement, that
they have any such Authority: but only they enjoin us a mere forbearance of
the Oath, the taking whereof is not properly (as has been showed above) any Act
of Civil Allegiance, or at least of bare Civil Allegiance.

43. Concerning the mere Civil Allegiance pretended to be contained in this
Oath, and that alone; Consider, First, whether whatsoever a Prince is pleased
to put into an Oath, which he terms an Oath of Allegiance, is to be held as
appertaining to mere Civil Allegiance; and whether the Refusers thereof are to
be looked upon as Refusers of Civil Allegiance. As for instance, if an Oath,
entitled an Oath of mere Civil Allegiance, were framed, wherein were expressly
denied a Power in the Pope to Excommunicate any of His Majesty's Subjects in
any case whatsoever, or to direct them in Spiritual affairs; sure no Catholic
would say, that such an Oath did contain mere Civil Allegiance, though the
Prince, by whose order it was framed, should term it an Oath of Civil
Allegiance, or that the Refusers thereof were guilty of Disloyalty.

44. Consider, Secondly, whether, since it is manifest that an Oath, though
styled an Oath of mere Civil Allegiance, may contain some things not
appertaining to Civil Allegiance, but to Spiritual Jurisdiction, as the
forementioned Oath, denying a Power in the Pope to Excommunicate; whether then
(I say) the Pope, to whom the Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction belongs, and not
the King, whose Jurisdiction is only Civil, may not judge of such an Oath, so
far as it contains things appertaining to Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. And if so, whether, since this present Oath contains such things,
as has been declared above, the Pope may not judge of this Oath, as far as it
contains such things, though it be pretended by some that it contains mere
Civil Allegiance: and whether we are not bound to stand rather to the Pope's
Judgment, in order to such things, then to the King's Declaration.

45. Consider, Thirdly, that there is this difference between the King
commanding us to take this Oath, (supposing he does command it,) and the Pope
prohibiting us to take it; that to the end the King may command us to take it,
it is necessary, that there be nothing therein contained which does not belong
to the Civil Power, since we acknowledge His Majesty to be our Sovereign only
in Civil matters: but to the end the Pope may prohibit us to take this Oath,
it is enough, that any thing whatsoever therein contained belongs to the
Ecclesiastical Court, whose Head the Pope is, and that he judges such things to
be unlawful. So that far less is required, or sufficient, to prohibit an Oath,
then to command it. Neither does the Pope prohibit each part of the Oath by it
self, and separately taken; but he prohibits us to take the whole Oath: and to
prohibit the whole, it is enough, that any part thereof whatsoever be unlawful,
according to that Maxim, Bonum ex integra causa, Malum ex quocunque defectu.

46. Consider, Fourthly, that we are bound to submit to the King's Commands
only in Civil matters, as to the Pope's Ordinances only in Spiritual; since,
as we acknowledge the Pope's Supremacy only in Spirituals, so we acknowledge
the King's Supremacy only in Temporals. And since this Oath contains, as has
been proved, some things not appertaining to the Civil Jurisdiction, we do not
think our selves obliged to submit to His Majesty's Orders, wherein he
commands us to take this Oath as it lies: as upon the same account we are not
bound to take the Oath of Supremacy, though His Majesty commands His Subjects
as much to take the one as the other, and Penalties are enacted against the
Refusers of both. Nay, if the thing commanded by the Pope be a Civil matter,
though it should be lawful, we are not bound to submit to such a Command,
since the Pope's Jurisdiction extends only to Spirituals: So if the thing
commanded by the King be Spiritual, though it should be lawful, we are not
bound to submit to such a Command, because the King's Jurisdiction extends
only to Temporals. Whence appears, that the Major Proposition of the Argument,
framed in the Objection, to prove the Refusal of the Oath unlawful, is false
and of no force. For since this Oath contains things not appertaining to Civil
Jurisdiction, the King, by commanding us to take this whole Oath as it lies,
commands us things not appertaining unto Him: But the Pope, by prohibiting us
to take this Oath, by reason of things appertaining unto Him contained therein,
and not farther then they appertain unto him, does not exceed his Jurisdiction;
and it is unlawful to deny Obedience to the Commands of a Superior in matters
appertaining unto him, and no farther then they do appertain unto him.

47. Consider, Fifthly, that though we should grant, as we do not, that it is
doubtful, whether the matters contained in this Oath, (wherein the main
difficulty thereof consists,) considered in themselves, do appertain to the
Ecclesiastical or Civil Court: yet since the Pope's and the King's Orders in
this point do contradict one another, we ought rather to submit to the Pope's
Prohibition, then the King's Command, in this Case. First, Because, though the
Pope and the King be both Supreme, the one in Spirituals, the other in
Temporals; yet the Pope's Supremacy (the End whereof is Eternal Bliss) is of a
higher Hierarchy then the King's Supremacy, (the End whereof is Temporal
Felicity only.) And certainly, when Two Supreme Governors clash one with the
other, so that we cannot obey them both, but must obey one of them, (as in our
present case, we must obey either the Pope, forbidding the Oath, or the King,
commanding it;) we are bound, caeteris paribus, to submit rather to him, whose
Jurisdiction is of a higher Hierarchy, then to the other, and to our Spiritual
Governor, then to our Temporal. Neither will the Protestants deny this
Doctrine to be true, when it happens that the Spiritual and Temporal Powers do
thwart one another, all other Circumstances being equal.

Secondly, Because, according to the common sentiment of Divines and Canonists,
when it is doubtful, whether such a matter, considered in it self, does
appertain to the Spiritual or Temporal Court, it belongs to the Spiritual Judge
to decide to which of these two Courts it does appertain: For, other
Circumstances being equal, the Spiritual Judge is to be preferred before the
Temporal: neither is there any other commodious way to decide the Question.
Thirdly, Because the Pope requires less of us then the King. For the Pope only
requires, that we should not take this Oath; not, that we should swear any
thing contrary to it: but the King requires, that we should positively take
this Oath as it lies; which is far more. And when Two Precepts contradict one
another, we ought to submit to that Precept of the two, caeteris paribus,
wherein least is required of us. Fourthly, Because the Pope's Precept in this
matter is Negative, but the King's Precept is Affirmative: and when Two
Precepts oppose one another, we ought rather, all other Circumstances being
equal, to embrace the Negative Precept then the Affirmative, according to the
common opinion of Divines.

48. Consider, Sixthly, that the Pope does not expressly condemn, as the
Opponent seems to suppose, any of the Points under debate, contained in this
Oath; neither does he require of us, that we should swear, that he has any
Power to depose Kings; but only, that we should not swear, that he has not any
such Power: which is what the King requires of us. So that the King, and not
the Pope, decides the Point under debate in his own favor, requiring us to
swear positively the part favorable unto Him. Since therefore Withrington and
his other Catholics, who defend the Oath, do confess, that this Question,
Whether the Pope has any Authority to depose Kings, is yet under debate between
Popes and Kings, Certant Scholastici, and adhuc sub judice lis est, as they
allege out of Trithemius and others; why should the King decide the Question
in his own favor, requiring his Subjects to swear positively; that the Pope
has no such Authority; which is, as it were, to take possession of the part
favorable unto him? or why may not the Pope inhibit such an Oath, in case the
King enjoins it, as long as the Question is in debate between the Pope and
King, as our Adversaries confess it is yet? Adhuc sub judice lis est. For as
long as it is under debate to whom such a thing belongs, either of the parties
has right to hinder his Adversary from taking possession thereof, though he
himself cannot take possession of it, till the Question be lawfully decided in
his favor: and it is much less to hinder another from taking possession of a
thing, then to take possession of it himself.

49. Consider, Seventhly, that whoever acknowledges the King to be our
Sovereign in Temporal and Civil matters, as we do, he must confess that
neither the Pope, nor any one else, has any direct and absolute Power over this
Kingdom; such a Power in any other being inconsistent with the Sovereignty of
the King in Temporalls: as in the like manner, whoever acknowledges the Pope's
Supremacy in Spiritualls, as we also do acknowledge, he must necessarily, upon
the like ground, deny any other to be invested with the same Superiority. So
that, should the Pope declare himself Sovereign in Temporalls over this
Kingdom, or any other His Majesty's Dominions, with a direct and absolute
Power, he would in that case declare a thing manifestly destructive to the
King's Sovereignty in Temporalls, which we acknowledge. Neither does it belong
to the Pope, or the Spiritual Court, to declare who is the Temporal Sovereign
of such a Kingdom; but to the Representative of that Kingdom, or to some
other Civil Power, according to the different constitutions of Civil
Government. So that to declare the Pope Temporal Sovereign of such a Kingdom,
is not to declare how far his Spiritual Jurisdiction, as such, extends it
self, (which does belong to the Spiritual Court;) but rather it is to declare
him Sovereign or Supreme Governor in a different kind: which Declaration does
not belong unto him. Neither, because a lawful Superior may, perhaps, exceed
his Power in some matters, does it therefore follow, that in no other thing he
is to be obeyed. What therefore we affirm in this point is, That as it belongs
to a Sovereign Temporal Prince, to determine what is precisely necessary for
the Conservation of his Temporal Sovereignty, in case he be unjustly attacqued
by another in his Temporalls: so it appertains to the Sovereign Spiritual
Prince, (who is the Pope,) to determine what is necessary to be done for the
Conservation of his Spiritual Sovereignty, in case he be unjustly attacqued in
Spiritualls.

50. Consider, Eighthly, to the end that it may clearly appear how willing the
English Catholics are to give His Majesty any just Security of their Loyalty,
that they are ready, if it be necessary, not only to take all the Clauses of
this Oath, wherein mere Civil Allegiance due to His Majesty is contained, but
other Oaths also, rather more expressive of Civil Allegiance then this is;
viz. such as were taken by the Subjects of the ancient Kings of England, or
which are taken now by the Catholic Subjects of other Christian Princes,
whether Catholics or Protestants, or of any other profession. And certainly it
would be very ridiculous to affirm, that there is no standing Oath, in any
other Christian Country, sufficiently expressive of Civil Allegiance. And to
descend to particulars; They are ready to swear, without any mental
Reservation, That they acknowledge their Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second
to be lawful King of this Realm, and of all other His Majesty's Kingdoms:
That they renounce all Power whatsoever, Ecclesiastical or Civil, Domestic
or Foreign, repugnant to the same: That they confess themselves obliged in
Conscience, to be as obedient to His Majesty in all Civil affairs, as true
Allegiance can oblige any Subject to be to his Prince: That they promise to
bear inviolably, during life, true Allegiance to His Majesty, His lawful Heirs
and Successors, and Him and them will defend against all Attempts whatsoever,
which shall be made against His or their Rights, the Rights of their Persons,
Crown or Dignity, by any person whatsoever, or under whatsoever pretense: That
they will do their best endeavor to discover to His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, or to some of their Ministers, all treacherous Conspiracies, which
they shall know or hear of to be against Him or them: That they do declare that
Doctrine to be impious, seditious and abominable, which maintains, that any
private Subject may lawfully kill or murder the Anointed of God, his Prince.
Now let any one judge, Protestant or Catholic, whether these forementioned
Clauses are not more, or at least as expressive of Civil Allegiance, as the
ordinary Oath is: And if so, then let them consider, whether, since Catholics
are ready to take any of the Oaths above mentioned, they can rationally be
suspected to refuse the ordinary Oath of Allegiance for want of Loyalty. For
did they refuse it upon that account, they would not offer to take the
abovesaid Oaths, wherein as much or more Civil Allegiance is contained then in
the ordinary Oath. And whether also (probably speaking) we may not vehemently
suspect, that Protestants, who will not be content that Catholics should take
any of the aforesaid Oaths, (wherein all Civil Allegiance due to Princes is
manifestly contained,) but will needs have them take the ordinary Oath, do
require of them somewhat more then mere Civil Allegiance: otherwise, why
should not they be content with any of the forementioned Oaths? Wherefore it
would not be amiss, that when the Oath is tendered to any Catholic who is
resolved to refuse it, he should make a Protestation of his Fidelity, by
offering to take any of the forementioned Oaths. Which will at least serve to
disabuse Protestants, that he does not refuse to take the ordinary Oath for
want of Civil Allegiance.

51. Consider, Lastly, that doubtless there may be framed an Oath of
Allegiance, with such glances upon the Tenets of Protestants, (the same is of
any other Religion,) that no Protestant, who will stick to the Tenets of his
Religion, can take: though it would seem very irrational, to deduce thence,
that Protestants deny Civil Allegiance to His Majesty, if they be ready to
take another Oath, wherein all Civil Allegiance is clearly contained. And if
so, why may not we refuse this Oath, by reason of some doubtful or false
Expressions it contains, or of some glances it has at our Religion, without
therefore deserving to be impeached of Disloyalty; since we are ready to take
other Oaths, wherein as much or more Civil Allegiance is contained?

52. If they object, Fourthly, for the Lawfulness of this Oath, the Authority
of the Kingdom of France, of the University and Parliament of Paris, and of
other Universities and Parliaments of that Kingdom, who constantly deny the
Pope to have any Authority or Power, direct or indirect, to Depose Kings; and
finally, of the French Jesuits, who subscribed the Censure and Condemnation of
some Books wherein that Power was defended; and why may not the Catholics of
England have the same liberty as the Catholics of France have?

53. Concerning the Authority of France, for this Oath, objected against us;
Consider, First, that though in an Assembly Anno 1615.
held in France of the Three Estates, Ecclesiastics, Nobility, and Commons, in
time of Cardinal Peron, there was drawn up Quoted in the Reflection upon the
Oath, page 73.
an Oath by the Third Estate, or Commons, wherein is affirmed, De hoc Articulo
ait Gallic. Eccles. in illis Comitiis, non alio tendere quam ad Schisma
conflandum, and corroborandum Haeresin. Mercur. Gall. Tom. 30. Ann. 1615. p.
298, 247.
That there is no Power on earth, either Spiritual or Temporal, that has any
Right over his Majesty's Kingdom, to Depose the Sacred Persons of our Kings,
nor to dispense with or absolve their Subjects from their Loyalty and Obedience
which they owe to them; for any cause or pretense whatsoever: yet the Two chief
parts of the Assembly, viz. the Rex, silentio imposito, Articulum inseri
codicillis vetuit. Nobilitas Clero consentit. Id. page 336.
Spiritual and Temporal Lords, were so much against this Article of the Oath,
that they were resolved, especially the Spiritual Lords, to die rather then
take it; and the Third Estate, or Commons, who had drawn it up, after they had
heard Peron's Oration against it, laid it aside, which is as much as handsomely
to recall it. And how can we reasonably say that the Kingdom of France is for
an Oath, which the Two principal parts of the Assembly, representative of that
Kingdom, were so eager against, and which the Third part, after serious
consideration, laid aside?

54. Consider, Secondly, that rather we may allege the Kingdom of France for
the Negative, or against the Oath, according to what happened in the Assembly.
In convent. Episc. Gall. habito 27. Febr. 1626. damnatus est ille Articulus:
subscripserunt 2 Card. 10 Archiep. 30 Episc. Rochefoc. in ration. cont. Schism.
Sect. 1. Sect. 102. and Mercur. Gallic. ^om. 11. An. 1626. p. 105. Etiam major
pars Tertii* Ordinis Articuli illius progressum impedivit. Card. Richelieu lib.
cont. 4 Ministros Calvinist. page 173.
For it is a certain kind of Argument against a thing, when, having been
proposed and debated in an Assembly, it was not carried, but rather rejected.
Neither has there been since enacted by any other Assembly of France any Oath
of this kind, to be tendered unto all, (neither do our Adversaries pretend, that
any such thing has been done,) as our Oath of Allegiance was enacted for all
sorts of people, by our Parliament, which corresponds to the Assembly in
France. Neither is there in France any other Oath, wherein is expressly denied
the forementioned Power, established by the King or any Parliament, or any
other ways, for to be taken by all such who swear Allegiance to his most
Christian Majesty. And the English Catholics are ready to take the Oath of
Allegiance to His Majesty which is generally tendered in France. And why may not
His Majesty be content with the same kind of Civil Allegiance from his
Subjects, which the French King and other Sovereigns require from their
Subjects? All which shows, that France cannot reasonably be brought as a
precedent in the Cause we treat of.

55. Consider, Thirdly, that since the Representative of France has so much
favored the Negative, though we should grant, (and whether it must be granted
or not, we shall see by and by,) that some other particular Tribunal or
Society of that Kingdom have favored the contrary; yet because the Assembly
or Representative of France is far above those particular Societies, we ought
to conclude, that France rather countenances the Negative, then the
Affirmative. Should we see that our Parliament did countenance so much the
Negative of an opinion, as the forementioned Assembly of France did countenance
the Refusal of that Oath; though some particular Court at Westminster, or the
University of Oxford, should countenance the contrary; we ought to say that
England rather stood for the Negative, then the Affirmative.

56. Concerning the Authority of the Parliament and University of Paris in this
Point; Consider, First, that neither that Parliament, nor any other Parliament
of France, neither that University, nor any other University of that Kingdom,
have ever yet made any public and authentic Act wherein they approve our
present Oath of Allegiance as it lies, and all its Clauses wherein the
difficulty thereof consists; neither do our Adversaries pretend any such thing:
but only that the Parliament and University of Paris, with some other
Parliaments and Universities of France, have made Decrees, wherein they deny
the Pope to have any Power whatsoever to Depose Kings, or to Absolve their
Subjects from the Allegiance due unto them, for any cause or under any pretense
whatsoever. Yet hence does not follow, that the Parliaments or Universities of
that Kingdom do approve this Oath. For to approve an Oath, it is necessary to
approve all and every part thereof: and who only approves one part, does not
therefore approve the whole. So that whosoever argues hence, to show the
Lawfulness of this Oath, his Argument must run thus: The University and
Parliament of Paris approve some Clauses of this Oath, whereat several persons
do scruple: Therefore they approve the whole Oath. Which Argument is
inconclusive, as is manifest.

57. Consider, Secondly, that though the Authority of the Parliament and
University of Paris may work so far with some, as to persuade them that this
Oath ought not to be refused upon the account of any just Scruple concerning
the Power in the Pope to depose Kings, or absolve their Subjects from the
Allegiance due unto them; yet it does not therefore follow, that the same
Authority (which does not concern it self at least in any public Decrees about
other Difficulties of the Oath) should persuade them not to refuse at all this
present Oath, since there are several other respects, not taken notice of by
the Parliament or University of Paris, in their public Decrees alleged by our
Adversaries, for which many refuse it. Some, though satisfied that the Pope has
no Power to depose Kings, yet they have a great difficulty about the word
Heretical: for it seems hard unto them, to censure the Doctrine which
maintains, that Princes Excommunicate or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed
by their Subjects, for an Heresy, or for as bad as an Heresy; and the
Defenders thereof for Heretics, either material or formal, as invincible
ignorance does or does not excuse them, or at least for as bad as such; and to
swear that they detest them in the like manner, either for such, or as bad as
such.

58. Others think, they cannot swear with Truth, that neither the Pope, nor any
other whatsoever, can absolve them from this Oath, or any part thereof, in any
case imaginable; since the King himself may absolve His Subjects from such an
Oath, either all of them, by laying down the Government with consent of the
Kingdom, as Charles the Fifth did; (and it is hard to oblige one to swear,
that a King of England in no case possible can do the like;) or at least some
of them, by passing a Town under his Jurisdiction to another King, as His
Majesty passed Dunkirk to the French King, and consequently absolved from the
Oath of Allegiance the Inhabitants who had taken it. Moreover, they do not see
how they can swear, that it is impossible, that, in any case whatsoever, a King
of England may be justly conquered. For if he be justly conquered, then he is
justly deposed; and if justly deposed, then his Subjects are absolved from
their Oath of Allegiance: for no body is bound to pay Allegiance to one who is
no longer his King or Sovereign.

59. Others cannot swallow that term [ Heartily] inserted in the Oath, nor
swear, that all they must swear, if they take the Oath, they swear heartily,
according to the plain and common sense of the words by them spoken. For to
swear heartily is more then to swear only with a mere power not to swear. A
Merchant, who throws out his goods into the Sea only to save himself and his
ship, cannot be said to do it heartily; which signifies, to do a thing
without a reluctance of mind; but rather with an inclination and propension of
mind thereunto. And how (say they) can we swear, that we take this Oath
heartily, and without any reluctance of mind, but rather with a great
inclination thereunto, when we are forced to take it to conserve our privileges
or employments, or not to undergo severe penalties enacted against those who
refuse it? and when we see that so many great Difficulties have been started
against this Oath, and pursued with so much vigor; that so many Learned and
Conscientious men are against it; and that the Supreme Pastor of the Church
has so often and so severely prohibited it? All which (say they) cannot but
create, in any tender Conscience, some regret and reluctance of mind to take
the Oath.

60. Others are deterred by the Title of the Act wherein this Oath is inserted,
An Act for the Discovering and Suppressing of Popish Recusants: whereby it
seems to be insinuated, that the taking this Oath is made a Denial of the Roman
Catholic Religion, or of Popery. For though other things are contained in the
Act, which do contribute to the Discovery of Popish Recusants; yet this Oath is
inserted among the rest, and compleats the Discovery of them. And it is not
lawful to do any thing which is made by Public Authority a Denial of the
true Religion, or a distinctive Sign of a false Religion.

61. Others, though they are satisfied concerning the Substance of the Oath,
yet are gravelled at some ambiguous Expressions. The Author of the Reflections
upon this Oath, though he be very fierce against the Pope's Power to depose
Kings, yet he seems dissatisfied with the Oath, by reason of several ambiguous
Expressions therein contained; as appears by what he says page 76, 77. and an
Oath must not be ambiguous. Nay, the Author of the Questions concerning the
Oath, though so eager for the Lawfulness thereof, does notwithstanding confess,
( page 26.) that it is dressed up unhappily with some odd Expressions, at the
first sight; and therefore he heartily wishes that another form of Oath were
framed, which might not trouble with Scruples the less-instructed Conscience of
any.

62. Others, though they believe that whatever is contained in the Oath is
true, and are ready to swear that they believe it, yet they cannot be brought
to swear positively, that whatever is asserted in the Oath is true: which is
very different. Others, finally, though they be satisfied concerning the
Substance of the Oath, and the Expressions too, yet see no Necessity of
swearing, or any good they get by taking the Oath: and an Oath, amongst other
Conditions, must be necessary. All such persons as these, though they be fully
satisfied, either from the pretended Authority of France, or otherwise, that
the Pope has no Power to depose Kings; yet those Decrees of France, which our
Adversaries produce, do not clear, nor so much as touch, the forementioned
Difficulties; and consequently are not alone able to induce the aforesaid
persons to take the Oath, or to justify the taking thereof. Whence it follows,
that because one refuses the Oath, it cannot in rigor be inferred, that he
denies such a determinate Clause thereof, let them take which they please;
since some dislike one thing, and some another: nay, nor that he does not
assent to the whole Substance of the Oath, and to its Expressions also. And
much less can it be thence inferred, that such an one who refuses the Oath does
deny Civil Allegiance to His Majesty.

63. Consider, Thirdly, that the Decree of the Parliament of Paris published
the 27. of June 1614. quoted by Withrington in the place above mentioned,
whereby was prohibited Suarez his Book, entitled Defensio Fidei Catholicae,
etc. is to be understood only, as appears by the Chapters cited in the Decree,
and by the tenor thereof, in order to the Prohibition of that Doctrine, which
maintains the Temporal Authority of the Pope over Kings: but it does not
concern it self at all with other Difficulties, which Suarez and other Authors
raise about the Oath: which notwithstanding must be cleared, before we can take
it.

64. Consider, Fourthly, that it is one thing to prohibit the teaching or
preaching that the Pope has any Power to depose Kings, or to command one to
teach and preach the contrary; which is all our Adversaries can prove from the
forementioned Decrees, or any other, of the Parliaments and Universities of
France; and another thing to command one to swear positively, that the Pope has
no such Power, and to abjure the Affirmative as Heretical, which the King
commands us to do when He commands us to take this Oath. So that the Argument
our Adversaries draw from such Decrees of France is this; The Parliament or
University of Paris prohibits any one to teach, that the Pope has Authority to
depose Kings, or commands some to teach the contrary: Therefore the King may
command us to swear positively, that the Pope has no such Authority, or to
abjure the contrary as Heretical. Which consequence is null, as is manifest.
For what University is there, wherein the Members thereof are not prohibited to
teach certain Opinions, or are not commanded to teach the contrary; many of
which Opinions are mere Scholastical and Philosophical Questions, either part
being probable? But yet they are not therefore commanded to swear positively,
that such Opinions are true, neither can they in Conscience many times swear
it: For one may teach such an Opinion to be true, though he cannot swear it to
be so; more being requisite to swear a thing to be true, then to teach that it
is so.

65. Consider, Fifthly, that what was resolved by the Parliament of Paris, in
that Decree concerning the Jesuits, was, That the Rectour, with some others of
the principal Fathers, should be summoned to appear in the Court at such a day:
That they should be told, that, contrary to the express Order of their own
General, issued forth in the year 1610. this Book of Suarez had been printed,
and brought into that Kingdom: That they should procure the same Prohibition
to be renewed by their General; and that they should exhibit an authentical
Copy thereof within three months: finally, That they should exhort the people,
in their Sermons, to embrace the contrary Doctrine to the Propositions they had
prohibited. But from all this it cannot be inferred, that the French Jesuits
did, or would have sworn positively, That the Pope has no Power, in no case
whatsoever, to depose Princes; nor that they did exhort the people to swear any
such thing; nor that they were commanded by the Parliament so to do. One may
exhort another to embrace an Opinion, which notwithstanding he will not nor
cannot positively swear to be true, nor exhort the other to swear it is so. And
yet whoever exhorts any one to take the Oath, he must exhort him to swear
positively, that the forementioned Opinion, viz. That the Pope has no Power to
depose Kings, is true. Much less can it be inferred from the aforesaid Decree,
that the French Jesuits did approve, or were commanded to approve, of all the
other Clauses contained in the present Oath. And consequently, their Authority
cannot be alleged for the Lawfulness thereof. For though the Clauses relating
to the Pope's Power to depose Princes may seem to some to contain the main
Difficulty; yet this to others seems no Difficulty at all: and there are
several other Difficulties involved in the Oath, as has been shown. And to the
end we may lawfully take an Oath, it is necessary to be satisfied concerning
all, and every Difficulty and Clause thereof. For to swear any thing either
false, or doubtful, though never so little in it self, is a grievous Sin.

66. Concerning the Authority of the University of Paris in particular, for the
Lawfulness of the Oath; besides what already has been said in general,
Consider, First, that though we should grant, (as we do not,) that the
Universitie of Paris, and other Universities of France, are for the Oath: yet
even our Adversaries confess, The University of Louvaine is also against this
Oath, as appears by a Censure they gave Dec. 29. 1662.
that the Universities of Spain are against it, where, beyond debate, there are
many Learned and Conscientious men, and as zealous for the Honor and Safety of
their Kings as any in France; and they have as many Prerogatives relating to
the Security of their Sovereigns against the Usurpations of any Ecclesiastical
Prince, as in any Country whatsoever. So that, admitting that on both sides
there are grave Authors, yet the Negative, in the present debate, has the
advantage of the Affirmative, That the Pope, who is the competent Judge in
these affairs, (as above has been proved,) and to whom both parties made their
address, has given his express Sentence for the Negative; and among other
things which render an Opinion, before probable, practically or in practice
improbable, one is, an authentic Declaration or Sentence of a competent,
especially Supreme, Judge to the contrary.

67. Suppose that in a Plea before the King and His Council, there are many
brave Lawyers on both sides, who produce several pregnant Arguments, and
excellent Precedents, in favor of their respective Clients, which render the
Cause doubtful; yet that party must needs carry it, for whom the King and His
Council gave their definitive Sentence: neither is it longer lawful for the
party condemned to stand out, because many learned Lawyers are on his side, or
to retrive the former Arguments produced for his right; which signifies no more
then to plead after the Suit is lost. Neither would the party who had gained
the Cause concern himself any farther with what the Lawyers of the contrary
side object against him. The same happens in our present Case. There are many
grave and learned Authors against the Oath: suppose there are also many for
it: yet since the Impugners of the Oath have obtained several express Sentences
of the Supreme Judge in their favor, they do not think themselves obliged to
take any farther notice of what the Defenders of the Oath produce against them,
which cannot excuse them from an exterior Compliance with the Judge's express
Sentence, as long as it is authentic. And this is the Reason, why the
Impugners of the Oath have not in a long time printed any thing against it. For
what more can they pretend by their writings, but that the Oath be condemned by
the Pope? which has been already done. But the Defenders of the Oath continue
still to write, after they have lost the cause; according to the common saying,
Losers must have leave to talk, or at least they will take it.

68. Consider, Secondly, that among other Oaths, which those who desire to be
incorporated in the University of Paris are to take, one for the Degree of
Bachelour is, That they will hold the Articles of the Faculty of Paris to be
true; and that, when occasion offers, they will defend them to be agreeable to
Faith and Religion: which is a promissory Oath; the truth whereof only
requires, that he who swears has a sincere intention to do what he promises:
and (as we have already seen) one may promise, even under an Oath, that he will
defend such an Opinion to be true, when occasion offers, though he does not,
nor cannot lawfully, many times, swear positively that it is true. For these
two Oaths are very different, Before God, I judge that the Pope has no Power to
depose Kings, and I promise to defend it, when occasion requires; and, Before
God, he has no such Power. The immediate object of the former Oath is only our
own Judgment, or Intention; whereof every one is certain: and consequently, to
call God for witness that he has such a Judgment, being certain that he has it,
is not to expose God to be a witness to a Falsity. But the immediate object of
the latter Oath is the Matter it self, which probably may be otherwise: and to
call God for witness of a thing that I know probably may be otherwise, is to
expose him to be witness of a Falsity; which, let the matter be never so
little, is a great affront. And therefore it is a common way of speaking among
conscientious people, I think such a thing is true, but I will not swear it is
true. Hence it follows, that the immediate object of Oaths is not always the
Judgment of the person who takes them: otherwise it would be impossible that
one should ever swear false, judging that he swears true, since every one is
conscious of his own actual Judgment; neither can one think that he judges
actually, when he does not: And yet certainly it is possible that one should
swear false, thinking that he swears true. So that though we should grant that
the University of Paris does oblige her Members to swear, that they will
defend, that the Pope has no Power to depose Kings; it does not therefore
follow, that they can be, or are, bound to swear positively, that the Pope has
no such Power: which notwithstanding we must swear, if we will take this Oath.
Neither, because they are bound to swear, that they will defend the Articles of
the Faculty of Paris to be agreeable to Faith and Religion, does it therefore
follow, (as some do seem to pretend,) that they are bound to defend them as
Articles of Faith. For the common Approbation of Theological and Spiritual
Books, is, that they contain nothing which is not agreeable to Faith and good
manners: and yet, sure, those who give such Approbations are far from approving
all that is contained in such Books, as Articles of Faith.

69. Consider, Thirdly, that among other Articles of the Faculty of Paris, one
is, (upon which chiefly our Adversaries seem to have had an eye,) That it is
not the Doctrine of the Faculty, that the Pope has any Authority over the
Temporals of his most Christian Majesty; and that the Faculty has always
resisted those who affirm this Power to be only indirect. Now to infer hence,
that the Faculty of Paris does approve our present Oath, even in this Point,
concerning the Pope's Power over the Temporals of Princes, is to argue thus;
The Faculty of Paris does not teach, that the Pope has any Authority over the
Temporals of Princes: Therefore, according to the opinion of that Faculty, we
may swear positively, that he has no such Power or Authority. Which consequence
doubtless is very weak: For it is one thing, not to teach such a Doctrine, or
to punish and resist those that do teach it; and another thing, to authorize
one to swear positively, or to teach the contrary. They might, in the like
manner, quote all the Jesuits who now live, or have been alive for many years,
though they are looked upon as the greatest sticklers against the Oath, in
favor of it. For they have been prohibited many years ago, and under
Excommunication, to teach or preach, that the Pope has any Authority whatsoever
to depose Kings; and whoever among them should teach any such Doctrine would be
severely punished: whence it manifestly follows, that it is not the Doctrine of
the Jesuits, that the Pope can Depose Kings. Will our Adversaries therefore
infer hence, that it is the Doctrine of the Jesuits, that we may positively
swear that the Pope has no such Power?

70. In the same Article is contained, That it is not the Doctrine of that
Faculty, that the Pope is above a General Council, nor that he is Infallible
without the consent of the Church. And sure hence cannot be deduced, That it is
the Sentiment of the aforesaid Faculty, that we may positively swear the
contrary Tenets to be true. And though in another of their Articles it be
affirmed, That it is the Doctrine of that Faculty, that his most Christian
Majesty's Subjects cannot be dispensed with, under any pretense whatsoever, in
their Loyalty due unto him: yet they are not therefore obliged to swear it.

71. Moreover, among other Oaths, which the Members of the University of Paris
are bound to take, they must swear, that they will hold, that the B. Virgin
Mary was preserved in her Conception from Original Sin: yet they are not
therefore obliged to swear it, and much less to abjure the contrary Doctrine
as Heretical. For there is a vast difference between swearing that we will
defend such a Doctrine to be true; and swearing that it is true, or abjuring
the contrary Doctrine as Heretical.

72. Consider, Fourthly, concerning a certain Decree made by the University of
Paris the 20. of April 1626. (whereof our Adversaries make so great an
account,) condemning several Propositions of Sanctarellus his Book as
erroneous, seditious, contrary to the Word of God, etc. according to a common
interpretation of those words of the Oath, I abjure as impious and Heretical,
etc. given by our Adversaries, that such a Decree or Prohibition is void, and
of no force. For, according to that interpretation of our Adversaries, the
forementioned words of the Oath are to be taken comparatively, not assertively;
that is, not for abjuring that Doctrine for Heretical, but only for as bad as
Heretical: in the same manner as is commonly said, that we detest such an one
as the Devil, knowing full well, that he is not the Devil. So that, according
to this acception, it is not necessary, that who takes the Oath should think
that the Doctrine there abjured is either impious, or Heretical; nay, he may
fully be persuaded that it is neither impious, nor Heretical: and he must think
so, if those words must be taken comparatively, as some will have; for all
comparison is between distinct things. All which, I confess, does seem somewhat
strange to me. Neither do I see how, with truth, without Hyperbole, and
according to the plain Sense of the words, one can look upon a Doctrine which
is not Heretical, for as bad as if it were Heretical; since Heresy is the
blackest Censure, and whatever Proposition is not Heretical, is less then
Heretical. But my present design is not to impugn the aforesaid Interpretation:
what I affirm is, that if such an Interpretation be warrantable, yet it cannot
be gathered from the abovementioned Decree, wherein the like expression is
used, viz. as erroneous, and contrary to the Word of God, that the Doctors of
Paris did hold the Propositions condemned in that Decree to be erroneous,
seditious, or contrary to the Word of God. Nay, notwithstanding that Decree,
they might, and must think those Propositions to be neither erroneous, nor
seditious, nor contrary to the Word of God. And if so, of what force is this
Decree, to prove that we may positively swear, that the Pope has no Power to
depose Princes?

73. Consider, Fifthly, Anno 162^. Feb. 9 Facultas Parisiensis hanc Censuram,
quoad formam and tenorem. revocavit, nec hactenus, quod sciam, aliam confecit.
Mercur. Tom. 12. An. 1627. page 21. Vide etiam Rochefoc. page 386.
that since the Censures contained in the forementioned Decree are several, and
the Propositions therein condemned are also several, it does not well appear
which Censures fall upon which Propositions; or whether every Censure falls
upon every one of them. It seems incredible, that those Learned men should
censure as erroneous, seditious, and contrary to the Word of God, etc. this
Proposition, which is mentioned in the Decree, The Pope may with Temporal
punishment chastise Kings and Princes for the crime of Heresy: since it is
manifest, that should an Heretical Prince be reconciled, the Pope, or any other
Confessarius who should reconcile him, might impose upon him for the crime of
Heresy some corporal and temporal penance or punishment, enjoining him to give
an Alms, to build an Hospital, or some such other work.

74. Consider, Sixthly, that the forementioned Book of Sanctarellus was
prohibited at Rome by the Pope before it was prohibited at Paris, in the year
1627.
as Spondanus, a French Author, relates; who also says, that the animosities
of the University of Paris against this Book did arise from some hidden seeds
of Schism. Now our Adversaries do not so much as pretend, that the Pope is for
the Lawfulness of this Oath, or of opinion, that we may positively swear, that
he has no Power whatsoever to depose Kings; though he prohibited that Book. Why
therefore do they infer, that the University of Paris, because it prohibits the
same Book, is for the Oath?

75. Consider, Seventhly, whether the Censures contained in the abovementioned
Decree may not be understood to condemn only a Power in the Pope to depose
Princes, either by reason of some Civil Insufficiency in the Prince to govern,
or some light cause mentioned by Sanctarellus, or upon the mere account of
Heresy or Apostasy, though they should permit their Subjects to enjoy Liberty
of conscience: which seems to have been the Doctrine of Sanctarellus. If so,
then our case is very different concerning the present Point. For neither
Bellarmine, nor Peron, (against whom our Adversaries do so hotly inveigh,) do
speak of a mere Civil Insufficiency; neither do they affirm, that a Prince may
lawfully be deposed, merely because he is an Heretic, unless moreover he
forces his Subjects to be so too, by persecuting them. And yet, in the Oath, we
are bound to swear, that the Pope has not any Power whatsoever, in any case
possible, to depose an Heretical Prince, whether he persecutes his Subjects or
not.

75. Consider, Eighthly, that though in the forementioned Decree, Sanctarellus
his Propositions be condemned as contrary to the Word of God; yet this is not
properly to condemn them (as our Adversaries pretend) for Heretical, unless
they be declared as such by the Church: as, to approve a Proposition as
agreeable to the Word of God, is not to approve it as an Article of Faith,
according to what above has been insinuated. And there is scarce any
Scholasticall Question of Divinity, wherein the Defenders of either side do not
endeavor to prove their Opinion out of Scripture; and consequently, they look
upon the opposite Sentence as contrary to the Word of God: yet they are far
from censuring it therefore as Heretical, and often prohibited so to do. Nay,
Protestants, who affirm those Tenets wherein we differ from them to be
repugnant to Scripture, and pretend to prove they are so; yet they do withal
confess, that they are no Heresies. So that as well Protestants as Catholics,
according to the plain and common sense of the words, understand somewhat more
by an Heretical Opinion, then an Opinion contrary to the Word of God.

77. Concerning other things relating to the Authority of France, contained in
the Objection; Consider, First, that the Author of a Book entitled Some few
Questions concerning the Oath of Allegiance, page 8. sets down an Arrest of the
Parliament of Paris, wherein the Jesuits were ordered (as he pretends) to
subscribe the forementioned Decree or Censure against Sanctarellus his Book.
But this is a great Mistake, if the Arrest be understood of that Decree. For
that Decree was made upon the 20. of April 1626. and the Arrest was dated the
17th. of March 1626. wherein the Jesuits were commanded to subscribe within
three days; so that, Plura circa Iesuitas Gall. quoad hanc rem vide apud
Mercur. Jesuit. page 844. and Mercur. Gall. Ann. 1626. Nec probant Adversarii,
Iesuitas unquam subscripisse hanc Prop. Papa in nullo casu potest deponere
regem.
according to this account, they were to subscribe a Decree 37 days before it
was made: and the Censure of the Sorbon mentioned in the Decree was passed the
4th. of April 1626. so that, were the Arrest to be understood of this Censure,
they were to subscribe 15 days before it past: which is ridiculous. Besides,
should we grant, that the Jesuits had subscribed the forementioned Decree and
Censure, we have already seen how little that Decree, or the Censure therein
contained, does favor the Lawfulness of this Oath: and consequently, neither
can the Subscription of the Jesuits to such a Censure and Decree help much
thereunto. For they would not therefore subscribe or approve the Oath as it
lies, nor affirm, that one might positively swear, that the Pope has no Power
whatsoever to depose Princes; and much less, that one might swear, that he
abjures the contrary as Heretical: (all which is required in the Oath:) since
the University or Parliament of Paris never required any such Oath or
Subscription. Nay, one's Subscription signifies no more, but that he thinks the
thing he subscribes to be true: yet one may think a thing to be true, though he
will not swear, nor counsel any other to swear it is so.

78. Consider, Secondly, that there are some other Propositions alleged out of
France in favor of this Oath, which are commonly held in that Kingdom; viz.
That his most Christian Majesty does not receive his Kingdom but from God, and
his Sword -- That he does not acknowledge any other Superior in his Kingdom,
but only God: (which is to be understood in Temporalls; for he acknowledges
the Pope to be his Superior in Spiritualls.) Now, even those who refuse the
Oath do confess the same of His Majesty. Neither is an indirect and
conditional Power to depose Kings (which some ascribe to the Pope in certain
cases) inconsistent with such Prerogatives. For every King has an indirect and
conditional Power or Right to wage war against any other Sovereign, though he
receives his Government immediately from God; and to depose him too, in case he
injures such a King or his Subjects, as it is possible he may, and refuses,
when required thereunto, to give any reasonable satisfaction. What good English
Subject is there, who, in the late Dutch War, (which we suppose to have been
just on our side,) would have sworn, that His Majesty had not Right and Power
to Depose the States General, (whom we acknowledge to be Sovereign, and to
depend of God alone in Temporalls,) and consequently, to absolve their Subjects
from their Oath of Allegiance made to them, in case they had persisted to
refuse to give His Majesty the satisfaction that was due? and what satisfaction
was due, His Majesty was to be judge. So that, were this indirect Deposing
power inconsistent with the Sovereignty of Princes, there would be no Sovereign
Prince at all. And since the Pope is Sovereign Temporal Prince of Rome, and
its adjacent Territories, as even Protestants confess; he must have the like
indirect Deposing power, or right, which is inherent in every Sovereign
Temporal Prince, as even our Adversaries will not deny. And yet, if we take
the Oath, we must swear, or testify before God, (which certainly is to swear,)
That the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church of Rome,
has any Power to depose Kings; that is, neither Temporal nor Spiritual,
neither direct nor indirect: for the Proposition is Negative, and by
consequence denies all Power whatsoever.

79. And here I cannot but ask our Adversaries a question; which is, Whether
either they or Protestants do affirm, that all Wars whatsoever undertaken by
Christian Princes, (whereof some are styled Defenders of the Faith, others
Catholic Majesty's, others most Christian Majesty's,) in Defense of the
Orthodox Religion, against another Prince, a Persecutour of the true Church,
and declared to be such by a lawful and competent Judge, whether (I say) they
affirm, that all such Wars are unjust and unlawful: and if not, whether the
Pope may not declare a Sovereign Prince to be an Heretic, and a Persecutour of
the Church, if really he be such: and whether, if he may make such a
Declaration, (as being a lawful Judge in matters of that nature, according to
the unanimous consent of Catholics,) he may not also in that case invoke the
help of some pious and powerful Christian King, (which is what is understood
by authorizing him,) to stave off by arms the manifest injury done to his Sheep
in Spiritualls: and if he may in that case invoke the help of some Christian
King to that effect, (since it is manifest, that Ecclesiastics may in some
cases invoke the help of a Secular Power,) whether then the King so invoked may
not condescend to the Pope's request, and compel the Heretical Prince, and
Persecutour, by force of arms, to desist from seducing his Subjects; and in
case of refusal, to prosecute the War (as he may all other just Wars) till he
has deposed, him and consequently absolved his Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance. And if they grant all this, how can they counsel us to swear, that
the Pope neither by himself, nor with any other, has any Power to depose Kings,
or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy them, or their Countries?
All which is involved in the Oath.

80. Consider, Thirdly, that because the Gallican Church has such Privileges or
Liberties granted unto it, either by some particular Concessions of the Pope,
or by some Contract, or otherwise; it does not therefore follow, that every
other Church or Kingdom does enjoy the same Privileges or Liberties. For one
Kingdom may have some particular Privileges which another has not: and perhaps
we had here some particular Privileges, granted unto us from Rome, which were
not granted in France. Among the Propositions alleged out of France concerning
the Pope's Authority, another is, (which seems to be held in France,) That the
Pope cannot put an Interdict (which is a mere Ecclesiastical Censure, as an
Excommunication is) either upon the French King, or his Kingdom: and moreover,
the Members of the University of Paris do swear, that they will defend, among
other Articles, that the said University does not approve, that the Pope may
depose Bishops, or deprive them, though Ecclesiastical persons, of their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, contrary to the Liberties and Canons of the
Gallican Church, commonly received in that Kingdom. And yet, sure, even those
Catholics who stand so much for the Oath, would think it somewhat harsh, if
the Parliament should force them to swear, that the Pope cannot depose a
Catholic Bishop of England, (were there any such Bishop,) that deserved to be
deposed; or that he cannot put an Interdict upon this Kingdom: since they
only pretend to deny the Pope any Jurisdiction over the Temporalls of the
Kingdom, or to inflict Temporal punishments; but not over the Spiritualls
thereof, or to inflict Ecclesiastical punishments, such as an Interdict is.
Wherefore this consequence is null; Such a Practice, or such a Doctrine, is
allowed of in France, or for France; Therefore the same Practice, or Doctrine,
must be allowed of in England, and for England.

Besides that the liberty which the French have concerning our present Debate
is only, that they may defend, that the Pope has no Power to depose Kings:
which liberty is also given to our English; since the Pope in the
abovementioned Briefs does not declare expressly, (as our Adversaries falsely
suppose he does,) that he has any such Power, or forbid us to hold or defend
the contrary.

81. Consider, Fourthly, whether, should we grant, (which we do not) that there
were in France a public Oath for all sorts of people, wherein they do
positively swear, that the Pope has not any Power to depose his most Christian
Majesty, whether (I say) there would not be several particular Reasons to
refuse such an Oath as our present Oath is in England, considering the present
condition thereof, which are of no force in France, to refuse the like Oath.
For we may prudently suspect here in England, that since the Framers of this
Oath were mortal Enemies to the Pope and See of Rome, they have made such
frequent mention therein of the Pope and See of Rome (without specifying any
other Sovereign Temporal Prince, nay not so much as containing them in
general terms; though there be as much need for His Majesty to secure the
Loyalty of his Subjects against other Sovereigns, as against the Pope;) out of
hatred and contempt of the Roman Church, the Papal Dignity, and the Pope's
Supremacy in Spiritualls: and since they could not so easily bring Catholics
to deny it explicitly by taking the Oath of Supremacy, they intend to make them
deny it implicitly, and under a color of Civil Loyalty, inducing them to take
this Oath of Allegiance. And that this was the design of the Parliament, is
manifest. For they would have inserted in the Oath a Renunciation of the Pope's
power to Excommunicate; whereby they would implicitly, even according to our
Adversaries judgment, have denied the Pope's Supremacy. And though they left
out that Clause at King James his request, yet there remains enough to make us
prudently suspect, that the Oath was contrived in contempt of the Papal
Dignity. Now it is a constant opinion among Divines, that when any thing,
though it should be indifferent of it self, is required of us in contempt of
any lawful Dignity, we are bound to refuse it, though otherwise we might
submit unto it. It is related of some ancient Christians, that they would
rather die then swear by the Fortune of Caesar; because such an Oath was
required of them by the Pagan Emperors in contempt of the True God, to the end
that they who took it might be thought to acknowledge implicitly thereby, that
Fortune was a Goddess: yet Christians may, if it be necessary, swear by the
Fortune of their Princes, who are Christians. In like manner, should an Arrian
King require of his Subjects, that they should swear or subscribe this
Proposition, Christ is a Creature, they might justly refuse it, though that
Proposition in rigor be true; because they might prudently suspect, that the
Arrians did require of them such an Oath, or Subscription, in contempt of the
Divinity of our B. Savior; which they denied, and endeavored to prove their
Assertion, because he was a Creature. Now nothing of this could be suspected in
France, where they are Roman Catholics, and own the Pope's Dignity and
Supremacy in Spiritualls.

82. Moreover, the very Title of the Act wherein this Oath is inserted, as
above has been hinted, does insinuate, that it was instituted by public
Authority, as a distinctive Sign, for to discover Roman Catholics by the
Refusal thereof. Neither can it be said, that the Framers of this Oath
intended thereby only to distinguish Loyal Catholics from those who are not
such: First, Because the Title makes no such distinction; and I suppose that
the Title was put in by those who framed the Act, and intended thereby to
declare their intention. Secondly, Because we might say the same of distinctive
Signs of Christians instituted by Pagan Emperors, viz. That they were
instituted by them only to distinguish Obedient and Loyal Christians from
others who were not such. For Christians, who were put to death by the
Emperors for not submitting to the public Tests ordained by them, were said
to be put to death for Disobedience to the Emperors Edicts: and many of the
Pagan Emperors did feign that they could not be secure of the Christians; as
some Protestants feign that they cannot be secure of Papists: and consequently,
those Pagan Emperors might in the like manner have required a compliance with
those Tests, in order to their Security; as Julian, the Apostata, required his
Christian Soldiers to do homage to his Standard, (where he and Jupiter were
painted,) under pretense of the Respect due unto him. Thirdly, Because
Protestants are persuaded, that the very Principles of our Religion are
inconsistent with Civil Allegiance; and therefore in the beginning of the
forementioned Act, they look upon this Inconsistency as an infection drawn from
our Religion: and consequently, they intend this Oath for to distinguish Roman
Catholics from not Roman Catholics; or (which is the same) Catholics who
stick to their Principles, as by them understood, from those who do not. So
that whoever takes this Oath, does, according to the Protestants Sentiment,
renounce or deny some Principle of the Roman Religion; though they require
somewhat more for a perfect Conformity to their Religion.

83. Now it is certain, according to all Divines, that it is never lawful to
comply with the distinctive Sign of a false Religion, though the thing of it
self should be lawful or indifferent; as with the eating of Swines-flesh in
time of the Jews, and the burning of Incense before an Idol; which might have
been instituted as an affront: for such Signs are only arbitrary. And yet
should there have been the like Oath enacted in France, we could not prudently
suspect, that it would ever have been intended for a distinctive Sign of
Catholics from not Catholics.

84. Again, our present Oath has been prohibited by several Briefs of the Pope
particularly directed to the Catholics of England: which is sufficient to
persuade any good English Catholic to acquiesce, and forbear the taking
thereof. But supposing that the Oath framed by the Third Estate of France had
past; yet had it not been prohibited by the Pope, there would not have been the
same reason to refuse it in France as here. And sure the French are so addicted
to the Pope, that had Vide Duval. in Elench. and Decretum Facult. Sorbon. ad
calcem Magistri Sentent. ubi dicitur, Ad Sanctam Sedem Apostolicam pertinet,
Authoritate judiciali suprema circa ea quae sunt Fidei judicialiter definire.
he expressly prohibited them to take such an Oath, or to defend such a
Doctrine, they would have submitted thereunto: since we see that they submitted
to the Bull of Innocent X. wherein the Five Propositions of Iansenius are
condemned, and assented unto it, without expecting the Determination of a
General Council, and though several persons in France are suspected to have
adhered to those Propositions.

85. The better to explicate this Doctrine, let us suppose, that two persons
possess their respective Lands upon the same Title, and that one of them has
been condemned by his lawful Judge, as possessing such Lands upon an unjust
Title: The other, who is not personally condemned, though his Title be no
better, is not bound to take notice of such a Condemnation, nor to deliver up
his Lands, till he be personally condemned. In the like manner, though the
English are bound to forbear to take this Oath, because they are prohibited
particularly to take it: yet the French, supposing they have the like Oath, or
teach the Doctrine contained in our Oath, as they do not, would not be bound to
take notice of such a Prohibition, as not being directed unto them. Wherefore
as it is not reasonable, that the same liberty should be permitted to them who
live in places infected, as to others who inhabit places free from infection;
to them who are in a tempest, as to those who enjoy fair weather: So neither is
it reasonable, that we English, who live in a Kingdom infected with Heresy,
and under a Persecution, should be permitted to have the same liberty as they
have in France, where they publicly profess the Catholic Religion, and the
Magistrates are free from the infection of Heresy, and obedient Sons to the
Church; and consequently, what they determine concerning the Pope's Authority,
cannot be suspected to proceed from hatred to the Papal Dignity: whenas, on
the contrary, since our Magistrates are implacable Enemies to the Pope, what
they resolve concerning the Pope's Power, may prudently be thought to proceed
out of indignation against him, and with design to bring off Catholics by
little and little from their Obedience to the Pope. And certainly, we ought to
trust rather a Friend, and to give him more liberty, then an Enemy. Whence I
conclude, that whatever our Adversaries produce out of the public Acts or
Decrees of the Parliaments and Universities of France, is of little or no force
to justify the taking our present Oath.

86. Consider, Lastly, that though our Adversaries do boast, that some Doctors
of the Sorbon, being consulted about this Oath, have approved it as it lies;
yet I have never seen their Subscriptions produced: and the Authors who have
written hitherto for the Oath, make mention only of those public Acts above
quoted. I remember, that those who heretofore defended the Nullity of the
Marriage between Henry the Eighth and Queen Katharine, pretended to have
Subscriptions from the Doctors of Paris in their favor; yet all Catholics
now confess that the forementioned Marriage was valid, though the validity
thereof has never been declared by a General Council, but only by particular
Bulls or Briefs; as the Unlawfulness also of this Oath has been declared.
Moreover, admit that some Doctors of Paris have approved this Oath as
represented unto them; yet we ought to consider how the Case was stated. For
every one is not able to state rightly a Case; and several times are left out
some Circumstances very material, which change the nature thereof. And
particularly we ought to consider, whether the several Differences assigned
above between England and France, in relation to the present Debate, were taken
notice of, wherewith French Divines might probably be unacquainted: and perhaps
some of them were asked only concerning the Pope's Power to depose Kings;
which because they denied, those who proposed the Quere presently inferred,
that they approved the whole Oath: which inference is ridiculous, as has been
shown. Now it is certain, that the same Case differently stated requires a
different Solution. Neither does it appertain to a Divine, when he gives his
opinion of a Case so stated, to examine whether it be rightly stated or not.
Some French Divines, having been asked, whether it be lawful for Catholics in
England to frequent the Protestant Churches, have answered in the affirmative,
because it is lawful in France for Catholics to go to the Huguenots
Churches: yet afterward, being more particularly informed of our Laws and
Customs, and of the Pope's Brief prohibiting English Catholics to frequent
such Churches, (which he has not prohibited to the French,) they have answered
and subscribed the contrary.

87. Besides, should we see the Subscriptions of those Doctors in favor of
the Oath, if there be any, probably we should find them to be liable to the
same Exceptions as the public Acts of France, which are produced by our
Adversaries to the same intent. Finally, concerning the Sentiment of the
ancient French Divines about this Point, I refer the Reader to the learned
Oration of Cardinal Peron, delivered before the Third Estate of France. And
admitting that some modern French Divines do seem to favor the Oath: if the
ancient Divines be of the contrary Opinion, why should we acquiesce rather to
the Sentiment of the former then of the latter; especially since the Opinion of
the latter has been seconded by the Pope's Briefs condemning the Oath?

I have been longer about this Point, because I find that the chief or only
inducement of several persons, to believe that the Oath may lawfully be taken,
is this pretended Authority of France.

88. If it be Objected, lastly, That many learned English Divines have and do
defend the Lawfulness of this Oath: That several English Catholics,
Conscientious men, have taken it: That the ancient Fathers of the Church were
against the Pope's Power to depose Kings: That so great an Authority as this is
for the Lawfulness of the Oath cannot but make the Affirmative probable; and if
it be probable that the Oath may be taken, why may we not take it? especially
since it is practically improbable, that it is lawful to deprive a man of what
he possesses, viz. a King of his Kingdom, upon a merely probable Opinion? That
it is no Article of Faith, that this Oath is unlawful, or that the Pope has
any Power to depose Princes; and if so, why may we not take the Oath, and swear
positively, that the Pope has no such Power? Finally, That those who impugn the
Oath are for the greater part Priests and Jesuits, who depend of the Court of
Rome, who are carried away with Passion and Interest, and who have never
seriously considered the merits of the Cause; and consequently, are not to be
consulted, nor hearkened unto, in this matter.

89. Concerning the Divines, and other Authors, who defend or have defended
the Lawfulness of this Oath; Consider, First, what Character Urban the Eighth
gives of them, Paul V. commanded Birket to take away their Faculties from such
Priests as had taken the Oath, or taught that it might be taken, unless they
repented.

Item in the Brief to the Bishop of Chalcedon the Pope says thus; Si quis
aliter docuerit, ejus Doctrina non e fontibus Salvatoris, sed ex Aegypti pu^eis
hauritur.


in the Brief he published against this Oath, the 30. of May 1626. in these
words; They who persuade you otherwise, (speaking to English Catholics,)
prophesy unto you a lying Vision and a fraudulent Divination. For sooner ought
the sword of the mighty to take from a Christian his life, then his Faith. Yea,
if an Angel from Heaven teach you otherwise then the Apostolic Truth, let him
be accursed, Anathema sit. And whether, should His Majesty give the like
Character of one of his Subjects, in order to prevent the rest from consulting
him, or following his Counsel in a certain civil matter, he would deserve to
be held for an obedient Subject, who, notwithstanding His Majesty's
Prohibition, should follow such a man's counsel in the very thing prohibited.

90. Consider, Secondly, that actually the Superiors of the Clergy and of the
Religious Orders here in England, with several others of their respective
Subjects, learned, conscientious and grave men, unanimously judge, that the
Oath ought not to be taken, and publicly profess, that they are of this
Judgment; whenas the Priests, who are of the contrary Opinion, (excepting one,
who is in actual Disobedience to his Superiors, to whom he has made a vow of
Obedience, and who for his Disobedience has been excommunicated,) do not dare
publicly to declare themselves, though the disadvantage (if any) lies here
upon those who are against the Oath.

91. Consider, Thirdly, that whoever is against any Part or Clause of this
Oath, may justly be alleged against this Oath; whereas no body can be alleged
for the Oath, unless he be for all and every Clause thereof, as is manifest,
according to that common Maxim, Bonum ex integra causa, Malum ex quocunque
defectu. Nay, those who are against the Oath need only to show, that something
therein contained is at least doubtful; for a doubtful Oath is unlawful:
whereas those who defend the Oath must prove, that whatever is therein
contained, as the immediate Object of the Oath, is certain; for such must be
the immediate Object of an Oath. And who will not rather think, that so many
who are against the Oath will evince that something therein contained is at
least doubtful, then so few who are for it will prove that all things therein
couched, and sworn, are certain? it being far easier to evince a thing to be
doubtful, then the contrary certain.

92. Consider, Fourthly, that even our Adversaries do confess, that all the
Scholastical Divines and all the Canonists, for about 500 years, have been
against some Clauses contained in this Oath; and that even now there is scarce
any Divine, and much less Canonist, (and to Divines and Canonists properly
appertains the discussion of the Clauses of this Oath under debate,) who dares
to defend publicly the Lawfulness thereof. Neither is there any Catholic
Author, besides some few of His Majesty's Subjects, either French, German, or
of any other Country, for so much as I have been able to learn, who has
printed any thing in defense of this Oath as it lies: whereas not only His
Majesty's Subjects, but also many foreign Authors, Spaniards, Italians,
Germans, and Flemmings, have printed Books against it, even as it lies. Now to
say that all the Divines and Canonists were in so gross an Error, and for so
many years, no body daring to oppose them, till some few Priests of our Nation
rose up to disabuse the World, and prove, that all those Divines and Canonists
had not understood either the Scriptures, or the Councills, or the ancient
Fathers, though in all probability they were as much versed in them as these
modern Divines; for them to say this, (I say) seems somewhat strange, and
savours not a little what the Protestants affirm concerning their pretended
Reformation, viz. That the whole Church was involved for many hundred years in
gross Errors, till Luther and Calvin came to disabuse the World, and to show,
that the Doctors of the Church, for so many years, had been erroneously
mistaken in the true sense of Scripture. It seems also very strange, what some
of our Adversaries insinuate, that those ancient Divines and Canonists had not
seriously, but perfunctorily considered the Points under debate in this Oath,
though they write great Tracts concerning them. What man can prudently think,
that neither Bellarmine, nor Peron, nor Suarez, nay nor St. Thomas, nor any
other of so many ancient and modern Divines, who have impugned this Oath, or
some part thereof, have seriously studied the Point, but only slightly
examined it; and that only Withrington, Peter Walsh, and some others of their
Caball, have thoroughly discussed this matter, and seriously studied it? If it
be reasonable to reject the Authority of so many Grave and Learned Divines,
upon such a precarious Supposition as this is; why may not any one, upon the
same account, slight the authority of his Adversary, saying that he has not
seriously examined the Point under debate; and that had he seriously pondered
it, he would have been of the contrary persuasion?

93. Consider, Fifthly, that Mr. Preston, who writ those Books concerning this
matter, published under the name of Withrington, and the principal Champion for
the Lawfulness of this Oath, as I am informed by a person worthy of all Credit,
and one who was well acquainted with him, never took the Oath himself, nor
advised any other to take it; but only writ those Books, to show, for the
comfort of Catholics, what might be said in favor thereof. The same Author
grants, Supplic. ad Paul. V. page 95. Append. page 3. Respons. ad argum.
Suarez. cont. jurament. page 204.
that the Pope has Authority to order and direct the Temporal affairs of
Princes, and to impose upon them Temporal punishments by way of a Precept, or
Prohibition, or a Direction, in order to their Spiritual good; and he inveighs
against Skulchenius, for accusing him, as if he had denied the Pope such a
Power over the Temporalls of Princes; and he says, that there is no
controversy in the present Point, concerning the Pope's Power to command or
prohibit Princes, even in Temporal affairs, with reference to the Spiritual
good of themselves or their Kingdoms. Neque de potestate Ecclesiastica
praecipiendi, sed tantum coercendi, ulla in praesenti controversia est. Now
this Authority which Withrington admits in the Pope over the Temporalls of
Princes, seems obnoxious to the same difficulties which he objects against the
coercive Power of the Pope, and is contrary to the Authority of the Faculty of
Paris alleged above by our Adversaries; Non esse Doctrinam Facultatis, quod
Summus Pontifex aliquam in Temporalia Regis Christianissimi Authoritatem
habeat. And certainly, if he has a directive or preceptive Authority over the
Temporals of Princes, he must have some Authority over their Temporals.

94. Now consider whether, since Withrington and his Associates will not grant
the Pope, as Supreme Pastor of the Church, any Power or Authority which is not
evidently deduced out of the Precedents which Christ and his Apostles have left
in Scripture, whether (I say) this preceptive, prohibitive, and directive Power
over the Temporalls of Princes, which Withrington grants the Pope, can be
better declared out of the Precedents left in Scripture by Christ and his
Apostles, (for when did any of them exercise such a Power over Temporal Princes
in Civil matters?) then the coercive power, which he denies the Pope. And
consider farther, whether the forementioned Power be not in effect the same
with the coercive Power. For if the Pope may justly, in some cases, and in
order to the Spiritual good of a Nation, command a King to desist from
persecuting his Subjects upon the score of Religion, or otherwise to lay down
his Government, and prohibit his Subjects, in case he goes on in persecuting
them upon that account, to bear him Civil Allegiance; how can they swear, that,
notwithstanding any Sentence made or granted, or to be made and granted, by the
Pope, or his Authority, against their Prince, they will bear him true
Allegiance? For certainly all just Precepts are to be obeyed; and doubtless
Kings will be as unwilling to grant this prohibitive or preceptive Power to the
Pope over their Temporalls, as the coercive Power. For they do not so much fear
what the Pope can do against them by force of Arms, as by force of Precepts
and Prohibitions.

95. Besides, the Author of the Questions concerning the Oath seems to grant,
that the Pope may, in some extravagant case of absolute necessity, to defend
the Spiritual welfare of those who are committed to his charge, See Caron, a
great defender of the Oath, in his Apostolatus Mission, printed at Paris 1659.
q. 13. in Canc. 2. q. 29. coroll. 4. and alibi, where he says as much as
Bellarmine for the Pope's Deposing power.
and acting only by a Commission derived from necessity, depose Princes; as
one may justly take away his neighbor's life, when, unjustly attacqued by him,
he cannot otherwise defend his own life. Now this is all that Bellarmine
affirms. For he does not grant the Pope Authority to depose Princes, but in
case of an absolute necessity, of defending his Flock from being infected by
their Prince with Heresy. And if they grant this Power to the Pope, how do
they affirm, that we may swear, that the Pope has not any Power or Authority,
in any case possible, to depose Princes? So that, if what the chief Maintainers
of the Oath teach concerning the Deposing power be duly sifted, we shall find,
that in effect they grant what they seem to deny; or at least that they grant
enough to render the taking of this Oath unlawful.

96. Consider, Lastly, whether, when it manifestly appears, that the ground
whereon an Author proceeds is false, or inconclusive, any account is to be
made of the Opinion or Judgment of such an Author. And if not, then let us
briefly consider the main Reasons whereon the Defenders of the Oath bottom
their Sentiment. It is far from my intention, to defend, that the Pope has
Authority to depose Princes: my design only is, to examine the Reasons whereby
some Authors do endeavor to show, that the Pope has no such Authority. For
let an Opinion be never so good, yet some may ground it ill.

97. The common Reason therefore whereon most of those Authors, who impugn the
Pope's Deposing power, do ground themselves in this Point, is, That a mere
Spiritual Power, such as is only granted the Pope over all Christendom, in
no case possible, does extend it self to any Temporal thing. This Reason does
not show, that the Pope, as Temporal Prince of Rome, has not an indirect Right
and Power to depose Kings, in some cases; such a Power being inherent to every
Sovereign Prince: and yet if one takes this Oath, he must swear, that the Pope
neither by himself, nor otherwise, has any Power whatsoever to depose Kings. So
that whoever takes this Oath, does, according to the common sense of the words,
(and he swears he takes them so,) implicitly deny the Pope to be Sovereign
Temporal Prince of Rome, because he denies him something inherent and proper
to all Sovereign Princes.

98. Moreover, a mere Spiritual Power may extend it self in some cases to
Temporal things; and the contrary is manifestly false. And even our
Adversaries confess, (as has been seen above,) that the Pope's mere Spiritual
Power may extend it self to Temporal things per modum directionis aut
praecepti. Christ and his Apostles either had no Temporal Power whiles they
lived, or at least did not exercise it, but only a mere Spiritual Power:
Joan. 18.36. Matt. 10.34.
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo: and yet he says, Non veni pacem mittere,
sed gladium; I did not come to bring peace, but the sword, and to cause a
separation between the nearest relations; as between Mother and Daughter,
Brother and Sister, and such like, who are tied one to the other by the Law of
Nature, as Subjects are tied to their Sovereign: which is to be understood,
when a reciprocal communication between them is prejudicial to their eternal
Salvation. Matt. 21.12.
Our Savior also used a Temporal Power and force, to cast out those who with
buying and selling profaned the material Temple of God* as Heretics profane
with their Heresies the Souls of men, the Spiritual Temples of God. Act. cap.
5.
St. Peter gave Sentence of death against Ananias and Sapphira; and God
miraculously concurred to the execution thereof: as he does miracles sometimes
to confirm the Sentences issued by the Pastors of the Church. The power of
Excommunication, which is allowed the Pope and other Prelates, is merely
Spiritual, as all confess: and yet, in some cases, it extends it self to
deprive the person excommunicated from all Civil Communication with others, due
unto them by the Law of Nature; according to what has been alleged above out
of Scripture. Neither can it be said, that such a punishment was imposed upon
Excommunicated persons by the consent of Temporal Princes. For what Temporal
Prince was there in the time of the Apostles, who granted any such effect to
their Excommunication; since the Temporal Princes then living were
Persecutours of Christianity?

99. Besides, a Confessarius has mere Spiritual power over his Penitent; and
yet, sure, he may enjoin some corporal and temporal Penance, (as has already
been hinted,) and oblige him, or declare him obliged, to make such a
restitution, or to forbear the going to such a place, where the occasion of his
ruin was: All which things are Temporal. A Wife, who cannot live with her
Husband without imminent danger of being perverted by him, is bound to quit his
company, and deprive him of the right he has over her, though merely Temporal
and Carnal: and she may be commanded by her Spiritual Directour to do so.
And sure there is as great a Tie between a Wife and her Husband, though in a
different kind, as between a Subject and his Prince.

100. Again, what Kingdom is there, where merely Spiritual crimes, as
Heresy, Apostasy, Blasphemy, etc. are not punished, by the Law, with some
Temporal Punishment, either of Death, or Imprisonment, or Banishment, or
Confiscation of goods, or such like? Certain it is, that in England there are
several Punishments enacted by the Law against Spiritual crimes, and in
matters of Religion, as it appears by so many Penal Laws established against
Recusants: yea, whoever is Excommunicated here in England, is deprived,
according to the Law, of power to plead, or sue another for what is due unto
him. So that Protestants, doubtless, are not of opinion, that one cannot be
Temporally punished by a mere Spiritual Power, or upon a mere Spiritual
account.

101. If it be objected, that Temporal Princes have enacted such Laws against
Spiritual crimes as prejudicial to the Temporal Good of their Subjects; or
because at least Christian Princes are empowered, by several Titles allowed
them, to defend by their Temporal Forces the Church, and to punish crimes
destructive to Faith: I answer, that, according to this Objection, the Pope may
deprive one of some Temporal thing, (if nothing else do hinder it,) when it is
prejudicial to the Spiritual Good of Christians: for he is invested also with
several Titles, which enable him to direct the Temporalls of Princes in order
to their Spiritual good, or the Spiritual good of their Nation: Because if a
mere Temporal Power (such as we only ascribe to Kings) can extend it self to
the Temporal punishment of a mere Spiritual crime, (when it is prejudicial
to the Temporal good, the Judgment of which crime does not belong to the
Temporal Court;) why may not a mere Spiritual power (such as we attribute
only to the Pope over all Christendom) enjoin, in certain cases, (if there be
not some other obstacle,) a Temporal punishment, or deprive of some. Temporal
thing, in order to a Spiritual end? the Execution of which punishment, and the
Deprivation of which thing, belongs to the Temporal Prince. And so we see,
that the Ecclesiastical Power does, and may justly, in some cases, invocare
auxilium brachii secularis, (invoke the assistence of the Secular Power,) in
order to inflict some Temporal punishment upon the account of some Spiritual
crime.

102. Yet farther, The power of Excommunicating (which is merely Spiritual)
may in some cases extend it self to punish mere Civil crimes; as may be made
appear by several instances: why may not therefore, in the like manner, a mere
Spiritual power extend it self, in some cases, to inflict a Temporal
punishment? And a mere Temporal Power also may, in certain cases, extend it
self to punish Ecclesiastical Princes, who are exempt from the ordinary Civil
Jurisdiction: why therefore, on the contrary, may not a mere Spiritual Power
extend it self to punish, in some cases, Temporal persons, and with Temporal
punishments, at least by the Assistence of Civil Magistrates? For Temporalls
are not out of the reach of the Spiritual Power, more then Spiritualls are out
of the reach of the Temporal Power.

103. Finally, the stoutest Maintainers of the Oath, and the greatest Impugners
of the Pope's Power to depose Princes, cannot deny, but that a Subject who is
persecuted by his Prince upon the score of his Religion, and is in imminent
danger of being perverted, may lawfully fly, and steal away into a foreign
Country, according to the ancient practice of Christ and his Apostles, and the
Primitive Christians, and according to those words of the Gospel, Marc. 10.23.
Cum autem persequentur vos in civitate ista, fugite in aliam; and this even
against his Prince's express prohibition: and his Spiritual Directours may
counsel him, or enjoin him, to do so: and consequently, such a man may
lawfully, in that case, deprive his Prince, upon a mere Spiritual account, (
viz. the Salvation of his Soul,) of a naturall-born Subject; which belongs to
the Temporalties of the Prince. Yea, what Priest or Lay-Catholick is there,
even among those who are so hot for the Oath, and against the Pope's Deposing
power, pretending thereby to signalize with particularity their Loyalty to the
King, who does not transgress, and thinks he may do so lawfully, upon some
Spiritual account, several Civil and Temporal Laws, enacted by the King and
Parliament against Popish Recusants; either sending over their Children beyond
Seas, against the express Laws of the Realm; or tarrying in the Kingdom,
against several Proclamations of His Majesty; or doing many other mere
Temporal things prohibited unto Papists by the Law?

104. All which instances, most whereof are granted by our Adversaries, do
evidently evince, That Spiritual and Temporal things are not so vastly
different, that they cannot, in any case possible, interfere the one with the
other: That it is not always unlawful to deprive one of a Temporal thing upon
a mere Spiritual account; and that a mere Spiritual Power may, in some cases,
extend it self to Temporal things: and consequently, That this proof of the
forementioned Assertion, viz. that the Pope has not Power to depose Kings in
any case possible, is manifestly false, and of no force, whatever the Assertion
be in it self. Neither do I say, that, because a Spiritual Power may, in some
cases, extend it self to Temporalls, it may therefore Depose Kings; but only,
that it is not a good Reason to prove, that the Pope cannot depose Kings in any
case whatsoever, because a mere Spiritual Power can in no case possible extend
it self to Temporalls.

105. Another Reason very common among those who defend the Oath, and deny the
Pope's Deposing power, is, Because neither the Unlawfulness of the Oath, nor
the Pope's Power to depose Kings, is any Article of Divine Faith. Whence they
infer, that one may lawfully take the Oath, and, by consequence, swear
positively, that the Pope has no such Power. Now let any one judge, whether
this consequence be not manifestly null: Such a thing is no Article of Faith;
Therefore we may lawfully swear the contrary. It is no Article of Divine Faith,
that His Majesty is King of Great Britanny: shall we therefore swear, that He
is not? It is no Article of Faith, that the Pope is Sovereign Temporal Prince
of Rome: and yet neither Protestant nor Catholic will swear, that he is not.
The reason is, because a thing may be certain, though no Article of Faith; or
at least doubtful: and one cannot lawfully swear what is false, or doubtful.

106. And as for our present case; Those who defend the Pope's Power to depose
Kings, in some cases, do not unanimously affirm, that it is an Article of
Faith, or that it is expressly defined as such by any General Council, or by
the universal Consent of the Church: but some of them endeavor to prove it
out of Scripture, as a mere Theological Truth; others deduce it from
Prescription; others from a Donation or Agreement made between Catholic
Princes; alleging to this purpose that famous Canonical Constitution of the
Council of Lateran under Innocent the Third, assented unto by the Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries of all or most Catholic Princes of those times, present
at the Council.

107. At least it does not seem impossible, that Catholic Princes, out of
hatred to Heresy, and zeal for the conservation of the Catholic Religion,
should make a League among themselves, that if any of them should become an
Heretic, and should be declared as such by the Pope, (to whom, as all
Catholics confess, belongs the Authority of Declaring one an Heretic,) it
should be lawful for the rest, in that case, to attacque the Transgressour,
and force him by their Arms to recant; and in case of refusal, to prosecute
the War till they have Deposed him, and Absolved his Subjects from their Oath
of Allegiance. And what is agreed upon so by the common Consent of Princes,
cannot be recalled, but by their common Consent. This case (I say) does not
seem impossible. Now the Pope in that case, by declaring such a Prince an
Heretic, does as it were authorize the rest of the Allies to attacque him; and
in case he refuses to recant, to Depose him: though he is not then so properly
Deposed by force of the Pope's Declaration, as of the Contract made between
those Princes. Suppose that some zealous Protestant should entail his Estate
upon his heirs with this Condition, That if any of them should quit the
Protestant Religion, and should be declared by the Archbishop of Canterbury
(whom Protestants acknowledge here in England as their Primate) to have quitted
Protestancy, his inheritance should pass to the next heir. Now if the
Archbishop should declare in this case, that such an one who possessed that
Estate had quitted the Protestant Religion, he would deprive him, or rather
declare him deprived of his Estate, though the Archbishop has no Authority, in
rigor, to deprive any man of his Estate. And in this case such a man would be
deprived of his Estate, rather by force of the Entailment, then of the
Archbishop's Declaration.

108. Finally, Protestants do commonly confess, (to return to the main Point,)
that the Points wherein they differ from us, as, No Purgatory, No
Transubstantiation, No Invocation of Saints, and such like Negatives, are no
Articles of Faith; and yet they are far from positively swearing the contrary.

Whence I conclude, that the forementioned Reason of these Authors is
manifestly false: For it runs thus. Whenever any thing is no Article of
Faith, the contrary may positively be sworn: But the Pope's Power to depose
Kings is no Article of Faith: Therefore we may positively swear, that he has no
such Power. The Major Proposition is manifestly false, as has been shown.

109. Another main Argument, which the Defenders of the Oath make a great
account of in order to deny the Pope's Deposing power, is, That our Savior did
not come into the World to deprive other men of their Temporal Dominions, Joan.
18.
(Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo;) and much less to deprive Kings of their
Kingdoms, (Non eripit mortalia, Qui regna dat coelestia.) Hence they infer,
that the Pope has no such Power, for his Power must be immediately derived from
Christ, whose Vicar he is. To this Argument I answer, First, That it is
manifestly false, that the Authority of Christ and his Apostles did not extend
it self, in some cases, to the Deprivation of Temporals; as has been proved.
Secondly, That the Pope and other Bishops have the Temporal Sovereignty of
several places, granted unto them by Temporal Princes, or otherwise acquired;
though neither our Savior nor his Apostles had any such Sovereignty. Wherefore
this Consequence is null, Christ had no such power; Therefore the Pope has it
not: and yet in the Oath we are bound to swear, that the Pope has not any Power
whatsoever to depose Princes, derived from Christ, or any body else. Thirdly,
That out of those words of the Scripture, and the Hymn of the Church, is not
proved, that our Savior had no Authority, in some extraordinary case, to
deprive Kings of their Dominions. Certain it is, that God has not given me this
life to kill my neighbor: yet in some extravagant case, when I cannot
otherwise defend my own life, I may lawfully kill him. It Is also certain, that
His Majesty was not made King of England, to take away from other Princes their
Dominions: yet He may do it, if otherwise He cannot defend His Subjects.
Neither did Christ come to damn any one out of his primary intention, but to
save all; as is evident from several places of Scripture: and yet he does, and
may justly, condemn men, who will be obstinate, to eternal punishments. In like
manner, his primary design in coming into the world was not, to separate a man
from his Wife, a Son from his Father, or Brother from his Sister; for he
commands all, especially Relations, to keep union and due correspondence among
themselves: and yet it is said of him in Scripture, Matt. 10.
Non veni pacem mittere, sed gladium, I did not come to bring peace, but
division, and to make a separation between man and Wife, Father and Son,
Brother and Sister, when the Communication with them is destructive to their
Salvation: and yet it is certain, that Subjects are not more expressly commanded
in Scripture to honor their Sovereigns, then Children are commanded to honor
their Parents, and Wives to obey their Husbands.

110. If our Adversaries object, That the cases alleged by us here and above,
to prove that Christ and his Apostles did sometimes exercise their Power over
Temporals, or deprive others of some Temporal thing, did proceed, not from an
ordinary, but an extraordinary Power; and by consequence, hence cannot be
inferred, that the Pope has any such Power, since he succeeds Christ, and his
Apostles, in their ordinary Jurisdiction only: To this I answer, That all the
cases at least alleged by us are not such. For the Power to deprive one, by
Excommunication, of all Civil conversation, and to separate a man from his
Wife, in certain cases, is inherent in the Pope according to his ordinary
Jurisdiction. That the forementioned Instances do show, that though Christ's
Power upon earth was merely Spiritual, and his Kingdom was not of this World;
yet he exercised sometimes his Power over Temporals: which was the main intent,
for which I alleged those Precedents of Christ and his Apostles. Finally, That
it is a very extraordinary case, for Popes to Depose Kings, and even (which is
much less) to Excommunicate them; and those who derive the Pope's Deposing
power from Christ, affirm, that he has received that Power only for some
extraordinary and extravagant cases.

111. And here I cannot but reflect upon these Authors, who impugn the
forementioned Power in the Pope. They require their Adversaries to show out of
Scripture the King-dethroning Power: if they cannot show it thence, then they
triumph, and conclude, that the Pope has no such Power: though that inference
be null, as we have insinuated. If they produce out of Scripture several
Instances to prove, that Christ's and his Apostles Power did extend it self
sometimes to Temporals; then they answer, that such cases were extraordinary;
and consequently, that they ought not to be brought as proofs of any such Power
in the Pope. So that, though Christ had exercised never so great Temporal
Power, and had Deposed more Kings then ever Popes did depose, or pretend to
depose; they might with the same Answer put them all off, saying, that they
were extraordinary cases, and proceeded from an extraordinary Jurisdiction.

112. There follows another Reason, of great value among the Impugners of the
Pope's Power to depose Kings; and it is, That there cannot be found in all
Antiquity, till Gregory the VII. his time, one precedent for any such Power in
the Pope; whereas Christians were persecuted as much by Pagan Emperors, as
they are or have been persecuted by Heretical Princes: Neither had the ancient
Christians less courage or zeal for their Religion, and the conservation
thereof, then the modern. But, whatever the opinion of the Pope's Power to
depose Kings be, this Reason is not solid. First, Because those who ground the
forementioned Power upon Prescription, or an Agreement made between Princes,
can easily answer, that in time of the Pagan Emperors there was no such
Prescription or Agreement made; and consequently, that it is no wonder, if in
their time no such Power was exercised. Secondly, Because, since the Deposition
was to be put in execution by the help of some Christian Prince, there was not,
for a long time, any Christian Prince at all, or any one so powerful, that
could put it in execution: and consequently, the Pope's Sentence, if he had
issued forth any against a Pagan Emperor, would upon this account have been
insignificant: neither would the Pagan Subjects have taken notice of it; and
the Christian Subjects were, many times, so inconsiderable, that had they taken
notice of it, or not, it would have been of little concern.

113. Thirdly, Because it is no good Argument, Such a Power was not exercised
till such a time; Therefore there was no such Power till such a time. The
existency of one only Act does necessarily infer the existency of a Power for
it: but the denial of several, yea of all Acts, appertaining to such a Power,
though for some long time, does not necessarily infer the denial of such a
Power. For a Power, especially to extraordinary cases, may lie dormant for a
long time. The Power to Excommunicate Princes nominatim is certainly derived
from Christ; and yet we find very few Precedents in ancient times of any such
Excommunication. And some have reflected very well, as above we hinted, that
there is not one Instance of an Heretical Prince, who was always brought up in
Heresy, Excommunicated nominatim: and yet even those who deny the Pope any
Power to depose Kings, affirm, that he may Excommunicate nominatim such Princes.

114. Fourthly, I do not remember to have read, that either Julian the
Apostata, or any of the Arrian Kings, were speciatim Excommunicated: and yet,
sure, there was a Power to Excommunicate them; yea and they deserved it too.
Why therefore do these Authors infer, that, because several Kings, who
persecuted the Church, were not Deposed, there was no Power to depose them?
Such a thing was not done; Therefore it might not lawfully have been done; is
no good Consequence. There was no General Council held in the Church for many
hundred years after Christ, till the First General Council, which was that of
Nice; though there were several Heresies, and many zealous Popes, in those
times: shall we therefore conclude, that the Popes had no Authority to call a
General Council derived from Christ? or shall we allege the continuance of
three hundred years without a General Council, to prove that there is no Power
in the Pope to call such a Council? And if a Power could lie dormant, by reason
of certain Circumstances, for three hundred years, why not for some years more?
So that, because the Popes did not exercise, for many hundred years, a Power to
depose Kings, it does not follow, that they were not invested with any such
Power.

115. I close up this Point with another Reason, which is, That the Impugners
of the Pope's Deposing power cannot understand, as they will needs persuade us,
what difference can be between a direct Power and an indirect Power: and since
they are convinced that the Pope has no direct Power to depose Princes, as even
Bellarmine confesses, they infer, that he neither has an indirect Power to do
it. For what matters it, say they, to make the mischief the less, whether one's
eyes be beaten out by a direct stroke from a Tennis-ball, or by a Bricol? In
answer to this Difficulty; No body denies but that, if a Prince be really
Deposed, the effect is the same, whether he was Deposed by a direct, or
indirect Power: and this is all the instance they bring does amount to. For
certainly, it is harder, more extraordinary, and more skill is required to
strike a set mark by Bricol, then by a direct stroke of a Tennis-ball; and were
one to stand the one or the other stroke, sure he would rather stand a Bricol
then a direct stroke. Moreover, there is a vast difference between a direct and
an indirect Power to depose Kings; and so palpable, that (sure) these Authors
could not choose but perceive it. Is there not a great difference between the
Power His Majesty has to depose, or recall a Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and to
depose a foreign Prince, when he cannot otherwise defend His Subjects? between
the Right every one has to make use of what is his own, and to make use of what
belongs to another, in case of extreme necessity? between the right one has to
cut off his hair, and to cut off his arm, when otherwise the whole body would
perish? between the power a man has to put away his Servant, and to put away
his Wife, from cohabiting with him, in some extraordinary case? Certainly, such
Powers are very different; and as different is a direct or absolute Power, from
an indirect or conditional Power only, to depose Princes. The former is
inconsistent with the Sovereignty of a Prince, but not the latter. A direct and
absolute Power is easily, often, and many times at the mere pleasure of him
that is invested therewith, put in execution: whereas a pure indirect Power is
seldom reduced to practice, and in some extravagant case only. Hence I
deduce, that the indirect Power over Princes, which some attribute to the Pope,
is not inconsistent with their Security, nor with the Duty and Respect due unto
them. For certainly one Prince may be secure of another Prince; and yet every
Prince has an indirect Power to depose any other Sovereign, in case it be
necessary for the defense of his own Subjects. Any one that walks in the
streets may be secure, that I will not take away his life; and yet I have an
indirect Power to kill him, if he attaques me unjustly, and I cannot otherwise
defend my self.

116. And as for the respect due to Princes, Catholic Divines affirm more of
the Pope, concerning this Point, (without being therefore charged with
Disrespect toward him,) then of mere Temporal Princes. For they openly defend,
that should the Pope become an Heretic, ipso facto he would cease to be Pope;
and should he persist to retain the Papal Dignity, Christian Princes might
compel him by force of arms to quit it: and yet they do not assert, that a
King, merely because he becomes an Heretic, ipso facto ceases to be King, or
that he may be Deposed upon that account only; since even Bellarmine and Peron
are not of opinion, that a Prince can be Deposed merely because he is an
Heretic, unless moreover he does endeavor to pervert his Subjects. So that
one cannot swear positively, neither does the Pope require it of any one, that
a King, neither by himself, nor by any Authority derived from his Crown, or
otherwise, has any Power whatsoever, in any case imaginable, to Depose the
Pope, not only as a Temporal Prince, but also as Pope, or an Ecclesiastical
Sovereign, according to what has been insinuated. What wonder is it therefore,
that Catholics should scruple to swear positively, in as ample terms, that the
Pope cannot Depose Kings? For, sure, no Catholic will affirm, that Kings have
more Power over the Pope, then the Pope over Kings.

117. From what hitherto has been discussed in reference to this Point, I
conclude, That though the Opinion that denies the Pope to have any Authority to
Depose Kings should be true, yet the forementioned Reasons to prove it are
manifestly false, or inconclusive; and consequently, the Authority of such
Authors, who ground themselves upon those Reasons, as most of our Adversaries
do, is void and of no force. Yea, should the aforesaid Reasons prove, that the
Pope has not any Power to depose Kings, yet it does not therefore follow, that
the Oath may lawfully be taken. For there are many other Difficulties, as we
have seen.

118. Concerning the Example of such Catholics as have taken the Oath;
Consider, First, whether most of them have not been guided by the Authority of
such Writers, as have grounded themselves upon the abovementioned Reasons;
which are palpably false, or insignificant. And if so, whether, as the
Authority of such Writers, so the Example of such Catholics as were guided by
them, be of any force. Consider, Secondly, that as there has scarce ever been
any Question, which before had been under great debate, and wherein
considerable parties were concerned, decided by a General Council, but that
some persons, who seemed learned and moral men, either out of ignorance, or
obstinacy, have stood out; and yet the Example of such ought not to move us to
follow them: So neither has there been any Debate, wherein numerous parties on
both sides were engaged, decided by the Pope out of a Council, but that some of
those who were condemned, blinded with ignorance, or carried away with
obstinacy, have refused to submit; and yet neither ought the Example of such to
invite us to imitate them, because they go against an express Order and
Declaration of their lawful Superior, to whom they had referred the Decision
of the matter under debate, and to whose Ordinances they owe at least an
Exterior Obedience.

119. Consider, Thirdly, whether it be not much to be feared, that at least
some of those who have taken the Oath, have been carried away with the prospect
to some Temporal Interest or Advantage, which did dazzle their eyes. Whether
others of them have not of purpose waved the conferring this matter with grave
and conscientious men, who were inclined to the contrary, though against their
Interest, and are ready to subscribe their Opinion: and whether they have not
guided themselves by some Priests, neither more learned, nor more conscientious
then the former, nor so many in number, and who refuse to subscribe their
Sentiment in this matter; though there does no reason appear, why they should
be afraid of any prejudice thereby. And if so, whether such persons, upon this
account, may not justly be suspected of some affected ignorance. Whether others
have not governed themselves merely by the Opinion of Laymen, unvers'd in
these Controversies; and not by the Sentiment of Divines or Canonists, to whom
the Discussion of these matters only appertains. Whether others have not
consulted one only part of the Oath, viz. concerning the Pope's Power to
depose Kings; and being informed that he had no such Power, have presently
taken the Oath, without consulting or examining several other Difficulties
contained therein. Whether some of them, being afterward better informed, do
or did not repent that they ever took the Oath. And finally, whether the
Precedents of such Catholics, who are justly presumed to have been governed,
in taking the Oath, by some of the forementioned ways, ought to move any
prudent and conscientious man, to make so solemn an Act, as is the taking this
public Oath, bringing God or witness of the Truth and Justice of all and every
thing he swears therein.

Urban. 8. Brev. ad reg. Gall. air, Iuramentum hoc totius Ecclesiae pietas
exsecratur. Brev. ad Epise. Chalced. vocat illud abortum mendacii, and
impietatis tesseram. Paul. V. 1. Brev. ait, Non potestis absque evidentissima
gravissimaque Divini honoris injuria obligare vos hoc juramento.
120. Consider, Fourthly, whether many of those who have taken the Oath, are not
ignorant of the several Briefs issued forth by Popes against it: or at least,
whether they have seriously pondered them; the Expressions so weighty,
wherewith they declare the Unlawfulness of the Oath; and the Character they
give of such as counsel or teach the contrary; which certainly is enough to
startle any tender Conscience: and whether they can think themselves obedient
Sons to their Supreme Pastor and Father, when they disobey his express
Prohibition, published several times, after so long debate, and so mature
deliberation. Finally, whether most of them have not been carried away with the
pretended Authority of France for the Lawfulness of the Oath: whereas France
never approved, by any Public Act, the whole Oath as it lies; nor that part
thereof, for which only the Authority of France is alleged, as it is couched
in the Oath.

121. Consider, Lastly, that if what is commonly reported be true, all or most
of such Catholics who have taken the Oath have proceeded upon evident
Mistakes. Some of them were induced thereunto, because they thought that the
taking this Oath was not malum in se, but only malum quia prohibitum; and that
the Popes by their Briefs had made it unlawful, and declared it so: and
consequently, that an extraordinary damage, such as they apprehend in the
Refusal of the Oath, does excuse them from complying with this, as with other
Prohibitions of the same nature. Now this is a manifest Mistake, as has been
shown above. And certainly, to take a false, doubtful, unjust or unnecessary
Oath, is intrinsece malum, or malum in se.

122. Others have taken the Oath, making beforehand a public or private
Protestation, that they intended only to swear thereby a mere Civil
Allegiance; and this way they pretended to secure their Conscience. But in the
like manner they might take the Oath of Supremacy, making a Protestation
beforehand, that they intended only thereby to swear, that the King is
Protector of the Church, as all Christian Princes are; and that to Him, as
such, does belong to take care, that the Laws established by the Church be
observed in His Kingdom; and that the Pope has no Preeminency inconsistent
with the aforesaid Obligation of Christian Princes.

123. Moreover, one might, in the same manner, take the Communion of the
Protestants, making a Protestation that he takes it only as mere Bread and
Wine, or for his Breakfast; and incense an Idol too, protesting that he does it
only to perfume the room: All which are vast absurdities, as no Catholic can
deny. The reason is, because as long as an Action is in it self unlawful, or
as long as it is doubtful whether it be so or no, no previous Protestation can
make it lawful.

124. In fine, some others of them will needs persuade themselves, that in the
Oath is denied only a direct and absolute Power, but not an indirect and
conditional Power in the Pope to depose Kings. But how can this be credible,
when both King James, who had a great hand in framing the Oath, and all other
Authors whatsoever, either Catholics or Protestants, who have hitherto
published Books in defense of the Oath, have unanimously understood, that
therein was denied, not only a direct, but an indirect Power also in the Pope
to depose Princes? And it is not probable, that they would explicate their own
Opinion to any disadvantage or prejudice, and make it harder then really it is.

125. Besides, they all impugn Bellarmine, as the chief Maintainer of the
Pope's Deposing power, and as the greatest Enemy to the Oath; and yet
Bellarmine as much as any other impugns the Pope's direct Power to deprive
Princes of their Dominions: and it is not credible, that the Maintainers of the
Oath would make themselves more Adversaries then really they were, or make so
famous a man as Bellarmine their Enemy, in a matter wherein he is their Friend.
Moreover, the very cause for which the Oath was framed does contain the denial
of an indirect Power. For this Oath was framed to deny the Pope all Power and
Authority to depose a King of England, or dispose of his Dominions, or to
absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance, even in case such a King should not
only be an Heretic himself, but also force his Subjects to be so, and the
Pope could not defend his Flock otherwise then by Deposing him. And what is
this, but to deny an indirect Power in the Pope to depose Kings? Neither do I
think that there is, even amongst Protestants, any Divine or Lawyer, who can
deny but that the forementioned Case is comprehended in the Oath.

126. If they say, That should that Clause of the Oath be understood in the
Latitude pretended, even the Protestants themselves, who take it, would be
manifest Perjurers. For they would swear, in taking this Oath, that the Pope is
not Sovereign Temporal Prince of Rome; since every Supreme Temporal Prince
has an indirect Power to depose any other Sovereign, as above has been
expounded. And how is it credible, that Protestants should frame such an Oath,
as no body (Protestant or Catholic) could take, without manifestly perjuring
himself?

127. To this I answer, That all Catholics must confess, that whoever takes
the Oath of Supremacy does swear false; and consequently, that those
Protestants who framed it, and took it, were manifest Perjurers, and many of
them without an invincible ignorance, viz. such as denied the Supremacy of the
Pope in Spiritualls; as doubtless many of the first Framers of that Oath did.
Yea, several Protestants, and amongst the rest King James, acknowledge the
Pope to be Patriarch of the West, and that England appertains to the Western
Patriarchate, and consequently, that the Pope has some Preeminency in England,
in order to Spiritualls; for every Patriarch has some Preeminency in his whole
Patriarchate: and yet they swear positively, in the Oath of Supremacy, that no
Foreign Prelate has, or ought to have, any Preeminency within this Realm; and
by consequence they swear false, even according to their own Principles.

128. What wonder therefore is it, that Protestants, out of Indignation toward
Catholics, should frame such an Oath of Allegiance, that even they themselves
could not take without being perjured? And the like is to be seen in all
Heterodox Countries, where, out of hatred to the true Religion, such things are
often required of the Professors thereof, that even the Heterodox Professors
themselves cannot lawfully execute. Besides, the Test enacted the last year,
1673. though levelled only at Catholics, is notwithstanding such, that
others, who are not Roman Catholics, yea Protestants of the English Church,
cannot comply with, if they understand the Principles of their respective
Religions, and will stand to them: as may easily be made appear.

129. It Is therefore not to be wondered at, that men out of Passion should
over-doe things; and that Protestants, to the end they might be sure to frame
such a Test, that Roman Catholics could not take, should frame such an one,
and in such general terms, that they themselves could not comply with: For
their mind seems to have been so much bent to consider what Roman Catholics
could not swear, that they did not reflect what they themselves could swear.
Wherefore it would not be amiss, when they require us to take either the Oath
of Supremacy or Allegiance, or comply with the Test enacted the last year, to
show them that they require of us what they themselves, even according to their
own Principles, cannot do: whereby will easily appear the unreasonableness of
their Request. From the premises hitherto set down, one may justly conclude,
that the Example of such Catholics who have taken the Oath, as grounding
themselves upon palpable Mistakes and Misinformations, cannot be a prudent
Motive for others to take it, nor a good Argument to show the Lawfulness
thereof.

130. Concerning the Authority of the ancient Fathers, against the Pope's Power
to depose Princes, or to absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance;
Consider, First, that though it should be granted, that the ancient Fathers are
against the forementioned Power in the Pope; it does not therefore follow, that
they are for this Oath, but only for one part thereof; neither for that in
such a degree, that one may positively swear it. Consider, Secondly, that to
prove, that the ancient Fathers and Doctors deny the Pope to have any Power
whatsoever, either by himself or by others, to depose Princes, in any case
imaginable, it is necessary to prove, that they deny the Pope any Power
whatsoever, to deprive a Prince of civil Communication with his Subjects, by
force of any Excommunication whatsoever: or, in supposition there has been an
Agreement made between Catholic Princes, that if any one of them become an
Heretic, he should forfeit his Kingdom, or be liable to be deposed by the
rest, in case he refuses to recant, to declare any one of such Princes an
Heretic, though really he be such: or, in case that a Subject, or Subjects,
cannot live under an Heretical Prince, and Persecutour of the true Church,
without imminent danger of being perverted, and consequently is, or are, bound
by the Law of God and Nature, to withdraw themselves; to declare, I say, in
such a case, that he, or they, are bound to withdraw, and to oblige them to it.
For those who assert the Pope's Deposing power, expound it in one of these
three ways; which many do not seem to understand. Therefore it would not be
amiss to ask them who deny the Pope any Power to depose Princes, what they mean
by a Power to depose Princes.

131. Consider, Thirdly, whether Bellarmine, Peron, Suarez, and others who
assert that Power, do not allege several ancient Councills and Fathers for
their Opinion: and if so, what reason is there why we should not think, that
they, being persons so eminent in Doctrine and Erudition, did not understand
them as well as Withrington, Caron, or Peter Walsh; especially, since most of
the modern Divines and Canonists, having seen what both parties do produce out
of Antiquity in their favor, are for the Affirmative? And had I time, I could
lay open the gross Mistakes committed by Caron in the quotation of ancient
Authors for his Opinion.

132. Consider, Fourthly, whether it would avail a man in a Suit of Law, to
pretend, that the ancient Lawyers are on his side, after that the modern Judges
and Lawyers, or the far greatest part of them, having heard what he could say
for himself, had determined the contrary: And if not, apply the same to our
present case.

133. Consider, Fifthly, whether those ancient Fathers, which the Maintainers
of the Oath allege, may not be understood to speak only of a direct Power in
the Pope to depose Princes: and if so, whether they can prejudice the Opinion
which only allows him an indirect Power. Or, whether they may not be
understood to deny only, that the Pope, as Pope, (for as such he has no
Temporal Dominions, nor Temporal Sovereignty,) cannot compel any Prince, by
his own Temporal Forces, to quit his Kingdom: and if so, the Authority of
such Fathers cannot be prejudicial to the Opinion, which affirms that the
Pope, having declared a Prince an Heretic, and a Persecuter of the Church, may
invoke the help of Catholic Kings, and authorize them to compel such a
Prince, by force of their Arms, to desist from persecuting his Subjects, and,
in case of refusal, to Depose him.

134. Consider, Sixthly, whether ancient Fathers are to be alleged for an
Opinion, after it has been condemned by the Church, or the Pope, as this Oath
several times has been: as, for instance, whether it be now a sufficient
motive to affirm, that Children baptized by Heretics are to be rebaptized,
because St. Cyprian was of that Opinion before the contrary was defined.

135. Consider, Lastly, whether it be not the unanimous consent of the ancient
Fathers, that we are bound to afford at least an Exterior Obedience to the
Pope's express Commands, in matters appertaining unto him, if the Compliance
with them be not manifestly Sinful* as the Forbearance of this Oath (which is
the thing only required of us by the Pope in the abovementioned Briefs) is
not: and whether there be not several things contained in this Oath, the
Decision whereof, according to the common Sentiment of the ancient Fathers,
does appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court, whose Head the Pope is.

136. Concerning the Probability of the Opinion, that asserts the Lawfulness of
this Oath; Consider, First, whether an express Declaration or Prohibition of
the Church, or Pope, does not render the thing prohibited practically
improbable, or the Lawfulness of the practice thereof improbable; though the
thing in it self, and prescinding from such a Prohibition, be probably or
certainly lawful. As prescinding from the Prohibition of the Church, it is as
lawful to eat flesh upon Fridays as upon any other days of the week: yet this
is improbable, practically speaking, supposing such a Prohibition. And if this
be so, consider farther, whether, since the Pope (to whose Orders we owe at
least an Exterior Obedience) has prohibited us, by several Briefs, to take
this Oath, it be not practically improbable, that it is lawful to take it;
though we should grant, that the Oath, prescinding from such a Prohibition or
Declaration, is in it self, and speculatively speaking, probable: as several
hidden Mysteries of our Faith, prescinding from the Declaration or Definition
of the Church, do seem probably otherwise.

137. Consider, Secondly, that it is not probable, nor credible, that the
Maintainers of the Oath would have made (as they did) their application to the
Pope, to the end he might give sentence of the Lawfulness thereof, and whether
it did contain any thing contrary to Faith, or not, had they not been
persuaded, that the Decision of these matters did appertain to the Pope. And if
so, that it was very ridiculous for them to make any such application to the
Pope for the Decision of these matters, or to refer themselves to the Pope's
Judgment, if they were resolved not to submit, even exteriourly, to his
Judgment, in case he should give sentence against them, as he did: and
consequently, we cannot probably presume they had any such resolution. So that,
unless they will condemn their own proceedings in this matter, (which it is not
probable they will do,) they must needs confess themselves bound to afford at
least an Exterior Obedience to the Pope's Briefs concerning this matter, till
they be lawfully repealed.

138. Consider, Thirdly, whether the same Exceptions which they make against
the Pope's Briefs, and his proceedings in this matter, viz. That he was
misinformed; That the Pope's Briefs are here in England of no force, without
the approbation of the King, who, as things now stand, does acknowledge no
Spiritual Power in the Pope over his Realm, and consequently, will not approve
any thing that comes from him, in order to the direction of His Subjects,
whether favorable, or not favorable unto him; That the Pope is fallible, and
inferior to a General Council; and other Exceptions mentioned above; whether
(I say) the same Exceptions might not have been made by us, in case the Pope
had given sentence for them, and against us, and had commanded all to take the
Oath, when they should be required thereunto by His Majesty: and whether our
Adversaries do think, that such Exceptions, made by us in that case against the
Pope's Sentence, could have justified our Refusal of the Oath, or our
Disobedience to the Pope's express Commands. Or what would they have said of
us, should we have persisted still to urge the same Reasons, and the Authority
of so many Doctors, against the Lawfulness of the Oath, after it had been
declared lawful by the Pope; and upon that account, and under pretense of
Probability, should have still refused the Oath? I am confident, that they will
not confess, that such proceedings of ours in that case, though they be the
very same which now they make use of, would have been justifiable.

139. Consider, Fourthly, that the Maxim they make so much account of in this
great Debate, viz. In dubiis melior est conditio possidentis, (In doubtful
matters better is the condition of him that possesses,) and consequently, that
no body can be lawfully dispossessed of what he has, upon a mere probable
Opinion, is insignificant in our present case. For it is to be understood, as
our Adversaries also understand it, as long only as the matter under debate
has not been decided by a lawful Judge. Now the Unlawfulness of this Oath,
which is the main Point under debate, has been, several times, decided by the
Pope, to whom even our Adversaries refer the Decision of this matter. Neither
does the Pope decide, in the abovementioned Briefs, (as the Opponents would
needs suppose,) that he has Authority to depose Kings, which is the thing our
Adversaries say is under debate; but only prohibits us to swear, that he has
not any such Authority, or hinders the King from deciding it in his own favor:
and every one has right, as long as the thing is under debate between him and
another, to hinder his Adversary from deciding it on his side.

140. Consider, Fifthly, whether mere indirect Power in the Pope to depose
Princes, such as is in every King to depose any other Sovereign, be
inconsistent with the Sovereignty of Princes, or whether it does dispossess
them actually thereof. If not, then to admit such a Power in the Pope, (as some
do,) is not to admit any thing which does actually dispossess Kings of their
Temporal Sovereignty.

141. Consider, Sixthly, whether, according to the several Precedents alleged
by such Authors who assert the aforementioned Power in the Pope, and assented
unto, as to matters of fact, by their Adversaries, Popes have not exercised
such a Power many years ago: and consequently, whether the Popes have not
possession of such a Power, ( just or not just I do not decide:) for one takes
possession of a Power by exercising its Acts. So that the debate which remains,
is not, whether the Pope has Possession of such a Power, or not; but only,
whether he has a just Possession thereof, or only an usurped: and
consequently, according to the Maxim produced by our Adversaries, In dubiis
melior est conditio possidentis, the Pope ought not to be deprived of such a
Power, till the matter be lawfully decided against him. And to oblige men to
swear positively that he has no such Power, is, in a certain manner, to deprive
him thereof, and to oblige men to swear positively a doubtful thing.

142. Consider, Lastly, that though it be probable, that one cannot wage war,
or deprive any one of what he possesses, upon the account of a mere probable
Opinion; whether this be so certain, (since grave Authors are of the contrary
sentiment,) that we may positively swear, that no body, who has only a
probable Opinion on his side, can lawfully dispossess another of what actually
he has.

143. Concerning the Interest of those who impugn the Oath, objected in the
last place against us; Consider, First, whether it be not as probable at least,
that those who defend the Oath, and deny the Pope all Power whatsoever to
depose Princes, are Flatterers of Princes, and Sycophants of Temporal Courts,
as that those who are of the contrary persuasion are Flatterers of the Pope,
and Sycophants of the Spiritual Court: and whether (morally speaking) it be
not impossible, that where the matter under debate is of so vast an extent, as
Supremacy in Spiritualls, and Supremacy in Temporalls, there should not be some
prospect of Interest, of whatsoever side we be, either from the Pope, if one
defends the Negative, that the Oath is not lawful, or from the King, if one
maintains the Affirmative, that it is lawful: and consequently, whether, were
this Exception equitable, one ought to hearken to either side.

144. Consider, Secondly, whether Roman Catholics (His M^jestie's Subjects) do
not depend more of the King, and Civil Government, in order to their Interest
and Preferment, then of the Pope, and Roman Court: or whether those who impugn
the Oath, may not fear more Damages from the Civil Government, then those who
defend it, from the Ecclesiastical: or, finally, whether the latter may not
hope to obtain greater Advantages from His Majesty by defending the Oath, then
the former from his Holiness by impugning it. Those who defend the Oath aim, or
may aim, at some particular Privileges, or Exemptions, to be granted them,
upon that account, from the Civil Government. Neither do I see what Damages
they can fear from the Pope, by defending the Oath. For though, perhaps, the
Pope may Excommunicate some of them upon that score; yet an unjust
Excommunication does not any harm: and the Defenders of the Oath are persuaded,
that such an Excommunication would be unjust, and not to be taken notice of. On
the other side, those English Catholics who impugn the Oath, may fear lest the
Penalties be put in execution against them upon that account; which, whether
justly, or unjustly executed, do in effect equally prejudice. And what such
Catholics can hope for from the Pope, I see not; since there is no Temporal
nor Ecclesiastical Preferment here in England to which, in the present
conjuncture of affairs, his Holiness can promote them. And if this be so, then,
upon the account of dependency, we ought rather to suspect those who defend the
Oath, then those who impugn it.

145. Consider, Thirdly, whether some of those Priests who have shown
themselves most forward to defend the Oath, have not received considerable
Pensions, and sums of money, to print their Books relating to this Subject,
from Protestant persons of quality, either Clergymen or Laymen, or both; and
whether they have not been countenanced and caressed by them upon that score.
And that this has happened, we can make appear. Moreover, whether they can
produce any Precedents of English Priests, who have received the like sums of
money, or encouragement, from the Pope, for opposing the Oath. And if not,
then, considering the event that this Debate has had hitherto, we must
conclude, that the Defenders of this Oath have got more then the Opposers
thereof.

146. And here I cannot but reflect upon what is related of some of our
Protestant Prelates, who, being noted that they kept familiar correspondency
with some Roman Priests, and encouraged them in their designs, answered, that
they did it to breed a Schism among Roman Catholics, thereby the better to
destroy them. Prynne, in his Canterbury Doom, page 557. says, that Archbishop
Lawd, being accused, that he conversed familiarly with some Priests, answered,
King James had conference with, and extended favors to some Priests, making
good use thereof, to set them at variance among themselves, and induce them to
write one against another; as Watson and Preston, who wrote diverse Books in
defense of the Oath of Allegiance, and did good service therein. Whereupon my
Predecessor, Archbishop Abbott, granted Preston a kind of Protection under his
hand and seal. Ibid. Lawd granted also Preston a Protection under his hand.
Fuller, in his Church History, in the Life of King James, says thus: Doctor
Bancroft afforded the Seculars countenance and maintenance in London-House,
accommodating them with necessaries, to write against their Adversaries, ( viz.
the Jesuits,) hoping that the Protestants might assault the Romish Cause with
more advantage, when they found a breach made to their hands by the others own
dissensions. Where I cannot but note, that as concerning the present Point we
speak of, the Protestants countenanced the Priests who defended the Oath, as
Preston, the chief among them, and not those Priests who opposed it. Whence
appears, that Protestants are of opinion, that the Defenders of the Oath are
against the Church of Rome, but not the Opposers thereof, since they join with
the former, and not with the latter; and sure, they would join with the Enemies
of our Church, according to their opinion, and not with her Friends.

147. Consider, Lastly, that those who are most blamed for opposing the
Lawfulness of the Oath are less liable to any suspicion of pretense, or
Interest, in this matter, since they are tied by a particular Vow, not to
pretend, neither directly nor indirectly, any Preferment or Dignity: besides,
they have been particularly prohibited by their General, who resides at Rome,
under pain of Excommunication, either to preach, or teach, in public Disputes
or Books, that the Pope has any Power to depose Kings: the like Prohibition,
for ought I know, being not imposed upon any other Religious Order. And
whatsoever heretofore some of them have taught concerning this Subject, it is
certain, what Henry the Fourth of France justified in a public Speech, that
they taught nothing in this matter, which is not still taught, and has been
taught before their Society was in the world, by several Learned men of other
Orders.

I have proposed these Considerations for the Satisfaction of such Catholics
who have a desire to be informed concerning the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of
this Oath, to the end, that having perused them over, they may proceed, in a
matter of so great concernment, with due consideration. For I have endeavored
to couch, in this short Discourse, the main Arguments on both sides. I believe
that Conscientious Catholics, who shall be pleased to peruse seriously the
forementioned Considerations, will have at least some rational Reluctance to
take the Oath, as it lies; which is enough to render the taking thereof
unlawful; since such as take it do swear, that they do it heartily, that is,
without any Reluctance of mind, but rather with a Propension and Inclination to
take it: which certainly no body can lawfully swear, who feels a Reluctance of
mind to any part of the Oath.

And to sum up the whole Substance of this Treatise: Since it is certain,
(neither do our Adversaries deny it,) that it belongs to the Pope, to decide
whether this Oath be unlawful or not; Since the Pope has determined several
times, that it is unlawful, and has prohibited the taking thereof, as all do
confess; Since what our Adversaries still urge, for the Lawfulness of this
Oath in it self, has been long since proposed to the Pope, and does concern the
very thing, for the Decision whereof even they refer themselves to the Pope's
Judgment, with resolution to stand to his Determination, otherwise why should
they refer it to him? Since, finally, all the Exceptions our Adversaries make
against the Briefs, and the Proceedings of the Pope in framing of them, are
frivolous, and such as would vacate (were they of any force) all Briefs
whatsoever, issued forth by Popes, and which even they themselves would not
have allowed us to make, in case the Pope had given the contrary Sentence;
Since (I say) all this is so, as does manifestly appear, by what has hitherto
been set down: I conclude, That our Adversaries are destitute of all rational
Motives, whereby to justify their Disobedience to the forementioned Briefs; and
that nothing but Ignorance or Obstinacy can move them to stand out.

THE END.

