THe Reader is desired to take notice, that this Copy was perfected by the
Author's own hand in his Lifetime, together with the Parable of the Ten
Virgins: Sold by Nathanael Crouch in Exchange-Alley.

SAVL and DAVID Compared together, OR, DAVID'S PICTURE FULLY DRAWN: OR, The
Description of a Man after God's own Heart, such a one as David was.

BEING The Sum and Substance of what is in the Scriptures witnessed
concerning David, both in the History of his Life, and in his Book of Psalms;
so far forth as the present Subject does require, that those Records should be
searched into.

Wherein is partly shown, How far a Saul may proceed in point of Virtue or
Religion, who yet is not, as David was, a Man after God's own heart.

By Benjamin Stonham.

London, Printed in the Year 1676.

ACTS 13. 22. And when he had removed him (viz. Saul) he raised up unto them
David to be their King; to whom also he give Testimony, and said, I have found
David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my
Will.
IN which words we have a summary Description of a Man after God's own heart,
in this Example of David; whom (when Israel would needs have a King) the Lord
himself did find out, and raise up, and recommend unto his People, with this
singular Testimony; which is worthy of our enquiring thereinto as we would be
able to judge of our selves or others, in a Case of so high concernment.

Now this General Testimony here, does refer unto some other Scriptures, from
whence it is several parts are borrowed. That he was found out of God is
attested, Psalm. 89. 20. and that he was after God's own heart, is affirmed, 1 Samuel 13. 14; and as an Evidence thereof it is here further added, which shall
fulfill a^l my w^ll; viz. in comparison of Saul, who is there said, not to have
kept that which the Lord had commanded him, 1 Samuel 13. 14.

But if we would more Distinctly know, wherein his being after Gods own heart
consisted, we cannot have a surer guide than to consider what is left upon
record in the Scripture concerning him, both in the History of his Life, and in
his Book of Psalms. And it may be observed, that there is no one man in the Old
Testament so much spoken of, as David is; that so we might be the better able
to understand the full Latitude and Meaning of what is here laid down in more
General terms.

Now unto this purpose we shall find, that David is described in the
Scriptures, both in a way of comparing him with Saul, and also, as he was in
Himself more Absolutely considered: Both which Branches of his Commendation, do
naturally spring from the Root of this Divine Testimony.

First, He is Comparatively described, or in a way of Comparing him with Saul.
Which Branch of his Description is clearly intended here, as is evident, from
the Commendation that is here given of him, together with the mentioning of his
being substituted in the others stead, and as the Reason why Saul was Removed,
and David Raised up* which is yet more fully signified in those other
Scriptures which this Testimony refers unto, 1 Samuel 13. 14. and 15. 28. Now
as David was an Example, of a Man after God's own heart; so also was Saul of a
mere Carnal man, whatever his Profession may be, or his Seize, in some
other respects. And accordingly this Comparative Description of David, is both
fairly offered from this Scripture, and of singular use to be enquired into.

Now David may thus Comparatively be said to be a man after Gods own heart,
whether we shall consider David at his Worst, or Saul when at the Best.

First, It cannot be denied, but that David had many failings, notwithstanding
all which, he was yet to be preferred far before Saul, as will appear upon our
observation of Readiness Distempers, recorded in the History of his life: whereby
we may also understand, what kind of Corruptions are most apt to abound among
Carnal Professors, such as Saul sometimes was; and more especially in those
Days, wherein David's promised Dispensation draws nigh, which is of use for
us in these later days to consider of.

Now those Temptations which did Principally bear rule in Saul, are as
follows.

1. Saul accepted of his outward Dignity, notwithstanding very Many, Great,
Known, Moral Rubs, that lay in his way; wherein he yet persisted, and without
the least Reluctance. He knew that he was desired, by a company of poor carnal
Creatures only; whose Vote alone, a Gracious heart would not have been guided
by; and therefore David was wont to consult with another sort of Persons, upon
every of his more than ordinary undertakings, 2 Samuel 7. 2. 2 Chr. 29. 25. Nay
and Saul did also know, that he was Desired by those carnal Israelites, that so
they might be like unto all the Nations, 1 Samuel 8. 5, 20; although they were
expressly charged, not to walk after the Doings of the Land of Canaan, Lev.
18. 3. Whereas, a gracious heart is taught, not to be conformed unto this
World, Romans 12. 2, according to the course whereof Unbelievers walk, Ephesians. 2. 2.
Saul also knew, that this Choice of theirs, was unto Samuel's grief, 1 Samuel 8.
6; and against the Revealed Will of God, and unto his Rejection, verse. 7. and
without any just Cause, 1 Samuel 12. 3. whatever advantage was taken by them,
from the miscarriages of Samuels Sons; which at the most was only Personal, and
not to be charged upon that Form of Government, 1 Samuel 8.4, 5. whereas David
was most tender of offending the Generation of Gods Children, Psalm. 73. 15: and
especially of sinning against the Lord himself; who also did not therefore
reject Divine Appointments, because of those humane frailties that did atten^
them. Nay and Saul also knew what manner of Person the Lord had foretold their
King should be, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, because of whom they
should one day cry out, verse. 18. which one would think might have a little
bridled his Ambition, as it would have done any man's, save his, and Hazaels, 2
King. 8. 12, 15. Saul also knew that this Choice of theirs was witnessed
against, by God himself, who had declared it to be some kind of Idolatry, 1 Samuel 8. 8; and did Providentially hint his being highly displeased at it, by
that unseason^ble Tempest, 1 Samuel 12. 17, 18, whereupon the people did confess
that this was their sin, v. 19. Notwithstanding all which considerable Rubs,
Saul did accept of his being chosen; which David would never have done, as
appeared by his forbearing to take the Crown, until his way was made very
plain before him. From all which we may infer, that a Carnal Professor is apt
to be guided by the Major Vote; and does not stick at the point of Conformity,
though never so against the mind of Christ; nor is he affected with offending
the Godly party, or with complying with some kind of Idolatry; nor with the
Rejecting of God's Appointments; but will adventure upon a worldly Temptation,
let what will follow; nay, though that God himself does witness unto the Evil
of such a thing, both by his Word and Providence, so as that some of his own
party are forced to confess it. This may a Carnal Professor do; and this is
one sin that will prevail in the latter days; and to persist in a sin of this
nature, is one sad Character of him who is not after Gods own Heart.

2. When Saul was Providentially advanced unto place of Power, he made his
Subjects Slaves, and his own corrupt Will the Rule of his Actions, and not the
Revealed Will of God. This is evident from the Description of that King whom
the People were then mad of, 1 Samuel 8. 11; which Saul himself did witness unto,
when he made that offer of Fields and Vineyards unto such as would take his
part, and side with his wicked Interest, 1 Samuel 22. 7. And this is another
character of a mere carnal Professor according to that measure of Rule that he
is invested with. He is wholly for himself, and for the satisfying of his own
desire, not regarding how much his private Interest is raised upon another
ruin; He seeks his own, and not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.
21. He devises iniquity and practices it, because it is in the power of his
hand, Mic. 2. 1. He is apt to be a provoking Parent to his Children, and a
tyrannical Master to his Servants, a racking Landlord unto his Tenants, an
oppressing Magistrate to those that vex him, and one that deals hardly with
his own enlightened Conscience, so far as it stands in the way of his worldly
Interest. Whereas a Gracious Heart does Rule over others in the fear of God,
knowing that he also has a Father, and Master, and Lord, and King in Heaven,
whose Subject he does approve himself to be. But Saul's selfish Domineering
Spirit, is one of the Carnal man's Distempers, by the cherishing whereof, he is
discovered to be such a one. And this kind of Corruption does always go along
with that form of Government, which is after the manner of the Nations, and
will continue, till David's Dispensation be advanced.

3. Saul ventured to offer the Burnt-offering before Samuel came, 1 Samuel 13. 9,
notwithstanding an express Charge to the contrary, 1 Samuel 10. 8; not being able
to tarry the due time, or to trust God in the way of his Duty; pretending that
he was forced thereunto, 1 Samuel 13. 12, by the Philistines Gathering, and his
own People's scattering from him, and Samuels lingering beyond the Days
appointed, ver. 11. and his own earnest desire of making supplication unto the
Lord, v. 12; whereupon the Lord threatened to Displace him, having found him out
another man after his own heart, v. 14. And thus a mere carnal Professor is apt
presumptuously to transgress a Divine Command; supposing that the Imminency of
some outward Danger does sufficiently warrant his unlawful action; and not
being able in well-doing to commit his way unto the Lord; concluding that his
being thus Enforced will excuse him, and that the Matter of a Duty will serve
the turn without respect had unto the due Manner of its performance; falsely
imputing the cause of his miscarriage unto another as Saul did to Samuel; and
fearing where no fear is, as the Event in Readiness case ^id ^vidence had he but
been in the exercise of a little further Faith and Patience, from the want
whereof all that which he had formerly done, became good for nothing. This
complicated Distemper is incident to such a sort of Persons especially in the
latter days; the bold and presumptuous prevailing whereof, does sadly
signify, that such are not men after Gods own heart; and that they shall be
Removed from such a place of Dignity, which otherwise they seemed likely to
have had established upon them.

4. When Saul was in a strait, he then was for consulting with God before the
Ark, 1 Samuel 14. 18; where God promised to meet the Children of Israel, Exodus
29. 42, 43; and where the chief Ruler was ordered to stand before the Priest,
who was to ask counsel for him, and at whose word the Ruler and his People were
to go out and come in, Numb. 27. 21: but when the Danger was over, Saul bad
the Priest to withdraw his hand, having no leisure then, nor apprehending any
need to consult with God, 1 Samuel 14. 19. And thus mere carnal Professors in the
day of their Distress, may consult with God and his chief Priests, or most
eminent Servants; but not so much from respect unto a Divine Command, as from
the urgency of their present Case; who therefore can dispense with their Duty,
if either they be not urged thereunto, or if it seem to interfere with their
outward Interest. An Hypocrite will not always call upon God, nor delight
himself in the Almighty, Job 27. 10. If there be any other way open, through
the pride of his countenance he will not seek after God, Psalm. 10. 4. Until he
be put in fear, he is apt to think that himself is God, Psalm. 9. 20. He sees
no self-worth in Religious Exercises, nor any great need thereof, save as his
outward advantage does press him into such a Service. He can pray when he has
nothing else to do; but otherwise, his Duty is a Clog, which he would gladly
have withdrawn. Let him but have the Creature on his side, and then let God go
where he will. This is another of their characters, who are of Readiness spirit.

5. Saul was a setter up of Duty of his own Devising, when he did so rashly
curse those that should eat any thing until the Even, 1 Samuel 14. 24, by which
means he troubled the Land, v. 29. and hindered that Victory which he thought
to have furthered, v. 30; making the People to be very faint, v. 31. and
occasioning their sin, in eating Blood, v. 32: all which was the just fruit of
his forbearing to take God's advice, v. 19: Such another piece of his blind
Zeal was also evidenced in his slaughter of those Gibeonites, which his
Posterity were made to pay for, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 9. And thus a carnal Israelite
is very forward to make void a lawful Covenant, such as that was which Joshua
made with those Gibeonites; seeking to destroy such who differ from himself,
though never so peaceable in a Civil respect; which course will end at last in
the ruin of his own Name: Such also are apt to coin a Religion of their own;
bitterly cursing them that will not comply with their superstitious Inventions;
whom the Generality are overawed to fall in with, unto the occasioning of much
after-sin and trouble: All which is the consequent of their not enquiring of
God, and unwillingness to be directed by him. A common Professor has a Zeal
for God, but not according to Knowledge, Romans 10. 2. And when he persecuteth
such as God would have preserved, he is apt to think that he does God good
service, Joh. 16. 2. He disregardeth his real Duty, and thinks to make amends
by imposing upon himself and others what is of his own Devising. In the midst
of his Despising God's counsel, he would be thought to be Religious still; who
at the same time does neglect his Body in a way of Will Worship, and hazard the
ruin of his Soul in a way of Disobedience. Whereas a Gracious Soul, or a man
after Gods own heart, is very fearful of persecuting any, and of Adding unto
or substracting from, the Laws and Commands of Jesus Christ.

6. Saul spared Agag, and the best of those Cattle, whom he was enjoined to
destroy wholly, 1 Samuel 15. 8, 9; and notwithstanding that this Command was
strengthened with the remembrance of his late Advancement, verse. 1. and the
signification of a special Reason why Amalek should be thus severely dealt
with, v. 2, 3, viz. because he laid wait for Israel in the way when he came up
from Egypt, Exodus 17. 8, being the first of their open Adversaries, Numb. 24.
20, smiting the Hindmost of them when faint and ^eary, Deuteronomy. 25. 18, whereupon
the Lord had Determined to put out the remembrance of them from under Heaven,
Exodus 17. 14, and enjoined Israel to be Active therein, Deuteronomy. 25. 19: So that
Saul was herein more than ordinarily Disobedient, as was hinted to him, 1 Samuel
15, 23, since he did what in him lay to make God a Liar.

Now as the Israelites were Types of God's People in after-ages, Gal. 6. 16; so
also were their Enemies, of such Things and Persons, as are the Saints greatest
Adversaries: and so Amalek does most fitly answer unto the World, or men of a
Worldly spirit; who are usually the first Discouragers of such as will needs
come out of spiritual Egypt, especially the Weaker and Poorer sort of them,
whilst others of greater Estates and Parts are not meddled with, at leastwise
not to their faces: and therefore this Worldly spirit is at utter Enmity with
God, and he with it, 1 John 2. 15. Jam. 4. 4. Mat. 6. 24. Joh. 15. 19. Which
Typical Amalek, Saul sinfully spared, destroying only the meaner sort of
People, 1 Samuel 15. 8, and those things that were Vile and Refuse, v. 9. which
proved unto his final Rejection, v. 23. 26, who was only more overly threatened
upon his former transgression, 1 Samuel ^3. 14.

And thus a carnal Professor, is apt to wax worse and worse, notwithstanding
his former Warnings; and in his conflicting with worldly Temptations, he may be
very exact as to what is of little use or worth, but will venture to spare the
Chiefest of them, unto his own utter overthrow in the issue. He will needs
retain something of a Worldly Nature still, which yet shall be destroyed, as
Agag was by Samuel, when Saul had forfeited his Crown by the discovery of his
Disposition. And such a spirit will prevail in the latter days, a little
before the Saints being Anointed for outward Rule, as Readiness disobedience
herein did David's being Anointed King, who was a Type of Daniel's High ones,
unto whom the Dominion must be given, Dan. 7. 18.

7. Notwithstanding that Saul knew himself to be thus notoriously guilty, yet
when Samuel came to meet him, he falsely boasted that he had performed the
Commandment of the Lord; 1 Samuel 15. 13. And thus a carnal Professor is apt to
proclaim his own goodness, though most unfaithful, Prove. 20. 6; and to boast
himself of a false Gift, like a Cloud and Wind without Rain, Prove. 25. 14. He
will flatteringly call another, Thou blessed of the Lord, (as Saul then did
Samuel) that so his own self-commendation may be received. He will give a true
Saint his deserved Praise, if himself may but be suffered to share therein. One
principal part of his discourse is to applaud himself, and then especially when
he does least deserve it. He knows what is his Duty, and will therefore
pretend highly unto his performance of it, when he has been most Neglective.
Vapourers are not only unseemly but suspicious persons; of which sort there
will be, in the last days, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Whereas Paul would not compare
himself with such as did commend themselves, 2 Cor. 10. 12, much less would he
Boast in another man's line, v. 16, or of such things as were Another's and not
his Own; accounting him a self-deceiver, who thought himself to be Something
when he was Nothing, Gal. 6. 3.

8. When Saul was convinced of his Transgression, hy the bleating and lowing of
those Cattle which he had kept alive, 1 Samuel 15. 14, contrary to Gods express
Command, v. 3. he then did most hypocritically seek to cover his Disclosed sin,
by pretending that these Sheep and Oxen were reserved, merely for Sacrifices
unto the Lord, v. 15; as if the Lord had forgot himself, when he bad that they
should be destroyed; or as if Obedience were not better than Sacrifice, v. 22;
nay, though his Conscience knew, that this was but to color over his Worldly
Interest, confessing afterward that he did it upon some other account, v. 24.
And thus a carnal Professor will flatter himself in his own eyes, until his
iniquity be found to be hateful, Psalm. 36. 2. And nothing will make him
confess, but a Downright proof, or undeniable Demonstration. He will dare to
put God himself upon the making out of what he does charge him with, Mal. 1. 6.
And when the Charge is made good, he will not ingenuously confess it, but has
his Evasions ready wherewith to color over what he cannot deny. And as he
deals with his own Conscience, so he thinks to stop the mouth of God with
some Religious Bribe. If he can but say* it is a Gift, he supposes it will
make suffic^^^^ reparation for a violated Command, Mat. 1^* 5, 6. He pretends
to design the advancement of Gods Worship, in his Retaining of those outward
good things, which he is bid to let go, in the faithful discharge of his
Duty. If you will believe him, he does not love the World* save as he may be
thereby made further serviceable. He counts it no better than a sacred
Oversight, when any good thing is bid to be despised, wherein Man's prudence
may rectify a Scriptural mistake. In the last days men will be Covetous, 2 Timothy 3. 2, under a form of Godliness, v. 5. supposing that Gain is Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5.

9. When Samuel had further urged this Sin which was so clearly proved, and in
effect confessed; yet Saul was most notoriously Impudent, in replying still,
that he had obeyed the Lords Voice, and had gone in his way, 1 Samuel 15. 20. A
carnal Professor has a Brazen face, and is apt to think that his Affirmation
is better than any ones Denial. He will justify himself before men, but God
knows his heart, Luke 16. 15. He will run the utmost hazard, rather than give
Glory to God by a free Confession. He will bid his Opponent to say on, as Saul
did Samuel; but is resolved to hold his own Conclusion, although he cannot
answer the others Argument. He places Victory in having the last word, whether
it be true or false. If he can but be Confident, he doubts not but his Cause
will have the better. Saul knew that Samuel was a Prophet, and though he heard
him declare, that what he now said was from the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 16, yet did he
labor to out face him. A carnal Israelite may arrive at such an height; and
Impudency is a clear sign of such a one, which David was far from being guilty
of.

10. When Saul could no longer deny the thing, he then Translated the Guilt
from off himself unto the People, as if it had been their Act alone, and not
his also, 1 Samuel 15* 21. Which if he had confessed at the first, it might have
been more easily believed. A carnal Israelite is a natural son of the first
Adam, who covered his transgression, Job 31. 33, by Dividing all the Blame
between his Wife and God, Genesis 3. 12; pretending that he had never eaten the
forbidden Fruit, had it not been given him by his Wife; nor should he have had
such a Tempter, had not God given him that woman to be with him: Wherein we may
observe, the Man's subtlety and Boldness, above the Woman's; for she only did
blame the Serpent, v. 13, but He also did charge God foolishly; and thus the
more there is of fallen Adam's Manliness in any, the more do they abound in
this Presumptuous skill, of raising their own Reputation upon the Ruins of
Another. Such will most boldly call in for that Provision, which they will
leave others to Pay for, when the Reckoning comes; which is one sign of a
sordid disposition. He may be known to be one of Satan's Scholars, whose
faculty does lie in such kind of Translations. Whereas David, in a like Case
was forward to justify the People, and to condemn himself, 2 Samuel 24 17,
although the People were the sole Original Cause of that sad miscarriage, v. 1.

11. Saul did confess at last, that he had sinned, but with an hypocritical
extenuation of his fault though, as if it had arisen more from his fear of the
People, than from any love that he had unto the Spoil, 1 Samuel 15. 24. An
hypocrite will always detain something of God's Due, in the best Payment that he
makes. And yet how plainly did his Nakedness appear through these Fig Leaves.
The People knew, that this was the Command of God by Samuel, as well as he; who
therefore could not blame him for putting it in execution. He feared not the
People, when he did Adjure them from eating food; which was a greater
Provocation than this could be. He was one that had Courage enough, but when it
might serve his Interest, he would seem as if he were a Coward. A formal
Professor's self-abasement is the Fruit of Pride; it is for some wicked End
when he croucheth and is humble, Psalm. 10. 10. He is not ashamed to declare,
that he fears Man more than God. He supposes it to be a sufficient Plea, if
his transgression be apprehended to be the fruit of fear. Such minceing words
are a clear Evidence of an unbroken heart, which David was never guilty of.

12. When Samuel would not be satisfied herewith, nor think this last Excuse
worthy of a Refutation, but was turning away from him, then Saul did confess
that he had sinned without any Extenuation added: but yet withal his Mind did
now run more upon his being Honored before the People, than upon his former
Sin, or present Duty, 1 Samuel 15. 30; though Samuel had but newly told him, that
God had Rejected him, v. 26; and rent the Kingdom from him, v. 28, and would
not Repent, v. 29. A proud carnal Professor's Interest, does chiefly consist in
the Preservation of his worthless Honor. He would be well accounted of,
although he is convinced of his real Vileness. He worshippeth God, that so he
might be seen of Men. He does not count sin to be his Shame, but only the
Knowledge of it, which therefore he seeks to hide. He will confess it privately
to prevent a more public Notice. His undeserved good esteem is dearer to him
than a Kingdom. His self-condemnings are merely extorted from him, and leave no
impressions upon his Spirit suiting with his words. The Nature of Sin does not
afflict him, but only the Consequents thereof; and may he but have the Praise
of Men, he is able to bear the want of the Lord's Commendation. David's
thoughts at such a time were working in a far other way; as his
acknowledgements were more Quick and Cordial: and indeed Saul did not Roundly
come off with his Confession, until there was no room left for God's Repenting.

13. After this time, Saul was a terror unto faithful Samuel, who went in the
fear of his Life, whilst in the pursuance of his Duty, 1 Samuel 16. 2; and in
the mean time, the chiefest of Saul's Herd-men, was Doeg an Edomite, 1 Samuel 21.
7, who boasted himself in mischief, Psalm. 52. 1, and loved evil more than good,
v. 3, and strengthened himself in his wickedness, v. 7: whereby Saul evidenced
plainly, that he was neither a Man after Gods own heart, nor yet a Magistrate
properly of God's Ordaining; since those Powers that are Ordained of God, are
said to be, not a Terror to Good works but to the Evil, Romans 13. 1. 3. But by
this means, Saul served as a dark Foil, to set off David*s Luster; and such a
sort of Civil Rulers shall usher in the Saints promised Dominion. However, we
may hence learn, that a carnal Professor is apt to Hate him unto the Death, who
offers to advance David's Interest, though according to that express word,
which the other cannot gainsay to be Divine. He may patiently hear that Truth,
which he will not endure the practicing of, by himself or others; in which
case, he will prove their deadly Enemy, whom he has formerly seemed to love
and reverence: The truth is, he cares not for the Best man's Company, when
himself is by such distasted; and if ever he can get the least color of
advantage, it will soon appear, what kind of good will he bears to them;
whilst men of looser Principles and Practices are his chiefest Favorites, in
case they will but please his humor, although they have not so much as the
Name of Israelites. And indeed, it is a sufficient Character of a carnal man,
when he can fall in with Edomites, who came of Esau, Genesis 36. 9, Jacobs Elder
brother, Genesis 25. 25, who sold his Birthright, v. 33, and therewith lost the
Blessing, Genesis 27. 35, which caused Enmity between them and their Posterity:
which Edomites are therefore fit Types of such, who are nearly related to God's
Israel after the flesh, but do yet hate them, because of those Blessings which
their Father has conferred upon them.

14. So soon as David was Anointed King, Saul was troubled with an Evil Spirit,
arising from his Guilt and Discontent, 1 Samuel 16. 13, 14; which he endeavored
to Play away, v. 17, being advised thereto by some of his Servants, v. 16; and
accordingly David was commended to him, v. 18, by whose Music he was for a
while Refreshed, v. 23. And let it be observed, whether such a male-contented
spirit in some, will not accompany the Saints being Anointed for their Rule,
which will be somewhat assuaged, as they shall be advanced into favor.
However, we may learn from hence, that a carnal Professor, when troubled in his
Spirit, is apt to make use of poor sensual Diversions and Applications, which
may have some Repercussive Influence, but will never prove an effectual cure.
He wants not some or other to advise him to such a course, and he is very apt
to take that counsel. He is more sensible of suffering than of sin, and would
be glad of Ease, by any means whatever. And in such a Case he will be satisfied
with some present refreshing, although it prove unto the Aggravating of his
sorrow afterward. He is of an Earthy Spirit, and is apt to think that
Creature Comforts can speak Peace to a troubled Conscience. A David shall find
favor in his sight, if he have but so much cunning, as to make him cheerful.
He would have Comfort, although it does not belong unto him, which if the Lord
will not give, he will then try some other means. He loves a gracious man,
not because of his Graces, but because of some outward refreshing, by means of
his acquaintance with him. And if he do but overcome his Qualms, he is
Refreshed, and (in his own apprehension) well. But David himself did never go
this way to work, in a case of the like Nature.

15. Saul envied David, because he did outstrip him, and was very wroth with
those, who did but give David his deserved praise, in relalation to that
Victory which he had wrought, by slaying the Goliath, whom Saul durst not
encounter with; who yet would have had all the Honor, and missing of it, he
was vexed, and eyed David from that day and forward, 1 Samuel 18. 7, 8, 9. A
carnal Israelite is usually very Proud, and not easily satisfied with his full
Due, in point of recompense. He comes in the Rear, as to his Duty; but would
be in the Front of those who are Rewarded. He valueth his own Achievements at
a very high rate, although they be far inferior unto what he would have
slighted in another. He loves the uppermost Seat, and is very angry if any
one be preferred before him. He is not well-pleased with those who will not
lift him up; and looks upon such with an Evil eye, who are esteemed of above
himself. A gracious heart may have Temptations unto Envy, but the Prevalency
and Indulging of this Distemper, is a very bad sign, and will discover it self
in due time more fully.

16. Saul was a most notorious Dissembler, with Man, as well as with the Lord;
who pretended that he would give Merab his elder daughter unto David; only he
would first have some further Proof of his faithfulness and valor, by some
fresh attempts upon the Philistines; but did by that means design and hope for
David's ruin, 1 Samuel 18. 17: and when he promised him Michal the younger
daughter, he pretended that it was from Love, v. 22, but did intend her for a
Snare, v. 21. A man after Gods own heart is Upright, and is therefore apt to be
Beguiled by another, as David was: but a carnal Professor will dare to Juggle
most egregiously. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil Eye, for as
he thinks in his heart, so is he; Eat and drink, says he to thee, but his
heart is not with thee, Prove. 23. 6, 7. His words are softer than Oil, yet are
they drawn swords, Psalm. 55. 21. He speaks fair, when he intends mischief;
and gildeth over his most deadly Poison. If David be not very watchful, this
gross Dissembler will be too many for him.

17. Notwithstanding his great Profession, yet Saul would curse and lie; both
which are witnessed by David, Psalm. 59. 12, and in relation to Saul, as the
Title of that Psalm does evidence. And that he was a Liar, appeared in the
breach of his Promise to David concerning Merab, 1 Samuel 18. 17, whom afterward
he gave unto another, v. 19. A gracious heart is loath to be accounted Light in
what he promises, 2 Cor. 1. 17, being taught of God to put away Lying, Ephesians. 4.
25; but a carnal Jew will Lie, Rev. 39; which he will not stick to do, who can
dissemble. He gives just occasion to the World to say, that Professors will
Lie, although they will not Swear. Let a David take heed, that he does not too
much depend upon the Promise of such a man. He can Dispense with his Word,
although there be nothing in it that is unlawful to be performed. The
cherishing of which Corruption, does sufficiently evidence, that such a man is
not after Gods own heart.

18. Saul was a Persecutor of David unto the death; he became his Enemy
continually, 1 Samuel 18. 29; speaking to Yonathan his Son, and to all his
Servants, that they should Kill him, 1 Samuel 19. 1; seeking himself to smite him
to the wall, v. 10; and sending Messengers unto his house to slay him, v. 11;
and being vexed with Michal, that she did not betray her own Husband, v. 17; and
casting a Javelin at his own Son Jonathan, because he did but ask, why David
should be slain, 1 Samuel 20. 32, 33; proffering at an high rate unto such as
would take his wicked part, 1 Samuel 22. 7, 8; and slaying eighty five Priests,
with all their Substance and Relations, merely because one of them had
Ignorantly supplied David with what he needed, 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19. Which
Persecution was no way justly deserved by David, Psalm. 59. 3; but merely
because the Lord was with him, therefore was Saul afraid of him, 1 Samuel 18. 12,
15, 28, 29; and because he saw that David was better than himself, which made
him think that he was the man whom Samuel had spoken of. Nay Saul did sometimes
confess that David was Innocent, and better than himself, 1 Samuel 24. 17, who
yet pursued him after that. And though he had sworn that David should not be
slain, 1 Samuel 19. 6, yet did he afterward pursue him with greater violence
than ever: And notwithstanding all David's former serviceableness, 1 Samuel 19.
5, and after-good deserving at Readiness hand, when he spared his Life, 1 Samuel 24.
11, yet did Saul follow after him, until he heard that he had fled the Land, 1 Samuel 26. 4. Which spirit of Persecution will eminently appear in the latter
days, and is an evident Character of a mere carnal Professor.

19. When the Lord would not answer Saul, he then consulted with the Devil, 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7; though he had cut those off who had Familiar Spirits, v. 9*
according to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 18. 11. A carnal Israelite will in his
strait use any the most unlawful Means that are. If Meekness will not
accomplish his design, he can and will make use of sinful Passion, or that
Wisdom which is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, Jam. 3. 14 15. If the Assyrian
be come into Immanuels Land, Isa. 8. 8. the common Professors there will seek
unto them that have Familiar Spirits, v. 19; debasing themselves even unto
Hell, Isa. 57. 9; consulting with carnal Policy, and complying with that
Assyrian way of Worship, which they have formerly engaged against. Such are
resolved to secure their worldly Interest, and when their formal Duty will not
do it, they will experiment the benefit of Disobedience, having heard that the
Gods of the Kings of Syria have sometimes helped them, which yet will prove
unto professing Isreal's ruin, 2 Chronicles. 28. 23.

20. Saul took a Sword and fell upon it, from the mere pride of his heart,
least those uncircumcised Philistines that had wounded him, should come and
thrust him through, 1 Samuel 31. 4. A carnal Professors Stomach will not yield
unto the last. Rather than he will bear the least Appearance of Disgrace, he
will be Accessory to his own destruction. He Glories in his Shame, and
counts that Bravery, which is indeed Self-murder. He is more solicitous
about his Reputation, than about his Everlasting state. The Saints Adversaries
shall at the last destroy themselves. And the final prevailing of such a
wilful self ruining disposition, does evidence a Saul-like Spirit, who was not
one after God's own heart.

These are the Principal of Readiness registered Miscarriages; and partly in
relation thereunto, David is here said to be after God's own heart, because
(when at his worst) he never did discover such a Desparate Frame of Spirit as
was in Saul, considering both the Substance and Circumstances of those
Distempers before mentioned. And this is the first general Branch of David's
Comparative Description.

From whence I shall now proceed unto the Second, which is this, That David
will appear to have been a Man after Gods own heart, comparing him with Saul,
when Saul was at his Best; or in relation to those Good things and Virtues that
were at any time to be found in him, notwithstanding all which he Differed in
Kind from what David was, in point of Goodness: Whereby we may also understand,
how far a mere carnal Professor may proceed, in a way of Virtuous Endowments,
and Religious actions.

And so, in the General, it is said, that upon the Change of Readiness Outward
condition, the Lord gave him Another Heart, 1 Samuel 10. 9. Which though it be
here chiefly meant of his being Qualified for Kingly Rule; yet does it fairly
hint unto us, that a mere carnal Professor may be in some sense said to have
Another Heart, which ^et is not after the Heart of God. In a Natural respect,
Man's heart or spirit is Differing from that of Bruits, Eccl. 3. 21; and yet in
a Spiritually Moral sense, the Heart or Knowledge of some Men is called
Brutish, Jude 10. Thence it is, that we read of Diverse Spirits, which we are
bid to try, 1 John 4, 1. as well as Works or Actions. And as some men are more
Grossly Carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3; so some are Animal, or more Refined, 1 Cor. 2.
14; both which do yet differ from him that is Evangelically Spiritual, v. 15.
Saul was but a Carnal Israelite, comparing him with David; and yet he had
Another manner of Natural Spirit than the rest of his Companions, whom yet he
did only Excel, as one Bruit does excel another. As gracious Actions have
their Counterfeits, so also have Renewed Principles and Dispositions; and thus
a mere Natural man may seem to be endued with Another Heart, or be another
manner of man, than himself sometimes was, or than others are; and yet no
Difference for Kind between them, according to a Gospel-Rule. Whereas David's
heart was of another Kind, as true Grace is, and as all the true Israel of God
are, who are New Creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17: Born again, Joh. 3. 3; the
Workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10; and Renewed in the
Spirit of their Mind, Ephesians. 4. 23, and not only in the Fixedness of their Will,
as some would have it, who make the Difference between Saints and others to
consist, not in the Nature of their Oil, but only in the Strength or Weakness
of those Vessels into which it is infused; whereas both in Reason and also
according to the Scripture, the Creature's Will is commanded by the Law in his
Mind, and the Constancy of a Saints Obedience, does depend upon the Newness of
his Heart or Spirit, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. A shadow of which Other Spirit may yet
be the portion of a mere carnal Professor. So much in the General.

But more Particularly, we may see in Saul how far a Natural man may go, as to
the Exercise of such a Disposition. And so,

1. Saul was Obedient unto his Father, at whose Command he went himself to seek
the lost Asses, 1 Samuel 9. 3, notwithstanding the Goodliness of his Person, v.
2, which would have made some others to have scorned so mean a Service,
especially since there were Servants, whose proper work that was. But yet Saul
went, without any the least unwillingness that we read of; and having passed
through the Land of Benjamin and Ep^raim, he spoke of Returning, not because of
Wea^^ness or the Nature of his Errand, but merely out of respect unto his
Father, lest he should leave caring for the Asses, and take thought for him, 1 Samuel 9. 4, 5. Let all Disobedient Children know, that they are so far from
being after Gods own heart, as that they come short of Saul, or of what a mere
Carnal man may attain unto. And let them also consider, that if Saul had now
been undutifull, he had missed of that Crown, which was set upon the head of
his Duty. But let them withal remember, that is no more than what may be the
practice of a common Israelite.

2. Saul sometimes evidenced a great deal of Humility. When Samuel first told
him of a Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9. 20, he asked him, wherefore he did so speak to him*
who was of the Least Family of the smallest Tribe of Israel, v. 21; in which
respect he seemed Little in his own sight, 1 Samuel 15. 17. And after his being
Anointed, meeting with his Uncle, and being demanded by him what Samuel had
said unto him, he told him nothing about his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 10. 15, 16. And
when he was chosen afterward by Lot, he could not be found, 1 Samuel 10. 21,
until the Lord found him out where he had hid himself, v. 22. And after that
he had been chosen, and owned by the People as their King, 1 Samuel 10. 24, yet
he returned to look after his Fathers Cattle, 1 Samuel 11. 5. And when he did
exercise his Regal power, he was content that Samuel should be his Colleague,
as appears from the tenor of his first Proclamation, 1 Samuel 11. 7. All which
were visible Demonstrations of his great Humility. Let all Proud, vainglorious
spirits know, that they are lower by the Head than Saul. And let them also
consider, that when Saul was most Humble, he then had most Honor put upon him,
both by God and Man. But let them withal remember, that a mere carnal
Israelite may be very little in his own sight, apprehensive of his smallness,
and unworthiness to be advanced; he may not affect to make known what Glory is
conferred upon him; he may seem unwilling to be preferred before another, and
tarry till he be sought for; he may not be puffed up with outward Dignity, so
as to despise or lay aside a former honest Calling; and he may be willing to
make a Good man his Associate, in the midst of his greatest outward Exaltation.

3. Saul could command his Passion; as appeared by his Holding of his Peace,
when some men did despise him both by their Words and Actions, 1 Samuel 10. 27;
though he had then a Band of men with him, v. 26, and therefore had Power in
his hand; though he was then Higher than any of the People, in point of Place,
v. 24. as well as Person, v. 23, and so was the more provoked; though his
Despisers were Children of Belial, v. 27, whose exemplary Punishment would
therefore have been the better born; and though Samuel and God himself had
Assigned the Kingdom to him, which would have fairly colored over his most
severe proceeding; notwithstanding all which, it is said, that he held his
Peace. Now what a shame is this to many eminent Professors, who cannot bear the
least Appearance of an Affront, but must give vent unto their Choler, upon
every petty Provocation: which yet is more sadly Aggravated, when such a
Disgrace does seem to have been Deserved; and when it is put upon them by the
Children of God; and it may be by their Equals, if not Superiors! When at any
time we are thus tempted unto sinful Anger, let us remember what a Goodly
Person Saul was, in comparison of us, who yet was not after Gods own heart: and
therefore let us neither be thus guilty, nor yet please our selves too much
with such a Virtue.

4. Saul was of a very Noble and Courageous Spirit in the Cause of God, and of
his poor afflicted People. David confesses that he was stronger than a Lion, 2 Samuel 1. 23. An early proof whereof he gave, when he heard of that sordid usage
which the Ammonites did threaten the men of Jabesh with, 1 Samuel 11. 2;
whereupon his Anger was kindled greatly, v. 6, and though he then had no Army
at command, having betaken himself unto his former Countreylife, v. 5; yet did
he immediately affright the People into a general Muster, v. 8, by a Resolute
threatening Proclamation, v. 7. and so Delivered the Men of Jabesh from their
Tyrannical Oppressors, v. 11; and so did prevent their Sin as well as
suffering; since they through unbelieving Fear had offered to make a Covenant
with their Enemies, v. 1. directly contrary to Gods Command, Deuteronomy. 7. 2. Now
these Ammonites descended of Lots younger Daughter, who being in Sodom, and
Lingering there, by that Means lost her Husband, Genesis 19. 14; and having an
inordinate desire of Children, and despairing of them in an ordinary way, v.
31, did thereupon commit Incest with her own Father, v. 36; whose spurious
Offspring were bitter Enemies unto the Holy Seed, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. 4, although
Israel did not intermeddle with their Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 2. 19, 2 Chronicles. 20.
10, 11, whatever was falsely charged upon them, in the days of Jephtah, Judge.
11. 13, 15: And so these Ammonites do fitly answer unto that sort of Persons in
the latter days, who being in spiritual Sodom, and lingering there, are by that
means tempted unto some unlawful complyances, under a pretense of being
Spiritual Fathers, which otherwise they think they could not be; whose
Offspring have always been bitter Adversaries to Gods Separated Israel, and will
not be for an Accommodation with them, without the loss of the others Right
Eye, or choicest Light, 1 Samuel 11. 2; although they have never been molested or
wronged by them. And some such Deliverance may possibly be effected in the
latter days, a little before David's Dispensation does begin. However, we may
learn from hence, that a Saul may be very valiant in the Def^nce of a righteous
Cause, and in relieving the Oppressed. Which witnesses unto the shame of those
Professors who can be Bold enough in a way of self-revenge, but never think
their Call clear enough, to stand up in the behalf of a Righteous and Public
Interest.

5. Saul seemed to be very much affected with Gods Goodness, in giving him that
Victory; and evidenced it, by saying, that not a man should be put to death
that day, when some would have had his forementioned Despisers executed, 1 Samuel 11. 12, 13. So also when he had overcome those Philistines afterward, 1 Samuel 14, 31, he built an Altar, v. 35; and when he had destroyed the
Amalekites, he worshipped the Lord in a way of thanksgiving, 1 Samuel 15. 25, 31.
A carnal Professor may seem to be convinced, that all his Deliverances and
other mercies do originally proceed from God. And such do come short of Saul,
who are only for the craving of a Blessing, and not for the Return of Thanks
upon a Mercy received: or when some Public and great Salvation does not
restrain a Private self-revenge. But yet we may observe, that Saul's
Thanksgiving was in a more Overly or formal way; whose first Altar for that
purpose, was accompanied with a greater sin than this Duty did amount unto, 1 Samuel 14. 24, 33, 35, and therefore the Lord would not Answer him upon his next
Enquiry, v. 37; and whose Desire to Worship the Lord upon his next Victory, 1 Samuel 15. 29, was not so much upon the account of Duty, as to recruit his
Honor, v. 30, which Samuel was therefore very Backward to join with him in, v.
26, 27.

6. Saul witnessed on Samuels behalf, that he had never Wronged that people, in
the time of his being Judge, 1 Samuel 12. 5, which was a very considerable
demonstration of his self-denial; since he did thereby consequentially declare,
that there was no just Exception against that foregoing form of Government,
which tended much to blemish Saul's present station; especially since Samuel had
newly foretold, what a Tyrant their King should be, whose following Oppression
must needs be sadly Aggravated, by his immediate Predecessors attested
Innocence. Policy would have taught him, that Samuels Disgrace would have been
for his own Interest, least otherwise the People's mind should alter, and he by
that means be soon Divested of his Regal Dignity. A carnal Israelite may
evidence a great deal of self-denying candor, in setting forth another's Worth
unto his own seeming disadvantage. What shall we then think of those, who do
what they can to Extinguish the Light of Another's Glory, lest their own should
be by that means Eclipsed? Such as refuse to witness unto another's Innocence,
when called thereunto, are worse than Saul was; especially when they will seek
to raise their Own, upon the undeserved Ruins of another good Name.

7. Saul did use to consult with God, 1 Samuel 14. 18. 37. 41; and not with the
Devil, until the Lord did forbear to answer him, 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7. Prayer is a
part of Natural Worship, which they who have but a Form of Godliness, will not
cast off. And not to call upon the Name of God, is the Description of an
Heathen, Jer. 10. 25. But yet a carnal Israelite may be very conversant about
this Duty, and such like Religious Exercises; especially when in Distress; whom
yet the Lord may not regard, because he is not sought unto after a Due Manner,
which makes such Duties to be in his account as Nothing; and therefore though
Saul is said to have Enquired of the Lord, 1 Samuel 28. 6, he is elsewhere said,
Not to Enquire of God, but of one that had a Familiar Spirit, 1 Chro. 10. 13,
14.

8. Saul was not a lukewarm Laodicean, but very Zealous in his way; as
appeared, not only by his seeking to slay the Gibeonites, in his Zeal to the
Children of Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel 21, 2: but also, in his sharp reproof of
those, 1 Samuel 14. 33, who had eaten Blood, v. 32, contrary to an express
Ceremonial Law, Lev. 7. 26: and especially in his Resolving, that his own Son
Jonathan should Die, 1 Samuel 14. 44, if he had violated his former Adjuration,
v. 24; supposing that upon that account the Lord would not answer him, v. ^7,
^8. A carnal Professor will very exactly observe some Lesser matters, to
color over his neglect of Greater. And in a religious Humor, he will
endeavor to outstrip the Best, as Saul did Joshua, secretly taxing him for the
want of his Zeal, in not slaying those Gibeonites before; although himself
could spare Agag, notwithstanding that he was as clearly charged to destroy
him, 1 Samuel 15. 3, as ever Joshua was, in relation to those Gibeonites, Deuteronomy.
7. 16. He could see a Mote in another Eye, but not the Beam in his own. And
such will be very Rigorous in punishing the Neglect of their own Devised
Worship; in which case, the Children are apt to be betrayed by their own
Parents, Luke 21. 16. What a shame is this to some eminent Professors, who
cannot see a Real Sin in their own Children; and who are not zealously affected
in a Good thing, as others are in their Superstitions.

9. Saul did obey Gods Order in his Expedition against Amalek, unto the Hazard
of his Life, 1 Samuel 15. 2. 4. Which Amalek did seem to typifie, Persons and
Things of a Worldly Nature, as has been before declared. And thus a common
Professor may boldly Adventure himself, in the pursuance of a divine Command,
and yet not properly upon that account. He may shame a great many, who are not
valiant for the Truth, and who will not run any considerable Hazard, as to
their Lives, Liberties or Estates, in the maintaing of what they know to be
their Duty. He may strongly oppose what is of a Worldly Nature in another; and
may utterly destroy what is more vile and refuse: but it is very Irksome to
him, not to spare the Best, or wholly to Demolish in himself, what he is a
Professed Enemy unto in others. The Little Horn (whom Saul might partly answer
unto) will adventure to subdue Three Antichristian Kings, Dan. 7. 24, and will
pluck them up by the Roots, or destroy them utterly, v. 8, that so himself
might be raised upon their Graves, v. 25, who is a Sprig issuing from the same
Roo^, v. 8. But a carnal Israelite may for a self end be a stout Opposer of
Worldly Things and Persons.

10. Saul did of his own accord deal Righteously with the Kenites, in not
destroying them together with the Amalekites, but gave them timely notice to
get away; beoause Jethro their Progenitor, Judge. 1. 16, had showed kindness to
Israel, both by his Counsel, Exodus 18. 19, and Guidance, ^umb. 10. 31, when
they came up out of Egypt, 1 Samuel 15. 6. He would not destroy the Righteous
with the Wicked, but only endeavored to separate them each from other, by
bidding them to Go, Depart, and Get down from among the Amalekites, lest
otherwise they might be destroyed with them; just as the Lord dealt with Lot,
Genesis 19. 12, and with his People. Rev. 18. 4. Wherein his Practice is to the
shame of those, who know not how to sever the precious from the v^le, but save
or destroy by wholesale; Rejecting the Truth because Bordering upon or Mixed
with some Errors; who cannot Do, but they must Over-doe; bleeding to Death,
when they are only bid to breathe a Vein; mistaking Paul's keeping of his Body
under, 1 Cor. 9. 27, as if it did import a self maceration; or as if his being
crucified to the World, Gal. 6. 14, did necessarily imply an utter neglect of
those Outward good things, which are of singular use to Gods Israel in their
Wilderness Condition, though nearly bordering upon Amalek; which therefore are
only to be separated therefrom, as to a Worldly Mind, and so they both may and
ought to be preserved, as to their lawful and sober use. But yet a Saul may be
in the exercise of such a prudent Discrimination; which therefore is not
overmuch to be boasted of.

11. Saul was no Debauched Person, o^ Gross Idolater. His sins were of a more
Refined nature. He put away those that had Familiar Spirits, and the Wizards,
out of the Land, 1 Samuel 28. 3; only he did not stone them to death, as he
should have done, Lev. 20. 27. So also, he did very good service against the
Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, the Kings of Zobah (who were Syrians, 2 Samuel 10,
8, or Assyrians) and the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14. 47. And thus, a man may be
very sober, and yet not after Gods own heart. He may not be grossly vicious
himself, and may declare against such things in others. And he may fight
against and vex, such Things and Persons, as those Enemies of Israel
beforementioned, do seem to have shadowed out. Among which the Edomites and
Ammonites (who were the same Originally with the Moabites) have been already
spoken to. The Philistines inhabited the Land of Canaan, whom Israel was
ordered wholly to destroy, Deuteronomy. 7. 16; and because they did not act
accordingly, the Lord left them as Thorns in their sides, Ju^g. 2. 2, 3, who
therefore were their worst Neighboring Enemies: And so these Philistines do
fitly answer unto manifest Corruptions within Professors, and to a more
profane sort of Persons without them; neither of which they ought to be in
League with; but because of their sinful compliance with them, they are
therefore justly plagued by them: Which sort of Things and Persons, a Saul may
very vigorously oppose; so that such as can be at Peace and Friendship
therewith, are not worthy to be called so much as Common Israelites. The
Syrians and Assyrians were little differing each from other, both which
descended from Shem, 1 Chronicles. 1. 17, as well as Abraham did, v 27; but these
proved the soarest Adversaries to Abraham's seed, only they were at some further
Distance from them, than the Philistines were: And so these Syrians or
Assyrians, do fitly answer unto Satan, both in the Letter and Mystery, Rev. 2.
13; who was of old, and will be unto the end, the great Devourer of Mankind, or
such as have any thing of Gods Image in them: whom he that will not oppose, is
not worthy to be compared with Saul. But an ordinary Professor may set himself
against such grosser Enemies, and yet not be a man after God's own heart.

12. Saul was willing to give Samuel the Hearing, and bad him Say on, what he
had from God to tell him, 1 Samuel 15. 16, although he might conclude from what
went before, that it would prove some dreadful Message. He did not fling away,
although he was a King, but Patiently endured his being very plainly dealt
with. Nor did he offer to imprison his Reprover, or in the least to Threaten
him, or so much as to Reto^t upon him in a way of proud Recrimination. Oh what
shall we think of such Professors, who are of Nabals Spirit, that a man cannot
speak unto them. But yet Poor Creatures (we here see) may go thus far, and
therefore this is a sorry Mark to trust unto.

13. Saul was convinced of his Sin, by Samuels dealing with him, and did
Confess it, 1 Samuel 15. 24, and at the last, without any Extenuation, v. 30. He
had not many starting-holes which when they were discovered, he did not then
keep them still; as many do, who will as soon die, as ingenuously confess,
what yet they cannot cover. Men prize their Honor, above Gods Glory, or the
Peace of their own Conscience, accounting it a far greater Disgrace, to
acknowledge Sin, than to be guilty of it. And yet this Breaking out at the
Lips, is no certain Sign of an Healthful Soul, or of a Spiritual Recovery.

14. King Saul desired that Samuel would for give him; notwithstanding the
great Distance that was between them, 1 Samuel 15. 25. He stood not upon his
terms, as many do, who think scorn to Humble themselves before those whom
they have Wronged or Offended. In case a Trespasser shall turn again and say, I
repent, he is to be forgiven, Luke 17. 3; but most men think those terms too
hard, when it is their own case, who will expect from others at an higher rate.
And yet a proud Hypocrite may lay himself thus low at the feet of his
Inferiors, for so did Saul at Samuels.

15. Saul was content that Samuel should Rule and overruled, in the case of
Agag's execution, whilst himself stood by, 1 Samuel 15. 32, 33, as a mere
stately Cipher. A carnal heart may be overpowered to part with, what he could
heartily wish might have been let alone. He may be made to spit out again, what
he has spared, and would have Kept still within his mouth, Job 20. 13, 15. And
yet generally such are very Passive in a work of that nature, as Saul was at
this time; who could not well tell how to help it, but would have no hand
himself in the doing of it. Now if Amalek does fitly answer unto Things and
Persons of a Worldly Nature, as has been formerly made out; then Agag must
needs typifie, what is Principal or Extraordinary in such a respect: and so a
Saul may permit that to be done, which he dares not Hinder; as some of late
years have done, in relation to what was eminently of a Worldly nature; but
when an Hypocrite dorh vomit up such things, it is from Gods Casting them out
of his Belly, Job 20. 15, and not from any natural Antipathy between him and
them, who otherwise would not forsake them, v. 13: whereas a truly gracious
heart is crucified unto the World, and not only the World to him, Gal. 6. 14.

16. Saul sometimes loved David greatly, and he became his Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 16. 21; whom he desired to stand before him, because he had found favor
in his sight, v. 22; not letting him go any more unto his Fathers House, 1 Samuel
18. 2, and setting him over the Men of War, v. 5. and making him his
Son-in-law, v. 27. But yet this love of his was not long-lived; nor was it
grounded upon David's being a man after God's own heart; but partly because he
could please his Humor, 1 Samuel 16. 23; and partly, because of some Moral
Virtues that appeared in him, in his encounter with Goliath, which Saul shared
in the benefit of; and partly because he did not then know that David was
preferred before himself, upon the first discovery whereof, 1 Samuel 18. 7,
Readiness spirit altered, v. 8, 9, and designed his following favors for a Snare,
v. 21: but yet at first, his love does seem to have been without Dissimulation.
Love to the Brethren, is indeed one Property and secondary Character of a true
Saint, 1 John 3. 14; but little do many think how sadly they are deceived, when
they conclude that all is well, merely because they love a Child of God; which
an Hypocrite may do, upon some mere carnal account. An eminent Example
whereof, may be observed in these latter days, when such whom Saul typified,
will seem greatly to affect the Lord's Anointed People, delighting in their
Company, advancing them unto place of Power, and desiring some intimate
acquaintance with them; so long as they are any way serviceable or refreshing;
and until they do perceive themselves likely to be overtopped by them. Whereas
a truly gracious heart has most Delight in those that are most Excellent, and
upon that account, Psalm. 16. 3: and John rejoiced greatly because of Christ,
although he knew, that he was prefetred before him, Joh. 3. 29, 30, 31.

17. When Saul had persecuted David, he did confess his Sin with Tears, 1 Samuel
21. 16, acknowledging that he had played the fool, and erred exceedingly, and
promised that he would do so no more, 1 Samuel 26. 21, which Promise (as it fell
out) he did perform, 1 Samuel 27. 4. A persecuting Hypocrite may possibly be
convinced of that or any other sin, and may acknowledge it unto the full,
mourning over his former folly, into which he may not Relapse again. There are
natural as well as spiritual Tears; and the Old man may be heard to sigh
sometimes; and a carnal Creature may reform his former wicked practices. Only
Readiness heart was a little Thawed upon some present Emergency, which was apt to
freeze again; nor was it Sin as Sin that did affect him, but merely David's
Kindness, who spared him when he might have cut him off; and notwithstanding
all this Remorse, Saul had a Disposition to have persisted in his Old way
still, but that the Temptation was removed, in his wanting of an Opportunity,
by reason of David's departure out of his Land, 1 Samuel 27. 5: and of this
nature is a carnal Professor's Reformation.

18. Saul did prefer David before himself, in point of Righteousness, 1 Samuel
24. 17; wherein he did verify what God had said before, 1 Samuel 15. 28. But it
was only in relation to some particular action; and of a Moral Nature; and in
a very clear case when it could not be denied; and in a good Mood; which only
aggravated his ^in, but did not Kill it. An hypocrite may utter self-abasing
words, when his heart is still as proud as ever. His sick qualms do only ease
his Stomach of some uppermost and Thinner humor, which leaves the remainder
more thick and dangerous. And he is more affected with some transient
Providence, than with that Word of God which does Abide for ever. He may be
convinced that others are Better than himself, whom yet he does not labor to
outstrip or imitate, in relation to those excellent things which he approves,
Romans 2. 18. 21.

19. Saul did much good to others, clothing them in Scarlet, and putting
Ornaments of Gold upon their Apparel, 2 Samuel 1. 24; which might be the Fruit of
his Spoils, and of that outward Peace that he procured. A carnal man may be
very useful, and in that respect his Death may be lamented. He may not be so
bad as it was expected he would have been. He may be Desirable upon some
account, at leastwise among the Daughters of Israel, or such as are of a more
Effeminate spirit. He may very much Adorn others, both in the Letter and
Mystery. It Is good to be serviceable in our Generation, but therewith to
remember, that thus one may be, who yet is not a man after Gods own heart.

20. Saul dedicated several of his Spoils unto a Pious use, for the Maintaining
of the Tabernacle and its Worship; which David did afterward convert unto the
service of the Temple, 1 Chro. 26. 28. A common Israelite or Protestant, may
stoutly oppose Philistian Papists and others; and may design their Spoils or
Conquests, unto the maintaining or keeping up of some Truths and Duties under a
lower Dispensation, such as that of the Tabernacle was; wihch Christ and his
People (whom David typified) may improve for some higher end, which was
shadowed out by Solomon's Temple. We may not therefore account men Saints,
because they have been useful in Vindicating the Truths and Worship of God, by
word or writing, since Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, did
typically Dedicate in some such way, as well as Samuel the Seer, and David with
his Worthies, 1 Chro. 26. 26, 27, 28; and in this very respect (as well as all
the other before named) did David far outstrip Saul, as will afterward be
made evident.

And thus I have finished the first general Branch of David's Commendation, viz.
in a way of Comparing him with Saul; in which regard partly, he is here said to
have been a man after God's own heart, because he was a Better man than Saul
was, whether we do consider David at his worst, or Saul when at his best.

From all which Discourse, we may observe something* which is of special Use,
both in a way of Trial and Instruction, and Exhortation.

Use 1. First, in a way of Trial, we may hence learn, on the one hand, that if
our Distempers be such as Readiness were, they will sadly evidence against us,
that we are not after God's own heart; and on the other hand, that we cannot
safely judge our selves or others to be after Gods own heart, unless our
Righteousness does exceed what was to be found in Saul; since David is here
thus witnessed concerning, in a way of Distinguishing him from the other, in
those forementioned respects. I dare not say, that Saul went as far as a false
heart can go, or that he is a David who does outstrip Saul; but this I may
dare to say, that he who is as Bad as Saul, or no whit Better, may groundedly
conclude, he is not right. I would not Discourage any, who have the least
measure of Worth or Virtue, nor is there any cause why such should be
Discouraged, considering how richly Readiness Duty was rewarded: Only let none
Deceive themselves by an over-valuation. Men may have Another Heart, and yet
not David's; they may be Obedient unto their Parents; Humble in their Carriage;
able to command their Passion; courageous in a good Cause; much affected with
God's goodness; ready to witness on a good man's behalf; they may consult with
God; be very zealous in the way of their Profession; adventure themselves much
in a way of Duty; and be very righteous toward men; they may be no vicious
Persons, or gross Idolaters; willing to hear the saddest word from God; confess
their sin; desire Forgiveness; and be content to part with a beloved Lust; they
may Love the Brethren; Acknowledge the evil of their former Persecution; prefer
them before themselves; Do good to others; and be very serviceable to the
Truths of God against the Opposers of them; and yet for all this, may not be
men after God's own heart. Thus far may a poor carnal Creature go, and a great
deal further, as might be proved (but that my present Subject will not bear
that Enlargement) from the instance of that other Saul, until he was
converted, and had his Name changed together with his Nature, who whilst he
was a Pharisee, was, as touching the Righteousness which is in the Law,
Blameless, Phil. 3. 6.

But what then shall we think of such, who will fall in with worldly
Temptations upon any terms; who make their own Will their Law; who do
presumptuously transgress a known Command; who cast off Prayer; who set up
Duties of their own Devising; who put God off with the vile and refuse,
reserving the Best unto themselves; who Eat and wipe their mouth, and then say
they have done no wickedness; who seek to cover their Disclosed sin; who will
most impudently deny what is undenyably proved; who will Extenuate at least
what can be no longer Denied; whose Mind runs more upon their Carnal Interest,
than either Gods glory, or their own Salvation; who are a Terror to good men,
and the Encouragers of evil; who seek to play away their trouble of Conscience;
who live in Envy against their Betters; who are most notorious Dissemblers; and
will both Curse and Lie; who Persecute men after Gods own heart; who can
consult with a Familiar Spirit; and who are wilfully accessory unto their own
Destruction? Certainly these men cannot be right, as to their present state,
since they do so fully resemble Saul when at his worst, in a way of Distinction
from whom (when at his Best) David is here said to have been one after God's
own heart. Indeed a Saul may become a Paul, and therefore such are encouraged
unto the use of Converting Means; but an actual Saul is not a David, and
therefore let not such offer to deceive others or themselves.

Use 2. Secondly, we may hence learn, in a way of Instruction, what may be the
Portion of a Carnal Professor from the hand of God, in point of Good things;
whilst we consider what Saul met with in that respect; who yet came far short
of David, in point of Privileges as well as Duty. Which lower sort of
Privileges were as follows.

1. Saul was Circumcised; which Paul reckons among those things wherein he
sometimes trusted, Phil. 3. 4, 5; and which Saul valued at so high a rate, as
that he would rather Kill himself, than be thrust through by the hands of
Uncircumcised ones, 1 Samuel 31. 4. Now that Circumcision in the flesh, was an
outward Badge of ones being a Legal Saint, or of that Number who were then
called an Holy Nation, Exo. 19. 6; and so it fitly answers unto the
Visibility of Saintship in Gospel Times, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And thus a mere carnal
Creature may be accounted Spiritual. Such may have a Name to Live, who yet are
Dead, Rev. 3. 1. A Fornicatour, a Covetous Person, an Idolater, a Railer, a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, may yet be called a Brother, 1 Cor. 5. 11. And
those may call themselves of the Holy City, or be called by the Name of Israel,
and Swear by the Name of God (whereby they profess themselves to be his
Servants, Isa. 45. 23, Genesis 31. 53.) and yet not in Truth or Righteousness,
Isa. 48. 1, 2. Little do many think that they are workers of Iniquity, till
Christ shall make it out, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Some one or other of those bloody
Soldiers that had crucified Christ, was yet seen afterward to wear his
seamless Coat or upper Garment, Joh. 19. 23, 24. There is no inconsistency
between the Inward Power of Sin, and an Outward Form of Godliness. Such as can
satisfy themselves with a bare Title of Christianity, may have it conferred
upon them in a way of Judgment.

2. Saul was a Member of the only true Visible Church that then was in Being;
by which means he did partake of those Church-Ordinances, which were denied
unto the Posterity of circumcised Ishmael and Esau. Which Congregational Church
and Ordinances, do fitly answer unto such like Institutions in Gospel Times;
which are some kind of choiser and more peculiar Privileges, that are not
vouchsafed unto all, who yet may be as it were circumcised, or visible Saints;
and therefore we read of some, who were added to the Lord, Act. 5. 14, who yet
durst not Join themselves to that Church in Jerusalem, v. 13, which then was
the only true visible Gospel Church in being. And though that this Israelitish
Prerogative, be unto this day Despised, by envyous Edomites, and by scoffing
Ishmaelites, (whose Principles both Eccles^astical and Civil are merely founded
upon the strength of Natural Reason, and who therefore to Deride such as are
guided by the Spirit and Word of God, as Ishmael did Isaac, because the one was
through the Strength of Nature, and the other through the strength of the Word
of Promise,) yet are these Gospel Appointments, very precious in the sight of
Christ, and of his separated Israel, whose reputation will be vindicated, when
the Glory of God shall Return into this Gospel-Temple Opened, Ezekiel. 43. 4, as
it Typically did of Old, after that the Babylonish Captivity was returned, Hag.
29, and the following Persian Check upon that work, was Rebuked, Ezra 4. 24,
and 5. 1, 2. But yet it must be granted, that God may not be wellpleased with
Many of them, who may All partake of that spiritual Meat and Drink, 1 Cor. 10.
3, 4, 5. The Church in Corinth had one very Wicked Person in it, 1 Cor. 5. 13;
and other Churches then had such among them, whom Paul advised to have cut off,
Call. 5. 12; the Generality of that Church in Sardis, had only a Name to Live,
Revel. 3. 1; and the whole Church in Laodicea, was stark naught, Rev. 3. 16.
Some venomous Toads may lurk under the Stones of these Mystical Temples, having
crept in unawares, Gal. 2. 4. Gospel Churches should not consist of any, save
such, who are more than Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1, which was typified of
Old, by the Lord's Excluding Levites, and his Admitting none but Priests, to
enter into the Temple or Tabernacle, Numb. 18. 2, 3; but yet these Churches may
possibly be made up of such, who have nothing of Christ in them.

3. Saul was an Israelite by Birth, 1 Samuel 9. 1, and not only by Religion, as
Proselytes were; which Paul hinteth as an Additional Privilege, when he says,
that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, Phil. 3. 5, without any mixture of
Gentilisme in his Lineage. And one of Saul's Progenitors is said to have been a
mighty man of Power, 1 Samuel 9. 1. Both which were Privileges, not to be
despised. Paul reckons up Eight several Prerogatives, comprehended in that
One, of being Israelites; to whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and
the Covenants, and the Giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the
Promises, whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came, Romans 9. 4, 5: all which Saul must be confessed to have shared in, because
he was an Israelite. And thus poor carnal Creatures, may be of Israel, and yet
not Israel; they may be the Seed of Abraham, and yet not Children; they may be
the Children of the Flesh, and yet not the Children of God or of the Promise,
Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. Such may descend of godly Parents, which is no contemptible
Mercy, since by that means they may share in the benefit of their Prayers and
Education, whereby the Lord is pleased many times to work the same unfeigned
Faith in them, which first dwelt in their Progenitors, 2 Timothy 1. 5. Such may be
admitted into the Number and Fellowship of those, who are not Polluted with any
gross Gentile intermixtures; who have been as it were Fathers in point of Faith
and Duty; who have continued true unto their professed Principles in the midst
of their manifold Temptations; and have not only espoused Christ's Truths and
Ways in a day of outward Prosperity, as the generality of Jewish Proselytes
were wont to do. They may seem to be the Prime Owners of all the Saints
Privileges, in point of Adoption, Glory, Covenants, Ordinances and Promises;
and of Such may Christ's Dispensation come, as to its more Outward or Fleshly
part; the Gospel of whose Visible Kingdom may be first Preached or Tendered unto
them, who yet may not enter thereinto, through Unbelief; but may Oppose and
Persecute it, to their own destruction, by reason of their Carnality.

4. Saul came of the Tribe of Benjamin, 1 Samuel 9. 1; which was another of those
Privileges that Paul sometimes gloried in, Phil. 3. 5; and not without some
seeming ground. Benjamin was Jacobs youngest and best beloved Son, by his
dearly beloved Rachel, whom therefore he called Benjamin, or the Son of his
Right Hand, Genesis 35. 18; in whose Life was Jacobs life bound up, Genesis 44. 30;
whom Moses calls the Beloved of the Lord, that was to dwell in safety by him,
and promises that the Lord should cover him all the day long, and dwell
between his shoulders, Deuteronomy. 33. 12; because Solomon's Temple, that was the
Place of Gods Habitation, was built within Benjamin's Lot, in Jerusalem, Psalm.
48. 2, the North part of which City was given to Benjamin, Josh. 18. 16. 28, as
the South part was to Judah, Josh. 15. 63; by which means these two Tribes were
united into One, and did jointly cleave unto the House of David, and the true
Worship of God, when all the rest fell off, 2 Chro. 11. 12. This famous and
renowned Tribe did Saul come of. And thus poor carnal Creatures, may be of that
Number, who are Israelites or Professors of a more than ordinary rank, being
called, The Sons of their Fathers Right hand; and some of which sort may
afterward be highly Dignified, by reason of their near Affinity or
Neighborhood with Judah the Tribe of David, or with Professors of the highest
Order. Those may be David's next Neighbors, in point of visible Descent; who
yet are far differing from him, as to his Heart or Disposition. Nay;
false-hearted Professors, may come forth out of the very Waters of Judah, Isa.
48. 1, or be of the same Society with the Best and Noblest Saints that are.
When Christ shall come, as he will then take to himself, one of those two Women
that are Grinding at the Mill, Matt. 24. 41, which was the work of Bond-women,
Exodus 11. 5, Isa. 47. 2, to signify that Bond and Free are all one in him,
Cat. 3. 28: so also he then will sever those two that be in the field, Matt.
24. 40, or such as are both of them honestly employed, in Flowing, or Sowing or
Reaping, or looking after their ^locks, in the Letter or Mystery: Nay and then
there shall be two in one Bed, the one shall be taken, and the other left, Luke
17. 34; intimating that Christ will then sever between such Professors, who
have sometimes been very Intimate Companions, lying in each others Bosom, and
in the same Bed, which is put to signify Divine Appointments, Cant. 1. 16.

5. Saul was a very choice and goodly young Man, being higher by the head and
shoulders than any of the People, 1 Samuel 9. 2; whom therefore both God and the
People chose to be their King, 1 Samuel 10. 24; and in which respect Samuel was
apt to think, that David's eldest Brother should have succeeded him, because he
was such another, 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7. And thus a Carnal Israelite at this day, may
seem unto an eye of flesh to be very choice and goodly, at leastwise when in
the Youth or Prime of his Profession. He may have much of the first Adam's
Comeliness, or Gods Essential Image, conferred upon him. He may have choice
Natural parts, and Moral Accomplishments, and common Gifts. He may have the
Tongue of Men and Angels, and yet be as sounding Brass, or a tinckling Cymbal,
1 Cor. 13. 1. ^e may have the ^leight of speaking and yet be but a cunning
crafty fellow in the Scripture phrase, Ephesians. 4. 14. He may abound with the
Enticing words of Man's Wisdom, and yet have no acquaintance with the Spirit, 1
Cor. 2 4. He may in such things be higher by the Head than Samuel or David, or
the Best that are. And upon that account he may be too much esteemed by Samuel,
and Idolized by others, and suffered by the Lord to bear sway for a certain
time, until a Better come. But as David's Dispensation does ^et up, so the Lord
will wean his true Prophets from such empty Vanities, and they shall then know
that a David is far better than a Saul, notwithstanding all this outward
Bravery. Such Midianitish fair Faces did sometimes tempt Israel unto Idolatry
and Whored^m, by calling them unto their Sacrifices, Number. 25. 1, 2, who
therefore were all cut off, Number. 31. 17; to signify that God will bring Saul's
Person into Contempt, and such like fleshly Excellencies, which have been
stumbling blocks in others way, together with the advancement of his David's,
who are his Second Choice, or Workmanship created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10,
who is the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3, which is more spiritual and
hidden, Joh. 6. 46; whereas the first Adaman! all his mere Natural Seed, were
only made after his First or more General or Essential Image, and not his
Personal, Genesis 1. 26.

6. Saul was Beloved of his Father, as appeared by his Sorrowing for him, when
he had been a little Absent, and saying, What shall I do for my Son? 1 Samuel 10.
2. And David hinteth that the Daughters of Israel had cause to mourn over Saul,
when he was Dead, 2 Samuel 1. 24, as himself seemed to do, with a very
Pathetical Lamentation, v. 17: which was no despicable Privilege, and
therefore it is recorded unto Jehoram's shame, that he Departed without being
Desired, 2 Chro. 21. 20; which Saul did not, since Mourning does evidence
Desire: And thus a common Israelite may be Desirable, and possibly may Deserve
to be so, as Saul did at his Fathers hand by being obedient to his Command; and
at the hands of others, by enriching them with the Spoils of his Battles. Such
may have after their Decease a competent testimony born unto the Honor of
their Name, and according to the measure of their worth. Some may wish for the
continuance of such as stand in David's way; and David himself may lament the
Death of Persecuting Saul because he was his Father, and of Rebellious Absalom
because he was his Son. But what advantage would it be unto such in Hell, in
case they knew that some did Commend them upon Earth? And yet they were only
some of the vain Daughters of Israel that wept for Saul, and merely because of
some lesser Toys that he was wont to please them with; whilst David's
Lamentation might be with a Dry eye, and without any great store of Inward
sorrow, as appears by his Order at the same time to teach the use of the
Bow, 2 Samuel 1. 18; and it may be he then did more lament upon the account of
Jonathan than of Saul, for whom he was Distressed, v. 26; or because of his
being Related unto Saul; or because Israel was reproached by the Manner of his
death; or because that some Moral good things were destroyed in him; or to
evidence that himself had no hand in his Destruction, as in the case of Abner,
2 Samuel 3. 33, 36. Pharisaical Professors aim chiefly at the Glory of men, and
they have that Reward, Mat. 6. 2; at leastwise from their carnal Relations, and
such as are apt to be taken with lower things.

7. Saul was Advanced to the Crown by those two significant Ceremonies of being
Kissed and Anointed, 1 Samuel 10. 1; his own Supremacy being hinted by the Oil,
Psalm. 45. 7; and the People's Subjection by the Kiss, Psalm. 2. 11, 12: which
Privilege was conferred upon him, before David was ever spoken of. Those may
outwardly be advanced unto the greatest height, who are not men after Gods own
heart and before their Betters. Solomon had seen Servants upon Horses, and
Princes walking as Servants upon the Earth, Eccl. 10. 7. Christ was a Prince,
(and in the eyes of wise men, a King, Matt. 2. 2.) who yet was seen walking
upon Earth in the form of a Servant, Phil. 2. 7. They that work wickedness may
be set up, Mal. 3. 15; whose Portion is in this Life, Psalm. 17. 14, and who are
not Plagued like other men, Psalm. 73. 5. To be sure, till David's Dispensation
does begin, it will be but bad judging of a Gospel-Saint by outward Happiness.
Men after Gods own heart are Designed to be uppermost, Rev. 5. 10; but in the
mean time, Di^es is served before Lazaru^, Luk^ 16. 25; and Saul before David;
and the four Beasts before the Saints the High Ones, Dan. 7. 17, 18; that so
there might be a Mystical Sun and Moon to be confounded, when the Lord shall
Reign before his Ancients gloriously, Isa. 24. 23. But Saul's being thus
Advanced, does also hint unto us, that inward Authority and Power, which a man
not after Gods own heart may be inv^sted with; by which he may be able to Rule
himself (as Saul did the Israelites) and also to save himself from some grosser
Temptations, typified by those Phil^stin^s, whom Saul was Anointed to save his
People from, 1 Samuel 9. 16; and in which respect, such a one may go Before a
David, (as the First A^^m did before the Second) whom yet (for Kind) he is
Inferior unto.

8. Saul was found out of God, being sent by him to Samuel and forespoken of
the day before, in Samuels ear, as if it had been some more than ordinary
Secret, 1 Samuel 9 15, and in a way of some kind of Mercy unto his People to save
them out of the Philistines hand, v. 16; who also was chosen afterward by Lot,
1 Samuel 10. 21, and when he could not be found, God told the People where he had
Hid himself, v. 22. What a mavelous proof was here of Gods having a special
hand in Saul's preferment; both by his Designation, S^n^ing, Anointing, Choice
and ^inding out; and yet this Saul was not according to Gods own heart, either
as to his Personal or Political capacity. There may be much of God to be
observed, in a mere Natural man's Advancement, and in the setting up of a
Worldly Form. Such things may be effected by a special hand of Providence; and
the Building of Readiness House may be Represented or Revealed unto a Samuel, 1 Samuel 9. 15, as that of David's was to him, 2 Samuel 7 27, the words in Hebrew
being the same in both places. When carnal people will needs come uner a
Worldly Dispensation, the Lord may assign the Person that shall manage it; who
may have that Honor put upon him, without his seeking for it, nay though he
seems willing to have been without it. The very Appearance of Readiness Humility
in Hiding himself among the Stuff, was thus Signally witnessed unto from
Heaven. There may be very little Outward difference to be discerned, between
Saul and David, as to the Manner of their respective Exaltations. Nay and a
common Israelite may thus be advanced by the Lord, to save his poor People out
of the hand of more grossly profane Philistines.

9. Good Samuel was strangely overpowred to fall in with Saul; who honorably
entertained him, 1 Samuel 9. 22, 23, 24; and then Privately Anointed him, 1 Samuel
10. 1; and then Publicly recommended him unto the People, 1 Samuel 10. 24; for
all which Samuel had a special and Peculiar Warrant, which cannot ordinarily ^e
expected by others, who yet may fully be persuaded to comply with the like
Person and Interest, and wherein the Lord may have an overruling hand. And thus
honest Jehon^d^b may give his hand to Jehu, 2 Kings 10. 15; and Barnabas may
also be carried away with some men's Dissimulation, Gal. 2. 13; as many good men
have been of later years deluded with an hypocritical generation, so as to fall
in with the People of Gods wrath, who fully answer unto Saul. A false heart may
Deceive both himself and others, 2 Timothy 3. 13. All Saints have not a Spirit of
Discerning, 1 Cor. 12. 10; and Paul himself did sometimes style Demas his
Fellowlabourer, Philem. 24, who proved an Apostate afterward, 2 Timothy 4. 10;
and therefore Paul durst not say that he was confident, but only persuaded of
the Faith of Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 5; and his Confidence concerning others, is
Qualified by his Adding, as it is meet for me to think, Phil. 1. 6, 7. Most men
are apt to see with others Eyes, which at the best are but Eyes of Flesh, Job
10. 4, and are apt to be taken with outward Appearances, as Samuel was with
Eliab's Countenance, 1 Samuel 16. 7. Indeed the spiritual Man is best able to
judge, 1 Cor. 2. 15; but there are few such; nor is it certainly known to
others, who those are; and the Best that are, may be mistaken. Let the Opinion
of Holy and Judicious men, concerning Things or Persons, be duly weighed,
together with their Grounds and Reasons; but let us always remember, that Man's
Judgment is a very small thing compared with God's, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4, and
seems to be one of those Golden Idols which shall be utterly Abolished, and
cast unto the Moles and Bats, or left with such whose Eyes are Blinded, Isa. 2.
18. 20.

10. Saul was Confirmed in a good Opinion of his present state, by many Signs
and Wonders which were foretold, 1 Samuel 10. 2, 3, 5, and which came to pass
accordingly, v. 9; all which Providence did doubtlessely much encourage him to
think, that God was not Displeased with him, who yet was given in Wrath, Hos.
13. 11. And thus an Abhorred Thing or Person, may be accompanied with many
strange Providential Attestations. What an encouraging Providence was that,
when five or six thousand of the Men of Ai, were able to Exanimate six hundred
thousand Israelites? What a Providence was that, when the Jews little Horn did
cast down some of the Host of Heaven, Dan. 8. 10; and when the Christian Little
Horn did Prevail against the Saints, Dan. 7. 21, having plucked up three of his
fellows by the roots, v. 8? The Assyrian is encouraged to fight against
Jerusalem, and to think that God had sent him, 2 King. 18. 25, because of his
former successes, v. 33. Some men are Providentially Established for
Correction, Hab. 1. 1^. There are some merely Trying Providence, which they
may easily mistake the meaning of, who cannot distinguish between the Lords
Highest Permissions, and his Lowest Approbations. How hastily may an
Inheritance be gotten, and yet in a way of Sin, Prove. 20. 21? How happy may
Proud men be, and those that Tempt God be even Delivered, Mal. 3. 15?
Extraordinary Providence are duly to be observed and improved, but yet not to
be compared with the Scriptures, as a Rule for Judgment. Saul had a clear word
from God, by which he might sufficiently have known the sinful nature of his
present undertaking, 1 Samuel 8. 7. 11; which he not heeding, was therefore
justly Hardened by after-Providences of a contrary seeming nature. Such as
receive not the Truth in the Love thereof, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, are justly given up
to ^trong Delusions, v. 11, occasioned by Deceitful Signs and Wonders, v. 9.

11. Saul was spirited for that work which God had called him to, and coth seem
to have been furnished with a pretty stock for that end, as appears by
Samuels bidding him to do as occasion served, for God was with him* 1 Samuel 10.
7. The Lord does not use to employ any, whom he does not also competently fit
for such a purpose: and if Saul was thus Qualified much more might David hope
that he should be dealt with accordingly. But a carnal Professor and a Worldly
Administration, may be accompanied with much of Gods presence, in a way of
Outward Communications: and a Prodigal Son may have his Portion put into his
Hand, Luke 15. 12; while the better Husband of the two, has nothing but from
Hand to Mouth, v. 29. When David's Dispensation shall be on foot, the Lord will
then be for a spirit of Judgment to him that sitieth in judgment, Isa. 28. 6;
and as an Assurance thereof, some more unworthy Things and Persons may have a
little Taste or first Fruits of such a Mercy. Christ is the Head of every man,
1 Cor. 11. 3; and as he is an Head, he does bestow some kind of Gifts even upon
those who are Rebellious, Psalm. 68. 18. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the mighty man in his Might, unless he does also truley understand
and know the Lord, Jer. 9. 23, 24. Not many Wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty men are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. When we are tempted to Boast of these
lower Seize, let us remember Saul.

12. Saul was endowed with the Gift of Prophesying, 1 Samuel 10. 10, when he met
with those who had that Spirit; which made them that (...) him formerly, to
wonder, v. 11; till (...) th^^ put the rest in mind, that God was the Father of
such Gifts, who might bestow them where he pleased, v. 12; notwithstanding
which, it became a Proverb to signify some very strange Occurrence. Which
Spirit he was acted by at the first, as a confirming ^ign of God's having
called him to that Place and Office of a King, 1 Samuel 10. 6; and at another
time, to prevent his doing mischief unto David 1 Samuel 19. ^9. 23, 24. Which
Prophets of Old, were immediately inspired of God, to utter strange Hidden
things, that were not to be known in any ordinary way: and so that Gift of
Prophesying does fitly answer, to some more than Ordinary measure of
Acquaintance with the Mind of God, together with ability to utter it, which may
in these latter days befall the Person or Dispensation of a wicked Saul.
Wretched Balaam was an extraordinary Prophet; and some workers of Iniquity will
plead, that they have prophesied in Christ's Name, Matt. 7. 22, 23; and he may
have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries and Knowledge who yet
is Nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Poor carnal Creatures, by virtue of some more
External Communion with Christ, may be able to derive this kind of Influences
from him; as the Ivy does draw much sap from that Oak which it does embrace,
although it has a distinct Root of its own. When Saul was in Company with
Prophets, he became like one of them; and many Professors are, according to the
Nature of their Company, from whom when parted, they are like other men. But
Saul was not at all spiritually advantaged by his Gift; no more are Hypocrites
by their Knowledge. Saul also was but seldom thus exercised; and the
Discoveries of Gods Mind to false hearts, are very Thin and Rare, in comparison
of others. And let it be observed in the latter days, whether some men's
extraordinary Light, be not subservient unto the securing of God's Anointed
Ones, as Readiness Spirit of Prophecy was unto David's safeguard.

13. Saul was received by the Generality of the People, with shouting, 1 Samuel
10. 24, and great rejoicing, 1 Samuel 11. 15. Woe be to that man whom All speak
well of, under a corrupted state of things, Luke 6. 26. Indeed Christ will be
the Desire of all Nations, Hag. 2. 7, and then Ten men (or a considerable
Number) of all Languages, shall take hold of his skirt that is a Jew, Zech. 8.
23: but so long as the Beast does Reign, the World will wonder after him, Rev.
13. 3; and till the Assyrian be destroyed, all the Neighboring Nations will
join with him against Gods Israel, Psalm. 83. 5, 6* 7, 8. How miserably are they
Deluded, who judge their Condition happy, because they are Generally approved.
If Number might be a lawful Judge, I should always like that Thing or Person
best, who have the Minor Vote; especially when the Verdict is brought in by
such a Jury as Readiness was, who were apt to quarrel with God's Appointment,
because of some men's failings under it, 1 Samuel 8. 5; who would be like other
Nations, contrary to God's revealed will, 1 Samuel 8. 5. 7; who were resolved
upon their own will, v. 19, though God had told them it would be to their after
sorrow, v. 18; who did Reject that which themselves confessed they had no just
ground to Except against, 1 Samuel 12. 4; who were for an Accommodation with
Idolaters, rather than expose themselves to outward d^nger, 1 Samuel 11. 1; and
who still Persisted in what they had acknowledged to be a Sin, 1 Samuel 12. 19:
all which are clear Characters of mere carnal Israelites* whose general good
Opinion one like themselves may have, in relation to his Person and Practice,
though never so much unlike unto the Heart and Mind of God.

14. Saul had a Band of men whose hearts the Lord himself had touched; wherein
the Lord consulted both for his Honor and Security, by choosing for him this
Royal Life guard, 1 Samuel 10. 26. And when he was in imminent danger afterward,
by David and his Party, how wonderfully was his life preserved, though David
had a sufficient Advantage and Provocation, 1 Samuel 24. 10, and 26* 8. How
sorrily do some ground their good Opinion of themselves, merely upon the Lords
preservation of them in such a Course or Practice. Great Transgressors may
strangely be Delivered, and yet be Reserved (as Saul was) for some more
Exemplary Punishment. As Israel marched through the Wilderness, they were not
to meddle with the Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, who yet were such as the
Lord hated. It would have been too great an Honor for Saul to have died by
David's hand. God is the Savior of All, though more especially of such as do
Believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. The Lord's People in the latter days may strangely be
overpowered to let those provoking Adversaries alone, who are designed to be
destroyed by some grosser Interest. Such may be remarkably secured for the time
being, who yet are far from being after Gods own heart.

15. Saul was despised by the men of Belial, 1 Samuel 10. 27; which may be
reckoned among his Privileges, since that is one part of a Godly man's
Portion, to be abused by the World. But Error may suffer as well as Truth; and
an Hypocrite may lie open to some kind of Persecution. The Nations sometimes
fell foul upon one another, as well as upon God's Israel. The Philistines hated
Saul, as much as he did David. Civility has its Enemies, as well as
Christianity; and therefore let none judge himself to be more than a carnal
Israelite, merely because he is Despised or Maligned by a Grosser Interest.

16. Saul was employed by God, in some special and public service against the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. 3: and his Dispensation in the latter days will be
eminently to be known, by some such required service, viz. the utter
destruction of that Worldly state of things, which Amalek typified. In a great
House, such as God's is, there is some work for Slaves, as well as Children or
more Honorable Servants. Had there not been some special work for Saul, he
should never have been so furnished and owned by the Lord as he was. A more
than ordinary Call, to some eminent work or service, may be the portion of a
mere carnal man. But Readiness employment had much of Revenge and Violence and
seeming Cruelty in it, 1 Samuel 15. 2, 3: and God foresaw, that he being left to
himself, would slubber it over, in order to his being rejected thereupon, as
had been formerly threatened, 1 Samuel 13. 14: and Readiness heart was hereby Lifted
up, as appeared by that Place (or Hand, as it is in the Hebrew) which he set up
in the way of his Return, 1 Samuel 15. 12, as a Monument of what his Hand or
Sword had done. Carnal Professors are only set about some courser work; and
that seeming Dignity does prove a sad snare unto them, occasioning their Pride
and Downfall; as those are most apt to be well conceited of their Duty, who
have least cause, both in relation to its Nature, Management and Consequents.
Whereas David was more nobly employed, more Graciously assisted, and generally
more Humble afterward.

17. God prospered Saul in what he went about. In his Expedition against those
wicked Ammonites, he slew the generality, and scattered the remainder, so that
Two of them were not left together, 1 Samuel 11. 11: and in his next attempt upon
the insulting Philistines, his Son Jonathan and his Armor-bearer slew twenty
men within half an Acre of land, 1 Samuel 14. 14, whereupon both the People,
Garrison, and Spoilers (...)* and the Earth also Quaked, v. 15. and the
Multitude melted away, Beating down e^ch other, v. 16. 20, which was a Taste of
that Cup which the Lord has reserved for his own People in the latter days,
Psalm. 83. 9. Isa. 10. 26. Judge. 7. 22. Ezekiel, 38. 21. Zech. 14. 13: and in his
present Enterprise against Amalek, he destroyed all the common sort of people,
1 Samuel 15. 8, from Havilah to Shur, v. 7: from whence it does appear, that
these Amalek^tes had now overrun the Ishmaelites, since those Ishmaelites of
old are said to have dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, Genesis 25. 18; as indeed men
of an Ishmaelitish Spirit, (or such whose Principles are mainly formed up
according to the Dictates of Natural Reason, as Ishma^l was Born by the
strength of Nature, and not through the strength of the Word of Promise, as
Isaac was) may be expected within a while to turn into Amalekites, who typified
such as are more grossly Worldly, both which did successively inhabit that
land of Havilah, where there was Gold, and the Gold of that Land was Good, Genesis
2. 11, 12; which holds true, both in the Letter and Mystery, with reference
unto these mystical Ishmaelites and Amalekites, who have the Best Worldly good
things among them, and it may be some better things also, shadowed out by Gold;
which they are wont to wear in public view, as the other did of Old, Judge. 8.
24, much glorying in their outward Bravery; which G^deon made an Ephod of, and
all Israel went a Whoring after it, v. 27; so prone we are to Idolize what may
be the Portion of Ishmael and Amalek; which shall do well to be duly weighed,
especially when Judges shall be restored as at the first, according to the
Promise, Isa. 1. 26. But in all these several Expeditions before mentioned,
Sau^ prospered marvellously. And thus three of the former Horns, are plucked up
by the Roots, before the little Horn, Dan. 7. 8, and by him, v. 24. A
self-seeking Jehu may be blessed with Success against wicked Ahabs House and
Interest, until there be none remaining, 2 Kings 10, 11. An Hypocrite may be
enabled to cast out Devils, Matt. 7. 22, and to deliver himself and others from
under the Oppressing power of many dangerous Distempers and Temptations. Let us
not therefore Rejoice, merely because such Devils are subject to us, as those
did Luke 10. 17; unless we have also good ground to hope, that our Names are
written in Heaven, as Christ there hinteth, v. 20

18. Saul was the Object of good Samuels Grief and Cry, when he under^tood of
God's Repenting that ever he had set him up, 1 Samuel 15. 11; and though Samuel
came no more to see him, yet did he Mourn for him still, v. 35; who formerly
had Prayed for him* 1 Samuel 12. 23, and Taught him, v. 24, and forewarned him in
case he should do Wickedly, v. 25. It is a precious privilege to be remembered
in Prayer by living Saints, 1 Samuel 7. 5; and that which a Gracious heart does
value at an high rate, Romans 15. 30: but yet Abraham did Pray for Ishmael, Genesis
17. 18, with whom Gods Covenant was not established, v. 19, 20, 21. The fervent
Prayer of a Righteous man avails much, Jam. 5. 16; but sometimes the Lord
will not be prevailed with* by holy J^r^my, Jer. 7. 16, or Moses and Samuel,
Jer. 15. 1, or Noah* Daniel and Job, Ezekiel 14. 14. The Saints Tears are
precious, and put into God's Book, Psalm. 56 8; but many heavenly showers
descend upon the Sea and Wilderness* notwithstanding which, the one is still
Salt, and the other Barren. Happy is he, on whose behalf Christ intercedeth,
Luke 22. 32, for him God hears always, Joh. 11. 42; but the best of his
Servents may Grieve and Cry all Night, and Mourn unto their death, and yet be
no more Heard for some, than Samuel was for Saul. Though also we may observe
that Samuel lived under a Lower Dispensation, and had a chief hand in Saul's
Advancement, who therefore might Mourn more than his share came to, upon a
self-account, as Abraham did for Ishmael, because he was his ^on when bid to
Cast him out, Genesis 21. 10, 11: and so the Rejecting of a Soul, may be Lamented
more by men of Samuel's pitch, than it is by those who answer unto David.

19. Saul was oft-times Providentially hindered from Effecting a sinful
purpose. He was not (that we read of ^ such an outrageous Tyrant, as Sa^uel bad
the People look for, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12. He was hindered by the People from
putting Jonathan to death, a^ he had rashly sworn, 1 Samuel 14 44, 4^. Though he
would fain have sp^red ^^^g, yet A^ag ^ied, 1 Samuel 15. 33. And though he often
endeavored to have killed David, and Jonathan for his sake; yet did the Lord
Prevent him, in relation to them both. Next unto being Sanctif^ed, it is a
Mercy to be Restrained; and yet a Divine Chai^ does not alter the sad state or
Nature of a Devil* Ju^^ ^^. Men shall be judged another day, according to what
they would have done as Christ hinteth, in charging them with Stoning him. Joh
^0* 32, who then had only taken up Stones for such a purpose, v 31. Saul might
as well have acted unto the Height of Sa^u^l's Prediction as d^e what he did;
nor was it any Thank to him but to the People, and self love in him, that
J^n^than was not put to death he did design the Life of Agag, if Samuel had not
then snatched away the Scepter from him for a while, ^^rhaps to signify, that
Worldly things shall be de^^royed, though seemingly in ^n (...) way let ^^ul do
what the can* and Dav^^ was e^^^live, because Saul could not come at him.
Though fleshly lusts were in Appearance mortified, yet if this were not through
the Spirit of ^hri^^ it would not evidence true Life or Sonship, ^om. 8. 13,
14; much less, if they be only Re^trained, and by a man's Own Spirit too, or by
the m^^r O^erpowering hand of others.

20. Much of the Lords Forbearance and Long suffering was exercised toward
Saul; whom God endured with much Pati^nce by the sp^ce of Forty years ^ct. 13.
21: and though ^^ the Two years and 1 Samuel 1^. 1, he had a suffi^^ent proof of
his Disobedience, v 13 yet di^ he then only Threaten him, v. 14, but no^ (...)
him, till his next miscarriage, 1 Samuel 1^. 2^* notwithstanding which Declared
Sentence, yet God continued him, (as some think seven years at least) although
Saul then grew every day worse and worse until his Death. Thus Pharaoh had his
Respites, Exodus 8. 15; and about the time of Forty years did God suffer the
Manners of Israel in the Wilderness, Act. 13. 18; to show his wrath, and to
make his Power known, together with the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of
Mercy, Romans 9. 22, 23. God had some work for S^ul to do, if it were but only
to correct and try his Servant David; and till that work be wholly performed,
the proud Assyrian himself is not reckoned with, Isa. 10. 5, 6. 12. Saul did
some Good; and upon that account was the House of Jehu continued unto the
Fourth Generation, 2 King. 10. 30. Saul was the nex^ Neighbor unto David, who
was a type of Christ; and Christ would encourage his Own, by giving them to see
how courteous he is to others. Samuel did plead hard with God for Saul; and God
would have all to know, that next unto his own Son, his People are the most
prevailing Advocates. And though Saul himself was David's Enemy, yet Jonathan
did love him dearly; and many times a wicked Parents Life is lengthned out for
the sake of a godly Child. Next unto saving Mercy, it is a Privilege to be
spared; but yet this is nothing save what an Hypocrite may share in, unto the
Multiplying of his Sin, and the Aggravation of his following Judgment, Romans 2.
4, 5.

From all which several Privileges, conferred upon Saul, we may safely
infer; that a mere carnal Professor, may be a visible Saint; a true visible
Churchmember; descended of godly Parents, and related to the best Society upon
Earth: the very next of Kin unto a man after Gods own heart: desired while
alive, and mourned for at his death: outwardly advanced above the Best:
eminently sought out of God: approved of by godly men: and marvellously
confirmed in a good opinion of their present state: Such may be Spirited for
their work: admirably Gifted: applauded by the Generality of sober Israelites:
wonderfully secured from imminent Dangers: maligned by a grosser Interest:
employed by God in some special Service: accompanied with Success: earnestly
prayed for by some of God's People: stopped in a sinful way: and endured with
much Long-suffering. All this, and much more, may be the Portion of an
Hypocrite, or of one who is not after God's own heart, and whose Mercies are
not like David's.

Use 3. Thirdly and lastly, If Saul were not after God's own heart,
notwithstanding all his seeming Excellency; let all so^ts of Persons th^n be
hence Dissuaded, from b^ing Quieted in Saul's Condition, or satisfied with his
Seize. And one would think that there needed no other Argument, but only
this, that Saul was not after the heart of God, in Point of Privilege or Duty;
since the Scripture does count him sufficiently miserable, who comes short of
the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. But yet in order unto the further setting home of
this Dehortation, let these following Considerations be duly weighed, from
whence we may see, in Readiness Example, what may ^e the doleful portion of such
a one.

1. Saul was a Worker of Iniquity; a wicked Transgressour; and in effect an
Heathen: so David styleth him, Psalm. 59. 2. 5, and in relation to his being
Persecuted by him, especially when he sent to watch and kill him in his own
house, as the Title of that Psalm does intimate. This is the Persecutors proper
Name, although he may be by some miscalled Religious. And thus does Paul style
himself, so long as he was a Saul, although he did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
There are some Gentlemen thieves, and there are unsuspected Sinners; but it is
not a Velvet Mask that can hide a Deforme^ face from the Heart-searcher's eye.
John had that Mystical Whore discovered to him, notwithstanding all her
Glorious and Sacred Colors, Rev. 17. 4 5. Such as pretend to Sanctity, and yet
Act Abominably, are a Smoke in God's Nose, whom he will recompense into their
Bosom, Isa. 65. 4, 5, 6. An Hypocrite may Justify himself, and highly be
esteemed by Men, but is Abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. And how
will it fill their faces with Confusion, when Christ himself (whom David
typified) shall call them workers of I^iquity, who have both Preached and
Prophesied, and (...) out Devils in his Name, Matt. 7. ^^, 2^. If a man be not
after God's own heart as to the Main, he is no better than a Worker of
Iniquity, whatever Profession he may make, and shall be one day bid to Depart
from Christ, as having never been known by him.

2. Saul was given in Anger, Hos. 13. 11; notwithstanding that he was by God
himself both sent, 1 Samuel 9. 16, and ^noynted, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and Confirmed, v.
7, and Spirited, v. 9, and Chosen, v. 21. Which Divine Anger, did evidence it
self by several Symptoms. Saul was a poor carnal Creature himself, so also were
the People that did desire him: now a Carnal man can see no Divine love in any
of his Enjoyments, since he is only a Child of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. Again, Saul
was given, in a mere Permissive way, and expressly contrary to Gods signified
Approbation, 1 Samuel 8. 7: now that which directly crosses God's Revealed Will,
viz. Success in a way of Sin, must needs come in a way of Anger. Again, when
Saul was first desired, it displeased the Prophet Samuel* and he Prayed against
it, 1 Samuel 8. 6: now that which does justly grieve their Spirits who have the
Mind of Christ, must needs be done, (or suffered to be done) in ^nger. Again,
Saul was desired, that so Gods Israel might be like unto all the Nations, 1 Samuel 8. 5. 20: now that which tends to confound the World, and Visible Saints
together, in opposition to an Instituted Separation, must needs be Permitted in
a way of Anger, since God is at utter Enmity with the World, Jam. 4. 4. Again,
God did foretell, that Saul would prove unto their sorrow, who had desired him*
1 Samuel 8. 18: now that which the Word of God declares to be the just matter of
Repentance, must needs be the fruit of Man's Sin and God's Anger. Again, Saul
was Given in answer to that Inordinate desire, which would not be overpowered
by the Purest and strongest Reasons, 1 Samuel 8. 19: now the granting of an
Impetuous and Unreasonable desire, must needs be in a way of Anger, Psalm. 81.
11, 12. Again, Saul did not satisfy the People in point of Content and
Service, as was Expected by them: now that which does not compet^ntly answer
its designed End, may be suspected as a Fruit of Anger; as Israel's Quails
were, notwithstanding which they were Lean, Psalm. 106. ^5, and were not yet
Estranged from their Lust, Psalm. 78 2^, 30. Again, Saul was a Wicked man, Psalm.
7. 9: now when a wicked man is set over a People, it must needs be in a way of
Anger, since that is represented as an heavy Curse, Psalm. 109. 6 Again, Saul
proved a sad Snare unto his People, generally overpowring them to join with him
in Sin: now that which does bring in Sub^^ction to such Tem^tations, is done in
Anger. Again, Saul was Removed in Wrath, H^s. 13. 11: now that which is so
taken away, must needs have been so Given, since New Covenant Gifts are without
Repentance, Romans 11. 29. A carnal Professors Privileges are all given in Anger.

3. Readiness Kingdom did not Continue, 1 Samuel 13. 14; so that in effect, his
being Anointed thereunto, did only amount unto a Visibility of Interest
therein; or rather unto a bare Tender thereof* upon some f^lli^le Condition,
which never had any good Event; the Instability of whose Privileges in that
respect, did fitly answer unto the nature of his Duty. Which Discontinuance of
his Crown, was Emblematically hinted to him, by his being Anointed with Oil out
of a Glass or Vial, which is a very Brittle vessel, 1 Samuel 10. 1. whereas David
was Anointed with Oil out of an Horn, that is not so easily Broken, 1 Samuel 16.
13. so also was Solomon his Son, 1 Kings 1. 39. the latter of which was a Type
of Christ, whose Throne is for Ever and Ever, Ps. 45. 6. as David was of the
Saints, who also shall possess the Kingdom for Ever, even for ever and ever,
Dan. 7. 18. Now Saul's Kingdom might therefore be said not to continue, partly
because he was Threatened by the Lord to be Removed, upon his Sin, 1 Samuel 13.
14. which Divine Word was as a Worm at the Root of his Dignity: and Partly
because that none of his Posterity Succeeded him, to keep up his Name, save
only for a while, which was not worth the speaking of: but Principally because
that David's following Dispensation, did Really differ from Saul's for Kind,
however they might in Appearance seem to be of the same nature, from David's
sitting in Saul's Throne, and being his Son*in-law. And thus, an Hypocrite may
have great Hopes, but they are like a Spiders web, Job. 8. 14. spun out of the
Bowels of his own Obedience, catching nothing but sorry Fl^es, and likely to be
soon swept down with Gods Besome of Destruction. He may lean upon his house,
but it shall not stand; he may hold it fast, but it shall not endure Job 8. 15.
His Privileges are treasured up in some Brittle Glassy Bottle, and his Wages
are put into a Bag with Holes, Hag. 1. 6. Such may be called the children of
the Kingdom, who yet shall be cast out into utter darkness, Mat. 8. 12. The
carnal Professors Goods are all of them prop^r Movables; and his best Tenure
is but Knight Service; or rather, he is but a Tenant at the Will of that Lord,
whom he Provokes daily to turn him out of all. Ishmael was Abraham's Son, but
because only according to the flesh, he therefore might not Inherit, what
sometime he was the Sole Heir Apparent of Worldly Constitutions and a Natural
man's Enjoyments, are both one, in point of instability however the Lord may
seem as if he were about to Establish them for Ever, as Samuel told Saul in
relation to his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13. 13.

4. S^uls Title to his Crown was irrecoverably cracked, upon his first Fall, 1 Samuel 13. 14. soon after he had Be^un to Reign, v. 1. and upon his Next
miscarriage, he was utterly Rejected, 1 Samuel 15. 23. without ^ll hopes of being
ever restored afterward. v. 29. wherein his State fully answered unto the
nature of that Vial* from whence he was first Anointed, 1 Samuel 10. 1. since
Glass is quickly cracked, and when once Broken, cannot be m^nded any more. And
thus a carnal Professors enjoyments are not only uncertain in the general, but
they are Quickly forfeited, as the first Adams Paradise was lost upon his first
Transgression, Genesis 2. 17. and as Ishmael was cast out upon the first
Appearanc^ of his Scoffing Disposition, Genesis 21. 9, 10. because he was the Son
of that Bondwoman, who answered unto Sinai, or the old Covenant of Works, Gal.
4. 24, 25. which did Immediately curse him that did not continue in All things
required by that Law* Gal. 3. 10. It Is true indeed, there is Now no such
Covenant of Works properly in Being (...) ever was since Adams Fall, save to
the (...), s^ long as M^ses his Ministration was in force; (...) men Naturally
considered, are only (...) Curse of that covenant which Adam violated being
said to be Strangers from the Covenants, viz. both New and Old, Ephesians. 2. 12. so
that an unbeliever has Now no Promise at all, of the least outward mercy,
entailed upon his best Duty, whilst in an unregenerated State. But though that
God be not Now obliged to recompense a Natural man's obedience* yet is he
Pleased usually to do so still, only that Arbitrary and Providential
recompense, depends upon very tic^le terms, so as upon his first (at
leastwise more considerable) failing, the Visibility of his Title thereunto, is
liable unto a speedy utter and irrecoverable crack, both in his own conscience
and in the thoughts of others. A natural man cannot groundedly promise to
himself, so much as a Temporal Forgiveness of his first Offense.

5. Saul had that sad Message of his Down*fall, together with an Aggravating
signification* of Gods having been then likely to have Established his Kingdom
upon Israel for ever, 1 Samuel 13. 13, 14. Which is not to be understood, as if
the Lord did not certainly foreknow, or had not fore-determined what afterward
did come to pas^: but he does hereby only intimate, that Saul's Kingdom was in
a very Fair and Probable way of having been settled upon him and his Po^terity,
according to an Ordinary rule of judging, had not this Act of his Disobedience
Unhappily i^tervened as it were in the very Nic^ of time; whereby the Lord did
Design to Aggravate Saul's present Sin and future Suffering. And thus Babylon
(who was a Tipe of Worldly or Antichristian constitutions, Rev. 17. 5.) shall
then fall, when most likely to be a Lady for ever, Isa. 47. 7. and an Hypocrite
is apt to be in Straits, when in the very fullness of his Sufficiency, Job. 20.
22. Which sad Surprizal with unexpected Judgment, was eminently Exemplified in
Agag the King of Amalek, who was confident that the Bitterness of Death was
Past, a very little before his being Hewed in pieces, 1 Samuel 15. 32. 33. to
signify, that Worldly Things and Persons (which Ama^ek Typified, as has been
formerly hinted) and more especially the most Eminent among them (answering to
this Amalek^tish King) are likely to meet with very Sudden Destruction, when
they shall say Peace and Safety, 1 These. 5. 3. and know nothing, until the
Flood come and take them all away, Mat. 24. 39. and when such have in their own
Apprehensions, made a Covenant with Death and Hell, Isa. 28. 15, 18. As we
would not be overtaken with unexpected Judgments, let us take heed of being
satisfied with Saul's Condition and Dispensation.

6. After that Saul was Anointed and Chosen King, the Israelites were sadly
afflicted by their Enemies on every side. The Ammonites had affrighted several
of them into an Offer of an unlawful compliance with them, 1 Samuel 11. 1. and
the Philistines were too many for them, 1 Samuel 13. 5. having left the common
People neither Sword nor Spear, ver. 22. nor Smith to make them any, ver. 19;
who being by that means Distressed, did Hide themselves, ver. 6. and the
Stoutest of them Trembled, v. 7. so as that their Enemies insulted over them,
by sending Spoilers out of their Camp, in several Companies, ver. 17, 18. Poor
carnal People are likely to be Disappointed of their high expectations from
Worldly constitutions; as the Israelites were, who looked for great matters to
have been done by their National King. And notwithstanding that seeming Inward
Authority and Command which some Professors are invested with, typified by
Saul's Supremacy; yet are they sadly over powered by Satan's temptations and
their own corruptions still, which were Spiritually shadowed out by Isreal's
Adversaries. Such may be made to think, that there is no way to get shut of
Satan, but by their compliance with him in relation to some Lesser sins; which
they could freely submit unto, but that they see at length, this will not
satisfy their Adversary; as was the case of those men of Jabesh. Such also may
be triumphed over, by many gross Philistian Lusts, which may be far more in
Number than all their Israelitish Virtues; and by which means they may be
Stripped of their best Defensive and Offensive weapons, such as a mere Natural
man might otherwise be furnished with; so as that their hearts may generally
fail them, whenever a Temptation does appear, and those Mystical Philistines
may send Spoilers among them what they please. As men would not expose
themselves to be the Servants of some Ammonitish temptations, which their
present Light and Tenderness does make them Tremble to think of; and as they
would not be Disabled by Spiritual Philistines, for any thing save Tillage, 1 Samuel 13. 20. or Actions of a more Civil and Common nature; so let them take
heed of Resting in Saul's condition, which was the Type of an Unregenerated
Professors State.

7. When Saul consulted with the Lord, what he should do, in a case of great
concernment, and according to Gods Appointment, Number. 27. 21. yet God would not
Answer him, 1 Samuel 14. 37. and at another time, when Saul was most afraid, and
when his heart greatly trembled, he did Enquire of God, but the Lord would not
Answer him, neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28. 5, 6.
which tempted him to consult with that Witch, v. 15. unto his own destruction,
1 Chronicles. 10. 13. The Lord was sometimes pleased to manifest himself of old by
Dreams, which were for the most part imparted unto Holy Persons, though
sometimes unto others also; but Saul had no Answer* in this way from any: But
the more ordinary way of Gods Discovering his Mind was then by Prophets, who
were Mostly Holy Persons also, though not always; but Samuel was now dead, and
that Spirit together with him, as to Saul's relief: But the Most ordinary way
then was, by consulting with the High Priest, being clad with Aarons Ephod, and
Breast Plate, wherein was the Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28. 30. Number. 27. 21. Now
Abiathar had formerly carried away this Ephod to David when he fled from Saul's
fury, 1 Samuel 23. 6. so that he had at present no Vrim to consult with through
his own default; And when he did consult therewith, the time before, 1 Samuel 14.
37. it was merely upon the Priests motion, and not his own desire, v. 36. who
but a little before, had seemed to Despise it, v. 19. and therefore had no
cause to Wonder at Gods not answering him thereby, v. 37. Though also his last
Enquiring of God, was in such a sorry manner, 1 Samuel 28, 6. as that he is
elsewhere said not to have Enquired of God at all, 1 Chronicles. 10. 14. And thus,
an Hypocrite may Pray, and Advise with the Lords most faithful Servants, (who
were typified by those Dreamers and Prophets and High Priests of old) and yet
may not be answered, upon the account of his present State or former
Sleightiness, and great Transgression, as was the case of Saul; which is a very
sad dispensation, and that which may occasion his consulting with Carnal Policy
at least, which is no better than a Wizard; just as it has lately befaln some
eminent Professors in our days. As men would have God to Hear them when at any
time they seek unto him, so let them take heed of Resting in Saul's condition;
since God does not Hear Sinners, Joh. 9. 31, nor any one that Regards
iniquity in his heart, Psalm. 56. 18.

8. Saul sadly Mistook what was the True and Proper cause of Gods not answering
him that day 1 Samuel 14. 37. Presuming that it was, because his sinful
Adjuration, v. 24. had not been observed, v. 38, 39. whereas he might easily
have suspected, that God was Offended, with his former Sleightiness, v. 19. and
with his being merely Passive in this present address, which had not now been,
if the Priest had not urged him thereunto, v. 36. and especially with the
Peoples eating Blood, which was the consequent of his wicked curse, v. 32.
which he was told of, v. 33. and thought he had sufficiently Expiated that
Transgression by a future Reformation, v. 34. though by the Law such Offenders
should have been cut off, Lev. 7. 27. And thus a carnal Professor is apt to be
very Grossly mistaken, as to what is the Proper ground of such a cross
Providence; being forward to impute the Procuring cause thereof unto some other
rather than himself; and not to see, what is the True and Manifest occasion of
Gods contending with him in such a way; but to pitch upon a fancy, and in the
mean while to overlook a Real and very great transgression. Now this is a sad
dispensation, since if the Cause of a Suffering be thus mistaken, a Soul
knows not what course to take for its Removeall, but may do Harm instead of
Good, as in the case of a Bodily distemper, when the right Humor is not his
upon: and therefore in such a case, David was so wise as to Enquire of God,
what the matter was, 1 Samuel 21. 1. as Saul here should have done, and whereupon
he might possibly have been Resolved, had he persisted therein, since it is
here only said, that the Lord answered him not That Day, 1 Samuel 14. 37.
intimating as if his Perseverance might have been crowned with success. But
this is one part of a Natural man's doleful portion, that he is not able to
Judge of Gods mind in his correcting Providence, through the prevalency of his
Ignorance, Self-love and Rashness. And let it be well observed, whether some in
our days, have not brought that Misery upon themselves, by their superstitious
Impositions, which they would think has been the fruit of others
non-complaynce therewith.

9. The Lord did justly Harden Saul in his sinful practice and opinion, by
suffering Jonathan to be taken by that Lot which Saul cast, 1 Samuel 14. 42;
wherein the Lord was Righteous, since Saul desired, that God would thereby
discover, who it was that had violated his former Adjuration, v. 41; and yet
Saul was justly Hardened, since he by this means thought that Jonathan's not
complying with that unlawful Prohibition, was the very Cause why God did not
answer Saul, v. 37. God would not answer him before, when it might have done
him good; but now did Answer him, unto his Obduration. The seeming Mercies of
an Hypocrite are real Judgments. Solomon had sometimes observed, that Riches
were kept for the Owners to their Hurt, Eccl. 5. 13; and after such a manner
does God hear the Sinners Prayer; as Christ did the Devils, when he suffered
them to do more M^schief, Matt. 8. 31, 32, which would redound at last unto
their own sadder Reckoning. They who will Dally with their Light, may justly be
given up to strong Delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11; as Pharaohs heart was
Hardened because his Magicians could do as Moses and Aaron did, E^od. 7. 22.
Christ bids his Disciples to pray, ^^t God would not lead them into
Temptation^, Mat. 6. 13; which intimates that he may do so, and sometimes
does, and which they have most cause to fear, who are not men after his his own
heart, or who are such as Saul sometimes was.

10. It Is said, That Saul vexed the Philistines and other Enemies, 1 Samuel 14.
47, but not, that he did subdue them, as David did, 2 Samuel 8. 1: and the
Generality of Readiness Victories, were either by David's Means, 1 Samuel 17. 46, or
at leastwise by J^nathan's, 1 Samuel 13. 3, and 14. 45, who was a Friend to
David, 1 Samuel 18. 1. But when Jonathan had smitten that Garrison of the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 13. 3, it did but make Israel to be had in Abomination with
them, v. 4; and though the Philistines were much discomfited in Readiness time by
Jonathan and David afterward, yet did they Recover themselves again, and were
at last the Death of Saul, 1 Samuel 31. 3. And thus, a Corrupt state of things
may be accompanied with some success, though Principally for the sakes and by
the hand of such as Jonathan and David were; but yet withal, that present
success may only vex the Adverse party, who at the last may Overcome their
sometime-Conquerours, especially when David is become the Object of those
Conquerours Persecution, and is more civilly dealt with by the Philistines,
than by his own Friends and Brethren: all which has eminently been Exemplified
in these latter days. So also, a mere carnal Professor may be enabled to vex
his Spiritual Enemies, whether more Refined (such as Moab, A^^on and Edom
typified) or more Gross, such as Amalek, the Kings of Zobah and the Philistines
were; by the help of Christ's hand in a more Common respect, (whom David in
Readiness time did so typifie) or by means of some Good things in such a one,
which are the Friends of Christ, and whom Jonathan was a fit type of. But yet,
a mere carnal Professor does only Enrage, and not properly Subdue his Moabitish
and Ammonitish inordinate Affections; his Syrian Temptations; his Amalekitish
Worldly mind; his Philistian Lusts (all which Types have formerly been more at
large explained;) and his Edomitish Body or Outward man, which was Originally
before the Soul, Genesis 2. 7, (as Esau was Jacob's Elder Brother, Genesis 25. 25.)
but lost the Blessing of Paradise for an Apple, Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 19, (as Esau
did his for a mess of red Pottage, Genesis 27. 35) ever since which time, it has
been an enemy to the Spirit, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Romans 7. 23, 24, as the Edomites were
against Israel: some or other of which forementioned Temptations are likely to
give him his deadly wound at last, unless the Lord be pleased to make him a
Better man than Saul ever was, who met with this portion in the Letter, to show
what they must spiritually look for, who are not men after God's own heart.

11. Saul was an occasion of much Mischief, as to Himself, so also unto Others.
He hindered the Philistines slaughter, by his superstitious Imposition upon the
People, 1 Samuel 14. 29, 30: He brought a sad Plague in David's time, by his
Blind Zeal, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, which ended in the Death of Seven of his own Sons,
v. 9: And he occasioned the untimely end of his worthy Son Jonathan, together
with Abinadab and Melchishuah, 1 Samuel 31. 2. Which Jonathan was a Valiant man,
2 Samuel 1. 23* and a dear Friend of David's, v. 26, who yet was Readiness Son; to
signify, that a wicked man may have a worthy Child; which may be added unto
his other Privileges beforementioned. But all the forenamed Mischief was by
the Means of Saul. Now let it be observed, whether something of this nature
also, be not Exemplified in these latter days, which seem to have been
eminently typified by Sam's Dispensation. Might not a grosser Interest have
been more fully vanquished, if Gods Israel had not been Weakened by some
unlawful Prohibitions? And have not some of Christ's faithful Friends been cut
off, upon his Fore-runner's being destroyed by that grosser Interest? To say
nothing at present, concerning the Fruit of that Blind Zeal, which may be more
fully discovered afterward. However, we may observe from hence, that an
Hypocrite may little deserve to be Desired or Lamented, in regard of his being
Mischievous unto others, whose Relations may sadly suffer for his Miscarriages.
How apt are such to hinder the slaughter of some Philistian Lusts, by their
superstitious forbearing those lawful and Necessary Helps, which the Lord has
not forbidden? 1 Cor. 7. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Col. 2. 23. How sadly do they
occasion the Perishing of some Good things in them, by a forcible Engaging of
their Light and Parts against Christ, as Saul did his Son and Subjects against
David, who therefore perished by those Phi^istines, as these are apt to do by
some more Reproachful Miscarriage. And how apt are such, to create unto
themselves a sad after-reckoning, by that which at the present they Blindly
apprehend to be their Zeal and Duty. As men would not be liable to such a
portion, so let them take heed of Resting in Readiness Condition.

12. Saul was (by his Naughtiness) the Cause of Samuel's Mourning, who had
Anointed him, 1 Samuel 15. 35; and by his Oppression, he made them Cry, who had
so Inordinately desired him, 1 Samuel 8. 18; whom they soon grew weary of, and
longed for David, 2 Samuel 3. 17. And let it be observed, whether Worldly and
National Constitutions (such as Readiness was) have not made those to Cry out,
who sometimes would not be satisfied without them: and whether that men of
Samuel's spirit, have not Mourned until the day of their Death, for such
Things and Persons, which they have been Instrumental unto the Advancement of.
However, we may hence learn, that a man not after God's own heart, is apt to be
unto the great Grief of others, both Good and Bad. Christ's outward Sufferings
indeed, were as a Sword piercing through his Mother's Soul, Luke 2. 35; but yet
upon some other account, that Womb was Blessed that bare him, and those Paps that
he had sucked, Luke 11. 27: whereas a foolish Son is the Calamity of his
Father, Prove. 19. 13, and the Heaviness of his Mother, Prove. 10. 1; a Grief to
his Father, and Bitterness to her that Bare him, Prove. 17. 25. Such are apt to
take those Courses, that may make their Relations and best Friends to be
Ashamed of them, and to wish for their Removal. Disobedience to God, may justly
strip those of that Respect and Love, which otherwise might be expected. He
that lives without being Approved, may depart without being Desired, as
Jehoram did, 2 Chronicles. 21. 20; and which may be the Portion of any one who is
not a man after Gods own heart.

13. The Lord checked Samuel, because of his Mourning so long for Saul, since
he had Rejected him; and Wiped his Eye, by sending him to Anoint David in his
stead, 1 Samuel 16. 1. And this is another part of that sad portion from the
Lord, which is most likely to befall a persevering Hypocrite, and a Worldly
Constitution; both which may Bitterly be Lamented by such, who do behold their
Evil, and foresee their Downfall; nor can it be denied to be a very great
Privilege, to share in the benefit of a Good man's Prayer and Mourning: but
yet when their Sorrow or Supplication relates to such things as these, it may
be so far from Prevailing with God, as that he may bid his People to Pray and
Mourn no more, and divert the Current of their Affections into some other
Channel. Has not this been fulfilled already, in relation to those Worldly
Forms, which some good men have formerly endeavored to keep up with their
Prayers and Tears? Has not the Lord Rebuked them for so doing, and given them
to understand, that he has Rejected them, notwithstanding what hand himself
had in their Erecting? Has he not inclined the Hearts of his Samuels, to go
seek up David, although with the hazard of their Lives, from Readiness hand?
However, we may hence learn, that a man not after Gods own heart, may soon
cease to be the object of a Saints Remembrance. He that will not be guided by
their counsel, may justly be thrust out of their Prayer. God can Silence any of
his Speakers when he pleases; and if a People or Person will not Answer to
Gods call, Jer. 7. 13, the next news is, Pray not for such, v. 16; which Word
is as the Sentence before Execution: and as poor creatures would not come under
it, so let them take heed of being satisfied in Saul's condition.

14. So soon as David was Anointed, the good Spirit of the Lord Departed from
Saul, and an Evil Spirit from God Troubled him, 1 Samuel 16. 13, 14. Which good
Spirit of God, cannot be meant of any special Graces, (for those Saul never
had) but merely of some Religious Actions, Ministering Gifts, and choice Moral
Virtues, viz. Ingenuity, Courage, Self command, etc. which pretty flowers did
sometimes seem to flourish in him, but now began to Wither: and in the stead
thereof, an Evil Spirit appeared, viz. a Spirit of Profaneness, Pride, Envy,
Slavish Fear, etc. as an Evil Spirit will not be long out of an Empty house,
Mat. 12. 44. And thus, some may have observed, that Worldly constitutions of
later years, have been more Beautified than heretofore by reason of their
Bordering upon David's Dispensation in the Mystery as Country houses near some
great City are finer than ordinary; and so long as those Earthly Forms have
been any way serviceable to Christ and his People, or at leastwise not
Prejudicial to them: but otherwise as a more glorious Ministration is growing
up, so a former must Disappear, 2 Cor. 3. 11. Joh. 3. 29. Heb. 8. 13.
especially when the former was not of Gods Appointing, and proves unto the
Prejudice of the latter; as when Ishmael began to Mock Isaac, then he and his
Mother must stay no longer in Abraham's house, Genesis 21. 9, 10. However we may
hence learn, that a carnal Professor's Gifts and seeming Graces, are apt to
fall into an utter Decay. He may be thought to be Another Man, 1 Samuel 10. 6;
and yet within a while, he may appear to be the same man he was, and a great
deal worse. His single Talent, not being well improved, may therefore be taken
from him, Mat. 25. 27, 28. He is but a Servant at the most, all whose Gifts of
Inheritance, will Return in Time unto their Old Master, Ezekiel. 46. 17. His Stony
heart affords this Seed neither Root nor Moisture which therefore must needs
quickly Wither. Luke 8. 6. 13. His Goodness is as a Morning cloud, and as the
early dew it goes away, being suddenly Dispersed and gathered up by the
Breaking forth of a Temptations Sun, Hos. 6. 4. The Old man's Sight is apt to
Wax dim, and Nature will Decay, and the First Covenant Gifts are fading. Nay
and such are also liable to be Possessed by an Evil Spirit. A Professing
Hypocrite may turn Profane; his sometime Raptures may be transformed into
Terrors; and he that has been a Lover of the Brethren, may prove their deadly
Persecutor: all which was verified in Saul, to affright every one from being
Quieted in his condition.

15. Saul was Afraid to encounter with Goliath, and was Dismayed at his
appearance, 1 Samuel 17. 11. and fled from him, v. 24. Which Goliath, was a
Philistine, whose Height was a full yard and Span above any ordinary man's, 1 Samuel 17. 4, who was completely Armed, from Head to Foot, v. 5, 6, 7; and the
Weight of his Armor (as some have computed it, from what is there said) did
amount to more than two hundred Pounds, at the lowest estimate. And so this
Goliath does very fitly shadow out, some terrible Suffering, or some more easily
Besetting Sin; both which are above an Ordinary man's height, and seem unto an
Eye of flesh as if they would run all down before them, and do Defy the Armies
of Israel, offering to fight with any one, upon condition that the conquered
Party shall be the Overcomer's Servant. The Devil is a ^esperate Gamester, who
would have Professors to adventure their All at one Cast; whilst himself will
no more stand to those Terms, than these Philistines did, upon their
Champion's being overthrown: and yet also the Prevailer in such a combat, is
very likely to Gain that which Goliath offered; which should encourage us, as
Stoutly to resist at such a time, as we are sure to be Resisted, if either we
Prize our getting Satan at an under, or would prevent our being his Slaves for
ever But this is one part of a poor Souls misery, that he dares not loo^ this
Goliath in the face. A Natural man had rather deal with an whole Army of
Ordinary temptations, than One such as Goliath was. He is apt ^^ flee from his
Duty, when accompanied with some greater Danger; and to give way to some
Beloved lust or Constitutionall corruption. He will be content to fight against
the common Philistines, if this Goliath may be but kept out of Sight. But
otherwise; a Saul is apt to give back, at such a Dead Lift, apprehending
himself not called out to this kind of Encounter, let Satan Triumph* let
Profession be Scandalized, let God be Defied, let Israel be Endangered, or let
what else will follow: though Saul could not but know, that if some or other
did not take this Goliath to do, his Army would soon have mouldred away, and
himself must then have perished by those Encouraged Philistines. An Hypocrite
is one, who does prefer his Bosome-sin and present Self-preservation, before
the Glory of God, and the future Safety both of himself and others. As
Professors would be loath to Backslide, in an hour of some great Temptation, so
let them labor to be after Gods own heart, and not only such as Saul sometime
was.

16. When David encountered with this Goliath, he Refused Readiness Armor, viz. his
Sword and Helmet and Coat of Mail, as not being able to go therewith, because
he had not Proved them, 1 Samuel 17. 38, 39. And this is another part of a Carnal
Professor's misery, that a man after Gods own heart dare's not make use of his
Armor, nor has ever been accustomed thereunto. A man's Armor is that by which
himself is Defended, and his Adv^rsary resisted, upon the Goodness or Badness
whereof his Life does much depend, and therefore his condition (in a conflict)
must needs be very sad, whose whole Armor deserves to be Rejected. Now the
Natural man's Armor is something like unto Saul's, which much resembled that of
the Philistines, save only that it was not so complete and full as Goliahs
was, for Goliath had Greaves of brass upon his Legs, to secure his Standing; and
a Spear together with his Sword, whereby to Kill his Adversary at some further
Distance; and a Target of Brass between his Shoulders, wherewith to Defend
himself from Backblows, in case he should Retreat, and one bearing a Shield
before him: whereas Saul only furnished David with a sword, and left both his
Legs and Shoulders naked. A carnal Professor is nothing so well armed, as his
Adversary is; whom he cannot reach, unless the other come very near him; and
his Legs (or main Supporters) are Open to the saddest wound, and if he once
turn his Back, he then has nothing to Secure him from a deadly thrust: whereas
his Spiritual Enemy can first reach him with his massy Spear; and has one
bearing a shield before him; (the Devil is two to one, when he deals with a
carnal Israelite;) nor is he so apt to fall by a blow upon his armed Legs, or
by a Thrust upon his armed Back; and therefore though Christ made him turn
Head, in that Duel that was fought between them, yet is it said that he only
departed for a Season, which intimates that he did Retreat without being
deadly wounded, Luke 4. 13. whilst the sinner is not able to stand, because he
has not the Whole Armor of God upon him, Ephesians. 6. 13; and when he gives Back
or Falls, he is in danger of never Riseing more, Prove. 24. 16; though indeed
among those Pieces of Gods Armor, Ephesians. 6. 14, 15, 16. there is none for the
back, to intimate, that Backsliding Professors are in a worse condition than
any other sort of Persons. But howeve^* the sinners armor is not for the
Saints turn, nor dare a man after Gods own heart make use thereof, in any of
his spiritual conflicts If such would suppress a supposed Heresy or Error;
their armous is Club-law, or Terrible Threats, or Passionate expressions;
whereas Paul's weapons were not Carnal* 2 Cor. 10. 4. and then much less
sinful, 2 ^^m. 2. 24, 25. If such would Overcome Temptations and Corruptions;
their armor is, the first Adam's strength, or superstitious means, or Yiedling
in a little, that so they might prevent a greater fall: whereas Paul was for
being strong in the might of God, and for His armor only, Ephesians. 6. 10. 11, and
not for giving place by Subjection at all, Gal. 2. 5. Ephesians. 4. 27. If such would
quench the fiery darts of an accusing conscience; their armor is, outfaceing
confidence, 1 Samuel 15. 20; or Sensual Diversions, 1 Samuel 16. 16, 17; or
Desperate engageing in sin unto some further height, 1 Samuel 18. 11. all which
were parts of Saul's armor but David made use of other. As men would not be
utterly Destitute of good Defens^ve and Offensive weapons, so let them take
heed of being such as Saul was; for all his Armor was Rejected by David, who
was a man after Gods own heart and knew what would best serve for such a
purpose.

17. Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord was with him, 1 Samuel 18. 12;
and because he behaved himself very Wisely, ver. 15. One character of Christ's
Spouse is, to be then most Terrible to the Wicked, when she is most Beautiful
and Comely, Cant. 6. 4. and one Property of a false heart is, to be afraid at
such a Sight. When Christ shall appear in his Glory, the sinners in Sion will
be Afraid, Isa. 33. 14 hiding themselves in Holes and Caves Isa. 2. 19; and
next unto himself, the Majesty of his Peoples graces is unto such Affrighting.
Ahab did not desire to see Michaiah, 1 Kings 22. 8; and Saul seemed well
content that faithful Samuel did no more see him till his death, 1 Samuel 15.
35. A Saint is compared to the Sun, and that make's him Terrible unto a weak
carnal eye, Cant. 6. 10. Fools know not how to carry themselves in a Wise
man's company, and therefore such rather choose to be alone; Christ's presence
Tormented him that was possessed with the Devil, Mat. 8. 29; and such a one was
Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 14. The appearance of God in any, must needs trouble those
from whom he is departed; and that was Saul's very case, 1 Samuel 18. 12. A
Serpent runs out of Man's sight; and a Natural man is of the Serpents seed, Mat.
3. 7. God is unto Transgressors a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29; and God is in
his People; who therefore must needs make sinners Fall down before them, 1 Cor.
14. 25. The World could not endure Christ, because he testified of it, that its
works were evil, Joh. 7. 7; now all his People are of the same spirit, who
therefore must expect the same portion. The Saints are Gods Anointed and shall
be uppermost; in which regard Saul was afraid of David. An Hypocrite is one
that Hates the Upright, Mic. 3. 2. and that makes him to be so much afraid.
He carries a guilty Conscience in his bosom, and thence he is afraid (as Cain
was) of every one he meets with, Genesis 4. 14. And this is another branch of a
Carnal Professors misery, which is very sad. An Heathen could say, that the
very Sight of a Good man is Delightful; so that he must be worse than an
Heathen, who is Afraid of such a one: A Professor would be thought to be a Good
man himself; and then what a sad thing it is, that he should be Afraid of his
own Pretended Party. He that is Afraid of a Good man, must needs also Hate him,
as Saul did David; now such as Hate the Righteous, shall be Desolate, Psalm. 34.
21, and be clothed with shame, Joh. 8. 22. and Plagued, Psalm. 89. 23. with the
Diseases of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 7. 15. and with all the Curses in Moses his Law, Deuteronomy.
30. 7. A good man does minister no more just ground of fear, than David did to
Saul; and it is one sign of a Wicked man, to flee, when no man pursues, Prove.
28. 1. And he that is afraid of a Good man because of the Lords being with him,
how much more will he tremble at the sight of God himself; before whom he must
one day appear. It Is sad being afraid of an Holy man, and yet this an Hypocrite
is apt to be.

18. Saul was utterly confounded at the News of his Death, 1 Samuel 28. 20. Which
astonishment of his did not arise from any mere Natural cause, for so he had
often looked Death in the face: nor was he loath to Die, because he would be
further serviceable to God, as David was, Psalm. 6. 4, 5. nor was he afraid to
Die, because of such Terrors as a gracious heart is subject unto, Ps. 88. 15.
But Saul's Amazement did manifestly arise from his utter Despair of Mercy, as
the fruit of his manifold and sad transgression. And this is another Branch of
a carnal Professors misery, that he is apt to be afraid of Death from a spirit
of Desperation. A Natural man's Treasure consists in his outward Glory, which
shall not Descend after him, Psalm. 49. 17. either as to his Wealth, v. 10. or
Wisdom, Joh. 4. 21. Eccl. 9. 5, 6; which is the more sadly aggravated, because
the Inward thoughts of such is, that these things shall continue for ever,
Psalm. 49. 11; and because such Die not thereunto beforehand, as a gracious
heart does, 1 Cor. 15 31. Sin is the Sting of Death, and the Law is the
strength of Sin; both which are Overcome to the true Believers hand, 1 Cor. 15.
56, 57, but not to others; who therefore must then needs before afraid. After
Death comes Judgment, Heb. 9. 27; and the very Name of Judgment is enough to
make an Healthful Faelix Tremble, Act. 24, 25. There is no Working in the
Grave, Eccl. 9. 10; which must needs Terrify that Soul, whose main Work is all
yet to do. When a wicked man Dies, his Expectation perishes, Prove. 11. 7; and
his case must needs be sad, whose Hope is utterly cut off. So that it is no
Wonder, if such a one be afraid of Death. But yet it is very Doleful, since
Death cannot be avoided, Heb. 9. 27. and since there the Weary be at Rest, Job.
3. 17, who therefore Long for it, v. 21; and since the Righteous has Hope
therein, Prove. 14. 32, As men would not Despairingly be Afraid of Death, so let
them hasten out of Readiness Condition.

19. Saul was one, whom David was directed by the Spirit of God to pray
Against, as is evident in many of his Psalms. And thus an Hypocrite is subject
to be pressed to Death by a good man's Prayer. A Saint may lawfully pray for his
own necessary Preservation but Hypocrites are generally Mischievous, who
therefore cannot but be Prayed against. A Saint must Pray for the advancement
of Christ's Kingdom, which will be raised upon their Ruins, of which number a
false heart is. It is according to God's Will, that his People should Pray
either for his Enemies Conversion or Confusion, Psalm. 83. 16, 17; now the
Saints are Heard in what they ask according to God's Will* 1 John 5. 14; and
therefore if an Hypocrite be not converted, he is in danger of being confounded
by a good man's Prayer. Now the Saints Prayers are very much Prevailing with
the Lord, and therefore woe be to that man whom they are engaged against. In
which Prayer of David, we may further observe, that it was directed against
Saul, as a Bloody man, Psalm. 59. 2, a Lion, Psalm. 7. 2, and as one who was set
on fire, whose Teeth were Spears and Arrows, and his Tongue a sharp Sword,
Psalm. 57. 4; which is the proper Description of a Persecuting Hypocrite. And
David prays against him, as one who lay in wait for his Soul, not for his
Transgression, and without any fault, Psalm. 59. 3, 4; appealing to God in that
respect, Psalm. 7. 3, 4, and desiring to be judged according to his
Righteousness, v. 8: and this is generally the Saints Case, whose Prayer
against Persecuting Hypocrites must therefore needs Prevail. And David in his
Prayer represents Saul, as a Worker of Iniquity, Psalm. 59. 2, an Heathen and
wicked Transgressour, v. 5, and as being a Cush, Psalm. 7, in the Title of it,
which signifies an Ethtopian, or one who could not change his Skin and sinful
Customs, Jer. 13. 23; which generally is the Disposition of a persecuting
Hypocrite, who being thus Dry, is the sooner Fired by the Saints Prayer. And
David Prays against Saul, that God would Destroy him by Degrees, Psalm 59. 11,
and in his Wrath, v. 13, or Anger, Psalm. 7. 6, and all this, as a Public Mercy
to good People, v. 7: which Circumstances are every of them very sadly
aggravating, when one is thus Gradually pressed to Death, under the heavy weight
of Divine Wrath, and in a way of Mercy unto the Godly. Nay and David was herein
guided by the Spirit of God, and did Pray in Faith, verily Believing that he
should see his Desire upon his Enemies, Psalm. 59. 10, who therefore did speak
of Readiness Destruction beforehand, as if it were already brought about, Psalm. 7.
12, 13, 14, 15, 16: Now the Prayer of Faith is very Prevailing, Jam. 5. 15,
Matt. 21, 22, and therefore such Prayers against the poor creature, must needs
make his Cond^tion doleful; which yet may be observed to be their Portion, who
do resemble Saul, and more especially in these latter days.

20. Saul is Expressly said to have been taken away in Wrath, H^s. 13. 11. Now
the word in Hebrew, that is there translated Wrath, is elsewhere rendered the
Rage of Wrath, Job 40. 11, and it properly signifies, to Go beyond ordinary
Bounds; intimating, that God's Wrath is more than his Anger; or that his holy
Passion was stirred up unto that Height, in Saul's Removal. Saul was taken away
in answer to David's Prayer, Psalm. 59. 10; but David Prayed, that he might be
consumed in Wrath v. 13; and it fell out accordingly. Saul was Given in Anger,
and therefore he must needs be Taken away in Wrath, presupposing him to be the
same man from first to last; since God's Forbearance does Add unto the
Impenitent Sinner's Treasury of Wrath, Romans 2. 4, 5. Saul was taken away, after
that he had ceased to Persecute David, 1 Samuel 27. 4; now when a man's
Reformation cannot prevent his being Reckoned with, it is a Sign of more than
ordinary Wrath; as in the Case of Israel's Captivity, which befell them, 2
King. 17. 6, when they were not so bad as formerly, v. 9; whose state then, was
typified by Lo ruhamah, a Daughter, to signify that their Provocations were
now grown weaker; and yet her Name signifies, No Mercy, or the Height of Wrath,
which appeared in their being utterly taken away at such a time, Hos. 1. 6.
Saul was smitten before his Enemies, 1 Samuel 31. 3, which was in those days a
Sign of wrath, Deuteronomy. 28. 25, and is to this day, with reference to what those
Philistines typified, viz. when a Soul is utterly vanquished by some more gross
Corruption: and let it be observed in these latter days, whether the chief
Supporters of Persecution and Worldly Forms, (such as Saul sometimes was) be
not also untimely Taken away by the hand of some grosser Interest, as an
Evidence of God's answerable Wrath. But above all the rest, Saul died
Desperately; not Enquiring of God, but of one that had a Familiar Spirit, 1 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14, a very little before his death, who then Worshipped the
Devil in Samuels likeness, being so far Deluded, as to think that this was
Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. 14; by whom his unavoidable destruction was foretold, v. 17,
18, 19; and whereunto himself was Accessory, 1 Samuel 31. 4: Now this is an
evident Sign of God's Wrath, when a Soul dies Desperately, consulting with the
Devil instead of God, and being wilfully Active unto the shortning of that Life
which might have been Prolonged; the accomplishment whereof, upon a Saul-like
Spirit or state of things in these last days, ought wisely to be observed and
improved. But this is another Branch of that misery which a Natural man is
subject unto, to be taken away in Gods Wrath; which must needs be very sad,
since Man's wrath is cruel, Prove. 27. 4. and then much more God's; the sense
whereof made the Psalmist distracted, Psalm. 88. 15, 16; and which if kindled
but a little, is enough to make men Perish, Psalm. 2. 12; especially when it
relates unto a man's being Taken away therein, which cutteth off all hopes of
future mercy.

From all which several Branches, of what may possibly befall a Natural man,
let every one take heed of Abiding in such a sad state; as they would not have
their Mercies to be given in Anger; as they would not have them to be
Uncertain; as they would not lose all upon the first Offense; as they would not
be surprised with Unexpected Judgments; as they would not be overpowered by
gross Corruption* as they would not that God should refuse to Hea^ their
Prayer; as they would not be counted Workers of Iniquity; as they would not
Mistake God's mind in his afflicting Providence; as they would not be led by
him into Temptation; as they would not one day Perish by their Corruptions; as
they would not become a Plague to others; as they would not Die without being
Desired; as they would not cease to be the Objects of a Saints Remembrance; as
they would not wax worse and worse* as they would not Backslide from their
Profession in an hour of Temptation; as they would not be wholly destitute of
Spiritual Armor; as they would not be afr^id of a good man; as they would not
be astonished at the Sight of Death; as they would not have the Saints to pray
against them; and as they would not be Taken away in Gods Wrath.

And thus I have now wholly done with David's Comparative Description, who is
said to have been a man after God's own heart, partly in a way of Preferring
him before Saul, his Predecessor; whose State and Condition has therefore
been at large declared, so far forth as the Scripture has left any thing
Material upon Record concerning him, for our Instruction.

From whence I shall ^ow proceed unto the Second general Branch o^ David's
Description; viz. As he was in himself considered. Which is of singular Use to
be enquired into, as we would know, when either a Particular Person, or Public
State of Things, is after God's own heart: since David's Person was a clear
Type of a true Believer; and since his Dispensation did also typifie, a
glorious State of things in Gospel Times, which at the first was merely
Spiritual, Lu. 1. 32, Act. 15. 16; but is to be at last made good in a Temporal
respect also, Ultimately when Christ shall come in Person, Rev. 22. 16, and
Dwell in that New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2, 3, which was shadowed out by David's
City; and before that time, at the Jews Conversion, Jer. 30. 9. and 23. 5. Isa.
9. 7. and 16. 5. Ezekiel. 34. 23. and 37. 24; all whose Promises must first be
accomplished upon us Gentiles, that so through our Mercy they also may obtain
Mercy, Romans 11. 31.

Now this Description of David, as in himself considered, is partly to be had
out of the History of his Life; but more Epecially out of his Book of Psalms.
Which Book of Psalms does seem generally to have been composed by David,
although that the greater part of those Psalms has not his Name Prefixed to
them; which yet is no Argument to Prove that they are not his, since the Second
Psalm has no such Title, which yet is expressly said to have been David's,
Act. 4. 25; so also the Ninety Fifth Psalm, v. 7, compared with Heb. 4. 7; and
the Hundred and fifth Psalm (the former part) compared with 1 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8.
Nor can it certainly be concluded, that any of those Psalms were Penned by
Heman, Ethan, Jeduthun, or Asaph, since by the same reason we may conceive that
the Sons of Korah did jointly compose some other of them, which may not be
supposed; especially since those before named are only called Singers, 1 Chr.
15. 19, or such as did fit the Psalms with Tunes; though possibly Asaph might
have composed some other spiritual Songs, which were made use of in Hezekiahs
time, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. But David is Peculiarly called the Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 1, in relation to his being the Penman of what the Scripture calls
Psalms, who therefore does seem to be acknowledged by Christ himself as the
Author of that Book, Luke 20. 42. So that I think we may safely conceive, that
the Generality of those Psalms are David's, unless it be evident unto the
contrary, either from the Title (as in the Ninetieth Psalm) or from some
Expressions therein, inconsistent with David's time; which yet cannot be
concluded, merely from what was Prophetically written; since Psalm. 83, was
penned in Asaph's time, who lived in the time of David, 1 Chr. 6. 39; and so
that Psalm and such like, might be composed by David, although they relate to
Aftertimes. Though I shall Mainly ground my following Discourse, upon what is
registered in those Psalms, concerning whose Author there is the least Dispute.

Now David (as in himself considered) is thus Absolutely Described in the
Scriptures, Partly, by his more Inward frame, or by some more General
Qualification relating to his whole Obedience: and Partly, by that more Outward
and Particular Proof or Demonstration that he gave, of his being a Man after
God's own Heart.

In the Prosecution whereof, it will be worth observing, how fully Paul does
resemble David, according to what is recorded in the Scriptures concerning
both. Which Paul was sometimes a Saul, both as to his Name and Nature, Act. 9.
2; but afterward he became a David, v. 15; as an encouragement unto men of
Readiness spirit, to wait upon God in the diligent use of Soul-converting Means.
And as David was the most Eminent in his Time for close walking with God, so
also was Paul, among those with whom he lived. And as David was a Standard to
his Successors in point of Privilege and Duty so also was Paul a Pattern to
them which should Believe hereafter, 1 Timothy 1. 16. So that there seems to be
something of the Divine Intendment in this Parallel between Paul and David,
which therefore ought so much the more to be regarded by us.

Now the First comprehensive Branch of David's Absolute Description, consists
in his more Inward Frame, or in those general Qualifications which related to
his whole Obedience which made his Duty Eminent, and evidenced him to be a man
after God's own heart. And so,

1. David's Obedience was Sincere. His Purpose was, to walk with a perfect
heart, Psalm. 101. 2; and he was Upright before the Lord, Psalm. 18. 23; in which
respect, God witnessed on his behalf, 1 Kings 15. 3, who had proved him, and
visited him in the Night, and found him to be as he appeared, Psalm. 17. 3. His
prayer did not go out of feigned Lips psalm. 17. 1, but was the work of his
Soul as well as Body, psalm. 86. 4, and was performed with his whole heart,
psalm. 119. 10. He also praised God with Uprightness of heart, psalm. 119. 7;
with his Soul and all that was within him, ps. 103. 1; with a^l his heart, ps.
86. 12, and with his whole heart, ps. 9. 1.

And thus Paul also was for Love without Dissimulation, Romans 12. 9; having
renounced the Hidden things of Dishonesty, ^ Cor. 4. 2; and speaking as in the
sight of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 17; and serving him with his Spirit, To. 1.
9; which Conversation of his in Simplicity and godly Sincerity was the matter
of his rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

A man after God's own heart, must needs be Upright, since God himself is so,
psa 25 8, who desires Truth in the Inward parts, psa. 51. 6. A gracious heart
is sincere in his dealings with God and Man. An Hypocrite is the worst of
Sinners, but Persons truly Justified are such in whose Spirit there is no
Guile, psa. 32. 2. Let this be duly weighed by them whose words are smoother
than Oil, whilst war is in their hearts; and who can counterfeit much
Earnestness in prayer, for that Light and Grace, which in their hearts they do
Despise.

2. David's Obedience was Universal. All the Statutes of God were before him,
psa. 18. 22; and otherwise he should have been ashamed, psalm. 119. 6. He
desired of God, that he would not let Any iniquity have dominion over him,
psalm. 119, 133; and he refrained his feet from Every evil way, v. 101, and
hated Every false way, v. 104.

And thus Paul also, had lived in All good conscience before God until that
day, Act. 23. 1; making it his constant exercise to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God and Man, Act. 24. 16: who stirred up others to
abound in Every grace, 2 Cor. 8. 7; and to be filled with the fruits of
Righteousness, Phil. 1. 11; being fruitful in Every good work, unto All well
pleasing, Col. 1. 10.

A truly gracious heart is Christ's own Image, Col. 3. 10; from whose fullness
he receives, and grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. True grace consists in an holy
Disposition, to Do whatever God requires, and to avoid the contrary. He that
cherishes the least known sin, or that lives in the careless neglect of any
known Duty, has a very bad evidence of his being a man after Gods own heart.

3. David's Obedience was very Generous, as was evidenced several ways. He
would not Offer unto the Lord his God, of that which did cost him Nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24. Nor was he Niggardly in point of Duty, but Abundant; sacrificeing
oxen and fatlings when the Ark had gone but Six paces. 2 Samuel 6. 13; praying
unto the Lord three times a day, Psalm. 55. 17, and praising him seven times,
Psalm. 1^9. 164; and preparing for the Temple, an hundred thousand Talents of
Gold, a thousand thousand Talents of Silver, and of Brass and Iron without
weight, 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. Nor was he Pressed into the service of God, but
Voluntary; Freely sacrificeing to him, Psalm. 54. 6; Chuseing the way of Truth,
Psalm. 119. 30; and beseeching an acceptance of his Freewill-offering, Psalm.
119. 108.

So also Paul could not satifie himself with that Duty which cost him Nothing,
or which was not accompanied with the Cross, Gal. 5. 11* as others could, Gal.
6. 12. Nor was he a spiritual Niggard, but in Labors more Abunaant, and in
Prisons more Frequent, than his competitors, 2 Cor. 11. 23. And as he did put
others upon doing service with Good will, Ephesians. ^. 7; so also himself could not
be Dissuaded from that duty which was accompanied with greatest Danger, Act.
21. 13; and was gladly spent for those, from whom he had not so much as Love, 2
Cor. 12. 15.

A gracious heart knows how great a King God is, who therefore served him
with the best Male he has, Mal. 1. 14. He is interested in Rich forgiving
love, and therefore must needs love much, Luke 7. 47. Obedience is connatural
to such a one, and therefore it must needs be very Voluntary.

4. David's Obedience was performed with much Earnestness of Spirit and
affection. He prepared for the House of his God with all his Might, 1 Chronicles.
29. 2. His Soul did Break for the Longing that it had unto God's Laws or
Judgments, Psalm. 119. ^0. And in relation to that Duty of Prayer, he did not
only Wish for what he would have, Psalm. 55. 6, but he also Sought the Lord,
Psalm. 34. 4; and Thirsted after him, Psalm. 42. 2; whom his Soul did follow Hard
after, Psalm. 63. 8; and unto whom his Soul was Lifted up, Psalm. 25. 1; Crying
unto him, Psalm. 61. 1; and groaning before him, Psalm. 38. 9. and roaring, Psalm.
22. 1. with Tears, Psalm. 39. 12. watering his couch therewith, Psalm. 6. 6; and
making them his Meat both in the Day and Night Psalm. 42. 3.

And thus also Paul was for serving the Lord with spiritual or Inward Fervor,
Romans 12. 11; which he himself was wont to do with many tears, Act. 20. 19;
warning every one with Tears both night and day, Act. 20. 31; writeing with
many Tears and much Anguish of heart, 2 Cor. 2. 4. and speaking of other's sins
with Weeping, Phil. 3. 18.

A gracious heart is Lively, 1 Pet. 2. 5. according to what was typified by
those Inwards, which Moses bad should be offered up by Fire, Lev. 1. 9. Gods
children are not ashamed to Weep before him, although the Serpent's Seed Hiss
at it, as if it were Effeminate. Such are willing to exercise their Affections
in his service, from whom they have received them. And therefore they Weep not
so much (as others do) upon the Creatures withdrawing or in relation to
outward Sufferings, because their Tears are laid out for God and in the
discharge of their Active duty.

5. David's Obedience was very Quick and Speedy. He was for Running in the way
of Gods commands. Psalm. 119. 32; which he made Haste and Delayed not to keep,
Psalm. 119. 60. When God said, seek ye my face; his heart immediately replied,
thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. Nay, so soon as he did but read what
God had writ concerning him; and consequentially understood that some further
Duty was required, because the Lord was not satisfied with Ordinary Sacrifices;
he Presently then said, Lo, I come, Psalm. 40. 6* 7; and did not Tarry, (as
sluggish Professors use to do) until he had some Louder Call.

And thus also Paul, so soon as the Lord had sent him to preach unto the
Gentiles, although he foreknew that this would prove a tedious piece of work,
Act. 9. 15, 16, yet he Immediately conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.
15. 16. And when some would have Legally imposed upon Believing Gentiles, Paul
did not give place by subjection no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 4, 5. He would not
that the Sun should go down upon men's wrath, nor that they should give place
unto the Devil, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27; but was for men's hearing Christ's Voice to Day,
Heb. 3. 7, for fear of being hardened, v. 13.

A gracious heart, is nothing else but an heavenly Echo, unto a Divine
command. Obedience is Elementary to such a one, who therefore only waits for
a word of Order, to give him the Title of being Dutiful, and the Honor of
Acceptance. He very well knows, that God loves a Cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.
7; and that he disliketh Dullness, by his forbidding Israel to feed upon the
sluggish Snail, Lev. 11. 30; and by commanding, that the firstling of an Ass
should either be Redeemed, or that they should break his neck, Exodus 34. 20; to
signify, that he was for the utter destruction of a Dull and Slothful
disposition.

6. David's obedience was performed, with respect unto God's Revealed Will, as
the Rule thereof. He shall fulfill My will, says God concerning him, Act. 13.
22. He exhorted others to cleanse their way, by taking he^^ thereto according
to God's Word, Psalm. 119. 9; which Word was a light unto his feet or path v.
^05; and Therein did he desire that his steps might be ordered, v. 133. And
when he brought Music into the House of God, the Reason of that Act was not
resolved into his own Will, but because so was the Commandment of the Lord by
his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 29. 25.

And thus also Paul delivered that Doctrine unto others, which himself also ha^
Received, 1 Cor. 15. 3; and the things that he writ, were the commandments of
the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37; and in relation to gospell-worship, he sharply rebuked
those who Added something of their Own, unto what he had received of the Lord,
which also he had delivered unto them, 1 Cor. 11. 22. 23.

A gracious Heart dares not resolve the VVarrant of his actions, into their own
apprehended or real Usefullness (at leastwise in matters of an Instituted
nature) save as they have some foothold from the Word of God. He counts
nothing to be his Duty, but what has some stamp of a Divine Authority. He
knows that the Scriptures were anciently shadowed out by Gold; and that the
Doors of the Temple turned upon Golden hinges, 1 King. 7. 50; to signify,
that Mystical Temples or Gospel-Saints, should neither shut nor open, with
reference to Religious actions, save as they have a Word from God.

7. David was for the performing of Obedience with understanding. He did not
only Observe Gods statutes, but he also knew that they were right, Psalm. 119.
75. And as he did desire to Walk with God, so also to Know the way wherein he
ought to walk, Psalm. 143. 8. As he did Believe the commands of God, so also he
desired that God would teach him Knowledge and good Judgments, Psalm. 119. 66;
and that he might be made to understand the way of his precepts in order unto
his Talking thereof, Psalm. 119. 27. He was not satisfied with an accidental
Hitting upon the mind and will of God, but he would also take Aim thereat and
be abl^ to make it out that he had a Respect thereto, Psalm. 119. 15: He stirred
up others, not only to Praise God, but to do it also with Understanding, Psalm.
47. 7; as himself also was wont to Meditate, while in that Duty of Prayer,
Psalm. 5. 1; knowing that one Character of a Wicked man, is, to be merely
Overpowred into a right way without any understanding of its Nature, Psalm. 32.
9.

And thus also Paul, would Pray and Sing, but with the understanding also, 1
Cor. 14. 15; preferring five words with understanding before ten thousand in
another way, v. 19. He Believed and therefore Spoke, 2 Cor. 4. 13; and he Knew
whom he had Believed, 2 Timothy 1. 12. His prayer for others was, that their love
might not only Abound, but that it might so do in Knowledge also and in all
Judgment, Phil. 1. 9.

A Gracious heart cannot be satisfied with the sacrifice of Fools, Eccl. 5. 1.
Whiles he is Rational in other matters he dares not be Brutish in the things
of his God. He knows the meaning of that Law which always required the Head
(the seat of understanding) for Gods peculiar use, Lev. 1. 8. 12. 15. and always
Salt, Lev. 2. 13, which was the Emblem of Discretion, Col. 4. 6. He counts
himself and others to be far worse than Parrots, when that which is Done or
Spoken before the Lord, is void of true Spiritual understanding, though in it
self it be never so right and good. All which should be duly weighed by those,
who offer the Blind for Sacrifice, being either Asleep or Wandering, or at
leastwise Virtuall Ignorant of what they are about; as is sadly evidenced, by a
Gross Disproportion between Present-religious Duties, and careless
After-carriages.

8. David's obedience was performed with all manner of holy Chearfullness and
Joy. He first Appointed the Singers, with instruments of Music, in Gods
worship and service, as an holy signification of that Alacrity which should
attend such exercises, 1 Chronicles. 15. 16. He greatly Rejoiced at his own and the
People's Liberal offering, for the service of the House of God, 1 Chronicles. 29. 9.
He was for coming before God's presence wirh a Joyful noise, psalm. 95. 2;
Delighting himself in God's Statutes, psalm. 119. 16; and being Glad when they
said unto him, come let us go up into the House of God* (...) 1. He Delighted
to do God's will, psalm. 40. 8; and Rejoiced at his word, as one that finds
great Spoil, psalm. 119. 162. The law of Gods mouth was better to him, than
thousands of Gold and Silver, psalm. 119. 72; and he Rejoiced in the way of his
Testimonies as much as in All riches, psalm. 119. 14.

And thus Paul also Delighted in the law of God, after the inward man, Romans 7.
22; stirring up others to be Cheerful Givers, 2 Cor. 9. 7; and bidding Church
members so to walk, as that their Officers might give account, with Joy and not
with grief, Heb. 13. 17. He was for the performing of service unto man, with
Good will, Ephesians. 6. 7; and therefore he would not detain Philemon's servant
without his leave, that so the benefit might not be as of Necessity but
Willingly, Philemon 13. 14. He knew that a Willing Mind was that which does
chiefly constitute Acceptance, 2 Cor. 8. 12; and that if he acted willingly, he
then had a Reward, 1 Cor. 9. 17.

A gracious heart accounts his Duty to be a Recreation; and answers as
Cheerfully unto that call, as if he were bid to eat or drink. He knows that
God does not love Sadness in a spiritual Sacrifice, by his forbidding Leaven,
Lev. 2. 11: and that he loves Cheerfulness at such a time, by his requiring
Wine and Oil; Exodus 29. 40.; the former of which does constitute its Reality,
and the latter its Visibility, Psalm. 104. 15.

9. David's obedience was performed with Reverence and holy Fear. He knew that
God's Name was Reverend, psa. 111. 9; and that he is greatly to be feared in
the Assembly of his Saints, psa. 89. 9; who therefore durst not compass his
Altar with Polluted hands, psa. 26. 6, but in his Fear did worship toward that
holy Temple, psa. 5* 7. And as he was wont to Lift up his Soul in Prayer, psa.
25. 1, so did he usually Bow down his Body, psa. 95. 6, unless his Prayer was
in a way of more private Ejaculations, and then we Once find him Sitting, 2 Samuel 7. 18.

Thus also Paul was for the Exercise of that Grace, whereby he might serve God
acceptably, with Reverence and Godly Fear, Heb. 12. 28. And though he was
Chiefly for serving him with his Spirit, To. 1. 9; yet did he not so lightly
esteem of Bodily Reverence, as many wanton Professors are apt to do, but urged
it upon such like Professors in his time, 1 Cor. 11. 4; and his own usual
Posture in the time of Prayer was Kneeling, Act. 20. 36. and 21. 5. Ephesians. 3. 14.

A gracious heart is one who Desires to Fear God's Name, Neh. 1. 11. He is
acted by that Spirit of Love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. which casts out Slavish Fear, 1 John 4. 18, but not Filial, 1 Pet. 1. 17. He knows that holy Fear, Deuteronomy. 6.
13, is put to signify the whole of God's Worship, as Christ explaineth it,
Matt. 4. 10; because Fear is one chief constitutive part thereof. And though he
knows, that mere Bodily Exercise does profit little, 1 Timothy 4. 8; and that
Gospel Saints are to turn away from such as have nothing but a Form of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5: yet is he willing to glorify God in his Body as well
as Spirit, since Both are God's, 1 Cor. 6. 20; and more especially with
reference unto prayer and praises, which are Acts of more Immediate Communion
with God, who then requires the greater measure of universal and holy
Reverence. All which should be well weighed by those, who without any real
Necessity, are wont to indulge their Flesh, and to evidence their Sleightiness,
by Sitting in a time of solemn Prayer: especially since the constant Scriptural
Posture at such a time, was either to Stand, as did Abraham, Genesis 18. 22, and
19. 27; the Levites, Deuteronomy. 10. 8, and 18. 5; Solomon, 1 King. 8. 22; Jehosha.
phat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 5; the Israelites, Neh. 9. 2; and the Disciples, Mark 11.
25: or to Kneel, as did Ezra, Ezr. 9. 5; Solomon, 1 King. 8. 54, and 2 Chro. 6.
12, 13; the Jewish Church, Psa. 95. 6; Daniel, Dan. 6. 10; Christ himself, Luke
22. 41; Stephen, Act. 7. 60; Peter, Act. 9. 40; and Paul, as in the places
before mentioned.

10. David did persevere in the way of his Obedience unto the End. He stirred
others up to seek God's face Evermore, psa. 105. 4; and at all times to Trust
in him, psa. 62. 8. He did always set the Lord before him, psa. 16. 8; whose
Eyes were ever toward Him, psa. 25. 15; and upon whom he waited All the day,
psa. 25. 5; resolving to call upon him as long as he Lived, psa. 116. 2; and to
praise him for Ever, psa. 52. 9; and to trust in his Mercy for Ever and Ever,
psa. 52. 8. His purpose was to Bless the Lord at All times, and that his praise
should be Continually in his mouth, psa. 34. 1; so long as he had a Being, psa.
104. 23. and 146. 2; Every day, for Ever and Ever, psa. 145. 2. He stuck to
Gods Testimonies, psa. 119. 31; resolving Never to forget his Precepts, psa.
119. 93; having inclined his heart to perform them always to the End, psa. 119.
112.

And thus also Paul desired, that he might not be weary in well-doing, Gal. 6.
9; but that he and others might Ever follow that which is good, Rejoicing
Evermore, praying without ceasing, and in Every thing giving Thanks, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 15, 16, 17, 18; Continuing in prayer, Col. 4. 2; and watching thereunto with
All perseverance, Ephesians. 6. 18.

A truly gracious heart must needs persevere; because he partaketh of that
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4, which is Unchangeable, Mala. 3. 6. He is blessed
with all spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 3, among which
Perseverance cannot be denied to be one. He has drunk of Christ's Water, which
preventeth all future and utter thirst, and wherein it is said to differ from
Common water, Joh. 4. 13, 14; now common water preventeth this utter thirst, so
long as it continues, and therefore Christ's Water must needs continue always;
which therefore is there said to be in such a one, a Well of water springing up
into Everlasting Life. He is Born of God, and therefore he cannot Sin as others
do, because the Divine Seed remains in him, 1 Jo. 3. 9. He knows the
Father, 1 John 2. 13; and therefore he cannot sin as others do, for then he
should neither have seen nor known him, 1 John 3. 6. He is interested in an
Everlasting Covenant, Isa. 55. 3; which undertaketh that he shall Not Depart
from God, Jer. 32. 40; and in which respect the New Covenant does specifically
differ from the Old one, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33.

11. David's Obedience proceeded from an Inward principle, and not only from
External Influences. God's Law was within his Heart, or in the Midst of his
Bowel^, Psa. 40. 8.

So also, the Lord was pleased to Reveal his Son In Paul, and not only Unto
him, Gal. 1. 16; and by him to Engrave in like manner, not in Tables of Stone,
as under Moses his Dispensation, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart, 2 Cor. 3.
3.

A gracious Heart is not merely passive in his Duty; nor is he acted by Outward
Impulsives only; but is furnished with an Inward Spring or Treasury of holy
Actions, from whence he brings forth things both New and Old, Matt. 13. 52.
The Hope of a Reward and the Fear of Suffering, are as a Wind upon his Back,
which forwardeth his progress Heavenward, but yet he is predominantly
influenced by an Inward Principle of Life, which keeps up his Spiritual
Motion when those Winds are down, and which helps him sometimes to move
against them. Thence is it that his spiritual Life is Hid, not being obvious
unto a carnal Eye, as all Outward Motives are. Thence is it, that he can fly
(like a living Bird) in a Calm of outward Encouragements; and not only whilst
that Wind is up, as every Lighter thing can do. Thence is it, that if need be,
he goes alone, not being carried (as many are) in others Arms. He Naturally
moves Upwards, as a Stone does Downwards, without being violently cast that
way; nay though his Motion does prove unto the breaking of his outward Interest
in pieces. True Grace is a New Nature, which never will Compound against it
self; nor needs to be Hired, any more than Moses his Mother did, to become
his Nurse, Exodus 2. 8, 9.

12. David's Obedience turned upon two golden Hinges; viz. with respect unto
God's Command, as being that from whence it did Begin; and with reference to
God's Glory, as being that principal End which he Aimed at. God had Commanded
him to keep his Precepts diligently, and Therefore did he desire that his ways
might accordingly be directed, psa. 119. 4, 5. He calls God his Glory, psa.
3. 3, because God's Glory was his highest Aim; who therefore begged for
Deliverance, psa. 9. 13, not so much that himself might be at quiet, as that he
might show forth God's Praise, v. 14; and that he might Live, to keep his Word,
Psalm. 119. 17.

And thus also Paul presses unto Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, and giving
Thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18, Because this is the Will of God: Who bids also, that
we should do all things to his Glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31; as himself desired that
others might do no Evil, Not that he might thereby appear approved; but that
they might do what is Honest, though he were Disesteemed, 2 Cor. 13. 7.

The Duty of a gracious Heart, is Properly such, and not Miscalled; as that is,
that is not performed in Obedience unto God's Command. And therefore it is
partly, that such a one Persevereth, because the Command continues, when all
other Motives fail, arising from Self-interest. A gracious heart is also taught
of God, to be Active in the pursuance of his Glory; and Principally to think
upon his Name, in all his Desires and Actions, Josh. 7. 9. Mala. 3. 16. He
honors God by his thus doing, and shall therefore be honored by him, 1 Samuel
2. 30. He counts himself to be Glorified, (as Christ did) if God be but
Glorified in him; whom God will then Glorify in himself, and straightway
glorify him, Joh. 13. 31, 32. He knows that a Selvish Aim is enough to spoil
the best Act that is; as in Jehu's Case, who had a clear Commission for what he
did against Ahab's house, 2 Kings 10. 30, which yet his Squint-eye did turn
into Murder, Hos. 1. 4.

13. David's Obedience proceeded from an Evangelical Spirit of Faith, and from
a Renewed spiritual Principle. That he was endowed with an Evangelical Spirit
of Faith, is evident from Paul's Gloss, 2 Cor. 4. 13, upon David's words, Psa.
116. 10. And that he was furnished with a Principle both Spiritual and Renewed,
is evident from his own Desire, of being upheld with Gods free Spirit, psa. 51.
12, and of having a Right Spirit renewed within him, v. 10.

And thus also Paul was for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 1. 5, as the Greek
there is; or for that Obedience which is the fruit of Faith, viz. That which is
of an Evangelical Nature; such as his own was, who had the very same Spirit of
Faith that David had, 2 Cor. 4. 13. And his professed Doctrine was, That all
things in Christ are become New, 2 Cor. 5. 17; which New Creature is now the
only thing that does avail, Gal. 6. 15; as being Christ's Main design upon the
Cross, to make one New man of old Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 15; who therefore
presses all Professors, to be Renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, and to put
on the New man, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness,
Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. And whereas the Generality are apt to rest satisfied, with bare
Material good Actions and Affections; Paul urges unto the Spirituality of
their Rise; assuring Eternal Life upon no other terms than a Mortification of
bodily deeds through the Spirit, Romans 8. 13; and desiring that others might be
filled, not only with the Knowledge of God's will, but in a way of Spiritual
Understanding also, Col. 1. 9; and affirming, that Gospel-Saints are created in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10, which the first Adam was never said to be; to
intimate, that Evangelical Holiness is far beyond that which the first Adam
had, by virtue of his first Creation: who further hinteth to us, that this
Spirituality does at the first Put forth in a more Low or Carnal Form, as
appears by his calling those Carnal, whom yet he confesses to be Babes in
Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1: and as a Sign of which Carnality or Babishness, and want
of due Spirituality, (at leastwise in Church Members and Professors of a longer
standing) he makes that to be, when such do despise or idolize their Spiritual
Helps, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4; and when they do Overvalue some more Inferior Gifts, 1
Cor. 14. 19, 20; and when they cannot bear more High and Spiritual Discoveries,
because somewhat Difficult and not so Generally received, Heb. 5. 11, 12, 13,
14.

A man after Gods own heart, is a man after Christ's own Image, whom the first
Adam was only a figure of, Romans 5. 14, whose utmost Perfections were but of an
Earthy nature, comparing him with the Second Man or Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor.
15. 47, 48. True gospel grace is but a Creature, and therefore it is not God;
but yet it is a New Creature, and therefore it is not the same with that
Natural Righteousness, which Paul oft-times calls Flesh, and in point of
Sanctification as well as Justification, if his words be duly weighed, To. 8.
1. 4, 5, 6. Phil. 3. 3. 8, 9, 10; in a way of Distinction from which,
Evangelical Holiness is Eminently called True, Ephesians. 3. 24. And therefore
whenever these Two are called by one and the same Name, of Oil, Matt. 25. 4. 8,
or Talents, v. 15; that Sameness is to be understood, in point of Materiality
or Visibility, but not in respect of Formality or Real Being. A gracious heart
cannot content himself with the Best Old State of things; since he knows,
that if any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. He is for
that Obedience which is added unto Faith, 2 Pet 1. 5, 6, 7, since he knows
that without Fai^^ it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And he is
pressing after that New Obedience of Faith, which is wrought by the Spirit of
Christ, and not by the first Adam's strength, nor only by some more Common
Operations of the Second Adam's Spirit, (which a mere Carnal man may share in,
by virtue of some General Union with Christ, as he is the Head of Every man, 1
Cor. 11. 3.) but by virtue of some more Peculiar influences, accompanying the
Souls Special Union with him, as he is the Head of his Mystical Body, Col. 1.
18. Hence it is, that such are for Obeying through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 22;
Living and Walking in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25; serving in Newness of Spirit,
Romans 7. 6; being sanctified by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 11; born after the Spirit,
Gal. 4. 29; waiting through the Spirit, Gal. 5. 5; builded through the Spirit,
Ephesians. 2. 22; being filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18; and Praying in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. Such know that Spiritual Obedience must needs be most
Acceptable to Christ; Partly, because it best agrees with his Ministration of
the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. Partly, because it best suiteth with his Fathers
Nature, who is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped accordingly, Joh. 4. 24:
Partly, because this puts the highest Dignity upon the Holy Ghost, since it
is the choicest of his Operations, as he is the Spirit of Christ. Partly,
because this Spiritual Principle is in it self more Excellent; since it was
more refined from the first, outstripping the first Adam's Righteousness; and
since this was never Mingled with Pollution, being Distinctly preserved by it
self, as if it were Another Person in the Saints, Differing from Sin in them,
Romans 7. 20; and being secured from any predominant loss, by virtue of an
Everlasting Covenant, Isa. 59. 21; whereas the Old Covenant's Grace was that
which did Predominantly perish; and it was the first Adam himself that fell,
and not only some more Inferior party in him. Partly, because this kind of
Principle does most Advance the Saints; whose Spirituality does Evidence their
Peculiar Union with Christ, and their Distinction from others; since Christ may
Extrinsecally act upon them who are no more truly Rooted in him, than the Ivy
is Rooted into the Oak, from whence it may yet Derive some Outward and
Growthful Influences, by virtue of their mutual Nearness, without any real
Oneness. And partly, because this New Spiritual Principle is most Nobly
Operative; as may be thus made out. First, Natural Goodness does bring down
Sin, but Spirituality is that which brings down, not only the Sinfulness of
Nature, but it is very Goodness also; now that which does lay proud Nature's
Honor most fully in the Dust, must needs be the most Noble Operation.
Secondly, Spirituality does indispensably depend upon Christ for peculiar
spiritual Influences unto the preservation of its Being, as the Natural Branch
does upon the Oak, because it has no other Root; whereas Natural Goodness does
not Absolutely depend upon any kind of spiritual Influences from Christ (no
more than the Ivy does upon the Oak) for the preservation of its Life and
Being, but only for it is Flourishing, or Better being; because it has (as
has the Ivy also) a Root of its own, viz. the first Adam's Remainder, which
does preserve it is Life in the Absence of all spiritual Influences whatever;
although it cannot Grow so Big or Flourishing without them, no more than the
Ivy could, if it did not embrace the Oak, and no more than a Natural man could,
if he had not some kind of Spiritual Gifts from Christ, (viz. Knowledge,
Utterance, Affection, etc.) which where they are, do much En^rease his outward
Bulkiness and Glory, but yet his Goodness could Live without them; so that a
Natural good man is less Depending upon Christ, than a Sp^ritual Good man is,
with reference to those respective Influences, which both of them are capable
of receiving from him; and consequently this Spiritual Principle does act most
Nobly, because it puts most Honor upon Christ by an Absolute Dependence.
Thirdly, Unto which I may add, that the Spiritual man does put the more Honor
upon Christ, by his being more passive in what he receives from him, than the
Natural man is; a Natural man is in his own Apprehension more abie, and in
Reality more active, in relation to his Depending upon Christ, and his Deriving
from him by v^rtue of the first Adam's strength remaining in him, as the Ivy
(though strength received from its own Root) uniteth it self with the Oak, and
draws Sap therefrom, wherein it is not so much Influenced by the Oak as by it
self; whereas the Spiritual man has his Original from Christ alone, and is
wholly self-insufficient unto any good work, 2 Cor. 3. 5, and is rather acted
upon by Christ, than active of Himself unto the receiving of that strength by
which any spiritual action is performed, Phil. 2. 13; as the Natural branch is
sent forth by its Root, and is ever after Maintained by it mostly in a passive
way; by which means the Spiritual man must needs be said to act most Nobly,
since he gives Christ the sole glory of his Activity; Nay further, Fourthly,
The Spiritual man's Influences do readily Transform him into the Nature of that
Root from whence they are Derived, 2 Cor. 3. 18. as the Wood Bark, Leaves and
Fruit of a Natural branch are all of the same Nature with the Root; whereas a
Natural man does Convert into Himself whatever Influences he does receive from
Christ, and so Christ seems to Bear him as the Oak does Ivy-wood and Leaves
and Berries, which is indeed a Filching from Christ, and a Running away with
his Money unto another Master: And then, Fifthly, or lastly, The Spiritual
man's Duty must needs be more Noble, because it is more Lasting, Abundant, and
Universal. Spiritual Duty is more Lasting because Christ has undertaken to
preserve it, as the Root does undertake for the Natural Branches, Joh. 6. 57.
and 14. 19; whereas the Natural man's Talent is apt to be taken from him, Matt.
25. 28, as the Ivy is apt to be cut down, or of itself to Wither, whilst the
Oak and its Branches are in their Prime: And Spiritual Duty is more Abundant,
because it is Measured by Christ, and is not able to Stint it self on this side
Perfection, Phil. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, as the Natural branch will Grow so long as
the Root deriveth sap unto it; whereas the Natural man only grows unto such
a Degree, taking so much of Truth, etc. as will serve his own turn, and then
Holding the rest in Unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18; as the Ivy will not outstrip
its Kind, although there may be some Gradual difference. And spiritual Duty
must also needs be more Universal, because the spiritual man is Led by that
Spirit, To. 8. 14, which guides into All Truth, Joh. 16. 13; as the Natural
branch (by a secret Instinct) does put forth Every little Twig, according to
the Order of its Root: whereas the Best Natural man does usually lack one thing
or other, Mar. 10. 21, tending to make him Evangelically Perfect, Matt. 19. 21;
as the Ivy is conformable to it is own Root, and not unto the Oak, in relation
to the Number (as well as Bigness) of all those Sprigs or Branches that issue
from it.

These things the Natural man receives not, for they are foolishness unto him,
neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually Discerned; but he that
is Spiritual judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. In every of which respects,
this Obedience of Faith proceeding from a New and spiritual Principle, must
needs be most Acceptable to Christ, and is therefore most highly prized by
those who are Men after God's own heart.

14. David's Obedience was performed in a very Exact and Accurate manner, or
with respect unto every Circumstance, as well as the more Substantial parts
thereof. God here undertook for him, that he should fulfill all his Wills, Act.
13, 22. Now the Greek word that is there rendered Fulfill, does properly
signify to Adorn a thing with all its due Formalities or Qualifications, like
an Artist, from whence comes that word Poet, who pretends to write or speak,
with the greatest measure of Art and Curiosity; and the same word is put to
signify an Industrious Sinner, Joh. 8. 34, who is both Expert and Exquisite in
the Making of such a work, Rev. 21. 27, and who accordingly does Make
provision, Romans 13. 14 And such a one indeed was David, who quickly spyed out a
Circumstantial failing, 1 Chr. 15. 13; who desired that his Eyes might be
turned from beholding Vanity as well as Sin Ps. 119. 37; and who would not so
much as Name a false God, ps. 16. 4, for so had the Lord commanded, Exodus 23.
13. Josh. 23. 7.

And thus also Paul was for abstaining from all Appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians 5.
22; setting no Bounds unto himself on this side the Resurrection of the Dead,
Phil. 3. 11; urging others to stand Perfect and Complete in Al^ the Will of
God, Col 4. 12; and to Ascend unto the utmost Height, as that word
Circumspectly does properly import, Ephesians. 5. 15.

A loyal Spouse will take notice of her Husband's very Hair, as well as his
Head, Cant. 5. 11: and a gracious heart dares not to violate the Least of
Christ's Commands, Matt. 5. 19. He knows that an Idols Temple is Nothing in
point of Goodness, but not in point of Sin; who therefore dares not hold any
Communion with it, though but in a way of Reduction or Interpretation, 1 Cor.
10. 19, 20, 21. He enquireth, not only what is Lawful, but what is Expedient
also, 1 Cor. 10. 23; as being loath that his Good should any way be Evil spoken
of, Romans 14. 16.

This holy Curiosity, was that of Old by which the Saints were known, who did
so Hate more Gross Iniquity, as that they shunned to be conformable to Worldly
and Wicked men, even unto Circumstances, as is required both in the Law and
Gospel, Lev. 19. 27. Mark 12. 38. Romans 12. 2, etc. Which Curious Spirit has
competen^ly appeared among Professors even since the time of their Degenerating
from Apostolical Purity. Hierom bids, V^ros fuge quibus Nigrum Pallium, etc.
haec omnia Argumenta sunt Diaboli; Shun those men that go in Black, etc. making
the superstitious Affectation of that Idolized Color, to be among other
things, one Argument of the Devil, Hieron. ad Eustochium. Augustine's Mother
left bringing of Cakes and Wine to their Place of Meeting for Public Worship,
merely because she was told, that it was a Resemblance of the superstitious
Heathens; Aug. Confess. lib. 6. Tertullian would not have Christians to wear a
Laurel-garland, merely because the Heathens were wont to be so Attired;
whereupon Rhenanus observes, that we are to forbear, not only such things as
have a Manifest Show of Wickedness, but also some things that might be called
Indifferent, Ne Ethnici in suis erroribus confirmarentur, dum rectius putant
esse, quod et^am Christianos observare vident; lest Heathens should be
confirmed in their Errors, thinking the Better of such things wherein they
were Imitated by the Christians: Beatus Rhena. in librum de Corona Militis. Nay
the very Papists themselves, thought fit to use Ordinary Leavened bread in the
Sacrament, and not Unleavened, least they should be thought to follow Ebion;
Gabr. ^iel. Lect. 38. All which should be duly weighed by those wanton and
Bold Professors, who are apt to make Nothing of sinful Appearances, and to call
those fondly Nice, who therein do outstrip them.

15. David's Obedience was performed with all manner of due holy and becoming
Humility. He confessed that his Goodness did not Extend it self to God, Psa.
16. 2: and when he and his People had offered so Nobly for the Service of the
Temple, he humbly acknowledged, that all that Store which they had prepared,
did come of Gods hand, and was all his own, 1 Chro. 29. 16, for all things came
of him, and of his Own had they given to him, v. 14.

And thus also Paul served the Lord with all Humility of Mind, Act. 20. 19;
accounting himself to be a Debtor both to the Greeks and Barbarians, to the
wise and unwise, Romans 1. 14; and that he had nothing to Glory of, though he did
preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 16.

A true Disciple of Christ has learnt of him to be of a Lowly Heart, Matt. 11.
29, who confessed that his Goodness did only extend unto the Saints, Psa. 16.
3, but not to God, v. 2; wherein David personated Christ, as appears from v.
10. A gracious heart is of most Real worth, and is therefore most Poor in
Spirit. He knows, that Humility is the way to Honor, Prove. 22. 4; and that
the Lord Dwells with the Humble, Isa. 57. 15; and that he Resists the
Proud, 1 Pet. 5. 5, and knows him afar off, Psa. 138. 6. He knows that God
cannot endure to be upbraided, Isa. 58. 3; and that there is no cause for it,
since we have nothing but what we have Received, which hinders Glorying, 1
Cor. 4. 7; and since we can do nothing but what is our Duty, Luke 17. 10. He
may have Pride about him, as a Part of his Body of Death, but he Resists it
in himself, and Longs to be delivered from it, Romans 7. 24.

These are the Principal Qualifications of David's Duty. From all which we may
observe, That a Man after Gods own heart, is one whose Obedience is Sincere,
Universal, Generous, Affectionate, Speedy, Regulated by Gods revealed Will;
performed with Understanding, Cheerfulness, Holy Fear, and Perseverance;
proceeding from an Inward Principle, with respect unto God's Command and Glory,
and from an Evangelical Principle Spiritually renewed; and is Accompanied with
all manner of holy Accurateness and Humility.

And thus I have finished the first comprehensive Branch of David's Absolute
Description; consisting in his more Inward Frame, or in those General
Qualifications which related to his whole Obedience.

From whence I shall now proceed unto the Second comprehensive Branch of his
being Described, as he was in Himself considered: which consists in that more
Outward and Particular Proof or Demonstration that he gave of his being a Man
after Gods own heart.

Now this Outward and more Particular Demonstration may be gathered, partly
from his professed Principles, or High and Noble Testimony; and partly from the
constant Tenor of his Actions, or Life and Conversation.

First, He did Outwardly Demonstrate his being a Man after God's own heart, by
those professed Principles, and by that Noble Testimony which he held forth to
Public view.

Which Principles and Testimony of his, did relate both unto several sorts of
Things and Persons.

First, David did bear a very High and grace-evidencing Testimony concerning
several Things. As for Example:

1. David Testifies concerning the Creature's Vanity. In which respect, he
tells us in the General, that he had seen an End of all such kind of
Perfection, Psa. 119. 96. And more particularly, he shows the Vanity of
Worldly Riches, of Creature-strength, and of this transitory Life. Concerning
Riches he says, that surely every man walks in a vain show, and is
disquieted in vain, who heapeth up Riches, and knows not who shall gather
them, Psa. 39. 6; for when he Dies, he shall carry nothing away, his Glory
shall not descend after him, Psa. 49. 17. Concerning Creature-strength he
says, that an Horse is a vain thing for safety, Psa. 33. 17, as also the
Multitude of an Host, v. 16; and therefore he would not trust in his Bow, nor
should his Sword save him, Ps. 44. 6. Concerning this Natural Life, he says,
It is a Wind that passes away, Psalm. 78. 39; a Flower of the Field that is
blasted with the Wind, Psa. 103. 15, 16; like unto Vanity or a Shadow, Psa.
144. 4; as an Hand-breadth, or rather Nothing, Psa. 39. 5.

And thus also Paul testifies, that the Fashion of this World passes away, 1
Cor. 7. 31: that Riches are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6. 17; that there is no
Confidence to be put in Flesh, Phil. 3. 3: and that it is appointed unto Men
once to Die, Heb. 9. 27; in which regard, he calls the Body, Mortal, Romans 6.
12, an earthly Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5. 1, and Vile, Phil. 3. 21.

A gracious heart can See unto the World's End. He does not Despise the
Creature, nor does he Idolize it. He knows it so well as that he dares not
abuse it, 1 Cor. 7. 31; or trust in it, 1 Timothy 6. 17, nor is he afraid when the
Glory of another's House is much increased, Psa. 49. 16, 17.

2. David testifies concerning the Souls worth; calling it his Darling, Psa.
22. 20. and 35. 17, about the Keeping whereof he was most sollicitous, Psa. 25.
20; and whose Redemption was too Precious for any to accomplish by the
Multitude of their Riches, Psa. 49. 6, 7, 8. Which though it may there
Primarily relate unto this Natural Life, yet does it Eminently import the
Invaluable worth of Men's Souls precisely taken.

And thus also Paul Testifies at an high rate concerning the Worth of Man's
Life and Soul. He did so Prize this Natural Life, as that he would willingly
have been Changed, without being uncloathed of his Earthly Tabernacle, though
Burdensome, 2 Cor. 5. 4: and did account it a great Mercy that the Sickness of
Epaphroditus was not unto Death, Phil. 2. 27. But as to the Soul strictly
taken, he hinteth how Dear it was, by making his willingness to have imparted
it, the highest Pledge of his Affectionate desire, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8; accounting it
the chiefest Object of a Gospel-Officers watchful care, Heb. 13. 17; and the
Principal Subject of Eternal Happiness or Misery, Romans 2. 9, 10.

A gracious heart is well acquainted with the Worth and Value both of his Life
and Soul. He knows that this Natural Life is the choicest of Outward Mercies,
Job. 2. 4; and therefore he dares not sin against his Body, 1 Cor. 6. 18, or
sinfully Neglect it, in a careless or superstitious way, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Col. 2.
23; and therefore his readiness to Die for Christ, is so much the more Noble
Act. But yet he prefers his Soul before his Body, choosing rather to die
than sin, Matt. 26. 35; reserving his Soul-love for Christ, Cant. 1. 7; and not
fearing Man so much as God, because Man can only kill the Body, Matt. 10. 28.

3. David testifies concerning the Nature of holy Communion in a way of
Brotherly Love, which he affirms to be very Pleasant, Psalm. 133. 1; to be
accompanied with a special Blessing from God himself, v. 3; and to be fitly
resembled by Aarons Ointment, v. 2, and by Mount Hermon's Dew, v. 3. The
Communion of Saints, resembles Ointment, in the Diffusiveness of its manifold
and precious Virtue; but yet it is like Aaron's Ointment, which might not be
converted unto a Profane or Common use, Exodus 30. 33: And it resembles
Hermon's or Sion's Dew, in its Descending from Above, Genesis 27. 28; and in its
making the Lower Valleys fruitful; and not so much from any Natural Virtue, as
from the Lord's Commanding that Blessing there; who speaks and it is Done,
who Commands and it stands fast, Psalm. 33. 9.

And thus also Paul testifies, that Christian-Love is that more Excellent way,
1 Cor. 12. 31; as being that One thing which does fulfill the Law, Romans 13. 8,
9; and the Greatest of all Abiding Graces, 1 Cor. 13. 13: who therefore
stirs up others to Keep this Spiritual Unity in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.
3; Beseeching them to Agree, by the Name of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 10; if they had
any Fellowship of the Spirit, Phil. 2. 1, 2; Wondering how they Durst do
otherwise, 1 Cor. 6. 1; bidding to mark them who caused Divisions, To. 16. 17,
and wishing that they were cut off, Gal 5. 12.

A gracious heart knows, that Christian-Love is a Fructifying Dew upon those
of a Lowly and Humble spirit; but that it is a work of Gods own creating also.
He knows that this Ointment is of a Self-spreading Nature among the Royal
Priesthood, or Gospel-Saints; but yet he dare not put this Sacred Oil upon
Common Persons, or be an intimate Companion for any but such as fear the Lord.
But so far forth as men are commendably Brethren, he counts it a Good and
Pleasant thing, that they should dwell together in Unity.

4. David testifies concerning the Usefulness of Afflictions. He was in some
hopes that the Lord would requite him for Shimei's Cursing, 2 Samuel 16. 12. And
he pronounced him Blessed, whom the Lord Chastised and Taught out of his Law,
Psa. 94. 12; intimating thereby, that his Chastisements are wont to be of such
a nature: Nay, he had Experienced the Benefit of Affliction, which learned him
God's Statutes, Psalm. 119. 71; whereas before he was Afflicted, he went astray,
v. 67.

So also Paul counts Sufferings for Christ, to be a Gift, Phil. 1. 29; which
fall out unto the Furtherance of the Gospel, v. 12. Who also says, that the
Saints are chastened of the Lord, that so they might not be condemned with the
World, 1 Cor. 11. 32: wherein the Lord deals with them as with Sons, Heb. 12.
7, that they might be partakers of his Holiness, v. 10, and taste of the
Peaceable fruit of Righteousness, v. 11; in which respects, such Dispensations
ought not to be Despised, v. 5. And himself did Glory in the Cross, because he
and the World were thereby crucified each to other, Gal. 6. 14; and because his
Tribulation did work Patience, Romans 5. 3, Comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 5, and at the
last, a far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17.

A gracious heart Knows, that all his Afflictions shall work together for his
Good, Romans 8. 28. His Sufferings for Christ's sake, will but make him like unto
Christ, Romans 8. 29; and Endear Christ so much the more unto him, Psalm. 119. 23,
24; and Advantage his Cause, Revel. 12. ^1; and Multiply his spiritual Incomes,
both as to Light, Rev. 1. 9, 10, and Comfort, Romans 5. 3, 5; and add to his
good Account, Matt. 19. 29; and take his Heart off the World, 1 Cor. 15. 31;
and Heighten others Courage, Phil. 1. 14; and Hasten his own Deliverance, 1
Cor. 10. 13, or Strength to Bear, 2 Cor. 12. 10; and make him at the Present
Glorious, 1 Pet. 4. 14. His Sufferings of a Private nature, are Preventive of
future Judgments, 1 Cor. 11. 32; and Interest him the more in others Prayers,
Ps. 20. 1, 2; and stir up Christ's Pity, Psalm. 103. 13; and Broach the more
Promises, Psalm. 18. 27. and are an Evidence of Sonship, Heb. 12. 6; and give
him to see himself, Job 36. 9; and make his Heart more Considerate, Eccl. 7.
14; and discover more of Gods Tenderness, Psa. 118. 18, and 31. 7; and stirs
up a Spirit of Prayer, Isa. 26. 16; and Open the Ear to Discipline, Job 36. 10;
and make the more deeply Humble, Lam. 3. 19, 20, 30; and the more Thankful for
the least Mercy, Job 10. 20; and the better able to Pity others, 2 Cor. 1. 4.

5. David testifies concerning the Danger of Prosperity. Worldly men are apt
to be Praised by others in a Flattering way, when they do well unto
themselves, psa. 49. 18; and to be Blessed by them, though they be never so
Covetous and Abhorred of the Lord, psa. 10. 3. He also tells us, that Rich
men are apt to say in their heart, that they shall not be Moved, nor ever be in
Adversity, psa. 10. 6; calling their Lands by their own Names, because their
Inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, psa. 49. 11; and
in which respect they Bless themselves much, whilst they are Alive, v. 18; And
because such are not Plagued like others, ps. 7^. 5, therefore Pride compasses
them about as a Chain, v. 6; their Mouth is full of Cursing, ps. 10. 7, and is
set against both Earth and Heaven, psalm. 73. 9.

Thus also Paul testifies, that such are Bastards and not Sons, who are
without Chastisement, Heb. 12. 8: and that not many Noble are Called, 1 Cor. 1.
26: and that the God of this world does Blind men's Eyes, 2 Cor. 4. 4: and that
Rich men are apt to be High-minded, 1 Timothy 6. 17, and to fall into many foolish
and hurtful Lusts which Drown men in Destruction and Perdition, v. 9.

A gracious heart knows, that Riches are often kept for the Owners Hurt, Eccl.
5. 13, both as to his Body, ver. 12, and Soul, Matt. 13. 22; which teaches him
not Covetously to affect them, nor Murmuringly to bear their want, nor upon
that account to Envy others.

6. David testifies concerning the proper Nature of Sin, as it is in it self
considered, or as it is severed from its sad Effects. And so he calls it
Foolishness, Psa. 38. 5; Brutishness, Ps. 94. 8; Pollution, Psalm. 51. 2, 7; and
one of the saddest Judgments, when Satan is permitted to stand at a man's
right hand, Psalm. 109. 6. And in relation to Covetousness in particular, he
calls that Folly, which Worldly men count the wisest way that is, Psalm. 49.
13.

Thus also Paul calls Sin, a Corrupt Old Man, Ephesians. 4. 22; a burdensome Body
of Death, Romans 7. 24; that which is the just Matter of Shame, Romans 6. 21; and
is the worse for being contradicted, Romans 7. 8, by which it appears to be
Sin, ver. 13, which is there hinted to be a Name full bad enough, without any
other Addition. And in relation to Apostasy in particular, he calls it, a
being Bewitched, Gal. 3. 1. Infectious Leaven, Gal. 5. 9, and a Root of
Bitterness whereby many are troubled and Defiled, Heb. 12. 15.

The Sinner does most abundantly experience the Effects of Sin, but a Gracious
heart is best acquainted with its Proper Nature. And therefore he would not
willingly commit it, although there were no Hell to punish it. Good Agur would
not Steal, not lest he should be Hanged, or be put upon a Fourfold
Restitution, but lest be should take the Name of his God in vain, Prove. 30. 9.
How shall I do this great wickedness and sin? says good Joseph, Genesis 39. 9,
although he never should have Suffered for that Act, which yet among the
Egyptians was punished with being beaten almost to Death, as Diod^rus S^culus
does affirm.

7. David testifies concerning the Desireableness of Naked Duty, without
respect had to its Reward. And so he tells us, that the Delight which he had
in God's Law, was one of his Preservatives from perishing in the time of his
^ffliction, Psa. 119. 9^; and that there is a great R^w^rd (not only ^y, but
also) In the very Act of Keeping God's Commands, Psalm. 19. 11.

So also Paul testifies concerning Duty, not only that it has all manner of
Promises annexed to it, 1 Timothy 4. 8; but also hinteth, that he ^id account
himself sufficiently Rewarded, if he did but Becomingly accomplish that work
which he had in hand, 1 Cor. 9. 18.

A mere Heathen may see into the Native beauty of Moral Virtue, but a man after
God's own Heart can say the same concerning God's Positive and Evangelical
Appointments. He seeks not his Own, but the things of Jesus Christ, which
things he Naturally cares for, and serves Christ as a Son does his Father,
Phil. 2. 20, 21, 22. He counts Duty Amiable when stripped of it is outward
Dress, and he would be Obedient, although he should have nothing but his Labor
for his Pains. To do the Will of God is his Meat and Drink, which an Hungry or
Thirsty man does not need being Hired unto. To walk closely with God, is both
his Work and Recreation; and he Sings in the very Ways of God, Psalm. 138. 5,
being ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3. 17, as well as in the Height of Sion,
where there is Wheat and Wine and Oil, Jer. 31. 12.

8. David testifies concerning the Nature of God's Written Word or Law; which
he describes both by its Properties and Operations. As to its Properties, he
tells us, that this Law of God is True, psa. 19. 9, and Right, v. 8; it is
Pure, v. 8, and Clean, v. 9; it is Sure, v. 7, or that which shall Endure for
ever, v. 9; it is Perfect, v. 7; it is altogether Righteous, v, 9; it is more
Desirable than the finest Gold, v. 10; and it is Heart-rejoycing, v. 8, being
sweeter than the Honey and the Honeycomb, v. 10. The Doctrine contained in the
Scripture, is True and Right, viz. the very Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13: And it
is pure or clean, viz. free from any polluting or Humane intermixture, being
like unto Silver Seven times purified, Psa. 12. 6: And it is Sure both as to
its Threats and Promises, and every thing contained therein, the least jot or
tittle whereof shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled, Matt. 5. 18: And it
is perfect, able to furnish a man Thoroughly unto All good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16,
17; which also was a perfect Rule of Old, in relation to every ordinary Duty
that was then required, Isa. 8. 20. And it is altogether Righteous, requiring
nothing but what is very Just, in David's judgment: And it is more precious
than Gold, because it holds forth the Best and most Durable Riches, Prove. 8.
18: And it is sweeter than the sweetest Honey unto a spiritual Palate, yea in
relation to those things contained in it, which make the Belly bitter, Rev. 10.
10. These are the Properties of God's Word or Law. And as to its Operations, he
tells us, that it was a Lamp unto his feet, psa. 119. 105, and that its very
Entrance gives Light, v. 130: It also was that by which he had kept himself
from the paths of the Destroyer, Psalm. 17. 4: It also had a Soul-comforting
Influence upon him, when in Affliction, psalm. 119. 92: And in relation to
Sinners, this Law of God is a Soul-converting Means, psa. 19. 7; able to
Cleanse a Young Man's way, which uses to be most foul, psa. 119. 9; making
Wise the Simple, Psalm. 19. 7, and giving Warning unto all, v. 11. which the
Best of God's Servants stand in need of; as is there intimated.

So also Paul testifies, that the Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 7. 12; and
that the Scriptures are the wholesome words of Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 3, given by
Inspir^tion of God, and profitable for Doctrine, Reproof, Correction and
Instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16, able to make a man perfect, v. 17,
and wise unto Salvation, v. 15; which therefore should be Attended unto in way
of Reading, 1 Timothy 4. 13, and meditated upon in a way of being wholly given up
unto them, v. 15; by which he would have those to be Tried, who do pretend unto
the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2; and those to be withdrawn from, 1 Timothy 6. 5, who
teach otherwise and consent not hereunto, v. 3, and that this Commandment be
kept until the appearing of Jesus Christ, v. 14.

A man after Gods own heart is no Anti-Scripturist: nor dare he deny, that the
Scriptures are a sufficient and abiding Rule for all sorts of Persons: nor will
he quarrel with their being called the Word of God: nor does he question their
Righteousness Purity and Worth, but prefers his a^quaintance with them
before any other kind of Study or Employment whatsoever.

9. David testifies concerning the Terribleness of God's Voice, which he says
is Thundering upon the Waters, Psa. 29. 3; and very powerful or full of
Majesty, v. 4; dividing the flames of fire, v. 7; shaking the Wilderness of
Kadesh, v. 8; discovering the Forests, v. 9; breaking the Cedars of Lebanon,
v. 5; making the greatest Mountains to skip like young Unicorns, v. 6, and the
Hindes to calve, v. 9. By which Voice of the Lord here, David might primarily
intend, that terrible Tempest of Thunder, which is elsewhere called the Noise
of his Voice, Job 37. 2, and which is oft-times accompanied with those
forementioned Effects, in the Letter: But yet he seems Ultimately to drive at
something of a Mystical and Spiritual Nature, viz. the Word powerfully
preached, much like unto that of Thunder in its Operations; and this appears
to be his principal aim, by mentioning the Temple, immediately before, v. 2,
and immediately after, v. 9; the Coherence between which, Expositors are very
much puzzled in making out, which may be easily apprehended, if the Thunder be
here taken for a Type or Emblem of Gods Voice in that Temple, which was a clear
Type of Gospel Saints and Churches, 1 Cor. 3. 17. And if we take this to be
David's chief meaning, we then have hence hinted to us, that the Word of God
Duly preached by his faithful Servants, and accompanied with his Blessing, is
very powerful, and full of Majesty, as being God's Voice in Man, Matt. 10. 20:
which thundereth upon the Waters, or People, whereof the Waters are a Type,
Rev. 17. 15; witness that Roaring that Peter's Voice made among those three
thousand Jews, Act. 2. 37; who were there made to call those Brethren, whom a
little before they had Mocked, v. 13: This Voice of God in his People, Divides
or sends out the flames of Fire; flashing in the faces of Many Sinners at
once, like Lightning, with much Terror and Demonstration, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25:
This Voice can Mystically shake the Wilderness of Kadesh; which being a wild
and barren place, may fitly typifie men of a more Barbarous and Heathenish
disposition, among whom yet Paul preached with great Success, Gal. 1. 16, 17,
Act. 15. 3: This Voice Discovers the Forests, by breaking down those thick
Boughs and Leaves, that sometimes were an Hiding and Darkning to them; witness
those strange Discoveries that Sinners meet with, both as to their former
Secret Lusts, and false Disguises: This Voice can break the Cedars of Lebanon,
or the Greatest of men, whom the Cedar typified, Ezekiel. 17. 3. 12; witness, when
Faelix Trembled upon the Bench, whilst Paul a Prisoner stood preaching at the
Bar, Act. 24. 25* This Voice can remove the greatest Mountains or Foundations
of those Mystical Trees; by Pulling down the strongest Holds of their former
Prejudices and contrary Principles, 2 Cor. 10. 4, witness the Conversion of
those stout and zealous Jews, Act. 21. 20, who were more Hard to work upon than
Publicans or Harlots, Matt. 21. 31: And this Voice of the Lord can make the
Hindes to calve, who are Fearful creatures, Cant. 2. 7, and such as Bring forth
their Young with much Pain and Sorrow, Job 39. 1, 2, 3; which Hindes are
therefore fit Types of Timorous Professors, who Bring forth some kind of Duty
with much Difficulty whom yet the Lord can marvellously Overpower in such a
case, as he did that fearful Prophet, Jer. 1. 6, 7, 17, and as he did those
Jews to reassume their Work, before the Prohibition was recalled, Ezr. 5. 1, 2.

Th^s seems to be the Spiritual import of that Voice of God, which David does
thus Testify concerning: Which preaching is very fitly resembled by Thunder,
since it is something of an Earthy nature Sublimated, 2 Cor. 4. 7, which being
Agitated, or Concocted by Heavenly influences, is Mighty through God, 2 Cor.
10. 4, flashing like fire, Jer. 23. 29, and making all Earthly things to shake,
Isa. 66. 2; and in which respect powerful Preachers are called Sons of Thunder,
Mark 3. 17; whose mavelous Operations are most frequent in Barren
Wildernesses, or among the poorer sort, Matt. 11. 5; and which usually falls
with greatest Power, (as Lightning and Thunder does) upon the sturdiest Oaks,
or most stout and Refractory Sinners, Act. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And thus also Paul testifies concerning this foolishness of preaching, that
it is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18, and the Voice of Christ himself, Ephesians. 2.
17, or the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13, which is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the Dividing asunder of Soul
and Spirit, Heb. 4. 12, or unto the Distinguishing of Spiritual Actions and
Persons, from such as are merely Natural, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15, which are only
made up of the first Adam's Perfections, heightened or improved by
Scripture Light and common Gifts. And he calls them Carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3, who
were for Christ, or for Immediate Teachings, 1 Cor. 1. 12, in a way of
Despising himself and others, who Labored together with God in his Spiritual
Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3. 9.

A gracious Heart will not despise Prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20, which works
effectually in such as do Believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13; although he will not Hear a
Strangers Voice, Joh. 10. 5, because he is not Sent of God, nor has any
Promise of Speaking unto another's Spiritual advantage, Jer. 23. 21, 22.

10. David testifies concerning a visible and future Glorious State of things
on Earth; which was shadowed out by his Own (and Solomon's) Dispensation, as is
evident from it is being called by David's Name, Ezekiel. 34. 23. The Perfection of
which Ministration is reserved until Christ's Personal Appearing, Rev. 22. 16:
but will be in its Measure, together with the Jews Conversion, Hos. 3. 5, whom
the Lord will Provoke, Romans 10. 19, by interesting us Gentiles first, in all
their Promises, Romans 11, 31. Which glorious Dispensation in these Latter days
shall first Begin, as David's also did, together with the Death of Saul, who
was a clear type of Daniel's Gentile-little Horn, or the Last settled support
of the fourth Monarchy. And then will these Earthly Gods die like Men, Psalm.
82. 6, 7, viz. in a Political and not Personal sense only, or else it would
not have been so much to be observed. And their Removal will be by God himself,
who puts down one, and sets up another, psalm. 75. 7; who then will
Command his Peoples Strength, Psalm 68. 28, for the Lord has said, that He
will bring them again from Bashan, and from the Depths of the Sea, v. 22, whose
Goings will then be seen, as he is both God and King, v. 24; which as his
People will then give him the sole Glory of, psa. 98. 1, so may it Restrain
their Adversaries from speaking with a stiff Neck, because God is Judge, psa.
75. 4, 5, 6, 7. But this Ministration of his will be ushered in by a sad
Dissolved State of things, psa. 75. 3; when all the Foundations of the Earth
will be out of course, ps. 82. 5, by reason of unjust Judging, v. 2, and what
then can the Righteous do, ps. 11. 3, but only suffer? whose Danger will be so
great, as that in their Salvation it will then appear, the Issues from Death
belong to God, psa. 68. 20; the Near approaching of whose Name, will be
Declared by his wondrous works, Psalm. 75. 1. Which Coming of his will be with
Clouds and Darkness, and yet with Righteousness and Judgment, psa. 97. 2. And
that work will Gradually be advanced, being at the first but as a little Spring
or Fountain, from whence yet the Lord is to be Blessed, psa. 68. 26; and
Beginning with little Benjamin and Judah, (as David's Kingdom did) but ending
with Zebulun and Naphtali, which were the Furthest Tribes, to signify that all
God's Israel shall at last come in, v. 27; and though the Singers (or such
Professors as have only good Voices, or such who at the Best, do but excel in
what is more Natural and Ancient, as Singing then was, these men) shall go
Before; yet the Players upon Instruments (or such as are good at Hand-work, and
Practice; or such who also do excel, in what is of a more Instituted nature,
and of a Later date, as Musical Instruments were, being first brought in by
David, who was a type of Christ; these men) shall follow after, among whom
shall be the Damsels with their Timbrels, or Despicable, but yet very Choice
and Precious Practical Professors, v. 25. But after that the Lord has been
favorable to his Land, in bringing back the Captivity of Jacob, Psa. 85. 1,
his People shall meet with an angry Check in their own Land, v. 4, 5; and shall
then be in danger of being utterly cut off, psa. 83. 4; but the Lord will
Revive them, psa. 85. 6, and speak Peace unto them, v. 8, in a way of free
Mercy, v. 10, which intimates that they had Deserved that Check, but not this
Deliverance. And then shall this work go on apace; which will be Terrible unto
the Wicked, for a Fire will go before him, and burn up his Enemies round
about: his Lightnings shall enlighten the World, the Earth shall See and
Tremble, and the Hills shall melt like Wax at his Presence who is the Lord of
the whole Earth, Psa. 97. 3, 4, 5: who will then wound the Head of his Enemies,
and the Hairy Scalp of such a one as goes on still in his Trespasses, psa. 68.
21, that his Peoples foot may be dipped in their Enemies Blood, v. 23; for in the
hand of the Lord there is a Cup, the Dregs whereof the wicked of the Earth
shall then wring out and drink, Psa. 75. 8; whom he will speak unto in his
Wrath, and vex in his sore Displeasure, Psa. 2. 5; making them like a Wheel,
psa. 83. 13, and Persecuting them with his Tempest, v. 15, and doing unto them
as to the Midianites, v. 9, because they said, Let us take to our selves the
Houses of God in possession, v. 12. But yet this Dispensation will be very
Comforting unto the Saints, who then shall flourish, psa. 72. 7, and whose Horn
shall then be Exalted, psa. 75. 10; and who shall then Rejoice because of Gods
Judgments upon others, psa. 97. 8: for all the Horns of the Wicked shall be
then cut off, psa. 75. 10; and the Faces of some shall be filled with Shame,
that so others may seek God's Name, and Know, that he whose Name is Jehovah, is
the most High over all the Earth, psa. 83. 16. 18; and then shall Kings bring
Presents unto God, because of his Temple at Jerusalem, Psa. 68. 29; Princes
shall then come out of persecuting Egypt, and Ethiopia (or such who cannot
Change their Spiritual Blackness) shall soon stretch out her hands to God, v.
31; when the Lord shall scatter the people that Delight in War, and shall
Rebuke the company of Spear-men, the Multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of
the People (or Oppressors both Old and Young) till every one submit himself
with pieces of Silver, v. ^0. Nay and indeed, this Dispensation will be
Acceptable to all sort^ of Persons, escaping those Judgments before mentioned;
and therefore the Heavens and Earth and Sea and Field and Trees are all bid to
Rejoice at such a time, psa. 96. 11, 12, 13; Prayer also shall then be made for
Christ continually, and daily shall he be praised psalm. 72. 15. And not without
cause, since this Dispensation will be full of Righteousness and peace: when
David shall receive the Congregation* he then will Judge uprightly, psa. 75. 2;
for the Kings Strength loves Judgment, psa. 99. 4; which the poor shall then
share in, psa. 72. 2, the poor of the people, and the children of the Needy, v.
4, whom he will then spare and save, v. 13, Redeeming their Soul from Deceit,
and preci^us shall their Blood be in his sight, v. 14; for he shall Deliver the
Needy when he cries, the poor also and him that has no Helper, v. 12. And
then, the Mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little Hills by
Righteousness, ps. 72. 3; and Abundance of peace will accompany the Flourishing
of Righteous men, v. 7; there shall be an Handful of Corn upon the top of the
Mountains, whose Fruit shall shake like Lebanon, v. 16: for then shall the
Earth yield her Increase, and God even our own God shall Bless us, psa. 67. 6.
And though Christ's Temporal Kingdom will have but a small Beginning, yet shall
it be Enlarged from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the Ends of the Earth,
psa. 72. 8; they that dwell in the Wilderness shall Bow before him, v. 9; the
Kings of Tarshish (famous for Shipping, Isa. 23. 1, and originally descending
from Japheth, Genesis 10. 4.) and of the Isles shall bring Presents; the Kings of
Sheba and Seba (descending from Ham, Genesis 10. 6, 7.) shall offer Gifts; which
Ham and Japheth, were Two of those three, from whom this Present world was
first replenished, so that their being now subjected unto Shem, of whom God's
Israel came, does intimate the large Extent of Shem's Dominion; yea all Kings
shall fall down before him* all Nations shall serve him, psa. 72. 10, 11; for
he shall inherit all Nations, psa. 82. 8; by virtue of the Fathers Gift, psa.
2. 8. And this Name of his shall Endure for Ever, psa. 72. 17, so long as the
Moon endures, v. 7, and shall be continued as long as the Sun, v. 17,
throughout all Generations, v. 5. The top-stone of which glorious State will
be, that outward Blessings will be accompanied with holy Fear, psa. 67. 7, or
that Righteousness and Peace shall then Kiss each other, psa. 85. 10, which
Righteousness shall set us in the way of Gods Steps, v. 13; and the speaking of
which Peace is accompanied with an Exhortation to Gods People, not to turn
again to Folly, v. 8, that so Glory may dwell in our Land, v. 9.

This Restitution of all things, is that which the Lord has spoken by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the World began, Act. 3. 21; and among the
rest, by this Prophet David, who was a man after Gods own heart; and therefore
to be of this Principle or Opinion, can be no just matter of Dislike to any;
nay it is well, if the Scornful Opposers of that Principle, can tell how to
make it out, that themselves are of David's Spirit.

And thus also Paul testifies, that there is an Habitable Earth, or World to
come, which shall be put in Subjection to the Son of Man, Heb. 2. 5, and which
he proves, v. 6, from David's Testimony, psalm. 8. 4. Which Habitable Earth
(whereof Paul might be said to speak, Heb. 2. 5, because he Meant it there, and
had but Newly mentioned it Before, Heb. 1. 6, as into [Which] God shall bring
in [Again] the first Begotten, for so the Greek there should be rendered; I say
this Earth) is no way suitable unto a mere Spiritual state of things, which
uses rather to be shadowed out by Heaven, as Heb. 12. 26. Nor could the
Dispensation of the Gospel (in that mere Spiritual sense) be called [now] the
World [to come] since [that] was come Already, Heb. 12. 18, 22; else needed not
Paul have been so fearful, as to the present unbelieving Jews Eternal State,
To. 10. 1, 2, 3, or that of Judaizing Gentiles, Gal. 5. 2. 4. Unless Christ's
Kingdom in the General (as it is Spiritual and Temporal too) be meant (here) by
this World to Come: and so indeed, that Comprehensive Kingly Dispensation might
be called, (as here it is) The World to come, because it was so called by the
Jews of Old, who yet did Mainly look for a Temporal Kingdom; and in that
Comprehensive sense, Paul might here say, [Whereof we speak] because Christ's
Ministration (in competition with that of Moses) was the Chief Subject of this
Epistle; which yet includes his Temporal Kingdom also, as that which in
Propriety of Speech (as well as in relation to the Jews Opinion) does fitliest
Answer to this Habitable Earth, or World to Come. Nor could Paul else have
said, as Heb. 2. 8, [but now we See not Yet All things put under him, referring
Principally unto Christ] since he had made an Open Show (upon the Cross) of his
Abolishing the Law of Moses, Col. 2. 14, 15. Yea Christ (when he Ascended) did
Really (Then) Receive a Kingdom, which yet was not Immediately to Appear, (and
which must therefore needs be more than Spiritual) Luke 19. 11, 12: in which
regard, Paul [now] might see him Crowned, Heb. 2. 9, (with a Spiritual Eye; and
Other ways, as to his Spiritual Kingdom,) though Now he Saw not Yet All things
put under him, v. 8, or with an Eye of Sense, nor shall any other see that
fully, until Christ's next Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 1; though Heb. 1. 6, may
possibly refer unto a Time on this side that. Which [Putting of all things in
Subjection under him] had been asserted before, concerning Man Indefinitely,
Heb. 2. 6, 7, 8; as being some way Applicable unto Adam Standing* and David
after his Anointing, and Every true Believer, yea All Mankind in General: and
therefore Jesus (in Particular) is fitly mentioned Afterward, v. 9, though He
was principal^y all along intended; especially since the Visibility of Jesus
his being Crowned [then] was merely in a Spiritual sense, and to be seen with a
more spiritual Eye. This clears up the Meaning of that [Habitable Earth, or
World to Come] in Paul's sense there. Who further hinteth, that the earnest
Expectation of the Creature, waits for that Dispensation, Romans 8. 19, because
it shall then be Delivered from its Bondage, v. 21, under which it now
Groaneth, v. 22. At which time the Saints shall Judge the World, 1 Cor. 6. 2;
and when Christ shall Come, 1 Cor. 15. 23, he must Reign, till he has put all
Enemies under his feet, v. 25, viz. all VVorldly Rule, Authority, Power, v. 24,
and Death it self at last, v. 26; and then comes the End, when he shall have
Delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father, v. 24, under whom the Son will then
Reign, v. 27; and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
also himself be subject unto him, who put all things under him, that God may be
All in All, v. 28. Which Testimony of his, is expressly seconded by John and
Peter, Act. 3. 1. 21. Rev. 20. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 13; and seems to be Hinted by
James, when he speaks of the Lords Coming, Jam. 5. 7, as Peter interprets
it, 2 Pet. 3. 12, with reference unto a time of General Restitution, Act. 3.
21, which therefore must needs be upon Earth, and on this side a General
Destruction: which Jude also intimates, when he mentions the Lord's Coming
with ten thousands of his Saints, Jude 14, referring unto Dan. 7. 10, where
this Doctrine of the Fifth Kingdom upon Earth, is undenyably handled.

11. David testifies concerning the Resurrection of the Body: whose lying in
the Grave, is set forth by Sleeping, Psa. 13. 3; but yet even there, he says,
that his very flesh should Rest in Hope, Psa. 16. 9, because the Lord would not
leave him in that Hell, nor suffer him to see Everlasting corruption, v. 10;
and upon his Awaking out of that Sleep, he humbly expected to be satisfied with
God's Likeness, Psa. 17. 15, in whose presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose
Right hand there are pleasures for Evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

So also Paul proves this Literal and Proper Resurrection of the Body, partly,
because else the Saints would be of all men most Miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 18, 19;
and partly, from the Resurrection of Christ himself, v. 12, as a First Fruits,
v. 20, and Procuring Cause thereof to others, v. 21, 22; who if he be not
Risen, then are the Apostles false witnesses, v. 15, and the Believers Faith is
vain, v. 14; and if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is not Christ
Risen, v. 13; but now is Christ risen from the Dead, and become the
First Fruits of them that slept, v. 20; the Manner of which Resurrection he
clears up, from v. 35, to v. 55; which will be by a foregoing Death, v. 36;
or Change, v. 51; in the Twinkling of an Eye, v. 52; unto a state of
Immortality, v. 54, of Power, v. 43; of Spirituality, v. 44; and of Glory, v.
43; though yet with some Gradual Difference, v. 41, in a way of Congruity with
the present Differing state of things in that respect, v. 38, 39, 40. 42. And
he does elsewhere conclude, that God has both Raised up the Lord, and will
also Raise up us by his power, 1 Cor. 6. 14; If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the Dead dwell in us, Romans 8. 11; which was not only his bare
Opinion, but the matter of his Knowledge, 2 Cor. 4. 14; wherewith he would have
Believers to Comfort one another, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18, and not to Mourn for their
Dead Brethren, as others which have no Hope, v. 13, 14. This Doctrine he
preached, Act. 17. 32, at Athens, v. 22, although some Mocked at it, v. 32;
wherein he agreed with the Pharisees, Act. 23. 6, and the Generality of his
Persecutors, Act. 24. 15.

A man after Gods own Heart, will neither (with the Sadduces) absolutely Deny
the Resurrection, Act. 23. 8; nor yet (with some others) subtly Undermine it,
by interpreting it in a mere Spiritual sense, as they did, who said it was
already past, 2 Timothy 2. 18, supposing it merely to consist, in that Spiritual
Renovation of Things and Persons, which began with the Dispensation of the
Gospel; whose word did eat as does a Canker or Gangrene, v. 17, tending to
Overthrow the faith of some, v. 18, and who did thereby shrewdly evidence, that
they did not belong to God, v. 19.

12. David testifies concerning the Last Day of Judgment; affirming* that the
Lord shall Judge the People, psa. 7. 8; and the World in Righteousness, psa. 9.
8: at which time, the Ungodly shall not be able to stand in the Congregation of
the Righteous, ps. 1. 5; and in relation whereunto, he desires that God would
not enter into Judgment with him, viz. out of Christ, or as he was in Himself
considered, Psalm 143. 2.

So also Paul testifies, that God has appointed a Day, wherein he will Judge
the World ^n Righteousness by Jesus Christ, whose Resurrection did Assure it,
Act. 17 31. Which Doctrine of Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6. 2, he reckons up
among those Truths that were first preached, and which he therefore calls
Principles, v. 1, or the Word of the Beginning of Christ, as it should be
rendered. Before which Judgment seat, all must Appear, 2 Cor. 5. 10; and every
man's Work will then be Tried, 1 Cor. 3. 13; which should Prevent our being
Censorious of others, Romans 14. 10, 12, or setting too much by either our Own or
Another Good or Ill opinion of us, 1 Cor. 4. 3. 4, 5. Which Judgment will
follow Death* Heb. 9. 27; and will Discover those Secret sins and Good Works,
which till then will not be Manifest, 1 Timothy 5. 24, 25. And therefore the
Saints are now chastened by the Lord, that so they might not then be condemned
with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 32. But he tells us, that this will be a Terrible
Dispensation unto Sinners, the mentioning whereof made Faelix Tremble, Act. 24
25; and not without cause, since there will then be no more Sacrifice for sins*
Heb. 10. 26 but a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation* v.
27, from him whose Vengeance is, and he will Recompense, v. 30; whose Judgment
will then be according to the Truth, Romans 2. 2. and Paul's Gospel, v. 16; which
shall not be escaped, v. 3, by those who despise God's Goodness* v. 4, and
after their Hardness and Impenitent Heart, treasure up to themselves Wrath
against that Day, v. 5. At which time the Lord will take Vengeance on such as
Know him not, and Obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9; and
will Righteousl^ recompense Tribulation to them that now Trouble his People, v.
6, and Rest to them that are troubled, v 7, whose present Persecutions, v. 4,
are a manifest Token of this Righteous Jud^ement of God to come, v. 5.

And these are the principal of those Things (in a way of Distinction from
Persons) which David witnesses unto; and whereby he did Outwardly evidence in
part, his being a Man after Gods own heart. From all which, we may safely
conclude, that a man after Gods own Heart, is partly to be known by his being
competently acquainted with, The Creatures Vanity, The Soul's Worth, The
Comeliness of true Christian Love, The Usefulness of Afflictions, The danger of
Prosperity, The proper Nature of Sin, The Desireableness of Duty, The Nature of
God's Law, The Majesty of his Voice, The Glory that is to be Revealed, The
Resurrection of the Body, and The last Day of Judgment.

But then Secondly, David witnesses concerning several sorts of Persons. As
for Example:

1. David witnesses concerning Himself, both as to what he was by Grace and
Nature. He does confess, that he was by Nature sinful, both in regard of
Original Sin, wherein he was Conceived and Shapen, Psa. 51. 5; and in regard of
Actual Sin, which he acknowledges, both as to the Heinousness thereof, psa.
51. 14, together with the Title of that Psalm; and as to the Numerousness
thereof, which were More than the Hairs of his head, psa. 40. 12, or than he
was able to Understand, psa. 19. 12. But yet through Free Grace, he was able to
say* that he was Holy, psa. 86. 2; the Servant of God, psa. 116. 16; and his
Holy One, Psa. 16. 10: which he does more at large Exemplify, psa. 26. 4, 5,
and elsewhere; and particularly, in relation to his Innocence toward Saul,
Psa. 7. 3.

So also Paul witnesses of Himself, that by Nature he was Carnal, sold under
Sin, Romans 7. 14; not finding how to Perform that which is Good, v. 18; groaning
under a Body of Death, v. 24; having a Law in his Members, which brought him
into Captivity to the Law of Sin, v. 23; and acknowledging, that he had
sometimes been an Heinous Blasphemer, an injurious Persecutor, and the chief of
Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 13. 15; and that he could not understand his Errors, since
though he Knew nothing by himself, yet was he not thereby Justified, 1 Cor. 4.
4. But yet, By the Grace of God (says he) I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10; a
Servant of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 1; a Saint or Holy One, Ephesians. 3. 8; who
pressed after Perfection, Phil. 3. 11, 12; willing to do that Good which he did
not, Romans 7. 19, and Hating that Evil which he did, v. 15; upon which account
he Thanked God through Jesus Christ, v. 25.

A gracious heart is well acquainted with Himself; and as he is free to
acknowledge his manifold Original and Actual transgressions; so is he also
Authorized to witness unto that Grace which the Lord has bestowed on him; and
though he bears Record of Himself (as Christ says, Joh. 8. 14.) yet is his
Record ture.

2. David witnesses concerning Angels; that there are Evil Angels, as well as
Good ones, psalm. 78. 49; that they are by Nature more Excellent than Man, psalm.
8. 5; that they are Many in Number psa. 68. 17; and Mighty in Strength, psa.
103. 20; and of a spiritual Substance, psalm. 104. 4; who are at the Lords
Command, fulfilling his Word, psa. 103. 20; Blessing his Name, psa. 148. 2;
encamping about his Servants, psa. 34. 7, and Keeping them in all their Ways,
psa. 91. 11; but Chasing and Persecuting such as seek after their Souls, Psalm.
35. 4, 5, 6.

So also Paul witnesses concerning Angels, both Good and Bad. In relation to
the Bad Angels, he says, that they are Spiritual Wickednesses, Ephesians. 6. 12; who
have a Prince, Ephesians. 2. 2, or some of which are Principalities, or Higher than
the rest, Ephesians. 6. 12; the Original of Antichristian Doctrines, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3,
and of all Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. 20; whose Children Sinners are, Act. 13. 10;
and by whom they are taken Captive at his Will, 2 Timothy 2. 26; working in them
like a Prince, Ephesians. 2. 2; and as their God, 2 Cor. 4. 4; unto whom Apostates
turn aside, 1 Timothy 5. 15, and unto whom all Scandalous Church Members are to be
Delivered up, as Paul did Alexander and Hymeneus, 1 Timothy 1. 20, (the latter of
which denied any proper and future Resurrection, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18,) and as he
gave order that the Incestuous Person should be dealt with, 1 Cor. 5. 5; which
is a sad Sentence, since such are then under his Power, who has the power of
Death, Heb. 2. 14. And he does further signify, that these Wicked Angels are
very Powerful, whom therefore he calls Principalities and Powers in High
places, Ephesians. 6. 12, working with all Power and Signs, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9: and that
they are also very Subtle, working with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 10; and being able to Transform themselves into Angels of Light, 2
Cor. 11. 14; in which regard that Child of the Devil is said to be full of all
Subtilty, Act. 13. 10; and upon which account he bids that we should put on
the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to withstand the Devils Wiles,
Ephesians. 6. 11, who else by his Devices will get an Advantage against us, 2 Cor. 2.
11. And as the Devil is Cunning, so also Paul tells us, that he is Mischievous
against the Saints, Tempting them upon every small Occasion, 1 Cor. 7. 5; in
which regard he was Jealous of those Choice Believers, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5; and
therefore he bids that Professors should have no fellowship with him, 1 Cor.
10. 20; nor give any place unto him, Ephesians. 4. 27; nor Expose any to fall into
his Snare or Condemnation, by an unmeet Advancing of them, 1 Timothy 3. 6, 7;
himself having experienced that Satan was a Buffeter, 2 Cor. 12. 7, and that he
would have been more serviceable than he was, but that Satan hindered him, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. But yet withal he tells us, that these Principalities are
spoiled by Christ, Col. 2. 15, who has Destroyed the Devil, Heb. 2. 14; and
that the God of Peace will shortly bruise Satan under his People's feet, Romans
16. 20; and whom the Saints shall one day Judge, 1 Cor. 6. 3. This is the sum
of what Paul witnesses concerning these wicked Angels.

And in relation to the Good Angels he tells us, that they are Spirits, Heb.
1. 7; Elect, 1 Timothy 5. 21; Innumerable, Heb. 12. 22; Glorious or Lightsome, 2
Cor. 11. 14; Endowed with admirable Gifts, Gal. 4. 14, 1 Cor. 13. ^; Powerful,
whom therefore he styleth, Principaliti^s, Thrones, Dominions and Powers, Col.
1. 16; and yet Gradually differing each from other, as that word Archangel
intimates, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. He also informs us, that their Nature is not
Humane, Heb. 2. 16; and that by Creation they are superior unto the Best of
Men, yea unto Christ himself as he was Man, Heb. 2. 7; but that yet they are
not to be Religiously Worshipped, Col. 2. 18; since they were all of them
Created by Christ as God, Col. 1. 16; and are Inferior unto Christ as
Mediator, in point of Name, Heb. 1. 4, and Place, Heb. 1. 13, and Rule, Heb.
2. 5, Christ being in all those respects far above them all, Ephesians. 1. 21, whom
therefore they Bow the Knee unto, Phil. 2. 10, and though they be Gods, ps. 97.
7, yet are they bid to Worship him, Heb. 1. 6; by whom Christ gave the Law,
Gal. 3. 19, Heb. 2, 2, and who have not power to alter his Gospel, Gal. 1. 8;
but are his Servants, in a way of ordinary Ministering unto his Saints, Heb. 1.
14, or in a way of extraordinary Revelation, Act. 27. 23; who are capable of
Growing in their Knowledge concerning the Manifold Wisdom of God, by the
Church, Ephesians. 3. 10, and who do frequent Gospel Church-Meetings, which should
provoke us unto all manner of comely Behavior at such a time, 1 Cor. 11. 10:
but notwithstanding the greatness of their Power, yet Paul was persuaded, that
neither Angels, nor Principalities can separate Believers from the Love of God
in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 38, 39.

A man after Gods own Heart is neither a Pharisee in point of Practice, nor yet
a Sadducee in point of Principle, who did deny that there was either Angel or
Spirit, Act. 23. 8.

3. David witnesses concerning the Man of Sin, in his Nineth Psalm, as is
concluded by some of the best Expositors both Ancient and Modern; and more
especially with reference to his last support: And since the Eighth Psalm does
undenyably treat of Christ's Temporal Kingdom, (as is evident from v. 4,
compared with Heb. 2. 5, 6,) it may easily be inferred from thence, that this
Ninth Psalm does handle the Fall of Antichrist, upon whose Ruins Christ's
Kingdom is to be raised. Which Application does seem to be further confirmed,
from the significant Title of this Psalm, which is, upon Muth (or the Death of)
Labben; the meaning of which word Labben, the generality of Expositors confess
themselves unable to understand; and in such a case, it may be lawfu^l for
others to give their sober apprehensions together with their Grounds. Now this
word Labben, unto me does seem most probably to be contracted of that Hebrew
word Lebbanah, which signifies the Moon, and is so translated Cant. 6. 10. Isa.
24. 23, and 30. 26, etc. And if so, then this word Labben may fitly be applied
to the Man of Sin; the Continuance of whose Dispensation is expressly Measured
by Moons or Months, Rev. 13. 5, and (as the best Interpreters agree) in regard
of the full Resemblance that is between the Moon and this Man of Sin; as for
Example: (1) The Moon is made in Scripture to be an Emblem of a Woman, in a way
of Distinction from the Man, Genesis 37. 9, 10: and so the Man of Sin and his
Party, are called Women, or persons of a more Effeminate Spirit, with whom the
Sealed Number are not Defiled, Rev. 144. (2) The Moon is Fair, Cant. 6. 10, and
Bright, Job 31. 26: and so is the Man of Sin in the eyes of Nightwalkers* and
in the Sun's absence, or unto those from whom Christ is gone, who is the Sun of
Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. (3) But the Moon is Spotted, and not so Clear as the
Sun is said to be, Cant. 6. 10: and so also, the Man of Sin has Always his
Leopard-spots, Rev. 13. 2, Jer. 13. 23, which Blemish the Luster of his Moral
Virtues and outward Glory, in the Eyes of all seeing Men. (4) The Light of the
Moon is also wholly Borrowed from the Sun, as all know, and as its Eclipse does
evidence; so also the Man of Sin does Borrow all his forementioned Glory from
Jesus Christ, who enlighteneth every man with whatever true Light he has, Joh.
1. 9, and more especially the Man of Sin, whose being so fair and bright, is
from some Common Union and Communion that he has with the Person and Things of
Christ. (5) The Lightsome Body of the Moon is also very Variable; so also is
the Glory of the Man of Sin, who first Arose not long after the ^un of
Righteousness, and then he was very small; who has Increased since unto his
Full, and since that time, he has been and still is Decreasing, in order to
his Change. (6) The Moon is most Glorious, when at its furthest Distance from
the Sun; so also the Man of Sin was in the Fullness of his Glory, about the
Midst of his 42 Months, since when (or as Christ's Kingdom has Approached) he
has Decayed exceedingly; and toward the Beginning of his Rise he was scarce
Discernable, as Pope P^us the 2^ does confess, Ante Nicenam Synodum,
unusquisque sibi vixit, and parvus respectus ad Roman^^ E^clesiam habebatur;
Before the Nicene Council (which was before the midst of the Third Century)
every Bishop lived to himself, and there was little regard had to the Church of
Rome, Aeneas Sylvius, Epist. 288. (7) But the Moon at best, is (according to
the Scriptures) but a lesser Light, Genesis 1. 16, which one can hardly Read by,
unless some very Legible hand; and notwithstanding whose utmost Brightness, it
is Night still, though some men newly Awakened out of Sleep, have been for a
while mistaken in that regard; and Astronomers tell us, that many Stars are
Bigger than the Moon, although this seems to be the Biggest of them all,
because of its Nearness unto such as dwell upon the Earth: and so the Man of
Sin is far Inferior unto Christ the Sun, though some of his Party have most
Blasphemously made them Equal; nay, Z^rabella says, that the Pope is more than
a God, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4; but yet his Light
is that by which no Truth or Duty can be seen, save what is very Obvious; and
notwithstanding which, his is a state of Darkness, save unto such who are
between sleeping and waking; and Christ's Stars (or Gospel Officers, Revel. 1.
20,) are Really far Bigger though they seem Less, unto men of a Low and Earthy
Spirit. (8) The Moon*Light is also without any sensible Heat at any time, and
the sharpest Winter-Frosts do accompany its greatest Brightness: so also, the
Man of Sin and his Party, may have some kind of Light, but yet no kindly
Warmth, save what is either Ensorced by their Presumptuous Confidence, and
Bodily Exercise, which profits but little; or what is gained from their
Earthly Cordials and Kitchin-fires, in the Want whereof they starve and die;
whereas the Children of the Day, are furnished with an Heavenly Heart-chearing
Light, without the help of any such Presumptuous Enforcement, or violent
Exercise, or Worldly Encouragements. (9) But yet the Moon Rules in the Night,
Psa. 136. 9, and upon the Sea, as appears in its Tides; and in the Night the
Moon is sometimes smiting, psa. 121. 6: so also, the Man of Sin has his
chiefest Rule in Places and Times of Darkn^ss, and among poor Ignorant people,
resembled by the Sea or Many Waters, Rev. 17. 1. 15, whom he keeps in
Perpetual and Variable Motion, this and the other way; and whom he smites with
spiritual Plagues, whilst the Sealed Number, or Christ's Party are Untouched,
Rev. 9. 1. (10) And the Moon is of a Long continuance, psa. 72. 5. 7: so also
is the Reign of the Man of Sin, whose Monarchy has lasted 1260 years, beyond
what any other Monarch in the world did ever yet attain unto. (11) The Moon
also is very Influential upon the Earth unto the Putting forth of many precious
things, Deuteronomy. 33. 14* and so it cannot be denied but that the Man of Sin has
put forth many precious things, not only in a way of Gratifying his Friends,
but also in witnessing unto many precious Truths, in clearing up many intricate
Scriptures, and in Civilizing many who were Profane, etc. all which must needs
be confessed to have been in some sense Precious; only these Good things are
rather violently Thrust forth by the Man of Sin, than Naturally Produced by
him, as the Moon is said in that place last mentioned to thrust forth her
precious things, as the Original word [Geresch] there used signifies; whereas
the Sun is there said to yield his precious Fruits in a more Natural and Kindly
way of voluntary Coming, as is hinted by that Original word [Thebuoth] which is
there translated Fruits. (12) The Moon also is apt by some poor Creatures to be
Religiously Worshipped, as is evident from God's forbidding it, Deuteronomy. 4. 19,
with the sorest kind of Death, Deuteronomy. 17. 3. 5; and from that act of Josiah, in
putting down such Idolatrous Priests or Black-coats, as the Original word
[Chemarim] there used signifies, 2 Kin. 23. 5; and from Job's Disclaiming such
a thing, Job 31. 26, as being a very Horrible Iniquity, v. 28: and so this Man
of Sin has all along been Worshipped by the Antichristian World, or Dwellers
upon Earth, or such whose Names are not written in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev.
13. 8, so also was his Image, v. 14, as the Dragon had been before, v. 4;
partly from the Fear of his Penalties, v. 15, and partly from the Wonderfulness
of his Power, v. 4, and Glory, Rev. 17. 8; for which they are most sadly
Threatened with Eternal torments, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11; whilst such as Reign with
Christ, are Described by their not having Worshipped the Beast nor his Image,
and by their not having received his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in their
Hands, although they did thereby run the utmost hazard, Rev. 20. 4. (13) But
the Moon was at Joshuah's Command, Josh. 10. 12, 13, who was an eminent Type of
Christ, and is therefore called Jesus, Heb. 4. 8: and so, the Man of Sin is
under Christ's command, who can bring him to a Stand when he pleases, and will
do so unto the World's Astonishment, when that shall come to pass in these
latter days, which Joshua's Conflict with those five Kings did then typifie.
(14) Nay and the Saints also are described, as having the Moon under their
feet, Rev. 12. 1: and so, whatever does properly relate unto the Man of Sin,
has been always Despised by Gospel-Saints, who neither have so much Admired his
Parts and Learning, or Magnified his highest Reformation and Religious Actings,
or Feared his greatest Power and Cruelty, or Doted upon his outward Glory and
Prosperity, so as to comply with him in any thing by which he has been
Predominantly to be known, in any Age of the World. (15) The Moon also will be
Eclipsed at the Lord's Appearing, to Avenge his People upon persecuting Egypt,
Ezekiel. 32. 7, and to Redeem them out of Oppressing Babylon, Isa. 13. 9, 10, and
to Destroy their last Enemies in that Valley of Jehoshaphat, Joel 3. 14, 15;
and then shall this mystical Moon or Man of Sin be confounded, when the Lord of
Hosts shall Reign in mount Sion, and before his Ancients gloriously, Isa. 24.
23. (16) Lastly, the Moon shall one day cease to shine any more, or at
leastwise it is Light shall be of no further use; which is a virtual
Annihilation, Isa. 60. 19, Rev. 21. 23: and thereunto be sure, the Man of Sin
is fitly resembled by it, for he shall one day wholly be Destroyed, or Die for
ever, as is evident from many Scriptures, and as is hinted from the Title of
this Psalm, which is upon Muth Labben, or the Death of the Moon, viz. the Man
of Sin, between whom and the Moon, there is a very full Agreement, in all those
respects before mentioned.

But then, in the Body of this Psalm, David does more particularly witness
concerning this Man of Sin, as follows. And so, in the first place, he
tells us what a Mischievous Height he would come unto, so as to destroy
Cities, and to make their Memorial perish with them, v. 6; which we have seen
fulfilled; and therefore Augustine did from this very Psalm foretell and
believe, that Antichrist should come unto such an Height, and act in such a way
both toward the Saints and others, that some would be apt to think, God had
forsaken the care of the World. But then Secondly, David does here foretell his
Downfall, which when it does once Begin, it will Hasten apace, v. 3, and that
it will End in his being destroyed for Ever, v. 5; who shall be turned into
Hell, v. 17, as having forgotten God, and himself also to be but a Man, which
he shall be minded of by his being put in Fear, v. 20. Whose Destruction will
be by a Mavelous Appearance of God's own Presence, v. 3; who will be then
Known by his Judgment executed, and by Ensnaring this Party in their own work,
v. 16, and taking them in their own Net, v. 15. And then these men shall be
declared to be Heathens, and Wicked, v. 5, whatever they have formerly been
accounted. But about that time the Saints will be brought to the very Gates of
Death, v. 13; who yet shall then Trust in God's Name, v. 10; and Pray unto him,
v. 13, 14, 19; and humbly Expect, v. 18; whom the Lord will be a Refuge unto,
v. 9; and not forget their Cry, v. 12; nor suffer their Expectation to perish
for Ever, v. 18; but will remember them when he makes Inquisition for Blood,
v. 12; which will be the matter of their hearty Praise, v. 1. 11. 14. And from
that time the Enemy shall Destroy no more, v. 6; but the Lord will take the
Temporal Rule into his own hand, v. 7; who shall Judge the World in
Righteousness, v. 8; and whose Dominion shall endure for Ever, verse. 7.

And so also Paul testifies concerning this Man of Sin, whom he calls the
Son of Perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3; and That Wicked one, v. 8; who was to Come
before the Day of Christ, v. 3; but not till the Roman Pagan Empire were taken
away, v. 6, 7; nor till there was first a falling away, v. 3; and then should
he be Revealed, v. 8; who was already at work in a more mysterious way, v. 7;
whose Coming would be, with all Power and Signs and Lying Wonders, and with all
Deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them that perish, that they might be
Damned, because they received not the Love of the Truth, v. 9, 10, 11, 12: who
would sit in the Temple of God, showing that he is God, and exalting himself
above all that is called God, v. 4; who will be first and principal^y to be
known, by his Forbidding Marriage, and lawful Meats, 1 Timothy 4. 3; whom the
Lord will consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and Destroy with the Brightness
of his Coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8; that is, whom he will Gradually Waste, by the
Testimony of his faithful Witnesses, and at the Last utterly Destroy, at his
own Personal Appearing.

A man after God own heart, will dare to style the Man of Sin and all his
Party, wicked Heathens, whatever flattering Titles others give them. He does
not envy his present Prosperity, knowing that he is the son of Perdition. He is
so well acquainted with his Person and Principles, as to Despise the One and
Abhor the Other, and not to Comply with Either.

4. David witnesses at large concerning Sion, Which Sion, in the Letter,
strictly taken, was an high Mountain in Judea, strongly fortified by Art and
Nature, which David having taken from the Jebusites, did afterward unite it
together with Millo unto Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 5. 7, 8, 9: but more Largely, this
Sion was put to signify the Whole City, (that Seat of Royalty, wherein the
Temple was afterward built,) as also, the whole land of Judea, together with
the Inhabitants of both. And so this Mount Sion is declared to have been a
Type, both of that forementioned Glorious state of things, Isa. 14. 32, Rev.
14. 1. and of a peculiar sort of persons, viz. Gospel-Saints, Gal. 4. 26, and
Gospel-Churches, Heb. 12, 22, as Paul explaineth it, in his concurring
Testimony concerning this Sion or Jerusalem.

And so David in relation to this Typical Sion (or Gospel-Saints and Churches)
does witness; 1, That she was the peculiar object of God's Love and Choice,
whom the Lord had chosen, Psalm. 132. 13; and whose Gates he loved more than all
the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. 2. True Gospel-Saints and Churches, are not
of the world, Joh. 17. 16, but Chosen out from thence, Joh. 15. 19; whom the
Lord loves above any other sort of Professors, (or such as were typified by
the common Israelites) and more especially their Gates or their more Solemn
Assemblies, which were there wont to be. 2ly, Duvid tells us, that this Sion
was the Perfection of Beauty, Psalm. 50. 2; being a very fruitful and High
Mountain, from whence one might behold many pleasant things beneath: And so,
the Saints and Churches of Christ, are very Beautiful, being clothed with the
Sun, and having the Moon under their feet, Rev. 12. 1; who are therefore
oftimes compared, to a Garden weeded, Beams collected, Pearls clustered,
Saphires pollished, and the like; being Perfected with Christ's Comeliness, as
Sion was with David's, so as that not only Paul, Col. 2. 5, but Christ himself,
Cant. 4. 9, seems ravished with the sight of them, especially in the Spring and
Summer season of their spiritual flourishing. Thirdly, David's tells us, that
this Mount Sion was on the sides of the North, Psalm. 48. 2, or on the
North-side of Jerusalem, Butting upon Moriah where the Temple was, Isa. 14. 13:
And so, the choicest Saints and purest worshippers, have generally hitherto
been Situated somewhat more Northerly, or at a further distance from this
world's Sun, having that made up in a sweeter Air, which others do enjoy above
them in outward warmth; nor does a gracious heart mislike this portion, but
counts it is Northerly Situation, to be one constitutive part of it is Beauty,
as David here intimates, because this does make them most like to Christ,
Phil. 3. 10, who first suffered, and then entered into his Glory, Luke, 24. 26.
Fourthly, This Sion was originally the Jebusites Fort, not wholly conquered
till David's time, who was a Type of Christ, and more especially with reference
unto that time when his Temporal Kingdom shall be first set up. And such are
the choicest Saints by Nature, who are originally Canaanites, Ezekiel. 16. 3, or
the children of God's wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. as Canaan was of Noah's curse, Genes. 9.
25; strongly possessed and fortified, 2 Cor. 10. 4, till Christ reduce them, who
loves to purchase with his Blood and Sword. God's dearest Son must at the first
be called out of Egypt, Hos. 11. 1. Mat. 2. 15, that so no flesh might glory in
his presence. Nor will this Conquest be fully perfect^d, until Christ's Temporal
Kingdom shall visibly appear. Fifthly, David tells us, that God was peculiarly
the God of Sion, Psa. 146. 10. And this is the Privilege of all true
Gospel-Saints, that God is peculiarly Theirs, as they are His; in which regard,
not only does Darius (an Heathen) call him the God of Daniel, D^n. 6. 20; but
Saul also (a common Israelite) does call him Samuel's God, in a way of
Distinction from himself, 1 Samuel 15. 15. And though others may have the
Boldness to call God Theirs, Joh. 8. 54; yet none have any lawful Power or
Authority to do so, save such as truly do Believe, Joh. 1. 12. Sixthly, David
tells us, that Sion was the place where God did Manifest himself in his
Greatest Glory, from whence he shone, Psalm. 50. 2; and before whom his People
did appear in Sion, Psalm. 84. 7; and where he did evidence his Greatness, ^s.
99. 2. And thus, Christ Manifests himself unto his true Disciples, and not
unto the world, Joh. 14. 21, 22; who have a Promise of his peculiar Presence,
Matthew. 18. 20; and God is in Them of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25. Seventhly, He
tells us, that in Sion the Lord would make David's Horn to Bud, and that he
had There ordained a Lamp for his Anointed, ps. 132. 13. 17; which Zacharias
does Mystically interpret, and with reference unto Christ's Interest in
Gospel Times, Luke 1. 69. And thus, as Christ's spiritual Kingdom was first set
up among these sons of Sion; so also, his temporal Kingdom shall first put
forth or Bud, among his choicest Saints and Churches; who will not there want a
Successor, as that word Lamp imports, 1 King. 15. 4. Eighthly, he tells us,
that Sion was the Place of most Prevailing Prayer, as also of most abundant and
acceptable Praises. Others are slow in returning Thanks for what Mercies they
have received, if ever they do perform what they have sometimes Vowed; but
Praise waits for God in Sion, and unto him shall the vow there be performed,
ps. 65. 1. there also Brake he the arrows of the bow the shield and sword, viz.
in answer to Sion's Prayer, ps. 76. 3. in which regard she is said to be more
glorious and excellent than the mountains of Prey, because of her effecting
that by Prayer, which others could not do by force of Arms, v. 4 5, 6. And
thus, the choicest Saints are most powerful with God in Prayer, and most ready
to be thankful, whose Praises are also best accepted, whilst the Sacrifice of
the Wicked is an Abomination, Prove. 15. 8. Ninthly, He tells us that as well
the Singers as the Players upon Instruments shall be in Sion, Psalm. 87. 7. And
thus, true Gospel-Saints have both the Form and Power of Godliness, or they do
both profess and practice; and they shall be fully furnished with all manner of
Gifts and Graces; nor does their Excellency consist in speaking only, (as did
the Pharisees, Matt. 23. 3, 4.) but these are good at handwork also; and they
shall daily more and more increase, in the Joint Knowledge and Practice of all
Truths and Duties, both Old and New, the former of which does fitly answer to
Ancient Singing, as the latter does unto that later Invention or Appointment of
Playing upon Instruments, which never was added unto the ordinary Worship and
Service of God till David's time. Common Israelites will own, whatever Truth or
Duty is evident by the Light of Nature, and those Institutions which have been
practiced and known of Old; but a true Son of Sion will Add unto these things,
whatever Christ would have Added, although it has not been in use before. At
the Gates of a right Spouse are all manner of pleasant Fruits, New and Old,
which she has laid up for her Beloved, Cant. 7. 13. Tenthly, He tells us, that
the Lord will abundantly Bless Sion's Provision, and satisfy her Poor with
Bread, and cloth her Priests with Salvation, Psalm. 132. 15, 16: all which
shall one day be fulfilled in the Letter, and in relation to Outward
Enjoyments, when the Highpriests or Eminentest Professors, shall Inherit the
Earth as well as Heaven; but in the mean time, and in a Spiritual sense, the
Best Saints are distinguished from others, by that Blessing which does
accompany their Provision, which makes their Souls to Thrive in every
Condition and under every kind of Dispensation; nay and the Poorest of them are
comfortably satisfied with Bread, so as to prevent their being spiritually
starved; and the Chief Priests among them are Clothed with Salvation, or with
that rich Grace, which does as Visibly Adorn them, as a comely Garment does him
that wears it, Job 29. 14. Eleventhly, he tells us, that Sion must needs be
very safe, whose Towers and Bulwarks he bids all to Mark and Number, that
they might tell it to the Generations following, Psa. 48. 12, 13; in whose
Palaces God is known for a Refuge, v. 3; and whom the Highest himself has
promised to Establish, psa. 87. 5, for Ever, psa. 48. 8; in which regard the
Greatest of those that come against her, are Astonished at the Sight of her
Impregnableness, whereupon they pass by together, and not without some Haste
and Trouble, v. 4, 5, 6. And thus, as the Mountains are round about Jerusalem,
so is the Lord about his People, psa. 125. 2; who will be their God for Ever,
and their Guide even unto Death, psa. 48. 14. Twelfthly, He tells us, that
Glorious things are spoken of Sion; and that God will make mention of Rahab (or
Egypt) and Babylon to them that Know him, This man was Born there; and of Sion
it shall be said, This and That man was Born in Her; and that the Lord shall
count (when he writes up the People) that This man was born There, Psa. 87. 3,
4, 5, 6: To signify, partly, that it is a great Honor unto that Professor
who had his first Beginning under Sion's Dispensation; as it is a Reproach to
him (among them that Know God,) whose Original was in Spiritual Egypt or
Babylon; and partly to intimate, that as Rahab, Babylon, Philistia, Tire and
Ethiopia. have sometimes Boasted of their Eminent and famous Men; so Sion shall
also be able to Produce her Men of Renown, and Two to the other's One. And
thus, it is a precious Privilege to have been Born (whether Naturally or
Spiritually) under a Purer Dispensation; as on the other side, it is enough to
Blemish his best Perfections, who is polluted with an Egyptian or Babylonish
Birth: And though the Antichristian Party have hitherto had the Name for
Eminency, yet have the Purest Worshippers always been Really their Equals, and
shall at last Outstrip them, in all manner of truly Glorious Accomplishments,
whether Natural or Moral. Thirteenthly, He tells us, that all Gods Springs
(as the Best Expositors carry it,) are in this Sion, psa. 87. 7. And thus,
Gospel-Saints and Churches, are better watered than any other; out of whose
Belly do flow Rivers of Living water, Joh. 7. 38; who have the most Fresh and
Durable and Fructifying Influences; whose Leaf and Fruit shall therefore Never
fail, psa. 1. 3, and from whom these waters are communicated unto others. If
every one had their Right, the purest Worshippers in all Ages, will be found to
have been the Wellhead of all those Choiser Scriptural Discoveries, which
others have Borrowed of them. Fourteenthly, He tells us, that Sion is God's
Dewlling Place, psa. 76. 2; the City of the Great King, Psalm. 48. 2; which he
has Desired for his Habitation, saying, This is my Rest for Ever, here will I
Dwell for I have Desired it, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. And thus the Lord may have
Tabernacled for a While, among those of a lower Spirit and Principle; but the
Place of his settled Residence has been among such Churches and Professors who
were most Powerful and Pure. His Foundation is in these Holy Mountains, Psa.
87. 1, which therefore cannot be Removed, ps. 125. 1; Himself has Built them,
and therefore the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them, Matt. 16. 18;
and he has built them an Habitation for Himself, Ephesians. 2. 22, and therefore Woe
be to those that say, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in
possession, Psa. 83. 9, 10, 11, 12: whose House are we, if we Hold fast the
Confidence, and the rejoicing of the Hope firm unto the End, Heb. 3. 6.
Fifteenthly, David tells us, that this Sion is a Public Blessing to all sorts
of Persons; the Salvation of Israel will come out of Sion, Psalm. 14. 7, and 53.
6; which Sion is elsewhere called, the Joy of the whole Earth, Psa. 48. 2; from
whence the Blessing was Desired, psa. 20. 2; and Pronounced, psa. 134. 3; and
Promised, psa. 128. 5; and Commanded, psa. 133. 3. And thus, upon Mount Sion
shall be Deliverance, and by that means the House of Jacob shall regain their
Possessions, Obad. 17: Judah shall be that Bow in God's hand, which sends
forth Ephraim's Arrows into their Enemies Hearts, Zech. 9. 13. The Purest
Saints, though they be least Esteemed, yet are they the Earth's Salt, which
keeps it from Putrefaction, Matt. 10. 13; in whose Sight the Nations shall
walk, Rev. 21. 24; and be Healed by the Leaves of their Tree, Rev. 22 2, which
whilst they Pluck off, like the Stag in the Fable, they do but thereby strip
themselves of their own Safeguard. Lastly, He tells us, that the Sons of Sion
were to be carried Captive into Babylon, Psa. 137. 1, who then would be
Insulted over, both by the Babylonians, v. 3, and Edomites, v. 7: But yet
withal, he adds, that God will Save Sion, Psa. 69. 35; and Return her
Captivity, psa. 126. 1, unto her own and others Admiration, v. 1, 2, 3; and
that he will Gloriously Appear in the Building of her up, psa. 102. 16; who
then will be Destructive to her Enemies, by Land, psa. 76. 3, 4, 5, and by Sea,
psa. 48. 7, for all those that hate her, shall be confounded, ps. 129. 5; upon
whose ruins she shall be Raised, and therefore she hears and is Glad because
of Gods Judgments, psa. 97. 8, as she is then Bid to be, psa. 48. 11. And thus
this Mystical Sion was to become a Wilderness, Isa. 64. 9; from whence that
Voice is heard, H^w are we spoiled, Jer. 9. 19; being stripped of all her Beauty,
Lam. 1. 6; and Plowed up as a Field, Mich. 3. 12; so as that Others should call
her an Outcast, whom None sought after, Jer. 30. 17; and she should account her
self forsaken of her God, Isa. 49. 14; and one whom his Soul loathed, Jer. 14.
19: But yet her Dead men shall live, Isa. 26. 19; and when she falls, she
shall Rise again, Mich. 7. 8; the Lord will make her that Halted a Remnant,
Mich. 4. 7; and she shall be rebuilt upon her own heap, Jer. 30. 17, 18; her
Wilderness shall be made like Eden, Isa. 51. 3; and thither shall the Ransomed
of the Lord come with Songs, Isa. 35. 10; and her Latter State shall be more
Glorious than the Former; her Redeemed ones shall see Eye to Eye, Isa. 52. 8;
and she shall be called The Sion of the Holy One of Israel, Isa. 60. 14; and
her Raising will be upon her Enemies Ruins, because that Time will be the Year
of Sion's Controversy, Isa. 34. 8.

And this is the sum of what David witnesses concerning Sion: With whom Paul
fully agrees, when he calls this Heavenly Jerusalem, the Mother of all
Gospel-Saints, Gal. 4. 26; and when he describes this Mystical Sion, or this
Choiser sort of Things and Persons under the Dispensation of the Gospel, as
being the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, the general Assembly
and Church of the Firstborn which are written in Heaven, and the Spirits of
Just men made Perfect, Heb. 12. 21, 22.

A Man after God's own Heart, is partly to be known, by that Acquaintance which
he has with this Sion, in every of those respects before mentioned.

5. David witnesses concerning the Principal and Necessary Qualifications of
Civil Rulers; affirming that He who Rules over Men, must be Just, Ruling in
the fear of God, 2 Samuel 2^. 3; adding withal, that such kind of Rulers, shall
flourish like the tender Grass by clear shining after Rain; and shall be like a
Bright rising Sun, very acceptable and full of increasing Glory, v. 4; and
though he foresaw that his Immediate Successors would not be such, yet did he
verily Believe that such should be raised up, suitable to what Himself was, and
by virtue of an Everlasting Covenant, which would Eminently take place in the
Latter days, notwithstanding the present and future unworthiness of his own
House, which was likely to Prevent it is Growth, ver. 5. But on the other side,
he says, that the Sons of Belial (or such as did cast off Christ's Yoke) shall
then be all of them as Thorns thrust away and utterly burnt with fire, because
they cannot be Taken or Touched, without being senced with iron or the staff of
a Spear, ver. 6. 7. All which is uttered by him, as being his last words, ver.
1. spoken by inspiration from his Spirit, v, 2. who is the God and Rock of
Israel, v. 3. which makes them to be the more Observable, since the last words
of any man (and then much more, a Good man) are full of weight, especially such
Words as the Lord himself does speak by such a man.

And thus Paul also Witnesses, that those Civil Rulers and higher Powers which
are Ordained of God, Romans 13. 1, are not a Terror to Good works, but to the
Evil, ver. 3, executing Wrath upon him that does Evil, ver. 4, and praising him
that does Good, v. 3.

A man after Gods own heart, does very well know that a Wicked man may
Providentially be set over others, in a way of Judgment, ps. 109. 6; but yet he
will boldly witness, what such should be, and must be, if according to what the
Lord has Ordained and Appointed in his Law. He is far from being offended
with those who do Desire that none but Men fearing God might be in Place of
Power. He looks upon this to be the Chief Qualification required in such;
whilst others are well enough satisfied with the Vilest Persons, save as their
own Private Interest is thereby prejudiced.

6. David witnesses concerning the Best Man's Vantiy; affirming that Every man
at his Best state is altogether Vanity, Psalm. 39. 5; and that men of Low degree
are Vanity, and that men of High degree are a Lie, who if laid in the Balance
are altogether lighter than Vanity, Psa. 62. 9; and that no King is saved by
the Multitude of an Host, Psalm. 33. 16; and that Princes are not to be Trusted
in, in whom there is no help, Psalm. 146. 3; and therefore he Hated those who
regarded such lying vanities, Psalm. 31. 6, and sharply rebuked them who sought
after this kind of Leasing, Psalm. 4. 2, viz. Saul's Party, who trusting in their
Prince, did thereupon vainly conclude, that they should have been too hard for
David. He testifies also, concerning Man's vanity, in Spiritual as well as
Natural respects; which he Exemplifieth at large in Isreal's case of old, who
soon forgot Gods wondrous works, Psalm. 106. 13, which at the first they were
mightily affected with, ver. 12; who made a Covenant with God, but did not keep
it, Psalm. 78 10; and notwithstanding his Judgments upon others, ver. 12, and
Mercies to themselves, ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, they sinned yet more against him,
v, 17; nay and though he corrected them also, ver. 31, for all this they sinned
still, ver. 32; and when they sought him in their Affliction, ver. 34, yet did
they but flatter him with their mouth, ver. 36. for their Heart was not Right
with him, ver. 37; and though he thereupon forgave their iniquity, ver. 38, and
brought them into their promised land, ver. 55, yet were they turned aside like
a Deceitful Bow, ver. 57.

So also Paul shows us, what a poor vain creature Man is, and Professors
themselves as well as others; which he Proves, not only by Demas his
Apostasy, 2 Timothy 4. 10, and others making shipwreck of faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19; but
also by the Galathians being so soon removed, Gal. 1. 6, as if they had been
Bewitched, Gal. 3. 1, who sometimes received him as Christ himself, Gal. 4. 14,
so as that he now stood in Doubt of them, ver. 20, fearing that all his former
labor had been in vain, ver. 11. Who also hinteth, that the Best cannot do
what things they would, because of that flesh which is intermingled with the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and in which regard he bids, that we should be strong in
the Lord and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10, as ever we would be able to
stand in the evil day, ver. 13.

A man after Gods own heart is of a Discerning Spirit, and Judges every man, 1
Cor. 2. 15; and therefore he is not so apt to stumble upon falling Professors,
2 Timothy 2. 18, 19; nor does he Idolize the Opinion of a poor vain Creature, 1
Cor. 4. 3; nor will he over-peremptorily undertake for any man, 1 Pet. 5. 12;
nor will he commit himself to every one, Joh. 2. 24; nor does he ground upon
fair Promises and smooth tongues, and forward good beginnings, because he
knows partly how vain man is.

7. David witnesses concerning the Proper Character of a true Saint, whom he
describes first Negatively, Psalm. 1. 1, as being one who will neither Sit in
the Scorners Seat, which implies a sinful settlement without Reluctance; Nor
walk in the Council of the ungodly, which which argues a constant sinful
practice, with some kind of Resolution to persist; Nor will he so much as stand
in the Sinners Way, which intimates a sinful dallying with what a man knows
to be dangerous, or a parleying with Discovered temptations; and in such
respects as these, he elsewhere says, that this sort of Persons Do no
Iniquity, Psalm. 119. 3, but are Undefiled in relation to any such kind of way,
ver. 1. He that is all one with Scorners, Ungodly men, or the finest sort of
sinners; and evidenceth himself to be so, by his fixed sitting in their seat,
or by his constant Walking in their wicked Counsels and projectings, or by his
being at a stand in point of holy Resolvedness unto the contrary; he that is
thus a Doer of Iniquity, is not a Righteous or Blessed man, in David's Judgment.
But then he Describes true Saints Affirmatively; as being such, who have made
a Covenant with God by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5, which was wont then to be cut in
Twain, and to be passed between, Jer. 34. 18, to signify, what he was worthy
of that brake the Covenant, Matthew. 24. 51. he also tells us, that such do
seek the Lord with the Whole heart, Psalm. 119. 2; Meditating in his Law both
Day and Night, Psalm. 1. 2; and Walking in it, ps. 119. 1, and Keeping his
Testimonies, v. 2; Fearing the Lord, ps. 112. 1, and Delighting in his Law, ps.
1. 2, Greatly, psalm. 112. 1; showing mercy and Giving, psalm. 37. 21; showing
Favor and Lending, and yet Guiding such Affairs with Discretion, psalm. 112. 5;
whose Clothing (or Outside) is of wrought Gold, and who are also all Glorious
Within, Psa. 45. 13; in whose Heart (as well as Mouth) is the Law of their God,
ps. 37. 31, and whose Righteousness endures for ever, psa. 112. 9; and who are
still fruitful, fat and flourishing in Old Age as well as Youth, psa. 92. 12.
14. These are David's Characters of a truly Righteous and Blessed man.

So also Paul tells us, to the same effect, that a true Gospel-Saint is
willing to Disperse, as need requires, 2 Cor. 9. 9: and that Persons truly
Justified, walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1: and that
they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with its Affections and Lusts,
Gal. 5. 24: and that as many as are Led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons
of God, Romans 8. 14: and that Christ is in Professors, except they be
Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5: and that if any Man be in Christ, he is altogether
Evangelically New, 2 Cor. 5. 17: and that such put no Confidence in any Duty or
Privilege of a fleshly Nature, Phil. 3. 3: and that we are made Partakers of
Christ, if we Hold fast the Beginning of our Confidence steadfast unto the End,
Heb. 3. 14: and that Christ's Mystical Body increases unto the Edifying of it
self in Love, Ephesians. 4. 16, with the Increase of God, Col. 2. 19.

The Man of Sin and his party, will Canonize any for their Money; but a man
after God's own Heart, dares not to make that Holy Ointment Common. He is
willing to Hope all things, but yet his Charity is not Blind or Simple. And as
David's Dispensation shall get up, or as the Gospel-Temple State shall be
Revived; so men will be adjudged Saints, according to these Characters of Paul
and David.

8. David witnesses concerning the proper Character of Sinners; whom he
describes by their Sitting or constant Walking or at leastwise Standing in a
Wicked way, psa. 1. 1: and by their inveterate Hatred against Christ's Kingly
Interest, psa. 2. 1, 2, 3: and by their false hearts, and Inward wickedness and
flattering Tongue, psa. 5. 9. Such do forget God, psa. 9. 17, and think
themselves to be more than Men, v. 20. Their Mouth is full of Cursing and
Deceit, psa. 10. 7; with flattering Lips and a Double heart do they speak, psa.
12. 2; they love all Devouring words, psa. 52. 4; counting their Lips their
own, which may not be controlled, psalm. 12. 4. Their ways are always Grievous,
Psalm. 10. 5; and there is no Fear of God before their eyes, ps 36. 1. They set
themselves in a Way that is not good, ps. 36. 4; and Strengthen themselves in
their Wickedness, ps. 52. 7; and Boast themselves in Mischief, v. 1. They
flatter themselves, until their Iniquity be found to be Hateful, psa. 36. 2;
they love Evil more than Good, ps. 52. 3; and though they may not Do Evil, yet
do they not Abhor it, ps. 36. 4. Such Bless the Covetous, whom God abhors,
psa. 10. 3; trusting in their abundant Riches, and not in God, psa. 52. 7;
scorning in their Prosperity to seek after God, who then is not in all their
thoughts, psa. 10. 4. Such say in their heart, they shall never be in
Adversity, psalm. 10. 6, who therefore call their Lands after their own Names,
psalm. 49. 11. They are wicked Persecutors of Gods Poor Saints, psalm. 10. 2,
Eating them up like Bread, psalm. 53. 4, when they have caught them with their
Subtlety and Dissimulation, psa. 10, 8, 9, 10. They are estranged from the
Womb, psa. 58. 3, and will not hearken to a Reclaiming Voice, v. 4, 5. Gods
Judgments are far above, out of their Sight, psa. 10. 6; concluding that God
is like them, psa. 50. 21, or that he Sees not, psa. 94. 7, or that he has
forgotten, psalm. 10. 11, or that he will not require it, v. 13; and in very
deed he says in his heart, that there is no God, although he does not speak it
out, Psalm. 14. 1.

Which Testimony is confirmed by Paul at large, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12, etc, and
in relation to Jewish Professors as well as others, v. 9, whom the Gospel
(which was typified by David's time) does by such characters convince of being
in an Unregenerated State, v. 19, whatever Pretense such may make unto
Religion, or the Privileges of Gods People.

If any man whatever, be either Grossly profane, so as not to Call upon God;
or Morally Vicious, viz. a Curser, a Liar, a Slanderer, a Dissembler, etc; or
an Opposer of Christ's Kingly Interest when the set-time is come; or a
Persecutor of God's poor People; or a Companion and Encourager of ungodly men;
or a flatterer of himself in any secret sin; or one that does not Abhor all
manner of Iniquity: Such a man (whatever he may seem to be) is in the
Scripture-sence a Wicked man; who will be so accounted by men after God's own
heart, and then more especially, when that Intrest shall be advanced, which was
typified by David's Dispensation.

9. David witnesses concerning that outward Prosperity which may befall the
very worst of men; who may spring and flourish, ps. 92. 7; who may be Lively
and Strong, psa. 38. 19; whose Eyes may stand out with Fatness, psalm. 73. 7;
who may Multiply, psa. 38. 19, and be full of Children, ps. 17. 14; whose Belly
may be filled with God's Hid Treasure, psa. 17. 14; who may be Rich, and the
Glory of whose House may be increased, psa. 49. 16; whose wicked Devices may be
brought to pass, psa. 37. 7; who may Boast of their hearts desire, psa. 10. 3,
and have more than heart can wish, psalm. 73. 7; who may leave Substance to
their Babes, psa. 17. 14; who may not be in Trouble as other men, psa. 73. 5;
who may have no Bands in Death, psalm. 73. 4; and who may be accounted Blessed,
though God Abhor them, psa. 10. 3.

So also Paul witnesses, that the Crucifiers of Christ were Princes, 1 Cor. 2.
8; and that Backsliders have the greatest store of Money, 1 Timothy 6. 10; and
that they who could comply with Idolaters, 1 Cor. 8. 10* were full and Rich,
and Reigned as Kings, 1 Cor. 4. 8.

A gracious heart knows this, and therefore he does not think any whit the
better of those, but rather suspecteth their spiritual State, who do most
abundantly share in these Earthly Accommodations.

10. David witnesses concerning the Saints being Afflicted, whose Afflictions
are very many, Psa. 34. 19, being apt to be Reproached, psa. 79. 12; and
swallowed up Quick, psa. 124. 3; and Broken in pieces, psa. 94. 5; and fed with
the Bread of tears, psa. 80. 5; and triumphed over, psa. 94. 3, and Killed all
the day long, psa. 44. 22; and none to Bury them, ps. 79. 3; or at leastwise
to be in Prison, and condemned to die, ps. 102. 20.

So also Paul tells us, that we must through much Tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God, Act. 14. 22; and that all who will live Godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12; it being Now, in that respect, as it
was of Old, Gal. 4. 29; so that if the Saints had hope in this life only, they
were of all men most Miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19; as being apt here to be
Despised, Defamed, Reviled, Buffetted, made a Spectacle to the World, accounted
as its filth, and as it were appointed unto Death, 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

All which a gracious heart is well acquainted with, and therefore he dares not
find fault with such a Portion, lest he should offend against the generation of
God's children, psa. 73. 15.

11. David witnesses concerning the Saints Happiness as to the Main,
notwithstanding those hard measures which they meet with. And so he does
pronounce them blessed, ps. 1. 1, with the Blessing of God, ps. 3. 8, who will
Bless the Righteous, and compass him with favor, as with a shield, ps. 5. 12.
And more particularly he tells us, that the sins of such are covered and not
imputed to them, ps. 32. 1, 2; and that the Lord is theirs, ps. 33. 12; and
that he has set them apart for himself, psalm. 4. 3; and that their steps are
ordered by him, ps. 37. 23; and that he will preserve them from this
Generation, psalm. 12. 7. viz. from Saul and his party, who typified the Man of
Sin, and more especially with reference unto his last Appearance, as has been
often hinted. Such never shall be moved, ps. 15. 5; and though they shall, they
shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholds them with his hand, ps.
37. 24; who will give strength unto his people, ps. 29. 11. The End of such men
is Peace, ps. 37. 37; and they shall still bring forth fruit in old age, psa.
92. 14; being crowned with Grace here, and Glory hereafter, psa. 84. 11. God's
secret is with them, psa. 25. 14; and they shall want no Good thing, psa. 34.
9, 10; for the Lord takes Pleasure in their Prosperity, psa. 35. 27; and their
Little is better than the Riches of many others, psa. 37. 16. The Lord is nigh
unto them, psa. 34. 18; his Eye is upon them, psa. 33. 18; his Ears are open to
their Cry, psa. 34. 15; who bids them to open their mouth wide, and he will
fill it, psa. 81. 10. They shall inherit the Earth, ps. 37. 9, because they are
Blessed of the Lord, v. 22; and as the Lords Goodness is laid up for them
Hereafter, so also is it wrought for them at Present, psa. 31. 19. They may
expect to be Preserved from Trouble, ps. 32. 7, since they are God's Hidden
ones, psa. 83. 3, not one of whose Bones is broken, psa. 34. 20; or to be
Delivered out of Trouble, psa. 34. 19. 22, since the Angels stand charged with
them, psa. 91. 3. 11; or at leastwise the Lord will not condemn them when they
are Judged, psa. 37. 33; and they shall find at last that all his Paths are
Mercy and Truth unto them, psa. 25. 10, who has undertaken to Teach them in
the way which they shall go, ps. 32, 8, and who will be their Guide even unto
Death, psa. 48. 14. All which Promises will Eminently be fulfilled in the
Letter, together with the Rearing up of David's Temporal Kingdom in these
latter days.

So also Paul witnesses, that true Believers shall never be condemned, Romans 8.
1, since God has Justified them, v. 33, and has forgiven them all their
Trespasses, Col. 2. 13. Such are not Servants but Sons, Gal. 4. 5, 6, being
predestined to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5; and if
Children, then Heirs, Romans 8. 17; whose vile Bodies shall be one day changed,
Phil. 3. 21, and then they shall appear in Glory, Col. 3. 4, such as never yet
entered into the Heart of man to imagine, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Such are at present
Blessed with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3; they have the Mind of Christ,
1 Cor. 2. 16; there is no Law against them, Gal. 5. 23; they may be confident
that God will Perfect whatever good work he has Begun, Phil. 1. 6; and he has
said, that he will never leave them nor forsake them, Heb. 13. 5. All things
are theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 22; Freely, Romans 8. 32; and every thing they have, is
sanctified to their use, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Their very Sufferings are a Gift, Phil.
1. 29; and all things shall work together for their good, Romans 8. 28; and more
especially their Persecutions, 2 Cor. 4. 17; for if we Suffer with Christ, we
shall also Reign, 2 Timothy 2. 12; and God is faithful, who will not suffer them
to be tempted above what they are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

The consideration whereof, does help a gracious heart to be contented with
what he has, Heb. 13. 5; and not to faint, 2 Cor. 4 16, 17, but to glory in
Tribulation, Romans 5. 3; and always to Abound in Gods work, as knowing that his
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

12. David witnesses concerning the Sinners Misery, upon the Whole, whatever
present Prosperity he meets with. And so he tells us, that it shall not be
with them as with the Righteous, psalm. 1. 4; but Salvation is far from them,
ps. 119. 155; who are the Hated of Gods Soul, ps. 11. 5; whom he forbids to
declare his Statutes, or to take his Covenant into their mouth, psa. 50. 16;
against whom the Lord's face is set, psa. 34. 16; and many sorrows shall be to
them, psalm. 32. 10; which they shall not escape, for God's Right hand will find
them out, psalm. 21. 8. They shall bring forth falsehood, ps. 7. 14, and not
perform their Mischievous Device, ps. 21. 11, and their mischief shall return
upon themselves, ps. 7. 15, 16. Their way shall perish, ps. 1. 6; and if they
turn not, ps. 7. 12, the Lord will rain upon them Snares, Fire and Brimstone,
ps. 11. 6; and they shall be cut down like Grass, ps. 37. 2, within a little
while, v. 10, though never so flourishing, v. 35, 36. They shall be made as a
fiery Oven, psa. 21. 9; and shall drink the Dregs of Gods Cup, ps. 75. 8; and
be destroyed for ever, psa. 52. 5, before the Pots can feel the thorns, psalm.
58. 9; and when they flourish, it is that they might be thus Destroyed, psalm.
92. 7. And at the last they shall be turned into Hell, psa. 9. 17, for the
Ungodly shall not stand in the Day of Judgment, nor Sinners in the
Congregation of the Righteous, psa. 1. 7.

And in relation to some particular sorts of Sinners, he tells us, that their
sorrows shall be multiplied who hasten after another God, psa. 16. 4: Such
shall be Destroyed and not Built up, who regard not the works of God, nor the
Operation of his hands, psa. 28. 5: Such as Turn aside unto their crooked
ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of Iniquity, psa. 125.
5: The Lord knows the Proud afar off, ps. 138. 6, and will bring down High
Looks, ps. 18. 27, and plentifully rewards the proud doer, ps. 31. 23: And as
for wicked Persecutors, he lays before them what did befall such like of Old,
ps. 78. 42, to the 51 verse. He prays against them sadly, psalm. 69. 22, to
the 29 verse, ps. 35. 4, 5, 6. 26, psa. 83. 13, psa. 109. 7, psa. 129. 5, ps.
140. 9; and he foretells, that such shall be as a Bowing wall, or tottering
Fence, ps. 62. 3, whom God will shoot at, and suddenly shall they be wounded,
ps. 64. 7, they shall fall by the Sword, and be a portion for Foxes, psa. 63.
9, 10. And as for the Desperate Opposers of Christ's Kingly Interest, the Lord
shall have them in Derision, psa. 2. 4, advancing it in despite of them, v. 6,
because it is Decreed, v. 7; and then shall he speak unto them in his Wrath, v.
5, and Break them with a rod of Iron, v. 9, for he has resolved to make all
those Enemies his Footstool, ps. 110. 1, who therefore are bid to Kiss the Son,
lest he be angry, and they perish from the way, psa. 2. 12. All which
Judgments will Eminently be put in Execution, together with the advancement of
Christ's Temporal Kingdom in these latter days.

So also Paul tells us, that the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with
the Son of the Freewoman, Gal. 4. 30; and that ungodly men shall not inherit
the Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10; being Alienated from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18;
and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12, the Children of wrath,
v. 3; who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9; and
which shall suddenly come upon them, as travail upon a woman with Child, and
they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. And more particularly he tells us, that
Idolaters are justly given up to other Sins, Romans 1. 23, 24: and that Apostates
are hardly to be Reclaimed, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6: and that Seducers shall wax worse
and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13: and that Persecutors please neither God nor Man,
filling up their Sins always, for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16; and that it is a Righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.

All which a gracious heart is well acquainted with, and therefore he envieth
not their present portion, psa. 37. 1, 2; he will not Passionately Avenge
himself upon them, Romans 12. 19; and he exhorts all to save themselves from
this untoward Generation, Act. 2. 40.

13. Lastly, David does evidence that he was a man after God's own heart, by
that full measure of Acquaintance which he had with God himself; and by that
glorious Testimony which he does bear concerning him, both under an Essential
and Personal Consideration.

First, David does witness concerning God, as he is Essentially to be
considered, or as the Father, Word and Spirit are all One God. And so,

1. He testifies, that though there be that are called Gods, both Angels, psa.
97. 7, and Men, psa. 82. 6; yet there is but One True God, for who is God save
the Lord, Psa. 18. 31? and he is God Alone, psa. 86. 10; whose Like is not to
be found among the Gods, v. 8, for who in the Heaven can be compared with him,
or who among the Sons of the Mighty can be Likened to him, psa. 89. 6?

So also Paul witnesses, that God is One, Gal. 3. 20; and that there is none
other God but One, though there be many that are called Gods, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5,
which yet are No Gods by Nature, Gal. 4. 8; and that they be No Gods which are
made with hands, Acts 19. 26.

Which every gracious heart will readily assent unto, and does witness it by
his Practice, and not by his Profession only, as those may do whom yet the
Scripture calls Idolaters, because they give that Honor to the Creature, which
is only due to God, Ephesians. 5. 5. Nor does he only acknowledge this One God, in
opposition unto Stocks and Stones, whom Heathens worship; or unto Satan whom
Profane men worship; or unto the World whom Sensual and Covetous Professors
worship: but also, in opposition to the Man of Sin, who sits in the Temple
of God, showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4, by his Restoring those
ancient Ceremonies which God has Abrogated, and by his Commanding those
Religious Acts which God has not Required, and by his Forbidding what God
Expressly has Commanded; whom therefore Men after Gods own heart, could never
yet (in any of those Cases) submit unto, because they have but one Lawgiver,
Jam. 4. 12; and because such are said to worship Idols, Rev. 9, 20, who do thus
worship the Beast, Rev. 14. 9; and though they Profess to know God, yet do they
in Works Deny him, who thus give heed to Jewish Fables and Men's Commands, Tit.
1. 14. 16. And though that Christ's choicest Servants, did Submit unto the
Temporal Power of that Roman Dragon, and of the Babylonish Beast, during the
time of their Reign, because then Christ's Temporal Kingdom was not as yet set
up, Rev. 12. 5, or else was Interrupted, Rev. 11. 2; as God's Israel of Old did
submit unto the Temporal Power of that Egyptian Dragon Pharaoh, and of the King
of Babylon afterward, so long as their Reign continued, because then God's
Visible Rule (in Israel's hands) was either not set up, Genesis 15. 13. 18, or
Interrupted, Jer. 29. 7: Yet toward the Expiration of the Roman Dragon's
Reign, Christ's Party made War with him, Rev. 12. 7; and toward the
Expiration of the Beast's Reign, Christ's Witnesses make War with him, Rev.
11. 7; because then the Time was come, for the Lord to Judge the Earth, and to
prepare his Throne for Judgment, as an Evidence that His Name alone is
Jehovah, Psa. 82. 8, and 9. 7. and 83. 18; as Moses at such a time did contend
with that Egyptian Dragon, Exodus 4. 23, and as God's Israel at such a time, did
Cease to pray for the Peace of Babylon, Psa. 137. 8; because then the time was
come, for Abraham's Anointed Seed, Psa. 105. 15, to possess the Gates of his
Enemies, Genesis 22. 17, and for the Lord to Reign in Mount Sion, Mich. 4. 7: Ever
after which time Christ's choicest Servants disown the Man of Sin's Temporal
(as well as Ecclesiastical) power, because the time is then come, for God to
convince the World, that he is the only true God, by setting up his more
Immediate and Visible Kingdom among his Israel; till when, the World will not
confess that the Saints God is the Only God, if there be any such; and at
which time, those Earthly Gods shall all Die like men as to their Politic
Capacity, psa. 82. 7, and shall be Proclaimed to be Idols or Graven Images,
whose Worshippers will then be Confounded, Psa. 97. 7, as Christ's Kingdom
shall be brought into the World, Heb. 1. 6, each Branch of which Kingdom does
manifest unto the World that the Saints God is the Only true God; and
therefore though Other Lords Besides Him have had Dominion over them, yet by
him (at that time) they will Only make mention of His Name, Isa. 26. 13, as
their Judge and Law giver and King, Isa. 33. 22. From whence also we may Partly
understand, how the Lord might be said, not formerly to have been Known by that
Name Jehovah, till Israel's Departure out of Egypt, Exodus 6. 3; viz. because
this Name [Jehovah] does principally import, that God is Alone, ps. 83. 18, or
that there is No God beside this Lord Jehovah, Isa. 4^. 6; which Truth was not
Effectually and clearly made out, until that his Typical Israel was then
Anointed to be Supreme above other Earthly Gods, which formerly their
Forefathers had not been; and in whose Temporal Advancement the Lord did first
Visibly appear to be the Only God, by taking all worldly Rule and Power into
his own hand, which first Begins in his Saints, Isa. 24. 23, from whom it
passes (in time) unto the Son, Dan. 7. 27, and by him it will be (at last)
delivered up unto the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24, that God may be All in All, v. 28:
And as this Kingly Interest of his shall get up in the World, in that Day shall
there be but One Lord (or Jehovah) and his Name One, Zach. 14. 9; which every
true gracious heart will (in all Ages) readily subscribe unto, Isa. 44. 5, and
to the utmost height of God's Increasing Due, and of his Peoples Duty, Psa. 96.
8. 10.

2. David witnesses concerning Gods being a Creator; who has made us, and
not we our selves, psa. 100. 3, with much Dreadful wonder, psa. 139. 14, and
Secret Curiosity, v. 15; who also made Heaven and Earth, psa. 121. 2; who laid
the foundations of the Earth, Psa. 104. 5; and has founded the World and its
fullness, psa. 89. 11; by whose Word were the Heavens made, and all the Host of
them by the breath of his Mouth, psa. 33. 6.

So also Paul witnesses, that God made the World, and all things therein; from
whence he argues, that he dwells not in Temples made with hands, as poor
Superstitious Creatures were apt to think; and that he needs not be
Worshipped with men's hands, since he gives to all Life and Breath; and that he
has made of one Blood all Nations of men, that they might seek after him; and
that men who are his Offspring, should therefore not think that the Godhead or
Creator can be like unto Gold or Silver or Stone graven by Art and Man's
Device, Act. 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, 29. And elsewhere he exhorts poor Heathens
to Turn from their Vanities unto the Living God, who Made Heaven and Earth, and
the Sea, and all things that are therein, Act. 14. 15.

A man after God's own heart is well acquainted herewith, who therefore dare
not say, that God made him not, Isa. 29. 16: and who therefore does call him
the Lord Alone, Neh. 9. 6, Isa. 37. 16; accounting those Gods to be Perishing,
who have not made Heaven and Earth, Jer. 10. 11; from whom he therefore turns
unto his Maker, Isa. 17. 7: not daring to Requite him ill, because he has made
him, Deuteronomy. 32. 6: nor making himself more Pure than his Maker, Job. 4. 17, but
therefore ascribing Righteousness unto him, Job 36. 3: not striving with his
Maker, Isa. 45. 9, who may do whatever seems good unto him, Jerem. 27. 5:
and Trusting in him, Psalm. 124. 8. 1 Pet. 4. 19.

3. David does witness, that God is Every where, and that he Knows All
things. He knew not whither to flee from Gods Presence, who was in Heaven and
Hell, and in the uttermost parts of the Sea, Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9. He does
acknowledge that God tries the Children of men, Psa. 11. 4; and that he
Looks upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth, Psa. 33. 14; and that all his
Adversaries were before him, psa. 69. 19, who Beholds their Spite and
Mischief to Requite it with his hand, Psa. 10. 14. And as concerning himself,
God Knew his reproach and shame, Psa. 69. 19; and his groaning Desires were not
Hid from him, Psa. 38. 9: yea he tries the Heart and Reins, psa. 7. 9; unto
whom the Darkness and Light are both alike, psa. 139. 12. He understood his
Thought afar off, and every word in his tongue, and was acquainted with all his
ways, psa. 139. 2, 3, 4; and therefore he kept God's Precepts, psa. 119. 168;
shall not God else search it out; for he Knows the Secrets of the heart, ps.
44. 21.

So also Paul witnesses, that God is not far from every one of us, Act. 17.
27; and that he Tries our Hearts, in which respect he durst not please Men but
God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.

A Gracious heart knows, that God is so in Heaven, as that he does also fill
the Earth with his Essential presence, Jer. 23. 24, although he be not
Graciously present every where, Numb. 14. 42; and therefore he dares not
indulge the most Secret or Pleasant Sin, for the ways of man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5. 20, 21.

4. David does witness concerning the Greatness of God's Power and Terror. His
Greatness is affirmed by him to be unsearchable, psa. 145. 3; whom Power
belongs unto, psa. 62. 11, who has a Mighty Arm, ps. 89. 13, and whom none
is like unto in point of Strength, v. 8: and as a proof whereof he has
ordained Strength out of the mouth of Sucklings, psa. 8. 2; he lifts up from
the Gates of Death, ps. 9. 13; he brings the Counsel of the Heathen to
naught, ps. 33. 10; the Wrath of man shall praise him, the Remainder of Wrath
shall he Restrain, psa. 76. 10. And as to God's Terror, he tells us, that
God is greatly to be feared by his People, ps. 89. 7; for the Lord most High is
Terrible, psa. 47. 2; in whose sight none may stand when he is once angry, Psa.
76. 7; in which regard, all the World is bid to stand in Awe of him, Psalm. 33.
8; and his Opposers are bid to Kiss him, lest he be Angry, Psa. 2. 12; at whose
Wrath the Earth sometimes Trembled, ps. 18. 7; and because of whose great and
terrible Power his Enemies shall one day submit unto him, Psalm. 66. 3.

So also Paul styleth him, a Great God, Tit. 2. 13; the consideration of whose
Strength should keep Idolaters from provoking him unto Jealousy, 1 Cor. 10.
22; who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29; and into whose hands it is a fearful
thing to fall, Heb. 10. 31; and because that Paul knew his Terror, he
therefore persuaded men in such a Self-ruining way, 2 Cor. 5. 11, so as that
others thought him to be Besides himself, v. 13.

This does encourage a gracious heart humbly to expect Great things from this
God, who is in a more especial manner Great in Sion, Psalm. 99. 2; and therefore
do such yield suitable Services unto him, because he is so Great a King, Mal.
1. 14. And his almighty Power does make them to seek unto him, Job 8. 5; and to
fear him only, and not any other in comparison of him, Heb. 11. 27.

5. David does witness concerning God's All Sufficiency, both in relation to
Himself and Others. His Allsufficiency as to Himself, is largely declared, Psa.
50. 9, 10, 11, 12, who therefore needs not what Man can do, for the World is
his and the fullness thereof. And his Allsufficiency as unto Others, appears
both in his Provision and Security: David concluded he should not want, because
the Lord was his Shepherd, Psa. 23. 1: Nor did he fear what man could do unto
him, because the Lord was on his side, Psa. 118. 6; whom he did therefore trust
in, Ps. 56. 4. 11; and was not afraid, though an Host should encamp against
him, Psa. 27. 3; and though ten thousands of people did compass him round
about, Psa. 3. 6.

So also Paul tells us, that God is not worshipped with men's hands, as
though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all Life and Breath and all
things, Act. 17. 25: the Word of whose Grace is able to build men up, Act. 20.
32; and if he be for us, who then can be against us, Romans 8. 31? since his
Grace is sufficient, 2 Cor. 12. 9; so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my
helper, I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13. 6; whose Promise
of not failing us, should make us content with what we have, ver. 5; and whom
we should therefore Glorify, because he is Able to do exceeding Abundantly
above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.

The consideration of which Alsufficiency or Almightiness, does move a gracious
heart, to walk before God and to be perfect, Genesis 17. 1; and yet to walk humbly
with him, since Man cannot be Profitable to the Almighty, Job 22. 2, 3; and not
to despise the least of his Chastisements, Job 5. 17; nor yet to fear that he
will pervert Justice, Job 8. 3.

6. David does testify concerning God's Holiness, even then when himself was
seemingly forsaken, Psa. 22. 1, 2, 3. He has no pleasure in wickedness,
neither shall Evil dwell with him, psa. 5. 6. Such as abide in his Tabernacle,
are upright walkers, and righteous workers, ps. 15. 1, 2, or such as have clean
hands and a pure heart, Psalm. 24. 3, 4. But he is angry with the wicked every
day, Psalm. 7. 11; and hates all workers of Iniquity, ps. 5. 5, with
Soul-hatred, ps. 11. 5; whom he will Destroy, ps. 5. 6, unless they Turn unto
him, psa. 7. 12, 13. Whose Holiness did make him greatly to Abhor his own
Israel, when once they turned Idolaters, Psa. 78. 58, 59; nay, and if David
himself should regard ^niquity in his heart, he then concluded that God would
not hear him, ps. 66. 18.

So also Paul bids us to follow after Holiness, without which no man shall
see God, Heb. 12. 14; who will execute his Judgments upon them that commit
Iniquity, Romans 2. 2.

Thence it is, that a Gracious heart endeavors to be Holy, because God is
so, 1 Pet. 1. 16; who will by no means clear the Guilty, Exodus 34 7, and much
less those whom he has known of all the Families of the Earth, Am. 3. 2.

7. David does testify that God is Just and Righteous. The Righteous Lord
loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7, and Judgment, psa. 33. 5: his Righteousness
is like the great Mountains, Psa. 36. 6: yea his Right Hand is full of
Righteousness, Psa. 48. 10: he Judges the world in Righteousness, ps. 9. 8;
and David knew that God's Afflicting Judgments upon himself were Right, psa.
119. 75: indeed some of God's footsteps are not known, ps. 77. 19, which
Brutish men understand not, Psa. 92, 5, 6* 7, and which were too Painful for
David himself to find out, psa. 73. 16. 17; but although Clouds and Darkness
are round about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of his
Throne, ps. 97. 2.

So also Paul tells us, that Gods Judgments are unsearchable, and his VVayes
past finding out, Romans 11. 33; but yet his Righteousness will one day fully be
Revealed, both in the Sinners destruction, Romans 2. 5, and in the Saints Reward,
Heb. 6. 10, one manifest token whereof, is the present Tribulations which they
endure, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5.

This makes a gracious Heart to rejoice at the thought of his coming to judge
the World with Righteousness, Psa. 96. 10, 11, 12, 13, who then will bring
forth their Righteousness as the Light, Psa. 37. 6; and in the mean time,
though they are humbly enquiring into the Nature of his Judgments, yet dare
they not call in question the Righteousness of what they do not understand,
Jer. 12. 1, 2.

8. David does testify that God is True; whose Faithfulness does reach unto
the Clouds, psa. 36. 5; whose Word is Right, psalm. 33. 4, and Pure, psalm. 12.
6, and Tried, psa. 18* 30: who is always mindful of his Covenant, psa. 111. 5,
and does magnify his Word ^bove all his Name, ps. 138. 2; whom David did
therefore resolve to trust in, psa. 56. 3, 4, and did encourage others to do
the like, psa. 31. 24, from what had been his own Experience, Psalm. 27. 13, 14.

So also Paul tells us, that though we Believe not the Promises or Threats of
God, yet he abides Faithful, 2 Timothy 2. 12, 13; and that though every man be a
Liar, yet God is True, Romans 3. 4, who cannot Lie, Tit. 1. 2, it being
impossible that he should, Heb. 6. 17.

Therefore a Gracious heart may boldly say, he will not fear, because this
faithful God has said, He never will forsake him, Hebr. 13. 3, 4.

9. David does witness concerning God's Rule or Government in the World; who
is the Governor among the Nations, psa. 22. 28, and whose Kingdom rules over
all, psa. 103. 19, for all are his Servants, ps. 119. 91. He does Good, psa.
119. 68, and he also brings Evil who turned the Egyptians heart to hate his
people, ps. 105. 25, and caused men to ride over their heads, psa. 66. 12.

So also Paul tells us, that the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness
thereof; in which respect he licenseth Christians to eat of meat sacrificed
unto Idols, in case they knew it not, 1 Cor. 10. 25, 26, but otherwise, he
therefore wishes them to forbear, v. 28: and according to which Rule, we still
may thence know, how far we may warrantably make use of those Things or Places
(not in themselves absolutely necessary) which have been once tainted with
Idolatry.

10. David testifies concerning God's absolute Sovereignty, who does
whatsoever he pleases, in Heaven, in Earth, in the Seas, and in all deep
places, psa. 135. 6; who puts down one and sets up another, psa. 75. 7;
and therefore when David was corrected, he opened not his mouth, because the
Lord did it, psa. 39. 9.

So also Paul tells us, that God works all things after the Counsel of his
Will, Ephesians. 1. 11; who has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, Romans 9. 15, and
whom he will he hardneth, ver. 18, which none may find fault with, v. 19; or
reply against God, v. 20, since he has power over us, as the Potter has over
the Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel unto honor and another unto
dishonor, v. 21.

This makes a Gracious Heart to fear him, because of his Dominion, Job 25. 2,
and who therefore dares not say to him, What do thou? Job 9. 12.

11. David testifies concerning God's general Goodness unto all; to whom Mercy
does belong, psa. 62. 12; who is Good, and does good, psa. 119. 68; and the
whole Earth is full of his Goodness, psa. 33. 5, visiting the Earth and
watering it, psa. 65. 9, by which means he does provide for every Beast, and
for all the Fowls of Heaven, psa. 104. 11, 12* and many are his thoughts toward
Man, psa. 40. 5, who has cause to praise him for his manifold Goodness, psalm.
107. 8. 15. 21. 31; for Good and Upright is the Lord, and therefore will he
teach Sinners in the way, psa. 25. 8, who has received Gifts for men, yea for
the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them, ps. 68. 18.

So also Paul tells us, that God left not himself without witness, in that he
did good to Heathens, Acts 14. 17, who is the Savior of all men, in a general
sense, 1 Timothy 4. 10, and would have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4;
beseeching them to be Reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20; and whose Goodness leads to
Repentance, Romans 2. 4.

12. David testifies concerning God's special Goodness to his People, unto
whom all his Paths are Mercy and Truth, psa. 25. 10; and whom he pitieth as a
Father does his Children, psa. 103. 13; forgiving their Iniquity, psa. 78. 38;
and suffering no man to do them harm psa. 105. 14; but giving his Angels charge
over them, psa. 91. 11; not forsaking them that seek him, ps. 9. 10, but
hearing their Desire, and preparing their Heart accordingly, psa. 10. 17;
saving them, ps. 18. 27, with his right hand, psa. 17. 7; for he does not
abhor the Affliction of his afflicted ones, psa. 22. 24, nor will he despise
his Prisoners, psa. 69. 33.

So also Paul tells us, that God is the special Savior of those that do
Believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10; who comfort such when they are cast down, 2 Cor. 7. 6.

13. David testifies concerning God's being Immutable; who shall endure for
ever, psa. 102. 12; and whose Counsel is like himself, psa. 33. 11, and so also
his Mercy, ps. 136. 1.

So also Paul tells us, that God is Immortal, 1 Timothy 1. 16, who Only has
Immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16; and that his Gifts and Calling are without
Repentance, Romans 11. 29.

14. David testifies concerning God's Wisdom, which eminently appears in his
more Heavenly work, and for which he is worthy of his People's Praises, psa.
136. 1. 5.

But Paul does more fully speak of God's manifold Wisdom, Ephesians. 3. 10; whose
Grace abounds toward his, in all wisdom and prudence, Ephesians. 1. 7, 8; which
yet is an Hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 7, and that which the World calls
Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24, as the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness
with him, 1 Cor. 3. 19, who is God only wise, Romans 16. 27.

15. David testifies concerning the Nature of God's good presence: The
Creature's Presence may yield some kind of momentany comfort, but in the
Presence of God there is fullness of Joy, and pleasures for Evermore, psa. 16.
11: and therefore he found it to be good for him to draw nigh to God, whilst
others went a whoring from him, psa. 73. 27, 28: accounting them Blessed, whom
God had chosen to Approach unto him in his Temple, or Presence Chamber, psa.
65. 4: and besides whom, he neither had nor desired any, in Earth or Heaven,
ps. 73. 25.

So also Paul tells us, that he was rather willing to be absent from the Body
than from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8: whom he did account it Best to be with, Phil.
1. 23; as being the Fullness of all things, Ephesians. 1. 23; and that wherein the
Saints future Glory does summarily consist, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

16. David testifies concerning what is the principal Object of God's Delight;
who does not Desire Legal Offerings, or that a man should think to satisfy for
his Failing in one respect by his Duty in another, psa. 40. 6; but the
Sacrifices of God are a Broken Spirit, in case of a miscarriage, psa. 51. 16,
17: and hearty Praises do Please him better than an Ox or Bullock ps. 69. 30,
31: he also takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
Mercy, psalm. 147. 11; and desires truth in the Inward parts, psa. 51. 6.

So also Paul bids Children to Requite their Parents, for that is good and
Acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5. 4: and Rich men to communicate, for with such
Sacrifices God is well-pleased, Heb. 13. 16: and Professors to Pray for the
Conversion of others, for this is good and Acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 3; and to be transformed by the Renewing of their Mind,
that they may prove what is that Good and Acceptable and Perfect Will of God,
Romans 12. 2; by having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 10, 11; but being fruitful in every good work, that they may walk
worthy of the Lord unto all Pleasing, Col. 1. 10.

And this is the Sum of what David testifies concerning God, as he is
Essentially considered, or as the Father Son and Spirit are all One God. But
then,

Secondly, David does also testify concerning God as he is Personally
considered, or as the Divine Essence is Distinguished into the Father, Son and
Spirit. And so,

1. David witnesses concerning God the Father, Psalm. 2. 7, whom he does call
Jehovah; and in competition with whom the Son is called Adonai; Jehovah said to
Adoni, or the Lord said to my Lord, viz. the Father to the Son, Psalm. 110. 1.
From whence we may be able further to understand that knotty Scripture, Exodus
6. 3, or how this name Jehovah was not known to Abraham, since it is evident
that the word Jehovah was known to him, Genesis 22. 14; but yet not, as to this
Mystical import thereof, or as it does signify a Father; under which Peculiar
consideration God had not manifested himself to Abraham as his Express Father,
nor to his Seed (but only as their God, Genesis 17. 7.) until their coming out of
Egypt, at which time he called Israel his Son, Exodus 4. 22; and therefore he
might be said, not till that time, to be known by this name Jehovah, Exodus 6.
3, which strictly taken, does signific his being Related as a Father; the
Discovery of which special Relation, was reserved of old, until the time of
Israel's Ascending out of the land of Egypt, Ho. 11. 1, which is applied to
Christ upon a like occasion, Mat. 2. 15. and who is said (Manifestatively) to
be begotten that very Day, when he was Raised up, in order to his Ascension and
Exaltation, Acts 13. 33; where Paul does concur with David, in witnessing
concerning God the Father, as he also does in several other places.

Though also, the Father may be signified by this word Jehovah, as it does
(most Properly) import his Being of himself, Isa. 44. 6; in which respect, that
Title is also given unto the Son, Jer. 23. 6, and to the Holy Ghost, Acts 28.
25, with Isa. 6. 8, 9, in a General sense, or as these Three are all one God, 1 John 5. 7: but yet in a special sense, that name Jehovah does more Peculiarly
belong unto the Father, because He alone (with reference unto the Son and
Spirit) may be said to have his Being of Himself, whereas the Son is said to be
Begotten by the Father, Ioh. 3. 16, and the Spirit is said to Proceed from
both, Ioh. 15. 26.

Now men of an Antichristian spirit, do hence appear, not to be men after Gods
own Heart, as David was; because they do (virtually at least) Deny, that Christ
is the Son, (by keeping up what he has Abrogated, and by Imposing what he has
not appointed) and so by necessary consequence they also do Deny the Father, 1
Ioh. 2. 22. and 4. 3.

II. David testifies concerning the Holy Spirit, both as to his Deity and
Properties.

1. The Godhead of this Spirit is witnessed unto by David, when he does affirm
it to be every where, Psalm. 139. 7; and when he does attribute a Creating power
thereunto, Psalm. 104. 30; both which are Incommunicable to the Creature.

So also Paul testifies that the Spirit is very God, when he applies that to
this Spirit, Act. 28. 25. which elsewhere is spoken of Jehovah, Isa. 6. 8, 9:
and when he affirms that this Spirit and God are both one, 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18:
and when he calls this Spirit Eternal, Heb. 9. 14: and when he affirms it
to be the searcher of All things, 1 Cor. 2. 10: and when he ascribes unto it a
Power to Raise the Dead, Romans 8. 11: and when he makes this Spirit the
Joynt-object of prayer, together with God, 2 Cor. 13. 14: and when he says
that Gospel-saints are the temples of this Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 19, as well
as of God, 1 Cor. 3. 16.

A man after God's own heart, is one who will not deny the proper God head of
the Holy Ghost.

2. David does also witness unto a Threefold property belonging to this Spirit.

First, David tells us, that the Spirit of God is Good or Useful, ps, 143. 10.

Whose Usefulness is more Particularly declared by Paul; as it does lead us
into the knowledge of our Hidden Privileges, 1 Cor. 2. 10: as it does fill the
heart with Joy, Romans 14. 17: as it does witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God, Romans 8. 16; as it makes us to Rejoice in Persecutions, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6, Romans 5. 3. 5; as it is an Earnest of what is to come, 2 Cor. 1.
22; as it makes us to Abound in Hope, Romans 15. 13; as it helps us to Wait
with Patience, Gal. 5. 5: as it delivers us from under the Law, Gal. 5. 18:
as it does in some sense Justify us, 1 Cor. 6. 11: as it Keeps the good
things which are committed to us, 2 Timothy 1. 14: as it does furnish with
Ordinary Gifts as well as Extraordinary, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10: as it Teaches
how to speak in Preaching, 1 Cor. 2. 13: as it makes our Preaching to be
powerful, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5, or to imprint upon men's hearts, 2 Cor. 3. 3: as it
helps our infirmities in Prayer, Romans 8. 26: as it strengthens us with
might in the Inner man, Ephesians. 3. 16: as it Mortifieth our fleshly lusts, Romans 8.
13: as it does sanctify, Romans 15. 16. or Renew us, Tit. 3. 5: and as it
witnesses to our sincerity, Romans 9. 1.

Secondly, David tells us, that this Spirit of God is Holy, ps. 51. 11; which
may be said to be so, Partly because it Works whatever Holiness is in the
creature, as Paul does often witness: but especially, because it is Holy in it
self; and cannot endure unholiness in another, being apt to be Grieved
therewith, as Paul informs us, Ephesians. 4. 30, if not Quenched, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.

Thirdly, David tells us, that this Holy Spirit is also Free, ps. 51. 12; which
may be said to be so; Partly because it is of the most Noble or Princely stock,
(as the same Hebrew word is often translated) proceeding from the Father; Partly
because it acts Liberaly, as Earthly Nobles or Princes use to do: Partly
because it does make them Free (in every good respect) in whom it is, 2 Cor. 3.
17: But especially because it is a most Free Agent, in every of its Motions and
Operations, and in which respect Paul styles it a Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29.

III. David testifies concerning Jesus Christ; both as he is God, and Man, and
Mediator.

First, as he is God; and so David does expressly call him God, ps 45. 6. which
Paul interprets concerning Christ, as he is the Son, Heb. 1. 8. So also,
David does declare him to be a God by Nature, when he says that the Heavens
and Earth are the work of his hands, psalm. 102. 25; which Paul affirms to be
meant of Christ, Heb. 1. 10. So also, when David styles Christ, his Lord, ps.
110. 1; from whence Christ argues his own being more than a Man, Mat, 22. 44,
45, unto the utter silencing of those Pharisaical Arrians, v. 46, however some
since are bold to question still whether Christ be very God.

Thus also Paul says, that Christ is God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5: for
whom, and by whom all things were Made, and do consist, Col. 1. 16, 17, Heb. 1.
2, 3; which clearly proves that he is very God, Heb. 3. 4: who has neither
End of Life, nor Beginning of Days, Heb. 7. 3: and who will one day Appear the
Great God, as well as his People's Savior, Tit. 2. 13. A man after Gods own
Heart, will witness unto (and not Deny) the Godhead of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, David witnesses concerning Christ, as to his Humane Nature also; in
which respect, he calls God the God of Christ, psa. 45. 7, as Paul explaineth
it, Heb. 1. 8; who had a Father, as he was God the Son; but as he was a Man, he
had a God. Nay and David did also foretell, that Christ (as Man) should be of
the Fruit of his Body, psa. 132. 11, as Peter does explain it, Act. 2. 30;
which Paul does also witness unto, Act. 13. 22, 23; affirming that Christ was
Made (which covertly asserts his Godhead) of the Seed of David according to the
Flesh, Romans 1. 3; who elsewhere says, that Christ took on him, not the Nature
of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16; which as it does clearly prove,
that Christ was truly Man, so also that he was very God; since otherwise, he
could not be said to Take man's Nature on him, which Act does necessarily
presuppose his Pre-existent Being, and as he must needs be God, it being there
denied that he ever was a Proper Angel.

And as David foretold, that Christ should be very Man, so also, that in that
Humane Nature he should be suddenly Raised from the Dead, psalm. 16. 10, and
that he should sit therein on God's Right hand in Heaven, psalm. 110. 1, as
Peter does explain it, Act. 2. 31, 34: the being of which Humane Nature now in
Heaven, is also testified by Paul, when he says, that he who Descended into
the Grave (which only suiteth with Christ's Humane Body) is the same who
Ascended into Heaven, Ephesians. 4. 9, 10; from whence he also looked for his
Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 1, which word Appearing does not agree with his Godhead
strictly taken, nor is it ever used, save with reference unto his Humane Nature.

A man after God's own Heart, will not deny (which yet too many at this day
do) that Christ still is, both very God, and also very Man.

3. Thirdly, David witnesses concerning Christ, as he is God-man, or
Mediator; and that both in a Relative and Absolute respect.

1. Relatively, or as he stood Related unto this Mediator; and so he calls
Christ, His Lord, Psa. 110. 1: as Paul does also very often; both in relation
to the Jews and Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1. 2; affirming him to be the Christians Only
Lord, 1 Cor. 8. 6; and that no man can truly say this, but by the Holy Ghost,
1 Cor. 12. 3.

A man after God's own heart, is for a special Application of Jesus Christ unto
himself; and cannot content himself with knowing what Christ is, without some
more Peculiar Relation between Christ and him. And as he is desirous to know
Christ under the consideration of a Savior, so also, he does freely own him as
a Lord, and as His Lord in particular. Christ is the Believer's Husband, and
yet such call him Lord, as Sarah did her Husband, 1 Pet. 3. 6; and therefore do
all his Spouses worship him, because he is their Lord, psa. 45. 11. And thus
does David call him, in the Spirit, Matt. 22. 43, or in Truth, Joh. 4. 24; and
not only in a way of flattering Complement, as the most do now, and as the
worst will one day do, Mat. 7. 22.

2. David witnesses concerning Christ the Mediator, as he is Absolutely
considered; both in relation to his Spiritual Beauty, his peculiar Privileges,
his special Graces, his Usage in the World, and every of his Offices, as he is
Prophet, Priest, and King.

1. David witnesses unto Christ's spiritual Beauty or Desireableness, when he
terms him fairer than the Children of men, Psalm. 45. 2. Which Desireableness
of his, Paul gives us a more particular account of, when he tells us, that
all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid in him, Col. 2. 3: who is
the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb.
1. 3: in whom all fullness dwells, Col. 1. 19, the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col. 2. 9, and therefore his people are complete in him, v. 10; to be
with whom for ever, is that wherein their future Happiness consists, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 17.

A man after God's own Heart, does count Christ white and ruddy, the chiefest
of ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10, yea altogether Lovely, v. 16; whom therefore he
loves with his Soul, Cant. 1. 7, as all the upright do, v. 4, yea even the
very Virgins, v. 3.

2. David witnesses concerning Christ's peculiar Privileges, when he calls
God His God, psa. 45. 7, with Heb. 1. 9: who might not see Corruption, psa. 16.
10, with Acts 13. 35: who did become the Head-stone in the Corner, psa. 118.
22, with Acts 4. 11: whom the Father bad, Sit at his Right hand, until he made
his Enemies his Footstool, psa. 110. 1; resolving to Advance him, in despite
of all Opposers, psalm. 2. 6; and promising to strike through Kings in the day
of his wrath, psa. 110. 5, on Christ's right hand.

So also Paul tells us, that Christ is appointed Heir of all things, Heb. 1.
2: whom God has set at his Right hand Ephesians. 1. 20: having given him a Name
above every name, Phil. 2. 9: and having made him the Head of all Principality
and power; Col. 2. 10: who is the first born of every creature, Col. 1. 15, and
the first born from the dead, that in all things he might have the
Pre-eminence, v. 18. All which a gracious heart is comfortably acquainted with,
as being therein represented by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6; or at least, complete in
him, Col. 2. 10, and some way Benefited, Ephesians. 1. 22, with reference to all
those Privileges.

3. David witnesses concerning his special Graces. And so he tells us, that
Christ was useful unto All, receiving Gifts for Men, yea for the Rebellious
also, psa. 68. 18, but more especially for the Saints, as Paul intepreteth that
Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 8. 12, in whom is all his Delight, and unto whom his
Goodness did extend, Psa. 16. 3, though not to God, verse 2, which was an
argument of his Humility, and wherein David was his Type, as is evident from v.
10. He was hated without a cause, ps. 35. 19, with Ioh. 15. 25. The reproaches
of them that reproached God, fell upon him, Psalm. 69. 9; which Paul
interprets to be an argument of his self-denial, Romans 15. 3. He loved
righteousness and hated wickedness, ps. 45. 7. with Heb. 1. 9. He resolved to
make God his Trust, ps. 18. 2, with Heb. 2. 13. The zeal of God's House did eat
him up, ps. 69. 9, with Ioh. 2. 17. He delighted to do Gods will with reference
unto his sufferings, having his Ears opened, ps. 40. 6. 8, which Paul renders
a Preparing of his Body, Heb. 10. 5. perhaps to hint unto us, that when a
Christians Ear is Opened, unto a Call from God to Suffer, his Body will be then
Prepared for it, however it might seem unfit before for such an undertaking.

So also, Paul tells us, that Christ tasted Death for every man, Heb. 2. 9;
and that being Rich, he became Poor for his People's sakes, 2 Cor. 8. 9: not
Pleasing himself, Romans 15. 3: loving Righteousness and Hating Iniquity, Heb. 1.
9: being faithful to him who did Appoint him, Heb. 3. 2: learning Obedience by
what he suffered, although he were a Son, Heb. 5. 8, and though he was equal
with God, Phil. 2. 6, yet was he in fashion as a Man, v. 8, and taking upon him
the form of a Servant, v. 7, became Obedient unto Death, v. 8.

All which Graces of his, a man of David's spirit is well acquainted with, and
is thereby stirred up unto an holy Imitation of him, in every of those and such
like respects.

4. David witnesses concerning Christ's usage in the world, from God and Man.
He was in Appearance Forsaken of his God, and under which cloud his Sun went
down, ps. 22. 1, with Mat. 27. 46. He was betrayed by his own familiar friend,
ps. 41. 9, with Joh. 13. 18. He was Opposed by the Great ones of the World,
Psalm. 2. 1, with Acts 4. 25. He was Rejected by the Professors of that time,
ps. 118. 22, with Mat. 21. 42. And whilst he was upon the Cross, some parted
his Garments, ps. 22. 18. with Mat. 27. 35; others Derided at his former Faith,
ps. 22. 8, with Mat. 27. 43, and gave him Gall with Vinegar to drink, ps. 69.
21, with Mat. 27. 48.

So also Paul tells us, that he was most unworthily put to death, Act. 13.
28; and that he was in all points Tempted like as we are, excepting sin, Heb.
4. 15.

All which a Gracious heart does labor to improve, unto the fitting of him for
such like measures, Ioh. 15. 20; and the composing of his Spirit under them,
Mat. 10. 24; who thereby also is encouraged to Beg for mercy in such a like
condition, Heb. 4. 15, 16, and humbly to expect it, since Christ himself has
suffered, being tempted, Heb. 2. 18.

Lastly, David witnesses concerning every of Christ's Offices, as he is a
Prophet, Priest, and King.

1. As he was a Prophet, or as he did speak in Parables, and uttered Dark
sayings, psalm. 78. 2, and 49. 4, with Mat. 13. 35. Which Prophetical (or
Preaching) Office of his, is also witnessed unto by Paul, both in relation to
the Jews, Romans 15. 8, and Gentiles, ver. 9, from ps. 18. 49.

A gracious heart does therefore count Christ his only Master in comparison,
Mat. 23. 10; nor is he offended with the darkness of his sayings, but seeks
unto him in such a case for help, as his Disciples were wont to do.

2. David testifies, that Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck, ps. 110. 4, with Ioh 12. 34.

Which Priesthood of his, Paul also does witness unto at large, both after
Aaron's order, and Melchizedecks; affirming him to be a Merciful and faithful
High Priest, Heb. 2. 17; a Great High Priest, Heb. 4. 14; an High Priest of
good things to come, Heb. 9. 11, who is entered into the True Holy place, v. 24,
once for all, v. 26, with his own blood, v. 12; being fully qualified for his
work, Heb. 7. 26; and called of God unto it, Heb. 5. 4, 5.

Now that Priesthood of Melchizedeck (which David does only speak of) does
seem to typifie Christ's Priesthood; in regard of its Work and Wages, together
with those special Properties which appertained thereunto.

The whole Work of Melchizedecks Priesthood, (so far as it is mentioned in the
Scripture) does seem to be contained, in his refreshing Abraham with Bread and
Wine, Genesis 14. 1^, and in his Blessing of him, v. 19, and in his Praising God
on his behalf, v. 20; whom he did thus go forth to meet, after his victorious
conflict with those four Kings, v. 17, who had taken his Brother captive, v.
14: To signify unto us, that the Main of Christ's Priesthood (with reference
unto Actual Believers, such as Abraham then was,) does consist, in furnishing
his faithful Servants with strength and Comfort; in his Interceding on their
behalf for further mercy; and in his Blessing God for what Success they meet
with in their lawful undertakings: all which may then be most Hopefully
expected by them, when they shall have made some glorious Conquest; and in
particular, when Daniels four Monarchs shall utterly be subdued by them, who
seem to have been typified, by these four Kings.

The Wages of Melchizedech were, the Tithes of all Abraham's Spoils; which
Abraham did freely give him, Genesis 14. 20, reserving nothing for himself, v. 23,
save what his men had eaten, v. 24: To signify unto us, that Tithes did
Originally shadow out Christ's Due; which Tithes were paid to Levi afterward,
but that Priesthood was only for a Time, together with the Change whereof,
this Law for Tithes was also changed, Heb. 7. 9. 12: So that the Advocates for
Tithes (at this Day) must prove, both that a Maintenance may now be forced, and
that this kind of Ma^ntenance by Tithes is now Lawful, since this is an old
Abrogated Law which may not be kept up in Gospel Times, Col. 2. 17. 20; nor is
there a Dispensation given, to keep up any Ceremonial Forms, though some would
pretend to do it, upon some other consideration. But Christ's Priesthood is for
ever, and so his Due is yet abiding; who does expect from his People, that they
should consecrate their Gain to him, Mich. 4. 13; reserving nothing thereof
unto themselves, save what is Needful to Refresh them with at Present, and to
prepare them for further service.

The special properties annexed to Melchizedech's Priesthood (above that of
Aaron's) were chiefly Three.

First, Melchizedech was King as well as Priest, and King of Salem, which is
King of Peace, Heb. 7. 2; whereas Aaron was Only Priest, whilst Moses was his
Lord, Number. 12. 11, or King, Deuteronomy. 33. 5: To signify unto us, that Christ is
both King and Priest, or a Priest upon his Throne, and that the counsel of
Peace is between them both, Zech. 6. 13.

Secondly, Melchizedech was also King of Righteousness (or Eminently Righteous)
as he was Priest, which Paul infers from the signification of his Name, Heb.
7. 2, concerning whom there is no failing mentioned; whereas Aaron and his
Posterity had their Infirmities, Heb. 7. 28, in which respect they needed daily
to offer up Sacrifices for their own sins first, v. 27: To signify unto us,
that Christ is such an High Priest, who is holy, harmless and undefiled, Heb.
7. 26.

Thirdly and (principally) Melchizedech was a Priest for Ever, as David does
expressly tell us, psa. 110. 4, whose Everlastingness in that respect, Paul
clears up, from the Scripture's silence concerning his Birth and Death, Heb.
7. 3, and therefore it is Presumptuous as well as vain, for any to Conjecture,
who this Melchizedech was; whereas Aaron and his Posterity were Many Priests,
because they were not suffered to continue by reason of Death, Heb. 7. 23: To
signify unto us, that Christ because he continues Ever has an Unchangeable
Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24, which Paul does there further argue, from his being
made Priest with an Oath, v. 20, which Aaron and his Posterity were not, v. 21.

The Substance of all which, a man after God's own heart does comfortably
understand; who doubts not but that Christ will faithfully perform his whole
Work beforementioned: who therefore is freely willing to give him all his
forenamed Tithes or Dues: and who also does Hopefully wait upon him for Mercy
and Grace to help in time of need, since he is both able and willing, because
he is a Righteous King and Merciful High Priest; especially since he Ever
lives to make Intercession for them that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

3. David does also testify, concerning Christ's Kingly Office, whom the Father
is resolved to set as King in his holy Hill of Sion, psa. 2. 6, and that he
shall Rule in the midst of his Enemies, psa. 110. 2; having given him the
Heathen for his Possession, whom he shall break with a Rod of Iron, ps. 2. 8,
9; in which respect the Greatest of them are bid to be Wise, v. 10, and to
become his Servants, v. 11; for all his Enemies must be made his Footstool,
psa. 110. 1, who shall wound the Heads over many Countries, filling the places
with their Dead bodies, v. 6; the Scepter of whose Kingdom is a right Scepter,
and whose Throne shall be for Ever, psa. 45. 6. The Rod of whose strength shall
come out of Sion, or whose Kingdom will be set up among a Choiser Remnant, psa.
110. 2, who shall be made willing to receive him, in the Beauties of Holiness,
(viz. Solemnly and Publicly, as Temple-worship was wont of Old to be
performed) and they shall then be gathered up into his Kingly Interest, as the
Dew is by the Sun, from the womb of the Morning, in its Youth, or at its first
Rising, psa. 110. 3; viz. Abundantly, Speedily, and without Tarrying for Man's
Order, Mich. 5. 7. But this work will meet with Difficulties, such as Israel
had in their passage through the Wilderness, who yet met with some refreshing
Brook continually, before they fainted, and so went on; in allusion whereunto,
it is said that Christ at this time shall drink of the Brook by the way,
therefore shall he lift up the head, ps. 110. 7.

So also Paul sometimes preached, that there was Another King, one Jesus, Act.
17. 2. 7; whose Kingdom then was merely Spiritual, but yet he tells us
elsewhere, that it shall be Temporal also, viz. in the World (or State of
things) to come, Heb. 2. 5, which we yet see not, v. 8, nor shall do (as to
its Fullness) till his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 1; who then shall Reign, till he
shall have put all his Enemies (and Death among the rest) under his feet, 1
Cor. 15. 25, 26: in which respect, he tells us, that Christ sprang out of
Juda, the Kingly Tribe, Heb. 7. 14, and that Melchizedech was his fullest Type,
who was both King and Priest, v. 1; whose Name does signify, the King of
Righteousness, and who was King of Salem, which signifies peace; to hint unto
us, that Christ's Kingly Dispensation will be abundantly replenished with Peace
and Righteousness.

And thus I have now finished the first General branch of that Outward
Demonstration which David gave of his being a man after God's own Heart; viz.
from his professed Principles or noble Testimony, concerning all these
forenamed Things and Persons.

From whence I shall now proceed unto the Second Branch of that Demonstration;
to show how David did evidence himself to be such a one, by his Personal and
constant Practice or Carriage, both in relation unto the Creature and unto God.

First, David did Practically evidence his being a man after God's own heart,
by the Constancy of his carriage toward the Creature. As for Example:

1. David was Prudent in matters, 1 Samuel 16. 18; Behaving himself wisely, 1 Samuel 18. 5, in all his ways, v. 14, more wisely than all the Servants of Saul,
so that his Name was much set by, v. 30.

So also, Peter testifies concerning Paul's Wisdom, 2 Pet. 3. 15, which he did
abundantly evidence both in his practice, writing and preaching; who being
holily Crafty, would not Burden the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12. 16, that so he
might cut off occasion from those who did desire it, 2 Cor. 11. 12: who wisely
confuted the Athenians Idolatry, from their own acknowledgement of an unknown
God, Act. 17. 22, 23: and who knew how to comply for a while with some men's
Weakness, so as yet not to Indulge their Sin, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22:
stealing upon those proud Corinthians by Degrees, and granting that at first to
be their Liberty and Knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 7, 9, which afterward he meant more
sharply to reuke them for, 1 Cor. 10. 20, ^1, 22.

A man after God's own Heart is a discreet and prudent man; who does not Behave
himself in a Light Vain Childish way, (as too many Professors do) but wisely;
and who in that re-regard does outstrip the highest Formalist, or such as
Readiness ordinary Servants were.

2. David was very Humble in his carriage, who scorned not to return unto his
keeping sheep, 1 Samuel 16. 19, after his being anointed King, v. 13; yea after
that Saul had entertained him in his Court, 1 Samuel 17. 15. And when he was
communed with, about being Saul's Son in Law, he thought it too great an Honor
for him, who was a Poor man and Lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 18. 22, 23, so little
was he elevated with his late merited applause, v. 7. And when he was
Persecured by Saul afterward, he thought himself unworthy of so great a
Dignity, as being a dead Dog or Flea, 1 Samuel 24. 14. Nay and when he was a
King, he took not any Proud state upon him, but when he was to speak unto his
Subjects, he stood upon his feet, and called them Brethren, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.

A man after God's own heart, is partly to be known by his Humility, which is
indeed the Gloss of all his other Graces. He is a King to God, Rev. 5. 10; and
yet that Oil upon his head, does not so lift up his heart, but that he can
buckle to the lowest duty incumbent upon him, between his Coronation and
Anointing. He can bear being fetched from the sheepfold to the Court, and being
carried back from thence unto his sheep again. His deserved Commendations do
not make him Haughty; nor does it seem a Light thing to him, to be so much as
Outwardly advanced, notwithstanding his most glorious Exploits. He counts the
creature Magnified by Afflicting visitations, as if it were an Honor to be a
sufferer, Job, 7. 17, 18. His outward dignity does not increase his inward
Height, so as to make him forget that his Inferiors are still his Brethren.

In which respect Paul was a famous Instance; who was not willing to rob Christ
of His Glory, by being too highly esteemed himself, 1 Cor. 1. 13: who was
content that others should share with him in the honor of Enditing his
Epistle, such as Sosthenes, 1 Cor. 1. 12: Timotheus, 2 Cor. 1. 1; Silvanus, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1; and sometimes all the brethren with him, Gal. 1. 1, 2: who would
not that any should think of him above what he was, 2 Cor. 12. 6, or above what
is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6: who styled himself the least of the Apostles, 1 Cor.
15. 9; and less than the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8; and their Servant for
Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4. 5, although he was not a whit behind the very Chiefest of
them, 2 Cor. 11. 5, but did excel them in point of Gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 18, and
Privileges, and Duty, both Active and Passive, 2 Cor. 11. 22, 23: who also
would not have others to be wise in their own conceit, Romans 12. 16; or to think
that they know any thing, 1 Cor. 8. 2, above what they ought to think, Romans 12.
3; but to be condescending to men of Low estate, v. 16, and in Honor,
preferring on another, v. 10.

3. David was obedient unto his Father, when he was bid by him, to take his
Load upon his back, and to Run on Foot therewith unto his Brethren, 1 Samuel 17.
17, 18, 20. And though Saul was also Dutiful unto his father, in his going to
seek the Asses, as has been before observed; yet David did far outstrip him;
since Saul was not then Anointed King, as David now wa^.

The greatest outward advancement will not make a Gracious Child to Disobey his
Parents, in what is meet and lawful; much less to Disrespect them, as many at
this day do, (when they they are a little Raised) who yet would be thought to
be of David's Spirit. In relation to which particular Duty, Paul sets an
example also, who sent his Apostolical Salutation to his Mother, Romans 16. 13;
and bids others, that they should in All things Obey their Parents, for this
is well pleasing to the Lord, Col. 3. 20; and that they should Obey them in the
Lord, for this is Right, and is the first commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6. 1,
2: who also tells us, that Disobedience unto Parents, Romans 1. 30, is one sad
Character of a Reprobate, v. 28.

4. David was careful of his Trust, who left not his sheep without a Keeper,
when himself was otherwise employed by his father, 1 Samuel 17. 20, although his
envious Brother did causelessely susspect him in that regard, v. 28.

A gracious heart does so attend unto one Duty as not to neglect another. He
will fulfill his fathers whole will; and has a more Especial eye unto what is
his constant work, that it be no way prejudiced by that which is Occasionally
required of him. He seeks to Prevent a Damage in his Absence, and is willing
to be Every where employed at once, so far as in him lies. A notable Instance
whereof we have in Paul, who dilligently attended unto that work which was
committed to him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20; resolving not to stir, until he had
performed it, Romans 15. 28, whatever hardships he met with, 2 Cor. 6. 4: nor was
he only thus careful whilst Present, but when he was Absent also, Phil. 1. 27,
having the care of All the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28, and strictly charging those
with whom that Flock was left, which he was never likely to see any more, Act.
20. 25, 28, 29.

5. David was of a very Meek and Quiet spirit, in a case of Personal
provocation; who was as a man that Hears not, and in whose mouth are no
Reproofs, whilst others spoke mischievous things against him, psa. 38. 12, 13,
14. When his eldest Brother's Anger was kindled against him, in a way of Envy
and false surmises, he only answered, What have I now done? is there not a
cause? and so turned away from him, to prevent any further wrangling, 1 Samuel
17. 28, 29, 30. Nor was he of a self-revenging disposition, witness his sparing
Saul, when his Life was put into his hand, a first and second time, 1 Samuel 24.
13, and 26. 11: nor did he Rejoice at the news of Readiness death, but Lamented
over him, 2 Samuel 1. 17, and did not Derogate from his deserved praises, v. 19,
21, although he had been his mortal Adversary. He also fasted and Prayed for
his Enemies, psalm. 35. 13, 14; and did Avenge the Death of Saul, 2 Samuel 1. 16,
and Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 4. 11, of Abner and Amasa, 1 King. 2. 5. 6.

So also, though Paul had a readiness to Revenge all Disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.
6, yet did he not delight to use the Rod, 1 Cor. 4. 21, or to exercise Dominion
over others, 2 Cor. 1. 24; but did Beseech (whilst Absent) by the Meekness and
Gentleness of Christ, that so he might not be Bold when Present, 2 Cor. 10. 1,
2; fearing lest when he Came, he should be found, what others would not have
him be, 2 Cor. 12. 20, and who therefore wrote thus being Absent, lest being
Present he should use sharpness, 2 Cor. 13. 10: who bad others that they should
not recompense Evil for Evil, Romans 12. 17, or Avenge themselves v. 19, but
overcome Evil with Good, v. 21, as himself was wont to do; who told those
peevish Galathians, that they had not Injured him at all, Gal. 4. 12: and who
Commended the Jews, Romans 9. 4, and 10. 2, although they were his Deadly
Enemies, 2 Cor. 11. 24, 26.

Let those who are of an Envious Revengefull and Passionate Spirit know, that a
man after Gods own heart is of another Temper. He can deal Plainly with
Offenders, and yet give them their Deserved praises. He can wisely vindicate
himself from Wrong, and yet without Revenge. He can be Angry, but it is not
without Just Cause, Mat. 5. 22; nor is it Rash or Hasty, Prove. 14. 17; nor is
it Feirce or Cruel, Genesis 49. 7; nor does it bereave of Reason, Luke 6. 11; nor
does it Indispose for Duty, Exodus 32. 19, 31; nor does it usually Transport in
a sinful way, psalm. 106. 33, but is kept within its due bounds, and Occasions
of that nature are Turned from, as in the case of David before mentioned; who
did not Politickly command his Passion at some particular time only, as Saul
did, 1 Samuel 10. 27; but that which was in Saul a Transient virtue, was in the
other a more Habitual Gracious Frame, who did not Indulge or Glory in his being
sometimes Hasty, but did Confess it with holy shame, psa. 116. 11.

6. David was eminently Courageous, in the way of his Duty; which added unto
the Luster of his forenamed Meekness. He was a mighty valiant man, and a man of
War, 1 Samuel 16. 18, who durst take a Lion by the beard (although he had a Bear
to back him) in a way of Rescuing his poor Lamb, 1 Samuel 17. 34, 35. He modestly
waved that Offer of being Readiness son in Law, until he was put to purchase it
with his sword, and then it did please him well, 1 Samuel 18. 23. 26. When Saul
and all his Army were Dismayed, 1 Samuel 17. 11, and fled from that vapouring
Goliath, v. 24, because of his great Height, ver. 4, and mighty Armor, v. 5, 6,
7, and big words, v. 8, 9, 10; David then bad that no man's heart should fail,
for he would go and fight with him, v. 32, although he was but then a Youth, v.
33, and ran to meet him, ver. 48, (when Saul had given him order, v. 37.) and
slew him, without any sword, v. 50, or outward Armor, v. 39.

A man after God's own heart will encounter both with a Bear and Lion, rather
than the least of Christ's Lambs shall be devoured. He will not plead, that
such a Truth or Duty is a sorry little thing, not worthy the hazard of his
Life; but will Adventure to preserve a poor shiftless Lamb, as much or more
than other things. He is not so well pleased with outward Dignity, as with an
opportunity of being useful, in the performance of some noble Duty, although
accompanied with utmost Difficulty. He dares to Encounter with not only some
of the Ammonites (as Saul did, 1 Samuel 11. 11.) who typified some more
Inordinate Affections when outrageous; but he will venture upon the Philistines
that lie in his very Bosom; nor does he only face them, (for so did Saul) but
he will Manfully resist the stoutest Goliath, or such a Temptation which the
Best of common Israelites submit unto: and in which expedition, he uses not
Readiness carnal weapons beforementioned, but does content himself (as David did)
with what the Lord affords in his Way, 1 Samuel 17. 40, and wisely fights
with his Enemy at the furthest Distance, v. 49, but chiefly trusts in the
Name or strength of God, v. 45, by which means he Overcomeeth, v. 50, improving
that unto the completing of his victory, by which his Adversary thought to
have Destroyed him, viz. his own Sword, v. 51. Such Mystical or Spiritual
Exploits, are Ordinarily to be observed, among those that are truly Gracious:
and some such Practice in the Letter, is that which a man of David's Spirit may
be Distinguished from others by, on this side that Time which David's
Dispensation typified, or in Readiness Lifetime.

In relation to which holy Courage, Paul was a second David; who heartned
others in nothing to be Terrified, Phil. 1. 28; and who was Eminent himself in
that respect. How Powerfully does he Threaten those proud Corinthians, 1 Cor.
4. 19! How fiercely did he set his Eyes upon that Devilish Elymas, Act. 13. 9,
10! how Boldly did he cast off those Envyous Jews, Act. 13. 45, 46! how
undauntedly did he withstand Peter to the face, Gal. 2. 11! and how
Courageously did he Preach with much contention, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2! not running
into a Corner, but speaking publicly from the time of his first Conversion,
Act. 9. 20; as afterward he did at Antioch, Act. 13. 14, at Thessalonica, Act.
17. 1, 2, at Athens, Act. 17. 17. 19. 22, and at Corinth, Act. 18. 8; although
he was a frequent Prisoner, in Deaths often, and many times Beaten, 2 Cor. 11.
23, 24; who yet returned unto the same place of Danger afterward, Act. 14. 5.
21; fighting with Beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15. 32,
where he yet Preached publicly, Act. 20. 20, although there were many
Adversaries, 1 Cor. 16. 9; not being dissuaded from his Duty by signified
Dangers or Entreaties, Act. 21. 11, 12, 13, 14, nor counting his Life dear unto
him, so that he might but finish his Course with Joy, and the Ministry which he
had received, Act. 20. 24.

And let all those of a Cowardly Spirit know, that the truly Righteous are
Bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1, viz. in their God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2: and a right
Gospel-Saint is described, by his not having received the Spirit of Fear but of
Power, 2 Timothy 1. 7: nor are Women owned to be the Daughters of Sarah, save as
they do well and are not Afraid, 1 Pet. 3. 6: and that Fear which drives into
a Confederacy with threatening Ashur, is called the Fear of Others, and not of
God's faithful Ones, Isa. 8. 12: and they are reckoned among Treacherous men,
who are not valiant for the truth, Jerem. 9. 2, 3: and he is called a wicked
Servant, who being Afraid, did Hide that Talent in a secret place, which should
have been put forth to Public Use, Matt. 25. 18. 25, 26, 27.

7. David was full of Natural Affection. He provided for the Securing of his
Father and Mother, who were in Danger for his sake, 1 Samuel 22. 3, 4. When some
of his Party were forced through Faintness to stay Behind, 1 Samuel 30. 10; he
made it a Statute, that such should yet share in his Spoils, v. 24, 25, though
others would have withstood it, v. 22. He was not willing to take away the Life
of any Israelite, witness his sparing Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 12, his forwardness to
comply with Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 20, and his Beseeching Amasa (with the rest) to
Return unto their former Duty, 2 Samuel 19. 11, 12, 13; and when his People were
Plagued, 2 Samuel 24. 15, Originally for their own Sin, v. 1, he was desirous to
have died for them, v. 17: Only he would not spare Sheba, who was a relapsing
Rebel, 2 Samuel 20. 1. 21; nor Shimei, who Causelessly had Cursed him in his
Afflicted state, 1 Kings 2. 8, 9; nor those who were Guilty of wilful and
Perfidious Murder, 2 Samuel 4. 11, 12, 1 King. 2. 5, 6.

So also Paul wishes Children to Requite their Parents, for that is Good and
Acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5. 4. And he does oft-times exhort the strong, to
Bear with the weak, and to permit their sharing with them in common
Privileges, Romans 15. 1, and 14. 1. Nor was he forward to Cut off any
Professor, save in a Case of Relapse, Gal. 5. 1. 12; or Blaspheming, 1 Timothy 1.
20; or some Grosser Scandal, 1 Cor. 1. 5. 11: but otherwise he was for the
Restoring of those in Meekness, who were Overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6. 1,
whom he Besought to be as he was, as if they had not Injured him at all, Gal.
4. 12; and would rather part with his own Liberty, than Offend his Brother, 1
Cor. 8. 13; and could wish that himself were Accursed from Christ, for his
Brethren according to the flesh, Romans 9. 3.

It is a sad Sign to be without Natural Affection, Romans 1. 30: nor are they
truly interested in God's forgiving Grace, who do not forgive an Offending
Brother, Matt. 18. 35, when truly Penitent, Luke 17. 4. The Elect of God are
full of Bowels, Col. 3. 12; who ought to lay down their Lives for their
Brethren, 1 John 3. 16; but who can yet put a Difference between Amasa and
Sheba, between Abner and Joab, between a Presumptuous Shimei, and such as
transgress in their Simplicity, 2 Samuel 15. 11.

8. David was Thankful to his Friends, and more especially to those who were
God's Friends as well as his. When he had conquered the Amalekites, he sent a
Present to all those Places where he and his men were wont to haunt, 1 Samuel 30.
31. When he was peaceably possessed of his Kingdom, he enquired after some of
Readiness house, whom he might show Kindness unto for Jonathans sake, 2 Samuel 9. 1.
He requited Barzillai's love, unto his Son Chimham, 2 Samuel 19. 32. 38, whom
also he recommended unto his Son Solomon's future care, 1 Kings 2. 7. And
though Abiathar did fall in with him, upon a Self account, yet because his
Father and Brethren were slain for his sake, he undertook his safeguard, 1 Samuel 22. 22, 23, and did Continue him in his Fathers Place, viz. the
Priesthood, 1 Samuel 23. 9: only he wisely advanced Zadok afterward, above
Abiathar, 1 Chronicles. 24. 3, 4, 6. though Zadok fell not in with him until Readiness
Death, 1 Chro. 12. 23, 28; the reason of which Preferment, was, Partly because
Zadok was more Nobly spirited, 1 Chro. 12. 28, who continued faithful when
Abiathar fell off, 1 Kings 1. 7, 8, who therefore was a Type of God's faithful
Servants in a time of General Apostasy, Ezekiel. 44. 10. 15; and partly because
Abiathar came of Ithamar, 1 Chronicles. 24. 4, who was the Younger Brother, 1 Chro.
6. 3, and whose Posterity had usurped the Highpriests Office, ever since the
time of Eli, 1 Samuel 14. 3; whereas Zadok came of Eleazar, 1 Chro. 24. 3, who
was the Elder Brother, 1 Chro. 6. 3, and upon whose Posterity the Priesthood
was settled by an Everlasting Covenant, Number. 25. 11, 12, 13.

So also, Paul paid Publius for his courteous Entertainment, Act. 28. 7, 8;
and Recommended Phaebe unto his Friends, as having been a Succourer of him,
Romans 16. 1, 2, and heartily thanked those who for his Life had laid down their
own Necks, v. 3, 4; and Prayed for such as had Refresht him in his
Imprisonment, 2 Timothy 1. 16: But yet he had the greatest measure of Respect for
those who were of the most Evangelical spirit, whom he calls Men of
Reputation, Gal. 2. 2, and in comparison of whom, he calls others seeming
Pillars, v. 9, although they were both his Friends and Eminent Apostles.

A man after God's own Heart, is of a Grateful Disposition, and does not
forget any of his loving Friends; but yet he does more especially Respect those
of a Choiser spirit, whom he will carefully Restore unto their Right of
High Priesthood (or Highest Reputation) above all self-seeking and false
hearted Professors, although these may Outstrip the other, in point of
Personal Courtesies. And as this is one Signal character of a Gracious heart,
so will it be Eminently to be observed, when David's Dispensation shall be
advanced.

9. David was very passive in whatever tended unto his being outwardly
Advanced. When he was Designed for that Encounter with Goliath, he did not Run
before he was Sent, both by his Father, 1 Samuel 17. 17, and Saul, v. 37. He was
not forward to be the Kings Son-in-law, until he was strongly urged thereunto,
1 Samuel 18. 22, 23. Indeed he did not Dissemblingly Complement, when Samuel
Anointed him, 1 Samuel 16. 13, as Saul did, 1 Samuel 9. 21; but yet he came not
among the rest of his Brethren then, till he was sent for, 1 Samuel 16. 11, 12.
And when Saul was Removed, without his being Active therein, he only came and
dwelt in Hebron, and waited till the men of Judah did of their own Accord
anoint him King, 2 Samuel 2. 3, 4; where he did only defend himself against
Readiness House, until all the Tribes of Israel came to him unto Hebron, and made
him King over Israel, 2 Samuel 5. 1. 3.

So also, Paul did not take upon himself that Honor of being an Apostle,
until he was Called to it by the will of God, 1 Cor. 1. 1. Act. 13. 2. Men of
a Worldly spirit will have their Ambitious wills, in spite of Opposition; but
Christ (whom David typified) will come Desired, Hag. 2. 7, and all his People
do therein resemble him. The Saints, the High ones, do not Take the Kingdom,
Dan. 7. 18, until it be clearly Given to them, v. 22. 27. They do not make
themselves Kings and Priests, but are Made such by the Lamb, Rev. 5. 10. They
are content to sit with Christ at Gods right hand (in a way of Mystical
Advancement only) till all their Enemies be made their Footstool; and till the
People shall take them and bring them to their Place, Isa. 14. 2, in their
Triumphing Chariots and stately Litters, Isa. 66. 20. All which was shadowed
out of Old, by the Ready Division of those Waters (the Types of Peoples, Rev.
17. 15.) so soon as Anointed Israel did but offer themselves to March through
them into their own Dominion, Exodus 14. 21, Josh. 3. 15, 16.

10. David spared None of Israel's Enemies (as Saul did Agag) but Manfully
resisted them All, viz. the Syrians, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines,
Amalekites and Edomites, 2 Samuel 8. 12. 14, until the Lord had given him Rest
round about from All his Enemies, 2 Samuel 7. 1. Such also was the Nobleness of
his Spirit in that respect, as that in the time of his being persecuted by
Saul, he saved the men of Keilah from being Plundered, 1 Samuel 23. 1. 5,
notwithstanding the little love which they bare to him, v. 12. Nay when he was
Beholden to Achish the King of Gath for shelter, 1 Samuel 27. 2, 3. 6, (which was
a great failing in him, and for which he had formerly in a like case been
Rebuked, 1 Samuel 22. 5.) yet was he there at work for Israel's good, 1 Samuel 27.
8, 9: and had he not been Dismissed, it is most likely that he would rather
have fought against this courteous Achish the Philistine, than have sided with
him against God's Israel, although they then were his Persecutors, 1 Samuel 29.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

So also Paul spared no Spiritual Enemy (as others did) but Warred with Every
high thing that exalted it self against God and Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. That
so he might be pure from the Blood of all men, he shunned not to declare the
whole counsel of God unto them, though to his Own utmost hazard, Act. 20. 24.
25, 26, 27. He might as well have Excused himself (as some others then did)
from such Adventures, and as David might, in relation to what he did for the
men of Keilah; but though he was free from all men, yet did he make himself a
Servant unto all, that he might Gain the more, 1 Cor. 9. 19. And though he
gained no more Love from some than David did from the men of Keilah, yet was he
Gladly spent for them, 2 Cor. 12. 15. Nay when he did sometimes Judaize, Act.
16. 3, (which seems to have been his failing, and for which he was in a like
case afterward Rebuked, Act. 21. 26, 27, 28. 30, 31.) yet was he then at work
for Israel's good, Designing thereby to Gain the Jews, 1 Cor. 9. 20: and if he
had not been suspitiously Prevented by those carnal Jews, (as David was by the
Philistian Lords) he would hereby soon have undermined their whole Mosaical
Worship, as his following Practice did fully evidence. And as Himself was thus
Publicly useful, so does he bid others also that they should Chiefly desire
those Gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 1, by which they might most Edify, v. 12, according to
his own Example, v. 19: and that no man would seek his own, but every man
Another's weal, 1 Cor. 10. 24, even as He pleased all men in all things, not
seeking his Own profit, but the profit of Many, that they might be saved, v.
33; which he does elsewhere urge, from the Example of Christ himself, Romans 15.
2, 3. Phil. 2. 4, 5.

A man after God's own Heart is of a public Spirit, impartially opposing
whatever warreth against the Souls of others, and not daring to Indulge any of
their spiritual Adversaries, although himself may be but ill requited for his
pains, and may have been more Courteously dealt with, by the chief Abettors of
what he has Adventurously resisted, for the Good and Benefit of his unthankful
Friends. Nay when a Gracious Soul does seemingly comply with what in his Heart
he Hates, (as Paul and David sometimes did) yet does he design thereby (when a
fit occasion serves) to further that Truth which he is thought to prejudice.
And though this kind of Practice cannot be denied to have been the Failing of
God's People in former times, (as may appear more fully afterward) yet in a
case like unto that of Paul's and David's, it has also evidenced their public
Spirit, and that secret Love which they still have had unto the Truths of
Christ.

11. David was very Just and Righteous; who having promised Bathsheba that her
son Solomon should Reign, stood to his word, 1 Kings 1. 30, though it was then
like to have cost the life of Adonijah, v. 50, whom David had never Displeased
at any time, v. 6. And when he was advanced to the Crown, he executed Judgment
and Justice unto all his People, 2 Samuel 8. 15, according to the best of his
Integrity and Skill, psa. 78. 72; and wherein he also fulfilled his ancient
Promise, psa. 75. 2.

So also Paul never had corrupted wronged or defrauded any man, 2 Cor. 7. 2,
but had renounced the hidden things of Dishonesty, 2 Cor. 4. 2, which was his
Comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 12. And as he was a Spiritual Ruler, he executed Justice
unto all, not suffering the poor Gentiles to be abused by those who seemed to
be somewhat, and were accounted Pillars, Gal. 2. 6. 9. 11, 12. He also was very
careful to speak the Truth and to make good his Promise; appealing unto God,
who knew that he Lied not, 2 Cor. 11. 31: and when he was hindered from coming
to Corinth according to his Promise, he makes a great stir to vindicate
himself from using Lightness, 2 Cor. 1. 17, which he was taught to shun, both
from the consideration of God's being True, v. 18, and from the Truth of
Christ, v. 19, and of the Spirit, v. 22, as being the Seal and Earnest of all
those Divine Promises, which are in Christ Amen, unto the Glory of God by those
who share therein, v. 20, or who do Glorify this Faithful God, by their
Resembling him in that respect, with reference to all their Promises unto Men.

A man after God's own heart, must needs be both Just and True, as to the
constant tenor of his conversation. He will not Oppress (as others do) because
it is in his Power, Mic. 2. 1, for he fears God, Neh. 5. 15. He will not Lie,
Isa. 63. 8; yea though he promises to his own hurt, he changes not, ps. 15.
4. From whence we may know, what to think of those Professors, who are
unrighteous in their dealings, or who do seem to make little conscience of
Lying Juggling and Dissembling: and though such have been formerly accounted
of, notwithstanding such spots upon their faces; yet will they Lightly be
esteemed, as David's Dispensation shall be advanced in the Professing world.

12. David was a lover of Plain dealing, both in an Active and Passive sense.
Though Saul was very great Professor in his time, yet David styles him, a
wicked fool, psa. 75. 4, and a Worker of Iniquity, psa. 59. 2, with the Title
of that Psalm: And as he was downright with Others, so also he desired, that
the Righteous would Reprove and smite him; which he would count a Kindness, an
excellent Oil that should not break his head, and for which he would also Pray
for them in their calamities, psa. 141. 5. Although he was a King, yet would
not he scorn to be Reproved by his Inferiors: nor would he Passionately Retort
upon them, though they did somewhat more severely smite him with the Rod of
their mouth: nor would he then complain of being Wounded, but would account
such applications Medicinal, or like unto sweet Healing Oil: nor would be watch
his opportunity to be Avenged upon such faithful friends, but would Requite
them in their Afflicted state, when men of a Revengful spirit would most
Insult. Nor did he only say thus in words, (as many false hearts will do) but
he did Act accordingly, when Nathan roundly told him to his face, Thou art the
man, 2 Samuel 12. 7; whom David did immediately submit unto, v. 13, without the
least show of Passion or Recrimination.

So also, Paul never used flattering words, 1 These. 2. 5; nor did he seek to
please Men, Gal. 1. 10, but dealt faithfully and plainly with all sorts of
Persons. He told those Proud Corinthians, that they were Carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3,
and puffed up, 1 Cor. 5. 2; and that if he came again, he would not spare them,
2 Cor. 13. 2; and in the mean time, he could not praise them, 1 Cor. 11. 17,
but spoke of their miscarriages unto their shame, 1 Cor. 6. 5, and, 15. 34. He
called the Galatians Foolish Backsliders, Gal. 3. 1, 3, and told them plainly,
he was afraid of them, lest he had bestowed upon them labor in vain, Gal. 4.
11. And though Peter James and John were seeming Pillars, Gal. 2. 9, yet when
Paul saw that they walked not uprightly according to the Gospel, v. 14, he did
withstand Peter to the face, v. 11, and sharply rebuked him before them all, v.
14, because he was to be Blamed, v. 11, for his Dissimulation, v. 13. And as
Paul's Grace appeared in his Active plain dealing; so Peter's Grace was
evidenced in his Patient bearing it, who then made no Reply, and who afterward
does highly commend Paul for his Depth and Wisdom, 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16, though he
had Branded him to all Posterity for his Hypocrisy, Gal. 2. 13.

Most men are of a flattering disposition, and love to be Soothed up
themselves; but let such know, that a Gracious heart is Wisely Faithful, and
will not scornfully Rebound a due Reproof, which is one sad sign of a very Hard
and Haughty spirit, Prove. 21. 24. And as David's dispensation shall get up, so
those shall speak Plainly, who have been wont to stammer at a Reproof, Isa. 32.
4; and the least Child shall be able to lead them, who have been wont to be
like Lions when Reproved, Isa. 11. 6.

13. David had his affections under a very great Command. He so Lamented the
Death of Saul, and (his dearly beloved) Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 17, as that at the
very same time, he could instruct his Party to use the Bow, v. 18, whereby the
Philistines had been Conquerers, 1 Samuel 31. 3. A Gracious heart will so Mourn
over a former loss, as that he may be able to Prevent for the Future, by
Learning to fight his Adversary at the utmost Distance, as Archers use to do,
and as his Enemy has done to him. And when his sick child was Dead, he ceased
then to fast and Pray, 2 Samuel 12. 20, as when he was alive, v. 16, because it
Now was bootless, v. 22, 23. He that is Timely affected with a cross
Providence, is not so apt to Weep Unprofitably, as others do. And when he did
effeminately long for those Waters which could not be had without utmost
hazard, 2 Samuel 23. 14, 15; he would not Satisfy his Inordinate desire with
such a Costly cup, but poured it out unto the Lord, v. 16, 17. A Gracious heart
will tremble to Indulge a Lustful appetite. And in relation to that Sin of
Covetousness he desired that God would Divert his heart therefrom, by inclining
it unto his Law, Psa. 119. 36. A gracious soul would not be of an Earthly mind.

So also, Paul was for the Bridling of Inordinate affections; which Members
upon Earth he would have Mortified, Col. 3. 5. He would not that Saints should
sorrow for their Dead Brethren, as others which have no Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13;
nor would he have a Penitent Offender to be swallowed up with overmuch Sorrow,
2 Cor. 2. 7. He would not that Christians should over zealously affect some
lower Gifts though spiritual, 1 Cor. 14. 12; much less would he have them to
Indulge Effeminacy, in their Hair, 1 Cor. 11. 14, or worldly Fashions, 1 Timothy
2. 9. He would not be brought under the Power of any thing, though Lawful, 1
Cor. 6. 12; much less would he cherish a sinful Lust, or make Provision for the
flesh, Romans 13. 14, who therefore did keep his Body under, and bring it into
Subjection, 1 Cor. 9. 27, being very Jealous lest Christian Liberty should be
abused, Gal. 5. 13. And as to that sin of Covetousness, he calls it Idolatry,
Col. 3. 5, reckoning it among those things which should not once be named among
Professors, Ephesians. 5. 3, and for which sin alone, a Brother is not to be kept
company with, 1 Cor. 5. 11: who also does Profess, that he never had Coveted
any man's Money or apparel, Act. 20, 33, nor had he used flattering words at
any time, as a cloak of Covetousness, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5, but had been Faithful,
unto the Disadvantage of his outward Interest.

A man after Gods own heart, is taught so to Love the Creature; as that he may
neither let go his Dominion over it, nor cease to be Christ's servant in the
enjoyment of it.

14. David was a careful Father, as his Son Solomon did more especially
experience; for whom he prayed, ps. 72. 1, and whom he diligently Instructed,
as Solomon himself confesses, Prove. 4. 4, (which he there seems to set down
at large unto the end of the 9th. Chapter) and as is evident from other
Scriptures, 1 Ki. 2. 3. 1 Chro. 28. 9. Wherein we may observe, that David did
first put Solomon upon getting wisdom, Prove. 4. 5, with all his getting, v. 7,
attending thereunto, Prove. 5. 1, and calling her his sister, Prove. 7. 4; as
being the Principal thing, Prove. 4. 7, and better than Rubies or any thing that
may be desired, Prove. 8. 11; and not to let her go, because she was his Life,
Prove. 4. 13: who freely offers her self to All, Prove. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and
Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; whose words are Truth and Righteousness, Prove. 8. 6, 7,
8; who teaches Prudence, v. 12. 14, and leads in the way of Judgment, v. 20;
who does preserve from sin, Prove. 4. 6, and is an Ornament of Grace, v. 9; with
whom are Riches and Honor, Prove. 8. 18, and who will give at last a Crown of
Glory, Prove. 4. 9: which highly commended wisdom, the Arrians themselves (as
well as others) confess to be chiefly meant of Christ, in whom are hid all the
treasures of Wisdom, Col. 2. 3, and who is expressly called the Wisdom of God,
Luke 11. 49, with Mat. 23. 34; who is the King of Kings, Prove. 8. 15, 16, and
whose Eternity or Godhead is set forth at large, ver. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 27,
28, 29, 30. And David does there abundantly advise his Son Solomon, to take
heed of strange Women or Wives, both in the Letter and Mystery, Prove. 5. 3. and
7. 24, whose bitter End and Enticing words he bids him to Beware of;
probably foreseeing that this would be his chief Temptation, both as he was a
Prophet, and as he was acquainted with his Natural constitution; which sadly
aggravated Solomon's afterfall, especially since his Mother also gave him the
same advice, Prove. 31. 1, 3. And David did also stir up his Son to all manner
of Duty, as he would have God to Bless him, 1 King. 2. 1, 2, 3; and to serve
him with a Perfect heart and Willing mind, as being the searcher of all Hearts,
who would cast him off for ever, in case he did forsake him, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

Men of a Worldly spirit, are spiritually unnatural unto their Children, only
Providing for outward Greatness and Moral Education at the best: but a man
after Gods own heart, does chiefly press upon his Child to get an interest in
Jesus Christ; and labors to obviate those Temptations which he is most
subject unto; and does most strictly charge him, to walk Closely with the Lord,
in a way of universal and sincere obedience, all his days.

So also, Paul bids Parents to bring up their Children in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. And though Himself had no Natural children
that we read of; yet as he was a spiritual Father, he did carefully Instruct
admonish and Correct those whom he had begotten unto Christ, as all his
Epistles evidence.

15. David was also a very careful Master in his Family, as appeared, both by
his Choice of Servants, and by his looking to them. He Dedicated his House to
God, as the Title of his thirtieth Psalm does show, and according to what then
was a Ceremonial Law, Deuteronomy. 20. 5; (the Mystical import whereof is still in
force) into which House of his, the Blind and Lame (who had been Despitefully
set to keep him out of Sion*) might not enter, 2 Samuel 5. 6. 8; to signify,
that he would not Harbor men spiritually Blind and Lame, (such as those
Pharisees were, Matt. 15. 14.) who hindered him (as he was the Type of Christ)
from being possessed of that Sion where the Lord had set him to be King, psalm.
2. 6. Which holy care of his in this respect, is elsewhere more clearly
testified, by his resolving, that a Liar and Deceitful worker should neither
dwell with him, nor tarry in his sight, ps. 101. 7, but that his Eyes should be
upon the faithful of the Land, that they might dwell with him, and he that
walked in a perfect way should serve him, v. 6; and that himself would walk
within his House with a perfect heart, v. 2. And as he did Bless (or Pray for)
the People, 2 Samuel 6. 18, so did he in like manner Bless his Household, v. 20.
Nor was he wanting to do them Right, witness his sore Avenging of that Abuse
which some of his Servants met with from those unworthy Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10.
4, 5, 6, wherein he was a special Type of Christ, Mat. 10. 15.

So also, Paul bids Masters to do the same things unto their Servants, as
knowing that their Master also is in Heaven, with whom there is no respect of
Persons, Ephesians. 6. 9. And as to the Choice of Servants, when John Mark (who was
his Servant or Minister, Act. 13. 5,) had sinfully Deserted that work whereto
he was Appointed, Paul would not entertain him ever after, Act. 15. 37, 38;
wherein he resembled David, who was not willing that a Deceitful worker should
Dwell with him, or tarry in his sight.

A Gracious heart will do what in him lies, to be furnished with Godly
Servants, whom he will Command to keep the Way of God, Genesis 18. 19, that so his
Family may be a little Church, Romans 16. 5, whom he may comfortably hold
Communion with, in the performance of Familyduties; for whom he daily prays;
and will not Despise their Cause, Job 31. 13.

16. When David was moved to bring the Ark of God's Presence (which was the
chief part of Worship then) from Kiriath-jearim into Sion, which he had lately
gained from the Jebusites, and made his Royal-Seat, 2 Samuel 5. 6, 7; he first
Consulted with his Leaders and all the Congregation, to know if they had any
thing to Object against the Warrantableness of this Attempt, 1 Chro. 13. 1, 2,
and to obtain their free Concurrence with himself therein, which proved
accordingly, v. 3, 4. He was a Prophet, Act. 2. 30, yet did he not Disdain to
Advise with those, who could pretend to no such extraordinary Inspiration. He
was a King, yet would he not Impose upon his Subjects (in matters of Religion)
without their own consent. He was herein a Type of Christ, Rev. 3. 7, yet did
he not improve his Uncontrollable Power, until his People were made Willing,
no more than Christ does, psa. 110. 3.

So also, when Paul was about to fetch (into Mystical Sion) that Ark (or Gospel
truths) which had been formerly Hid in Legal Shadows, as the Literal Ark was in
Kiriath-jearim, or the Field of Woods, psa. 132. 6; yet he did Reason and
Confer about these things, both with the common People, Act. 17. 2, and with
the chiefest Leaders, Gal. 2. 6. He had the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 7. 40, yet
did he not Enforce any, in a Commanding way, but only gave his Judgment, v.
25. He was an Apostle, yet did he not exercise Dominion over the Faith of
others, 2 Cor. 1. 24, but would have every one to be fully persuaded in his own
mind, Romans 14. 5. He was in Christ's stead, yet did he speak to others in a
Beseeching way, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Men of an Antichristian-spirit are for a Compulsory Imposition, in the things
of God; but a Man after God's own heart, is for a Voluntary Reception, and is
willing to hear whatever can be justly alleged unto the contrary. Himself is
fully satisfied, and yet he would not that others should see with his Eyes, but
with their own. He does not first court the Affections, (much less constrain
the Will) until the Judgment be well informed, whose Dictates he would have
the Will to follow. And as this is the Constant temper of a Gracious Soul, so
will it more especially appear, when David shall come to Rule over all God's
Israel.

17. David was the Friend and Companion of Good Men, but Hated others, in an
Holy way. He was a Companion of all them that feared God, psalm. 119. 63; and
all his Delight was in the most Excelling Saints psa. 16. 3, unto whom his
Goodness did extend, v. 2, and whose Horn should be by him exalted, ps. 75. 10.
But he had not sat with vain persons, nor would he go in with Dissemblers, but
Hated the Congregation of Evildoers, psa. 26. 4, 5, with perfect Hatred, psa.
139. 22; bidding them to depart from him, psalm. 6. 8, and resolving Early to
Destroy them, ps. 101. 8, or at leastwise to Cut off all their Horns, psalm. 75.
10. He was a very humble man, but yet he would not know a Wicked person, psa.
101. 4. He was a Loving man, and yet if any hated God, he hated them, although
they might be his Personal Friends. He did not delight to be Alone, but yet he
was no Company for Liars, psa. 101. 7, or privy Slanderers, v. 5, or froward
hearts, v. 4, or men of High Looks, v. 5; accounting it his Woeful misery, when
he was constrained to dwell with such, ps. 120 5.

So also Paul was much Comforted with such as Titus, 2 Cor. 7. 6; but he was an
utter Enemy unto Intimate Communion with wicked persons, with whom he would not
have Believers to walk in Church Fellowship, 1 Cor. 5. 13, nor to Marry, 1 Cor.
7. 39, and 9. 5, nor yet to keep Company, 1 Cor. 5. 9, especially if they had
been Professors, v. 10, 11. Nay he would have such to turn away from those who
do Deny the Power of Godliness, although they have it is Form, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

They who put no Difference (in point of Intimate Communion) between the Vile
and Precious, do give but a bad Evidence of their being men after God's own
heart. What then may we think of them, all whose Delight is in men of a Lighter
Spirit, and who do Despise them most, that are most Excellent? Promiscuous
Intermixtures in Marriages, was that which ushered in the Deluge, Genesis 6. 4, 5:
and Christ sorely threatens some of the Asian Churches, because of their
Impure Communion, Rev. 2. 14. 20: nor have any Right unto God's Tabernacle
(which was a Type of Gospel fellowship) who do not Honor those that fear the
Lord, Contemning others, psa. 15. 1. 4: and Wrath was upon Jehoshaphat, because
he Loved them that Hated God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2, or because he made Affinity with
wicked Ahab, and Helped the Ungodly, 2 Chro. 18. 1, 2. And though this holy
Curiosity has been Despised by the Man of Sin, or by Men of Readiness temper; yet
will it come in Request again, as David's Tabernacle shall be more fully reared
up.

18. David was Spiritually very Useful, in a way of Instructing and
Encouraging others, from his own Experiences. He bids Kings and Judges to
Kiss the Son, lest he be Angry, Psa. 2. 10, 11. He bids others to stand in
Awe, and to be still; and in order unto the Preventing of their Sin, he would
have them to heed what Conscience speaks upon their Bed, or when they are
most Composed, psa. 4. 4. He opened his Mouth in Parables, and left upon Record
behind him, what he had heard and known, for the Benefit of future Generations,
ps. 78. 2, 3, 4. He preached Righteousness, and did not Refrain his Lips; he
Declared the Righteousness, Faithfulness, Salvation, Loving Kindness and Truth
of God, and did not Hide them in his heart (in a Concealing way) from the great
Congregation, psa. 40. 9, 10. He Exhorts all sorts of men, who have been
Relieved in their Distresses, to Praise the Lord for his Goodness and
wonderful Works, psa. 107. 2, viz. Captives, ver. 10, Sick-men, v. 17,
Seamen, v. 23, and others. He stirs up Israel, the House of Aaron, and all
that fear the Lord, to trust in him, psalm. 115. 9, 10, 11. He calls upon
Saints to fear the Lord, psa. 34. 9; and bids Children to come unto him,
that he might teach them so to do, v. 11; and labors to make the Brutish
understand, psa. 94. 8, and would have All to hear Christ's voice To Day, and
not to harden their hearts, as heretofore, psalm. 95. 7, 8. He would have
upright hearts to Rejoice in God, psalm. 32. 11; and patiently to wait upon him,
ps. 27. 14, who will strengthen their Heart that Hope in him, psa. 31. 24.

So also when Paul was converted, straightway he Preached Christ, Act. 9. 20,
and kept back nothing that was Profitable, but taught the People both
publicly, and from house to house, Act 20. 20; comforting those that were in
any trouble, by the Comfort wherewith himself was comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 4.

Grace is self-propagating as well as Sin; and according to what is in the
Heart, the Mouth will speak, Mat. 12. 35. Those give but a bad evidence of
their being like unto David, who can Discourse of any thing more freely, than
of what is Spiritual; which speaks sadly unto our Dumb Professors, who scarce
know how to get out a savoury word, when at any time they do confer
together. Such may pretend their Bashfulness and Inability to speak; which yet
does not hinder them in any vain or worldly Communication: but the proper cause
is Pride in some, and Emptiness in others, who could not else thus hold their
peace from Good.

19. When David was Personally most Afflicted, yet was he then mindful of
Sion's Interest, and was not wholly taken up with his own Concernments. When
himself was Desolate, psalm. 25. 16, and when the Troubles of his Heart were
much Enlarged, v. 17, because of his Sin and Suffering, v. 18; yet does he
Conclude with Prayer for Israel's Redemption out of all his Troubles, v. 22.
When he was ready to go down into the Pit, psa. 28. 1, he yet forgot not to
pray, that God would save his People, and Lift them up for ever, v. 9. Nay when
his Bones were broken, by reason of the Greatest Fall that ever he met with,
psa. 51. 8, yet did he then remember Sion, and prayed for the Building of
Jerusalem, v. 28. Nay when he lay upon his Deathbed, as his last words did
evidence his Public Spirit, 2 Samuel 23. 1. 3; so his Last Prayer, psa. 72. 20,
was chiefly for the Advancement of Christ's Interest (as the whole Body of that
Psalm does show) though in the Person of his Son Solomon, v. 1.

So also, Paul's Personal Afflictions, 2 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, did not
make him to cease Caring for the Churches, v. 28; notwithstanding that General
bad Example which others did therein set before him, who All sought their own,
and not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 21.

A man after God's own heart, is not of a private Spirit, but his Affections
are like Springs, whose Waters serve in Common. He prefers Jerusalem above
his Chiefest Joy, psa. 137. 6; and he is more Grieved with the loss of God's
Ark, than with the Death of his nearest Relalations, as Eli was, 1 Samuel 4. 17,
18, and his Daughter, ver. 19. 22. They who can Solace themselves in their
Cieled Houses, when God's House lies waste, Hag. 1. 4, are only called This
People, v. 2, but not the People of the Lord; and such as Mourn not for
Jerusalem, do neither Love her, nor shall Rejoice for Joy with her, Isa. 66. 10.

20. David did Rejoice in the Graces of others, and Mourned for their Sins. He
was Glad, when they talked of Going up into the House of God, to Serve and
Worship him; psa. 122. 1; and he rejoiced with great Joy, for that the People
Offered Willingly unto the Building of his Temple, 1 Chro. 29. 9, Blessing God
before them all, v. 10, for what he had then seen with Joy, v. 17. But he was
Grieved, when he beheld Transgressors, because they kept not Gods Word, psa.
119. 158; and Horror did therefore take hold upon him, v. 53; whose Affections
did burst out into Rivers of Tears, upon that account, v. 136, and whose Zeal
had consumed him, not so much because such were his Enemies, as because his
Enemies had forgotten the Words of God, v. 139.

So also Paul did Bewail the Chrinthians Wantonness, 2 Cor. 12. 21; and wrote
with tears concerning the Enemies of Christ's Cross, Phil. 3. 18; who had great
Heaviness and continual sorrow in his heart for poor hard-hearted Jews, Romans 9.
2. 4; for whom he heartily Prayed, Romans 10. 1, and labored if by any means he
might provoke them to Emulation, that so some of them might be saved, Romans 11.
14. He also gave Thanks to God with much Rejoicing, when he heard of Others, as
to their Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 7; Faith, Romans 1. 8; and Bounty, 2 Cor. 9. 11,
or Faith and Love, Ephesians. 1. 15, 16, Col. 1. 3, 4: giving Professors to
understand, that their stedfastness was his Life, and consequently their Fall
would be his Death, at leastwise in point of Comfort, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8.

Nor is there any Outward Fruit, which does more clearly Demonstrate a work of
Grace within, than thus to be Affected toward Others, upon a Spiritual
account. A mere Carnal man may selfishly rejoice or mourn, because of Another's
Sin or Duty, by which Himself is some way Prejudiced or Advantaged: but He is a
man after God's own heart, who grieveth because of God's Dishonor, and joyeth
in his being Glorified by Others as well as by Himself: According to which Rule
of Judging, how few are there of David's Spirit? and how unlike are they to
him, who vex at those that do Outstrip them, as Cain did, 1 John 3. 12; who
have pleasure in them that are as bad as themselves, Romans 1. 32, which is one
Mark of a Reprobate, v. 28; and especially such, who do Compel men to sin,
Act. 26. 1^, and do what in them lies to Hinder the Salvation of Another,
which fills up their Sin, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16, and evidenceth them to be the
Devils Children, the Enemies of All Righteousness, Act. 13. 10, and worse than
Dives was in Hell, Luke 16. 27, 28!

And this is the Sum of what the Scriptures witness, concerning David's
Personal and constant Practice or Carriage toward the Creature: which is the
First Part of the Second Branch of that Outward Demonstration that he gave of
his being a man after God's own Heart.

From whence I shall now proceed unto the Second Part, or Top-stone of this
Demonstration; to show how David did evidence himself to be such a one, by his
Practice and Carriage toward God, in a more immediate way of Communion with
him, or respect unto him.

Now David's holy Carriage toward God, was manifested both in Relation unto
Sin and Duty.

First, In relation to Sin: and so he appeared to be a man after God's own
heart, in these following particulars.

1. David was an utter Enemy unto Idolatry: in which respect, Jehoshaphat is
said to walk in the first ways of his Father David, and not to seek unto
Baalim, 2 Chro. 17. 3; which is not to be understood in a way of comparing
David's First and Last ways together, (as if he did at last Degenerate) but
only in a way of comparing David's ways (which were first) with the
Idolatrous ways of his Sons and Successors; for David himself was Zealous
against Idolatry unto his Last. He knew that their Sorrows shall be multiplied
that hasten after Another God; and therefore he neither would offer their
Drink Offerings of Blood, nor take up their Names into his Lips, Psa. 16. 4.
And when he had conquered the Philistines, he did not convert the Images (which
they had left) to other uses, but he and his men did Burn them, 2 Samuel 5. 21,
viz. his Men did so, by his Command, 1 Chro. 14. 12.

So also, Paul was an utter Enemy to all Superstitious or false Worship. His
Spirit was stirred in him, when he saw that the Athenians were wholly given to
Idolatry, Act. 17. 16. He bids Christians to take heed of Israel's Idolatry,
1 Cor. 10. 7, whose Golden Calf was not the Terminating Object of their
Worship, but only the Mean by which they worshipped the Lord, Exodus 32. 5;
which therefore fitly answers unto men's Inventions in God's Worship, Psalm.
99. 8. He would not have Professors to touch the Unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6. 17,
by Sitting in an Idol-temple, at that Good meat which had been Polluted by some
Idolatrous Worship before-going, since they which ea^ of the Sacrifices, are
also Partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18, 19, 20, 21: which fitly answers
to those Good Sermons that may be made in Idol-temples, as spiritual Feasts, to
keep up the Reputation of those places and of the superstitious Worship
performed in them, in a way of provoking the Lord to Jealousy, 1 Cor. 10. 22.
Nor would Paul have Christians to eat that Meat (although it is Property were
now Altered) if any told them, that it had been formerly offered unto Idols, 1
Cor. 10. 25. 28: the full Mystical extent whereof, let others study. Nay Paul
would not endure that Love Feasts should be added to the Lords Supper, lest
they should be (in time) accounted as a Part of Christ's Institution, 1 Cor.
11. 20, 21, 22, 23; nor would he have such (in matters of Religious Worship) to
Intrude into th^se things which God had not Commanded, or which they had not
Seen, Col. 2. 18; affirming that they hold not the Head, ver. 19, who yield
Subjection (in the matters of God) unto Men's Doctrines or Prohibitions, ver.
21, 22.

From all which we may observe, that Men of Paul's and David's Spirit, will not
Accommodate with Superstition. They are for the utter Annihilation of Images,
and not for their Defacing only. They are not free to keep up the Names of
Idols, by which our Days and Months are Heathenishly called. They will have
no Communion with Man's Inventions in God's Service, under any pretense
whatever. They will not come within the Doors of an Idol-temple, to eat the
best Spiritual Feast there, although the Grosser Superstition should first be
over. They will not consult for the Maintaining of Christian Love, by hazarding
the Purity of Christ's Appointments They count Subjection to Man's Religious
Prohibitions or Commands, to be a Beheading of Christ, who is their Only Law
giver in matters of that Nature. Such as make light of these things which God
is so Jealous of, do give a bad Proof of their being Men after his own heart.

2. David did carefully Keep himself from that which was His Iniquity, by way
of Eminency; and as a Proof of his being Upright before the Lord, psa. 18. 23.

And Paul does in a more Especial manner bid, that we should lay aside that Sin
which does most Easily Beset us, Heb. 12. 1. A more easily Besetting Sin, is
that which may Eminently be called Ours; which a man after God's own Heart does
Keep himself from, with utmost care. He diligently observes the Age of his
Life, the Temper of his Constitution, and the Nature of his Particular Calling
or Outward Condition; every of which may Betray him into the hands of some
Predominant Temptation; and having found by sad Experience, that such a
Particular Temptation (by his Often being overtaken with it) is in a more
Peculiar manner His, he chiefly studyeth to Preserve himself therefrom
accordingly. He knows that Ordinary Philistian Lusts will soon Run, if their
Goliath be once conquered, and therefore he first Encountreth with this
Champion, and cease not until he has Overcome him. He knows, that His Sin
is the Old man's Fat and Blood, which the Lord does more especially require,
Lev. 2. 27, and therefore he will sacrifice it to him. He knows, that most
Professors do Plead for this, and therefore he will not Spare it, that so he
might do something singular, or More than others, Mat. 5. 47.

They who are sensible, that some Corruption or other is eminently Their
Iniquity, and who do yet Indulge it, because it does more easily Beset them; do
sadly evidence their not being Upright before the Lord, as David was.

3. David did not wickedly Depart from his God, but Kept his ways, and did not
Put away his Statutes from him, Psa. 18. 21, 22: as having seen their
Destruction, who went a Whoring from him, psa. 73. 27; and Knowing, that God
would l^ad them forth with the Workers of Iniquity, who turn Aside unto their
crooked ways, psa. 125. 5.

Nor did Paul Draw back unto Perdition, Heb. 10. 39, but kept the Faith, 2 Timothy
4. 7: as knowing, what is and will be the sad portion of Backsliders, Heb. 6.
4, 5, 6, and 10, 26, 27, 38.

Indeed every the least Transgression is some kind of Drawing back or Departing
from the Lord; but to do so wicked^y, or unto Perdition, does import some
Greater miscariage, either as to the Matter or Manner of such a Failing; in
both which respects, a man after Gods own heart is not thus guilty. He may come
short of his Duty, through simple Ignorance of the Truth; but yet he is not of
those who do Rebel against the Light, Job 34. 13. He may be forced from the
true Worship and service of God, as David was, in his flight from Saul; but yet
he will not then go and serve other Gods, though others bid him do so, as they
did David, 1 Samuel 26. 19. He may for a while Suspend his Positive witnessing
unto some Gospel Truths, as Paul sometimes did, because of others weakness; but
yet he will not act unto the Prejudice thereof, as did the false Apostles. He
may depart from some Lesser Truths, but not from what are of greater moment,
viz. Proper fundamentals, or the Predominant Truths of such a Time. Or when he
does Backslide in any principal respect, he timely returns with advantage;
which is enought to salve the truth of this Position, that a man after Gods own
heart, does not Wickedly Depart from him, or Draw back unto Perdition.

4. David did Resolve, that he would set no wicked thing before his eyes, Psalm.
101. 3. His Sin was ever before him, in a way of holy shame and sorrow, psalm.
51. 3; but not in a way of stumbling block, Ezekiel, 14. 3. Indeed he once sadly
fell from the roof of his house, 2 Samuel 11. 2; but he did not Ascend up thither
with a purpose to fall from thence. He did not stir up himself, but was
provoked by Satan, to number Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. It was not in cool blood,
but in his Haste, when he said, that All men (and Samuel among the rest) were
Liars, psalm. 116. 11.

So also Paul did what he allowed not, or (as the Greek there has it) what he
knew not, Romans 7. 15; to be sure, what he Would not, v. 20, and what he Hated,
ver. 15; which therefore could not properly be called His act, v. 17, or at
least wise not the act of his Mind, v. 23, or Will, v. 21, nor any of his
Delight, v. 22; and consequently he could not be said to set sin before his
Eyes.

A man after Gods own heart, may be compassed about with the Iniquity of his
Heels, in an Evil day, psalm. 49. 5; but yet he will not set any Iniquity before
his eyes. He sets before himself the Evil of suffering, Luke 14. 31; but not
the evil of Sin, save in a way of Detestation, or Arming of himself against it,
Ephesians. 6. 12, 13. He may be overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6. 1; but his feet do
not Run after Evil, Isa. 59. 7. He may be sold under sin, Romans 7. 14; but he
does not sell himself to work evil, as Ahab did, 1 King. 21. 20. His soil may
bring forth Thorns and Briars; but such things are not of his setting.

5. David made conscience of his very words and Thoughts; both which he did
desire, not only that they might be Accepted, but also that they might be
Acceptable; and in the sight of God, ps. 19. 14. He was Purposed that his Mouth
should not Transgress, psa. 17. 3; and said he would not sin with his Tongue,
but took heed unto his Words as being part of his Ways, ps. 39. 1. He hated
Vain Thoughts, psalm. 119. 113; and Gods Testimonies were his Meditation, v. 99;
whose eyes prevented the night-watches that he might Meditate in the Word of
God, v. 148.

So also; Paul put away his childish Thoughts, 1 Cor. 13. 11; casting down
sinful Imaginations, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. He would have a Christians speech to be always savoury
and Gracious, Col. 4. 6; and that Jeasting or foolish Talking should not be
once Named among them as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. 4; and that no corrupt
Communication should proceed out of their mouths, but that which is good to the
use of Edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29; since
evil Communications corrupt good Manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33.

A Gracious heart is far from thinking that words are wind, or that his
Thoughts are free. He knows that his Tongue should be his glory, ps. 30. 12;
and that his words are actions in the Bud, by which a man shall be Justified or
Condemned, Mat. 12. 37. He also knows, that the Thought of Foolishness is
sin, Prove. 24. 9; and that God searches the Heart, to give to every man
according to his Ways, Jer. 17. 10. Such are not after Gods own heart, who
make no great matter of vain Thoughts and Idle words; which speaks sadly unto
those Professors, whose Precious Time is lavished away in Foolish Talk and
Jeasting, unto the shame of their Profession.

6. David was self-suspitious, who therefore desired that God would search him
and know his heart, and Try him and know his Thoughts, and see if there were
any wicked way in him, psa. 139. 23, 24. He had acknowledged before, that God
was acquainted with all his ways, v. 3, and Words, v. 4. and Thoughts, v. 2;
whom now he does desire to prove him, as being Jealous of his own Deceitful
heart, lest he through Pride or Ignorance should Overlook some more refined or
beloved sin. And though the Lord had formerly searched him, and known him, v.
1; yet does he here desire, that he would yet again more fully prove him. Yea
though he was comfortably persuaded, that nothing should be found, psa. 17. 3;
and that he had walked in his Integrity, psa. 26, 1, yet did he still desire,
that God would Examine him and Prove him, and try his reins and heart, v. 2.

So also Paul did not Judge himself, and though he knew nothing by himself, yet
did he not therefore Justify himself, but he that Judged him was the Lord, 1
Cor. 4. 3, 4.

The Pharisees were of a self-justifying disposition, Luke 16. 15; but a truly
Gracious heart is self-suspitious. He knows that the heart is a very
Deceitful thing, Jer. 17. 10; and that God is greater than the Conscience, 1 John 3. 20, whom he does study to show himself Approved unto, 2 Timothy 2. 15, by
whom he must be one day Judged, and whom he would therefore have to search and
Try him thoroughly. He will not scornfully reject those Censures and Reproofs,
which yet he hops to be false and Groundless, suspecting his being apt to
overlook that in himself, which another may more readily discern. Although his
Conscience does acquit him, yet will he put it upon a fresh enquiry, until he
has the Judgment of his All knowing Judge. He does the Truth, and yet he
comes to the Light, that so his Deeds may be made Manifest, that they are
wrought in God, Joh. 3. 21. Nor does he thus desire to be searched, because he
thinks all is well, as that young man did, Mat. 19 20; or merely beause he
feared an exacter Scrutiny at Christ's Tribunal; but because he would rectify
what is amiss, and be led in the way everlasting, psa. 139. 24.

7. David was loath to sin through Ignorance, and therefore he desired that God
would teach him the way of his Statutes, Psalm. 119. 33, and open his eyes, v.
18, and give him understanding, v. 34, and show him all his ways, Psa. 25. 4;
for which end he waited upon him all the day, v. 5, and promised that he then
would keep Gods Law, unto the End, Psalm. 119. 33, 34; to show that he rested
not in a bare form of knowledge, but did desire to be Instructed, that so he
might not sin.

Thus also, when Paul was convinced, that he had Ignorantly persecuted Christ,
Act 9. 5, whereof his present Bodily blindness was a sign, v. 8; he forthwith
begged that he might know what he should do, v. 6* and so continued praying, v.
11, until he had received his Bodily and Spiritual sight together, v. 16, 17,
and straightway Practiced, v. 20, according to what was Revealed in him, Gal.
1. 16.

Some men are willingly Ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5, and come not to the Light, least
their Deeds should be Reproved, Joh. 3. 20; or when they have asked, What is
the Truth? they will not Tarry for an Answer, Joh. 18. 38, or do not receive
the Love thereof, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. But a Gracious heart does Cry after
Knowledge, Pro. 2. 3, the Knowledge of God, v. 5, that so he might be delivered
from the way of the Evil Man, ver. 12. He does not shut his Eyes, and then say,
he sees not, but earnestly desires to be Informed, that so he might not Err
through Ignorance. He seeks for Direction with an Upright heart, and does
what in him lies to be found in every of Christ's ways, though never so
Solitary, Deep or Dangerous.

8. David did Mistrust himself, and therefore he Besought the Lord, that he
might not be Led into Temptation, by being inclined to Covetousness, psa. 119.
36, or any Evil thing, Psa. 141. 4. He knew the Danger of being Overmercyed,
and therefore he durst not desire the speedy Destruction of his Enemies, lest
he and his People should prove Forgetful, psa. 59. 11. To sit at the Sinners
Table, is a manifold and sore Temptation; and therefore he would not that God
should let him eat of their Dainties, le^t he should be thereby Tempted to
practice their wicked works, psa. 141. 4. He knew the Hankering that was in
heart after Earthly Vanities, in case they were in View; and therefore he
desired that God would turn away his Eyes from beholding those Objects, and
Divert his heart from Covetousness, by Enclining it unto his Testimonies, ps.
119. 36, 37.

Suitable to whose Prayer, was Paul's Practice; who being sent by Christ to
preach a Purer Gospel to the Gentiles, Act. 9. 15, he went not to Jerusalem
(where the Jewish Apostles were) till Three years after, Gal. 1. 17, 18, where
having stayed but fifteen Days, v. 18, he came no more there of Fourteen
years, Gal. 2. 1; one principal reason whereof, was, lest he should have run in
vain, v. 2, or lest Peter, James and John (who were men of a Legal Spirit)
should have Tempted him to Judaize, and therefore he might Avoid them, until
he was now competently fortified against that Temptation. And as he was thus
Cautious himself, so also he advised others to shun what might be an Occasion
of their stumbling. He was afraid lest some should be Beguiled by the false
Apostles, as Eve was, by being the Serpents Hearer, 2 Cor. 11. 3; from whom he
therefore wishes them to Turn away, 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5. He knew that the
Midianitish Feasts did Occasion Israel's Bowing down unto their Gods, Number. 25.
2; and therefore he bids Christians to keep out of Idol's Temples, and not
to come at their Feasts, 1 Cor. 10. 8. 14. 18. 20. He tells the Galatians,
that their complying with Abrogated Ceremonies, was the ready way to Betray
them into their ancient Heathenism, Galat. 4. 8, 9, 10.

Job would not stand Gazing upon the Sun or Moon, lest his heart should be
enticed to Idolatry, Job 31. 26, 27. Agur would not be over Rich, lest being
full he should Deny the Lord, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Nor will a Wise man come Nigh the
Door of an Harlots house (in the Letter or Mystery) for fear of being almost in
All evil, in the midst of the Congregation and Assembly, Prove. 5. 8. 14.

9. David did mourn after more Strength against his Corruptions, than yet he
had attained. He wished Earnestly, that his Ways were Directed to keep Gods
Statutes, because he was Commanded so to do, Psa. 119. 4, 5. With his whole
heart did he seek to God, that he might not Wander from his Commandments, psa.
119. 10. And being sensible that he had gone Astray, he heartily besought the
Lord to seek him up, psa. 119. 176.

And how did Paul long to be Delivered from his Body of Death, which made him
to count himself a very Miserable Wretched man, Romans 7. 24!

In many things we Offend, Jam. 3. 2; but a Gracious heart does purify himself
as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3. He is not satisfied with this, that all men have
their Failings; but labors, if by any means he might attain unto the Sinless
state of Saints Raised from the Dead, Phil. 3. 11. He will not make a League
with Canaanitish Lusts, although he cannot Overcome them; wherein there is no
want of Will, although he fails in Performance, Romans 7. 18. Fools make a Mock
at Sin, Prove. 14. 9, but a Man after God's own heart count's that his greatest
burden.

10. David made light of no Iniquity, but yet he Chiefly feared Presumptuous
Sins and Great transgressions, lest they should have dominion over him, psalm.
19. 13.

And though Paul would have Professors to Avoid those Lesser Evils which he
terms not Convenient, Ephesians. 5. 4; yet does he more Especially declare against
more Heinous Sins, which he would not have to be so much as Named among them,
as becomes Saints, v. 3.

Men of a Tender Conscience are oft-times Doubly wronged; Partly, in that the
Matter of their Scruple is judged small, which (in relation to such a Time) is
usually Greater than the other are aware of; and Partly, because they are
thought to strain at Gnats, and to swallow Camels. But holy Zeal is made up of
Light as well as Heat, and a man after Gods own heart does wisely put a
Difference. He will not Despise the Least of Christ's Commands, and yet he
Chiefly minds what is of greatest weight. He knows that a Blot is far worse
than the Missing of an Hair-stroak, and this is the Rule by which he writes.
He would not Trip, because he is much more afraid to Fall; and the least Moat
does make him weep, because his Eye is Tender, and not because he would thereby
seek to Hide some greater Beam. He knows that Great transgressions are Big
with many Little ones; and that he who sticks not at the Former, will scarce
boggle at the Latter, save in a way of Humor and Hypocrisy. However he may be
Censured by those that have a mind to cavil, he so endeavors to walk
Exactly, as that Especially he may not be Scandalous.

11. David knew his own Weakness, and therefore he desired that God would
undertake to secure him from Temptations of a sinful Nature. He was Purposed
that his Mouth should not transgress, psalm. 17. 3; but yet lest his Foot should
slip, he prays that God would Hold up his Goings, v. 5; and that He would set
a Watch before his mouth, and Keep the Door of his Lips, psa. 141. 3.

And Paul wishes him who thinks he stands, to take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor.
10. 12; since our Sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5; in the Power of whose
might he would have Christians to be strong, Ephesians. 6. 10, and therefore he
recommendeth Prayer, v. 18, as the last part of that Armor, v. 11, that so
they might be able to Withstand in the Evil day, v. 13.

Jehoshaphat had almost 12 hundred thousand fighting men 2 Chro. 17. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18; and yet when he encountered with his Adversary, his Eyes were up
unto the Lord, as if he had no might, and knew not what to do, 2 Chro. 20. 12.
A Gracious heart is full of Strength, and yet he is in his own eyes Weak, and
when he is most weak, he is most strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. The best regiment of
his Health, is, that he is always Complaining of his Weakness, and is never out
of the Physicians hand. He does not put Confidence in his Resolution, but
Trusts in the Lord, who brings it to pass, psa. 37. 5.

12. David was yet in the careful use of all holy self securing Means. He
solemnly Engaged to keep God's Righteous Judgments, psa. 119. 106: God's Word
was Hidden in his heart that he might not sin against him, v. 11: and he did
Meditate in his Precepts, that so he might have respect unto his VVayes, v. 15.
He knew the force of a serious Covenant, and therefore he desired not to be at
a Loose end, as false hearts use to do. He carefully stored up what
Preservatives he met with in the Scripture, and labored to work them upon his
heart by Holy Meditation. And when he had received an Absolute Promise from
God, that his Mercy should not Depart from his Son, as it did from Saul, 2 Samuel
7. 15, and that his House should be Established for Ever, v. 16; he did not
hereupon Presume, unto the Neglect of Means, but presently fell to Prayer, that
God would do as he had said, verse. 25, and did therefore put up that Prayer,
because of the former Promise, verse. 27.

So also, though God had given Paul all them that Sailed with him, Act. 27. 24,
so that he verily Believed, v. 25, there should be no loss of any man's Life,
v. 22; yet did he tell the Soldiers, that they could not be Saved, except the
Seamen did continue with them, who were the Ordinary Means of that Assured
Preservation, v. 30, 31. And though he did Believe, that God would Deliver him
from Every evil work, 2 Timothy 4. 18; yet did he Run and Fight and keep his Body
under, lest he should be a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27: Who also exhorted those
Philippians, to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12,
though he was sensible of their Own utter Insufficiency thereunto, v. 13, and
though he was Confident, that God would Perform in them whatever Good work he
had Begun, Phil. 1. 6.

A gracious heart does so Depend upon the Lord, as that he will not yet Tempt
him, by a sinful Neglect of those Means which God has directed him to be in
the careful use of. He knows his Inability to Pray, without the Spirits
Help, Romans 8. 26, which Blows where it Lists, Joh. 3. 8; and yet he does
Pray, that so he might be Quickened, Psalm. 119. 88. He knows that New Covenant
Mercies are Everlasting, and yet he does not think that Exhortations, Threats
and Circumspection are therefore useless or unnecessary; but evidenceth by his
Practice, that though himself be weak, whom God does undertake for, yet is he
not therefore Idle but Industrious.

13. David was glad, when he was stopped in an Evil and sinful way. He blessed
the Lord, who sent Abigail to meet him, and Blessed her by whose Advice he was
kept from shedding Blood in a way of Self-revenge, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33, although
he was a Soldier, and had been sorely Provoked by that Disgraceful Repulse
which he had met with from her Husband, v. 10, 11, whom he had not Hurt, v. 15,
but Secured, ver. 16; which great Reproach he was upon his march to have
Revenged, v. 13, resolving to have done it to the utmost, v. 22; and yet was
quickly stopped in that full Career, v. 35, and Blessed the Lord again, who had
kept him from that evil, v. 39, which he did sometimes think was Lawful, v. 34.

And thus Paul evidenced himself to be of David's Spirit, by stopping in his
full Career of Persecution, upon Christ's Call, Acts 9. 4, although he had
Threatened Slaughter, v. 1, and was Resolved to put the same in Execution, v. 2,
verily Thinking that it was his Duty, Act. 26. 9; and as Others did therefore
Glorify God on his behalf, Gal. 1. 23, 24, so also did he give all Honor and
Glory unto God for this Great Preventing Mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. 17.

Saul was Enraged, when Disappointed in his Design to Kill good David, 1 Samuel
19. 17: but a man after God's own heart Rejoices, when his unlawful Devices
are not brought to pass. He only Mourns over such Attempts, and Blesses God
as heartily for Hedging up Hell's way with Thorns, as for Enlargement in his
way to Heaven. Nor does he thus to Pacify his Lust, when he cannot Satisfy
it; but from the Disposition of his Heart, which would not sin; and evidenceth
it, by endeavoring to Kill that Root, whose Budding Fruits the Lord has
Blasted. Nor is he thus Glad, in some Particular Case only, as Darius was, in
the case of Daniel, Dan. 6. 23; but he does Always Bless God for such Defeats,
and improveth those Rebukes unto a more strict search into the Nature of what
he could not so clearly see, whilst under the power of his Temptation.

14. When David was overpowred by his men, to cut off the skirt of Readiness
Garment, in a way of Gratifying his Unbelief and Self-revenge, his heart did
smite him Presently, 1 Samuel 24. 5; so also when he had sinned in Numbering his
People, 2 Samuel 24. 10: both which did evidence, that he was one of a very Quick
and Tender Conscience.

And so was Paul; who was Ashamed to speak of, what some were not Ashamed to
Practice, Ephesians. 5. 12; and who did Burn with holy Zeal, until he had Removed,
whatever was matter of just Offense to any weak Brother, 2 Cor. 11. 29.

A Gracious heart is very Tender, 2 Chro. 34. 27; and such a one is apt to
Blush, at the very Mentioning of some Sins, yea though himself be not Guilty of
them, Ezra 9. 6. He is more sensible of sinful Imaginations, than others are
of wicked Actions. No sooner has Satan foiled him, but presently he cries
out, What have I done? Every the least Blast of Satan's wind, goes through him,
and makes his spirit Tremble, it is so Delicate. His heart has Touched
Christ, and therefore it always shakes when Turned from him, as does the Needle
touched with the Lodestone: It would Amaze the Generality of Professors, could
they but see, how men of David's spirit startle, so soon as every they Begin at
any time to Slumber; as it is with those in the Letter, who are afraid to sleep.

15. When David had sinned against the Lord, he did acknowledge it, psa. 51. 3,
and did not seek to Hide it, psa. 32. 5, or Translate it upon Others, but took
it wholly to Himself, 1 Chro. 21. 17, though Satan did then Provoke him, ver.
1, for Israel's Sin, 2 Samuel 24. 1. Nor did he speak thereof in a way of Mincing
it, but called it Iniquity, Psa. 51. 2, Transgression, v. 3, Foolishness, Psa.
38. 5, Evil Indeed, 1 Chronicles. 21. 17; and styleth himself a very Beast, because
of his simple Envy, psa. 73. 21, 22.

So also Paul freely confessed, that he had wasted the Church of God
exceedingly, Gal. 1. 13; shutting the Saints up in Prison, consenting to their
Death, punishing them often in every Synagogue, compelling them to Blaspheme, and
persecuting them even unto strange Cities, Act. 26. 10, 11. Nor did he speak
here of in a Mincing way, but therefore calls himself a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, Injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 13, and exceeding Mad, Act. 26. 11.

Some men will rather Die, than Confess a fault; but the Distempers of a Godly
man break out at his Lips, which is a Means to save his Life. He will not Cover
his Transgressions, like Adam, Job 31. 33, as knowing the doleful Effects of
such a Silence, psa. 32. 3, 4, and that the Lord will have Iniquity to be
Acknowledged, Jer. 3. 13, who then is Just and Faithful to forgive it, 1 Job.
1. 9. Nor does he seek to Lessen it, but sets it out with all its
Aggravations, as being more offended with it in Himself, than in Another.

16. David was also very deeply Humbled for his Sin. His Life was spent with
Grief, and his years with Sighing, his Strength failed, and his very Bones were
consumed, because of his Iniquity, psalm. 31. 10. Nor was his sorrow like a
Land-flood only, but like a Living Spring; for his Sin was Ever before his
Eyes, Psalm. 51. 3.

And thus it was with Paul, who being convinced of his former Evil Course, Act.
9. 5, did lay it so to heart, as that he did neither eat nor drink of Three
Days after, ver. 9. Nor was it some violent Pang, but when he had obtained
Mercy, yet did he style himself the Chief of Sinners still, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14,
15.

Sin makes God to cry out, I am pressed, as a Cart that is full of Sheaves,
Am. 2. 13; and therefore a man after God's own heart must needs Groan under it.
A Saint overtaken in a fault, is out of Joint; who therefore must needs be in
very great Pain, until he be Restored, Gal. 6. 1. Sin is that Root from whence
all Sufferings grow, Lam. 3. 39; and therefore it must needs be a Root of
Bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. Professors sins are of the Deepest Die, which
therefore must needs Imprint accordingly upon a Tender heart. Cain complained
of his Punishment, Genesis 4. 13; which David submitted unto, and only desired
the Lord to Take away his Sin, 2 Samuel 24. 10. 17. And that which may be the
Natural man's Passion, is the Godly man's constant Frame, who Mourns all his
days, for that which he is yet Persuaded is Done away.

17. David did chiefly mourn for Sin, as it related unto God, against Whom (and
Him Only) he had Sinned, as himself confesses, psa. 51. 4: Which cannot be
meant, as if he thought he had not sinned against Vriah also; but merely, in
competition with that Evil which he had thereby brought upon himself, in the
Loss of his inward Peace, psalm. 51. 8. 12, the Misery upon his Family, 2 Samuel
12. 10, 11. 14, and the Forfeiture of his own Life, if the Lord himself had not
remitted that part of his Punishment, 2 Samuel 12. 13: Notwithstanding all which
Personal Mischiefs procured by his Sin, he yet was Mainly grieved, for that
Reproach which he had thereby brought upon the Great Name of God, 2 Samuel 12.
14, who had been so Good to him, v. 7, 8: and therefore he thus confesses
here, Against Thee, Thee Only, have I sinned.

So also Paul does not tell us what sorrows he had brought upon himself, but
only that he had done many things contrary to the Name of Jesus, Act. 26. 9,
abusing them who did believe on Him, and consenting unto the Death of Stephen,
whom he calls His Martyr, Act. 22. 19, 20; which is in effect as if he had
uttered David's words before mentioned.

They who truly fear the Lord, are also said to think upon his Name, Mal. 3.
16; the Dishonouring whereof by Sin, is that which chiefly wounds a Gracious
Heart. And therefore it is, that such are ever after, most Zealous for this
Name of God, as David was, who Knew it, psa. 91. 14; and did Remember it, psa.
119. 55; accounting it Holy and Reverend, psalm. 111. 9; designing to build a
Temple to it, 1 Chro. 22. 7; calling his own Advancement by it, psa. 75. 1;
desiring to fear it, psa. 86. 11; describing true Saints by their Love unto it,
psalm. 119. 132; mourning because of its being Blasphemed, psa. 74. 10; and
Praying for himself, that so this Name of God might be Magnified, 2 Samuel 7. 25,
26, and Against others, that they might seek it, ps. 83. 16.

18. David did look upon his Outward Sufferings to be the Fruit of Sin; and
therefore he desires that all his Sins might be forgiven, in order unto the
Removal of his Affliction, psa. 25. 18; confessing that his wounds did stink,
because of his Foolishness, psalm. 38. 5; and calling his Outward Evils by the
Name of their Father, viz. His Iniquities, psa. 40. 12, or the Iniquity of his
Heels, psa. 49. 5, which had gone over his Head, and were a Burden too heavy
for him, psa. 38. 4, because they were the Original of all his Sufferings. And
though Men did hate him without a Cause, seeking to destroy him Wrongfully, and
making him to Restore what he had not Taken, psa. 69. 4; yet even then did he
confess, that God Knew his Foolishness, and that his Sins were not hid from
him, v. 5; which intimates his being sensible, that he had Deserved those
Sufferings from the Lord, though not from the hands of Men.

So also Paul tells us, that Death is Sins Wages, Romans 6. 23; and therefore
(Partly) does he call his own Sin, a Body of Death, To. 7. 24. Nay when himself
and others were Persecuted by Man for Christ's sake, yet does he call those
very Persecutions, fatherly Chastisements and Corrections, Heb. 12. 4, 5. 9; to
signify unto us, that a Gracious heart is so far from charging God foolishly,
when he does at any time Rebuke for Sin, as that he does charge himself with
Meriting at the hand of God, that which Man does unjustly lay upon him for the
sake of Righteousness.

19. David was duly sensible of Old Transgressions; desiring that God would
not remember the sins of his Youth, Psa. 25. 7; and humbly confessing that
Original Iniquity wherein he was shapen and conceived, Psa. 51. 5.

So also, when Paul was Aged, yet he remembered still, Act. 26. 10, what he had
done amiss when Young, Act. 7. 58. Nor did he think, that Infants are acquitted
from the Guilt of Original Sin, but proves the quite contrary; because Death
reigned over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's
transgression, Romans 5. 12, 13, 14. Nor did himself Forget what God had long
since Pardoned; but after that he had obtained Mercy, he still confesses his
former Injuries that he had done, as well as his Grosser failings and
miscarriages, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

A Gracious heart has All his Trespasses forgiven, Col. 2. 13; but yet he will
not forgive any of them to himself, so as to be forgetful of them. Nor is he
satisfied with confessing them Once for all, but makes that his Constant work,
which others count Needless, because it has been done before. He humbly
forgets that Duty which is Behind, Phil. 3. 13; but though he puts away
his Childish things, in point of repeated Action; yet does he Confess them
still, in a way of Continued self-humiliation, 1 Cor. 13. 11.

20. David did see, that he stood in need of being Cleansed from secret Faults,
and from those Errors, which he (through Ignorance) could not understand, psa.
19. 12.

So also, Paul does acknowledge his need of Pardoning Mercy, for what he did
Ignorantly in Unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13, nay though he sometimes verily though it
had been his Duty, Act. 26. 9. And though he Knew Nothing by himself, yet was
he not thereby Justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4; which clearly intimates a Possibility
of his being to be Condemned, for that which he (through Ignorance) might not
be able to understand.

A man after God's own heart, does not resolve the Lawfulness of an Action,
into his Apprehended Light; nor does he conclude, it is no sin, merely because
he Thinks it not to be so. He knows, that sins of Ignorance were to be
Sacrificed for of Old, Lev. 4. 13, 14. 22; and that there is but One Faith or
Rule of Life, Ephesians. 4. 5, which every one (within the compass of it is knowledge)
is first bound to understand, and then to practice, Romans 14. 5. And though an
Erroneous Scruple may stop a Lawful action, Romans 14. 23; yet he that Knew not
his Masters will, and did commit things worthy of Stripes, is liable to be
Beaten, although with fewer Stripes, Luke 12. 48. And therefore a Gracious
heart will both Acknowledge those Errors which he does not Particularly
understand, and beggeth to be Cleansed from those faults which may be secret to
himself as well as others.

And this is the sum of David's Grace-evidencing Carriage toward God, in
relation unto Sin.

But then Secondly; David did evidence his being a man after God's own Heart,
by the Constancy of his Carriage, in relation to that Positive Duty and
Obedience, which he did more immediately perform unto the Lord: And that both
in respect of Passive and Active Duty.

First, in respect of Passive Duty, or of that Suffering-service which he was
put upon for Goodness sake. And so we read, not only that he was Patient then,
psa. 38. 12, 13, 14; but also (which is very strange, considering the
Dispensation he lived under) that he rejoiced to do the Will of God, when
called forth to suffer for him, or to be Offered up Himself, in the stead of
those substituted Legal Sacrifices, which did but shadow out his kind of
Suffering service, ps. 40. 6, 7, 8, wherein he was a Type of Christ, Heb. 10.
5, 6, 7. Which Persecutions of his are largely handled in his two and twentieth
Psalm; and yet he styleth that Psalm (as its Title shows) Aijel Shachar, or
the Hind of the Morning: to signify, with what Inward Cheerfulness he went
about that Suffering-duty, as if he had been an Hind, whose feet are noted for
their Nimbleness, or skipping up on High, psalm. 18. 33, especially in the
Morning.

In which regard, Paul does more Plainly tell us, that he was not Ashamed of
his Sufferings, 2 Timothy 1. 12, but did Rejoice in being Offered upon the
Sacrifice and Service of others Faith, Phil. 2. 17; and was Ready both to be
Bound and Die for the Name of Jesus, Act. 21. 13, so soon as he had heard
thereof, v. 11; accounting it a Gift to suffer as well as to believe, Phil. 1.
29; and not only so, but he did also Glory in his Tribulation, Romans 5. 3, and
desired to Glory in Nothing else, Gal. 6. 14; being chiefly ambitious of
Knowing the fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, and of being made Conformable
unto his Death, Phil. 3. 10.

A Gracious Heart may Cry, as David did, psalm. 22. 2; especially if seemingly
forsaken upon the Cross, as David was, v. 1: but yet he Takes up that Cross
more Cheerfully than if it were an Earthly Crown. He does not put others upon
Suffering, that so himself might be Excused, as the Jewish Priests did by their
Sheep and Oxen, who Died in their Sacrificers stead: but he is willing to bear
the Cross Alone, and to Ease others of that Burden, as Christ was, Joh. 18. 8.
He does Prefer his Duty before his outward Interest; and does Delight to do
this Will of God, so soon as it appears (from the Volume of his Book) to be
God's Will that he should suffer. And thus he does evidence himself to be a man
after God's own heart (as David was) by the tenor of his Carriage toward God,
in respect of Passive Duty.

Secondly, David did evidence himself to be such a one, in a way of Active Duty
also; as will appear, first in the General thus:

Genesis David did not Rest in Legal Duties, but Pressed after what was of a more
Evangelical and Spiritual Nature. He knew that Incense was but a Type of
Prayer; and therefore he desired that his Prayer might be set forth before the
Lord as Incense, and the Lifting up of his Hands as the Evening Sacrifice, psa.
141. 2. He knew that Praises would please the Lord better than an Ox or
Bullock; and therefore he would Magnify him with Thanksgiving, Psa. 69. 30,
31. He knew that the Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; and that he did not
desire Sacrifice, nor was delighted in Burnt-Offering, Psalm. 51. 16, 17.

So also, Paul knew that Legal Holiness was only shadowy; and therefore he was
for putting on the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and
True Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. He knew that Legal Circumcision was Nothing, 1 Cor.
7. 19; and therefore he was for Circumcision in the Heart and Spirit, and not
in the Letter, Romans 2. 28* 29. He knew that the who^^ Law was Dead, (so far as
it was Only given by Moses, or Enlivened by his Authority) that we should
serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter, Romans 7. 6;
and therefore he does Disgracefully call those Concisionists, Phil. 3. 2, who
still Boasted of their Legal Privileges or Duties, v. 4, which himself had
counted Loss for Christ, v. 7.

A Gracious Heart is not satisfied with Legal Sacrifices, or with such Duties
now, as those Sacrifices were of Old; because he knows, that the Lord is not
pleased with them.

Legal Sacrifices were ancient Ceremonial Laws, which only were Imposed until
the time of Reformation Heb. 9. 10: now a Gospel-Saint is not for the Keeping
up of ancient Ceremonies, Col. 2. 16, 17.

Legal Sacrifices were only the Shadows of Good things, Heb. 10. 1: now a
Gracious heart is not satisfied with a mere Form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5, or
show of Grace, Col. 2. 23.

Legal Sacrifices were Lesser things when at the Best; which therefore
(Comparatively) the Lord says, he Never did command, Jerem. 7. 22, 23: now a
Gracious heart is not satisfied with Lesser Duties, in the neglect of Greater,
Mat. 23 23.

Legal Sacrifices were Bloody things, which therefore had a show of Cruelty:
now a Gracious heart is not Taken with that pretended Piety, which crosses the
Rule of Charity, without an express Word requiring it; because he knows, that
God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, Matt. 9. 13.

Legal Sacrifices were wont to be Accounted of, merely according to their
Number, 1 Kings 8. 63: but a Gracious Heart is not satisfied, with Praying so
Often, or Hearing so Many Sermons, or Reading so many Chapters in a Day; because
he knows, that Good Actions severed from spiritual Affections, are but like
unto the Skin of a Sacrifice stuffed out with straw.

Legal Sacrifices were after-Duties, in a way of Satisfaction for some Former
failing; or in a way of Doing for Life, Gal. 3. 12: now a Gracious Heart does
know, that he cannot Do for God, beyond what is his bounden Duty, Luke 17. 10;
and therefore he does not Act in a way of supposed Satisfaction or Deserving,
but only of Obedience.

Legal Sacrifices were Deputed in the stead of Others, Lev. 16. 11. 15, who
should have supplied that place themselves, according unto strict and proper
Justice, Genesis 2. 17: now a Gracious Heart will bind no Burdens upon others (in
a way of Doing or Suffering) which he is not willing to Bear himself, as did
the Pharisees, Matt. 23. 4.

Legal Sacrifices were Customarily Repeated, without Effecting what they were
used for, Heb. 10. 1, 2: now a Gracious Heart is not satisfied with that
Learning which never comes to the Knowledge of the Truth; or with that
Confession, which Ends not in the Forsaking of his Sin; or with any other
Religious Duty, which tends not unto Perfection.

Legal Sacrifices were performed by the Creature, without the help of any
supernatural Assistance: now a Gracious heart is not satisfied with what he is
able to do, by virtue of the first Adam's Strength; unless that Flesh be
Animated by the Spirit of Christ, that so he may Offer up spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Legal Sacrifices were such as mere Carnal Jews did sometimes Abound in the
performance of, Isa. 1. 11: but a Gracious heart is for Outstripping others,
Mat. 5. 47; and is not Satisfied, unless his Righteousness does Exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees, v. 20.

From all which, we may observe, that such are not men after God's own Heart,
who are for the keeping up of Abrogated Ceremonies; who are for Shadows without
the Substance; who are for Lesser things, with the Neglect of Greater; whose
Religion is stained with Cruelty; who place their Holiness in the Number of
their Performances; who gather Satisfaction from what they do, for what they
have done Amiss; who do Translate unpleasing Duty from themselves to others;
who do not Thrive and Grow by what they do converse about; who are contended
with what a mere Natural man can do, and with what the Generality of
Professors do attain unto. Thus much in the General.

Particu: But then David also did more Particularly discover that he was a man
after God's own heart (with reference unto his Active Duty toward God) in
these following respects.

1. David evidenced very much of a Gracious Spirit, in relation to God's more
Immediate Corrections. He did humbly Commit his Spirit into God's hand, Psa.
31. 5: choosing rather to fall into his hand, than into the hand of Men, 2 Samuel
24. 14: eying him in Shimei's Cursing, 2 Samuel 16. 10: giving Him leave to do
with him what seemed good unto him, 2 Samuel 15. 26: acknowledging that God was
Holy, although he did not hear his Cry, psa. 22. 2, 3; and that he was to be
Justified (as being Clear) when he Judged, psa. 51. 4: and Blessing the Lord
for Evermore, with a Twofold Amen, psa. 89. 52, when himself was seemingly
Abhorred, v. 38, and his Covenant made void, v. 39.

So also, Paul laid his Liberty and Life at God's seet, Act. 21. 13:
acknowledging him Righteous, when most severe, Romans 3. 5: whose Tribulation
made him Patient, Romans 5. 3: who looked at Sufferings from Man, as being the
Will of God, Heb. 10. 36: and who abounded in Blessing God, 2 Cor 1. 3, even
then when his Sufferings abounded also, v. 5.

Let all Impatient Spirits know, that a man after God's own Heart is of another
Disposition. He may complain To God, as David did, psa. 22. 1; but not Of God,
as did Cain, Genesis 4. 13. He would not be Rebuked in Wrath, psalm. 38. 1; but yet
he is in Subjection when Corrected, Heb. 12. 9; and opens not his mouth,
because God does it, psa. 39. 9. He could be glad if God would Speedily deliver
him, psa. 31. 2; but yet his Eyes Wait upon the Lord, until he shall have mercy
on him, psa. 123. 2. He Accepts the Punishment of his Iniquity, Lev. 26. 43;
and Reverenceth his Correcting Heavenly Father, Heb. 12. 9* in All things
giving Thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.

2. David's Grace did also very much appear, in relation to that Duty of
Prayer. He constantly sought unto the Lord, both when he was to Flee, 1 Samuel
23. 10, although he Certainly knew before, what Danger he was in; and whither
he should go take possession of his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 2. 1, although he knew
before, that Saul was dead: and when the Lord would have him to fight his
Adversary, although the Case were never so Plain, both in relation to Others, 1 Samuel 23. 1, 2, and Himself, 1 Samuel 30. 8, and 2 Samuel 5. 17. 19. And though (in
answer to his Prayer) he had been Once bidden by the Lord, to help the
Oppressed Keilites, 1 Samuel 23. 1, 2; yet being Discouraged by his Men, v. 3, he
Enquired of God Again, v. 4, that so he might be Certain, what was the Will of
God. And when (in answer to his First Prayer) God bad him go up against the
Philistims, 2 Samuel 5. 19; yet when they came up Again, v. 22, he sought unto
the Lord a Second time, v. 23; though one would have thought, his first
Commission might have sufficed, or rather no fresh Order at all, to fight with
them, whom God had of Old commanded to be Destroyed, although they did not
Begin the quarrel, as here they did, v. 17. Thus David did Pray Always, yea when
his Heart was Overwhelmed, Psalm. 61. 2; and when others became his unworthy
Adversaries, that Cross wind drove him into this safe Harbor of Prayer, Psa.
109. 4. Nor did he only Pray for Outward good things, but chiefly for
Spiritual Blessings, and was Earnest for Grace as well as Comfort, first
begging a New heart, psa. 51. 10, and then the Joy of God's Salvation, v. 12;
being as Loath to lose God's Holy Spirit, as that himself should be cast away
from his Presence, v. 11. Nor did he Pray to God, in the strength of his own
apprehended worth, but in the Multitude of God's Mercy, psa. 5. 7; that he
would save him for his Mercies sake, Psa. 6. 4; pardoning his Iniquity, and not
remembering it, for the sake of his Name, Psa. 25. 11, and Goodness, v. 7; and
blotting out his Transgressions, according to the multitude of his Tender
Mercies, Psa. 51. 1. Nor was he overhasty for an Answer, but Waited patiently,
Psa. 40. 1; resolving to wait upon his Name, Psa. 52. 9; yea Truly his Soul
waited upon God, Psa. 62. 1, and as the eyes of Servants upon their Masters,
until he should have Mercy on him, Psa. 123. 2.

An Hypocrite will not Pray Always, Job 27. 10; but a Gracious heart begins
every of his undertakings with solemn Prayer. He knows that all Good is from
the Lord, Jam. 1. 17; for which he yet will be Enquired of, Ezekiel. 36. 37, who
knows the Meaning of spiritual Sighs and Groans, Romans 8. 26, 27. He will be
Instructed from the Lord, before he will Encounter with Difficulties, or Flee
from Dangers, or satisfy his Desires. And thus he does, upon every fresh
occasion, and not only Once for all; more Narrowly enquiring after that, which
some would Dissuade him from, upon the account of Self-preservation.
Temptations do only foil him upon his Knee, and he will Pray, although his
heart be ready to Die within him, through Overwhelming sorrow. And the
Blessings of Gods Right hand are chiefly in his Eye; who would have Peace, but
(Principally) Grace, begging (as David did) that his Heart might be not only
sound, Psa. 119. 80, but also Quickened, v. 88. and Enlarged, v. 32. And this
Incense of his Prayer, is Offered up Before God's Mercy-Seat, Exodus 30. 6, or
with the Premised Confession of his own utter Nothingness, Genesis 32. 10. Nor
does he only Pray, when God is Quick of Hearing, but when he Hears not,
Psalm. 22. 2; accounting it his Duty still, at leastwise Patiently to Wait
God's Leisure.

And such a man was Paul; who was for Prayer, not only upon weightier
Occasions, but when he was to take a Journey, Romans 1. 10, or to Eat and Drink,
1 Timothy 4. 5, and in Every thing, Phil. 4. 6: though more Especially for Grace
and Peace, in a way of Free Mercy, 1 Timothy 1, 2, and with all Perseverance or
patient Waiting, Ephesians. 6. 18.

3. David was speedily Obedient to God's signified Order; whereby he evidenced,
that God was his King, as he does style him, Psalm. 5. 2, and 84. 3; and that
Himself was his Servant, as he professes, with an Affectionate Reduplication,
Truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, Psalm. 116. 16. He waited for an
Answer to his Prayer, in point of Command as well as Comfort. He went when God
bad him Go, 2 Samuel 5. 19, 20; and when he was Forbidden, ver. 23, he did as he
was commanded, v. 25.

So also, when Christ had told Paul, what he should do, Act. 26. 16, in answer
to his Prayer, Act 9 6, he was not Disobedient to that Heavenly Vision, Act.
26. 19, nor did he Confer with Flesh and Blood about it, Gal. 1. 16; and when
the Spirit did forbid his going into Bithynia, Act. 16. 7, he also complied
with that heavenly Prohibition, v. 8; in answer to those Titles of King and
Lord, which he does often give to Christ, whose Servant he does Every where
profess himself to be.

Men use to say (in way of Complement) I am your Servant; and many Workers of
Iniquity will say, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7. 22, 23; but a Gracious heart does speak
thus by his Practice, Going and Coming and Doing, as he is Bidden, by which a
Real Servant is described, Matt. 8. 9. He Watches unto Prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18,
and Hears what God will Speak, psalm. 85. 8, and with reference unto Direction
as well as Peace. He seeks for Instruction with an Upright heart; and
therefore he Ecchoeth to God's Counsel by an Immediate compliance with it. He
is not only a Retainer unto Christ, wearing his Livery, and Living at his own
Command; but he is one of Christ's Household Servants, waiting for his Masters
Order, and carefully putting it in Execution. The Lord is his Shepherd, psa.
20. 1, without whose Leading, he will not force into the Greenest pasture, v.
2; but he will follow him into the Shambles, psa. 44. 22. Nor is he thus
Obedient, because he is Overpowered, as Balaam was, in Blessing Israel, Number.
24. 13, which therefore made him to make a Virtue of Necessity, v. 1: but this
is the Godly man's Disposition, evidenced by his Readiness and Constant
Practice. Those were proud men, Jer. 43. 2, who would not Take that Counsel
which God had given, in answer to their Pretended Prayer, Jer. 42. 3.

4. David was very sensible, that all the Mercy he had, did come Originally
from the Lord; and from his Free Grace alone; whom therefore he was very
Thankful unto. He does confess that it was God, who girded him with strength,
and made his Way perfect, psalm. 18. 32; by whom he had run through a Troop, and
leaped over a Wall, v. 29; whose Gentleness had made him Great, v. 35, and who
had subdued under him those that rose up against him, v. 39; who made him to
lie down in Safety, psa. 4. 8; and who must first Open his Lips, before his
Mouth could show forth his Praise, psa. 51. 15. -- He also does witness unto
the Freeness of God's Grace therein; acknowledging that Israel was saved by the
Light of his Countenance, because he had a favor to them, psa. 44. 3; and that
himself Deserved not God's being Mindful of him, psalm. 8. 4: and when the Lord
had heard his Prayer, psalm. 66. 19, though this did Prove that he had not
Regarded Iniquity in his heart, v. 18, yet does he only Conclude, v. 20, with
Blessing him, who had not Turned away his Prayer, nor his Mercy from him,
without hinting in the least, that his own Holiness was any way Influential
thereunto. -- He also was very Thankful unto God, for what he had received,
with all his Soul, psa. 103. 1; Praying Three times a Day, psa. 55. 17, but
Praising him Seven times, psa. 119. 164; and when his Heart was in the most
Fixed frame, psalm. 57. 7.

So also, Paul does confess, that All things are Through the Lord, Romans 11. 36;
who made his Labors to be Successeful, 1 Cor. 3. 7; whose Gift Faith is,
through which the Saints are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8; who works in us to Will as
well as Do, Philip. 2. 13; not being sufficient to Think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5; and therefore he would have
none to Boast, since the Root did Bear them, and not they the Root, Romans 11.
18. -- He also witnessed unto the Riches of God's Grace herein; who works of
his own Good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 13; according to the Gift of whose Grace he was
an Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 7, and Whatever else he was, 1 Cor. 15. 10; by which Grace
of his we are Saved, Ephesians. 2. 5, and not by Works, Romans 11. 6, for who has
first Given to him* v. 35? and as a clear Proof hereof, he tells us, that
when we were yet without Strength, Christ Died for the Ungodly, Romans 5. 6, and
while they were yet Sinners, ver. 8. -- For all which Mercies he also was very
Thankful, as all his Epistles do declare at large, and more particularly,
Phil. 4. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. Ephesians. 5. 4. A Gracious heart is well acquainted with
his own utter Nothingness, in point of Strength and Worth; who therefore gives
Praise unto the Name of God, and Puts it from himself with Both his hands,
psa. 115. 1. As on the One hand it is not He that sins, but Si^^ him, Romans
7. 20; so on the Other hand, it i^ not He that Labors, but the Grace of God
with him, 1 Cor. 15. 10. He gives unto God the sole Glory of all his Good and
Virtuous achievements, Act. 4. 10; and labors to stop that Thief, which
would Rob God of what is Wholly Due to him Alone, Act. 14* 13, 14, 15. Nor does
he attribute the Grace of God bestowed on him, to any Self-worth, Dan. 2. 30;
but from the Foundation unto the Top-stone; he cries, Grace, Grace, Zech. 4.
7. Nor does he sever his Prayers and Praises, Phil. 4. 6; but whereas most men
do only Crave a Blessing, he also Gives Thanks; wherein he does so Abound,
as that this Latter seems to bear the Name of his whole Obedience, Ephesians. 5.
4.

5. David was Faithful unto the Lord, and careful to Perform whatever Vows
and Promises he had sometimes made unto him. He stuck unto God's Testimonies,
Psa. 119. 31, and did not forsake his Precepts, v. 87. He undertook, that in
Sion the Vow should be performed unto God, psalm. 65. 1, however it might be
slighted other-where; Himself had sworn, and would Perform it, that he would
keep his righteous Judgments, psa. 119. 106. He resolved to Pay his Vows, psa.
22. 25, which his Lips had uttered when he was in trouble, Psa. 66. 14, in the
Presence of all God*s People, Psalm. 116. 18.

So also, Paul had obtained Mercy of the Lord to be Faithful, 1 Cor. 7. 25;
which he did evidence, not only in the Performance of that Legal Vow, Act. 21.
26, which he had made, Act. 18, 18; but more Especially in the Fulfilling of
that Evangelical work, which was committed to him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20; and which
was Committed to his Trust, because he was accounted Faithful, 1 Timothy 1. 11, 12.

All sorts of Persons may Promise unto the Lord at a very high rate, when in a
Good Mood, as Saul was, 1 Samuel 26. 21; or when under some heavy Judgment, as
Pharaoh was, Exodus 8. 8; or when Affrighted with the sight of God's Terror, as
Israel was, Deuteronomy. 5. 27; whose heart was not yet steadfast in such Covenants,
psa. 78. 37: but a Gracious soul is Faithful, and more especially unto the
Lord, whose Promises to him are True, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He fears God, and
therefore when he has Vowed, he dares not say before the Angel, that it was an
Error, Eccl. 5. 6, 7. He knows that God is True, 2 Cor. 1. 18; and loves
Truth, psa. 51. 6; who takes it for Granted, that his Children will not Lie,
Isa. 63. 8: and therefore he would be Faithful. He is for a Perpetual Covenant,
that shall not be Forgotten, Jer. 50. 5; and thereby evidenceth himself to be
after God's own heart, who is Always Mindful of his Covenant, psa. 111. 5. Those
are Rejected Ephraimites, who compass God about with Lies; whilst Judah yet
Rules with him, and is Faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. 12.

6. David was Eminent for Believing, both in respect of Trust, Hope and
Confidence. God had been his Trust from his Youth, psalm. 71. 5; in whose Mercy
he Trusted for Ever and Ever, psa. 52. 8; and then more Especially, when he was
Afraid, psalm. 56. 3, which made him not to fear what Man could do unto him, v.
11. He also Hoped in the Lord Continually, ps. 71. 14; having been made to do
so when he was upon his Mother's Breasts, ps. 22. 9; encouraging himself in the
Lord his God, when his People spoke of Stoning him, 1 Samuel 30. 6; and bidding
his Dejected Soul to Hope in God, psa. 42. 11, although he had Forgotten him,
v. 9; who was his God from his Mothers Belly, psa. 22. 10, and who had heard
him from the Horns of the Unicorns, v. 21. Nay he was also Confident, that God
would Hear him when he called, psalm. 4. 3; and that his Goodness would follow
him all his Days, psa. 23. 6; and that he should yet Praise him for the Help
of his Countenance, psalm. 42. 5; and that God would have his Enemies in
Derision, psa. 2. 4; turning them Back, when he did Cry, psa. 56. 9; and
therefore he feared no Evil, though in the Valley of the shadow of Death, psa.
23. 4; though in the Midst of Trouble, psa. 138. 7; though an Host should
encamp against him, psa. 27. 3; and though ten Thousands of People should set
themselves against him round about, psa. 3. 6; not Doubting to Overcome that
Great Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 46, through his Name or Strength, v. 45, who formerly
had delivered him out of the Paw of the Bear and Lion, ver. 37: all which he
therefore Spoke, because he had Believed, psa. 116. 10.

So also, Paul had the same Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13, who Trusted in
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 12; and as in Spiritual Respects, so in relation to Temporal
Deliverance also, improving former Experiences of that Nature, unto the
strengthening of his continued Trust, 2 Cor. 1. 10. And as he did thus Trust in
God, so did he also Hope, that in nothing he should be Ashamed, Phil. 1. 20:
nor in this Life only had he Hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 19, but did rejoice in
Hope of future Glory, Romans 5. 2, which was the fruit of his Experience, v. 4;
by which he was already Saved, Romans 8. 24, although he then saw not the thing
Hoped for, v. 25; which Hope was an Helmet to secure him, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8, and as
an Anchor to keep him steadsast, Heb. 6. 19. Nay he was also Confident, that
God would Perform whatever good work he had Begun, Phil. 1. 6; and that he
would deliver him from every Evil work, and Preserve him unto his Heavenly
Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 18; being verily persuaded that Nothing should separate him
from the Love of God, Romans 8. 38, 39; and because of which Confidence, he was
rather willing to be Absent from the Body, and to be Present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5. 8. All which he therefore spoke, because he had Believed, 2 Cor. 4. 13.

A Gracious heart is strong in Faith, and is thence Signally called, a
Believer. He makes God his Trust, and Hops in him, unto the utmost of his
Visible ground. And though men fearing God, may walk in Darkness, as to that
point of full Assurance, Isa. 50. 10; ('it is a most unscriptural and
uncharitable Opinion, that of some, as if there were no Faith, save that of
full Assurance;) yet together with the Advancement of David's Dispensation in
the Latter days, these Mists shall be Dispelled, and they shall see Eye to Eye,
Isa. 52. 8. And a little before that time, men after God's own heart may
Possibly be endowed with a kind of particular Faith (such as David had before
his Coronation) relating to their Outward Redemption, which they may be
Pececuliarly enlightened into, and therefore speak what with Sobriety they have
Believed; whilst Faith will not be sound upon the Earth, (or among those of an
Earthy Spirit) when the Son of Man thus Comes, Luke 18. 8.

7. David did Dedicate unto the Lord, (and for the Service of his Temple) that
Silver, Gold and Brass, which Toi the King of Hamath had sent him for a
Present, 2 Samuel 8. 11; as also what Gold and Silver he had forcibly Gained from
the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines, Amalekites, 1 Chro. 18. 11, and
from the Syrians, 2 Samuel 8. 12, who came to succor Hadadezer, v. 5, from whom
he took Shields of Gold, 1 Chro. 18. 7, and very much Brass, wherewith Solomon
made the Brazen Sea and Pillars and Vessels of Brass, v. 8.

With respect to all which, I may say, as Paul does concerning Marriage, Ephesians.
5. 32, This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church.

For the better understanding whereof, it must be noted, that David himself was
an unquestionable Type, Primarily of Christ, and Secondarily of those who are
Christ's, viz. his Saints and People; whether these Saints be Collectively
considered, (so David's completed Temporal Kingdom shadowed out their Portion
under the Seventh Trumpet,) or whether they be Individually considered; and so
his Reigning state did shadow out every of their spiritual portions in all
Gospel-Ages; which latter I shall now only prosecute, and briefly touch the
other in the close of this Particular.

Now then, as David at this time had his Friends and Adversaries, so also has
every Individual Saint his Friends and Enemies, from whom he gains (as did
David) several Gifts and Spoils, which are accordingly improved, though in a
more mysterious way.

First, David had his Toi the King of Hamath for his Friend, who was a poor
Creature compared with David, yet friendly and not despised. Thus also each
Saint is always furnished with such a Friend, viz. the Remainder of the first
Adam's good Nature in him; which is a poor low thing compared with Christ in
him, but yet it is very Friendly, and not to be despised.

Secondly, This Toi the King of Hamath presented David with Silver, Gold and
Brass. And thus also, the first Adam's good Nature does furnish each Saint,
with some kind of Golden Knowledge, and Silver like Peace, and with the Brass
of Outward Interest, viz. Esteem, Authority and Influence, all which are
useful, although Inferior.

Thirdly, David also had his Enemies, viz. the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites,
Philistines, Amalekites and Syrians; which Syrians do seem at that time to have
been One with the Assyrians, as being near of Kindred, the one coming from
Ashur, and the other from Aram, who were the two Sons of Shem, Genesis 10. 22. And
thus also each Saint has his spiritual Enemies, resembling those
beforementioned, with respect unto what those are chiefly noted for in the
Scripture; which I have formerly hinted, and shall here briefly recapitulate.

As for Example:

The Edomites came of Esau, who is chiefly noted for the Sale of his Birthright
and his loss of Supremacy; which made him to hate his brother Jacob ever after.
And so those Edomites do fitly resemble the Saints Body or Outward man, which
is Originally a little Elder than the Soul, Genesis 2. 7, and has been a Clog
unto it, 1 Cor. 9. 27, ever since the self-contracted Fall, before which time,
the Outward man had visibly the Name of Adam's Happiness, which since that time
has fallen to Jacob's share, and so shall be to all Eternity, viz. more
Spiritual, Ephesians. 1. 3.

The Moabites and Ammonites are chiefly noted for their being the Fruit of
L^t's Daughters Inordinate desire of Children. And so they fitly answer to
those Inordinate and fleshly lusts which war against the Soul, and which the
Best are ^id to take heed of, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

The Philistines are chiefly noted for their being in the very heart of
Israel's Land. And so they fitly answer to Bosome-sins, which do more easily
beset us, Heb. 12. 1, and which therefore may be called Ours by way of
Eminency, Psa. 18. 23.

The Amalekites are chiefly noted for their being the first Opposers of Israel
in their Journey toward Canaan. And so they fitly answer to that Worldly mind,
firstly prevailing upon the true Converts Fleshly part, which is most faint and
subject to be smitten.

The Syrians or Assyrians are chiefly noted, for their high Descent, (viz. from
Shem) and yet their deadly hatred against God's Israel, from first to last. And
so they fitly answer to those more Diabolical Tentations, which come from
Satan, who was an Angel by Creation, but (to the Saints especially) is now
become a roaring and devouring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

These are the Principal of those Adversaries, which every true Gospel-Saint
has been and still is conflicting with (in the Mystery) as David did of Old in
the Letter.

Fourthly, David did forcibly gain from Hadarezer and the rest, their Shields
of Gold, their choicest Silver, and very much Brass: And in like manner, each
Gospel-Saint does forcibly gain from Satan and his Party (by his conflicting
with them) much Golden Wisdom, (which has been the Old Man's Shield) much
inward Comfort, which is of more worth than Silver; and the meanest part of
whose Gain (like unto that of Hadarezer's Brass) has been and still is
useful, Partly to Adorn, (as Solomon's Pillars did his Porch,) Partly to
Cleanse, (as Solomon's Brazen Sea did the Priests, 2 Chro. 4. 6;) and in
several other respects, suiting with what Solomon's other Vessels served for;
all which were made of Hadarezer's Brass. Little thought Hadarezer and his
Confederates, that they should have Increased David's Treasures, whom they
intended to destroy: and little thinks Satan or the Old Man, that a poor
Believer should be Enriched by their Conflicting with him, whom they design to
make a Spoil of: but thus God orders it, that Satan does learn a Saint more
Wisdom than he had before; and Corruptions conquered do add unto his stock of
Comfort; and the Soul by this means is far more Beautiful and Pure and
Serviceable, than otherwise it might have been both unto God and Man. Barely to
be Tempted (though in never so violent a manner) may prove unto our great
advantage, in case we overcome as David did.

Fifthly, David did Dedicate unto the Lord, and for the Service of his Temple,
whatever Gifts and Spoils he had thus gained. Now Solomon's Temple (in a Larger
sense) did shadow out Christ's Body, both Natural, Joh. 2. 19. 21, and
Mystical, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17; but in a Stricter sense, that Temple was a Double
Type, relating unto the Beginning and Ending of Christ's Whole Dispensation.
Firstly, it was a Type of that Outward Glory in Gospel times which God bestowed
upon his Saints and Churches in the days of Constantine, which Glory was
destroyed by Mystical Babylon (as Solomon's Temple was by Nebuchadnezzar,) and
is to be Restored again (as that of Old in the Letter was) together with the
Return of that Babylonish Captivity. But then ultimately, or at the Last, that
Temple of Solomon did typifie that far exceeding Glory of John's New Jerusalem,
wherein the Lamb (whose Personal Reign was ultimately shadowed out by
Solomon's) is said to be the Temple of it, Rev. 21. 22.

In every of which respects, a truly Gracious heart does Dedicate his
forenamed Gifts and Spoils unto the Service of God's Temple: that is, he does
design to Glorify Jesus Christ, both in his Person and Members and Interests,
by all that Light and Joy and other Advantages, which he at any time has
gained, from Friend or Foe. The Natural man is apt to convert such things unto
a sinful use, as Saul did his Revenues unto the stirring up of others against
good David, 1 Samuel 22. 7, 8; such are apt to be the more Mischievous because of
their Knowledge, and yet more Presumptuous because of their apprehended Peace,
and to improve their Outward Interest in Satan's service: and though some
others of them be not so Gross, yet do they convert such things unto a selfish
use; pursuing after Knowledge in a self-exalting way, desiring inward Peace in
a mere self-satisfying way, and improving their outward Interest, as Saul once
did his, unto the Promotion of good David, merely because he did Refresh hi, 1 Samuel 16. 21, 22, 23: and though some more refined Natural man may Dedicate some
part of his Spoils unto the Lord, as Saul and Abner did, 1 Chro. 26. 28, yet is
it only for the service of the Tabernacle (under which Saul lived,) which
shadowed out some Lower things, (far short of what the Temple typified,) such
as are, Natural accomplishments and Moral Virtues, and the more External part
or Form of Godliness.

But now a truly Gracious heart designeth Christ's Glory, by every thing he
has, or does desire. He magnifieth Christ, by the improvement of his outward
Interest in the World; he beggeth inward Peace, that so he might do his Master
the more cheerful service; he does reduce his Knowledge unto Practice, and
would be Gracious, that so Christ might be glorified in him, rather than that
himself should be thereby advantaged, as David did prepare for the glory of
that House, which yet himself foresaw he should not share in. And thus he
aims at Christ's advancement in every thing he does; which will be most fully
evident at Christ's Appearing, which Dispensation was ultimately shadowed out
by that Temple, unto the service whereof David did thus Dedicate his Gifts and
Spoils; and whereby he eminently did demonstrate, that he was a man after God's
own heart.

And thus Paul did Gain much spiritual Gold and Silver, (or at leastwise
Brass) not only from his Friend, viz. the Remainder of the first Adam's good
Nature in him; but more especially from his Enemies, by subduing his Edomitish
Outward man, 1 Cor. 9. 27; his Moabitish and Ammonitish Inordinate Affections,
1 Cor. 6. 12; his Philistian Bosom-Lusts, which did more Easily beset him, Heb.
12. 1; his Amalekitish Worldly mind, Act. 20. 33; and his Syrian or Satanical
Temptations, 2 Cor. 12. 7: the Gain of all which Conquests, was Dedicated by
him to an Holy Use, and left upon Record for the service of God's Mystical
Temple, viz. his Saints and Churches; all which were Committed by him, to
Timothy and other faithful men, 2 Timothy 2. 2, (as David's Dedicated things were
to Shelomith and his Brethren, 1 Chro. 26. 26, 27, 28.) for future Use, and for
the service of a far more Glorious following Dispensation.

A man after God's own heart, does Gain much by his Conflicting with and
Overcoming Satan's Temptations and his own Distempers; whose precious
Experiences are not Abused by him unto Licentiousness, but are carefully
Treasured up, for the rendering of himself and others more Serviceable to the
Lord, in Present and Successive Generations. If God has not Despised his
Prayer, psa. 102. 17, (when Overwhelmed, as the Title has it,) this shall be
written by him for the Generations that are to come, v. 18. If he perceive that
some Bosom-sin has been the Death of any, as the Philistines were of Saul, by
shooting at a Distance, 1 Samuel 31. 3: this also shall be written in the Book of
Jasher (or the Upright,) that Others may learn to use the Bow, 2 Samuel 1. 17,
18, and Timely resist such Mortal Adversaries. Or if himself has Experimented
the Misery of Hiding Sin, Psa. 32. 3, 4, and the Benefit of an Ingenuous
Confession, v. 5; this also shall be Written, that so every Godly man may be
Instructed to Pray unto the Lord in a time of Finding, v. 6. And thus he
labors to make others Better than Himself, by communicating his Experiences
unto them; as David (with his dear-bought Spoils) sought to Enrich that Temple,
which yet Himself came short of.

And as the Daughter of Sion in the latter days, shall Thresh the forenamed
Nations, (viz. their Edomitish false Brethren, their Moabitish persecuting
Kindred, their Indulged Malignant Philistines, their Amalekitish Worldly
friends, and their Syrian (or Assyrian) Diabolical Enemies,) they shall then
Consecrate their Gain and Substance to the Lord, Mic. 4. 11, 12, 13, and shall
not raise a Private Interest upon the others Ruins, as did the Little Horn,
Dan. 7. 24, unto the Lords Dishonor and his Peoples Prejudice, v. 25.

Those are not Men after God's own heart, who either do Abuse what they have
Gained by such like Conflicts, or do convert it unto some Lower or selfish use,
and not unto the spiritual or Public good and benefit of Present and Afterages.

8. David did Magnify God's Law or written Word; accounting it the ordinary
means of Instruction, Psa. 119. 105, Reformation, v. 9, and Conversion, psa.
19. 7: wherewith he did Consult, psa. 119. 24, and labored to direct his ways
according to that Rule, v. 5, as being Perfect, psa. 19* 7, and Abiding, v. 9:
wherein he Meditated all the Day, as an Evidence of his Exceeding Love, psa.
119. 97; rejoicing thereat as one that finds great Spoil, v. 162, and
counting it better to him than Thousands of Gold and Silver, v. 72* and Sweeter
than Honey to his mouth, ver. 103, because he thereby gat Understanding, v.
104, and Comfort in his Affliction, ver. 92, and was forewarned, Psalm. 19, 10,
11.

So also, Paul does Advance the Scriptures; Disputing from them, Act. 17. 2;
Proving his Doctrine by them, 1 Cor. 15. 3; and recommending the Study of them,
1 Timothy 4. 15, as being given by Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16, both as a Lasting
Rule, 1 Timothy 6. 3. 14, and Perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

Those are not men after God's own heart, who seek to Disgrace the Scriptures;
calling them (according to their own Improvement of them) a Nose of Wax, a Dead
Letter, of use for young Beginners only, but not for All, at leastwise not a
Perfect or Only Rule; by which they sadly evidence that there is no Light in
them, Isa. 8. 20, whilst they Pretend to be Discharged therefrom, because of
the Day Star Risen in their hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19; which place (if rightly
understood) does no way Antiquate the Scriptures unto Any, as the Sole Rule of
Life, until Christ's Personal Appearance, who Then is called the Bright and
Morning Star, Rev. 22. 16; till when, himself sadly Denounces against those,
v. 18, 19, 20, who either Add unto, or Take away from the Words of that
Finishing Book, which they are guilty of, who Cry up any other Rule, and Decrie
this, as an evident Demonstration of their Pride and Ignorance, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4,
from whom a Gracious heart is bid Withdraw, v. 5; since they Deny that Only
Principle (or Faithful Word) by which Gainsayers are to be Convinced, Tit. 1.
9, which never can be by Man, so long as an unscriptural Impulse upon the
Spirit is maintained as a Warrantable Rule by which to walk, there being no way
to Try the Spirits, 1 John 4. 1, but by the Scriptures, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.

But a man after God's own heart, does Meditate upon the Scriptures, and is In
them, as the Greek there has it, 1 Timothy 4. 15, not as a Canker-worm, to Deface
or Eat them, 2 Timothy 2. 17, but Continuing in them, that so he might both save
himself and others, 1 Timothy 4. 16. He makes them his Counselors, psalm. 119.
24, and has recourse unto this Law and Testimony, Isa. 8. 20, not daring (in a
Case of Difficulty) to consult with that Familiar Spirit of Carnal Policy, v.
19. He is Admonished by These, and mourns over his former mispense of
precious Time and Strength in reading other Books, Eccl. 12. 12; holding fast
this Form of sound Words, 2 Timothy 1. 13, and Meditating therein Day and Night,
Psa. 1. 2, not that he might only have a Form of Knowledge, Romans 2. 20, but
that he might not sin against the Lord, psa. 119. 11, and be made wise unto
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15, designing to keep that Word in his desire to live,
^sal. 119. 17.

9. David delighted in God's Instituted Solemn and Public Worship, and was
very Zealous for it. God's Tabernacles were very Amiable in his Eyes, psa. 84.
1; and he accounted that man Blessed, who was chosen of the Lord to Approach
unto him, and to Dwell in his Courts, psa. 65. 4. He was Glad when others said
unto him, Let us go into the House of God, Psa. 122. 1, resolving there to
stand, v. 2; for he Loved the Habitation of that House, ps. 26 8, and made it
the Only object of his Desire, that he might Dwell there all his Life, to
behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to Enquire in his Temple, Psa. 27. 4. And
when he was Driven from this Worship into a Dry and Thirsty Land, Psa. 63. 1;
his Soul did then chiefly Pant and Thirst after God, psa. 42. 1, 2; yea his
Soul thirsted, and his Flesh longed for him, to see his Power and Glory, as he
had seen him in his Sanctuary, Psa. 63. 1, 2; yea his soul longed and fainted
for the Courts of the Lord, his Heart and Flesh cried out for the Living God,
psa. 84. 2. And when he was Returned, in answer to his earnest Prayer, he was
very Zealous for that kind of Worship ever after, psalm. 69. 9; peremptorily
declaring, that none Ought to be Admitted into Church Fellowship, but Upright
Walkers, and Righteous Workers, and Truth-speakers, psa. 15. 1, 2, who do not
Backbite or Injure, or Take up a Reproach against their Neighbor, v. 3, who do
Contemn the Wicked, and Honor those that Fear the Lord, v. 4, who are of a
Merciful Spirit, and take not a Reward against the Innocent, v. 5; whose Hands
are Clean and whose Heart is Pure, who have not lift up their Soul to Vanity,
(or False Worship) nor Sworn Deceitfully, psa. 24. 3, 4, although it prove unto
their own Hurt to make good their Promise, to God or Man, psalm. 15. 4. And such
was his Zeal for this House of God, as that he could not be at rest, psalm. 132.
4, until he had brought the Ark from Kiriath-jearim to Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 13.
6, with great Solemnity and Joy, v. 8; preparing a Place and pitching a Tent
for it, in his own City, 1 Chro. 15. 1, into which at last he brought it, v.
25, liberally offering seven Bullocks and seven Rams, when God helped the
Levites that bare it, ver. 26, and when they had gone six paces, 2 Samuel 6. 13;
where David danced before the Lord with all his might, more like a Priest than
like a King, v. 14, (viz. not in any Coercive way, as did more clearly appear
by his doing this with the People's free consent, 1 Chro. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4,) for
which Michal despised him, both in her Heart, v. 16, and with her Tongue, v.
20; but David did set it in its place, v. 17, with manifold expressions of
Thanksgiving, v. 17, 18, 19. Upon which occasion, (viz, the Removing of this
Ark, or the Advancement of God's Instituted Worship,) David seems to have
penned his Sixty eighth Psalm, as Expositors conceive, and as appears by
comparing its first Verse, with Number. 10. 35; from whence we may infer, that
this Psalm (and all the contents thereof) belongs unto the time of the
Continuance and further Exaltation of this kind of Worship. However, it is
manifest, that David did then compose Another Song, 1 Chro. 16. 7; the first
fifteen verses whereof, are the first fifteen verses of his hundred and fifth
Psalm; only David does (in this Song) bid the People to be Mindful of that
Covenant, 1 Chro. 16. 15, which (in the Other Psalm) he says that God had
Remembered for ever, psalm. 105. 8: the Eleven following verses of this Song, are
the same with his Ninety sixth Psalm, with very little variation: the next
verse of this Song, is the first verse of his hundred and seventh, and his
hundred and eighteenth, and his hundred thirty sixth Psalms: and the two last
verses of this Song, are the two last Verses of his hundred and sixth Psalm:
From all which we may infer, that all those Psalms beforenamed were of
David's penning, although his Name be not Prefixed to them; and that the Ninety
sixth Psalm (which treats of Christ's Coming to Judge the Earth, v. 10, 11,
12, 13,) does Plainly refer unto a Time^ on this side Christ's Personal
Appearing, viz. whilst the Ark or Instituted Worship is still in force, and
when it shall be more fully set up, under David's Dispensation, distinct from
that of Solomon's; and until that be done, Christ's Temporal Kingdom (in the
hands of his Saints) will not be in its full Perfection. -- Nay such was
David's Zeal for this Ark of God, as that when he had thus brought it into his
House and City, he could not be satisfied with its dwelling within Curtains, 2 Samuel 7. 2, but Purposed to build a Temple for it, v. 5; and being not Permitted
so to do, 1 Chro. 22. 8, he yet did evidence his Zeal, in his Preparing for
that House, an hundred thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand
Talents of Silver, (both which amount to Seven hundred and fifty Millions of
Pounds) and of Brass and Iron without weight, ver. 14, beside wrought Stones,
v. 2, and Cedar-Timber, v. 4, and Onyx-stones, and Stones to be set, Glistering
Stones, and of diverse Colors, and all manner of Precious Stones, and Marbles
in Abundance, 1 Chro. 29. 2; over and above all which, he gave of his own
proper Goods, and as an Evidence of his great Affection, v. 3, three thousand
Talents of Gold, of the Gold of Ophir, and seven thousand Talents of refined
Silver, v. 4, both which amount to Thirteen Millions eight hundred seventy and
five thousand pound sterling.

And thus also Paul was Delighted in Gospel-Instituted Worship, and was as
Zealous for it, as he had sometimes been against it, Phil. 3. 6, and for the
Traditions of his Fathers, Gal. 1. 14. He cried down the Jewish Sabbaths, Col.
2. 16; but not the Religious observation of the Lord's Day or First Day of the
week, wherein he Joined with them at Troas, Act. 20. 6, 7, and did sufficiently
Countenance it, by that General Order of his to all the Galatian Churches, 1
Cor. 16. 1, 2; which surely Paul would not have done, if the Difference between
that Day and others had been a mere Humane Invention. He also was for
Gospel-Churches, whose Order he did behold with Joy, Col. 2. 5: and for
Church Officers, viz. Elders and Deacons: and for all manner of
Gospel-Church-Ordinances; from which himself did not Plead to be Exempted, 1
Cor. 10. 16, although he was an Apostle; no more than David did, although he
was a Prophet. Nay Paul was very Zealous also, not suffering Love Feasts to be
coupled with the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 22, 23; and peremptorily Declaring,
that Elders must be Holy, Tit. 1. 8; Deacons Blameless, 1 Timothy 3. 10; and that
none are to be Admitted into (or continued in) Church fellowship, who are
Scandalous, 1 Cor. 5. 11; Heretical, Tit. 3. 10; Anti-Scripturists, 1 Timothy 6.
3. 5; Idle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. 14; Frequenters of Idol-temples, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 16,
17; Ceremonialists, Gal. 5. 11, 12; or mere Formal Professors, 2 Timothy 3. 5, not
being satisfied with the bare Outside of Godliness, without its Power, no more
than David was with the Tabernacle Alone, without the Ark, which was the Ark of
Gods Strength, Psa. 132. 8, and Power, psalm. 63. 2. In the managing of which
business, Paul did not make use of any Kingly Force, 2 Cor. 10. 4, but Priestly
(or Saint-like) Gentleness, v. 1, or at leastwise Spiritual Compulsion only,
v. 2, 3, for which some did Despise him, v. 7, as Michal did David, because he
had laid aside his Royal Robe. Which Gospel-Ark was also thus carried by Paul,
with Singing, Act. 16. 25, Gal. 1. 24, and Blessing God, who Helped him to bear
so great a Burden, 1 Cor. 15. 10; yea he Rejoiced, when Himself (instead of
David's Fastings) was Offered up unto the Lord, in the Close of that Service,
Phil. 2. 17. And though he was not suffered to see that more Glorious
Dispensation upon Earth, which was typified by Solomon's Temple; yet has he
Prepared for it in Abundance, by all his Labors, Sufferings, and especially
his Epistles, containing Rules more Precious than David's Gold and Silver;
which as they have been partly Improved already, and at such a time, viz. in
the days of Constantine; so will they be of further use still, when the Glory
of the Latter House, (or of the Gospel-Temple Opened) shall every way be
Greater than of the Former, Hag. 2. 9.

Those are not men after God's own heart, who do despise Christ's Institutions;
reproachfully calling them Beggarly Elements, Worldly or Carnal Ordinances, and
things which only are of use for Children under Age; as if they might take
liberty to speak of Christ's Appointments in the Gospel, as Paul does of
Abrogated Ceremonies, Heb. 9. 1. 10. Gal. 4. 3. 9. But a Gracious heart
knows, that Moses his Ministration might not be Taken away, until Christ
came in Person or in the Flesh, Heb. 10. 9: and then it is not likely, that
Christ's own Dispensation or Institutions shall be Lawfully Taken away, by any
other but Himself, which therefore ought to be Held fast until He Come, Rev.
2. 25. He knows, that the Gospel-Temple (which signifies Instituted Worship)
was not Destroyed (in Mystical Babylon) but only shut up, (as the Jewish
Worship was in Literal Babylon) which is seen Opened afterward, Rev. 11. 19,
to signify its being still in force; even under the Seventh Trumpet, v. 15. He
knows, that the Lords Supper is Enjoined as a Memorial of Christ's Death
until he Come, 1 Cor. 11. 26; whose Coming in the Spirit only, cannot be
there intended, both because he was so come already, and because his Spiritual
comeing does no way suit with his Bodily death: and therefore a true Christian
will not Destroy the least part of Christ's Law, till all be fulfilled; no more
than Christ did the Law of Moses, Mat. 5. 17, 18.

Nay he is also very Zealous for Purity in Communion; for Gospel Ordinances
without Humane Intermixtures; and for the Power of Godliness together with its
Form: all which are vigorously advanced by him, without Carnal weapons, and
with utmost Joy, notwithstanding his Outward Cost or Personal Losses thereby
contracted. And though he may not outlive a Lower or Tabernacle-state, yet
does he carefully Prepare for the setting forth of that Glory, which upon Earth
he may not be a Sharer in. And as this has Always been the Disposition of a
Gracious heart, so it will much more evidently appear (in all those
forementioned respects) together with the Temporal rearing up of David's
Tabernacle, or under the Seventh Trumpet's Sounding.

10. David was not Discouraged from his Duty by what he met with, but rather
was Encouraged thereby in its Pursuance. He Perfected the Ark's Removal, 2 Samuel
6. 12, notwithstanding that Providential Check, in the Death of Vzzah, v. 7;
and Michal's scoffing at his self-uncovering Zeal, v. 20. made him Resolve to
be yet More Vile, in such a way, v. 22. Because others endeavored to make void
Gods Law, psa. 119. 126; he therefore Loved it above Gold, v. 127, and did
Esteem it to be Right, and Hated every false way, ver. 128. Though he was sma^l
and despised, yet did he not forget God's Precepts, psalm. 119. 141: though
Trouble and Anguish had taken hold on him, v. 143: though he was like a Bottle
in the Smoke, v. 83: though Princes did sit and speak against him, ver. 23:
though the Proud had him greatly in Derision, v. 51: though the Wicked had laid
a snare for him, v. 110: though the Bands of the Wicked had Robbed him, v. 61:
though they had almost consumed him upon Earth, v. 87: and though his Soul was
continually in his hand, yet did he not forget Gods Law, v. 109.

So also, Paul was not Discouraged by what he met with in his Advancing
Christ's Ark or Gospel Truths; but was the more Bold and Zealous, because
others did Blaspheme, Act. 13. 45, 46; and went on still, though some did scoff
at him, as if he were Beside himself, 2 Cor. 5. 13, Act. 26. 24; though he was
Despised, Defamed, Reviled, Persecuted, Buffetted, made as the Filth of the
World, and a Spectacle to all, 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13; though he was
Troubled, Perplexed, and Cast down, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9; yea though his Life was in
continual danger, Act. 20. 24, and though he had been ofttimes in Deaths, 2
Cor. 11. 23.

The wicked flee when no man pursues, but the Righteous are bold as a Lion,
Prove. 28. 1; following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14. 4, although
their way be never so Solitary, Deep, and Dangerous. Discouragements are as a
Whet-stone to all true Valor, and a Gracious heart is truly Noble. His heart
may fail him for a while, as Peter's did; but that Recoil does make his next
onset the more Courageous.

11. David did highly Prize God's Love; which he accounted Excellent, Psa. 36.
7; able to make his Broken bones Rejoice, psa. 51. 8; the Light of whose
Countenance is Saving, psa. 80. 19; and was set by him in opposition to all
Earthly good, psalm. 4. 6; whose Comforts did Delight his Soul, in the Multitude
of his thoughts within him, psalm. 94. 19; in whose Favor is Life, psa. 30. 5;
and whose Loving Kindness is better than Life, psa. 63. 3; who therefore was
Troubled, when God did Hide his face, psalm. 30. 7; and only desired, that God
would not rebuke him in his Wrath, nor chasten him in his hot Displeasure, psa.
38. 1.

So also Paul valued God's Love at a very high rate, as being that which
Passes Knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19; which therefore he desired, next unto Grace, 2
Cor. 13. 14; and by which he was Constrained to Live unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

A Slave may be Exanimated with his Master's Anger, but he that is born of God
does chiefly Live by his Heavenly Father's Love; which puts more Gladness
into his heart, than when the Worldling's Corn and Wine increases, ps. 4. 7.
Christ's left hand under his head does nothing so much refresh him, as his
right hand Embracings, Cant. 2. 6. No Silver is current Coin with him, but that
which has the Image and Superscription* of God's Love engraven Thereupon. The
Light of God's Countenance, is that, without which he cannot see the Creature's
Beauty, nor be affected with it. He may be content to walk in Darkness, because
it is his Father's pleasure; but one of God's Smiles is more to him than all
the World, which therefore his Lovesick Soul is panting after, and will not
hazard its loss for all the Pleasures that sin affords.

12. David was well contented with his Outward Lot, accounting it a goodly
Heritage, psalm. 16. 6; because the Lord was the portion of his Inheritance, v.
5; besides whom he had none in Heaven, nor desired any upon Earth, psa. 73. 25;
in whose presence is fullness of Joy, psa. 16. 11; and whose Everlasting
Covenant was all his Salvation and Desire, although his House was not made to
Grow, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

So also, Paul had learned, in whatsoever state he was, therewith to be
Content, Phil. 4. 11, even when he was abased, hungry, and suffered need, v.
12, yet then he had All, and was Full and did Abound, v. 18.

Contentment is joined with Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 6; and whilst others mind
Earthly things, Phil. 3. 19, a Gracious heart does converse in Heaven, v. 20,
where his chief Treasure is, Mat. 6. 21. He shall inherit All things, Rev. 21.
7; and all things Are his at Present, 1 Cor. 3. 22, because he is better
satisfied with his Little, than others are with their Abundance. Those are not
men after God's own heart, who will adventure to step aside, for the Gaining or
Securing of a Worldly Interest; or who are not Content with such things as are
allotted to them, within the compass of their Duty.

13. David was for the converting of Mercies into Duty; which he knew to be
God's Design, who therefore had girded him with gladness, to the End that his
glory might sing Praise unto him, Psa. 30. 11, 12. He stirred up God's Saints
to fear him, because there is no want to such, Psalm. 34. 9: and he did
Therefore encourage his People to build God's Temple, because he had given them
rest on every side, 1 Chro. 22. 18, 19; upon which very account, it was in his
own heart to have done the like, 2 Samuel 7. 1, 2, 3. He did therefore desire
that God would teach him his Statutes, because the Earth was full of his Mercy,
Psalm. 119. 64: and did promise to teach Transgressors God's ways, upon his own
being upheld with his free Spirit, Psa. 51. 12, 13: earnestly begging that he
might always dwell in God's House, because he was assured that God would Hide
him in the time of Trouble, psalm. 27. 4, 5: who also bad all the workers of
Iniquity to Depart from him, because the Lord had heard the voice of his
weeping, Psa. 6. 8: and who had therefore walked in God's truth, because his
Loving kindness was before his Eyes, psalm. 26. 3.

So also, Paul durst not argue, unto his continuing in Sin, because of God's
Abounding Grace, Romans 6. 1, or because he was from under the Condemning Law, v.
15: but did beseech others to be Holy by the Mercies of God, Romans 12. 1; and
because they had such Promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1: exhorting them to Mortify sinful
Lusts, because they should Appear with Christ in Glory, Col. 3. 4, 5: and to be
Sober, because God had not appointed them unto wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8, 9: since
the Saving Grace of God, does Teach to Deny Ungodliness, Tit. 2. 11, 12; and
his Goodness leads to Repentance, Romans 2. 4; by whose Love, himself was
Constrained unto all manner of Duty, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

A carnal Heart does turn God's Grace into Lasciviousness, Jude 4; and Kicketh
when he is waxen Fat, Deuteronomy. 32. 15; leaning upon the Lord, and thereby taking
liberty to sin, Mich. 3. 11. But a man after God's own heart, will therefore
not dare to sin, because the Lord is Gracious, Genesis 39. 9; and will therefore
swear by the God of Truth, because the former Troubles are forgotten, Isa. 65.
16: and as there is Forgiveness with God, that so he might be feared, Psalm.
130. 4; so will this Fear of him and his Goodness, be then most abundantly
evidenced, when David shall reign as King, Hos. 3. 5.

14. David was not vainly Puffed up before the Lord, in the sense of any
Privilege received, or Duty performed by him. Although he was a King, and was
therefore Advanced, because of his being more Righteous than his Predecessor, 1 Samuel 15. 28: yet is it said, that King David did confess his own utter
unworthiness of such a Dignity, 2 Samuel 7. 18. And though the Lord had openly
witnessed, his being a man after God's own heart, yet did he not proudly
pretend unto any absolute Perfection, but did express a due sense of his many
sinful Infirmities. And though he had more understanding than all his
Teachers, psa. 119. 99; yet did he confess, that some Knowledge was too
Wonderful for him, Psa. 139. 6; nor was he so Haughty, as to intermeddle with
things too High, psa. 131. 1. Nay he was so far from Boasting before the Lord,
because of what he did; as that he did account his most Costly Service to be a
special Privilege, whereof he was not Worthy, and for which he returned
Thanks, 1 Chro. 29. 13, 14.

So also, Paul judged himself unmeet to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 9;
although he was not a whit behind the very chiefest of them, 2 Cor. 11. 5. And
though he was a very spiritual man, yet was he sensible of his being also
Carnal, Romans 7. 14. And though he knew more than many others, yet does he
confess that his knowledge was but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9; and that some things
were past his finding out, Romans 11. 33; who therefore does check Intruders into
those things which they have not seen, Col. 2. 18; and through the Grace of God
given to him, he bids every man not to think of himself more highly than he
ought, but soberly, according to that measure of Faith which God has dealt
unto him, Romans 12. 3. Nay he did count it an act of Gods Dignifying Grace, that
he should be the Minister of Christ unto the Gentiles, Romans 15. 15, 16; the
imparting of whose Gift unto them, was that which did satifie his own earnest
longing, Romans 1. 11.

The Natural man's Privileges, do lift up his heart before the Lord: so also
do his Parts and supposed Graces. But a man after Gods own heart, is not
thereby made to forget his remaining Imperfections, or to think that he is any
other than unprofitable, when he has done all that is commanded, Luke 17. 10;
but rather, that his being Employed by the Lord, is to be reckoned by him among
the greatest of his engagements.

15. David did utterly renounce his best inherent Righteousness, with reference
unto his being thereby Justified in the sight of God. Although he was Gods
Servant, ye did he pray, that God would not enter into Judgment with his
Servant, for in his sight shall no man living be Justified, ps. 143. 2; which
clearly proves the Insufficiency of a saints best Righteousness (in point of
Habits as well as Acts) to Justify him in the sight of God: since this is
Expressly meant, of not being Justified in Gods sight, which necessarily
infers, to be Condemned by him (directly contrary to the Benefit of Faith,
as Paul explaineth it, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16.) and which therefore cannot be
understood with reference unto the Saints Chastisements only: nor can David
here be thought to pray, that God would not Judge him (as the Papists plead) in
a way of comparing his Righteousness with Gods, or in a way of excluding his
inherent Grace; (since he had no cause to fear his being thus severely dealt
with by strict Divine Justice,) but he does Only beg, that he might not be
Judged according to his own Best obedience, for then he never should be
Justified in the sight of God. And as he does (in that respect) renounce his
own righteousness, so does he elsewhere pronounce him blessed whose
transgression is Forgiven, whose sin is Covered, Psalm. 32. 1. which Cover
cannot be meant of inheren^ righteousness, Partly because this Covering here,
is manifestly of the same import with being forgiven; now Sanctification and
Pardon, are two Diverse benefits Distinctly mentioned, Psalm. 51. 9. 10; and
therefore that Covering of sins, which signifies their being Forgiven cannot
be meant of Inherent Righteousness: and Partly because the Saints Best
obedience is comprehended in that word [Works] which Works, are Universally
denied to be that [For Which] a man is Justified in Gods sight, as Paul does
prove from these very words of David, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8.

And thus Paul does herein concur with David both as to the Negative and
Positive formal cause of being Justified, as has been abundantly observed by
some others.

1. As to the Negative, Paul plainly tells us, that we are saved by Grace and
not of Works, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9: which Denial of Works, cannot be restrained unto
Works before Faith (as the Papists plead,) Partly because the Spirit of God
does here make no such exception; nor had he now to deal with vainglorious
Jews, but sinful Gentiles, who had no works before Faith whereof to Boast, as
the Jews had: Partly because, Faith is first mentioned, as being that Through
which we are saved, and then Works are denied Afterward; to signify, that he
also intends those works of Grace which follow Faith: and Partly, because the
same kind of Works must needs be meant in the Denial, which are intended in the
Reasons for which they are denied; (viz. 1, Lest any man should Boast; 2.
Because we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works; 3.
which God has before ordained that we should Walk in them:) but every of those
Reasons relate to works after Faith; since These only are such as we are
created unto in Christ Jesus; which God only has ordained, as a Way to Walk
in, but not as any Causes of our salvation; that so he might prevent our
Boasting, which otherwise could not be, since a Believer might else Boast, that
Salvation is Due to him Working, and consequently though the Giving of strength
to work with, would be an act of Grace, yet the accounting of Wages unto that
work, would be of Debt and not of Favor.

So also he tells us that Faith is counted for Righteousness, to him that
Works not, Romans 4. 5; which cannot be limited to works before faith, because
he there speaks of Abraham, v. 1, 2, 3, who had been Regenerated long before
that time, and yet is here said to be Justified, not by Works, which therefore
must needs include works of Grace as well as any other, or such as his
Circumcision was, which was a good work, relating to God, and proceeding from
faith, ver. 11.

And to the same purpose he elsewhere does deny to Justification, whatever
Working is besides Believing, Gal. 2. 16, and, 3. 11; which therefore cannot be
limited, either unto Ceremonial Works alone, or unto other Works before faith
or Without it: and which indeed is evident otherwise; for Bellarmine himself
confesses, it is not the Ceremonial Law which says, Do this and thou shall
live; which yet Paul speaks of, in this Discourse, Gal. 3. 12: nor can he be
thought only to Deny those Works which are before faith or without it; since
these Renewed Galathians could not be so foolish as to think themselves better
Justified by their Natural than by their Spiritual Works; and since Paul does
Dissuade them from seeking to be Justified by Works, by the sad consequent
thereof, viz. their being made perfect by the flesh, Gal. 3. 3, and their being
then Fallen from Grace, Gal. 5. 4; which evidenceth sufficiently, that they
never intended to Renounce the help of Grace or their state of Renovation.

Nor does he Contradict this Denial of All Works in point of Justification, in
any other place; however some would sain improve an Appearance of that nature.
He does indeed tell the hypocritical Jew, that, Not the Hearers of the Law are
just before God, but the Doers thereof shall be Justified, Romans 2. 13: not to
feed such with a vain hope of being Justified by Works; but merely to convince
those of Unrighteousness, who boasted of their bare Hearing the Law, which
could not Justify without the Doing of it, according to the Jews own
Principles, and the tenor of their Legal Covenant. He also tells us, that we
are not Justified or Saved by works of Righteousness which we have done, Tit.
3. 5; not merely to exclude those works which had been formerly done without
the help of Grace; but only to show, that no man can plead his being saved, by
any works that he Has done, but that we are Justified by Gods mere Grace or
Favor, v. 7, and not by our being Renewed; for then it should have run thus,
That being justified Thereby, viz. our Regeneration, v. 5, 6, which does
Immediately go before. So also he tells us, that we are Justified by Faith,
Romans 5. 1: but not as it is a Work or Formal Cause to be Justified by, but
merely as an Instrument to lay hold upon that Righteousness which God has
provided by Jesus Christ. He also terms those works Flesh, by which some
thought to be Justified in the sight of God, Gal. 3. 3: not only to Deny those
works which were done without the help of Gods Spirit; but merely to Disgrace
all manner of Works whatever, in point of Justification; since the most
Spiritual works themselves do deserve to be called Flesh, in such a respect.

2. As to the Affirmative, Paul tells us, that Faith alone (as it lays hold
upon a Righteousness Imputed) does Justify before the Lord, in opposition to
all those works which he has formerly Denied. He plainly shows, that Christ
does Answer unto Adam, as a Public person* representing all his Seed, Romans 5.
14; and that the Righteousness of Christ which Justifies unto Life, does
Answer to Adam's Offense which brought forth Condemnation, v. 18; and that
Christ's Obedience does make his seed Righteous, as Adam's Disobedience did
make his Seed Sinners, v. 19: now we were all made Sinners, by that One act of
Adam's eating the forbidden Fruit, severed from that Inherent Sin received from
him, as the Just Punishment of his first transgression, v. 12; and therefore
(by the Rule of Opposition, hinted in that word, So,) all Christ's Seed are
made (or constituted, as the Greek word signifies,) Righteous, by the
Obedience of One, viz. Christ, severed from that Inherent Righteousness, which
is received from him, as the deserved Fruit of his Obedience.

And to the same purpose Paul elsewhere tells us, that the Righteousness of
God by Faith, is (not In, but) Upon all them that do Believe, Romans 3. 22; and
that Christ is a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, v. 25, which can be
no way applied to Inherent Righteousness: and that Christ was made Sin for Us,
(viz. by Our Sin) that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5. 21, viz. by his Righteousness, as the Opposition does naturally evince. And
therefore does Paul desire, that he might be found In him, (which plainly
shows that the Cause of Justification is Without us,) not having his own
Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9, without Excepting those works of Grace, which he
does Distinctly mention afterward, v. 10, as he had done before, v. 8; since
Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness, (viz. in point of being
Justified by Works) to every one that does Believe, Romans 10. 4.

Those are not men after Gods own heart, who think to be Justified in the sight
of God, by any other than a bare Imputed Righteousness. A man of David's
Spirit, is for the Perfecting of Holiness unto the Justification of his Faith,
Jam. 2. 18; but yet with reference unto the forenamed Justification of his
Person, he humbly beggeth, that God would not Enter into Judgment with him.

And thus I have now wholly finished this Latter Branch of David's Description
in the Scripture, viz. as he was in Himself considered, or as he did evidence
himself to be a man after God's own heart, both by his more Inward Frame, and
by that Outward Demonstration which he gave of his being such an one, so far as
it may be gathered, from his Professed Principles, and constant Practices or
Carriage, both toward the Creature and toward God.

It now only remains, that I should Improve this Latter Branch, as I have
done the Former, viz. in a way of Trial, Instruction, and Exhortation.

Use 1. First, We may be able from hence to Try our selves and others, whether
we be Men and Women after God's own heart, by observing what Agreement there is
between us and David, who had this Testimony from God himself.

What are our constant Practices? Do they agree with David's? Then are we
Right, so far as Fruits do evidence the Nature of a Tree, Mat. 7. 18.

What also are our Principles? Since some Opinions are reckoned up among those
Fleshly Works, which are most Manifest, Gal. 5. 19, 20.

But more Especially, What are our Inward Frames? which are the Life and Soul
of both the former; and which none knows, but the Spirit of Man, which is In
him, 1 Corinthians. 2. 11.

I forbear to reckon up the several Particulars, relating to each of these
General heads, because they are very many, and shall therefore refer the
Reader to what has been before declared.

And though I will not be over-rigorous, in imposing upon others, as to every
Circumstance or Degree of what David attained unto; yet if we do not Agree with
him as to the Main thereof, we cannot groundedly expect to share with him, in
that Testimony which God gave of him.

Use 2. Secondly, We may hence learn (for our Instruction) what may be the sad
Portion of one who is a man after Gods own heart, by our observing what did
befall David after his having received this Testimony from the Lord.

And so, in the General, we read concerning David, that his Bones were vexed,
his Soul also was sore vexed, psa. 6. 2, 3, being wearied with his groaning,
and making his Bed to swim all Night, and watering his Couch with Tears, so
that his Eye was consumed because of Grief, ver. 6, 7. The sorrows of Death and
Hell did compass him about, psa. 18. 4, 5; yea, he was poured out like Water,
and all his Bones were out of Joint, his heart was melted like Wax within him,
his Strength was dried like a Potsheard, his Tongue clave to his Jaws, and he
was brought into the dust of Death, Psalm. 22. 14, 15. And in the midst of all
this outward misery, he remembered God and was troubled, he Complained and his
Spirit was overwhelmed, Psalm. 77. 3

All which may be the portion of the Holiest man that is; and therefore none
may condemn himself or others, merely from the want of outward and inward
Comfort, or from the presence of overwhelming Sorrows, which Paul found, 2 Cor.
7. 5. and 11. 23, to 27.

But we have also a more Particular account of David's hard Measures, as they
were brought upon him, either, By Man, or by the Lord, or by Himself.

I. First, David was very hardly dealt with by Man, and by all sorts of Men, as
will more fully appear, in all these following respects, together with their
Aggravations.

1. David had Many Enemies, who were more than the hairs of his head, Psa. 69.
4; which made him to cry out, Lord! how are they Increased that trouble me;
Many are they that rise up against me, Psalm. 3. 1. All the Multitude cried out
against Paul, that he ought not to live any longer, Act. 25. 24; so that a
Godly man is sure to Die, if the Major Vote be empowered to pass that Sentence;
in which respect, a sad Woe is denounced against them whom All men speak well
of, for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets, Luke 6. 26.

2. And when David was thus surrounded by the Generality, the rest did Despise
him, shooting out the Lip, and shaking the head against him, psa. 22. 6, 7. So
also, Paul's bodily presence was counted weak, and his speech contemptible, 2
Cor. 10. 10; yea he was made a Spectacle to the World, 1 Cor. 4. 9, and as its
filth or Off scouring. v. 13; as all those must expect to be, of whom the world
is not worthy, Heb. 11. 38.

3. And so soon as David was anointed King over Israel, the Philistines came up
to seek him, 2 Samuel 5. 17, who had been formerly very courteous to him, 1 Samuel
27. 6. And thus, so soon as the Saints Temporal Anointing becomes General and
Visible, they then may expect to be sought after, by their most Grossly
Antichristian adversaries, who have been sometimes Favorable to them, in the
time of their being Persecuted by a more Refined Interest, with whom themselves
also were at variance. And this has always been the Saints Portion, to be
pursued by those of a Profaner spirit, so soon as their spiritual Anointing
has been heard of; as Paul was by those Greeks, immediately upon his first
Conversion, Act. 9. 29: which also holds true with reference unto their
Grosser inward Lusts, which then are more outrageous than ever they were
before; and therefore let no young Convert be discouraged, simply because he
finds some unusual stirrings of Inward Lusts, so that he be not Overcome
thereby, no more than David was by those Philistines, although he was once in
danger of being slain by a Philistian Giant, when himself was faint, 2 Samuel 21.
15, 16, as a good man may be by some corruption, when his Strength fails.

4. David became the Object of Readiness Envy and mortal Hatred, merely because of
his deserved Commendations and greater worth, 1 Samuel 18. 8, 9. 29, so that
there was but a step between him and Death, 1 Samuel 20. 3. And thus when the
Multitude flocked after Paul, the Jews were filled with Envy, Act. 13. 45; and
took unto them certain lewd sellows of the baser sort, and set the City in an
Uproar, Act. 17. 5; and some of those Jews banded together, and bound
themselves under a Curse, that they would neither Eat nor Drink till they had
killed him, Act. 23. 12. A man after Gods own heart, must look to be the Object
of carnal Professors Envy, especially when his deserved Praise does any whit
Eclipse the Luster of their Esteem among the People. Active Envy is one sad
sign of a Wicked man, and Passive Envy is both the Character and Portion of a
Gracious Soul.

5. When David was in Distress from want of Necessaries, Nabal would not
relieve him with what he might have spared out of his Abundance, although he
was humbly fought unto, 1 Samuel 25. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Christ's persecuted
People must not wonder, if Worldly men refuse to Know them in that Condition;
and therefore it was, that Paul did both Hunger and Thirst, 1 Cor. 4. 11: but
let those Churles remember, that though David was hindered from revenging
himself upon Nabal's House, yet Christ (whom David typified) will one day fend
such to Hell, who have not ministered to him in his Persecuted Saints and
Members, Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43, 45, 46.

6. When David was in a low Estate, then Shimei was bold to Curse him* and
called him a Bloody man, merely because he was righteously possessed of the
Kingdom, and had accomplished the Will of God upon the House of Saul, 2 Samuel
16, 7, 8. When Paul was Persecuted, he also was Defamed, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13; and
some were bold to call that Heresy and Pestilent Sedition, which was his
bounden Duty, ^ct. 24. 5. 14. And if ever the Reigning Saints be brought into a
Low Condition, then let them expect that men of Shimei's spirit will Revile
them, for what they have Lawfully done against a more refined Interest,
typified by the House of Saul: but let such also know, that though David
forgave Shimei, upon his late Submission, 2 Samuel 19. 18, 19, 20. 23; yet
Solomon did therefore take away his Life, 1 Kings 2. 44. 46, by David's Order,
v. 8, 9; to signify that Christ in Person (whom Solomon shadowed out) will not
Acquit those wicked Cursers, who were Forgiven by his abused Saints and
Members. And let such abused Saints remember, 2 Samuel 16. 12.

7. When David's Father sent him to the Camp, to know how his Brethren did, and
to carry them Provision, 1 Samuel 17. 17, 18, he was deeply Censured by his Elder
Brother, as being Careless of his Flock, and Proud, v. 28; merely because his
Brother feared, that he would gain the honor of encountering with that Goliath,
v. 26, whom Saul and all his Army were afraid of, v. 24. And thus, if any
gracious Soul (according to the will of God) does undertake some more Difficult
Service which others wave, he must look to be Censured by his Brethren, as
being Proud, and Neglective of his flock or proper work, at least he shall be
counted Indiscreet, as Paul was, because he Hazarded himself beyond what others
did, who had the Name for Sober men, 2 Cor. 5. 13: but he was satisfied with
this, that he was Manifest unto God, and in the others Consciences, v. 11; as
David also was, who therefore would not stand quarrelling with his censorious
Brother, but Turned from him, and still proceeded in his way, 1 Samuel 17. 29,
30, which ended in a glorious Victory, v. 50, and then we read not that his
Brother did ever meddle with him afterward: but let such hard Judges also
know, that David was then acted by that Spirit of God, which followed upon his
being anointed King over his Elder Brothers head, 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7. 11, 12, 13.

8. When David was Afflicted, he was a Reproach among all his Enemies,
especially among his Neighbors, and a Fear to his Acquaintance, Psa. 31. 11:
his Lovers and Friends stood aloof from his Sore, and his Kinsmen stood afar
off, Psa. 38. 11: yea he became a Stranger to his Brethren, and an Alien to his
Mother's Children, psa. 69. 8. So also, when Paul was entering into the like
condition, John departed from him, Act. 13. 13; and Barnabas departed also,
because Paul would not admit of John, without satisfaction for his former
Offense, Act. 15. 37, 38, 39; and Demas quite forsook him, 2 Timothy 4. 10, and
All men forsook him at his first Answer, v. 16. So that a man after Gods own
heart, has no cause to account it strange, in case his very Brethren be
Alienated from him, when he is Pesecuted or Afflicted.

9. David was Traitorously dealt with, even by Achitophel himself, who was his
own familiar Friend, in whom he Trusted, psalm. 41. 9; who was his Guide and
Equal, with whom he took sweet counsel, and walked unto the House of God in
company, psalm. 55. 13, 14. So also, Paul was in Perils, among false Brethren, 2
Cor. 11. 26, who came in Privily, to Spy out his Liberty, Gal. 2. 4. There are
false Spiritual brethren as well as Natural, who will not stick to lift up the
heel against those in fellowship with them, in a time of Affliction; whom
therefore men of David's spirit had need to be aware of, lest they pay dear for
putting too much Confidence in them, which Christ would not do, Joh. 2. 24.
But let such false hearted Achitophel's know, that David will righteously
requite them, psalm. 41. 10; who did Prophetically pray, that Death might seize
upon them, and that they might go down Quick to Hell, psalm. 55. 15, as it
befell Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17. 23, and Judas, Mat. 27. 5, who did Betray his
Master with a Kiss.

10. David was scornfully Despised by his own Wife Michal the daughter of Saul,
merely because he waved his own Personal Interest, in his Zeal for God, 2 Samuel
6. 16. 20. So also, because Paul was not so Terrible when Present, (wherein he
did Deny himself for Public good) he therefore was Despised by those wanton
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 10. 10, whom he was Jealous over, lest they should forsake
their first Husband, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3, as Michal had sometimes dealt with David,
1 Samuel 25. 44. There are some Persons, who may stand Mystically related unto
others, as a wife is to her husband, for so is Christ's Mystical Church to him,
Ephesians. 5. 32; now these very Wives may prove Despisers of their best Husbands, in
case their Zeal for God does make them Careless of their outward Interest, unto
the others prejudice; as Michal was vexed with David, because his forgetfulness
of himself, did Secondarily redound to her Imagined disgrace. But let such
Scorners know, that as this Scoffing Michal was of the house of Saul; so also,
it is said, that Therefore she was Barren until the day of her death, 2 Samuel
6. 23: which spiritual Barrenness, is that which Scoffers at holy Zeal may look
for, as it befell Michal in the Letter, who yet does seem to have left behind
her a very Numerous Off spring in the Mystery, viz. Men and Women of her
Despising Spirit and Disposition. And let such Despised ones also know, that
David then resolved, he would be yet more vile in such a way, and was
Consident, he should be therefore had in Honor of those very Persons, whom
Michal concluded to have been of her Mind, 2 Samuel 6. 22.

11. David was in danger of being Stoned by his own Party, when they had lost
All at one clap; though David was no more in fault than they; nay though
himself had then lost as much or rather more than any of the rest, 1 Samuel 30.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So also, when Paul and all the rest were likely to have been
cast away at Sea, Act. 27. 20; his own very Companions in that common Calamity,
would have Killed him, v. 42, though he was no way Accessory to that Danger,
but gave Advice to have Prevented it, v. 10. 21. A man after God's own heart,
may deeply suffer from unreasonable men, in case they fall into some Distress,
though it be merely occasioned by their unwillingness to take his Counsel, or
at leastwise by the mere Providence of God, without his being Active thereunto:
nay though themselves do no more know what Shift to make in his Absence, than
Paul's and David's Party did, in case those Two had been Destroyed. Paul had to
do with some who were unreasonable, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2, which every Good man is bid
to look for: but let him then encourage himself in God, as Paul and David did
upon that Occasion, who came off well in the Issue, notwithstanding that fore
Temptation.

12. Davd's own Subjects did sometimes Rebel against him, being headed by
crafty Achitophel and smooth-tongued Absalom, although many of them went in
their Simplicity and knew not any thing, 2 Samuel 15. 6. 11, 12. And some such
Civil Defection may Possibly come to pass, when the Saints (whom David
typified) shall have the Temporal Dominion set up among them; who therefore are
bid to be Prepared for it, especially if they shall procure that Scourge unto
themselves as David did, whose sad Experience is written for their Warning, as
his self-humbling Practice then is also left for their Direction. But in the
mean while it may not be wondered at, if a Good man be not Obeyed by those who
should be Ruled by him, Heb. 13. 17; since Paul's word from Christ, was
sometimes Rebelled against by those, who ought to have been Subject thereunto,
2 Thessalonians. 3. 4. 6, 10, 11, 12. 14.

13. David's own Son who came forth of his bowels did seek his Life, and rose
up in Arms against him, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Which as it may prove the sad portion of
a Gracious man, to be thus chastised or Afflicted by his Natural Children: So
Paul experienced little less from some of his spiritual Children, who therefore
was Enforced to use the Rod, and to Hazard their being Spiritually Cut off, in
his just Defense of that Authority which Christ had invested him withal. But
let such Rebellious Children know, that Absalom was Hanged in the badge of his
Wantonness, 2 Some. 18. 9, and stabbed to the heart for his Undutifulness, v.
14, notwithstanding his Father's Indulgent charge unto the contrary, v. 12: and
let them also learn, what that Severe Law means, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21, which
though Man now does not put in Execution, yet is it a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the Living God. And though David was over tender in relation
to his Rebellious Son; yet Paul delivered some of his seeming Converts up to
Satan, and wished that others were Cut off, without being Spiritually Unnatural.

14. David was thus Persecuted by Man, without any Just occasion given,
although the Lord was Righteous in his being so Chastised. Without Cause did
they hide for him their Net, in a Pit, which without Cause they dug for his
Soul, psa. 35. 7. The Mighty were gathered together against him, Not for his
Transgression nor his Sin, they did prepare themselves without his Fault, Psalm.
59, 3, 4. And though they Pretended much, yet did false Witnesses rise up, and
laid to his charge things that he knew not, Psa. 35. 11; making him to restore
that which he took not away, psa. 69. 4; and Wresting his words every day,
psalm. 56. 5. His numerous Enemies did hate him without a Cause, psalm. 69. 4; so
also did they that Winked with the Eye, and Wrongfully rejoiced over him, Psalm.
35. 19. He was first sought after by those Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. 17, who by
their own Confession, had found no Evil in him, 1 Samuel 29. 6. He had done Saul
no Evil Isal. 7. 3, 4; appealing to himself in that respect, 1 Samuel 26. 18;
which Saul acknowledged* v. 21. He hurt not Nabal's Shepherds, nor was himself
a Runaway, as Nab^^ called him, 1 Samuel 25. 7. 10. He was no Bloody man, with
reference to the House of Saul as Shimei termed him, who had not wit enough to
fix upon that matter of Vriah. His heart was not Proud or Naughty, as Eliah
tol^ him it was, when he wrangled with ^im He had not Deserved what he met with
from his Friends and Familiars and Wife and Child a^^ Subjects; which was his
Comfort and ^e^ Shame. No more was Paul any real Troubler, or Seditious person,
as he was said to be; but challenged his Accusers to Prove against him any Evil
doing, Act. 24. 19, 20. It is not the Saints Blameless walking that will secure
him from the venomous Tongues and bloody Hands of wicked Persecutors. But let
such Causeless Adversaries know, that David did Therefore call Professing Saul
an Heathen, and stirred up the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel to Visit him
without Mercy, Psa. 59. 4, 5.

15. David was most unworthily Insulted over, when in his low Condition. He
then was the Song of Drunkards, psa. 69. 12, with hypocritical Mockers in
Feasts, psalm. 35. 16, who together with the Abjects, rejoiced in his Adversity,
v. 15, with a Wide mouth saying, Aha, Aha, our eye has seen it, v. 21. When he
was sick, they did conclude it was an evil disease, and that he should rise up
no more, psalm. 41. 8. Nay many said, there was no hope for him in God, psa. 3.
2. who therefore bad him Flee unto his Mountain, psalm. 11. 1; and in a
Scornful way did think that God neither Would nor Could deliver him, psalm. 22.
7, 8. This has been the Saints lot in all Ages from wicked men, the Baseness
of whose Spirit is evidenced in their Triumphing over a poor Afflicted
creature, whom at another time they durst no more meddle with, than Shimei
durst curse David in the day of his Prosperity. But let such Insulters know,
that God will not despise the Affliction of the Afflicted, but will awake unto
their Judgment, and then let those expect to be severely reckoned with, who
have rejoiced at his Peoples hurt, and have Added what they could to their
Affliction.

16. David was ill requited for his Love, yea for his Love they were his
Adversaries, psa. 109. 4, 5; rewarding him Evil for Good, who had humbled his
Soul with Fasting when they were Sick, psalm. 35. 12, 13; and had delivered him
who was his Causeless Enemy, psa. 7. 4, as Saul himself confessed, 1 Samuel 24.
17, 18. Christ did many good works, yet did the wicked Jews attempt to stone
him, Joh. 10. 31, 32; and this must every well deserving Christian look to meet
with, but in so doing, they shall heap coals of fire upon their Enemies head,
whom God will repay, Romans 12. 19. 20, according to David's Prayer in a such a
Case, which is enough to make such wretches tremble, psalm. 109. 5, 6, 7, etc.

17. David was thus Abused for God's sake, Psa. 69. 7; because he followed the
thing that Good was, ps. 38. 20; when he wept and chastened his Soul with
fasting, those very Religious Duties were turned to his Reproach, psalm. 69. 10.
Paul therefore became the backsliding Galatians Enemy, because he had told the
Truth, Gal. 4. 16. But as it is the most Blessed thing to suffer for the sake
of Righteousness, Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12; so Woe be to those who do engage the Lord
himself against them, by hating his People, merely because of their being
Faithful to him and them, which will be one day cleared up together with their
righteous Judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.

18. David had none to help or pity him in this sad Condition: he looked for
some to take Pity, but there was none, and for Comforters, but he found none,
psa. 69. 20: yea he looked on his Right hand, and beheld, but no man would Know
him, refuge failed him, and no man cared for his Soul, psa. 142. 4. No man
would stand by Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 16; and Job had better have been without his
Visitors, who did so vex him with their Discourse, as that he wished they would
altogether hold their peace, Job 13. 5. But let such solitary ones remember,
that God has been wont to supply man's place, 2 Timothy 4. 17; and let the other
read, Mat. 25. 41, 42, which does not so much relate to Bodily meat and drink,
as to those Inward Cordials that should be then ministered to Christ's poor
Sufferers; and from the want whereof, Job argues the Forsaking of God's Fear,
Job 6. 14, which God himself did witness unto in the close of that Temptation,
Job 42. 7, 8.

This is the Sum of those hard measures which David met with from the hands
of Men: which is the First branch of this Second Use, for our Instruction.

II. Secondly, David was also Afflicted by the Lord himself* from whose
Experience in that respect, we are instructed further, what may befall a man
after God's own heart.

1. David was made to Wait some considerable space of time, before he might be
Possessed of that Kingdom which was conferred upon him. All do confess, that he
served an hard Apprentiship at least, between his first Coronation and
Anointing; during all which time, he was continually exercised, not only with
Delays and very Mean Employments, but also with many Fears and Dangers on
every side. And thus it is foretold, that after the Saints being preclaimed
Earthly Kings, they shall be gathered together as Prisoners are gathered in the
Pit, Isa. 24. 21, 22, from whence they shall be sent forth, Zach. 9* 11, as
Joseph was, Genesis 37. 22, after that his Supremacy was first declared, v. 9; and
as the Witnesses are slain, after their having been in place of Superiority, or
in a capacity of making War; and as the Jews prayed for the Return of their
Captivity, psa. 126. 4, after their Captivity was Returned, v. 1. And in the
mean while, it has been the Saints common Portion, to tarry a long while for
that spiritual Crown, which he was Elected unto, before the Foundation of the
World, Ephesians. 1. 4, and which he was Anointed unto at his first Conversion:
during which sad Interval there is but little seeming difference between
himself and others, save only that he stands upon his own Defense, as David
did against Saul, but apt to flee before his over-potent Adversary, and
sometimes to conclude, that he shall one day Perish by the hand of his
Rebellion and Unbelief. Those have no cause to call in question a work of Grace
begun, merely because they do not for a long while get the Throne; so that they
do but keep themselves from being taken Captive by their Spiritual Adversaries;
or so long as it is no worse with them than it was with David.

2. When Saul was dead, and when David was set upon his Throne in Hebron, yet
was it seven years longer, before he could get possession of All that Kingdom,
which God had allotted to him, 2 Samuel 2. 11; during which time, he had many
sharp Contests with Readiness House, only himself grew stronger daily, 2 Samuel 3.
1. And thus, when the Slain VVitnesses are Risen, they then Ascend up into
Heaven, or out of sight, (as Christ did thereupon,) Really indeed Possessed of
a Kingdom, (as Christ then was) but not Visibly, (no more than Christ yet is)
until their Return (as Christ's Forerunners) together with the Sound of that
Trumpet which is the last of Seven.

So also, a Gracious heart must look, that the Visibility of his Spiritual
Dominion (over some Lusts) will be for some time Eclipsed, after their Head is
mortally wounded, or when the Law in their Members is become a Body of Death,
through the Prevailing of Christ's Law in their Minds, as Paul experienced. I
like that Corn best (both in the Letter and Mystery) which Gradually comes up,
and not all at once, M^^k 4. 26, 27, 28; whereas that which forthwith sprang
up, had no Deepness of Farth or Root, and therefore soon withered away Mat. 13.
5, 6. But lest any should abuse this Cordial, we must also remember, that
David's House did wax ^^r^nger and stronger: and that we may do the ^^ke, ^^s
^n take heed of being over-Gentle or Indulgent to any of our Distempers; which
though it might be David's Virtue in relation to Readiness House, yet will it be
our Vice in relation to what was thereby Typed out within our selves.

3. When David had obtained a very Full and Peaceable possession of his Whole
Kingdom over all the Tribes of Israel, the Lord did yet exercise him with
further molestations, not only from the uncircumcised Philistines, (by whom
his Life was once endangered, 2 Samuel 21. 15, 16;) but also by a general
Defection of Israel and Judah from him, as has been formerly declared. Which
is a fair warning to the Saints, whenever their Temporal Rule shall become more
universal. And in the mean while, let every Gracious Soul expect, that when his
spiritual Dominion over Sin and Self is come up to some good Degree of
settlement, he may be still exercised with Inward sad Defections, and with some
Grosser onsets from Without. And as we would Prevent such Inward Rebellions,
let us take heed of Gross breach of Duty, which was the Pocuring Cause of
Absalom's Rising up against his Father, 2 Samuel 12. 10, 11. And as we would not
be Endangered by our encountering with Philistian Temptations, so let us take
heed of engaging therewith unnecessarily, (as David then did, 2 Samuel 21. 17.)
and of going out against them without Enquiring of God, (which David did not
formerly omit, 2 Samuel 5. 19. 23.) especially when we are Faint (as David then
was, 2 Samuel 21. 15.) and when we have to do with some Giant, girded with a New
Sword, or furnished with some Advantages which have not formerly been made use
of, all which may easily be Applied unto Particular Cases.

4. David met with no small Discouragement from the Lord, in his removal of the
Ark into his own House and City; which was a good and Pious act, wherein his
Predecessor failed, 1 Chro. 13. 3: but yet then did God Try good David, by
striking Vzzah presently with Death, because he did but hold the shaking Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7: which though it was a Righteous Dispensation (as David afterward
confessed, 1 Chro. 15. 13.) yet was it sorely Trying, that God should thus snib
his servants Zeal, which put him to a present plunge, that he durst proceed no
further, 2 Samuel 6. 9, 10. Let not a good man wonder, in case he meets with
some Providential rub, in the pursuance of his holy Zeal, for the Advancing of
what was typified by God's Ark. Good attempts are apt to be accompanied with
bad success; especially when matters of this nature are not managed with
utmost care: Religious things are very curiously to be intermedled with; and if
a due Manner be not attended unto, together with the Matter, it is not a Godly
Zeal that will secure a David from being whipped, at leastwise upon another's
back. Let us remember Vzzah, when we are apt to lay the Warrant of our Action
upon the Goodness of our Intention: and let us remember David's case, when we
are tempted to think, that such an act is Evil, merely because it meets with
some Providential check; which may put us upon Enquiring into the procuring
Cause thereof, but should not absolutely discourage us therefrom; nor will it
long have any such undue impression upon a gracious heart, no more than this
Temptation had upon David, 2 Samuel 6. 11, 12.

5. David could not Avert by his Earnest Prayer, either the untimely Death of
his poor Child, 2 Samuel 12. 16, 18. 22, or the sad Destruction of his Subjects,
2 Samuel 24. 10. 15. A good man's Prayer is very Powerful with God, and yet
somet^mes it may not be heard, although accompanied with Tears and Fasting: God
may not always Answer unto his Name, as he is the Hearer of Prayer, at
leastwise not according to man's Rule of Judging. Christ's general Promise,
Joh. 14. 13, is to be read with John's Spectacles, 1 John 5. 14, and as in
relation to the Thing desired, so also with reference unto the Qualification
both of the Person and Duty, ps. 66. 18. Jam. 5. 16. It is possible, that some
Spiritual good thing desired (at leastwise Privileges) may not be thought
Good for us at Present; though usually such Petitions (at leastwise if for
Grace) are mostly ineffectual, through want of Uprightness and Fervor. But in
relation to Outward Blessings (which David could not obtain) let not the Best
man wonder, in case he be not Heard: and as we would not be Denied, so let us
take heed of Sin, which may Obstruct our Prayer as David's did) although our
Holiness cannot Deserve its Audience.

6. The Lord charged David with Readiness Arrears; and brought a Famine in David's
time because Saul had unjustly slain the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. 1. Time will
discover, what reference this Instance has unto the Latter days, in what the
Ruling Saints may meet with, because of those unrighteous Persecutions, which
those of a more Peaceable (or Gibeonitish) though Grosser Spirit, may formerly
have Groaned under, from some carnal Israelites, who have had a Zeal for God,
but not according unto Knowledge. In the mean while, we may observe from hence,
that a Godly Successor may fare the worse because of his Predecessors
failings; as an Innocent Child may outwardly be afflicted because of his
Parent's Sin, Exodus 20. 5; and as the Good Disciples were all of them charged
with speaking that, Mat. 26. 8, which was indeed only uttered by Judas, Joh.
12. 4, 5. However, a Gracious Soul has no cause to wonder, in case he be dealt
with afterward, for some former miscarriages in the time of his Unregeneracy;
as good old Job was made to possess the Iniquities of his Vain and Youthful
State, Job 13. 26, which David therefore prays that God would not remember,
psa. 25. 7, and which it is therefore our Wisdom as well as Duty to be Humbled
for, first in relation to our selves, and then to others, since a little Leaven
may infect the Whole, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 6, And herein good David was defective,
because he did not endeavor timely to purge away that Guilt which he could not
but know that Saul had brought upon the Nation, and for which himself was
therefore thus chastised with a Famine; which kind of Punishment (at leastwise
in a spiritual regard) may be expected by us also, in case we carelessly neglect
the use of those Purifying means, which Christ has sanctified for Gospel Times.

7. David was not permitted to build the Temple, (because he had been a man of
War) although he had it in his heart to have done so, and from a good
Affection, 1 Chro. 28, 2, 3. The Temple was the Place of Gods Rest, (in
competition with the Moving Tabernacle) and therefore that Temple was a Type of
happy Settlement, which David might not attain unto on Earth, because he had
shed Blood, and yet that very Bloodshed was only in the pursuance of his
blameless Duty. David's Dispensation (Distinct from that of Solomon's) does
fitly answer unto the Kingdom of the Stone, distinct from that of the Mountain;
the former of which relates to Christ's Rule in and among his Saints, as the
Latter does unto his Rule in Person: which Dispensations God will preserve
Distinct, and not suffer them to be Confounded each with other; so that the
Ruling Saints must not expect to have that Perfect Settlement (in matters
Temporal or Spiritual) which is reserved till afterward And in the mean while,
let no Gracious man wonder, if he does yet come short of that Resurrection of
the Dead (in point of Grace and Comfort) which he is Now laboring to Attain
unto or Apprehend, and which he does therefore follow after and reach forth
unto and press toward, Phil. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. Those do pretend unto more than
either David had or Paul expected, who dream of any Absolute Perfection, on
this side a Literal Resurrection from the Dead: and they who thus boast of a
License to build that Temple in this Life, do give others just ground to think,
that they have never been God's Warriors as David was, who therefore was thus
Typically prohibited; but yet he Now is eminently interested in that happy
Perfection which was typified by that Temple, and which every of God's faithful
Warriors shall one day share with him in. And lest some should Abuse this
Cordial, unto the disregarding of their Imperfections, because no man on Earth
is absolutely Perfect; let such remember, that they are not men after God's own
heart (as Paul and David were) who do not strenuously Press after what yet they
cannot attain unto whilst Warriors, since Absolute Perfection implies Peace
or Quietness: and therefore (Partly) the Warring Witnesses must first Die
before they Reign, Rev. 11. 7. 15, as Christ himself did, Luke 24. 26, and as
the best of his Servants must expect to do, 2 Cor. 5. 6, the Vail of whose
Flesh must be rent in twain, before they can look into that Holy of Holyes,
which was a Type of more absolute Perfection. But yet there is a Comparative
Perfection, which some (above others) may attain unto on Earth, Phil. 3. 15;
which as we would have to be our Portion, so let us take heed of intermingling
our own Affections with what are truly spiritual, in any of our holy
Conflicts, as the best of Gods Warriors are apt to do; and therefore perhaps
good David might not be suffered to build the Temple, because he could not
Wholly Justify that Spirit which he was acted by in shedding blood, although
the Matter of that work was Blameless Duty.

8. David's House might not be made to Grow, as himself does intimate, 2 Samuel
23. 5; Prophetically foreseeing, that Ten Tribes would soon fall off from
thence, as the deserved Consequent of Solomon's backsliding into Sensuality and
Idolatry, by the solicitation of his many and strange Wives, 1 King. 11. 4. 11.
Which possibly may Ultimately shadow out that great Defection of Gog and Magog,
in the close of Christ's Thousand years Reign on Earth, not through the least
fault in him (which would be most horrid Blasphemy to imagine) but through the
permitted instigation of that Old Serpent, Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9, who first deceived
Eve, (unto the ruining of her present Happiness) by tempting her to Sensuality
and Idolatry. And however, let not the Ruling Saints (on this side Christ's
Personal appearing) expect, that their House will be made to Grow, since it is
evident from the Scriptures (as I have elsewhere made it out) that they will
soon Degenerate, (as did the ancient Jews, when their Babylonish Captivity was
returned,) which will make way for another Revolution, first in the Literal
Jews Conversion, Romans 11. 22, 23. 25, and then at last in Christ's own Personal
Dispensation. In the mean while, let no Gracious man wonder, in case his House
does not Grow, in case his Outward Interest be not advanced, in case his
Posterity come short of him, yea and in case that himself shall outlive his
being Serviceable as he has sometimes been; all which may be the best man's
portion, who yet may well be satisfied (as David was) if the Lord has made
with him an Everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

9. David was forely Exercised with several bad Children. He had an Incestuous
Amnon, a filthy Unnatural and Bloody Absalom, and a Proud aspiring Adonijah.
Which as it is a sad Affliction, so may it befall the dearest of Gods Servants,
lest Grace should seem to be Hereditary. But let such Parents take heed of
procuring that Trial unto themselves, by their own Rebelling against the Lord,
by setting a bad Example before their Children, and by a sinful or fond
Indulging of them; in every of which respects good David failed sadly. Let us
mourn over that Corruption which we have entailed upon them, and let us correct
them with holy Grief and not with sinful Anger, improving their Disobedience
unto the advantage of our Duty, and laboring by all holy means to prevent
their Fall, and to recover them again, and in so doing let us humbly refer
them to the Lord.

10. David was also Bodily afflicted with many Sicknesses and sad Diseases,
Psa. 38. 3, 5, 7; which made his Life burdensome, v. 2. 6. 8, and his Enemies
to insult, Psalm. 41. 8. Bodily health is a very great Outward Mercy, which yet
is most abundantly granted to Wicked men, Psalm. 38. 19, whilst those of a
Clean heart are thus Plagued all day long, Psalm. 73. 5. 14. But as an
undutifull Child shall not need to break an Obedient Parent's heart, so neither
need an Healthful Soul be overwhelmed with a Weakly Body. Only let us take
heed of being Accessory to such Infirmities by our Foolishness, (as David does
confess he was, Psa. 38. 5.) sinfully Neglecting our Bodies, through
carelessness or inordinate affections, or superstitious self-impositions; and in
so doing, we may be spiritually advantaged by a Feeble Constitution in a
manifold respect, as several have experienced, unto their comfort and
satisfaction.

11. David knew what it was to be Deserted of God in point of inward Peace;
sadly complaining that his Bones were broken, psa. 51. 8, and that he was
Forsaken, psalm. 22. 1, yea for a long time forgotten, psa. 13. 1. He that
fears the Lord may walk in Darkness and see no Light, Isa. 50. 10; and Paul
himself had fears within together with his outward fightings, 2 Cor. 7. 5; nay
Christ was not exempted from this Temptation upon his dying Cross, Matthew. 27.
46, to comfort his poor Deserted Members in the like condition, and to silence
their censorious Ignorance, who will deny the Sun, merely because it sets in
a Cloud. This is indeed the Saints Hell on Earth, but yet no ground of any
absolute Discouragement; only let such take heed of Tempting God to hide his
face by their departure from him, or undervaluing of his Love in the Creature's
presence; and let them especially beware of breaking their own bones, as David
did, by a Dangerous fall from the Roof of his House one Evening, 2 Samuel 11. 2,
which did Occasion that forementioned Complaint, psa. 51. 8.

12. The Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David
against them, to say, Go number Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel 24. 1: that is, God
did righteously permit Satan to Provoke David hereunto, 1 Chro. 21. 1, and he
left David therein unto his own Infirmity. Indeed man ought to charge himself
Alone, with Temptations of a sinful Nature, and not the Lord or any other, Jam.
1. 13, 14; nor is a bare Temptation sinful (no more than Christ's was, Mat. 4.
9.) save as a man is thereby Enticed and Drawn away, Jam. 1. 14; nor does the
Lord thus Tempt any man, v. 13, viz. as a man's own Lust does tempt himself,
which is the wh^le of what that Scripture drives at; and in which sense, it is
there also said, that God Cannot be Tempted, viz. Enticed by any Evil, v. 13.
But yet the Righteous God may Lead into Temptation, as Christ hinteth, Mat. 6.
13, and as himself experienced, when he was Led up of the Spirit into the
Wilderness to be Tempted of the Devil, Mat. 4. 1, viz. by the Holy Ghost
himself, Luke 4. 1. And thus the Lord may Tempt his People, by giving Satan
leave to Buffet them, 2 Cor. 12. 7; or by Applying some Tempting Means unto
them, Deuteronomy. 8. 2; and by Withdrawing his Arbitrary Influences from them, and
leaving them unto themselves, as did befall good Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 32. 31. And
though this being Left under a Temptation, may Principally be upon the account
of Others, as was in David's forenamed Case, 2 Samuel 24. 1; yet is it our Duty
and Wisdom chiefly to charge our selves therewith, as David then did, v. 17,
and together therewith the sad Consequent of that Temptation was graciously
rebuked. And though this be the saddest Dispensation that a Gracious heart can
possibly fall under, yet we know that All things work together for good, to
them who are the Called according to God's purpose, Romans 8. 28. And let such
also know, that in relation to all these forementioned Trials, (as also those
which follow) there is a time comeing when all these Tears shall be wiped from
their eyes, Rev. 21. 4.

This is the Sum of those Afflictions which David met with more Immediately
from God himself: which is the Second Branch of this Use for our Instruction.

III. Thirdly, David's hardest measures of all, were such as he met with from
Himself, or from his own Corruption: whose Failings in that respect, are also
registered in the Scriptures, not for Encouragement to do the like, but for our
Warning. And if any shall take occasion hence to Cherish the like Distempers in
themselves, let such know, that this act alone does sufficiently discover what
they are; since none of God's People have ever dared thus to do, with
reference unto a Known Temptation. Satan is called Baalzebub, 2 Kings 1. 2, or
the God of Flies; and Beelzebub, as the Greek word is, Mat. 12. 24, or the God
of Dung, because of what those Flies did Feed upon: and Satan indeed does seem
to be Their God, who (like those filthy Flies) do feed upon such Mystical
Excrescencies. And on the other side, let none evidence that they are sorry
Virgins (and not Spouses) by their being Nice and Coy in a way of Humor; or by
their being apt to take Offense at the sober Mentioning of David's Failings,
which cannot be Hid, and which are therefore left upon Record, that so all
might take notice of them for their good: especially since Paul was guided by
the Holy Ghost, to reckon up Israel's failings in the Wilderness, because those
things were our Examples, and were written for our Admonition, to the intent
that we should not Lust after Evil things, as they also Lusted, 1 Cor. 10. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Now David's recorded Failings were either more Gross or more Refined.

He very Grossly fell in that matter of Vriah; wherein the speech of Eliphaz
might be applied to him, Job 5. 1, because he therein was so Singular; which is
enough to terrify every one from treading in the same steps; especially since
Solomon tells us, that no such Straglers Return again, neither take they hold
of the paths of Life, Prove. 2. 19, however this Single David might be
Miraculously recovered. And let it also be considered, how dearly David was
made to pay for this Sin of his, both in a way of Inward Horror, Perpetual
Ignominy, and Outward Sufferings of the same kind, 2 Samuel 12. 10, 11, although
his own Life was spared, by an act of special Grace, v. 13; and yet it is also
evident, that he did not then walk up unto the top of his House, with any Set
Purpose to Fall thus from thence, but was merely Overtaken there with this
Temptation, 2 Samuel 11. 2, that others might take heed of such like Occasions,
and lest they fall from one great sin into another, as David did; who yet when
Raised up, did never Relapse into the same again.

But there are some other of his more Refined Failings mentioned, which the
Best of men are Subject unto and which are as follows.

1. David confesses, that himself (among the rest) did not in Readiness days
Enquire at the Ark of God, 1 Chro. 13. 3, as was his bounden Duty, by the Law
of Moses, Exodus 25. 22. Now that Ark was placed at the West end of the Holy of
Holyes (which was a Type of Heaven, the place of Gods presence, Heb. 9. 24*) or
at the farthest distance from the East or Worldly worship, it being the custom
of Idolaters to worship toward the East or Sunrising. And so, the Generality
of Professors (at leastwise in the days of Saul, who typified the Man of
Sin,) have sadly neglected to Enquire of God in the way of his Appointment; and
have consulted (as Saul was wont to do) with their own Will, and Carnal
Policy, and natural Reason, and mere Humane Authority, in the things of God;
which has continued both them and their Leaders, in many sad Consequents of
that preposterous course. But so soon as David's Kingdom was competently
settled, he then bethought himself of rectifying this abuse more Generally,
though he was formerly furnished with the Ephod, for his own Private Direction,
which was accordingly impr^ved. And as to his forementioned Neglect, himself
was then Constrained thereunto, through Readiness profaneness; which cannot be so
fairly pleaded by us in Gospel times, since the Ark of God's Presence is now
more easy to be come by, and not Confined to one certain Place as heretofore
it was. However, David was timely sensible of that miscarriage, and did redress
it; and nothing short of that, will evidence, that such like Transgressors in
these latter days, are men of a truly Gracious Spirit.

2. David was somewhat Hasty, as himself confesses; who said in his Haste,
that he was Cut off, psalm. 31. 22, and that All men were Liars, psalm. 116. 11,
chiefly referring unto Samuel, because that Kingdom was so long Delayed, which
Samuel had Anointed him unto. Hope deferred is apt to make the heart sick, Pro.
13. 12; and as all sick Persons are subject to be Pettish, so some talk Idly
then, which is more ordinary in this kind of Sickness. When Christ was Dead,
some of his Disciples began to Question, whether this was He, Luke 24. 21, yea
though they did then confess a Confirmation of it, by a sufficient Report that
he was Raised again, v. 22, 23, 24, who therefore were sharply rebuked for
their Folly and Unbelief, v. 25, as those must expect to be, who are alike
guilty. But thus to Cut off our selves (in case we be not Speedily relieved) is
that which a Gracious heart is subject unto, both in relation to Temporal and
Spiritual Temptations. We are very prone to Limit the Holy One of Israel unto
our Time and Way of fulfilling what he has promised; which if it does not
prove accordingly, we then give all for Lost, and though we may not dare to
Question the Word of God, yet may we boldl^ call that a false Interpretation of
it, which may be the Truth. But David did only speak thus in Haste, and did
Correct himself in Time, because he was still endued with that Spirit of Faith,
whose present Exercise was for a while Suspended, psalm. 116. 10: which is
enough to startle those, who do in Cool blood Maintain what is the issue of
their Unbelief, and who do Persist therein notwithstanding the sufficient means
offered for their Satisfaction.

3. David was sometimes overpowered to make himself Worse than indeed he was;
as when he Feigned himself Mad, before Achish the King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21. 13;
and when he Pretended to the same Achish, that he had been fighting against the
men of Judah, 1 Samuel 27. 10; and when he bore Achish in hand, that he intended
to be for him against the Israelites, 1 Samuel 29. 8. And thus in the days of
Saul or the Man of Sin, many Professors have been tempted to Feign themselves
Mad, and to make as if they had not the Exercise of their Reason and
Understanding, to know such Truths and Errors, which any ordinary man might
see with half an Eye; and which themselves knew well enough, but that they were
Afraid to be endangered by the discovery of their Abilities: nay many have made
an Outward show of being for or against such Things or Persons, which in their
Hearts they have been Contrarily affected toward. This is a great miscarriage,
which tends much unto the blemishing of our Profession; and which the subtle
Philistian Lords will not be always deluded with, 1 Samuel 29. 4, however Simple
Achish might be satisfied, ver. 9; and which discovered Incredulity of theirs
has been in much mercy to these poor self-ensnaring Dissemblers. But let us
know, that David yet was but a Young Professor, (which many cannot plead) and
that his failing was not in point of Action, but only of Expression and
Appearance; which therefore cannot be compared with their Dissimulation, who do
proceed further. And as we would be preserved from such a Snare, so let us take
heed of what betrayed David hereinto, which was his forementioned Hastiness or
Unbelief.

4. David's Unbelief drove him at last to Flee out of the land of Israel into
the land of Moab, 1 Samuel 22. 3; about which Flight he did not consult with God,
and for which the Prophet Gad rebuked him, v. 5. Now as to his Flight out of
his own Land, too many have followed him over Hastily (in times of Persecution)
under a pretense of providing for their Relations, as David then did, 1 Samuel
22. 3, 4: which though I will not absolutely deny the Warrant of, yet surely we
may not Flee upon every Light Occasion out of that Land or Place in which the
Lord has set us, and not without Enquiring of God's Oracles for our License,
especially since many have been rebuked by the Lord (and by his Prophets or
more Enlightened Servants) for their so doing, whereupon good David returned, 1 Samuel 22. 5. A godly man's heart is Fixed, with respect to Evil tidings, Psa.
112. 7; and Christ forbids going from House to House, Luke 10. 7; and some
are disgracefully called Wandering Stars, Jude 15, and Hirelings, who flee upon
the Wolfe's appearance, Joh. 10. 12. And let it be observed, that David's
spirit was never in so sad a Case, as when he thus Fled, psa. 120. 5, for fear
of Doeg, v. 2, which hurried him into this sudden undertaking, 1 Samuel 21. 7,
and 22. 3: whereas his Faith was always more Lively at other times, whilst he
was in the Wilderness of Ziph, psalm. 54. 4, 5, 7, and in the Cave, psalm. 57. 1,
2, 3, and Watched in his own House, psa. 59. 3. 10. 16, and in the Wilderness
of Judah, Psalm. 63. 8, 9, 10, 11, and when he was in another Cave, Psalm. 142.
7; although his Outward Condition was then bad enough, but yet he was all this
while in his own Land, (as is evident from the respective Titles of those
Psalms) and fared from the Lord accordingly. And as we would not fall into the
like Temptation, so let us take heed of Weakening our Spirits, as David then did
his, by his Pretending that he was then sent about Readiness Errand, 1 Samuel 21. 2,
which did immediately usher in this Flight of his, first unto Achish the King
of Gath, v. 10, and then into the Land of Moab, 1 Samuel 22. 3.

And as to those Persons whom David now fled unto, (viz. the Moabites and
Philistines) too many have also followed him in that respect, who have sought
for shelter unto Things and Persons of a Moabitish and Philistian nature,
endeavoring to secure themselves by getting into favor with a Persecuting and
Uncircumcised Party; and who have also Aggravated that Act of theirs, as David
did, by a fresh compliance with that Philistian or Grosser Interest, 1 Samuel 27.
2, from whence there had been formerly a very narrow escape, 1 Samuel 21. 12, and
for which Mercy, Praises had been returned, psalm. 34. 1, compared with the
Title. But yet David did live to Recover what he had hereby lost, in his
after-conflicts with those whom he had sometimes complied with; and nothing
short of that, will satisfy concerning others, that they are men of David's
Spirit.

5. David was once overtaken with a Temptation to Dally a little with his
Light, in cutting off the Skirt of Readiness Robe privily, which was in order to
his having Killed Saul, as his Servants moved, and as himself did intimate, by
saying afterward, The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand
against him, and by his Heart smiting him because he had cut off Readiness Skirt,
which could not relate to that Act alone, save as that was a Trial made upon
his Conscience, which if endured without Reluctance, might have encouraged him
to Perfect his Servants Motion, whom he was thus far willing to comply with, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5, 6. It is indeed very sad to Dally with ones Light at any time,
since the Eye is soon put out, and not to be Restored without a Miracle. But
yet alas how frequent is this Practice among Professors, (although they will
not confess it,) and how Rare a thing is a truly Tender Conscience! Thence are
such grounded Jealousies, that one scarce knows how to Trust another; thence
are such bold Adventures to Speak and Act at pleasure; thence are such sharp
Contests among men of Differing Opinions, and not so much from Ignorance as
want of Candor. I am no great Admirer of that Light which is in Every man, but
I yet could be glad, if Every one did walk up faithfully unto what Light they
have. And though good David was a little touched with this Distemper, yet was
he presently Heart-smitten, so as to confess his Folly and to proceed no
further; which they shall do well to weigh, who Persevere (upon a like
Occasion) and would Outface.

6. David was also once transported, in a way of Self-revenge; so as to design
the utter ruin of Nabal's house, because of his Churlish and ungrateful
carriage toward him, 1 Samuel 25. 21, 22. Revenge is very pleasing to flesh and
blood, and is too apt to be indulged by the best, through want of exercising
that Affection upon our own Corruptions, which is one Evidence of that
Repentance not to be Repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. But lest any should cherish
this Distemper in themselves because of David's pattern, let such also
remember, that David did not put this Purpose of his in Execution, but was soon
stopped in that Dirty-lane which led to Nabal's house, and Blessed God for that
Obstruction, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. And as a Motive to cease from this kind of
Anger, let us observe how speedily the Lord himself Avenged David of this
Nabal, so soon as the matter was referred to him, 1 Samuel 25. 38, 39, who has
said, that Vengeance is his, and he will Repay, Romans 12. 19.

7. Though David's Many Wives, 1 Samuel 30. 5, and 1 Chro. 14. 3, was not a Known
sin in those Days, as is generally conceived; yet did he also undeniably
evidence the Inordinacy of his Affection, when he so longed (as if he had been
some Breeding Woman) for those Waters of Bethlehem, which could not then be
had, without the apparent hazard of their Lives who were to fetch them, 2 Samuel
23. 15. It is the Saints Duty to mortify Inordinate Affection, Col. 3. 5, and
to Abstain from fleshly Lusts, 1 Pet. 2. 11; and they that are Christ's, have
Crucified the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24; but yet they are
long a Dying, as that word [Crucified] does import; and therefore (perhaps)
this Failing in David, may be Mentioned in the Latter end of his Life, 2 Samuel
23. 1, 15, though possibly it might relate unto his Younger days, as seems
to be intimated, v. 13, and 1 Chronicles. 11. 10, 13, with 1 Samuel 22. 1. But lest
any should be Encouraged by David's Example, let them remember, that he durst
not Drink those Waters which he had so Impetuously thirsted after, but poured
them out unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 23. 16, 17, that so we might be instructed, how
to get rid of such bad Companions.

8. I am of Opinion with those who think, that David dealt not so Righteously
with that Amalekite, who hoping for some Reward, did therefore falsely accuse
himself as if he had slain Saul, 2 Samuel 1. 10, whenas it is evident that Saul
slew himself, his Armor-bearer standing by till he was Dead of that wound, 1 Samuel 31. 4, 5: whereupon David forthwith proceeded to take away this poor
Amalekites life, 2 Samuel 1. 15, without any foreign Witness, which God's Law
required in that case, Number. 35. 30; and did not so much as Reprieve him until
the matter might have been known, yea though he confessed afterward, that he
then perceived what Temptation this man was under, 2 Samuel 4. 10. Now though it
was Just with God, thus to meet with this Amalekite, as a warning to all
Mystical Amalekites or Earthly minded men, who will Wrong Themselves for the
Hope of Worldly gain: yet can I not wholly Justify this Act in David, however
it may be Extenuated by his now being in a Hurry, and in a Military Posture,
and under a Temptation of thus Vindicating himself from having had any hand in
Readiness untimely death. Men are too apt to secure their own Interest, by
intrenching upon another's; and many a Rash Sentence is put in Execution
without sufficient Proof (at leastwise unto the Murdering of a man's Good
Name) without any Witness or Visible ground, or the Parties own Confession, nay
though he does Declare unto the contrary, beyond what he is bound to do. But
let all such false Witnesses know, that by the Law of God they should be dealt
with themselves as they had thought to have done unto their Brother, Deuteronomy. 19.
18, 19, 20, 21, which God will yet put in Execution, though man does not, Psa.
7. 16.

9. David did ill, in sparing Joab, whom he knew to have been a wilful
Murderer, both in the case of Amasa, 2 Samuel 20. 9, 10, and Abner, 2 Samuel 3.
27. Others also have been bold to do the like, whom I would wish to consider,
whether they can find any Warrant for their so doing from Number. 35. 31, Genesis 9.
6. And if any shall make a Plea of David's Practice, let them know, that as his
Failings are not written for our Copy, so neither did he Pardon Joab, but only
Delayed to proceed against him, because the other was too Hard for him, 2 Samuel
3. 39, until a fit Season came, and then he gave order for his just
Punishment, 1 Kings 2. 5, 6, and in the mean while did sufficiently declare
against his wicked act, by that dreadful Curse, 2 Samuel 3. 29. And though this
kind of Indulgence, has mostly prevailed under Readiness Dispensation, yet let
the Ruling Saints take heed, lest they be overtaken with the like Temptation,
upon some Politic account, as David then was. And though every Private Person
be not in a capacity of conniving at wilful Murder, yet all are too apt to
stop the course of Justice, or at leastwise not to Open that Obstruction, when
it relates to some more Considerable or useful Person, as Joab then was,
according to a Worldly rule of Judging. But as men of Joab's spirit must expect
to be reckoned with by Solomon, or Christ himself, notwithstanding all their
former good Service; so let the Indulgers of such a spirit know, that Joab was
a continued Thorn in David's side, not only crossing him in Absalom's death, 2 Samuel 18. 12. 14, but also sadly complying with him in Vriah's Murder, 2 Samuel
11. 15, 16, 17. Though it should chiefly sway with Churches and Civil
Governors, not to Respect men's Persons in such a case, because the Judgment
is not their's but God's, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.

10. David did surely Fail, when he was Displeased with the Lord himself,
because he had made a breach upon Vzza, 2 Samuel 6. 8, as if the Lord had thereby
given him some just occasion of Offense. Shall mortal man be more Pure than his
Maker? May not God do whatever his Soul desires? Must he give Account of any
of his matters? When David had sinned grievously in the matter of Vriah, it is
only said, that God was Displeased with him, 2 Samuel 11. 27; and may David be
Displeased or Angry, because God destroyed Vzza? Especially since that Act of
God was not resolved into his Sovereignty, but was an act of righteous Justice,
because Vzza did then Transgress the known Law, in touching that Sacred Ark
which none but the Levites might meddle with, Number. 4. 2, 15. How prone is sorry
Man to find fault with God, ever since he was Ambitious of being Equal with
him, Genesis 3. 5, 6! Our hearts are Naturally very Haughty, which does appear
when we are Crossed, and Proud flesh cannot endure the least Touch of that
nature. And though a Gracious heart be not so apt to be thus transported upon a
Worldly occasion, yet let him take heed in David's case, or when the Lord shall
seem to Check him in his holy Zeal, which we are too prone to expect his
absolute Acceptance of, and Pettishly to let it fall upon the least
Discouragement. But we must also know, that David soon recovered this sudden
slip, and speedily returned to his former Duty, Justifying God and taking the
blame upon himself, as being the cause of that rebuke, 1 Chro. 15. 13.

11. David does seem to evidence at one time much of a Cruel spirit, both in
his sentencing a supposed Oppressor, and in that Execution which he did upon
the subdued Ammonites. When Nathan was sent unto him, to draw out a Confession
against himself in the matter of Vriah, under the Person of a Rich man taking a
Poor man's Lamb to spare his own flock, 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4; David's anger
was greatly kindled (little thinking that Nathan meant Him,) and whereas the
Law did only require a fourfold Restoration, Exodus 22. 1, David made bold to
Add, the Death of that Rich man also, v. 5, 6: but when that Parable was
explained, he then would have been loath that Sentence should have been executed
upon himself. From whence we may observe, how apt the Best are sometimes, to be
severe in Judging others, until it come to be their own Particular Case.

And as David did thus Hardly Sentence, so also he was as Cruel, in that
Execution which he then did upon the Ammonites, putting them under Saws and
Harrows and Axes of Iron, 2 Samuel 12. 31. Now as we would not be overtaken with
the like Temptation, so let us take heed of Gross breach of Duty, which David
lay under the Guilt of at that time, and which did then occasion the unusual
Fierceness of his Disposition.

12. David did sinfully Indulge some of his Children; not having Displeased
Adonijah in all his life, 1 Kings 1. 6; and being so fond of Absalom, as that
his Soul longed after him, 2 Samuel 13. 39, (although he had unnaturally
murdered his Brother Amnon, v. 28, 29,) and earnestly wished that he had Died
for him, 2 Samuel 18. 33, although that wicked Son did then seek his own Father's
Life. It is an ordinary thing for Parents to make their Children Wantons; and
to overlook in them, what is severely witnessed against, in others. But let
such childish Parents bear in mind, how sadly poor David smarted for his
Fondness; since Adonijah was Ambitious unto the shortning of his days, because
his Father had not Displeased him at any time, 1 Kings 5. 6, 7; and since
indulged Absalom would fain have murdered his Father, and did murder his
Brother, because David did not cut off Incestuous Amnon, as he should have
done, Lev. 20. 17, and because he spared Absalom who Bloodily accomplished that
work himself. And though David was much in captivity to this Distemper, yet did
he overcome it before his death, and made that up in Solomon's good Education,
which had been wanting in him to the rest, as has been formerly declared.

13. David does seem not to have dealt so fairly, when he gave all
Mephibosheth's Land to Ziba, upon his false Accusation of him in the other's
absence, 2 Samuel 16. 4; which was the worse, because Ziba had half the Land
given him still, after that Mephibosheth had sufficiently vindicated himself
from that Aspersion, 2 Samuel 19. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. A good man may
possibly be ensnared by another's Flattery, to Judge unjustly before both
Parties be heard to speak; and that may betray him (being once engaged) to
Persist in what he has so done, at leastwise not to reverse it wholly, when
the truth is known. The best earthen Pitcher may be sometime carried by One
ear, which yet is a sign of Emptiness; and fawning Sycophants are apt to be too
acceptably entertained, which yet is a Sin and Shame; and when a man is once
Engaged in an evil way, it is not so easy to Return, which should provoke us to
take heed of bad Beginnings. But David now was not himself, and though he did
fail in this particular act, yet was it his Habitual Purpose, to cut off the
Privy Slanderer, psa. 101. 5.

14. David confessed, that he had sinned greatly, when he would needs know his
utmost Strength, or all the fighting men that were in Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel
24. 2, notwithstanding Joab's witnessing against it, and earnest Disswasion
from it, v. 3, 4, and 1 Chro. 21. 3, 4. The best of men are too apt to Delight
themselves in Viewing their supposed strength, in point of Gifts or Graces or
any other self-elevating Advantages, which is Abominable in the eyes of a mere
Carnal Joab, and much Provoking unto the Lord himself. Indeed a man may
Lawfully take notice of what Good he has received, in order to his giving God
the Glory of it, 1 Cor. 15. 10; but we are apt to do so in a way of Vain glory
and Self-pleasing, as David did, which is a great miscarriage. And let it be
observed, whether the Declining state of David's Dispensation in the Latter
days, be not attended with the vain Boasting of a mere Fleshly Numerous Party;
which always has been the bad Companion of Outward Peace and Temporal
Prosperity, among the Generality of Professors. But as a Corrosive to such
Proud flesh, let it be duly weighed, that David was hereunto Provoked by the
Devil, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1; and did Confess this Sin unto the full, v. 8. 17; and
never did commit the like again; neither was this Numbering Perfected, or put in
the Account of his Chronicles, 1 Chro. 27. 23, 24: and that he was also sharply
Corrected by the Lord, by his Losing Seventy thousand of what he had so Gloried
in, 1 Chro. 21. 14; which may be expected by all, as the Righteous Consequent
of their delighting to stand in the proud View of their apprehended
Excellencies.

15. David does also confess, that he had not Duly sought the Lord, when he
attempted to Remove the Ark, 1 Chro. 15. 13, which should have been carried by
the Levites upon their Shoulders, v. 2, and not by Oxen upon a Cart, as then it
was, 1 Chro. 13. 7, and therefore was poor Vzza smitten, ver. 10. From whence
we may observe, that the Best men are apt to manage a Good cause Badly; and in
Particular by Translating the Burden of that Duty upon others, which the Lord
has imposed upon our selves. It is good to be Enquring of God in such a case,
since we are naturally prone to spare our own Shoulders, and to consult with
carnal Policy in matters of a Religious nature. All seem Desirous, that
Gospel Worship might be Advanced; but few are willing to take that Ark upon
their Backs, so long as there are any Oxen to bear it for them, by means
whereof it shakes or is Endangered, which does occasion some fresh
Presumptuous act, unto the Death of some, and the Rebuking of all the rest.
Which instance may more especially refer unto a time to come; but yet is
fully Exemplified at this day: since we have been too apt to lay heavy burdens
upon the backs of others; upon which the Ark has lately shaken, which some
well-meaning Vzza has endeavored to hold up by unhallowed means; and
therefore perhaps the Lord has smitten them with the Plague, which Israel is
threatened with, in case they do neglect their Open solemn Worship, when called
thereunto, Exodus 5. 3, which we in Gospel Times are bid to hold up, in the face
of greatest outward danger, Mat. 10. 27, 28, and are forbidden going from House
to House, in a way of designing Privacy, Luke 10. 7. And this Ignorance of a
Due Order proceeds from a foregoing Neglect of consulting with God's Oracles,
through the corruptions of former times; as David was therefore ignorant, that
this work belonged to the Levites, because they had generally Disregarded God's
Ark in the days of Saul, 1 Chro. 13. 3.

16. The Lord had ordered, that the Ark should be Placed within the Tabernacle,
Exodus 26. 33; but David brought the Ark into Jerusalem, and left the Tabernacle
behind at Gibeon, 1 Chronicles. 16. 37. 39, appointing Asaph to minister before the
Ark, and Zadok before the Tabernacle, which was not according to God's Order.
It is an hard matter to carry on God's work by Wholesale, and not to leave
some part thereof behind. And though David had now got the Better part, viz.
the Ark) into his own House, yet did he hereby occasion Others to wait upon an
Empty Tabernacle. Thus some are satisfied with a Form of Godliness without its
Power, whilst others pretending to the Power do therefore disregard an
instituted Form, and little think that both these should go together till God
give further Order. And as this Partial dealing with God's Appointments
prevailed thus in David's time; so I expect it will befall his Dispensation in
the latter days; nor will it be much to be wondered at, if the Best shall
Differ each from other, on this side what the Temple typified, especially a
little before the final Dissolution of a Tabernacle state: But to prevent our
making light of such a failing, let us remember how often good David was left
without Advice from God, after that he had thus put Asunder what God had
Joined: and that Christ (whom David typified) would not omit one jot or tittle
of the Law till all was fulfilled, accounting him the Least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, who shall do otherwise, Matt. 5. 18, 19.

17. Though David had the Ark at home, yet did he use to Worship in an High
Place at Gibeon, where he had left the Tabernacle, 1 Chro. 16. 39. 40, where
Solomon also worshipped and a^l the People, which was their Sin, 1 Kings 3. ^,
3, 4. And it is evident, that David did put more Honor upon that High-place
than upon the Ark, because he had only Asaph a Levite to minister before the
Ark, 1 Chronicles. 16. 37, whereas Zadok the prime High Priest did serve before the
Tabernacle in that High-place at Gibeon, v. 39. From whence we may observe, how
prone men are to Intermingle something of their own with God's Appointments;
and highly to prefer the Tabernacle-Outside of a Duty before the Ark of God's
Power; and under the Pretense of God's Tabernacle to Magnify their own
Inventions or Superstitious High Places. And let it be duly weighed, that this
turning of God's own Tabernacle into an Idolized Form, was the Consequent (or
at leastwise the Concomitant) of its being severed from the Ark, which those
are most subject unto, who do pretend at the Highest rate; so Dangerous a thing
it is to sever what God has Joined, and so Natural a thing it is to be
Will-worshippers and not to see it. This also may prove another great
Temptation in these Latter days, for the preventing whereof, let us remember,
that the forementioned Plague (which thinned David's Worshippers and Warriors)
did so rage in this High-place at Gibeon, as that David was afraid to come
thereat, 1 Chro. 21. 29, 30, and he grew out of conceit therewith ever after,
having met with more of God's gracious presence otherwhere, v. 28. And thus the
Lord at last will gather up his precious ones, into One fixed Temple-state of
his own appointing, out of all those superstitious Wanderings and Divisions,
which have been the fruit of their religious Humors; as he now showed David
where that Temple should be built, which yet he was only suffered to make
Provision for, but might not Set it up, 1 Chro. 22. 1, 2, 3. 7, 8.

18. When David was in Prosperity, he said, he never should be moved, Psalm. 30.
6: from whence we may observe, how prone the Best are to be Secure, which is
their sinful weakness; as on the other side, in a day of Adversity to conclude
that God has forgotten to be Gracious, which David confesses to have been his
Infirmity, Psalm. 77. 9, 10. We are apt to walk by Sight, and so to be ensnared,
by reason of our unacquaintance with God's Methods, who keeps not unto the
common road of man's Reason, that so his People's Faith might be in continual
Exercise. We are naturally of a very Narrow and Presentaneous spirit, not
willing (through self-love) to prepare for Darkness in a Sunshine day, nor (at
another time) to Hope for mercy, through our Peevish Unbelief. But as good
David overcame Despondency, when he remembered that God's Way was in the
Sanctuary, Psalm. 77. 9. 13; so also was his Security rebuked, by the Sudden
Hiding of God's face, unto his being Troubled, Psalm. 30. 7; both which are
registered for our Warning and Direction, in relation to those two Extremes.

19. David was once tempted to Hold his Peace from Good, whilst the Wicked was
before him, Psa. 39. 1, 2. And it should seem, that the Good Discourse which he
did then Refrain, related to the Creature's Vanity, Psalm. 39. 4, 5, 6, which
Wicked men cannot endure to hear of; and therefore he calls it a Parable or
Dark Saying, Psalm. 49. 4, which does concern the Worldlings Folly, who Trust in
that which cannot Save them from the Grave, v. 6, 7, 9, nor prevent the
Righteous from having Dominion over them in the Morning, v. 14, or when the Sun
of Righteousness shall arise. Wicked men are Earthly-minded, who therefore will
not understand nor can endure to hear, that their Life is short, and that their
Wealth is worthless, and that the poor afflicted Saints shall one Day be
possessed of their present portion: in which respect, the Best are apt to Speak
of such things Darkly, and sometimes to Hold their peace. How hard it is to
bear a Full and Faithful testimony to Offensive Truths! But as it is a bad Sign
to be Offended with the Truths of Christ, so is it the Disposition of Gracious
heart to Overcome his sinful Silence, as David then did, whose sorrow was
stirred, and whose heart was hot within him, until the burning fire had made a
passage for his musing by his Speech, Psalm. 39. 2. 3. Those are not of David's
Spirit, who are in bondage unto that Temptation of sinful Silence, although
the Best may for a while be hard put to it, Jer. 20. 9.

20. David confesses, that his feet were almost gone, in point of Envy at the
Sinners Happiness, Psa. 73. 2, 3, considering how himself was dealt with, v.
14. But yet he quickly did recover himself, v. 15, by going into the Sanctuary,
or communing with God's Oracles, v. 17, and styled himself a Foolish Ignorant
Beast, because of his being so disturbed without any just cause, v. 21, 22, 23.

These are the Principal of David's registered Miscarriages; which I have not
Delighted to ^ake into, but that I could not well avoid it, in this Set
Discourse about his whole Description: especially since many are apt to Argue
from his Failings, which I have therefore mentioned together with their due
Extenuations and Disswasives, that so none may make the worst hereof, in way of
Censure or Misimprovement.

And thus I have now Finished this Second Use, which is for our Instruction.

Use 3. I shall conclude all, with a few words of Exhortation, to be such as
David was for the Main, viz. Men and Women after God's own heart.

And one would think, there needs no other Motive, save what is hinted from
the Duty it self Exhorted unto. Our first Parents were so Ambitious of being
Like to God, as that they ventured their All, in the pursuit of a mere
Delusion; and shall we then stick at any thing, to Purchase that which will
Truly make us such as the Lord himself is? What can be desired more, than to be
After God's own heart, who is the Center of all Perfection; although there were
no other Encouragement, save what arises from the Thing it self?

But yet because naked Grace and Duty are of small account in most men's eyes,
I shall therefore endeavor to set this Exhortation home upon the hearts of
all, by several Motives; and shall confine my self to such things only, as did
befall good David, (above Saul) and every of which may be expected as their
Portion who do resemble him in point of Grace, and which are as follows.

Mot. 1. David was anointed King, 1 Samuel 16. 13, and was Peculiarly chosen by
the Lord himself, Psa. 78. 70, who did Prefer him before Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 28,
and before his own Brethren, 1 Samuel 16, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Men after God's
own heart, are Chosen Vessels, (as Paul was, Act. 9. 15.) whom God Prefers
before the rest; who are made Kings, and who shall Reign on Earth, Rev. 5. 10.
Now this Kingdom of theirs has hitherto been of a Spiritual nature only,
(which yet is a sufficient Dignity;) but their Inward Grace will in due time
grow up to Outward Glory, which shall be Generally given forth at Christ's
Personal Appearing, Col. 3. 4, a more Particular taste whereof will be on this
side that time, (...). 15, according to what they were visibly A^^inted unto
from the time of that War, v. 7, and which they took Possession of when the
Witnesses Ascended up to Heaven, v. 12: as Christ was Proclaimed King, Luke 19*
38, before his Suffering, and went to receive that Kingdom at his Ascension,
Luke 19. 11, 12, which yet he will not Visibly and fully exercise till his
Return, 2 Timothy 4. 1; and in a way suitable to what befell David. This Honor
shall one day be conferred upon all the Saints; and when they shall thus
Visibly appear with Crowns upon their heads, then every one will wish that He
also had been a man after God's own heart; which therefore is the first Motive
to be of that Number.

2. David was made to Wait and Suffer much, between his Anointing and
Coronation, that so he might be Fitted and Prepared for his Kingdom: which
though (Materially considered) it was Afflicting, yet was it of special use,
since he was very Young when first Anointed, 1 Samuel 16. 11, and wanted that
Experience which is the fruit of Patience, Romans 5. 3, 4; and therefore he did
not over-hastily desire Readiness destruction, Psalm. 59. 11. The Anointed Warring
Witnesses have no great mind to Die; but vet they that Reign with Christ must
also Suffer with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12, who learnt Obedience by what he suffered,
Heb. 5. 8, and who in Mercy to his People will not Advance them over-speedily,
until he has first Wrought them for it, 2 Cor. 5. 5, and made them Meet to be
Partakers of it, Col. 1. 12. When Israel came first up out of Egypt, they had a
Mixed multitude with them, Exodus 12. 38, who set the rest a Lusting, Number. 11.
4; and therefore they might not enter into the Land of Promise, till those bad
Humors were Purged out, Number. 14. 29. 30: and when that People's present
Captivity shall be returned, the Lord will first bring them into Another
Wilderness, until he has Purged out the Rebels from among them, Ezekiel. 20. 34,
35, 36, 37, 38. Sudden alterations are apt to Overset the Creature's Weakness,
and therefore the Lord does Gradually proceed in doing Good unto them, first
Preparing their Heart, and then causing his Ear to hear, Psalm. 10. 17. Saul was
Immediately possessed of his whole Dominion, but David was made to Stay, until
he had first served two Apprentiships, that so he might be the better able to
drive that Trade, which is the happy Portion of every Gracious Soul, and
another Motive to be of that Number.

3. When Saul was once Dead, though David had long War with his House, yet did
he wax stronger daily, 2 Samuel 3. 1, and many fell off unto him, until his Host
was Great, like the Host of God, 1 Chro. 12. 22. And let it be observed, how
this Agrees with the VVitnesses, between the time of their Ascension and the
Seventh Trumpet's sounding; as it has been made good to Christ (in his
Interests and Members) ever since himself Ascended. In the mean while, this is
the Portion of every gracious Soul, to wax stronger and stronger, ever after
his first Main contest with the Body of Sin, which from that time is called the
Body of Death, because it grows Weaker daily, notwithstanding some lesser
Conflicts afterward, which may interrupt the Peace and Fullness of his
Spiritual Dominion for the time being; and which also is occasioned by his own
Indulging those Spiritual Adversaries (as David did his) against whom if all
offered Advantages were carefully Improved, this War might sooner come unto an
happy Issue.

4. David was furnished with a Spirit suitable to that work which God had
called him unto, from that very Day wherein he was Anointed, 1 Samuel 16. 13. And
as the Spirit of God was upon Christ, because he was Anointed, Isa. 61. 1; so
is it also given forth unto all his anointed Servants, according to the measure
of the Gift of Christ. The Saints are poor Creatures in themselves, but they
are encouraged to expect the help of God's Spirit in their enquiring into
mysterious and needful Truths, Joh. 16. 13, 14; in their performance of
Religious Duties, Romans 8, 26; in their Reviving Prohibited Temple-work, Hag. 2.
4, 5; in their honorable mannagement of Suffering service, Mat. 10. 19, 20;
and in their unusual converse about Difficult affairs (whether Spiritual, Civil
or Military) when called thereunto, Isa. 28, 5, 6. Saul had some Ordinary Gifts
of Gods Spirit conferred upon him, such as a Wicked man may share in; but
David did experience it is more Peculiar Influences, in his Overcoming that
Goliath whom Saul fled from; an Extraordinary measure of which Spirit did also
appear in his unparalled Worthies, 2 Samuel 23. 8, etc. which has been
Spiritually Exemplified in all those of David's Spirit hitherto, who have done
very Strange Exploits, as an Encouragement unto others to be of that Number.

5. David was Successful in what he undertook, for the Lord was with him, 1 Samuel 16. 18, enabling him to slay that Giant, 1 Samuel 17. 50; and to Take that
impregnable Fort of Sion, 1 Chro. 11. 5; and Preserving him whithersoever he
went, 1 Chronicles. 18. 6. A wicked man may Prosper in what he puts his hand
unto, Jer. 5. 28; but as it proves Destructive to them, Prove. 1. 32, so they
have no Promise for it, but may Expect the quite contrary, Deuteronomy. 28. 29:
whereas a Gracious heart has this Ensured to him, Psa. 1. 3, because such do
Delight themselves in God, and do commit their way unto him, Psa. 37. 4, 5, and
do belong unto that Sion, where God does command the Blessing, Psa. 133. 3. The
Spirit of God in such does work Effectually, so as to Overcome the Stoutest
Adversary and Strongest Hold, notwithstanding the Despicableness of their
Persons, and the Weakness of those Means which they make use of. The only way
to be Successful in our Attempts, is to become men after God's own heart.

6. David was Accepted in the sight of Readiness Servants, and of all the People,
1 Samuel 18. 5, who Loved him, v. 16, and among whom his Name was much set by,
because of his Singular Wisdom, v. 30; and Jonathan Loved him as his own Soul,
v. 1; nay Saul himself did sometimes greatly Love him, 1 Samuel 16. 21, who
afterward did Fear him, because the Lord was with him, 1 Samuel 18. 12, and
because he did behave himself so very wisely, ver. 15, which made him at the
last to turn his utter Enemy, v. 29. Every one would fain inherit the Good will
of all, and the only way to do so, is to be such as David was. Such is the
Glory of that Grace and Wisdom, bestowed upon a man after God's own heart, as
that the Common sort of people cannot but Love him; yea Hypocrites themselves
do therefore Reverence him, and are Afraid at the sight of God in him, whom
they have no cause to Hate, but only that they so Envy his superior worth,
and Fear that God will Advance him above themselves; which makes them to
become his Enemies, whilst others of a Grosser spirit Favor him, as the
Moabites and Philistines did David, when Saul was set against him, and as the
Heathens did Paul when he was Persecuted by his Friends and Brethren, Act. 23.
27, and 24. 23, and 27. 3, and 28. 2, 7, 16, 30, 31.

7. David was Seen by Others, to be a Worthy man, and one whom the Lord
intended to Advance accordingly. Abigail could say, that God would certainly
make him a sure House, because he had fought his Battles, and because no Evil
had ever been found in him, 1 Samuel 25. 28. Nay Saul himself Saw and Knew that
the Lord was with David, 1 Samuel 18. 28, who also confessed that he was more
Righteous than himself, 1 Samuel 24. 17, and that he Knew well he should be
surely King, v. 20, as his Son Jonathan had formerly hinted, 1 Samuel 23. 17.
Though wicked men and worldly Professors may Revile God's precious ones, yet
are they convinced in their Consciences that they are more righteous than
themselves, and are sometimes constrained to confess it, as Paul was in part
acknowledged by those censorious Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 13, 14, whom the
Lycaonians Deified, Act. 14. 11, as also did those Barbarians, Act. 28. 6. and
whom the Devil himself acknowledged to be the Servant of the most High God,
Act. 16. 17. And as they know them to be men of Worth, so also they know that
God will Advance them, and therefore are glad at last to Indent with the Saints
for their own Security, as Saul did with David, when he was wearied with his
Unprofitable and Unsuccessefull Persecution, 1 Samuel 24. 21.

8. The Lord did by a special hand of Providence, convey the Ephod (together
with Abiathar) from Saul to David, 1 Samuel 23. 6; which stood him in great
stead, as being that by which he might come to know God's Mind and Will, and
which he did accordingly Experience, unto his great advantage, v. 9; who also
was confident that God would Guide him by his Counsel, until he did receive
him unto Glory, Psa. 73. 24, for God had Promised to Guide him with his Eye,
and to Instruct and teach him the way that he should go, Psa. 32. 8, in answer
to his earnest Prayer, Psa. 143. 8. A man after God's own heart may comfortably
wait upon the Lord for his Direction, and is supplied with Peculiar means
accordingly; he has the Mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16, and is endued with that
Spirit, which Leads into all Truth, Joh. 16. 13; whilst others are left to
walk in their own counsels, Psalm. 81. 12, and Perish through lack of Knowledge,
as Saul did when he had lost the Ephod.

9. David was confident that God would Hear him when he did call unto him, Psa.
4. 3, and therefore he would then Look up, Psa. 5. 3; and did accordingly
Experience it, when he at any time consulted with him, 1 Samuel 23. 2. 4. 11, and
30. 8; which he acknowledges, Psalm. 3. 4, and 6. 8, 9; who therefore resolved
to cry unto him, that performs all things for him, Psalm. 57. 2. Every man
would have his Desires granted, which yet none but a Gracious Soul can
Groundedly expect, whose Voice is sweet, whose Person is accepted; who goes
unto a loving Father, by the Son, and through the Spirits help: whilst the
Sacrifice of the Wicked is declared to be Abominable. And as the Saints have
always been prevailing in their Prayer, so will this Eminently appear in these
Latter days, when God will Hear them whiles they are yet Speaking, Isa. 65.
24, when they shall Search for him with all their heart, Jer. 29. 13, and when
they shall offer unto the Lord a Pleasant Offering as in the days of Old, Mal.
3. 3, 4.

10. God did consider David's Trouble, and Knew his Soul in Adversities, Psa.
31. 7; and though he Chastened him sore, yet did he not give him over unto
Death, Psa. 118. 18; nor did he leave him unto the mercy of his Enemies, 2 Samuel
24. 13, 14, 15; but did Miraculously Preserve him from Readiness fury, by a
strange Diversion, when Saul had once surrounded him, 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27, 28;
because God did Delight in him, Psa. 18. 19. The righteous Lord does Weigh the
Path of his Just ones, when they are made to walk in Heavy ways, Isa. 26. 7;
and debateth with them in Measure, staying his Rough-wind in the day of the
East Wind, Isa. 27. 8. He does deliver them from too great a death, 2 Cor. 1.
10, and will not suffer them to be Tempted above what they are able to bear, 1
Cor. 10. 13, though Satan does very much Desire to have them, Luke 22. 31.
Himself is both their Judge and Executioner, 1 Cor. 11. 32, whilst Wicked men
are delivered up by him unto the Officer, Mat. 5. 25. God's Israel are an
unconsumed Burning Bush, Exodus 3. 2, whom he knows how to deliver out of
Temptations, 2 Pet. 2. 9; and does thus dispense himself unto them in way of
Special Mercy, Isa. 38. 17.

11. The Lord was better unto David than He would have been unto himself;
crowning him with his Preventing Goodness, Psa. 21. 3. An eminent Instance
whereof was, when he was Forcibly hindered from Joining with Achish against
Israel, 1 Samuel 29. 9, 10, 11, who doubtlessely would in the Battle have fought
against Achish, as his Prudent Lords concluded, v. 4; which would have made the
Philistines to Blaspheme exceedingly: but therefore the Lord so ordered it as
that David could not Ensnare himself, as he did then Endeavor to have done, v.
8. Men after God's own heart, do frequently experience his Overpowring
goodness, in way of Mercy to themselves; whom his good Spirit does not Permit
to blemish their Profession and prejudice their Peace, as they would do, if
left unto their own Devices and Inclinations. He bids that they should Pray,
but yet he Acts for them beyond what they Ask or Think, in answer to their
Habitual desires, and to the cry of their Condition, which they cannot
sometimes Express, through want of understanding, or from the Prevalency of
their Distempers. How might the Best be Overtaken with sad Tentations, if the
Lord did not sometimes Answer before they Call, by keeping them out of the way
of such Occasions! And every one will one day wish, that he had been of that
Number, whom God does thus Prevent with unrequested mercy.

12. When David only had it in his Heart to build a Temple, God did Accept his
good ^ntent, and did Reward him for it, as if he had accomplished his Purpose,
2 Samuel 7. 2. 11. The Acceptance of a Willing mind, is one Peculiar privilege
belonging to a true Believer, when nonperformance is not from want of Will, 2
Cor. 8. 11, 12. Christ is content to eat his Spouses Honeycomb, Cant. 5. 1;
who can Interpret the Characters of his Peoples Sighs and Groans, Romans 8. 26,
27; and lets their Desires pass for Actions, or else All his Sheep could not
be said to have Relieved him in Want, Mat. 25. 35, 36, since many of them are
unable so to do, but yet because the Poorest and Weakest Saint is not wanting
in point of Will, he therefore is Reckoned among the rest, as if he had Done
accordingly. Eternal Glory is thus dispensed unto such in way of Righteousness,
because they would be Infinitely Dutiful; as others would be Disobedient, who
therefore are Justly punished with Everlasting torments. The Sinner's good
Works shall one day be disregarded, Matt. 7. 22, 23; whilst a Gracious Soul
will bountifully be rewarded for his mere Good will; which is a strong Motive
to be of that Number.

13. David was Timely corrected by the Lord, and was not suffered to run upon
the Score, (as others were) save in a case of more than Ordinary Provocation,
as in the matter of Vriah, (wherein he lay almost a Year without Rebuke,) and
when he Relapsed into an unlawful Flight, (where he was suffered to Continue a
full year and four months, 1 Samuel 27. 7,) after that he had been fairly
Warned of such a like Attempt before, 1 Samuel 21. 12: but otherwise, the Lord
soon Checked his offer to have killed Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 5, and his first Flight,
both unto Achish, and the King of Moab, 1 Samuel 22. 1. 5. The wicked are
permitted to Treasure up wrath unto themselves, Romans 2. 5, whilst the Lord
does more speedily chastise his Own, that so they might not be condemned with
the World, 1 Cor. 11. 32; which is no small mercy, since his Deferred anger
turns into Fury, and will conclude in so much the fiercer Vengeance. Let every
one be therefore willing to become a Saint; and as the Saints themselves would
be more Speedily and Gently dealt with, so let them take heed of Great
transgressions, and of Relapsing into what the Lord has formerly rebuked them
for, lest they be then made to Smart as David did upon the like occasion.

14. The Lord seems to take no notice of David's Failings, save only in the
matter of Vriah, excepting which, he is said not to have turned aside from Any
thing that God commanded him all the days of his Life, 1 Kings 15. 5. God
threatens to set the Wicked man's sins in order before his eyes, Psalm. 50. 21;
and to convince him of All his ungodly deeds and words, Jude 15: but as the Eye
of his Justice does not behold Iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23. 21, so neither does
he Reproach his faithful Servants with their Lesser failings, but Names them
according to the Better part of their Inward frame and Outward conversation.
The true Believers Person is denominated from his Better part, so that it is
not He that sins, but Sin that dwells in him, Romans 7. 17: and though their
Least miscarriages are matter of their present Shame and Sorrow, yet is it not
according to God's Revealed Will, that such things should be mentioned to stain
their Reputation, when Deceased. All would be glad to have their Good Name
preserved, the best Embalmer whereof is Grace, since the Memory of the Just is
blessed, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot, Pro. 10. 7. Only the Saints
themselves must know, that though their Names be Fairly writ in Heaven, yet may
some Fouler blot be never wiped off on Earth to all Posterity.

15. When God had deeply humbled David for that miscarriage in the matter of
Vriah, he then Returned to him with Advantage, and gave him a second Son, who
was the world's Wonder, and whom the Lord himself did call Jedidiah, to
signify, that he was God's Beloved, 2 Samuel 12. 24, 25. God is Angry with the
Wicked every day, Psa. 7. 11; and notwithstanding what he has formerly done
against him, yet is not his Anger turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still, Isa. 9. 21: but in relation to his Own, his Anger endures but a Moment,
Psa. 30. 5, he will not always chide, Psa. 103. 9, but with Great Mercies will
he gather them, Isa. 54. 7, according to the days wherein he has Afflicted
him, Psalm. 90. 15. His Soul does Long to go forth unto his Children, (as poor
David's did to Absalom) and he waits to be Gracious, Isa. 30. 18, offering to
be reconciled upon the Lowest terms that may be, Jer. 3. 13, whose Bowels are
then troubled for them, Jer. 31. 20, accounting their Light correction to have
been Double punishment, Isa. 40. 2, and is more Gracious to his Returning
Prodigals, than ever he was before, Luke 15. 22, 23. And who would not be glad
to be of that Number, whose very Chastisements do only make way for the fuller
evidencing of their Fathers Love?

16. David was one of God's Prophets, as he is expressly called, Act. 2. 30,
and as many of his Psalms do evidence. And though that extraordinary gift of
Prophesying was never common to all the Saints, and is now wholly in a manner
ceased, ever since the Scripture or Word of Prophecy was completed, which
none may Add unto, Rev. 22. 18: yet as the Saints have Generally been styled
Prophets heretofore, Psa. 105. 15; so every true Believer is in some sense a
Prophet still, and more especially those of David's spirit in Gospel times, who
shall be rewarded as Prophets, and Saints, and such as Fear God's Name, Rev.
11. 18, and whom Christ calls Prophets, Mat. 10. 41. A man after God's own
heart is as it were a Prophet, in regard of his peculiar Acquaintance with
Hidden Mysteries, by virtue of a special Gift, Mat. 13. 11. He that is
spiritual Judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15, having his Senses exercised to
Discern both good and evil, Heb. 5. 14. The wicked shall not Understand, as do
the wise, Dan. 12. 10; and God's Law is Sealed up among his Disciples, Isa. 8.
16, which others therefore cannot read, Isa. 29. 11. The Holiest Hearts are
most likely to have the Clearest Eyes, since God's Secret is with them that
fear him, Psa. 25. 14; and therefore these sons of faithful Zadok shall one day
be advanced unto place of Judgment in matters Controversal, Ezekiel. 44. 15. 23,
24.

17. David was Authorized by God to call him Father, Psa. 89. 26, and God did
also say to him, Thou art my Son, Psa. 2. 7. The Devil's Children may be Bold
to call God their Father, Jo^. 8. 41, 44, but true Believers are Empowered by
God to become his Sons, Joh. 1. 12; and because they are Sons, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into their Hearts, which cries, Abba Father, Gal.
4. 6. Indeed this Spirit is fitly resembled by the VVind, which Blows where
it lists, and which Adopted sons have no great cause to wonder at, since
Christ himself could only sometime say, My God, my God: but yet the veriest
Child might Truly say, The Sun is up could he but see it through those Clouds,
which make him call that, Night, which only is a Gloomy Day. And though the
Antichristian world's Hour be termed the Power of Darkness, Luke 22. 53, yet is
Christ's Dispensation lightsome, Isa. 60. 1, which will destroy the Saints
covering Veil, Isa. 25. 7, for they shall then See eye to eye, Isa. 52. 8, and
shall be Emboldened to call God Father, and shall not turn away from him, Jer.
3. 19. And then the wicked workers of Iniquity shall first begin to know the
Difference between Lord, Lord, and Abba Father, which should provoke them to
consider (before it be too late) that none but Gospel-Saints are Sons.

18. Readiness Privileges were very short-lived, as has been formerly declared;
but David's Mercies are called sure, Isa. 55. 3; so was his House, 1 Kings 11.
38, being confirmed with an Oath, Psa, 89. 35; so also was his Kingdom, which
therefore could not be hindered, Psa. 2. 1, 4, 6, 7; he also had Length of days
for Ever and Ever, Psa. 21. 4, and was Assured that Goodness and Mercy should
follow him All his days, Psa. 23. 6, for God made him most blessed for Ever,
Psa. 21. 6. Everlastingness is as it were the Life and Soul of Misery or Mercy;
and as the Damned's Misery is Everlasting, so are the true Believers Mercies
sure, as David's were, and as an Everlasting Covenant can make them, Isa. 55.
3. Sinners are most merry-hearted, but Saints alone have strength of
Consolation, whose Hope is both sure and steadfast, which also enters into that
within the Veil, Heb. 6. 18, 19; whereas the Sinners Happiness is only in this
Life, and is in that respect Uncertain also. Saints only have Security for
Earth and Heaven, 1 Timothy 4. 8; whilst they who are without Christ, are
therefore Strangers from any kind of Covenant or Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12.

19. David was a public Blessing, for whose sake Others also did fare the
better, as did Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 12, 13; Abijam, 1 Kings 15. 4, 5; and
Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 5, 6: and it was this David who did bear up the Pillars
of a Dissolved Earth, or State of things, when he first came to Reign, Psa. 75.
2. 3. Wicked men would fain be rid of God's people, not knowing of what
Necessary use they are, to help them by their Wisdom, Eccl. 9. 15; Prayers,
Exodus 10. 17, and Presence, Job 22. 30. The holy Seed are the Earth's
Substance, Isa. 6. 13; and the Professing World would soon become a Sodom or
Gomorrah, if it were not for this very small remnant, Isa. 1. 9, who are
compared to Salt, Mat. 5. 13, which keeps this Universe from Putrefaction, and
unto that New Wine which does Preserve the Cluster from being utterly
Destroyed, because there is a Blessing in it, Isa. 65. 8; and therefore that
wicked Joash could Mourn over Dying Elisha, as being the Chariot of Israel and
its Horsemen, 2 Kings 13. 14. Which as it has been a truth in all Ages, so
more especially with reference unto David's Dispensation in the Latter days,
when there would be no mercy shown to any, but for the sakes of a very few,
whom God intends to make the Inheritours of his Mountains, Isa. 65. 8, 9;
whilst hypocritical Professors are Public Mischiefs, v. 6, and therefore
their Persons shall be slain, and their Name accursed, v. 15.

20. David was not so much in Bondage unto the Law of Moses as others were, but
had a Liberty (in some things) to Add and Alter, by Divine Permission. He
Added constant Singing unto the Worship of God, together with other Music
which had not been in use before, 1 Chro. 25. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7: and whereas
Moses had ordered, that the Levites should not Begin their Service till five
and twenty years old at soonest, Number. 8. 24; David appointed them to Begin from
the Age of Twenty years, because the Tabernacle was then at Rest, which
therefore did not require such Manly Servitours, 1 Chro. 23. 24, 25, 26, 27; as
the Reason of his forementioned Addition might be, because the Lord had then
given him to be a Psalm-Enditer, and because his Dispensation (compared with
Readiness) was a Time of Singing and Rejoicing. Now David herein was Primarily a
Type of Christ, as he is his People's King and Lawgiver, Isa. 33. 22; but yet
that Practice of his does Secondarily denote, what is the Common Privilege of
all those who are men after God's own heart: and as in relation Chiefly to the
Law of Moses, as it was given forth by him, (which Paul was wholly dead unto,
Gal. 2. 19, save as the Moral Equity of its Matter was Abiding;) so also with
reference unto some Particular things required in the Gospel, which do appear
to have been of a Temporary Nature; and which yet are with utmost Wariness to
be understood. A man after God's own heart (in Gospel Times) is Absolutely Dead
to Moses his Ceremonials and Judicials, as to the Formal Obligation of any such
Laws, Col. 2. 16, 17. 20, 21, 22, whilst other poor Creatures do desire Again
to be in Bondage to them, Gal. 4. 9, and are exceedingly Offended with such as
Differ from them, Act. 21. 21. And though Gospel-Prophets (or Eminentest
Saints) are no more Exempted now from Christ's Appointments, than Legal
Prophets were of Old; yet are they enabled (by comparing one Scripture with
another) to see, that some Gospel-duties are only required in such a Case or
Season; as in that Duty of Forbearance (to name no more at present) which Paul
imposes upon Gentile-Christians in relation to the weak Jewish Ceremonialists,
Romans 14. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 22, which some would fain hold to be still in
force; as if we ought to bear with Worldly Professors submitting to
Antichrist's Appointments in these Lightsome times, as Paul did then bear with
the Conscientious Jews Observation of those Divine Laws* which then were but
Newly abrogated. But men after God's own heart, have comfortably been
Instructed by him, how to Interpret such Evangelical Commands, so as to escape
those snares which ^he ^gnorance of others has betrayed them into. And let it
be observed, whether the Near approach of Dav^^'s Temporal Dominion in the
latter days, be not accompanied (as it was of Old) with several that have
Understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do, and all whose
Brethren will in due time be at their Commandment, 1 Chro. 12. 32. This
singular Understanding is Desirable, which as we would be endued with, so let
us labor to be such as David was.

21. David had many Prayers put up for him by Others; that God would Hear him,
and Defend him, and Strengthen him, and Accept his Offerings, and Grant his
hearts Desire, Psa. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, by which he knew that God did Save him, and
would Hear him, v. 6. It is no small Mercy to share in the benefit of God's
peoples Prayers; which Pharaoh himself could Prize, when in Affliction; and
which none are so Assured of, as men of David's spirit. The greatest help that
a Saint can lend, is to engage the Lord by Prayer; and as a Fellow-member must
needs be most Earnestly remembered, so is the Lord most Easily entreated on a
Saints behalf, because himself loves such, whom therefore a little Interceding
prevails for, Joh. 16 26, 27; especially since (next to Christ himself) God
will not turn away the face of his Anointed, but will Hear others for their
sake, Psa. ^32. 10: which as men would experience the truth and comfort of, so
let them labor to be of David's spirit; whereas the Wicked are sadly Prayed
Against by all the Godly, in case they do not Return, which does them more harm
than they are aware of.

22. God undertook to beat down all David's Foes before his face, Psalm. 89. 23,
which was accordingly effected, as David witnesses, Psalm. 18. 39, 40* although
his Adversaries were too Strong for him, v. 17, yea though they Sought unto the
Lord to save them, v. 41. This has been made good unto the Saints in all Ages,
with reference unto their Outward Enemies, whom God has subdued under his
People's feet, according to his Promise, Rev. 11. 5; although the Fullness of
that Temporal Deliverance is reserved until the Latter end of David's
Dispensation; which is enough to Terrify the Saints Opposers in these Latter
days, since God has undertaken to make them his People's Footstool, Isa. 60.
24, and then the Prayer of Spiteful Moab shall not Prevail, Isa. 16. 4. 12.
And in the mean time, their spiritual Enemies must needs be subdued, for God
has Promised it, Mic. 7. 19, who shortly will bruise Satan under their feet,
Romans 16. 20. A mere Natural man may be able to Vex his Adversaries, as Saul did
his, 1 Samuel 14. 47; but David only could Praise the Lord for an absolute
Conquest, 2 Samuel 22. 1: which all will one day count a Mercy, as Witches would
be glad to burn their ^mps, when once they come to be in fear of suffering for
their Wickedness.

23. When David was thus Delivered, he knew that the Congregation of the People
then would compass God about with Praises, in the strength whereof he pleaded
with the Lord for Saving Mercy, Psalm. 7. 7. When the Wicked Perish, there is
shouting; but the Saints Mercy is the Ground of Other's Joy, Prove. 11. 10. How
did poor Hiram seem to Bless the Lord, when Solomon succeeded David, 2 Chronicles.
2. 11, 12; for whom prayer was made continually, psalm. 72. 15, and all Nations
did call him Blessed, verse. 17, as his Dispensation was a Type of Christ's, the
very First appearance of whose Temporal Dominion, is ushered in with Universal
Joy, psalm. 96. 11, 12, 13, excepting those Angry Nations, upon whose Ruins
that Kingdom is advanced, Rev. 11. 17, 18. Indeed all sober Persons have ever
been apt to congratulate the Saints Outward welfare, whose Inward prosperity is
both the Matter of a Good man's Prayer and Joy, 3 John 2, 3, 4; partly as they
are Fellow Members, which cannot but Rejoice in each others Honor, 1 Cor. 12.
26; and partly as the comfortable Experiences of one Godly man do minister
encouragement unto Another's Hope in the like condition, Psalm. 32. 6: and this
is Another of the Saints peculiar Privileges.

24. Though David died before there was a Temple built, yet in his days the
very Tabernacle was dignified with that name of Temple, where every one did
speak of God's glory, Psa. 29. 9; which David did worship toward, Psa. 5. 7;
where he desired to Enquire of God, Psa. 27. 4; and from whence the Lord heard
his voice, psalm. 18. 6. In way of Agreement with which forenamed Privilege,
the Saints Tabernacle-state is as it were a Temple, or an Heaven upon Earth;
since they Converse in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20, before their Earthly Tabernacle be
dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1; and since they have that Grace already, which is the
Earnest of their Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. In which respect also, the Saints
on Earth may be said to have the Pattern of a future Glorious state, as David
had the Pattern of that Temple, 1 Chro. 28. 19; for which he was also suffered
to make a large Provision, both in relation to its first Erecting, verse. 14.
and following Reparations, 2 Chro. 5. 1: and thus the Living Saints in all
Ages, have seen the Promises afar off, Heb. 11. 13, and have abundantly
Prepared for that Glory, which yet themselves on Earth might not share in; and
herein is that Saying true, One sows and Another reapeth, Joh. 4 37; though
yet it was both Abraham's Privilege and Joy to see Christ's Day at such a
Distance, Joh. 8. 56; and both he that Sows and he that Reapeth shall Rejoice
together, Joh. 4. 36; which therefore is another Motive to be such as David was.

25. There was a very full Resemblance between Christ and David, (as I have
shown elsewhere at large,) in which respect Christ is expressly meant by
David's Name, Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24, Hos. 3. 5. Professing Saul was called Cush an
Ethiopian, and many times an Heathen, as has been formerly observed; and
though Antichristian Professors would fain Monopolize unto themselves that Name
of Christians, yet does the Scripture style them Gentiles, Rev. 11. 2; in
regard of the sad resemblance that is between them and Pagans, both in their
Principles and Practices. But men after God's own heart, are such as have
Christ formed in them, Gal. 4. 19; and thence it is that sometimes Christ is
called Jacob, Psalm. 24. 6, and sometimes the Saints are called Christ, 1 Cor.
12. 12, and the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 33. 16. Now would not every one be
glad, if Christ and he might Lawfully Exchange their Names? especially since
this is no bare empty Title, but is accompanied with being saved, Jer. 33. 16;
and such peculiar Honor have all the Saints.

26. Notwithstanding all David's Dangers, yet was he not given over unto Death,
Psalm. 118. 18; and notwithstanding all his Sicknesses, yet did he not come unto
an Untimely End, but the Lord did Heal all his Diseases, Psa. 103. 3, and did
Renew his Youth like the Eagles, v. 5; so that he Died in a good old Age, full
of Riches and Honor, 1 Chro. 29. 28, and all his Acts both first and last
(together with his Reign and Might) were Registered for after-Ages, and in some
Books to all Posterity, v. ^9* 30. The Seventh Trumpet will give a Joyful
^ound, for then the Saints Outward blessings will Eminently first begin to be
Restored to them, and length of Days (among the rest) in way of Peculiar
Mercy, Isa. 65. 20. And in the mean time, Saints have the Promise of this Life
at present, 1 Timothy 4. 8, Ephesians. 6. 3, which they shall Enjoy, when fitted for it,
Rev. 21. 7; nay, they do now begin to Live for Ever, Joh. 6. 47; and they do
Virtually Live long at Present, because they live most properly, 1 Timothy 5. 6;
however, they do not Naturally Die until their work be done, 2 Timothy 4. 7, who
therefore may be said to Die in a Good Old Age, being full of Spiritual Riches
and Honor: whose Works do also follow them, Rev. 14. 13; whereas the Wicked
man Lives unto his own perpetual Shame and Sorrow.

27. David's Eternal State was absolutely secured, since God had forgiven him
all his Iniquities, Psalm. 103. 3; and since he knew, that God would receive him
unto Glory at his death, Psalm. 73. 24. A man after God's own heart, may be
Afraid, (at least wise Loath) to Die; but yet, as he does Live to Christ, Phil.
1. 21, so Death has lost its sting, 1 Cor. 15. 55, (because his Trespasses are
all forgiven, Col. 2. 13,) and will be to his Gain, Phil. 1. 21, because he
then shall Rest from all his Labors, Rev. 14. 13, and goes to receive his
Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Wretched Balaam would fain have Died the Righteous man's
Death, Number. 23. 10, and all will one day Vote with him; which as they would
obtain, so let them Live his Life, and labor to be of this little Happy
Number. And though such as come short of David's Pitch, may be Admitted into
their Master's Joy, Mat. 25. 23; yet they who most Abound in Grace, shall have
a Proportionable entrance ministered into Glory, 2 Pet. 1. 8. 11.

28. When David was dead and gone, he then was made a Standard unto others, in
point of Grace, whom Solomon was bid to Imitate, 2 Chro. 7. 17; who was said to
be Resembled by Asa, 1 Kings 15, 11, Jehoshaphat, 2 Kings 18. 3, and young
Josiah, 2 Kings 22. 1, 2; but not by Abijam, 1 Kings 15. 3, nor Amaziah, 2
Kings 14. 2, nor wicked Ahaz, 2 King. 16. 2. Pharisaical professors are most
ambitious of being called Masters, Matt. 23. 10, or Leaders of the way, as the
Greek word there imports: but men after Gods own heart are (next unto Christ
himself) the Guides of others, Phil. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 1, whom they are bid to
follow, Heb. 6. 12, as a Directing cloud, Heb. 12. 1, considering the end of
their Conversation, Heb. 13. 7. And what greater Dignity can be desired, than
that the Lord should thus make his poor Servants to be a Secondary Rule whereby
he would have others walk.

29. It is said, that David's fallen Tabernacle shall be Raised up again, by
the Lord's own hand, Am. 9. 11; and then his House shall be as God, as the
Angel of the Lord before the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Zech. 12. 8. Which
Prophecies relate both unto Christ and to his Seed, and Partly have been
fulfilled already, Act. 15. 16; but yet the Greater (and more Visible) Part is
still behind. The Saints Holy City or Temporal Rule (partly meant by David's
Tabernacle) has for a long time been trampled under foot by Antichristian
Gentiles, Rev. 11. 2; but it shall be Raised up again, v. 15, and then men
after God's own Heart shall be Advanced, v. 18: In the close of which
Dispensation, Christ himself will rear up his Tabernacle, Revel. 21. 3, and all
the Saints shall come with him, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13, having their Earthly
Tabernacles Raised up, 1 Cor. 15. 52, and made like his, Phil. 3. 21; and then
the Feeblest Saint shall be as David, whilst men of David's stature shall be
as Angels, or far above their fellows.

30. Not only did David (by the Spirit) lawfully Witness on his own behalf, 2 Samuel 23. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; but God himself did also Testify concerning him, that
he was his Servant, who followed him with all his heart, to do that Only which
was right in his eyes, 1 Kings 14. 8. And thus the Lord will one day Witness to
the Full, what manner of Persons his faithful ones have been, and will
accordingly reward them, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36, 37. 40; whilst others shall be
suitably Convinced, in order to their final Condemnation, v. 41, 42, 43, 45.

This is the Sum of David's peculiar Privileges; which the Lord has
therefore left upon record, that so others might be stirred up to be in love
with David's Graces: As they would wear his Crown: as they would be prepared
for their future Portion: as they would Grow in spiritual Strength: as they
would be Spirited unto their work: as they would be Successful in what they
undertake: as they would Merit the good Esteem of all: as they would have their
real Worth to be observed: as they would Know God's Mind and Will: as they
would be Heard in Prayer: as they would be Considered in Adversity: as they
would have preventing Mercy: as they would be Rewarded for their good Intent:
as they would timely be corrected: as they would have their Frailties to be
covered: as they would have God's Love to be renewed with Advantage: as they
would have an Insight into Mysteries: as they would be Authorized to call God
Father: as they would have their Mercies to be sure: as they would be a public
^lessing: as they would know the Duty of such a Season: as they would have the
Benefit of others Prayers: as they would have their Enemies to be subdued: as
they would have their Mercies to be the ground of others Joy: as they would
have a present Taste of after glory: as they would have Christ's Name and their
Exchanged: as they would Live until their Work be done: as they would have
their Eternal State secured: as they would be a Standard unto others: as they
would have their earthly Tabernacle to be Raised up in Glory: and as they would
have God himself to be a comfortable Witness on their behalf.

THE END.

