A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, March the 13th. 1691/2.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Worcester.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

Romans VIII. 6. For, to be carnally minded is Death; but to be spiritually
minded is Life and Peace.


IN these Words is implied a Distribution of Mankind into those who are
carnally and spiritually minded; which Distinction is so Large and
Comprehensive, as to take in all sorts and conditions of Men, and of so great
Moment and Importance, that their Life or Death, Happiness or Misery depend
upon it. But, considering the Mixture of Good and Evil in Mankind, it is not an
easy matter to set the Bounds of the carnal and spiritual Mind; and
considering the frequent Impunity and Security of bad Men, and the Fears and
Troubles, which the best are not exempted from, it seems next to impossible to
make out (at least as to this Life) that to be carnally minded is Death, but to
be spiritually minded is Life and Peace. Yet, our Apostle does not seem to
confine the Consequences here mentioned to another World, (although the full
Accomplishment of them be only there to be expected;) but if we attend to his
Scope and Design in the end of the foregoing Chapter, and the Beginning of
this, we shall find that even in this Life the Result of a carnal Mind is a
sort of Spiritual Death; and of a Spiritual Mind is Life and Peace: For, when
S. Paul in the 7th Chapter had Represented himself as Carnal and sold under
Sin, Romans 7.14.
although there were great Strugglings between the Convictions of his
Conscience, and the Strength of Carnal Inclinations; yet, as long as the latter
prevailed so that he could not do the things that his Mind and Reason told him
he ought to do; 19, 20.
but did those things which he was convinced he ought not to have done: The
more he Reflected upon himself, the more Sad and Miserable he found his
Condition to be, as appears by that Emphatical Expression which followed upon
it, O wretched man that I am, 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? But he no sooner finds hopes
of Delivery and Escape out of that Estate, but he breaks forth into a Transport
of Joy and inward Satisfaction. 25.
Thanks be to God who has given us the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Not merely a Victory over Death, but over Sin too: And so he begins this
Chapter after a triumphant manner; There is therefore no Condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus; 8.1.
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. For the Lord of the Spirit
of Life which was in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and
Death: 2.
He that groaned under his Captivity before to the Law of Sin, does now rejoice
in his Deliverance from it by the Grace of the Gospel. For, what could not be
done by Natural Freedom, by the Power of the Law and the Force of Reason, is
brought to pass by the Assistance of Divine Grace given to the Souls of Men by
Jesus Christ. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the
Flesh: 3.
What was that which the Law could not do? It could Awaken, Convince, Terrify
and Confound the Consciences of Sinners under the Sense and Apprehension of
their Sins; but it could neither Satisfy the Justice of God, nor the Minds of
Men; it could not Remove the Guilt, nor take away the Force and Power of Sin.
But God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the Flesh; i. e. Jesus Christ becoming an Expiatory Sacrifice
for Sin, took off the damning Power of Sin; and by the prevailing Efficacy of
his Grace subdued the Strength and Force of it to such a degree, That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, 4.
who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. How could this be, if S.
Paul still considered himself in the same Condition he did in the foregoing
Chapter? For if he were still in Captivity to the Law of Sin in his Members,
how was it possible that the Righteousness of the Law should be fulfilled in
him? How could he walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, if the Good
which he would he did not, and the Evil which he would not that he did? For
these things are so repugnant to each other, that when they are spoken of the
same Person, it must be under different Considerations; the one of him, as
merely under the Power of the Law; the other, as under the Grace and Influence
of the Gospel. The one was like Rough and a Churlish sort of Physic, which
searches into every Part, and puts all the ill Humors of the Body into Motion,
and makes a general Disturbance and Uneasiness within, but yet lets them remain
where they were; the other is like a gentle but more Effectual Remedy, which
carries off the Strength and Power of inward Corruptions, and alters the Habit
and Temper, and puts quite another Disposition into us, which produces very
different Effects upon us. For, instead of Horror and Despair, and inward
Anguish and Confusion, there will follow a New Life of Joy and Peace here, and
Eternal Happiness hereafter.

And this is what the Apostle means in the Words of the Text; To be carnally
minded, etc. Wherein are two things, which very much deserve our Consideration.

I. The different Tempers of Men's Minds; some are Carnally and others
Spiritually minded.

II. The different Consequences which follow them: To be carnally minded is
Death; but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace.

I. The different Tempers of Men's Minds. The different Denominations are taken
from the Flesh and the Spirit; which are here represented as two Principles so
different from each other, that the same Person cannot be supposed to be acted
by both of them. For, as the Apostle says in the foregoing Words, They that
are after the Flesh do mind the things of the Flesh; Ver. 5.
but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. Where the Flesh,
in a Moral Sense, takes in all our Sensual Inclinations which are Sinful
either in their Nature or Degree. The Spirit is that Divine Principle, which
possesses the Mind with the Love and Esteem of Spiritual things, and keeps our
Natural Inclinations within the Compass of God's Law. To be carnally minded, is
to be under the Influence of Carnal things, so as to make the Pursuit of them
our Chief Design: To be spiritually minded is to have so deep and just a Sense
of God and his Law upon our Minds, as to make it our business to Please him,
and therefore to Subdue all such Inclinations which are repugnant to his Will.

But here lies the main Difficulty; how to Judge concerning this matter so, as
to be able to Determine whether we our selves be carnally or spiritually
minded. Which is a thing of so great Consequence for us to know, that the Peace
of our Minds, the true Comfort of our Lives, our due Preparation for Death, and
a Happy Eternity, do all depend upon it. And yet that this is a real Difficulty
will appear from these Considerations.

(1.) It requires a greater Knowledge of our Selves (as to our Spiritual
Condition) than most Persons in the World can pretend to. For it is not a
slight and superficial View of our Selves, not a transient, sudden Reflection,
nor a partial Inquiry into our inward Passions, and the Course of our Actions,
which can make us capable of passing a true Judgment upon the Temper of our
Minds; but there must be a true Light, a serious and diligent Search, frequent
Recollection, free and deliberate Thoughts, long Observation and due Comparison
of our Selves with our Selves and with the Law of God, before we can form a
just Opinion as to the prevailing Temper and Disposition of our Minds.

It Is true, this is not necessary in all Persons; for some (and I am afraid too
many) are so carnally minded, that the least Reflection or Consideration would
make them see how bad their condition is. For, they have no true Sense of God
or Religion at all; they have no serious thoughts or apprehensions of Divine
and Spiritual Things; this World they pretend to know something of, and have
too great an Esteem of the Vanities and Pleasures of it; for these wholly take
up their Hearts and Time; and they have a savor and relish for any thing that
tends to their Greatness or Honor or Entertainment of their Appetites or
Fancies here; but if we speak to them of another World, of God and Heaven and a
Spiritual Disposition of Soul; either they look on us with Amazement, as if
they were Insensible of such things; or else with Scorn and Contempt, as if we
went about to Deceive them. Alas! They are too Wise to be imposed upon by us;
and they have other things to mind (I am sure not greater or weightier) which
take up all their Time; and so what through the Business and the Impertinencies
of this World, their Time passes away as a Tale that is told; and as though it
were a very pleasant Tale, they are troubled only to think it will be so soon
at an End. But these are not the Persons, who require any such Care to pass a
right Judgment upon them; for they can pretend to nothing that is Spiritual, as
to the Tempers and Dispositions of their Minds; and therefore such as these
must be set aside, for it is too apparent that they are only sensual and
carnally minded.

But as the Papists distinguish of the Body of Christ, so may we of the Carnal
Mind; there is a gross and Capernaitical Sense; and there is a more refined and
(if I may use the Expression) a more Spiritual Sense of it. For although it be
a great Absurdity in them to suppose that a mere Body can be after the Manner
of a Spirit; yet it is not so to suppose a Carnal Mind to have a Mixture of
some Spiritual Qualities and Dispositions in it. And this makes the difference
so much harder to be perceived between the carnally and spiritually minded;
since there are the same Faculties of Perception, Reasoning, and Application in
both; and the same common Principles of Religion may be owned by both; which
may in Reason be supposed to make some Impression on the Minds of the more
Ingenuous part of Mankind, who are not given over to such a Reprobate Sense as
the former were. Now, how to distinguish between frequent good Impressions on
the Mind, and an Habitual Temper and Disposition, is not to easy to all who
are concerned to distinguish them. And yet a Person may be thoroughly convinced
of his Sins, and Tremble at the Apprehension of the Justice and Severity of God
against them, he may have many Checks and Reluctancies of Conscience while he
goes on to commit them; he may Sigh and Groan and Lament under the wretchedness
of his Condition by his Love of Sin; and yet may love his Sins all the while
more than God or Heaven, or any thing in Competition with them. The difference
does not lie in the Nature or Number of the Impressions from without, but in
the inward Principle of Action. A Cistern may be full of Water falling down
from Heaven, which may run as long as that holds which fell into it; but a
Spring has it rising up within, and so continues running when the other is
spent. A carnal Mind may have many Spiritual Convictions, and good Motions and
Inclinations, but after a time they wear off and leave no lasting Effect behind
them; but where there is a Spring in the Soul, there is a fresh and continual
Supply of such Inclinations, as keep up a constant Course of a Spiritual Life;
which our Savior calls Rivers of living Water. Joh. 7.38.


I confess it is hard to determine what a Habit or Principle abiding in our
minds is; yet the Scripture does evidently suppose such a thing, when it speaks
of the New Birth, Joh. 3.3, 6.
and the New Life, and the New Creature, 1.13.
and the Children of God; all which are very insignificant Terms, if there be
not under them something answerable to the First Principles of Life; Romans 8.8,
9. 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 John 3.9, 10.
and if there be not a Divine Spirit dwelling and acting in the Souls of Good
Men, and raising them up above Carnal and Sensual Objects to things Divine and
Spiritual, and carrying them through the Passage of this World so as to prepare
them for a better. But yet there may be many things which carry some
Resemblance to this Principle within, which come not up to it. There may be
such Principles of Education and good Manners, such Awakenings of Conscience,
such a Strength of Natural Reason and Common Ingenuity, as may carry one on to
do some very Good things, and yet he may fall short of having a true Principle
of Spiritual Life in him. But then, there must be another Principle within,
which contradicts this, and prevails over it, and carries him on to the Love of
Sin, which proves too strong for the Love of God and the due Regard to
Spiritual things.

The Result of this Discourse is, since the Carnal Mind is not to be taken
merely for such a one which stands out in Opposition to the Gospel, nor for
such a one which is Insensible of Spiritual things; but such as may consist
with a Common Profession of Religion, and have the same Convictions and good
Impressions which others have; it does require a more than ordinary
Acquaintance with our Selves to be able to judge aright, whether the Temper of
our Minds be Carnal or Spiritual.

2. But this is not all; for, since there is so great a Mixture of Good and
Evil in the better sort of Mankind, there is required not barely Knowledge of
our Selves, but a good Judgment too to adjust the Proportions of Good and Evil
in Particular Persons, so as to be able to judge whether we are Carnally or
Spiritually minded. For, as those who are Carnal, while they follow their
Carnal Inclinations, may have many inward Strugglings by Spiritual Convictions;
so those who are Spiritually minded may meet with many Combats from the Flesh,
which may be Troublesome, where it cannot prevail. But there is a great
difference between the Spirit struggling against the Flesh in the Carnally
minded, and the Flesh struggling against the Spirit in those who are
Spiritually minded. For, where there is no perfect Victory, there will be some
Opposition; and the best have so many Failings to complain of in this World; so
many Infirmities and Defects in their good Actions; so many Passions not
brought into their due Order; so many Omissions of Personal and Relative
Duties; such variety of Tempers and Weakness of Resolution; such Coldness in
Devotion and Unreasonable Dejections of Mind; so many unaccountable Fears and
such dreadful Apprehensions of Death and the Consequences of it; that these
things must make great Abatements as to such as are truly Spiritually minded.

But by all these things the Difficulty still increases, and therefore it is
time to come to the Resolution of it; and that will be by showing that the
Difference between the Carnal and Spiritual Mind lies in these three Things: 1.
In the Deliberate Judgment and Choice. 2. In the Prevailing Interest. 3. In the
Constant Rule and Measure of Actions.


1. In the deliberate Judgment and Choice. For the main difference as to the
Carnal and Spiritual Mind, lies in the different End which is aimed at by them.
Where the Chief End is the Pleasing our Selves, and the enjoying of any thing
as our Happiness under the Supreme Good, whatever Thoughts and Intentions we
may at some times have, to Repent of our Sins, and turn our Souls from the Love
of Sin to the Love of God, as long as we continue pursuing a wrong End, we have
too great Reason to conclude our Minds to be yet carnal and sold under sin. For
while the Apostle represents himself so, he tells us he had his Conscience
thoroughly awakened with the Sense of his sins, even of those which the World is
least apt to be sensible of, Romans 7.7, 8, 9.
inward and secret Sins; he was not only convinced of the Excellency and Purity
of the Law, 12.14.22.
but had some Pleasure and Satisfaction in it; he had some hearty desires to be
rid of his beloved Sins; but yet they were too hard for him, he sighed and
lamented under his deplorable Condition; but 'till the Grace of God came to set
him free, he was in a miserable and hopeless State.

But how is it, that the Grace of God thus refines and purifies the minds of
Men, so as of Carnal to make them Spiritual, when the same Passions and
Inclinations remain? A Change there must be, and that real and spiritual, and
therefore in our best Faculties, viz. our Understandings and our Wills; not by
a Revelation of New Objects to the Mind, nor by offering any Force upon the
Will; but by fixing the Judgment of the Mind and the Choice of the Will upon
the best and most desirable Object, which is God himself, as the Supreme Good.
The Turn of the Soul which makes one Spiritually minded, must not be only from
gross and sensual Inclinations, but from every other kind of Good, which stands
in Competition with the Supreme. A truly Spiritual Mind is one that is
possessed with the Love of God above all, and that values other things, as they
tend to the Enjoyment of Him. God must be the only Center of his Hopes and
Designs; for in him alone his true Happiness consists: As the Psalmist
expresses it; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.25.
and there is none upon Earth I desire besides thee. Whatever falls short of
this, may agree to a carnal Mind; but a Carnal Mind can never love God as he
ought to be loved; not with a Supreme transcendent Degree of Love, which is
alone proper and suitable to him. All other kind of Love is beneath his
Infinite Goodness and Perfections; and to love him as we do his Creatures, is
to do him the greatest Dishonor, for it levels their Perfections, and supposes
them to deserve the same Degree of Affection from us.

But there may be many Spiritual Notions in Men's minds about God and Religion;
about Mystical Unions, and the Participations of Divine Love; man seeming
Spiritual Raptures and Ecstasies, and yet there may not be this Spiritual Mind.
For the Heats of Enthusiasm may seem to be very Spiritual, but are of another
kind; they are Spiritual, as they are the Effects of a great heating of the
Spirits by the Force of a vehement Imagination; which has been often
accompanied with as vehement an Inclination to Sensual Pleasures; which shows
the plain Difference between an Exalted Fancy and a Spiritual Mind.

A Spiritual Mind is such a one as is not only thoroughly convinced of the
Reality of Spiritual things; but of their Excellency and Desirableness, above
any others that can be offered to our Choice. It sees through all the
Glittering Vanities of this World; and soars above the most tempting and
bewitching Follies of Mankind here: It frequently retires from the Noise and
Confusion, the Hurry and Vexation of Worldly Affairs, that it may converse more
freely with Invisible Objects; not merely by way of Contemplation, but by
raising the Affections of the Soul toward them, as the things which it has
chosen for its Happiness.

And this makes a ^onderfull Alteration in the thoughts that these Different
Tempers have concerning the same things. I do not deny but those who have
carnal Minds may have some raised and spiritual Thoughts, but they are too cold
and speculative; they may have noble and refined Speculations about the
Invisible World; may be fully convinced that the things which are seen, could
not be what they are, were it not for the things which are not seen; and that
the things which are not seen, are of incomparably greater value than those
which are so much more admired, because they are seen. But we must not
conclude, that because men do really believe Spiritual things, therefore they
are spiritually minded, (for that were to suppose all to be Saints who are not
Atheists;) but there must be such a due Preference in our Minds, of that
Invisible and Eternal State, above all that is accounted Great and Desirable
here, as gives a just Denomination to one that he is Spiritually minded; i. e.
that his Mind and Soul is fixed upon another World as his proper Happiness, and
other things are regarded and valued in Subserviency to it.

2. A Spiritual Mind is discerned by the Prevailing Interest. For, as long as
we are made up of Flesh and Spirit, there will and must be a Combat between
them: Gal. 5.17.
For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh;
and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would: And yet the same Apostle soon after adds, They that are Christ's
have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts; 24.
the Meaning is, that, in some particular Instances and less remarkable Cases,
the Flesh may sometimes be too hard for the Spirit; but in all Notorious
Instances of the Lusts of the Flesh, which he reckons up; and in the main Issue
of all lesser Combats the Spirit will be too hard for the Flesh in those who
are spiritually minded; as the Flesh will be too hard for the Spirit at last in
those who are carnally minded. If we look on them in the time of the Combat, it
will be hard to judge which is most likely to prevail; but those may have the
better in some particular Skirmishes, who may lose very much in the State of
the War; a Good Man may be foiled by Surprise or under some disadvantage, but
he will recover himself, and, it may be, gain Ground by his Falls; and a bad
Man may in some fits of Devotion seem so spiritually minded, that one might be
apt to think he were quite changed, 'till he returns to his former Practices.
If we had been to judge of Ahab in the time of his Humiliation; and of David in
the time of his Impenitency after his Sins of Adultery and Murder, we should
have thought in common Justice and Charity, the latter had been the carnal, and
the former the spiritual-minded man. But it was quite otherwise; which shows
that we are not to judge of Men's Spiritual Condition by sudden and violent
Motions whether good or bad; but by that Interest which prevails with them in
the whole Course of their Lives. To give a general Character of a Man from some
Violent Passion against the Tenor of his Life, would be like drawing the
Picture of a Man in a Fit of an Epilepsy, or a Convulsive Motion of his Face.
And to believe a Man to be a Good Man, because he has some good Moods and
Passionate Fits of Devotion, is, as if we should take a piece of rotten Wood
for a true Phosphorus, because it shines sometimes; or suppose Judas to be a
Saint, because he was so much in our Savior's Company. The inward Habits and
Dispositions of Men's minds may be covered over and disguised a great While; but
a Tempting Occasion lays them open; as no doubt Judas did not get his habit of
Covetousness of a sudden, but it was still growing and ripening under a fair
appearance; and when the proper Season came, the Secret Malignity brake forth;
and the Temptation of Thirty Pieces of Silver discovered the Baseness and
Hypocrisy of his Heart. Sometimes the Vein of Hypocrisy lies deep, and is
covered over with such a fair outside, that no one can have Reason to mistrust
it, 'till it discovers it self, and then the Corruption is found to loathsome,
as to render ordinary Sincerity suspicious. But this is a common Fault, either
to be too easily deceived, or too unreasonably mistrustfull; there is no
certainty in a Deduction from particulars, but where the Causes are Equal and
Necessary. It is as absurd an Inference that there is no such thing as a
Spiritual Mind, because some who have pretended to it have been found Carnal;
as that there is no such thing as Common Honesty among men, because some who
have long born the name of Honest men have been found great Cheats and
Impostors. But when a Predominant Habit does discover it self, the Person must
bear that Title and Denomination which it gives him.

3. A Spiritual Mind is known by the general Conformity of Actions to a Divine
and Spiritual Rule; and so a Carnal Mind by following the Bent and Inclinations
of the Flesh. And there lies a great Part of the Difference; for such who lay
no Restraint upon their Natural Inclinations must needs be carnally minded;
because the Flesh, as S. Chrysostom observes, Chrysostom. in Gal. 5.17.
is not taken, by S. Paul, merely for the Body, but for the corrupt Part of our
Selves, as consisting of Soul and Body. Aug. c. Julian. l. 4. c. 12.
It is observed by Cicero 3. de Rep. That Mankind come into the World in a very
ill Condition, with a Body naked, frail and infirm, with a Mind subject to
Troubles, dejected with Fears, impatient of Labor, prone to Lust; but in the
midst of all this, there is a certain Divine Flame of Wit and Understanding,
which lies as it were busied and overwhelmed; but with great Care and Industry
may be so preserved and improved, as to Command our Appetites and Govern our
Passions. But, alas! How little does the Reason of Mankind signify to the
greatest Part of them? It helps them to see their Folly, and like a Sea-Light
to a sinking Ship in a dark Night, makes those who are aboard, to behold their
Misery, without helping them out of it. If the Frame of human Nature be
considered in it self, and by way of Speculation, we have no Cause to complain
of it; for as God has given us Inferior Faculties suitable to the
Constitution of our Bodies, so he has likewise Superior, which are capable of
Controlling and Governing them. But when Habit and Custom is joined with a
Vicious Inclination, how little does human Reason signify? All the
Considerations of Natural Order, and Decency, and Regularity, and Good Example,
are easily overborn by the strong Propensities of a Corrupt Inclination; which
hurries men on to satisfy first their Brutal Appetites, and leaves
Consideration 'till afterward. So that Reason seems by such an After-game,
rather given to Torment, than to Reform them.

Therefore the Wise God has superadded his own Law to enforce that of Reason
by a greater Authority; that Men may think themselves more concerned to take
Care of their Actions, when they must give an Account of them to one Infinitely
above them. But what can Mankind do in such a Wretched Condition? For the Law
of it self is but like a Toil to a wild Beast; the more he struggles, the more
he is Entangled; so that he sees his Misery by it, but not his Remedy.

But such is the Goodness and Mercy of God toward Mankind, that he has never
refused to accept those, who have sincerely endeavored to do his Will
according to the Measure of that Assistance which he has given them. Thus we
find Characters of Men in all Ages, Genesis 6.9.17.1.
who were said to be Righteous before God, just and upright and perfect Men;
and yet some of the most eminent of these had remarkable failings, Job 1.1, 2,
3. Psalm. 37.37
as Noah, Abraham and Job; yet they had extraordinary Testimonies of God's
Approving their Integrity and passing by those Faults which were contrary to
the general Design and Tenor of their Lives.

I confess we meet with two Instances to the contrary in Scripture, which
deserve our Consideration; and those were of Extraordinary Persons too, eminent
for their long and faithful Service of God; and yet upon single Faults
committed by them, he was very severe with them. Which may seem to take much
off from this Lenity and Goodness of God toward such who have a general
Sincerity of Mind toward him. But, if we more strictly consider these two
Cases, we shall find there was something very provoking in the Circumstances of
them, which made God so much more displeased with the Committing them. For,
they were Sins committed by them, in their Public Capacities, and about such
things wherein the Honor of God was more particularly concerned.

The First is the Case of Moses, who was a great Pattern of Wisdom and Meekness
and Faithfulness, for forty years together, in the Conduct of a very froward
People in the Wilderness; yet at last he happened to fail in some Part of his
Duty, and God was so angry with him, Deuteronomy. 3.24, 25.
that he would not hear his Prayer for going into Canaan, but he cut him off in
the Wilderness at last, as he did the People for their Unbelief. But what was
this Sin of Moses which made God so highly displeased with him? If we read the
passage as it is related in the History of the Fact, it is not so easy to find
it out. The People murmured for want of Water, Numb. 20.2, 3.
God upon Moses his Prayer commands him, to take his Rod, and in the Assembly
of the People, 6.
8.
to speak to the Rock and the Water should issue out. Moses assembles the
People, expostulates the matter with them, strikes the Rock twice and the
Waters came. 10.
Where is the great Sin of Moses all this while? Yet, he often repeats it,
Deuteronomy. 1.37.
that God was angry with him for something done at that time. God himself
says, Moses and Aaron rebelled against him; 4.21.
and that they did not sanctify him before the People: the Psalmist says,
Number. 27.14
Psalm. 106.33.
they provoked his Spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. After
all, the sin of Moses was a Mixture of Anger and some kind of Infidelity: For,
the Psalmist says, he was highly provoked; and God himself says, Number. 20.12
they believed him not, to sanctify him in the Eye of the Children of Israel.
The Fault then seems to lie in this, that they were more concerned for their
own Honor than God's, and did not so clearly Attribute the Power of the
Miracle to God, but that the People might think they Assumed it to themselves,
as appears by their Words to the People, ver. 10.
Hear now, ye Rebels, must we fetch you Water out of the Rock? Which Expression
does not give God the Glory he expected from them; and he is so tender in
Matters of his own Honor, that he would suffer none to encroach upon it, no
not his faithful Servants, but he made them smart for attempting it.

The other case is that of David's Numbering the People; and he was a Man after
God's own Heart, of great Sincerity and Courage and Constancy in his Service.
Yet of a sudden he took up a Resolution that he would have all the People
numbered, without any Apparent Reason for it. And although he was discouraged
from the Attempt by those about him, yet he would be obeyed. And what came of
it? Truly, before the thing was completed he grew very uneasy at what he had
done, for it is said, 1 Samuel 24.9.
His heart smote him after that he had numbered the People; and David said to
the Lord, I have sinned greatly in what I have done. And yet in the Book of
Chronicles it is said, that he finished it not, 1 Chr. 27.24.
because Wrath fell for it against Israel. What was the Cause of all this
Severity against David? Was it such an unpardonable Sin for a King to
understand the Number of his People? Suppose it a Failing, yet why should God
be so angry for one such Failing in him that had served God so sincerely as
David had done? There must be something Extraordinary in this Case; for, Exodus
30.11.38.25.
God sometimes supposes the People to be Numbered; and in some Cases he
requires or allows it; Number. 1.2, 19 26.4
why then is he so displeased now at the doing it? 1 Samuel 11.8. 2 Samuel 18.1.
The best Account I know of it, is this; It was not a mere piece of Vanity and
Ostentation in David, (although that be Displeasing to God,) but it was a thing
(as designed by him) which was generally looked on as inconsistent with the
Fundamental Promise made to Abraham; and so it is mentioned in the Chronicles,
why the Numbering was not exactly taken, because the Lord had said He would
increase Israel like the Stars of the Heavens. 1 Chr. 27.23.
Which seems to imply that there was a general Notion received among the
People, that since God promised to increase them beyond Number, no one ought to
go about to take the Exact Number of them. For, this must seem to savor of
Infidelity, and a Contempt or Mistrust of God's Fundamental Promise. But
however upon such Occasions God might use two of his most faithful Servants
thus, yet we have no Reason to question his Readiness to pardon these and other
their Failings upon a Sincere Repentance, and to accept of their general Care
and Endeavor to Please him instead of a Perfect Obedience.

But I have something farther to offer, for the clearing these two difficult
Cases, viz. that there is a Difference to be observed between the Rule of God's
Proceedings with particular Persons, as to the general Sincerity of their
Actings; and the Measure of God's Political Justice as to Persons in Public
Capacities The Reason is, because in the latter Cases, God may justly have a
Regard, not merely to the Actions themselves, but to the Circumstances of the
People they are related to. Thus Moses, mentions it three several times. The
Lord was angry with me for your sakes; Deuteronomy. 1.37.
and again, 3.26.
the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes and would not hear me; and the Lord
said unto me, Let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this matter. It seems
he was so much concerned as to pray to God, and that earnestly, that he would
give him leave to conduct the People into Canaan: but God would not grant his
Request. But he tells the People that it was for their sakes that he was
denied. 4.21.
Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, and swear that I should
not go over Jordan, etc. So that the Blow which was given to the Head was for
the sake of the whole Body.

And it is remarkable in the Case of David, that before he fell into the Sin of
Numbering the People, 2 Samuel 24.1.
The Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel; and he moved David against
them to say, Go Number Israel and Judah. From whence it is evident, that the
Sins of a People may provoke God to let Princes fall into such Sins, which may
give just Occasion to God to punish both together. But this is a very different
Case from the Method of God's dealings with particular Persons with Regard to
their Integrity, according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. Which is
established on such Foundations, that we need not give way to Despondencies for
the sake of such particular Acts of Severity.

II. I am now to consider the different Consequences of these two, To be
carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace;
which, in short, is, that the Advantage is far greater which comes to Mankind
by one than by the other.

And that will appear by comparing them together, (1.) As under Equal
Circumstances. (2.) As under unequal Circumstances.


1. As under Equal Circumstances. And here we have two sorts of Persons to
consider.

1. Those who have Convictions of Conscience going along with a Carnal Mind.
Such who look on the Conditions of Men in this World at a Distance, and judge
only by Appearance, would be apt to think that those who do allow themselves
all the Liberties which a Carnal Mind does incline them to, have very much the
Advantage of those who are under the Restraints of a Spiritual Mind; for they
are bound to severe Rules of Virtue and Mortification, to deny all Ungodliness
and Worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously and godly in this
present World; and these are thought to be very hard things; whereas such who
are not under these Difficulties, seem to lead the most pleasant and easy
Lives, enjoying themselves and being full of Noise and Confidence and appear to
be all Mirth and Good Humor. But there is another Account to be taken of these
things: If Men could look within and see all the secret Misgivings, the inward
Horrors of Conscience, the Impatience and Dissatisfaction they have, when they
seriously Reflect on their evil Courses, it would quite alter their
Apprehensions of these things, and make them conclude with the Roman Orator,
Est autem unus dies been and ex praeceptis tuis actus peccanti immortalitati
anteferendus. Cicer. Tuss. Qu. l. 5. c. 2.
That one Day spent according to the Rules of Virtue were to be preferred
before everlasting Debaucheries. And he was no Fool, no Pedant, no mean and
contemptible Person, who said this, but a Man of Wit and Sense, of Quality and
Experience, who had Opportunities and Means enough to have pursued the most
Sensual and Voluptuous Course of Life; which yet we see out of Judgment and
Choice he despised, and preferred a far shorter life according to the Rules of
Virtue, before a Vicious Immortality. And yet, how short were the
Encouragements to a Good Life, and the Dissuasives from Sin among the best of
them, in Comparison of what we all know now by the Gospel of Christ? They went
no farther than mere Natural Reason and the Common Sense of Mankind carried
them; but we profess to believe the Wrath of God revealed from Heaven against
all unrighteousness and ungodliness of Men; Romans 1.18.
2.5, 6.
16.
and that there will be a great and terrible day, 14.10.
wherein men must receive according to their Works, 2 Cor. 15.
whether they be Good or Evil. 10, 11.
And will not this dreadful Consideration awaken the Drowsy and Secure Sinner
and make him look about him betimes, while there is yet any hopes of Mercy?
Will he not become so wise at least, as to enter into the Consideration of his
Ways, and to look back on the former Course of his Life, to examine and compare
that with the Law of God by which he must be judged? And if we have but
Patience to do this, he will have no farther Patience with himself, for being
guilty of such unspeakable Folly. He will abhor himself for all his sensual
and sinful Delights; which will turn into the greatest Bitterness and Anguish
to his Soul; He will lament his Folly and Wickedness with the deepest sorrow;
and take up sincere and firm Resolutions to return no more to the Practice of
them. And if this be the Result, as it ought to be, of all the distinguishing
sinful Pleasures of a carnal Mind, I leave it to the most impartial Mind to
Resolve whether there will be the least Advantage by pursuing them.

2. But we have too great Reason to suppose that Men may harden themselves to
such a degree of Wickedness, as to be Insensible of the Folly of it, and to
mock at those who go about to reprove them for it. Such as these are at Ease,
because they have no Sense of their Condition; but so are those in a Lethargy:
Is their Case therefore to be envied; or compared with those in Health,
although more sensible of Pain and Danger? Who seem to be better pleased at
sometimes, and transported with their own Imaginations than Men in a Frenzy?
and yet no Man thinks their Condition happier for it. There is a sort of Moral
Frenzy which possesses some part of Mankind, who, are not only Extravagant in
their Actions, but Assume such a Degree of Confidence in Committing them, as
though the Wise Men of all Ages had been the only remarkable Fools in it. But
it is no such easy matter to Run down the Principles of Virtue and Religion,
they have stood the Shock of all the Sarcasms and Reproaches of former Times;
and there is still nothing at the Bottom of all the Scorn and Contempt that is
cast upon them: but a Carnal and Profane Temper of Mind; which may bear them up
for a while, but it will be sure to End in Everlasting Confusion; and then they
will find what they were so unwilling to believe, That to be Carnally minded is
Death. Not a mere State of Insensibility, but the worst kind of Death; A Death
of perpetual Horror and Torment; A Death without the Power of Dying, and yet
with a perpetual Desire of it; A Death whose Sting can never be taken out; and
whose Terror is said to be as everlasting as the Joys of Heaven. And shall not
the Apprehension of such a Death, as this, so dreadful, so unavoidable, so
insupportable, make the greatest Sinners to Tremble, and be Confounded at the
Apprehension of it? And, if once such Thoughts break into their Minds, farewell
then to all the Imaginary Pleasure and Satisfaction of a Carnal Mind; for it
must sink it into the Confusion if not the Despair of Hell.

(2.) But I have hitherto represented the Disadvantages, of one side; but are
there not such on the other too? Some are too apt to think a Spiritual Mind to
be nothing but a disordered Fancy, and Melancholy Imaginations of invisible
things. If this were all, it were so far from being Life and Peace, that there
could be no real Satisfaction about it. But a Spiritual Mind is truly the most
desirable thing we are capable of in this World. For, it is the best
Improvement of our Minds, which are Spiritual. It is, the purging and refining
them from the Dross and Corruption which debased them. It is, the Advancing
them toward the Divine Nature, by a gradual Participation of it. It is, the
Raising them above the Carnal Delights, and the sollicitous Cares and
Perplexing Fears of this World; and fitting them for a perpetual Conversation
with Divine and Spiritual Objects.

And what then can be more agreeable to the best Part of our Selves here, than
to have a Mind so disengaged from this World and so fit for a better? So that
we may be content to take a View of the Worst which can be supposed as to
Disadvantage here, which is, that Good Men may be under Unequal Circumstances
as to their Condition in this Life; that is, when the Regarding another World
more than this, may make their outward Condition more uneasy here, than it
might have been, if they had followed only the Dictates of a Carnal Mind.

There are two sorts of Troubles we are to Expect in this World, (1.) Such as
we bring upon our Selves by our own Acts: (2.) Such as are common to all
Mankind: In both these the Spiritual Mind has the Advantage.

(1.) As to such which men bring upon themselves. Let this be supposed; as it
ought to be, when God pleases among Christians, who are to follow Christ in
taking up his Cross: Is there any thing in this, which overthrows the Advantage
of a Spiritual Mind above a Carnal? Can a Carnal Mind secure Men from Pains and
Diseases, from Losses and Disappointments? Nay does not the Pursuit of Carnal
Pleasures bring more Troubles upon Men in this Life, than the Case of
Persecution does upon the best Christians? If the Loathsome Diseases, the
Reproachful and Untimely Deaths, which of all things ought to be most avoided,
by such who believe no Life after this, be compared with the Pains and
Martyrdoms of those who have suffered for their Religion, these will appear to
be far more Eligible than the other, because the Mind has far greater
Satisfaction under them, and a certain Expectation of an Infinite Reward to
follow upon them. Whereas the others can have no Comfort in looking back on
what they have done, or forward in what they are to Expect. For they have
destroyed their own Happiness and hastened that upon themselves which they
account their only Misery.

(2.) As to the Common Calamities of Life, which none can prevent or avoid, the
Spiritual Mind has very much the Advantage of the Carnal; For the one fills
them with inward Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, which of all things carry men
best through the Troubles of Life; being joined with Patience, Humility,
Self-Denial, and Submission to the Will of God; which are all the genuine
Effects of a Spiritual Mind; but a Carnal Mind is froward and impatient,
uneasy to it self and to all about it, and this makes every Pain and Trouble
to be much greater than it would have been; like the Ass in the Fable: which
lay down in the Water with his burden of Wool and so made it heavier than
before.

There were two things the Philosophical Men of Pleasure sought to comfort
themselves by, under the unavoidable Troubles of Life; which the Spiritual Mind
has far greater Advantages than any of them had, as to both of them; and these
are Reflection and Expectation.

(1.) Reflection. When Epicurus was in his last Agonies under the Stone,
Epicurus Hermacho. V.
what a miserable way was it for him to go about to comfort himself, by
Reflecting upon his Atoms and his Maxims, his Imaginary Notion of the Happiness
of Life consisting in Pleasure, when his Life was so near being ended by
Excessive Pain? But a Good Man that has sincerely endeavored to serve God in
his Generation, Ciceron. de Finibus, l. 2. c. 30.
and to do all the Good he could, and to promote the Interests of Religion and
Virtue in the World, may in the midst of many Failings and Infirmities, look
back with Comfort on the Course of his former Life, and by the Peace of a Good
Conscience may enjoy inward Satisfaction, under such Pains and Distempers,
which make Life uneasy and Death more welcome, as it is a Passage to a far
better State. And that is the next thing.

(2.) Expectation. It was a sorrowful Expectation which Epicurus supported
himself with, when he was in the Prospect of Death; which was no more, than
that the Subtle Atoms which made up his Soul, would soon be scattered and
dispersed, he knew not where, and then he should be, as if he had never been.
But what Comfort is there in such a Dissolution? Men that have deserved it, may
heartily wish it;, but they have deserved something worse, and that they must
Expect. For, the just and holy God, will certainly call them to an Account for
all their Vices and Follies; Heb. 10.31.
and it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God; and what a
miserable Case are those in, 27.
who have nothing to look for but Judgment and Fiery Indignation, which shall
consume the Adversaries of God and Religion?

But O the Blessed Hope and Joyful Expectation that attends a Spiritual Mind!
Especially when it is Enlivened and Assisted by the Powerful Influences of
Divine Grace. For without that, even Good Men may be liable to some Dejections
and Fears as to another World, from the vastness of the Change, the Sense of
their Failings, the Weakness of their Minds, and Mistrust of their own Fitness
for Heaven; but so great is the Goodness and Mercy of God toward them that
sincerely love and fear him, that he always makes their Passage safe, though it
be not so Triumphant. And although the Valley of the Shadow of Death may seem
gloomy and uncomfortable at a Distance; yet when God is pleased to Conduct his
Servants through it, he makes it a happy Passage into a State of a Glorious
Immortality and Everlasting Life and Peace. To which God, etc.

FINIS.

