Verus Christianus, Or DIRECTIONS For Private DEVOTIONS, And Retirements.
Dedicated to the Most Reverend Father in God GILBERT Ld Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, Primate etc.

By DAVID STOKES, D. D. and Fellow of Eaton College.

(...). St. Basil. de abdic. reru^. To which is added by the same Author an
APPENDIX, Containing in it some private Devotions of the late Learned Bishop
Andrews never before extant.

OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. LICHFIELD, Printers to the University, for R.
DAVIS. 1668.

The Preface, With some praevious Advice to the true-Christian Reader.
A True Christian does not intend to serve his own turn of Christ, (servirsi de
Christo, as the Italians say) but is His true, faithful, humble, and hearty
servant, to his power, and (to make him the more able to be so) He admits of
good Helps, and Advice, and till he has gotten the habit of Devotion, he is
not unwilling to, be made devout by the book (as we use to speak.)

He cannot but think, that service a hard task at the first. For true
Christianity, is the conformity of our selves to Christ, and an undertaking to
fight under Christ's Banner, against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and so
continuing Christ's faithful Soldiers, and servants to our lives end. This we
undertook in our Baptism, at our Initiation and Admission into the Church
Militant. (...) -- Yet, who settles himself seriously and quietly about it?
(though upon that depends Etennity.) Who makes the holy Scripture his chief
Oracle, and daily Counselor, in that point? taking-in other Helps (as they
offer them selves) till our Lord Jesus Christ, by His own glorious Epiphany
takes him off, and disposes of him, according to his blessed will, and
pleasure. But this end of all things is at hand. It Is high time, to serve
Christ indeed: and in this practice of Christianity, we may well make use of
others labors and devotions. But let us withal, be ready to second all their
good thoughts and Memorandum's by our own fervent prayers, and such like
endeavors, for the little time of our short life, and Christian warfare. So
shall we end in Rest, and Glory, and Immortality, having lived the life, and
died the death of such true Christians. In order to that,

1. Let our sorrow for our sins and our combats with our future infirmities
keep some Analogy with our former offenses.

2. Let not us misapply our sorrow to any of those troubles that may cause
death, but spend all our sorrow upon our sins in a true Repentance. And let
us not allay or charm any storms that arise from sin by speculations of the
Book of Life, or other mysteries, that exceed our capacity, but by an Oracle
within us (the answer, or stipulation of a good conscience, that says Amen, to
the better performance of God's Will hereafter) which being well done, the
trouble of the soul will be accepted, as a welcome sacrifice,

3. Let our purged, and sanctified Hearts be the more pltale to obey God
hereafter, and more open to receive his holy Graces, and more dilated in giving
Praise and Thanks to God for them.

4. Let us, while we walk still upon Nets, and Snares, be the more wary, and
attent to our Christian duty, keeping our Tinder from dangerous Sparks, and our
Matches from Fire.

5. Let us employ our Anger in chiding our sins, and our Fear in keeping
Gentinel, that they may creep into our hearts no more.

6 Let the notice of Gods threats against sinners, make us scorn the
allurements, and temptations of sin hereafter.

7. Let our Good-Fellowship spend it self most in the entertaining, and
cherishing of good thoughts and resolutions, that they may grow up the faster
into divine Comforts.

8. Let our zealous opposing of bad thoughts, be like the bruising of the
Cockatrice Eggs in the s^ell, and dashing those children of Fdom against the
stons. If that will not serve, let us bring a counterpoise, a Meditation of
Death, and Hell, that may roughly turn them out.

9. Let us, if we meet with troops of sorrow, not look upon them, but upon Him,
that is the Lord of Hosts, and can turn all our sorrows into joys, as easily
as he turned Water into Wine.

10. Let us, give a serious check (with some authority) to those Idle devices,
that are hatched by a luxurious fancy, and spend the animal spirits upon mere
toys.

11. Let us no^ forget that all things are transient, as we our selves are, our
bodies being like houses of clay, or Earthen Uessels, quickly broken and become
of no use: therefore let us hasten to be settled in Religious duties.

12. Let us contract, and correct our buisiest worldly thoughts, and never show
them much welcome, but in their due time.

13. Let our care of this world (like stubble and straw) be burned with the
fire of divine love, and the zeal of God's Honor.

14. Let some private Humiliation be used upon our bodies, if not a kind of
buffetting (in St. Paul's way) yet some other way of punishing them, that God
may show the more Mercy, and Pity to our Souls.

15. Let us, instead of Idle Visites, and fruitless discourses with others, be
often retired to a Parley with our own Souls, in a Soliloquie, and visitation of
them, which are the richest Jewels in the world, and for which chiefly our
Savior laid down his precious blood.

16. Let our ardent desire of Heavenly things confound our love of Earthly; For
a little viaticum will serve a short life, and a little is more then God owes
us. But, A little of God's favor is of more value then much wealth and
prosperity. He can make us amends, where it will be most welcome (i. e.) Where
many that are last, shall be first, and the first last.

17. Let us look narrowly even to our Meditations of Divine comforts (the good
aspects of Heaven) that we be not deceived in them, and take an ignis fatuus (a
sudden flash) for a sacred burning bush. That Is ever false fire, that brings
any thing with it, against the restraint of sin, or care of amendment of life.

18. Let this be our great care, to keep our Soul, in that state, wherein we
would have it leave this world, and, in the mean time, anticipate our
assumption to Heaven, by earnest wishes to be with Christ. So may we take our
flight toward God before hand, like clouds elevated to Heaven: and, in our
flight, drop down somewhat, that may advance the growing Goodness of some, that
we leave behind us.

19. Let not our good Resolutions (through excuses, and delays) be spunne out
in little Threads, and so, by degrees, come to nothing.

20. Let our Prayers be as ready for doing, as asking, (i. e.) Let Us labor to
doc what we pray we may do.

I conclude with Hierocles. (...). to the same sense.

A Transition of what follows in the Book it self.
YOu have had the Preface to the whole Book, with a general previous Advise, by
way of Introduction, fitted for them that desire to live like true Christians,
Wherein if I have said somewhat, which (by the Good Grace, and Blessing of God)
has so moved the Heart of some One of my Readers, that he wishes himself
worthy the name of Veru^ Christianus, and that Salvation may, this day come to
his House (as it did to Zacheus's, upon the first hearing Christ's voice) Let
him remember [qui non est Hodie, Cras minus -- ] And if he be but as well
affected as Agrippa seemed to be, when he said, he was almost persuaded to be a
Christian. Then I will use the like words to him, that the Angel did to Gedeon,
Dominus tecum (i. e.) I will say, God be with thy good heart, go on in this
thy strength, God and Men, and Angels will be thy Spectators. Take Christ's
Cross upon the, and ^ight under his Banner. And (that thou may p^evail with
others) Wrestle with God Himself first (as Jacob did, in his importunate
Prayers) and let Him not go without a blessing. Then let St. Paul acquaint
thee with all the Armor of God, and ce^se not to use it, till thou have taken
the Kingdom of God by violence.

It is likely, (upon such good intentions) our worst enemy will rouse himself,
and prepare to have about with thee, and threaten some of his fiery darts, and
subtle assaults, drawn from the greatness of thy sins, and late Repentance,
wherein he will as good, as say to thee, what David's enemies said to him (upon
occasion of his Two Scandalous Sins and the punishments, that flew after
them) For then, Many there were that said unto his Soul, there was no help for
him in his God. None in this world, none in the world to come (as Kimchi does
well expound (...) that pregnant, double word, as the Jewish Grammarians call
it) Many said so, but He was not troubled at it. He laid himself down, and
slept quietly, and so rose again, in confidence, that God would protect him,
and strike his enemies upon the Cheek Bone (i. e.) with a blow of disgrace.)

Use you the like faithful prayers, and such a blow will be enough to silence
your stoutest enemies. Trust God for this, Cherish the good Motions of his Holy
Spirit, and go on with your Resolutions, and you have done well for this day.

Betake your selves to your quiet rest, close-up the day with these Meditations
upon your Pillow, And you shall not want a supply of more particular advise. I
will be ready for you, as soon as you awake.

GENERAL ADVICE more briefly set down for their sakes, that have much other
business.
In the Morning.
1. When we are fully awake, we may use these, or the like Ejaculations.

PRaise the Lord, O my Soul, that has delivered me from the dangers of this
night, and by a sweet and quiet rest fitted me the better for his service this
day. And, O my Soul, let his service be the chief work of this day!

O let the first fruits of this and every day be His; and the first opening of
my mouth, the blessing of his holy name.

Let my hearty prayers and praises come before him, like the Incense, to season
and sweeten my thoughts for the whole Day: that I may the more cheerfully serve
my God, the God of all Mercy and Consolation.

2. When we are retired into our Closets, or Studies, some Ejaculations or
prayers may be used to this purpose.

Lord, give me grace to study how I may love Thee above all; in whom are all
things most eminently, that are most worthy of our love.

Teach me, how to serve and honor Thee above all, whose Service is both
perfect freedom from the slavery of sin, and the most honorable way of
Employment.

Teach me how to fear thee above all, that I may need to fear nothing else,

Before we come out of our Closets, let us ask our selves, how we mean to spend
the present day? in what actions, or entertainments? And (that we may choose
the best) let us take a short Memorandum from the wise man, which may serve as
a short Sermon, or Instruction for every day.

A short Sermon, taken chiefly out of the first and last words, in the book of
the Preacher.
VAnity of vanities, says the Preacher, Eccl. 1. that is, All things in the
world (whatsoever they may be in our mistaken opinion) are indeed extreme
vanity, in respect of those things which are above, which should be the chief
object of our desires. If you will hear the Preacher: This is the sum of all
that is worth the hearing. c. ult. v. 13. Fear God and keep his Commandments:
for that is the whole Duty of man, who being a reasonable Creature, owes that
service to his Creator, and to Him alone. Therefore the Preacher adds, v. 14.
that God will bring every thing unto Judgment (discovering all our secret
thoughts and actions, good or bad, and passing his last irrevocable sentence
upon them all.)

The best Use that can be made of this truth, may be gathered out of the
Preachers own words, directed to every one of us, c. 11. 6. In the morning sow
thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand that is, Lay hold upon all
opportunities of doing good every day. Begin, and persevere to the end: and do
it with all thy might, as well as thou can. c. 9. 10. For there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou art going
apace:

This short Sermon may sharpen our desires, and endeavors to make this and
everyday a Preparation to the last day that we may be fitted for mercy before
that day come: after which it cannot be done in all the infinite length of
Eternity.

And in all our Meditations of Death, and the last Judgment, let me comfort my
self with this, that He only is to be my Judge, that is my blessed Savior, and
has fully paid the ransom for my Sins, and desires not the death of a
Sinner, but the death of Sin.

3. Before we leave our Closets, let us have recourse to some set form of
Devotion, wherein we may faithfully and thankfully express God's tender
mercies, and our bounden duty.

Such expressions we may find in the Psalms, and Hymns, and Anthems, or other
parts of our public Service: and such are these.

Be merciful to me, O Lord, the God of all mercy and consolation, give me grace
not to pore too much upon the greatness of my sins, but to fix my thoughts
rather upon the greatness of my Saviors love that suffered for them, and so
purchased my lihertie, changing my slavery under sin and Satan, into the happy
and honorable Title of the Servant of the most high God, which carries
perfect freedom along with it. Teach me to make thy holy praecepts sweeter to
me then the honey, and the honey comb: and of more value then the richest
treasures, and beauties, and honors of the world.

For thou, O Lord, art the thing that I long for. Ps. 7. 4. Thy loving kindness
is better then life it self. Ps. 63. 2. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth, tha^ desire in comparison of thee. Ps. 73. 24.

Anthem.
Above the Stars my Savior dwells,
I love, I care for nothing else;
Dear Savior raise my duller eyne,
To see some of thy beams divine:
And wondering let me often say,
Come Lord Jesu, come away.
O fit me for thy coming; and then make no long tarrying O my God. Psalm. 40.
21. and in the mean time, Give me Grace to continue in the number of those that
wait and long for the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2. 13.

4. Such a short Morning task will quickly set us at liberty for our daily
occasions: but when public Prayer time comes on, let us listen to the Bells
that invite us to God's House, the place of his special presence. Whither let
us not come without due Preparation: and before we enter in, let us look to our
feet, (our affections, that bring us in,) and admonish our selves, not to offer
the sacrifice of fools in God's house. For while we are there, we are made a
spectacle to God, to Angels, and to Men. Therefore we should hoc agere, and use
such good heed, rever^nce, attention, and devotion, that we may end with a
blessing, and so go out better then we came in.

5. After our return from public Service, a few hours well spent may produce a
cheerful heart all day, and a sweet rest at night. Especially if we begin or
end the night with a short Scrutiny, and examination of our selves: what we
have done well, in the day time, to thank God for it; and what we have done
ill, to ask pardon, and resolve by the grace of God to do better next day.

After our Scrutiny, when we draw near toward bedtime, let us remember the
affinity betwixt Death and Sleep, and how soon one may be changed into the
other. That will oblige us to take order, that as the body is to rest, so the
soul also may rest upon her proper pillow, (the Peace of God that passes all
understanding,) and rely upon the custody of Him, that neither slumbers, nor
sleeps.

This being done, doubt not, but (if we live) a sweet sleep shall render us
cheerful and vigorous the next day; and, if we be carried from the bed to the
grave, (as perhaps we may) thence God will raise us to a better life, and
change our vile bodies to the likeness of his glorious Body; and from our
Mother-earth, bring us to our Heavenly Father, whom none can see, and not be
everlastingly happy.

A few days thus ordered may be an Introduction to all the rest, according to
this good Beginning.

But, what is all the rest? Who knows what the rest of our Days may prove,
whether few, or none? Live well a few days, and your life will be at an end,
as the Emperor Antoninus was wont to say. The longest life is but a few days:
Few and evil, says the Patriarch Jacob of his; for with us good days are
prosperous days, all other are counted evil days, or nights of affliction,
rather then days. Put all together, Days and Nights, Good and Evil, they will
all be quickly ended, and we shall begin our Eternity.

Lets every day strive to make that happy

Ab hoc momento pendet Aeternitas.

MORE PARTICVLAR ADVICE for times of Retirement, Meditation, and Devotion.
I. The need we have of several holy retirements.
(...). Christianity is the conformity of a Christian unto Christ (says
Gregory Nyssen in Profess: Chr:) He is the pattern, and the way, and the Truth,
and the Life. The Rule of all our actions we have from Him, who is the word of
God, and the Son of God; whom (by a voice from Heaven at his Baptism) God
commanded us to hear and obey.

Now will a little care, and a little time be sufficient to fit us for the
knowledge and practice of all this? Will there not be need of several returns to
our reading, and studying, and soliloquies, and meditations, how to facilitate
these duties? Must we not watch and mistrust our selves, and be our own
Remembrancers to keep us close to our task?

For, that which sets us on work, and has most power to draw us one way or
other, is not any external thing: it is rather in our own Apprehensions, and
Affections. Thence is the Rhetoric, that prevails with us, and has all the
Instruments, and Operations of the Body and Mind at her command. To compass
and effect this, all the Helps, and all the Vigilance that can be used, will
prove little enough. For (whatsoever is our talk, and speculation, and
intention) I doubt not, but in the practice, we do all of us find it a
difficult matter to disintangle our selves from those natural or habitual, and
bosom sins, that are apt to en^are and enthrall us again, if our best
endeavors provide not for good heed, and ready use of the complete armor of a
Christian.

Nay, if Sin could be avoided with ease, yet there are so many Circumstances or
Requisites, that go to the piecing up of good Actions, that the best of men
need not be loath, or ashamed to be made virtuous by the Book: our Practice
easily running counter to our Theory, and some things as easily persuading us
to slack that pace, of which we were once as confident, as we were fully
resolved. And no wonder. For we have in us somewhat of the Beast, as well as of
the Man, and are not so ready to hear Reason and Religion, as to be lead by
some Senses. To which we may add, that when we are not endangered by inward
frailties, and corruptions, we may have cause enough to fear danger from the
contagion of commerce without us.

Therefore in the close of our Secessions, and Retirements, we should often
pray, that when we venture abroad, we may be delivered, not only from our
selves, and our own inclinations, but from our friends, and enemies, and
oppositions, and temptations of all sorts.

And we should as often admonish our selves, that we walk upon snares, and may
suddenly, and dangerously be surprised in our greatest security.

To say nothing, that the World, which, at the best, is but our Inn, may, by
some accident, be quickly turned to our Hospital, and we thence summoned to the
last, and highest Tribunal, before we are well advised of it.

II. The Frequency, and Constancy of this holy Employment.
THis holy retirement that I plead for, should be put in practice, at least,
twice, or thrice every day, least the mind insensibly begin to flag, and sink,
for want of such a help and support. As we see our Clocks, and Watches, though
we wind them up in the morning, yet they will fail in their motion, if we do
not wind them up at night again. And after a good Fire, that has been made in
the morning to refresh us, at night we take order for an other to do the like.

Every Morning therefore, when our judgment (before either the Affections, or
external objects have wrought upon us,) is yet most free and impartial, put
these or the like questions to thy self, (as the Emperor Antonine did.) Whose
soul do I properly possess? a Brute's? or a Heathen's? or a Christian's? And
what use do I mean this day to make of this soul? About what shall I now employ
this better part of my self? shall I rather put it to the hazard, to become
good to morrow, then be so to day? etc. Much after this manner was the noble
Antonine wont to rouse up himself. Not without good reason, for such as our
daily thoughts and resolutions are, such will the Mind be in time, The soul
receiving a tincture from the Phanta^e, and Imagination; which therefore had
need to be dyed, and thoroughly soked every Morning, with assiduity of Prayer,
and Reading and Meditation.

And that will not be enough, unless every Night again we call our selves to
account, and inquire, How all this has appeared in our practice? and what
Actions of the day have been advanced, and improved by our morning-resolutions?
or what caused the stop and impediment? that we may be the better provided to
avoid it, or remove it another day. And why should we not in the Morning, and
at Night (these two several times at least) bestow so much pains upon the soul,
to order it, and keep it, as our only treasure? which whosoever has lost,
has nothing else to loose or keep.

We are careful enough, that every thing else about us should be neat and
cleanly kept, and repaired. For when are we so forgetful, as to leave the body
one day without meat, and drink, and sleep, and attendance, at several hours?
Nay with what ceremony, and in what state are those times for the most part
strictly observed? Why then should not the Soul twice a day look for some
little attendance, that is worthy of far more, and better?

Twice a day a Pythagorean would have looked up to the heavens with some heed,
and observation; to put himself in mind, how constantly and invariably the
Heavens perform their task; and what is their good order, and purity, and naked
simplicity. Should not much more be done by a Christian, that knows his Soul
was breathed from a higher heaven, and should tend only thither?

It was the Evangelical Prophets resolution. If 26. 9. with my Soul have I
desired thee in the night, and with my spirit will I seek thee ^arlie in the
morning. Which agrees with the practice of the first times in the Jewish
Church; where Aaron was enjoined to offer sweet incense every morning, and
every evening. Exodus 30. 7. As also a Lamb in the morning, and an other in the
evening, for a continual burnt offering. Exodus 29. 38. And on the Sabbath two
Lambs, beside the continual burnt-offering. Numb. 28. 9.

David accordingly appointed the Levites to stand every morning to praise the
Lord, and likewise at evening. 1 Chronicles. 23. 30.

But David himself did more. For he says, In the morning, and evening, and at
noonday will I pray, and that instantly. Ps. 5. 5. 18. So he professed of his
set, and earnest prayers; but of his praising God he says yet more: Seven
times a day (i. e. often) do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments.
Psalm. 119. And what David said of his constant task three times a day, the fame
is said of Daniel, Three times a day he humbled himself before his God. Dan. 6.
10.

After this done under the Law, sure we Christians cannot but impose this holy
duty upon our selves, for twice at the least, every day. That, as God is in
Himself Alpha and Omega, Apoc. 1. (the Beginning and the End, the First and the
Last,) so He may be to us our Alpha, and Omega, (the entrance, and the close of
every day.) And that as soon as we awake in the morning, we will accustom our
selves to acquaint our thoughts first with God: and at night (composing our
selves decently to sleep) in some short Prayer, or pious Meditation, shut up
our thoughts, and so commend our Souls and Bodies to the protection of Almighty
God.

III. Incitements to Morning Devotion, drawn from the Examples, and Advice of
others.
WE might do well sometimes, to chide our selves into the practice of our
Morning devotion, by considering, How much we come short

Of those in the first times of the Law, which brought their Offerings unto God
every morning.

Especially of King David, that prevented the dawning of the Morning, to make
his humble addresses to his God Ps. 119. 147.

Of the whole multitude of People in Zacharie's time, that were found praying
without, at the time of Incense, which was in the morning. Luk 1. 10.

Again, of all the People of the Jews, (not long after) that were wont to come
early in the morning, to attend our Savior. Luk 21. 38.

Of the Apostles, in their early entrance into the Temple. Act. 5. 21.

Of those in the Primitive times of the Church, who were accused of no worse
thing then this, that it was their ordinary custom to meet together at the
dawning of the day, to worship Christ with Hymns and Prayers.

Of the Papists in our days, who by their strict observance of their Hours of
Prayer, might provoke us to some Devotion in our own way.

I do not muster up these Instances together, with any intention to urge a
necessity of rising betimes to do it, or of a punctual tie to a set private
Hour. For Age, and weakness, and study, or labor over night, and natural,
or habitual constitutions of our bodies, and the like, do qualify and excuse
some in this case more then others. But, I hope, this will persuade us to a
more constant morning Devotion, when we see our fit times, and can well do it.
And that we may do it then with cheerfulness and readiness of heart, (which
makes all our Service the better accepted) I will put you in mind of the Kingly
Prophet's delight in this kind of service, who was able to say, My Soul flies
unto the Lord before the Morning-watch. Ps. 130.

I will sing of thy power, and praise thy mercy betimes in the Morning. Psalm.
59. 16.

Awake Lute and Harp, I my self will awake, etc. Ps. 92.

After you have heard Him, you may hear the Prophet Jeremiah, and others
calling upon us.

Arise in the beginning of the watches, pour out thy heart like water before
the Lord. Lam. 2. 19.

A wise man will give his heart early in the morning to the Lord that made him.
Ecclesiasticus 39. 5.

It is a good thing to give thanks to thee, O Lord, and to tell of thy loving
kindness early in the morning, Psalm. 92. 12.

We should prevent the Sun to give thanks unto thee, and at the Dayspring pray
unto thee. Sap. 16. 28.

How often this has moved us, I know not: But shall we recall to memory what
we have read of our Savior himself?

Jesus rising up before day went into a solitary place, and there prayed. Marc.
1. 35,

So he did to preach too, and the people flocked as early together to hear Him:
Luc. 21. 37.

If he rose so early to pray for us, and teach us, shall not we sometime rise
as early to pray for our selves, and read, and meditate upon that which he has
taught?

Nor must we forget that he has done more then so. For we find him Luc. 26.
23. continuing all night in prayer in our behalf. That is more then our rising
early in the morning to do it for our selves.

But without such a high Pattern, may not even this of it self prevail with us
Now and then to see the beauty of the rising Sun; which declares the glory of
the Creator? or to hear the Birds of the Air, betimes in the Morning,
melodiously chanting his praise? While we then look upon the Sun, going forth
as a gy^nt, to run his race. it might prompt us with the memory of our race who
run here for a crown of Immortality. And, while we are taken with the melody
of the cheerful Birds, our selves might be provoked to call upon God, that He
would open our lips, that our mouths (that are filled with more blessings) may
show forth his praise.

IV. The entertainment of our selves at our waking, looking up, attiring,
washing, etc.
IT were well done of us, if we would se order our thoughts, that every day
they might first be initiated, with some divine Meditation, some ejaculation,
or expression of our Love, and Service to God.

Upon that first good tincture, and seasoning, they might be the better
preserved the whole day after. And we may take a hint of good Meditations from
some such passages, as these:

1. When we wake and look up.
How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? A little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep, etc. Prove: 6. 9.

As a door turns upon the hinges: so does the slothful upon his bed. Prove:
26. 14.

Awake, Aris^, be Enlightened. Isai. 60. 1. For the true light is come (the
knowledge of thy Savior, the Sun of Righteousness, that enlightens every man)
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Ephesians: 5. 14. (before thou
could wake, and beg his grace to raise thee from death in sin, by the
light of his countenance, graciously shining upon thy dull and drousie Soul,)

Arise, for thou have a great journey to go. I Kings 19. 7. (and many
obstacles in the way.)

It is high time to awake out of our sleep in sin. For now (since we have
received the light of the Gospel) our salvation is nearer, then when we first
believed. Rom: 13. 11.

The Night is far spent, the Day is at Hand. Let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of Light. 1 Thessalonians: 5. 5. For we are
all Children of the Light, and Children of the Day: We have free liberty to
make our addresses to the Father of Lights: and as great encouragement to
expect help, and succor from the power of darkness.)

Yet a little while is the Light with us. Let us walk, while we have the Light.
Joh. 12. 35.

Otherwise, This will add much to our sin, and heavy punishment, that Light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their
deeds are evil.

But, Open thou mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. Ps.
119. 18. And love him that said, I am the light of the world. He that follows
me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Joh 8. 12.

Open thou mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in Death. Ps. 13. 3.

(Let not ease and security flatter me into a dangerous sleep again; nor any
thing else be interposed betwixt me and the true light. Rather Anoint thou mine
eyes with that eyesalve, that will make me see clearly. Rev. 3. 18.

Above all, show me the light of thy countenance, and be merciful to me, Ps.
67. 1. (and remove from me the hazard of that blindness, which I am apt to
bring upon my self.)

Show me the true light, which is the light and life of men. The light that
shines in darkness, though the darkness comprehend it not. Joh. 1. 4.

The Lord bless me, and keep me. The Lord make his face to shine upon me, and
be gracious unto me. The Lord lift up his countenance upon me, and give me
peace. Number. 6 24. That is, The Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, three
Persons, and one Lord and God, bless me, be favorable and merciful unto me,
and preserve me in his Peace, (the peace of God that passes all understanding.)

2. When we put on our apparel, we may take some hints of holy ejaculations
from these following places of Scripture.
Take not much thought for raiment, but consider the Lilies of the field, how
they grow: they toil not, neither do they spin; and yet Solomon in all his
glory, (which cost him dear) is not arrayed like one of these (in their natural
attire,) says our Savior. Mat. 6. 28.

Therefore at least let us take no thought how to make that an Instrument, or
Access to our Pride, which had no other end at first, then to cover our shame,
after the discovery of our sin, (as the Hebrew words (...) and (...) may put us
in mind, that carry a memorandum of them both:) That may put us in mind to
follow the advice of John the Divine, Rev. 3. 8. to purchase the white Robe
(belonging to them that are willing to lay down their lives for Christ, as he
did his for them,) that so in that clothing, the shame of our nakedness may
not appear. Then should we be secure, though our Savior himself should come
suddenly upon us, like a thief in the night, (Rev. 16. 15.) that we should not
be found naked to the discovery of our shame.

This should be our chief aim for apparel (that apparel, that will hide our
fin, rather then show it, as pride does.) So far should we be from too much
adorning the body, that may this day be committed to putrefaction. And so much
it concerns us to labor for the hope of being clothed hereafter with
Immortality. 2 Cor. 5. 2.

To that end, Let us endeavor more and more, to put off the old man, with his
deeds and put on the n^w man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of
Him that created him. says St Paul Col. 3. 9.

And St Peter speaks to the same purpose. Our adorning, let it not be that
outward adorning: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is
not corruptible. We that have been baptized into Christ, let us every day put
on Christ: Gal. 3. 27. put on our Lord Jesus Christ, with Him all Christian
virtues, making provision for the Spirit, rather then for the flesh, Romans 13.
14.

By putting on the whole Armor of God, (without which we cannot fight so
manfully under Christ's banner, as in our Baptism we undertook) In this armor,
we may be able to stand against all the wiles of the Devil. Ephesians. 6. 11. If we
would have a particular note of what is so to be put on. St Paul insa^ces, In
the breast plate of faith and love, and for a h^lmet, the hope of salvation, (1
These. 5. 8.) (which will enable us with patience, to bear off many a shroud
blow.)

And again.Putting on (as the elect of God) bowels of mercy, (Col. 3. 12.) and
charity, the bond of perfection. And to avoid spiritual pride too, after all
these, we may take another Item from St Peter. Be sure to be clothed with
humility, for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the hum^ble. 1 Pet. 3.
5.

3. In the time of Washing.
When we are thus (one would think) attired, and armed cap a pe, yet there is
something more to acquaint our thoughts withal. In the time of Washing, to
confirm our former meditations, and resolutions, before we ventet again into
the world, which is wholly set upon mischief (in that sense, totus positus in
maligno) and where we way quickly walk upon nets, and snares, and fall upon
many unexpected hazards, if we look not well about us.

First, in the washing of our hands; let us be put in mind of that Preparation
to ou^ Morning Prayers, to wash our hands in Innocence, (Psalm. 26. 6.) before
we approach nearer, and presume to make our humble addresses to the Majesty of
God.

And when we apply the water toward our eyes: Let us not forget how many times
our eyes should have sent out other water, and been turned into fountains of
tears, to wash away the sins of our former neglects.

Then, when we wash and swill our mouths, let that put a short confession into
our mouths, of the excess in eating, and drinking; and of the evil and
unsavory language, that has often polluted them, and therefore should have a
time of cleansing: and of those Secrets, which might better have been suffered
to rot in our mouths, then to have passed that hedge of the teeth, which nature
has set, as the memorandum of our bounds, and limits in that kind.

4. While we make use of the Looking-glass.
If through our dullness, or somewhat worse, we have neglected to prompt our
Inventions, and Memories, with such pious Ejaculations, as might easily be
drawn out of the former, or other like pieces of Sacred Scripture, and be made
seasonably reducible, and appliable to our godly Morning thoughts, which should
first season us, and make us the apter to be, in the residue of the day, as
Vessels of Honor.

If this be neglected from our first waking, till we are up, and ready. Yet
then, at least, when we inform our selves by the Looking-glass, how fit we
are to appear abroad, Let us admonish our selves of studying for the
inwardbeauty.

If we appear young, and cheerful, let us persuade our selves, to spend that
vigor in the service of God, while it will be accepted.

If our looks begin to bear the Characters of old Age, let us ask our selves,
what we have done, to make that Age honorable?

If our gray hairs appear here, and there, let us take them, as the blossoms
of the grave; the arrows of admonition, like those of Jonathan; the feathers of
the Swan, that come, when we are near our last song of [nunc dimittu] the
sensible Alteration of the chiefest, and most declining parts of the body unto
that color which, if it come from the cares of our Calling, deserves double
reverence.

If we look all white to the Harvest, let us be assured, that Death is coming
with his sythe^ and it is high time to be provided of an other mansion, when
the soul is chased out of this.

And lastly, If our looks be never so young let us hear with patience, that,
All flesh (...) grass, and the glory of it, as the flower of the grass,
which may quickly fade away, and (...) no more seen.

And what need I thus enlarge my self in these particulars? When necessary
occasions do not otherwise take up our thoughts, (...) may from the very
kembing of our hair ((...) excrement wherein some place so much (...) their
pride and curiosity,) and from what else we do in the dressing and composing of
our selves; from all those we might borrow the rise of some good Meditation,
that would advance our thoughts, and be a means to keep off those idle
phancies, which will else be ready enough to encroach upon us.

V. Preparation to our set-devotions, as soon as we are ready.
WE are then fi^test for devotion, when the mind has not been yet seized upon,
and possessed with any worldly thoughts; And in it self, there is no reason
that we should meddle with any such thoughts, and much less with any servile
work and business of our own, till first we have served God.

Therefore it was generally said of old, A Jove principium. The light of Nature
(beside the practice of the Church) can direct us, that it should be our first
task to worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker i. e. to
serve God before we serve our selves. The first fruits of every day should be
his: the first opening of our mouths the blessing of his holy name: and the
first cast of our eyes, and posture of our hands directed to his holy Throne.

Holy David was of that mind, when he said, My voice shall thou hear betimes, O
Lord. Early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
Ps. 5. 3.

And accordingly, let it be our resolution in the morning, as soon as we can be
composed for it, to present our prayers before Him, like the Incense that
should sweeten our thoughts for the whole day.

VI. A previous Consideration of Prayer in general, and the best Motives to the
use of it.
BEfore we come to give direction for particular Devotions and Prayers, it is
fit we should say somewhat, that may bring us in love with Prayer, the
Sanctuary of a penitent Soul, and the key that opens the way to all Go^'s
blessings and favors, and admits us into the nearer presence and audience of
Almighty God; and somewhat that may move and induce us to the constant and
right use of it. Which I hope will be no hard matter to gain from any man.

For he that will consider the power, and virtue of prayer, which may easily be
seen in the speedy and wonderful effect of the prayers of Moses, Josuah,
Samuel, and many other devout Servants of God.

He that is conscious of his own ignorance and backwardness to foresee, and
procure what is best in the midst of daily wants and necessities, beside the
necessities of other men, which the law of Charity binds him to regard;
especially of those men which are members of the same mystical body: of whose
sufferings he should have a quick sense, and express it in his good wishes and
Prayers, wrestling with God for them, as an earnest coadjutor, and
fellow-intercessor, (the Apostle calls it (...). Romans 15. 30.

He that will give ear to the many Evangelical exhortations to daily and
instant prayer. Luc. 18. 1. 1 These. 5. 17 etc.

He that believes God's omnipotence and all sufficiency, as being the Well of
life, the Father of lights, and giver of every good thing, the Lord of Hosts,
whom all creatures serve and obey.

He that has acquainted himself with God's Fatherly promises, to hear and
grant our humble petitions. Ask and you shall have. Mat. 7. 7. Ioh 16 23. Psalm
34. 6 and 50 15. and 103. 13. and 81. 11. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill
it.

He that will not deny or forget all these, must necessarily acknowledge how
foolish and careless he is, that will rather want, then seek that by Prayer,
which may be so easily purchased.

VII. Other preparatory Meditations before prayers in the morning, or at any
other time.
BEfore thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the Lord.
Ecclus. 18. 23. And let the first preparation be made in the Heart, that thou
may (with those in Ier.) lift up thy Heart together with thy Hands to God in
the Heavens. Lam 3. 4. For Prayer is too great a business to be committed
only to the Tongue. Nor can we expect, that He which calls for the heart, and
directs us to seek him with all the heart, and with all the soul, (Deuteronomy. 4.
29.) will be any thing moved with the sound of our lips, when the heart is
silent; or that he will be found of those that seek him carelessly. Such as
those in Isay 29. that draw nigh to God with their mouths, and honor him with
their lips, but their heart is far from him. Of whom our Savior says, that
they worship him in vain. Mat. 15. 8, 9.

Now he that would prepare his heart, must be told, that a sinful impenitent
Heart shall have no acceptance. It must be such a one as will depart from
iniquity. 2 Timothy 2. 19. We may learn that from Zohar the Naamathite: if thou
preparest thy Heart (says he) and stretchest out thy hands toward God: if
iniquity be in thy hands, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy
Tabernacles. Then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, and without fear.
Job. 11. 13. Zohar would have thee come with a pure heart, and clean hands, and
not to forget the reformation of thy Tabernacles, that is, of thy House, and
Family too, as well as of thy self.

If Zohar be thought of no great Authority, let the Prophet Micah propose a
question to this purpose. VVherewithall shall I come before the Lord, and bow
my self before the High God? says he, (Micah 66.) and his answer would be out
of the highest oracle, v. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good: and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God?

What Micah says, the Royal Prophet (that had best skill in praying) resolved
long before: If I incline to wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear
me. Ps. 66. 16. And the reason of it we may have in his own words elsewhere.
For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their Prayers. But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. Psalm. 34.
14.

The wisest of Kings does but comment upon those his Father's words, when he
tells us, that a good man obtains favor of the Lord, but the prayer of the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord Prove 12. 2. and c. 15. 8. 29.

When such men pray and spread forth their hands before God, he will hide his
eyes from them: yea though they make many prayers, he will not hear, says the
Prophet Isaiah, c. 1. 15. but he that sets himself to serve the Lord, shall be
accepted with favor, and his Prayers shall reach the clouds: says the son of
Sirac, Ecclus. 35. 16.

And does not the Gospel speak the same, language? We know that God hears not
sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he
hears, says the blind man in the Gospel. Ioh. 9. 31. And if we will hear our
Savior himself, we must conclude, that every one that asks as he should do,
shall receive. Mat. 7. 8, 21. But not every one that (carelessly or
hypocritically) says, Lord, Lord, shall have his prayers ^ound so potent, as
to pierce the Heavens, and make way for them, or himself to ascend thither.
That is a privilege reserved for him, that, in preparation of heart, is ready
to do the will of our Father which is in heaven. But he that is otherwise
minded, may receive his answer before hand from the Prophet Isaiah, that though
God's hand be not shortened, nor his ears heavy, yet iniquity will separate
between God and such a suitor, and make him hide his face from him, when he
would be looked upon with some favor. Is. 59. 2. and 1. 17, 18.

VIII. A farther supply of such Preparatory Meditations, as may make us fitter
to be heard in our Prayers.
WE have showed already what need we have to come with a penitent heart, and
resolutions of a good life, and how far that may prevail. Shall I now show (if
we would have yet more hope of Audience, and be sure to have our prayers more
acccepted,) how we should improve a penitent heart truly prepared with
Contrition, and Humiliation of spirit? for those Prayers are most successful,
that come up to that. In which regard, as much as we are affected with the
desire of a good issue of our Prayers, so much we should endeavor more and
more to prostrate and cast down our selves before the throne of Grace. For he
that in a sense of his own miserable estate, esteems himself the most unworthy
to be suffered to look up to Heaven, or be admitted to any access near the
Mercy-seat; he is likely to be the first that shall be looked upon, and called
nearer.

He that, in his own opinion of himself, places himself lowest, as a worm and
no man, He that descends so far into the thought of his own vileness, that he
sees his soul ready to cleave to the dust, and his body so despicable, that he
thinks it worthy to be trod upon: his Petition is not unlikely to be looked
upon in the first place, and himself preferred before all those, that expected
to have an Answer before him.

I say not this without some reason. For then we have the best foundation to
build high, when we are at the bottom of Humility. And if we will hear what God
himself says of this kind of address to him, we will easily believe, that as
he which exalts himself will be abased, (according to the degree of his
self-exaltation) so he that humbles himself will be exalted, according to the
measure of his Humiliation. So far shall we be from doubting, that when we are
most out of conceit with our own value, Cod respects us most. When we'are
placed by o^r selves so low, that we think, we cannot go lower; then indeed, as
we may be sure, we cannot fall: so nothing is so sure, as that we shall rise.

To learn this excellent lesson shall we be (...), taught by God himself, and
hear how he expresses it in his holy word.

Upon whom shall I lo^k, but upon him, that is of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word. I sai. 66. 2.

A troubled spirit is a Sacrifice to God. A broken, and contrite heart he will
not despise. Psalm. 51. 17. Nay it is in the plural (...) Sacrifices, that is,
a Sacrifice equivalent to many other, A Sacrifice that goes beyond all the
Sacrifices of the Law.

The Lord is nigh unto them, that are of a ^ontrite heart, and will save such
as be of an humble spirit. Psalm. 34. 17.

King H^zekiah found this true, as well as David, in that ready answer from
God. I have heard thy prayers, I have seen thy tears. Isai. 38. 5.

So did Daniel, in the Angel's report, that srom the first day, that he set his
^eart to understand and chasten himself before God, his words were heard. And
so will all other that make trial of Gods infinite mercy.

IX. Another sure way of Preparation, from our Love of God, and our Delight in
Him.
BEside that sad way of Humiliation, we have another more cheerful way of
promoting our Prayers. We may take it from holy David, a man after Gods own
Heart, that had made great use of it.

How dear, and sweet the very m^ntion of God, or his holy word, or any thing of
his, was to David's tongue, and heart, he has sufficiently expressed in many
Psalms, especially in the 119, and 145. both of them Alphabeticall Psalms
(that they might be the easier committed to memory) and the latter so highly
esteemed by the Jews, that R: Kimchi tells us, the Rabbines had a saying, that
whosoever heartily recited the 145 Psalm: thrice a day, needed not doubt of his
e^ernal F^licity. As if they thought it the best Psalm to increase the love of
God in us, and so to fit us f^r the Beatificall Vision, and the heav^nly quire
above.

Yet how easily, or how much soever the Jewish Church was taken with emphatical
expressions of that Divine Love: many in the Christian Church (that should be
more affected with it) do seem to dote so much upon somewhat here below, that
they cannot hear with that ear, and wish to go along with the Psalmist, charm
he never so wisely. Therein they are rather like those Idols, that have ears
and hear not.

But, if I should tell them, how advantageous holy David says that our love of
God may prove to our obtaining of what we pray for: I hope they would listen a
little better to that. Therefore I will keep them no longer from it.

They may see it Psalm. 37. 4. in these words Delight thy self in the Lord, and
he will give thee thy heart's desire. Which is made good in another Psalm,
that speaks in the person of God.

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him. He shall
call upon me, and I will hear him.

Now, though this be the reward of Divine Love, yet it were a shame, that we
should need much to be incited to it, to love him whose creatures we are, and
on whose mercy and goodness depends all our Felicity.

X. Other Means to facilitate our access to God, by Prayer.
NOt only our love to God, but our love, and respect to others too may procure
a good success of our Prayers.

As, 1. Mercy in forgiving them.
Hence is that Evangelicall advise.

When thou prayest, lift up holy hands, without wrath. 1 Timothy 2. 8. that is, be
in Charity, when thou prayest.

If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there rememberest that thy Brother
has ought against thee. Leave there thy gift: go first be reconciled to thy
Brother. Mat. 5. 24.

Forgive thy neighbor, so shall thy sins also be forgiven, when thou prayest.
Ecclus. 28. 2.

2. Mercy in relieving them.
Old Tobit made it his advise to his son. Turn not thy face away from the
poor, and the face of God shall not be turned away from thee. c. 4. 7.

Solomon had said it before him, in other terms. He that stops his ear at
the cry of the poor: he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. Prove.
21. 19.

King Nebuchadnezer was therefore put in a fair way of preventing a sad
punishment by Daniel's good counsel, to break off his sins by alms-deeds, and
mercy to the poor. Dan. 4. 27.

And Cornelius found the virtue of this, when he had the honor to be told by
an Angel, that his prayers were heard, and his Almsdeeds were had in
remembrance in the sight of God. Act. 10. 31. Ecclus 3. 30. and 4. 10.

3. Due respect to Parents.
Who so honors his Father, makes an atonement for his sins. Ecclus. 3. 3. He
shall be heard, when he makes his prayer. v. 5. and v. 15.

Thus, in all things, our Christian, and virtuous demeanor of our selves has
the force of letters of recommendation, to promote our cause to the throne of
grace.

And we have our Savior's own word for it, that If we abide in him, and his
words abide in us, Ask what we will, it shall be done unto us. Joh. 15. 7.

Out of these, and the like Institutions (which we take out of the holy
Scriptures, and wherein we perceive, what preparation fits us best for the
attaining of our humble suits of the hand of God) every man should select some
above the rest, as most peculiar to himself, and wherein his present care
should make some amends for his former neglect: remembering the advice of
Baruch, (...), etc. i. e. As it was your mind to go astray from God: so being
returned, seek him ten times more, Baruch 4. 28. (by humble, and hearty
obedience, as well as by earnest supplication).

XI. Caveats for the Matter, and Manner of Prayer.
THat our Prayers may be succcessesull, it will be further necessary to take
order, that they may be ever attended with those Cautions, Virtues, and Graces,
which are most conducible to that end. Such as these are.

1. Not to ask amiss for any thing, either in the scope, and matter, or in the
method and order of of our Prayers. For many ask, and receive not, because they
ask a miss: (Jam. 4. 3.) that they may consume it upon their own pleasures and
fancies. In such cases, we must not expect to be heard, unless it be to the
punishment of our folly, and presumption. And otherwise we must not (...), that
is, our prayers must be grounded upon some just cause, lest he answer our
childish Petitions with [you ask you know not what.] The best way is to confine
and conform our Prayers, as well as our Actions to the will of God: and if we
ask any thing agreeable to his will, he will hear us. 1 John 5. 14.

As for the order, wherein to ask it, we may learn that out of the method of
our Lords prayer, and his own Precept, first to seek the kingdom of God, and
the righteousness proposed by him; Mat. 6. 33. not doubting but all other
necessaries will then be easily entreated, by way of access, and addition to
the other: which is the meaning of (...) in that place.

But Heaven, and such spiritual graces, as fit us for that, must have the first
place in our Prayers; and all other things must not only follow in a second
place, but with subordination to the good will and pleasure of God, with fiat
voluntas tua, thy will be done. For if it be good for us, he will grant it,
either in that particular, or in something better: we must submit to his holy
will, with non sicut ego, not as I will, but as thou will. Mat. 26. 39

2. Another thing required is to pray in faith. For as Prayer is the Hand that
knocks, so Faith is the Key that opens.

Therefore be not faint-hearted when thou make thy prayer. Ecclus 7. 10.

Ask in faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavers, is like a wave of the Sea,
driven with the wind, and tossed up and down. Jam. 1. 6. Let not such a man
think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. No, God will be found of
them that tempt him not, and shows himself to such as do not distrust him.
Wisd. 1. 2.

For indeed, to distrust him, is to offer injury to his Goodness, and Truth;
he having promised to hear us, when we ask as we should. Especially, when we
ask heavenly things. Petite, and accipietis, [ask, and you shall have,] is most
true in them. Math. 77.

God is nigh to all them that call upon him faithfully. Ps, 145. 18.

We may have it in our Savior's own words. What things soever you desire when
you pray, believe that you receive them, and you shall have them. Marc. 11. 24.

But this Faith must be grounded upon the mediation of our Lord, and Savior,
as himself has taught us, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he
will give it you Joh. 16. 23. Therefore in this confidence we must remember to
preserve our reverence, and learn another Lesson from our blessed Savior: that
is,

3. To pray without Battologies, and Tautologies. When you pray, use not vain
repetitions, as the heathen do, that think they shall be heard for their much
speaking, and babbling: Mat. 6. 7.

This vice proceeds commonly from ignorance and inadvertency: therefore if you
will hear the wise man's advice, Be not rash with your mouth, and let not your
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou
art upon earth, therefore let thy words be sew, or let thy Prayers be short.
Eccles. 5. 2.

Short, I say, not always in time, for Christ himself prayed all night; nor
avoiding all repetitions, for therein may lie the best expression of our
Hearts, as Psalm. 107. and 136.

But short, that is, cutting off the vanity of idle and unnecessary words. Such
as we might be ashamed to use any where before our betters: which made the Son
of Sirac join them together, Use not many words in the company of your Elders,
says he, and much less should you use much babbling when you pray, when you
speak to God himself. Ecclus. 7. 14. For in both cases A Fool's voice is known
by the multitude of words: Eccles. 5. 3.

And we should not come to God with the sacrifice of Fools, who consider not
what they do. Eccles. 5. 3.

When we have taken order for this, to come as we should do, there is yet a
fourth Caution,

4. To pray with fervency, and (which will easily follow upon that) with
perseverance.

For we must be affected with the value of what we ask and seek after.

I know not what we do in other cases, when we seek any thing that we long for.
We are so intent upon it, and so inquisitive only for that, that we hardly
observe what else comes in our way; or, if we do, we desire nothing more, then
quickly to be rid of it.

Such should be our earnest Intention and constant Endeavor for the success of
our Prayers.

We may raise this thought a little higher, if we will recall how often we
have sought and longed for our dearest friends, and other delights on earth of
lesser value. How the very memory of them has tickled our hearts: our groans
alone, our discourses in company; our fantasies in the day, our dreams in the
night have run that way.

When we recall this, we may be confounded, that in seeking after the best
gifts, and comforts by Prayer, our thoughts were never taken up half so much
with eager persuit, and longing after them.

If ours were not, some others were. This is the way, wherein King David was
excellent, and Mary Magdalen, and the Syrophaenician, and other like
importunate Suitors, that would not be denied. They knew their earnest desires
were like wings to mount them up, and procure them admittance to the throne of
grace.

Therefore they never tendered themselves in that remisnes, which the Prophet
Eliah disliked in King Jcash, 2 Reg. 13. 19. or of which Saint Augustine
accuses himself (in his Confessiens) where he tells us, that this was his
fault before his Conversion. He labored and prayed for a chaste heart; but he
did it so faintly, as if he would be denied: And (he says himself) he should
have been sorry to have been heard too soon.

So do we many times. We make fair weather to devotion, and knock at the gates
of Heaven, but we run away, before we can have our Answer. Whereas we should
be both earnest in the suit, and tarry Gods leisure for the grant.

For it is the fervent prayer of a righteous man, that availes much with God.
Jam. 5. 16.

When we pray, and that instantly, then will he hear our voice. Ps. 55. 17.

When we have waited patiently, then will he incline to us, and hear our
calling. Psalm. 40. 1.

He loves the prayer of such a one as Epaphras, that can (...), i. e. Wrestle
with God (as Jacob did) and be hearty and fervent in prayer. (As the great
Apostle gives honorable testimony of Epaphras.)

He takes delight in such as, when they pray, will mind who they speak to, and
consider what happiness, and content it would be, to obtain their humble
request at the heavenly Throne of Mercy: and therefore in all the time of their
devotion they will [hoc agere] be truly affected, and diligently intent, and
vigilant, in their perseverance Ephesians. 6. 18 Col. 4. 2. (which Saint Paul
calls) (...).

He would willingly listen to one, that would sometime pray for himself, as
Christ prayed for us, with strong cries and tears, Hebr. 5. 7. Remembering how
Importunity prevailed with the unjust Judge (in the Parable of our Savior) and
how it may prevail for them that will give God no rest, till he vouchsafe to
answer them.

Such were holy David's prayers wont to be, set forth in the sight of God, as
the incense. Ps: 14. 2. (like frankincense laid upon hot coals.) So should
ours be (as if our hearts, as well as our tongues, were touched with a coal
from the Altar) mounting upward with that fervor, attention, and devotion
which carries our ^houghts from earth, and presents us, as it were, for that
time, before the Throne of God's Royal Majesty in Heaven.

Now they will more happily and easily compass this fervency, and intention of
spirit, that are able to follow Saint Peter's advise, to join Sobriety, amd
Watchfulness unto Prayer. 1 Pet. 4. 7. For Sobriety makes us fit to watch: and
if we bring not a hearty vigilant prayer, we may pull a curse upon our selves,
rather then a blessing. We cannot but think so, if we consider, that Prayer is
one of the chiefest Services, that we perform to God: and therefore we must
not think, that God will endure to have that done coldly, and lazily, and
carelessly. Prayer gives us access unto the Throne of God, and leave to speak,
and hope to have Audience before his Divine Majesty.

Therefore should we study to offer it up, attended with those graces and
virtues; and ushered in with that preparation, that may put us in further hope
of Acceptance, after we are heard.

In that regard, the holy Saints of God, in all ages, being to commence some
special suit unto God, have not been unwilling, many times, to prepare
themselves with Fasting, and lay hold of all other good helps, whereby they
might come as well fitted as they may be, for a business of so high
consequence, as that of Prayer.

XIII. The close of this Meditation, with a return to the time.
ANd now, having given a view of most of those helps (to conclude this
Meditation) I will only add, that some advantage to Prayer may be drawn from
the very Time, which brought us into this discourse.

Of all other, the Morning is the fittest time for Prayer. While we are more
fresh, fasting, and sober: while our best thoughts, affections, vigilance,
intention, and fervor (not yet taken off, or abated with worldly affairs) are
the more ready to attend our Prayers.

Therefore let us use the more care, not to let that time of our Devotions be
passed over, but as it should be.

And (both then, and ever) Let us not presume to pray without some serious
preparation, or some praevious ejaculation, sent before, to that purpose.

For, we had better spend less time in Prayer, then rashly, and unpreparedly
adventure upon such a work too soon.

Preparatory Ejaculations, fit to be used, when we compose our selves to Prayer.
OLord, all hearts, and all things else, are naked, and manifest in thy sight,
H^b. 4. 13. and all at thy disposal. O Cleanse the thoughts of my Heart by the
inspiration of thy holy Spirit, and make it fit for Prayer, and other holy
Duties.

Graft in it, with the hatr^d of Sin, the love of thy holy namt.

Give me that Faith, that may conduct my self: and that Charity, that may take
others along with me, to the Throne of thy grace.

Teach my Heart the Reverence, due to thy Divine Majesty, in the presenting of
my humble Petitions.

Make my servent and vigilant Prayer, truly expressive of the value of that
which I came to beg; conformable to thy holy will, and in the name and
mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

[This is enough to be spoken of Prayer in general, in reference to our
present purpose. From this Digression we will now return to our particular
Morning-Devotions]

For which we learn of our Mother Church (by what she does in public Prayer)
to begin our private Addresses then too, with a form of confession which is to
begin with our pardon, and peace first humbly begged from Almighty God.

I shall therefore commend unto you, first a Confession and Prayer, used by
Bishop Andrews, then another used by Archb. Laud.

XIV. Confessio cum Precatione.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father [all-mercifull, and Mercy it self] I
have [wi^tingly and willingly] run from thy ways: erred, and strayed from
them, more like an untamed heifer, and wild ass, then a lost and wandering
sheep. I have followed too much [or rather altogether] the absurd devices, and
brutish desires of my own heart. I have not only offended against, but even
been offended at thy holy Laws [thy most holy Laws] I have left undone [nay not
done all] those things, which I ought to have done: and I have done [done
nothing else but] those things, which I ought not to have done. And there is no
health [nor hope of health] in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon me
miserable [most miserable] sinner [the greatest of sinners, and the most
unthankefull for so great grace, as has been offered to me. Spare me, and all
them, O God, which confess their faults. Restore thou them that be penitent:
that desire to be penitent: that wish they were so: that fear they are not
enough: that are sorry they are not more penitent] for this is according to thy
promises, [thy most gracious, most sweet promises] declared unto mankind in
Christ Jesu our Lord [that invites all, and promises to refresh all, that feel
the weight, and ^urden of their sins, and come to Him for ease.

Grant therefore, O most merciful Father, ^or his sake, [who is our Redeemer,
Advocate, Author and Finisher of our Faith: Propitiation, Righteousness, and
Justification] that I and all penitents, may ever hereafter live a Godly,
Righteous, and Sober life. Grant that we may do this, to the glory of thy Holy
Name, and the Salvation of our own Souls. Amen.

Pro Remissione Peccatorum.
O Eternal God, and most Merciful Father. Pardon, I beseech Thee, all the
Sins, Omissions, Commissions, Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, by which I have
provoked Thee ^o anger, from the time of my birth to this present moment: that
no one, nor all of my ^ins together, may ever be able to cry oft^er, or louder
in thine ears for vengeance, ^hen the cry of my Prayers may ascend up to Thee
for Mercy, and forgiveness, and ob^ain what they sue for. Particularly, I
humbly ^eseech Thee, forgive unto me my greater, and ^ore clamorous Sins. Such
as are -- O Lord, against Heaven, and against Thee have I ^nned, and committed
foul transgressions (...) Thy sight. But, I beseech Thee, wipe ^em all out of
the Book of Thy Remembrance, through Jesus Christ, our Lord an^ only Savior.
Amen.

To these if you will add a Penitentia^ Psalm. There are seven of them that
is, the 6. 32. 38. 51. 102. 130. 143. They will (...) very well, one for every
several Day of the Week. And they may help on the Work (...) our Repentance:
if we will so often use the words of those pious Men (that made them with their
spirit. And all the helps in tha^ work are as necessary, as they will be
advan^ tageous. For,

We are charged often, and seriously to re^member how we have provoked the Lord
our God to wrath more then once. Deu. 9 7, 8^ And the Lord our God is a
consuming fire^ and a jealous God. Deuteronomy: 4. 24. Therefore humble thy self
greatly. For the vengean^ of the ungodly is Fire and Worms. Ecclus. 7^ 17. And
if the righteous scarcely be saved where will the ungodly, and sinner appear 1
Pet: 4. 18.

The Meditation of these places of hol^ Writ, were enough to fright the
Impeniten^ and make them long to be better acquainte^ with Penitential Psalms.

Then may they hear more comfortabl^ words. For,

If we confess our fins, God is faithfu^ and just to forgive us our sins. 1 John 1. 9. No^ is not the voice of the Gospel only. Solomon could put us in
that hope, long before the Gospel was sully revealed. He that covers his
sins, shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses, and forsakes them, shall have
mercy. Prove. 28. 13. And others before him, have said the like. It was God's
mercy ever of old. Hos. 14. 2, 3, 4. Hos. 6. 1, 2.

But we must lay hold on it, while it is called to day. Hebr. 3. 13, 15. There
is a long night coming, when nothing can be done. John. 9. 4. And there is no
relying, or boasting of the little day of our life. Prove. 27. 1. We know not
how soon the Sun may set for ever upon us, and we be conveyed, out of the way,
into our everlasting House. Eccles 12. 5.

Therefore let us not put off from Day to Day, to turn to the Lord. For
suddenly his wrath may break forth, and in our security we may be destroyed,
and so perish in the day of Vengeance. Ecclus 5. 7.

But God is never so ready to punish, as he is to pardon. The Royal Prophet
that had experience of that mercy, tells us, that when but he resolved to
confess his transgressions unto the Lord, the Lord forgave the iniquity of his
Sin. Psalm. 32. 5. And (if we would have it confirmed by the Evangelicall
Prophet) he could tell us, God is so merciful, that upon our resolution)
before we call, he will answer; and while we are yet speaking, He will hear.
Isay 65. 24.

How then can they think to escape, that neglect so great Salvation? Hebr. 2. 3.

After this so needful, and gainful a Service of Confession: As our Church
does, so we should do well to address our selves to another Confession, that
of Praise, and Thanksgiving. In imitation of the Invitatory Psalm, and the Te
Deum, and the like Hymns in public: we should have somewhat ready, for that
purpose, in private. Such as what now follows.

XV. A Morning Devotion framed according to St Basil's direction (Constitut.
Monast. c. 1) and the rare Pattern of the sweet Singer of Israel (in many
Psalms.)
PRaise the Lord, O my Soul! While I live will I praise the Lord: yea as long
as I have any being, will I sing praises unto my God. Psalm. 146. 1.

As long as I live, will I magnify him on this manner, and lift up my hands in
his Name. Ps. 63. 5.

Every day will I give thanks unto Him, and praise his Name for ever and ever.
Ps. 145. 2.

Every day (with all readiness, and thankfulness of heart) I will worship and
fall down, and kneel before the Lord, my God, my Maker. Psalm. 95. 6.

By whom I was fearfully, and wonderfully made. Psalm. 139 13, 14. My soul
cannot but be affected with that curious workmanship, even to astonishment, and
amazement. To consider, how there is not the least bone, or member in my body,
but took along with it an apparent stamp, and impression of Divine Power and
Wisdom. While my whole Body, (to say nothing of the rate Faculties of the
Soul) was so cunningly and secretly wrought, and embroidered with veins,
sinews, arteries, and other incomparable varieties of necessary parts, that,
as they were first framed, and molded secretly in my Mothers womb, so they are
not now, all of them, exposed to the view of every eye, but show themselves
only by the use, that is made of them.

Such are the wonders of my Creation.

How shall I then be able to express, or conceive, how mercifully, and freely
I was redeemed with a costly and mighty salvation. 1 Cor: 6. 20. Luc: 1. 69.
and by no less Providence, and Goodness, miraculously preserved (in fad and
perilous times) unto this day.

Therefore shall the first Fruits of every Day be H^s, and the first opening of
my mouth, the serving, and blessing of his holy Name.

My hearty Prayers and Praises shall come daily before Him, like the Incense,
Psalm. 141. 2. ascen ding upward, and seasoning, and sweetening my thoughts
here, for the whole day.

In this manner, and for ever, Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is
within me praise his holy Name. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not
all his Benefits. Ps: 103. 1. etc.

Which forgiveth all thy sins (thy great sins) and heals all thy
Infirmities, (thy manifold infirmities.) Which satisfies thy Body, and Soul
with variety of good things: and, so often, after a sweet, and quiet sleep,
renews thy strength in the Morning, and returns thee to thy Friends, and
thy own employments, Young, and lusty as an Eagle v. 5. that appears in her
fresh plumes, vigorous and youthful again.

For this shall my mouth, every morning, be filled with thy praise, O Lord: and
my Soul make her boast of Thee, Ps. 34. 2, 3.

For this I will remember Thee in my Bed, and when I awake. Ps. 71. 7. And upon
all opportunities, sing of thy Honor, and Glory, all the day long. So shall my
Soul be more, and more satisfied as it were with marrow and fatnes, while I
thus endeavor to praise Thee, with joyful lips. Ps 63. 5.

Here we may tender a particular recognition of some special mercy, and
favor, showed to us, or ours.

After which we may take others into our Confession of Praise.]

And O that all others might join with me in the close of my thankful
acknowledgments.

O that they would praise the Lord with me and let us magnify his Name
together. (Psal' 34. 3.) Though not in the same place, yet with the same heart
and affection, bearing a part in the Angels, and our Churches Hymn.

Glory be to God on high, and in earth Peace, good will toward men.

We praise Thee, O God, we bless Thee, we worship Thee.

We laud, and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising Thee, and saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts. Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory.
Glory be to Thee, O Lord most high.

O that men would thus praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men. That they would offer unto him
the sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and tell out all his works with gladness. Ps.
107. 21, 22.

O that we could thus every where, every morning renew our thanks unto thee, O
Lord, for all thy spiritual, and temporal Blessings.

For all thy mercies, in all times of secret or apparent danger.

More particularly for that mercy that has watched over us this night past, and
continued our life to another day. Many in that time (no doubt) have been cited
to thy Tribunal. Blessed be thy long sufferance, that does still patiently
invite, and expect us to Repentance, and a lively Faith in Thee. Romans 2. 4. 2
Pet. 3. 15.

Enlarge thy mercy, O Lord, to us all: and give us all grace, carefully to
steward our time, as a precious talent.

To that end, teach us every day to deny our selves, to submit our wills to thy
blessed will: and in all the changes and troubles of this mortal life, to cast
the anchor of our hope sure upon Thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After such a form of Confession, and thanksgiving, we may, (when we have more
liberty of Retirement) add to these, or the like Meditations, these that
follow,

XVI. Some places of Scripture, that may afford us matter of Meditation, fit to
prepare us for the works of our Calling.
IN the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest; for
thou know not whether shall prosper this or that. Eccles. 116.

If thou will not labor, why do thou cumber the ground? Luc. 13. 7

It is good that thou should take hold of this: yea also from this withdraw
not thy hand. Eccles. 7. 18.

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might. For there is no
work, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.
Eccles. 9. 10.

As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to
those of the Household of Faith. Gal. 6. 10.

Let us be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for
as much as we know, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor 15 58.

And let us not shift off our well-doing with the uncertain hope of a more
convenient time; (as Felix did the hearing of the blessed Apostle, Act. 24.
25.) Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. 2 Cor. 6. 2.

But we know not what a Day may bring forth. There is no boasting of to morrow.
Pnov. 27. 1.

To day, if you will hear his voice while it is called [to day.] Ps. 958. Heb.
3. 13.

The Night is coming on, when no man will be able to work. Joh. 94.

For, this is the last time. 1 John 2. 18.

God works no miracles among the dead, nor shall the dead rise up again to
praise him. Ps. 88. 10.

Remember the Days of darkness shall be many. Eccles. 11. 8. And when the Tree
falls, whether it be toward the South, or toward the North, in what place
soever it falls, there it lies. v. 3.

Be strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be
rewarded. 2 Chr. 15. 7.

Whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive recompense for,
of the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 8. in good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over. Luc. 6. 38.

Our former Meditations will take the deeper impression, if (at our best
leisure) we will take a view not of our Duty only, but of our Frailty too, and
our uncertain abode in this world: which I shall now endeavor to lay open, and
clear to every eye, by such several degrees, as will make the best discovery.

XVII. Our daily Duty, and the short Time allotted to us.
THe days of man are like the days of a Hireling, that is, all to be spent in
labor. Job. 7. 1. (He that has no greater business may please to stay with
me a while, and hear how this time should be spent.)

Man shall go out unto his work until the Evening. Ps. 103. To his (work,)
that is, to such a work as befits him, and agrees with the functions of a
Reasonable Soul of a Christian, etc.)

To the (Evening,) that is, to the period of his Life. So to make it [opus diei
in die n^stro,] a Days work in the compass of our Day.

For in God's Arithmetic, our Life is usually reckoned by Days.

The Days of Adam, Seth, Enos. Genesis 5. The days of my pilgrimage, says old
Jacob, are few and evil. Genesis 47. In the days of Josiah, Solomon, Herod the
King, etc. 1 Reg. 10. All reckoned by Days. (Our Nights slide away insensibly.
It is well, if our Days are worth the reckoning.) Or rather, our whole life is
but one Day.

In which Day of our Life (as in all other Days) there are distinct seasons,
wherein we may apprehend opportunities for any work; and we cannot do it but
only in them. For who can deter the cool of the Morning to some remoter part
of the day? who can anticipate the heat of the Noon, and take it in the Morning?

So it is in the Day of our Life. The strength of Youth must be used in the
Spring, and morning of our Days: and the weakness of Age must be expected when
our Night comes on.

Therefore in the whole course of our Day, we must learn to distinguish betwixt
(...), and, (...), (betwixt the Day, and the Opportunity, and season of the
Day) betwixt our drousy hours, and our hours fitter for Action. Opportunity not
extending it self equally to all our day, but lighting upon some parts. Which
may admonish us (that we may be some days the more excused) to be the more
diligent upon other Days. For indeed (as our Church, in our Common Prayers,
[in Zacharie's Song] does every day put us in mind) our daily task and the end
of our Redemption is to serve God in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of
our life. And this must the rather be thought on, because some men's days are
like Winter-dayes, short, and sharp: some like Summer days, fair, and long.
And some men's days are intermixed: but all together are but Dies. Nay, it is
well if they come up to a Day. It may be they will prove but as a watch in the
night, (Ps. 90. 4.) like a piece of a night, rather then a whole day;) or (if a
day) but dies palmaris. David thought his to be such, tbat he could span them,
(Ps. 39. 6.) measure them at his fingers ends: and so may we. Nature has
imprinted the memory of it there, that we should never forget it.

For the fingers are longer and longer, to the top of the Middle. finger (which
is the highest,) and then they go low^r and lower, with a descent that is more
sudden. And so does our Life with a more violent, quick, and praecipitate
descent, and perhaps without such degrees.

Therefore they that have looked into the shortness and misery of our life,
could never find any comparison low enough. They that call it Vanity (in the
Abstract,) when they think better upon it, will rather call it Vanity of
Vanities, the Abstract of that. Eccles. 1. They that express it by a Day, when
they find it proves not always so long, will rather correct their expression
by a shadow of that day, or (if that be too much) umbra declinata, My days are
like a shadow declining, says holy David. Ps. 102. 11.

For (alas) to make our Life a whole day, is to fit the comparison to them that
live to their full Age. But what if they dye in the Noontime of their day? what
if they dye in the morn of their Age? what if the Sun set suddenly upon them,
as soon as it is up? Jer. 15. 9. Nay, what if Death enter into the very
chambers of the Womb, and cut off the thread of their life, before they see
light? Can their life be expressed by a Day?

No: a shadow, and a shadow declining is little enough for that. So soon do
some bury their Day, and never restore it: so soon does their Sun set, and
never rise again, before it climb the half ascent of Nature: and so brittle we
are, all of us, like the vessels of the Potter.

That Pot goes first, that gets the first blow, not that which was first made.
Such be our Bodies at the best, Houses of Clay: Jsb. 4. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 1. every
day mouldring away, and ready to fall.

And so weak, that even Meat, and Drink, the very staff of life, the props of
this ruinou^ house, do as often prove the occasion of falling, as any thing
else.

But when the best course is taken, we cannot say our Life is like a Body,
which though it be never so swift, may have some obstacles witho^t, to hinder
it in the speed. It is like a shadow, that cannot be stayed by any outward
resistance, or any thing within us. The Sun only it is that lends it to us,
and takes it along with him in his swift motion; though many times so sliety,
that we cannot perceive it. For who sees the shadow, as it passes along upon
the Dial? yet stay but a while, and who cannot see that it is passed? So it is
with us, whether we move or rest, wake or sleep, take notice of it, or let it
alone, our shadow still walks on, till it meet with the shadow of Death. Whence
it comes to pass, many a time, that like those which are asleep in a Ship,
that is beaten along with a lofty wind, we are brought into our Haven, before
we ever dreamed of measuring so much as half the way.

And so (before the time we expected) we are laid up in the Treasury of Nature,
in the Dormitory of many Saints, whence there is no return to our former
mansions. Those places of former acquaintance will know us no more.

For when we dye, we are like water poured out, that cannot be gathered up
again. 2 Samuel 14 14. When we are laid asleep in the grave, we have taken up our
lodging there, as in domo aeterna. Eccles. 12. 5. No thought of removing while
the world continues.

XVIII. A view of our frailty, taken from the consideration of our first
Materials.
THat what we have said of the Duty, and Hazard of every Day, may take the
deeper impression, somewhat may be added concerning our first Principles, in
the Day of our Creation.

Of all the Elements, God then made choice of the Earth to be our matter: and,
of all sorts of Earth, He derived Man, and his Name too, from the basest,
slimy, contemptible part of the Earth. That is (...) which gives the name to
Adam, or Man.

The Egyptian darkness had light enough, to discover this truth unto us. For,
hence it was, that in their Natalitia, they had a custom to make them a Posie
of Herbs, and those stinking herbs, such as grow in their fenny, and foggy
places: to show the Affinity we have with Mire and Clay, the morish, and baser
parts of the Earth, from whence we begin the top of our Pedigree.

The Earth is a Principle low enough, and base enough: but we must go lower.
Man that is borne of a woman falls short of what Adam borrowed of the Earth.
The horror of that is not fit to be uttered. Nor can I think of speaking so
little, but that it may quickly seem to be too much.

Such is the Mold wherein we are cast, that come after Adam. And so much cause
our holy Mother, the Church has to direct us (in our Te Deum) every day to
give humble thanks to our Blessed Savior, that for our sakes, he would not
abhor even the Virgin's womb.

Man either ways considered, in his Original (from the Earth, or from a
Woman) is a subject too mean, to detain us any longer. We will rather look a
while upon the Misery that waits upon him, which had so fearful a beginning,
as may presage no rare sequel of his story, while he is in this House of Clay,
this foul Prison, and stinking Sepulcher of the body.

In the view of this Misery, first we may look upon the shortness of Man's time
here.

So short it proves to many, that they never come alive into the world. For,
the Mother, or the Midwife is (now and then) a Manslayer in the birth. And the
question being but of a weak vessel (of the mother I mean, as well as of the
child) that which is borne must sometimes be hindered from being borne alive:
lest she that promises a Birth, and Life to another, make way for her own
funeral.

A child, that has but a weak thread of life to hold by, when he is delivered
of his Mother. For that is to him as dangerous an escape, as she has, in being
delivered of him.

After this hazard, is he likely to hold out, that is thus born of a woman?
For, we say, the woman is the surer side. Then is he marked out for an issue of
the weake^ vessel. And so (when he is newly born) he is presented to the world
more naked, infirm, ignorant, and destitute of help then any other creature.

He Is born with a faculty of nothing but weeping. Wherein he shows enough of
the woman. But, for any other ability, there is no Creature, but goes beyond
him in his birth. Which I speak not of living, and sensible creatures only.
For, the very trees (that have a far inferior degree of life) have better
clothed, and armed their young issue, that proceed from them, against all
injuries, then any woman ever will set out one, that is born of her.

It is no wonder, if all children come into the world crying, that have so much
reason to complain of their sad condition.

And yet (would you think it?) We can quickly forget our Principles, and as
soon as we are grown up, be as brisk, and jolly, and proud, and busy in the
world, as though we were born like the stoutest of all Creatures, and could not
with the fillip of an ague, and the blast of 100 diseases, be turned again to
our womanish weakness, and (which is further) into the very earth too, from
whence the choicest piece of manhood was taken. So soon are we turned from man
to woman, from woman to earth, and so all our thoughts perish.

This is our case, if we live long enough to see it. But (as God would have it)
most of us come short of this experiment of our frailty; our short li^e will
not reach up to it.

The Royal Prophet reckons the term of our life 70 years: and how few come up
to that? Or if they do; would you but abstract so many years spent in our
infancy, and ignorance; so many in the wild disorders of Youth; so many in the
sickness, weakness, and necessities of Age. Then so many ni^hts in sleep, so many
days in visits, and complements, and recreations, and somewhat worse: Then
could you but see what is left, and compare that with Eternity, you would say,
I have spent too much time, to show how little our life can challenge.

And how uncertain is that little? it fades away insensibly, when it presents
it self to us in the greatest show and perfection. In the midst of all our
sweets, it is ever spending and drawing to a period. In our sleep, and other
our best ways of rest, and content, we consume away, and hasten to our graves,
never continuing in the same state. One Month, one year, one Age of our life,
ever thrusting on another. One change producing an other in every part of our
Age, till (before we expect it, for the most part) we are suddenly brought to
our End. Either by some poison, that lies hid in our delight, and never
discovers it self till it is too late: or by some accident, that we could not
forefee^ or, at least, by the hasty ripeness of our Age, that sometimes makes
us fall off from the tree of life, before we have well informed our selves how
to live.

While our time is spending so fast, we should take speedy care of our eternal
state hereafter: while our life here is running away, we should be the more
vigilant over that heavenly race, that is set before us: To that purpose,
casting off such impediments as may hinder us in that course, and acquainting
our selves with the means, that may advance our security of a better life.

XIX. The fulness of our misery amplified by way of Instance.
WE have found the term of our life to have so much of Nothing, that a Day, or
a short time is too large an expression: now you may see, it is filled with so
much variety of Misery, that we shall not be able to express it to the full.

It is no small part of our misery, though our h^arts are so enlarged, and
insatiable in the desire of seeming good things, so that the whole world is not
able to fill one heart: yet on the contrary, if they come to be filled with
misery, a little of that (if they be not carefully looked to) will so choke
them up, and oppress them, that they will be ready to break. And this fulness
discovers it self in trifles.

How is Haman out of all patience, if Mordecai do not show him some respect?
Esth. 5. 11. Neither the glory of his riches, nor the multitude of his
children, nor the favor of the King, nor any thing would avail him, so long
as Mordecai the Jew did no reverence to him. In the height of his felicity, the
want of a poor Ceremony made him think of no other way to appease his wrath,
then by sacrificing the whole Nation of the Jews to his fury.

But what speak I of infolent ambitious Haman? We may see the like in a Holy
Prophet, but subject to those infirmities that we are.

How is the Prophet Jonas fully vexed, if he do but want his gourd, when the
Sun began to convey a little more then ordinary heat? In that only misery (if
it deserve the name) he is so full of it, that it runs out at his mouth. And
when God asked him, if he did well to be angry for the Gourd, he gives him this
strange Answer, that he did well to be angry unto death.

As it was in proud Haman, and angry Jonas, so it is in most of us. The loss
of one expected Pleasure, or Profit, or Dignity will set us in a pett, and make
us forget our selves, and our best ways of solace.

It were an infinite labor to run over all the Instances in this kind, to show
that we have hardly any one kind of misery, but is able to fill and burst the
little heart of man. For the mere fancy, and deluded apprehension of a danger,
that perhaps will never come; yes, and of a danger past, has power enough to
lay wast the poor heart of man.

And if we escape those, and the hazardous mistakes, that Fancy (in dreams, or
otherwise) presents, like bugbears, to affright us into nothing: we are not
then secure. So many real troubles may come from any thing that is near us, or
about us.

There is not one member of the Body but may (we know not how soon) be attended
with such pain, as may seem a piece of Hell upon Earth, and make us think the
rest and quiet of the body in a stinking grave, to be a Happiness, not unworthy
of our Ambition. So intolerable it is to endure the pain, and perhaps no less
intolerable to endure the remedy.

But what speak I of diseases? there are a thousand other ways to add more
measure to the fulness of our misery, and make the stoutest of men an instance
of frailty.

A little poison can swell him into Death. A little pin can make way for his
life to run out at. A little superfluous heat can render him (in a few days)
key-cold. And the very look of a venomous eye can blast him into nothing.

Hunger can eat him up. Thirst can dry him into a very Skeleton. His own food
that should pres^rve his life, can breed the matter of his Death.

So weak a Castle is the Heart possessed of in this house of clay, which is
full of holes to let in sorrow, diseases, and death, and has as many passages,
whereat Life and Comfort can take the wing, and fly away.

And yet can we (that know all this) busy our selves in building strange
Castles in the Air. We can triumph in the Cobwebs of our own conceits, till
death blow them away with our own breath. We can spend our short miserable
life in catching flies, or what is more vain.

And if misery come not fast enough upon us, we can invite and purchase it at
our own cost. For what do we else, when we tempt it in by the eye, and make our
own fears, loves, and Jealousies, the betrayers of our own strength. When we
swallow it down in the taste, and buy our sharpest pains, with the shortest
pleasure. When we suck it in at the other senses, and make our selves senseles
by the organ of sense. When our wild apprehensions expose us to scorn, and
contempt, if not to the danger of Schism, and Heresy, or what else may proceed
from the rash and disordered notions of the weak brain of man. When we make our
selves sick of the Epidemical diseases of self-discontent, and the desire of
change, though (a thousand to one) for that which is far worse. We can pick
misery out of others seeming Felicity, and like all but what we have ^ot. And,
when we have got what we long^d for, we can long as much to be rid of that
(...) exchange for a new Vanity of another, ^ame. Thus we tire our selves out
of one ^ish into another, and through several Em^loyments, run our selves out
of breath. As if ^ur short miserable life had not shortness, and ^isery enough
of it self: but we must catch ^t all means, and devises, that may shorten the
^ne, and fill up the other.

If all that we have hitherto said be not e^ough to fill the bosom with
excess of mise^y, there is nothing about us, but is able to ^rompt our
memories with the sad accesses that ^re often made to all the former dangers,
by ^ome heavy and disastrous event.

The Earth we tread on, has often deceived ^er inhabitants, and devoured whole
Cities on (...) sudden,

The Air we live by, has often infected ^hole whole Countries, anf made the
most ^opulous places a solitary wilderness.

Fire and Water (that we refresh our selves ^ithall) have been the unexpected
destructi^n, and ruin of many healthy bodies, and ^ourishing states.

The like may be said of other Creatures, ^at (some time or other) seem to
conspire against us. But from no Creature do we suf^er more, then we do from
those of our own ^ind. Man's greatest ^isery is to fall into the hands of man.
Homo homini Demon.

Nature has not armed any one Creature with such shrewd weapons to fight
against men^ as we have invented engines, and stratagems and malititious
devises, to make away one another, by whole troops.

And yet, forsooth, Man is he, that is naturally Animal politicum, a lover of
society Man is he that Nature brings forth unarmed as if she intended him for
Peace, and Charity.

How many of us then are very unnatural For, we find it too true, there is no
such cruelty as the cruelty of one man to another No such variance as that
between man, and man: between brother, and brother.

Nay, I may come nearer.

No such variance, no such civil wars, (...) those which we have within our
selves. (...) own Affections, and Reason are at the greate^ odds. The Body and
Soul are not so united but that their dissentions are as great (...) any.

Therefore no wonder. if we are often aff^cted, and vexed with other men: with
our be^ friends, and kindred. For, we seldom continue long in peace, and good
terms with ou^selves.

And which of us is not conscious of some bitter conflicts, that we have had
with ou^ own passions) if we be not ruled by them which is far worse) To say
nothing of the cruel whippes, and lashes that some have had from their own,
conscience too.

This is the top of all the misery, that can fall upon man. Hardly can we add
any thing to this fulness.

Put altogether, and you will say, we have heard enough, in confirmation of
this truth: though only by way of Instance and Induction. Where the very
reckoning up of the Particulars is able to tire and convince us, and make us
willing to be freed from any further proof.

XX. The close and fruit of the former Meditations.
I Hope the pious and heedfull Reader will find out sometime, seriously to
weigh the former Advertisements: which are fit and proper Motives, not only to
humble us, but to weane us from too much love of a short and miserable life:
and from doting upon wealth and honor, which may leave us, or we them, we know
not soon.

For, our life is so uncertain, that (in our greatest strength, and hope) it
is but a puff of breath in our nostrels, that puts a difference between our
estate and the estate of the dead.

And again (in this little uncertain time) so full of trouble, that every
particular Day has his full measure. (...). Sufficient to the day is the evil
thereof, says our blessed Savior himself. Mat: 6. 34.

And, if that move us not, yet remember, that, while we procrastinate, and spin
out the time (that spends so fast, of it self) Vengeance and Damnation do not
sleep. 2 Pet. 2. 3. While we go on securely, live as we list, and rant it: we
know not who sets all upon the score. Therefore let us not defer our amendment,
and reconcilement to God, and our selves. Let us quickly make sure for those
Cordials, and Supports, that will stand us in most stead, when the cup of our
Affliction is fullest, and the tide of our miseries begin to overflow.

And withal, Let the short continuance of us, and our misery here, teach us
not only to be the more patient (our short sufferings working an eternal weight
of Glory) but the more valiant too, and the more desirous of employment wherein
to express our selves.

In other cases, the more the hazard is, the more we rouse up, and are pleased
with the fair occasions, that we have to show our Valor.

Optat Aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem, i e. the love of our credit
will make us slight all danger.

But in all cases, we take good encouragement from the thought of the reward.
And why should we not here? For, If shortness of time, and fulness of misery
cannot awake us, this, I hope, will; that they which live well, shall have them
both answered with length of time, and fulness of joy, in the presence of God,
where there are pleasures for evermore.

I intend to say more of that fulness, but first I will conclude what has been
said, with this Morning prayer following, that may help to prepare us for the
business of the day.

A Morning Prayer
IN all that we shall do this day, prosper thou, O Lord, the work of our hands,
O prosper thou our handiwork. Ps. 90. 17.

In all that we shall think or say, let the words of our mouth, and the
Meditations of our heart be such, as may be ever acceptable in thy sight, O
Lord, our strength, and our Redeemer, (Ps. 19. 14.) that thou may for ever
vouchsafe to be with us both in life and death.

Wherein (for the short time of our life here) give us grace so to behave our
selves, as in thy presence: fearing nothing so much as thy displeasure; hating,
and sorrowing for nothing so much as our sins; loving and joying in nothing so
much as in Thee, and thy glory.

And for the time of our Death, we beseech thee in thy good providence, and
mercy, so to order it, that we be not found either unprovided, or unwilling to
depart, in that kind of Death, and by that means which thou shall appoint. But
so to be ever affected in Faith, and Love, as they that long to be delivered
from this body of sin, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

In this Hope we rest, and into thy blessed Protection and mercy this day, we
commend our souls and bodies: Beseeching thee so to sanctify and direct us in
the ways of thy Laws, and in the works of thy Commandments; and to give thine
Angels such charge over us, that through thy most mighty Protection, both here,
and ever, we may be preserved in body and soul to serve thee, the only true
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XXI. The Fulness of misery here, answered with the best Fulness hereafter.
IN the close of the last Meditation, I promised to say somewhat of a better
fulness, (that we might not be too much dejected by the fulness of our misery)
and now I shall do it. There is a happy fulness proposed to our desires, and
endeavors, if we will labor to be in the number of those, that have no
inordinate appetite to the things of this life; but rather arden^ly desire, and
long for an extraordinary pitch of a holy and virtuous life. Never counting
our selves to have apprehended, nor looking back to those which are behind us,
but pressing forward toward the Mark, that is set before us, which is the way
and means to the price of eternal glory. Phil. 3. 12, 13. To such our Savior's
promise is thus delivered with his blessing, Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled, or satisfied. Mat. 5. 6.

But wherewithal? with so much, as cannot be fully expressed to our dull
capacities. Therefore it is left indefinite, being far above our language, or
desire.

This Fulness, and satisfaction may seem to be the perfect expletion of all the
natural desires of the soul, and body, and person of man, with their own proper
Objects, as far as he is capable.

1. The Soul. In the Understanding, with Truth it self: In the Will, with
Goodness it self.

2. The Body: 1. with Life, in the true land of the living. 2. With health and
chearfulnes, where all tears will plainly appear to be wiped away, and all
maladies cured. 3. With Beauty: where our Bodies shall be like to our Savior's
glorious body, (Phil. 3. 21.) in some conformity to his now most glorious
estate.

3. The whole Person. 1. With glory and honor, which we earnestly expect, and
wait for (St. Paul's word is most Emphatical, (...).) 2. With the best society
and conversation. Innumerable company of Angels, 10000 times ten thousand
ministering Spirits: and with them the glorious company of Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and other Saints that make up one quire, to sing
Hallelujahs in Heaven. 3. With such union with God, as we are capable of. For,
nothing else will satisfy the little triangle of the heart of Man, but the
Trinity it self. Nothing but (...) (all sufficient) is our objectum adaequatum.
The height of [saturabuntur] must rest upon that. Who can fully express these
things? But we are to be excused, if we endeavor to express what we can. For
there is a blessed hunger, and thirst after the knowledge of them.

Who is not delighted to hear? that (howsoever we are here dispersed, and
persecuted) we shall be hereafter as Fellow-Citizens, in the same heavenly
Jerusalem: Hebr. 13. 14. Hebr. 11. 10. as we are already Fellow-Citizens of a
lower Jerusalem, which is the Christian Church, built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the head cornerstone.
Ephesians. 2. 19. 20.

We shall be Fellow Servants in the same glorious Family of the King of Glory:
as we are already Fellow Servants of the same Household of Faith. Gal 9. 10.
Ephesians. 2. 19

We shall be as Children of the same Heavenly Father, not only in filial Love,
and Obedience, but also in the fruition of an eternal Inheritance. Hebr. 9. 15.

We shall be as the Spouse of Christ. The Prophets speak of him, as of our
Lord, and Husband, Isai. 54 5. and St Paul makes mention of it, as of a great
Mystery. Ephesians. 5. 32. It began in our Savior's assuming our Nature, and it
will be consummate at the great marriage Supper of the Lamb: when we see his
new Bride, prepared, and adorned for her Husband. Rev. 197. and 21. 2.

We shall all be members of the same mystical body, whereof Christ is the
head. And the Holy Spirit will diffuse Himself into every mystical member,
making us all of one Spirit. Not by way of Essence, and Information, but by way
of Inhabitance, and Participation.

In this divine Union to the Understanding, we shall know God fully, not
extinsively, but diffusively. As we see the Sea, distinctly from all other
bodies, and know it to be the Sea, and see what the largenes of the Object will
suffer.

In this Union to the Will, we shall be filled with the love of God, and find a
divine influence of his favor.

Hence are those strange expressions in the holy Scripture, wherein we are said
to be (...) partakers of Christ, Hebr. 3. 14. and (...), partakers of the Holy
Gh^st, Hebr. 64 and (...), partakers of the Divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Which
one would think enough, to express the fulness of our Felicity.

All this Fulness, and Satisfaction cannot but strike a luster upon the whole
Person; upon our very dark bodies: as the splendour of the Sun does upon the
dark body of the Moon.

But if any man doubt, how a spiritual Substance (if I may so speak) can thus
sparkle, and be visible in the Body.

Let him remember, how the life of the Body can clear the looks of that: when
it is powerful within, and the Heart well pleased.

Let him consider how a little glimpse of the divine Vision, dressed the whole
countenance of suffering Steven, so that his face became as the face of an
Angel.

Let him conceive, how the sight of his newborn Savior carried the heart of
old Simeon into such an exstasie, that the earth could hold him no longer, he
was presently come to his [Nunc dimittis.] What should I strive to say more of
this fulness, and satiety, which has a veil drawn before it, and cannot be
clearly discovered?

The Devil might undertake (at a venture) to show the glory of all the world in
a Mountain, and in a Moment, but there is no Mountain high enough, no Time long
enough to show us the fulness of this Joy, and Glory.

God has purposely concealed it, that we might rather love Him for Himself,
then be ravished with the powerful love of any reward.

Therefore if I had the tongue of Men, and Angels, my words would be but like
Counters, that must stand for a greater Sum. For there is no fulness like
this, and yet there is nothing but may be more fully expressed.

I wish we may all know it, by the happy fruition hereafter, that we may see it
a Fulness both without defect, and without end. In the mean time we may cheer up
our selves with the speculation of it, and sing with the Psalmist, In thy
presence, O Lord, is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Ps. 16. 12.

XXII. The same Happiness expressed under the promise of the Vision of God.
ALL the Happiness that we have named, or that can be named by any farther
enlargment, may be epitomized in two words, Visio Dei. So much there is in
that, though hardly to be uttered, or conceived by mortal men. But it is
reducible to these two branches of Felicity.

1. The happiness that we are here capable of (by the eye of Faith) in heavenly
Contemplations.

2. The Eternal Happiness, whereof we shall participate hereafter, in the full
fruition of the Deity.

These two ways only it may be conceived, arcording to the two several states
of a Christian, here in Grace, and hereafter in Glory.

1 That [here] is in holy devotions, and divine Speculations, guided by the eye
of Faith. Such as we have especially at the Holy Table, and other our highest
Raptures, after the exactest and best preparations of our selves, which present
us pure, and holy before God.

A Type of this we had in the Legal purifying and hallowing, before the
entrance into the Temple, where they accounted, that they had a kind of Vision
of God: as appears by those phrases of the Psalmist.

Quando veniam, and apparebo ante faciem Dei. When shall I come to appear
before the face of God? Ps. 42. 2.

Videbitur Deus Deorum in Sion: The God of Gods will be seen in Sion. Ps 84. 7.

So they expressed the happiness of their holy approaches to him, that dwelt
between the Cherubims, where sometime appeared a luster, that represented the
Majesty of God.

But, of all other, their Priests, and Prophets, the Seers of Israel, had the
greatest share of this happiness. Their pure Souls were more taken up with such
heavenly Visions: wherein they became like pure looking-glasses, that
represented so much of the pleasure of God, as the children of Israel could not
have well seen, but in them. nor they themselves so well discovered, if they
had not, like pure, and holy vessels, been fitted, and made capable of so high
a favor.

To have such an immediate divine influence upon the soul, never came to any,
but upon a quiet and holy composure of themselves.

2. This is all that can be thought upon here, the other, and clearer Vision of
God, is that which we expect in a better life.

To see God is the Epitome and Compendium of all Happiness. Our best Joys and
Delights here are but a blaze to that light and Splendour, as our greatest
sorrows, and troubles here are but shadows of darkness to the horror that
follows upon the loss of that sight. For, as all misery begins with shutting
our o^ his presence, so all happiness begins with the light of his countenance,
with the Vision of God.

Hence it is, that Moses longed for it, [Let me see thy face]

David was resolved on it, Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. Show us the light of
thy countenance, and we shall be safe.

And Philip said well, Ostende nobis patrem, and sufficit: Show us the Father,
and we will ask no more. Joh. 14. 8. For who can be admitted to the sight of
him, and not be happy?

They that saw Moses (that had seen God face to face) had more glory to look
on, then they were able to behold. Moses was saine to do them the favor to
veil his face.

They that saw but a glimpse of this glory (in the Transfiguration) were
presently at building of Tabernacles, to stay by it, [bonum est esse hic.]

They that saw St. Stephens face in his Martyrdom, (while he then looked upon
Christ) saw it shine like the face of an Angel, while the glory of Christ
sparkled a little upon it.

What happiness do you then think it is, to see God in his glory, when they have
been so affected, that have but seen them that have seen God, and not in his
full glory neither?

And what a heavy doom will they hear, that shall be excluded for ever from
seeing God: from seeing him in that Jerusalem above, which signifies the Vision
of true peace and happiness. Where all the holy Lamps of Heaven (the blessed
Spirits there) have only the light of Gods countenance to kindle themselves
withal. Which He, out of a gracious prodigality, casts abroad among them, as
the Sun does among the stars, and that is enough to fill them all with Glory,
and Content. The Vision of him being all their Felicity, as it must be ours.

XXIII. The first means of attaining the former Happiness.
SOmewhat we have now heard of the Vision of God, as we did before of the
fulness of joy, in those terms wherein the holy Scripture is pleased to deliver
them unto us: Which cannot but enlarge our hearts with earnest desire to long
after them. But that is not enough toward the purchase of such Felicity. For we
must not think that such a Fulness, and the Vision of God, (the top of all
Blessings,) will be given to wishers, and woulders. We must do somewhat that
God proposes, if we aim so high. And the sooner the better: for Death
follows us faster, then we shall follow the way to our eternal Felicity.

As for the Fulness, which we named first, if we desire such Happiness, (as well
we may,) we must look back (p. 95.) to what our blessed Savior prescribed as
the means to it, out of Mat. 5. 6. in these words: Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

We must so long to lead a virtuous and godly life, that our Longing may be
like a hunger and thirst after a high degree of that Righteousness: which is
there (and in many other places of holy Scripture) a word of a large compass,
extending it self over all virtues. The use of it, even in profane Authors to
that purpose, is so ancient, that Aristotle cites a verse for it, out of an old
Poet;

(...). In which sense the Scripture often calls him [(...)] a righteous or
just man, that is, every way a good man, in all the course of his life. So St.
Aug. and Greg. Nyssen, and Leo, and others, take (...) in that Beatitude, to be
meant de generali Justitia, and vitae sanctimonia, which we call Evangelical
Righteousness.

And for the Vision of God, (which we named in the second place,) if we are
truly affected with the desire of that, the means to it is peremptorily set
down in these words.

Follow after Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see
God. Heb. 12. 14. God himself has joined them all together; and it is in vain
for us to think of taking them asunder. Peace, and Holiness cannot be parted,
and without Holiness no man can see God.

I will bring you acquainted with them both, in the order wherein they are
named, beginning first with Peace.

This Peace, (true Christian peace) begins at home, in a peaceable settled mind.
St. Basil calls it (...), a sweet composure, and temper, following upon the
subjection of the sense and appetite to reason, and all the faculties of body,
and soul to the will and service of God.

For it dwells in a heart that is at unity within it self, and with alll other
but Sin, and Satan. A heart that is conscious of no crime, but what is washed
off by repentance. And so having lost the trouble and sting of all disquiet, is
easily reconciled to God, and, for his sake, to all the World.

Such is this Peace, so apt to communicate it self to God, and Man.

To them both. For it has not the happy reward (the Vision of God) by looking
toward God only, but rather by looking upon men, and being at peace with them.

Our Savior intimates as much, where he puts pacem inter vos [have peace among
your selves] before Deus vobiscum, [the God of peace will be with you.] For
that implies, that we may cozen and deceive our selves in the apprehension of
our peace with God, whom we have not seen, if we stand not in good terms of
peace, and love with men, whom we have seen.

That is the evidence of the other. And it must be Peace with all men too. For
if we are at peace with them only, that are at peace with us, what thanks have
we? Do not even Sinners the same? But if we are ambitious of drawing near to
the God of Peace, we must be at peace with our Enemies too; and love them, as
He loved, and did good to us, when we were Enemies to him.

Nay, we must not begin our addresses to him, till we have first made sure for
that Peace. Whatsoever else we present before his Altar, it will never be
accepted, unles we first acknowledge that love to all others, which is the first
thing belonging to our Peace.

The Royal Prophet has it in plain words. Cum his qui oderunt pacem [I was at
peace with them that hate peace. Psalm. 120. 5, 6.] That Is durus sermo, you
will say. Have we no limitation in this case? yes: we have one in St. Paul's
advise to the Romans, Si fieri potest, [if it may be,] and Quantum in vobis
est, [as much as in you lies] Romans 12. 18.

For you remember the league between Peace, and Truth, when they kissed each
other, as the Psalmist speaks. Ps. 85. 10. We must not forsake divine truth, to
purchase our peace with men: we must not hazard our eternal peace above, to
make sure for peace here below. Nor must we flatter men in their vices, and
lull them asleep in sin, by that means to keep them in peace, and love. If
their faults come in our way, when we have a fair occasion to work upon them,
we may not spare them, though we study this precept of living in peace.

Such and the like Cautions we may propose to our selves, in the prosecution of
our peace with men: and (with that proviso) if we follow it with our best
endeavors, we have done enough for our Peace. For it is enough for us to
follow it. We cannot always overtake it, and have peace as we would. To be
fully possessed of peace is for the blessed Saints above. It is enough for us
to do our parts, and to expect the happy success from God, the great
Peacemaker.

But follow it we must, we that are Christians.

For where should the study and care of peace be expected, but among us. And
yet we see, we are often at more variance, then all the world beside. The enemy
has sowed his Tares of Schism and Sedition so thick, that they spoil the
growth of the Church, and are ready to choke and entangle the best Corn.

And all the while, whose Prayers and endeavors fight against the common Enemy
of Mankind? what is become of those pious acclamations, and zealous
benedictions anciently bestowed upon those that studied the peace of the
Church? Let them prosper that love it. And Beati pedes blessed are the Feet of
those, that come with the good tidings of peace.

In the best times, the best and wisest men were put to a nonplus in
expressing the worth and lovelines of it.

O quam bonum, and quam jucundum, (says that pious and warlike King,) O how
good and pleasant a thing it is? Ps. 133. He speaks it but of peace among
Brethren. Will you ask me the Question?

First how good it is? R. It is so good, that nothing is good without it; and
where that is, (by a rare Alchymy) it turns all to good. Solomon a wise man,
and a Type of the best Peacemaker, has told us as much as that comes to: A
handful of herbs with peace, is better then a house full of Sacrifices, where
that is not: Prove. 15, 16. that is, better then a house full of good cheer, as
the Jews were wont to make after their Sacrifices: so good it is.

2. Then, How sweet and pleasant is it? R. I know no sweet that can stand in
comparison and competition with it. King David tells us of Aaron's ointment, and
the dew of Hermon. But it is not Aaron's ointment that has such sweetness,
though your liberal fingers should pour it out so freely, that it should run
down to the very skirts of his garment.

It is not the dew of Hermon, that can like us so well, though it bring the
hope of Fruit and profit along with it: Neither the sweet ointment upon the
head of man; nor the sweet dew upon the face of the Earth: nothing so pleasing
as Peace.

Therefore the sweet singer of Israel never seems to have pleased himself
better, then when he got into his Song -- abundantiam pacis: Ps. 72. 7. That is
his full Music: There he is in his sweetest strain, when he sings of abundance
of peace, so long as the Moon indures. There he takes himself, and us indeed:

-- circum praecordia ludit.
You cannot but be well affected at the reading of it, if I put you in mind of
that Affection, wherein the Roman story tells us, how the Graecians entertained
the message of the peace of Achaia: Iterum, iterumque Praeconem repetere illam
vocem jubebant: They had never enough of that. The sound of that word pleased
them; beyond all the Music in the world.

Dulee bellum inexpertis, we say. A drum and trumpet, that calls for war, may
be good Music to an ignorant Novice, as it is to a Horse, that has no
understanding.

He perhaps (as Job says, of the horse) will swallow the ground with
fiercenes, and rage, and say, among the trumpets, Aha! and mock at fear, when
he smells the battle a far off. Job 39. But all thy Joy, and Triumph (ante
victoriam) is but the joy of those, that have no fear, (...) wit. He that has
understanding, though he go to war, and see reason for it, yet he has no
further end proposed to himself in it, then the assurance of peace. He fights
for peace, and is forced to buy it at that price: because he finds no other way
of purchase. Peace is his aim, and his joy, in the midst of Arms.

But what speak I of him, and his peace, Peace is the Joy of all: the Desire of
Men, and Angels. P^x in caelis, say we, we wish Gods peace may be with us. Pax
in Terris, say they, Peace on earth: Good will toward Men.

Nay, the very Devils are of that mind. They complain that our Savior came to
trouble, and disquiet them. Luc. 4. And that gives a little Copy of their
countenance. It shows their inclination to some peace, if it could be had.
Angels, Men, Evil Spirits, All would have as much peace, as may be. Nor can
they wish any thing better, or more pleasant then that pacem te poscimus omnes:
We are all for peace, if we understand our selves. Which our Savior seems to
mean by those words. Have salt, and have peace, one with another. Marc. 9. 50.
that is (according to the Hebraisme which puts the Imperative for the Future
Tense) If you have any wisdom, or understanding: if you have micam salis, you
will have peace. He has but little salt in him, and knows but little, that
knows not the benefit of Peace, and desires not to partake of it, in every
kind.

Especially, it is the desire of all good Men. They like it best, and are ever
readiest to follow after it. Our holy Mother, the Church has brought them up
to the love of Peace: directing us every day to pray for it: to that purpose,
appointing 2 Collects for Peace, one for every Morning, the other for every
Evening: and at full Service, making choice to dismiss us with the blessing of
Peace.

And well She may do all this. For She is Gods Vineyard. And Peace is the only
hedge, and fense to keep her from danger. Or if you will, Peace is the Bond,
that ties us together, among our selves, and God to us. His Tabernacle is in
Salem Psalm. 76. 3. (that is, in English) His Habitation is in Peace! And if we
live in Peace, the God of Love, and Peace will be with us. 2 Cor. 13. 11. He
that dwells in love, and peace' dwells in God, and God in him. 2 John 4. 16.

Such were the Comforts and Meditations of Christians in the first, and best
times. Which made the multitude of believers to be of one Heart, and Mind. Act
4. 32.

And what are we now, or what do we? We put fair for a multitude of believers.
For who accounts not himself to be one of the Faithful? But what is become of
Cor unum? (one Heart) we are to seek for that.

If the Church has been so heretofore, why should not we be like minded? Has
not our Savior left us the same Legacy of Peace? Has he not left us all, as
Sheep under one Sh^pherd? And who ever saw Sheep play the Wolves, or not be at
peace with one another? If we would but think of the peace of Sheep, and the
place of Sheep: we should not easily be divided among our selves. Especially if
we would consider withal that it is not left to us, as a matter indifferent,
whether we will follow Peace or no?

It is composed of a peremptory Command, and cannot be kept, unles we follow
that Rule of St Paul, Let all things be done decently, and in order.

For if St Aug: mistake not and the Schoolmen, that commend him. for making up
the Description of Peace, by [tranquillitas ordinis] following of Peace connot
be but in a harmony of Obedience (an orderly disposal of our selves, for the
attaining, and keeping of Peace) ever giving Peace the preeminence in our
consultations, according to the Apostle's other Rule, (...). Col. 3. 15. that
is, Let the love of Unity, and Christian Peace carry away the price, or
moderate all your Actions (like a (...) and (...)) let all be concluded in
peace, as far as it will stand with the utmost of our ability.

Which that we may the better be persuaded to do, it will not be amiss, to take
a further view of this Peace, and the terms, wherein the Scripture proposes it
to us. Hebr. 12. 14. Psalm. 34. 13.

XXIIII. Another reflection upon the proposal of the first Means.
WE must yet take a little more pains, to express our affection to peace;
which is commended to us in such emphatical words. For.

(...) (seeking, searching, inquiring after) and (...) or (...), (following
hard, pursuing, or hunting after) are words of labor, and of love too. Psalm.
34. 13. Hebr. 12. 14. ut supra.

What we love, we spare no pains, carefully to search, and eagerly to pursue.
And such should be the search, and prosecution of peace. For, He that would
have us, not to cast our ^earles to swine, Mat. 7. that neither deserve them,
nor care for them, He will not bestow ^o rich a jewel as Peace, but upon such
as va^ue it, according to the worth of such a trea^ure: and discover that
valuation, by seeking ^t (when it seems to be hidden, or lost) and ^ollowing
after it (when it seems to fly away, and be gone from us.)

No otherwise did He, that is our Peacemaker, and reconciled Heaven and Earth
together. To show what esteem He set upon Peace: He spared no pains to seek,
and fol^ow it to the very Cross; where He pay^d his own precious blood for the
price of ^t.

After such a Pattern, we should not loose Peace so easily, nor follow her so
saintly, as we ^o.

Shall I show you, what we must do, to fol^ow her?

1. If we would do it in earnest, my first ^dvice would be (especially for
public peace) that every man would mend one. It is the method we find in the
Psalm before named. First, Eschew evil, and do good, Then, Seek ^eace, and
ensue it.

Then Peace would be no stranger among us. For it is Sin only, that disturbs
our Peace, our best Peace.

That Is the first Advise.

2. Then (when we come to make use of our care, and diligence in seeking peace)
Let us be sure to seek Her in the right place, and fol. low Her the right way.

And I believe, that is the Middle-way, Righteousness, and Peace are best, in
equilibrie, and will not endure to be drawn to either side.

If we tread inward too much, one way, by partiality.

If we suffer our selves to be wrested, another way, by too much prejudice. If
w^ fall to extremities, either way, peace will be lost. For, in the carriage of
all things, it i^ Moderation, that procures, and maintains peace.

3. To bring us, by degrees, to this Moderation. A sweet carriage, a mild, and
gentle delivery of our selves is of great moment Abigail found it so, in
appeasing of David She gained so much upon Him, by Her di^creet language, and
d^meanour, that David was not only turned from his sury to a man of Peace: but
He honored her with a hig^ Elogium, and blessed her mildnes, that prevented
his fiercenes. 1 Reg: 3. 9. We say It is good in a Fever not to have a roug^
tongue. It is far better in a case of anger, a^ we see by Abigail. There St.
Peter's advice does well, not to answer railing with railing, but rather to
bless, knowing that we are called to inherit a blessing. 1 Pet. 3. 9.

4. Then, to gentleness of speech, and carriage, some mildnes would be added by
our Actions too. To purchase our peace, we must be willing de summo jure
aliquid remittere, not to stand upon too punctual terms and demands of our own.

That Love may the better come for the cement, to unite us together again when
we have been at odds, we may do well to learn somewhat of our Masons, that
pare, and cut, and square their stones, to make them agree the better in the
Fabric. So must we, that are living stones of that Building, whereof our
Savior is the head cornerstone.

Never any was so hewed and hacked at, as he was, in the purchase of our peace.
And shall not we be content to suffer a little, and part from somewhat of our
own, for the better aedification of our selves, and others, in such a high
virtue as this?

5. And if we will go so far, we shall then be easily persuaded to another
step. Not to dote upon our punctualities in other cases. Not to expect, that
they which began the quarrel, should begin the truce, and accord. The greater
is our glory, if we can be as forward in making the peace, as our Adversary was
in first doing the wrong.

Our glory did I call it? Nay it is our Duty. For we are not advised, if Peace
follow us, to entertain it, but rather, if peace turn away, to follow it.

When a man has injured you, and afterward submits himself, and makes means
to be reconciled, then Peace follows you: you cannot for shame, but embrace
her, and bid her welcome. But if your Enemy persist in his injuries, then Peace
seems to run away from you. If you are a Son of Peace, you must follow after
her, woo her, labor for her, and be glad you can have her so.

For indeed, as other things do, (which take themselves wings to fly away) so
will peace sometimes subducere se; she will slip away, and we shall be at a
loss. We may go seek her: Then is the time to hunt her out. And when we have
got hold of her, we must urge, and importune her, and press upon her.

Every way. As we must prevent him that has offended, if he be modest, and
fearful to tender himself, which is to seek peace; so if he be perverse and
obstinate, and keep at a distance, we must follow him, recover him, lay hold on
him, and non dimittere nisi, not rest, till we have gained upon him.

For the Author, and Founder of our Peace requires it so strictly in some
cases, that rather no sacrifice, then no peace: Nay, no claim of eternal peace
in heaven, without pardon of others offenses to us here.

They that weigh this, will be willing,

1. Sometime by good offices to win those that are offended (as Jacob won
Esau by his presents) and draw them with the cords of love. Os^. 11.

2. Sometime to avoid, and pass over the occasions of further quarrel,
knowing, that the Beginning of strife is, as when one lets out water, that
cannot easily be stopped. Prove. 17.

3. Sometime again, to beware of those suspicions, that would keep off
reconcilement: and to prevent others with the blessings of peace. Psalm. 21.

And, in that way,

4 Not to take such state upon us, as may make them more shie. Not to Domineer
over them, when we find our advantage. Not to oppress them, when it is in our
power, but rather to please our neighbor for his good: remembering that Christ
pleased not Himself (sought not his own ease, and profit, and content) to show,
what we should do for the purchase of our own Peace, if He did so much for
ours.

And, when all is done, we must not forget that we have spoken only of seeking,
and following after Peace. For to be fully possessed of peace, that is for the
blessed Saints above. We that are here, must be content to follow it: to do
our parts. and expect the happy success, from God Himself, the great
Peacemaker: who will not fail howsoever, to return our good endeavors into
our own bosom.

XXV. The second Means of attaining the Happiness, that was before proposed, out
of Hebr. 12 14.
WHen we have taken the best order we can for Peace, we must not so content our
selves, unles Holiness go along with it. Which is taken (in the forecited place)
for that purity, and sincerity, that embraces, and sweetens all the best Duties
of a Christian. To this so divine a Virtue, there are many Pretenders, amongst
whom Holiness will pass well enough, if it be acted, and represented by the
Tongue, or Gesture. But

Holiness is another thing.

St James expresses it by pure, and undefiled [pure Religion, and undefiled
before God] Jam. 1. 27.

St Peter delivers it in words, that may serve for a plain comment upon the
aforesaid place of Hebr. 12. 14. Seeing that you look for such things, says
he, be diligent, that you may be found of Him, in peace, without spotte, and
blameless, that is, Let God find you following of Peace, and Holiness. 2 Pet.
3. 14. And does not the Psalmist paraphrase upon this Holiness, when he says.
Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and who shall stand in his Holy
place? He that has clean hands, and a pure Heart. Psalm. 24.

We see, through all these Instances, How Holiness is set out by clean,
unspotted, undefiled Purity, and Innocence, which makes it so amiable, and you
will the rather believe it to be so, if you will see a little, on the contrary,
how all Sin, and Unholines is set out by Filth, and Pollution: as being that
which turns the Beauty of Holiness into a loathed deformity. and the Temple of
God into a cage of unclean birds.

St Peter expresses it by wallowing in the mire, and returning to the vomit. 2
Pet. 2. 22. David bewailes his loss of holiness in no better terms. I stick
fast in the deep mire, where no ground is. And when God had delivered him from
his sin. He has brought me out of the horrible pit (says he) out of the mire,
and clay. Psalm 69. 2.

As it was in David's apprehension, when his eyes were opened, to see the
foulnes of his sin. So is it with us, when we have our right senses about us,
and are not like those Idols, that have noses, and smell not. For so filthy is
sin, that it makes us and all that is ours, corrupt and abominable. It defiles
the conscience, rots our good name, in^cts our acquaintance by the contagion of
sin, and makes our very Prayers abominable, which otherwise might be our
sweetest odors.

In which speculation, St Basil said the Angels forsake the custody, and and
company of us, when we forsake Holiness to delight in sin. And the Poet could
say, Accipiet nullas sordida turris aves.

And yet we have had but a little glimpse of this Holiness, in the Purity of it
self, and the contrary Impurity of Unholines.

Shall we now come a little nearer to it, and take a clearer view of the large
extent it has over all virtues. (...) the Hebrew word (coming from (...)
praeparare, separare) implies, that Holiness is a separation of our selves from
sin to a virtuous, and godly life. Which is the extent of the word
Righteousness, as it is often used in holy Scripture.

Yet there are some, that would-confine Holiness to some one part. Some lodge it
in the ear: some in the tongue. Though our Savior came not to smooth our
tongues, or fill our ears, but to present us with pure hands, and chaste eyes:
to guide our feet into the ways of Peace, and Holiness: and to render all our
parts, and actions such, as may receive purity and holiness from the right
Fountain, the Heart it self.

We must begin with Holiness in the Heart if we mean to see God. Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God, says our Savior. Mat, 5. 8. There we
must begin, but we must not stay there.

Thence we must climb up to those several steps of Holiness, so often commended
to our care in the word of God. building up our holy Faith, (as St. Jude
speaks,) till it come to a full structure.

To this structure you must bring in all the good works that may be, making
your holiness pass through all Virtues. St. Paul means that by (...), being
fruitful in every good work, Col. 1. 10. But there he is in generals. Will you
hear him run over the particulars? Then observe what he says to the
Philippians. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think of these things, and the God of Peace shall be with you
Phil. 4. 8, 9.

This is the Holiness that must be joined to peace, if you will hear the great
Doctor of the Gentiles.

Will you now have some particulars from St. Peter, the Doctor of the Jews?
Thus says he. Add to your Faith virtue, (he is no Solifidian:) then he goes
on. To your virtue knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness, Charity, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly,
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 5,
6, 7, 8, 11. i. e. so shall we be admitted to the Vision of God.

Shall I add what St. Peter has in the ninth verse, he that lacks these
things is (...), like one that is purblind, and cannot see a far off, or (...)
blind outright: that is, he is so far from seeing God, or any divine things,
that he sees nothing as he should do.

XXVI. Another reflection upon the proposal of the second means, Hebr. 12. 14.
NOw, if we have them, we shall not be kept long from the happy sight of him
that is the God of Peace, and Holiness.

Yes, Have them (you will say,) but how shall we have them?

The answer is laid before our eyes, in the words of sacred Scripture.

Follow Peace, and Holiness.

They are both so willing to be had, if we will but follow them, there needs no
more.

But we must learn what it is to follow. The word [(...)] rendered by following,
we observed before to be a busy and active word. It signifies a hearty and
serious persuit, an eager hunting after what we long for.

Having told you this, I hope I shall have leave to ask one Question.

He that has some faint desire hovering about the heart, and breathing it self
about the lips; if he put himself to no farther trouble in the prosecution, can
he be said (in this sense) to follow Peace, or holiness? I believe, he that
seeks or follows any thing as he should, must use his head, and his feet, and
somewhat else, as well as his wishes, and lip-labor. And so he had need, that
thinks of attaining what here we speak of. For can we think, that peace or
holiness do so undervalue themselves, that they will wait our leisure, and ^e
whistled up when we please, by the charm of a cold prayer, or two?

Or can we imagine, that such Precepts as these (to follow after peace and
holiness, without which no man shall see God) are so given to us, that if we
like them, we may use them; if not, we may lay them by?

Do we conceive, that what the holy Scripture enjoins, and we are commanded to
preach, is left to our liberty to practice as we or you shall see cause? Then
may our Preaching, and your Hearing quickly come to an end, like a tale, or
dream of one running after Peace, and Holiness, and before he came at them,
stumbling upon Felicity, and the Vision of God.

Let us not deceive our selves, God is not mocked. He that says, there is no
enjoyment of the one, without following of the other, (no seeing God without
Holiness,) he will not dispense with the Duty, and follow after us with the
Reward, that care not to make our selves capable of the Blessing. For this will
prove a necessary Duty.

And then there would be another Quaestion: Whether we do so perform it?
whether we so follow after holiness, as if we understood what it is to follow
after? and what is the value of that which is set before us?

Shall I more fully explain, what is the true Force of ((...)) which is,
Following?

He rightly follows a Duty, that (avoiding all occasions of the contrary vice)
watches for, and apprehends all hints, and opportunities of doing good. He that
ambitiously lays hold of a happy hour, and fair way, wherein to approve his
virtues.

And this way of following and persuing we may learn from the practice of
those, that have little to do with Holiness. How does the coveteous man follow
his beloved gain? Does he not rise early, and late retire himself to rest? Does
he not exhaust his strength, and abilities, by Sea, and Land, to compass what
he aims at, though with hazard of health, and life it self?

What does the ambitious, and amorous person? How eagerly, and with what pains,
do they hunt after that, which they fancy their best prize, and content?

Our following of Holiness might borrow a little heat and aemulation from their
following of Vice.

But we have them can set us better Copies to follow, if that will move us.

Let us follow those Saints that have gone this way before us, as far as they
have been Followers of Christ: and follow them in that Resolution, which we
have from St. Paul, I count not my self to have apprehended (says he, Phil. 3.
13. i. e. I am not so secure of my name in the book of life, that I may sit
down and take my ease,) but this I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, (that is, not relying too much upon the former pains that I have taken
in a Christian course of life, and the Duties belonging to my place,) and
reaching forth unto those things which are before, (that is, keeping my eye
still upon the end of my race, with resolution of perseverance,) I press on
toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God, in Jesus Christ.

Or, if any would press higher still, let them follow the ardour and obedience
of the blessed Angels: as it is our daily prayer, that God's will may be done
by us in Earth, as it is by us in Heaven.

XXVII. Another view of this Means, with a fuller expression of the extent of
it, out of Psalm. 34. 13.
WE shall need to say no more of the terms, wherein Holiness is proposed. But
Holiness being so necessary a Duty, as without which we are excluded from
eternal Felicity, it will not be amiss to hear a little more of the full extent
of it. And that we may best learn from holy David, who in the long compass of
the 119 Psalm, containing 176 verses) and elsewhere, has given us more pious
expressions of his Desires, and Resolutions for an exact, holy, and virtuous
life, according to the dictates of God's holy word, then any other have. And
(as he was the best able, having it so much in his thoughts, and endeavors,
so) he has given us also the best Periphrasis of Holiness, in the full compass
of it, and joined it with Peace too, (which the better fits our former
Meditations.) He has done it in these words. Eschew evil, and do good: seek
peace, and ensue its Ps. 34. 13. upon which we build our following Discourse.

[Eschewing evil, and doing good] is here put as a complete description of
Holiness, in the true extent: and agrees with that which we observed of the
Hebr. (...), that Holiness in us, is a separation of our selves from sin, to a
holy, and virtuous life.

This Holiness, so clearly and fully discovering it self (both by eschewing
evil, and doing good) may well be set in the first place (before peace) either
as absolutely necessary, and eminent in it self; or as being the best means,
to conduct us to our Peace.

For, no hope of Peace without a good life. If we will be Filii pacis, and look
for the blessing of Peace to rest upon us, we must begin with [eschewing evil,
and doing good.] Our seeking and laboring for the best peace will be of little
consequence wiithout that.

For it was Sin that first broke the peace every way. And the breaking off of
sin must usher the way to our Peace again.

The Word of God is the Gospel of peace upon these terms.

The Ministers of God, which are his Ambassadors, propose no other conditions
of Peace.

The holy Sacram^nts are no otherwise the signs, and pledges of our peace.

1 In the one, the laver of Regeneration, being justified by Faith, we have
peace toward God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

But so, that we enter covenant to be no more at enmity with God, but to fight
under his Banner, make his Enemies ours, and live in obedience to his Laws. Of
all which this is the sum, to eschew evil, and do good.

2. In the other Sacrament of the holy Eucharist, we are honored with an
Invitation to God's holy Table, which is an evident confirmation of our peace.
He would not invite us, if he would not be Friends with us. But to that we have
no Admission, and welcome, without the renouncing of our evil ways, and
resolving to do good.

These are the steps of our Jacobs Ladder, that is, of our Liberty to ascend,
and descend, and have fair intercourse between God, and us.

This is the order of that Wisdom from above, which is first pure, and then
peaceable, says St. James, c. 3. v. 17.

In these steps, and in this order, our Savior led us the way. For how read we
of him: Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore the Lord
has anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above thy Fellows: Psalm. 45. 8.
That is, He was first Melchisedec (King of Righteousness,) and as glad of that,
as of the oil of gladness, that made him King of Salem, that is, King of Peace.

But whatsoever we think of the Order, or of the terms, wherein they are
expressed, still we shall see, that they usually go together.

Righteousness, and peace: Ps. 85. 10. in the holy league.

Obedience, and peace. Great peace have they that keep thy law. Ps. 119. 165.

Peace, and Holiness, Hebr. 12. 14. (as we found them before.)

Peace, and innocence. Keep innocence, and that will bring a man peace at the
last. Psalm. 37. 38.

And as many as walk after this Rule of newnes of Life) peace be-upon them.
Gal. 6. 16.

And, in effect, this is all that is required of us. God calls not for great
learning, or deep understanding, nor any thing else but good living. Knowledge
and Truth go not beyond this: they do but show the way: This is the way.

He that knows much, may increase his sorrow by his knowledge; when he thinks of
what our Savior said of him, that knew his Masters will, and prepared not
himself to do according to it. Luke 12. 47.

But, he that knows less, may settle himself closer to the practice of what is
here required, (eschewing evil, doing good, following of peace.) And blessed
is the man, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. Luc. 12. 43.

I will say no more of the Order, and Union of those two. I will rather look a
while upon eschewing evil, and doing good, as they may be considered in
themselves.

But still we may take notice of the Psalmist's method, which will teach us,
first to take order for the eschewing of evil, before we undertake the doing of
good.

1. For Sin is our spiritual disease: we must be cured of that, before we come
to the works of our perfect health.

2. Sin is our Pollution. And who can be filled with sweet and precious
virtues, till his Body and Soul are become pure, and fit vessels, wherein to
receive them? Or what Doves will come to filthy cottages?

3. Sin is our Deviation, and departure from God, and goodness. First we must
recedere a malo, get out of those blind ways, before we can be set in a clear
way of doing good.

Having seen the Order, wherein this charge is to be taken, I will keep you no
longer from the Duty. We must now learn, what it is to eschew evil, or rather
first, what it is not.

1. Recedere a malo:) To eschew, or recede from evil, is not to go from one sin
to another: to pass from Prodigality to Covetousnes: to shift from swearing to
lying; from adhorring Idols, to rush upon sacrilege. Romans 2. 22.

Thus to cast out one sin by another, is but to cast our Devils in the name of
Beelzebub. That is not to recede from evil, but to change the name of evil.

2. Much less is it to return from any Sin to the same sin again. That is but
to go from the mire to the water, and thence to the mire, and so to keep in a
maze, and circle of sin.

What is it then to recede from evil? I will tell you it by the several
degrees.

1. If we cannot prevent sin, at least not to stay by it, not to dwell in it,
not to like it, but to use the best means to avoid it, and (as soon as we can)
to bid defiance to it for ever.

2. To make such a quick recesse, that our sins do not overtake us, to renew
their acquaintance, and cousen us far worse then they did before: especially
those that haunt us at set times and places. As some men's sins do in their
Shops, and other places of gain: some in their chambers, or Feasts, or at other
times of mirth, and recreation: some in their walks, and melancholy
retirements. From these we must have a quick recesse.

3. Not only to be quick at it, but to make such a sure recess, that we fail
not of our purpose. For the ways of wickedness are slippery, and perplexed, we
walk upon snares, we are compassed with Briars, and pits. Our ignorance, or our
blind zeal; our rashness, or carelesnes; may plunge us into perdition, before we
are well advised how to find the way out.

4. And Lastly. Receding from evil implies the forsaking of all sin, without
exemption or dispensation for any. For the least sin can let in another, and so
let in death. And the breach of the least Commandment can make us guilty of
the breach of the whole Law.

All these together make up our recesle from sin, and show what need we have to
fly often into the Sanctuary of Prayer, and beg this grace of God, that we may
eschew all sin.

And yet (in stead of eschewing) how many hug and applaud themselves in it?
Some in their sweet sacriledg, and Bread stolen from the Altar. Some in their
gainful Usury, some in other false delights. Till those delights prove the very
Thieves, that steal away their time and the peace of their Souls.

Here were a happier employment for such men, to study how they may leave fin
before it leave them, and so make one step toward the purchase of their best
peace, by eschewing evil.

From eschewing evil we must now go on to entertain our thoughts with doing
good. And no more then needs.

For to decline from evil, and do no harm, will not serve our turn, in it self.
To decline from evil is a principle of our Repentance, and the task of a young
Beginner, or a new Convert; who must thence go on to Fruits worthy of
Repentance, or else he may fall short of the reward.

At the best, to go by weeping-cross from our sins, is but like Mary Magdalens
washing our Saviors feet with her tears. From thence we should go on to the
imitation of her precious ointments; and filling the Church with some sweet
odor of our Virtues.

Our eschewing evil, is but our coming out of darkness, and the shadow of
Death. Our doing good, is our walking in the glory and luster of a good Life,
that others seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

Lastly, our eschewing evil, is but the circumcising, and paring off our carnal
desires, which profits nothing, unles we keep the law of good works, Romans 2.
25. For, (that we may apply the words of the Apostle,) Circumcisto prodest, si
legem observes.

Which would be observed by them that dream of a miraculous Faith, which is
merely a dead thing without good works, and has no such Spell, as to turn
Hypocrites, and fruitles Professors into Angels of Light. Nor have we any
reason to expect it should, whether we look to the end of our Creation, or our
Redemption. For the Apostle tells us, that we were created to walk in good
works, Ephesians. 2. 10. and redeemed to be a people, zealously given to good works.
Tit. 2. 14.

And more then once God himself tells us, that it is his good will, and
pleasure; and not his only, but our glory, and perfection.

So that holy David's advice both to eschew evil, and do good may be taken for
Evangelical advice: at least it will prove so, when we come to see that piece
of the Gospel fulfilled, of our Savior's rewarding every man according to his
works: Math. 16. 27. when we come to see, that they which have done no good, as
well as they that have done evil, must go into Hell fire.

I should add another thing of this doing good, for the extent of it: That
our goodness should not be shrunk up into one or two good deeds. For as?
eschewing evil] was found to be the receding from all evil: so [doing good] is
doing all the good that may be. The more the better. and the sooner the better,
that we be not taken off, by Death or Sickness, or some other inability, before
our work is well done. But I may say the less here of this Extent, because I
spoke of it before (in the 25 Section.)

XXVIII. A Transition to that which immediately follows, with the design of
it. And therein, first a Defense against assaults from without us.
HAving taken a little view of our frailty, and misery by nature: and of the
Happiness, which (notwithstanding) by the Grace, and Mercy of God we may attain
unto: and of the steps, by which we climb so high from so low a condition. We
must not think this enough, though upon this information, and advise, we
resolve to follow the best course. It is one thing to know, and resolve: and
another thing to put in execution, and persevere to the end of our Christian
race. Many Diversions and Impediments may obstruct us in the way.

Saint Paul forewarnes us of (...), and (...), that is, of cheating, wily
circumventions, and subtle malicious devises of wicked men, and evil spirits:
that oppose the Heart of man. Ephesians. 4. 14. and 6. 12.

And the Prophet Jeremy tells us of a false friend in our own bosom A
Dangerous Heart of our own, that is d^ceitfull above all things: hard to be
known, and harder to be regulated, as it should be. Jer. 17. 9.

Let us be content to bestow a little time, to enquire what advise may be
given, to secure us in both these cases. And first in the first.

1. Against all Assaults, and Stratagems, and Temptations, that set upon us
from without, Saint Paul advises us to be provided with (...) the whole armor
of God. Which he names particularly in this manner. The girdle of Truth: The
Breast Plate of Righteousness. The feet shodde with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace. The Shield of Faith. The Helmet of Salvation. The Sword of the
spirit. Ephesians 6. 11. 12. 13:

Our whole life is like a warfare (says Job) we are all Soldiers under
Christ's banner. Job. 7 1. And of the Foot too. For (that we be not too high
mounted in our undertakings) the armor, which we heard of, is such as uses to
be provided for the Foot.

The Girdle is cingulum militare. Having our loins girt with Truth, or in
Truth, (in veritate, that is vere truly.) If you read it [with Truth] then
Truth it self (Divine Truth) is the girdle, that keeps us in, and leaves us not
to that liberty, which goes along with false Doctrine. But [(...)] In Truth,
seems rather to signify the true, and real girding of the loins. And that is
done by the girdle of Chastity (the proper curb of the loins, to prevent the
danger of that part.)

How needful this military girdle is, we may guess by the old Roman Militia,
where [cingulum deponere] was to give over the place of a Soldier. The need of
this girdle does not so appear to the Jew, and the Mahumetan, who are for many
Wives and Concubines, and think Fornication a light offense. But he that will
now be of the Church militant under Christ, must have Chastity brought as near
to him, as the very girdle, that he is girded withal. And this must appear,
not in fair professions only, but in sober truth [in veritate] that is, in
heart, and practice.

When we have this girdle [in veritate] we may fasten the sword of the spirit
unto it, which is the word of God.

Our chaste, and pure thoughts will be a means to lead us into all divine
Truth, and fit our hearts for the whole will of God, contained in his holy
word, which is best seen, as God himself is, by the pure in heart.

And because I have put the girdle and the sword together, I will so far
interrupt the Apostle's method as to continue my discourse of the sword.

This sword of the spirit, that is (in the Hebraisme) this spiritual sword, the
word of God, is therefore called a sword, for the power it has over sin, and
sinful men.

We had some hint of it, in a mystery, in St Peter's vision, where he saw all
manner of Beasts, and heard a voice calling to him, Peter, arise, and stay: If
by those Beasts we will understand sins, or sinful men: (no better then Beasts)
the word of God, in the mouth of an Apostle, is that sword, that can slay, and
conquer. So it may be discovered in a mystery. But without a mystery we have it
often, and more plainly. As in Isai. where the Messiah (the branch of the root
of less) is said to smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips to slay the wicked. Isai. 11. 4. and in the Rev. where a
sharp two-edged sword is said to come out of his mouth. Rev. 1. 16:

In the virtue of this sword the Apostles and their succ^ssours have been
victorious through all the world, and subdued whole Nations to the Kingdom of
Christ.

And how every Christian should use this spiritual sword, in his own defense
(preferring his obedience to God's holy word, before his yielding to any sin)
our blessed Savior showed us the way, in his spiritual combat, in the
wilderness. Mat. 4.

When he was tempted to turn stones into bread, our Savior keeps off the
temptation with the spiritual sword, Scriptum est, It is written, Man shall not
live by bread only.

When we read the other temptations, we find the like repulse given to the
Devil, with the same sword. Scriptum est.

If such be the use of the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, what
will the Laity say to those, that would so far disarme them, as to keep
them from this spiritual sword? Though it has been so abused by themselves,
and so bowed to their own ends, as if they took it rather for a sword of wax,
then a sword of the Spirit.

And what shall we think (for we must say little) of another generation of men,
that talk much of the Spirit, and of the word of God, but make little use of
this spiritual sword, if we may guess by their Actions, that look quite
another way.

But I must look upon the rest of the Armor, that make up the (...), and the
next is the Breast Plate of Righteousness: which we might understand generally
of a righteous, and innocent life (a good defense for the Heart) but that the
Apostle (the best Interpreter of himself) expressing it to the Thessalonians
by [(...)] we may take Righteousness here for Charity. Which is one notion of
(...) in Hebr. whence (...) in gr: and Justitia in lat. are often in the holy
Scripture taken for Charity. The reason of which Hebraisme is, because the
Scripture accounts Charity no more then Justice, or Righteousness. It being a
just, and righteous act, to supply others with what we can well spare from our
selves: or a debt of love, which we owe to God, and men. This is the reason,
why the Apostle calls that (...) (righteousness) in his Epistle to the Ephesians:
which in the Epistle to the These: he expresses by (...) (Charity.)

And Charity may well be the Breastplate, which is the tie and preservative of
all virtues, and lies nearest to the Heart.

When this piece of Armor is put on. In the next place our feet are to be shod
with the preparation of the gospel of Peace.

To have our Feet shod, is to be fitted, and ready for motion.

To have them shod with a military shoe (such as in the brazen, and iron age
of swordmen, were their brass shoes, that armed them against the injuries of
the ways, where, in time of war, the enemy placed as much danger as he
could) is, in Christian warfare, to be provided against the hazard, and peril
of a Christian course of life. And,

To have them shod with the preparation of Gospel of Peace, is to be ready to
preach, or the practice what belongs to our peace with God, and Man, as the
Gospel directs us. Which indeed had not been a Gospel (that is, not so good
tidings) without Peace.

And, I doubt, though it be a Gospel of Peace, yet there are some great
Pretenders to Christian warfare, that are not so shod in these evil days.

Let us take care that we be so as the Apostle intends (such as are ready to
use the weapons here commended to us, in the defense of this Gospel of Peace,
and the propagation of it) and then we make the next piece of Armor, the
Shield of Faith.

Faith helps to shield, and protect every part about us. Therefore the Apostle
joined it with the Breast Plate of Charity, or Righteousness. And we may join it
with all the rest. 1 Thessalonians: 5. 8.

Nay, it is of such virtue, that it is not so much a part of our Armor as
indeed the Victory it self, as Saint John speaks. 1 John 5. 4. Therefore
Saint Paul (Epes. 6. 16.) might well ascribe unto that, the repelling of all
those dangerous lusts, and temptations that are suggested by the Devil, or any
of his wicked Instruments. It is our certainly believing the threats, and
promises of the Gospel, that has the power of quenching those fiery darts, and
preventing the venom, which otherwise from thence might spread, and diffuse it
self to the deadly infection of the Soul.

Wherefore, after a Shield of this power, and virtue, we may well hear of the
Helmet of Salvation, that crowns the head, and makes us now complete in our
Panoplia.

A good Soldier will have a special care of this part of his Armor, that
defends his head. Both because in the head those prime faculties are placed,
that guide the whole body: and because a wound there is most dangerous.

It is here called the Helmet of Salvation. But let us enquire, what that is,
slest we be mistaken in the sound of the words.)

Saint Paul interprets Himself, and tells us what it is (in his Epistle to the
These: (...) when he calls it, the Hope of Salvation. 1 Thessalonians: 5. 8. And that
Hope is a good Helmet, and somewhat more.

It will keep us from drooping, or being ashamed. Spes non confundit. Rom: 5. 5.

It will make us to hold up our heads without any fear, what danger soever
threatens to afflict us.

For, what storms? what blows will not be endured by him, that hopes for no
less then Salvation, and a crown immortal?

And who would not strive to purchase the Helmet of that Hope? Which being
added to what we heard before, makes up the whole Armor of God, as the Apostle
calls it, Ephesians: 6. 18. Because from Him we must expect it, and His blessing
upon it. Which we are advised to beg, and entreat by our best prayers, and
endeavors.

For this complete Armor was not set out for us to gaze on, but to purchase,
and put on, and be ready to make use of, or (in the Apostles words, v. 13. 14.)
to stand, as if we were provided, and resolved to oppose the Enemy.

And when, we think, we have done so, and are armed cap a pe. Let him that
girds on his harness, boast himself, as he that puts it off. 1 Reg. 20. 10.

He that says, he has the girdle of Chastity, and tells you so (in veritate)
in verity: may chance to find in time, and place, wherein to be dissolute.

He that begins with girding on the Sword of the Spirit. Let him take heed, he
do not end in the flesh. It is the Item, which the great Apostle gave to the
Galatians.

He that talks of the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and Charity, Let him be
sure of it (in cord) in that part which is covered with the breast plate: and
not boast of the flourishing of Opinion, that he has put into other men: That
Opinion of theirs perhaps may hold out, when his Righteousness may prove like
the Morning dew, that soon passes away.

He that walks as confidently as one that is well shod, against the danger of
the worst ways: shod with the preparation of the Gospel, and a ready Heart to
serve Christ: Let him be careful so to walk with God, that he continue to the
end. For he only that perseveres, shall be saved. Mat. 24. 13.

And lastly, (to close up the Panoplia.) He that secures himself of the Shield
of Faith, and the Helmet of Hope, let him show his Faith by his works, and his
Hope by his patience: and take heed he make not shipwreck of both at last, as
did Hymenaeus, and Alexander. 1 Timothy 1. ult.

And that this may be done, let us all with our armor take the Apostle's
advice along with us, (Ephesians. 6. 18.) Praying upon all occasion, with all
servency of prayer, and supplication in the spirit, and vigilance, and
perseverance, that, by God's assistance, we may continue Christ's Faithful
Soldiers and servants to our lives end, and be able to say with the Apostle, I
have fought a good fight, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of Righteousness.
2 Timothy 4. 7.

XXIX: Advice concerning the dangers from within us.
AFter we have been informed of the best advice against all assaults from
without: in the next place, it is of as much concernment to think of the
dangers from within

Against which we have the best Counsel and direction in those words of
Solomon, Keep thy heart above all keeping, (or with all diligence,) for out of
that are the issues of Life: Prove. 4. 23. that is, It is not only the Fountain
of our natural life, but thence also are the Springs of our Health and Solace
here, and of our Joy and happiness hereafter.

Well might this Caveat come out of a Kings heart, and out of Solomon's, the
wisest of Kings. But upon what occasion he spoke this, or any other of his
Proverbs, it is not easy to discover in so uncertain a method. They are
Aenigmata for that, as well as Proverbia You may sooner riddle the meaning,
without the occasion, then what the occasion was, when you know the meaning.

But whatsoever the true occasion might be, we know there was a time, when (out
of woeful experience) he had occasion enough to speak it, both in regard of his
own heart, (which is here so well advised,) and in regard of others, that were
to succeed him in the Throne.

This Counsel, this Legacy alone, deserved better keeping, then the best
treasure, and the strongest Fort, that the great Solomon could leave behind
him. No Rule of such consequence as this, for Him, and His, and for all Kings,
and Princes, quorum in salute n^stra omnium salus continetur: Our safety
consists much in theirs, and theirs as much in their own circumspection. For
themselves are their best Guardians under God: and their keeping close to this
Caution here, is their chiefest guard: Custodia prae omni custodia:

And it is the chiefest, not for them only, but for all others too. Therefore
it is a Rule born with us: (non facta, sed nata.)

[Keep thy Heart] is the first voice of Nature, the main principle that she
leaves imprinted in the Creature. Nor is this enough: but (for the farther
safety, and easier custody of the heart) that provident hand of God, that we
call Nature, set it in the securest place, and walled it about with strong
Ribs, and those Ribs (as the Anatomists observe) somewhat in the sorme of
Swords, for a natural defense of this little f^rt of Life. So that if we will
hear Nature her self, it is that which she directs us unto.

And as it is in Nature, so it is in Grace. Grace begins with the heart: and
having so begun, her greatest strength, and Spiritual munition is spent in the
ordering of that.

In regard of that beginning, My Son give me thy heart, (Prove. 23. 26.) says
this Penman of the Holy Gh^st elsewhere in the person of God: And in regard of
that consequent care, and defense, he says here, Prae omni custodia.

So it is in Nature: So it is in Grace: and so it is in regard of that common
enemy of Nature, and Grace too. He aims at the root of the Tree; he strikes at
the heart: and if he get any hold there, he keeps that above all keeping,
whatsoever he does for the leaves of Complement, and branches of our outward
carriage, and behavior.

So that every way; In nature, in grace, in the opposition of both, there is no
lesson of such use, and consequence as this, [Keep thy heart above all keeping.

In which words (according to the constant language of the Holy Scripture) by
the Heart we must understand the Thoughts of the Heart, or the whole Soul of
man. For nothing indeed is so perfect an emblem of the Soul, as the heart is.

1. It is so in the very outward Form. The Heart is wide above, and
narrow-pointed below. So should the Soul be dilated toward Heaven, contracted
toward Earth. Again, the Heart is such a Triangle, as the round world is not
able to fill: and the Soul has an obscure image of more then a Triangle, (of
the blessed Trinity it self.) For it consists of Reason, Will, and Memory,
(three distinct Faculties in one Soul,) and in every part is satisfied only
with God, created unto him, and never at rest but in him, says St. Aug. The
Soul is like the Heart in both these. But

2. There is yet a greater resemblance in the very Life of the Heart. For the
Heart lives by a continued breath, (per (...) and (...).) So in the life of the
Soul, there be Animae suspiria, and spiritus sancti influxus, (Ejaculations of
the Soul, and influences of the Spirit) and without that continual intercourse
betwixt God, and her self, the life of the Soul decays. Therefore (in that
regard also) it follows well in Solomon's advice, Keep thy heart above all
keeping, for out of that are the issues of life.

We understand what is here meant by the Heart, and how the Soul is figured in
that. Thence we may easily gather, what it is to keep the heart.

To keep the heart is the Office of the Soul, being watchful and observant over
all her thoughts, and affections: and to keep the heart above all keeping, is
the Emphasis of Care, and Diligence: In the same phrase which you have v. 7.
with all thy getting get understanding, that is, in respect of that, care not
for getting of any thing else. So, with all thy keeping keep thy heart; that
is, in respect of that, care not for keeping of any thing else.

XXX. Of the particular consequences (implied in the former Advice, and the
delivery of it,) and first of the Possibility of keeping the heart.
IN the Former Advice, (and the pathetical delivery of it,) two things are
plainly implied.

1. He that says, Keep the heart, implies that it may be kept. It is not
utterly impossible.

2. He that says, [Keep the heart above all keeping,] implies that it must be
kept, there is a necessity of keeping of it.

First, we will see the possibility of keeping the heart. And that we cannot
see more clearly, then in the removal of those lets, and impediments, that we
commonly pretend, against the keeping of the heart, or at least, we magnify a
great deal more then we need, to excuse our selves. Whereas it were better
wisdom to baulk such Scruples, and rather keep our hearts to some absolute
Rule, that may raise our endeavors to the highest pitch. Of those lets, and so
much magnified Pretenses, there are especially Four.

1. First, the malice and subtilty of the Devil to hinder the means.

2. Another is, our own natural weakness to apply the means.

3. A third, our unruly passions to interrupt them.

4. And then, forsooth, if all this were not, that yet we can do nothing
without a supernatural power, and therefore we may sit still. These Four,

1. For the malice and subtilty of the Devil (if that be objected against the
keeping of the heart,) I answer.

First, we may be mistaken in it. For I doubt not, but that is often fathered
upon the Devil, that rather issues from our selves: according to that of St.
James, Every man is tempted when he is drawn away, and enticed by his own lust.
Jam. 1. 14. We are often tempted by that natural concupiscence that remains in
us, ad agonem, (says St. Aug.) that is, only to increase our cautio^ and to
exercise our diligence in the resistance. For which (to make us amends) there
are also many divine sparks hid in the Soul, that are able to encounter it.

And then again, for those attempts that arise merely from the Devil, many of
them are such as may be wholly prevented: many of them are such, as may be
frustrated, and repelled.

First, they may some of them be prevented. For indeed, they are more of our
own procuring, then we are often aware of. If we did not give the Devil
encouragement, and fondly discover our weakness, and put an occasion into his
mouth, we should not have him so often, and so buisy about us.

And therefore Chrysostom: says, He is like a dog that sawns upon us, when we sit
at Table. If we throw him some meat, and bestow our favors upon him, we are
sure to have more of his company: but if we chide or neglect him, (whenever
he comes) after a while he will not loose his labor so much, as to try a
conclusion upon us. So it is with the Devil, Resist him, and he will fly from
you. Jam. 4. 7.

And if he do not fly, if he will try his conclusions, there are many ways
also to frustrate his practice, and return it upon his own head. For whatsoever
comes from him, if it vanish without any consent of ours, it shall not be
imputed to us, it shall be set upon his score.

If we fail of that, yet we may take the Foxes, the little Foxes, (Cant. 2. 15.
that is, says St. Jerome, we may intercept his wily tricks, before they gather
strength. To which purpose we had the whole Armor of God, (in the former
Section commended unto us.)

So that if we scan the case, as it should be, (for the keeping of the heart,)
we have no such Impediment, in so high a degree, either from the Devil, or from
our own concupiscence, as the ordinary complaints of the world do seem to infer.

2. And this makes way for Answer to the 2d. Obj. the hindrance that we plead
from our own natural weakness in spiritual cases, to apply the means for this
custody.

Natural weakness, so we call it, but commonly it is the abuse of the word, for
Idleness and unwillingnes to be reformed. St. Aug. confesses, this was his
Fault before his conversion He labored, and he prayed for a chaste heart, but
he did it so faintly, as if he would be denied: and he says himself, he should
have been sorry to have been heard too soon. So do we for the custody of the
heart. We are conscious of weakness, and therefore perhaps we make fair weather
to Devotion, and knock now and then at the gates of Heaven: but we run away
before we can have our answer. Whereas if we duly weighed what charge this is
[of keeping the heart above all keeping] we should use the opportunity of
Prayer, above all opportunity, for the keeping of it. Our Prayers would not be
so cold, nor our Vigilance over the heart so poor, and slight, that when we
pray, that we may be able to keep it against the enemy, we can hardly beware of
the enemy in the very Prayer that we deliver.

This is a sore malady. We injure our selves no way so much as this. And it
comes not so much out of natural weakness, (though I am too well acquainted how
much that is, but, I fear, it proceeds not so much from that, as from an
inconsiderate behavior, and want of this diligence that here is called for.

David, to this purpose, could physic himself with Fasting, and water his
Couch with his tears. Ps. 102. 9. and 6. 6. St. Paul could use his Body like
his adversary, that he would buffe^ and keep under, from all hope of
resistance. 1 Cor 9. 27. And we (without such ado) think it enough to flatter
God, by undervaluing that power that we have from him.

But he would like it better, if we admonished our selves, that it is his gift
that little power that we have, and it were wisdom and thankfulness in us, to
husband the talent well, and procure more by using of that. He would like it
better, if we chid our selves out of that affected weakness, by the Examples of
those many Saints that have gone as far before us in all virtue, as they have
in time. For could they macerate themselves with Fasting, and cannot we abstain
from riot and excess? Could their Charity empty themselves of all that they
had, and cannot our justice give every man his own? Or if these patterns be too
high, and out of our reatch.

What say you to those virtues of the Heathen, who had no other motive but
vainglory? amongst whom (and elsewhere) some rare spirits there have been,
(come into the World from among the cobwebs of a nasty Cottage) that have
filled Ages with admiration of their virtues and greatness.

Or (if they also do not move) shall I provoke you by the example of little
children the weaker age, such as Daniel, and those three in the Furnace? Or of
women (the weaker sex,) such as the resolute Deborah, Esther, and some other of
that rank.

Or of the simple and ignorant among the common people, that have (some of
them) attained to such a height of Piety above the more learned, that St.
Augustine might well cry out to his Friend Alipius, Quid patimur? surgunt
indocti, and rapiunt coelum, and nos cum doctrinis nostris, fine cord, ecce
ubi volutamur in carne and sanguine? What advantage is it to have better heads
in keeping, if others do keep better hearts then we?

Or lastly, shall I name the worst livers too. (Publicans, Thieves, Harlots,
and the like) that, as our Savior told the Jews, many times step in before
us, into the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 21. 31. and shame those that might have
had the start of them.

To say nothing, that (besides all this) we may go to school to the inferior
Creatures. To the Ant for diligence, to the Dove for chastity, to the Cock for
valor.

A strange thing it is, that what has been done by all these, should not, in
some measure, be possible unto us? Let them all be scanned, as they should be,
and I have said enough to shake the second pretense drawn from our own weakness,
and that disabling us from doing any good.

But we rest not here.

3 A third scruple there is, drawn from our unruly Affections, and their
Inclinations hot, and violent. Does not this also trouble us, without any
ground? For.

What if they are hot, and violent? So much the better, if they are well
bridled, and and directed to the right use. What if a Horse be of a hot nature,
and quick metal? So much the fitter for service: Though if he be not well
backed, and mastered, he may chance to make his Rider repent, that he was so
well mounted. So it is with the Soul, (that goes here under the name of the
Heart) She is the (...), that is, She holds the Reins, to guide, and command
those qualities, which are indeed natural, and as they should be fitted to her
service. Although they prove unnatural, and immoderate, and wild, when they are
suffered to rage, as they list, and turn the Soul out of her own throne, and
dominion, to which they were purposely created to stoop, and obey.

Can we tame the furious horse? Can we alter the nature of other unruly
Creatures, that have no reason to guide them? And we that are made after the
Image of God ((...)) in the mild part especially, as Chrysostom speaks: shall
we be able to work nothing upon our selves, by bringing the Appetite, and
sensual part, under the Dictate of Reason? Can wild creatures, that have no
reason, be made tame? And cannot tame creatures, that have reason, be kept in
their right state?

Yes, the custody of the heart inforres the command of the body. And he that
keeps that in the right state (not stupefied with idleness, not distempered with
excess) shall happily avoid the extravagance of Passions, and make that his
profitable Servant, which otherwise will be his Master, and Tyrant, to keep him
under.

This may be said of that hinderance in keeping the heart) which is objected
against the Affections, and Passions.

But yet we have not done.

4. There is one main Impediment behind, and (notwithstanding all that has
been said) some are still ready to object.

Obj. Are we here advised to keep the heart? Is it a task for us to perform? Is
it a Duty within the reatch of our ability? Surely, if God Himself do not keep
the heart, in vain do they labor that keep it.

Resp. It is true, that of our selves, excluding God's help, we cannot: without
his especial grace we cannot. But if we our selves forsake the heart in vain
do we then look for God to come, and keep it. As we cannot, excludi^g His help:
so He will not, excluding our endeavors.

Obj. So, if it be said, that It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs. etc. Romans 9. 16.

Resp. It is true, there is no such necessity, no such merit in them, to
purchase it. But, by running, and by entreating we may move God to help us. And
so it is our fault only, if we be not helped, though it be his grace only, if
we be.

Therefore, if thou love thy self, Do not forsake thy Heart, because we can
do nothing without God's grace, and assistance: but watch over it the rather.
Because we are not sure, that God will do any thing, by his grace, and
assistance, unles our endeavors go along with it.

If they do, He has promised his assistanced Ask, and it shall be given you:
seek, and you shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Mat. 7. 7.
Learn what it is to ask, and to seek, and to knock. And, when you have actually
done so, then your own happy experience will answer your scruples, and easily
inform you, that to your own safety, your own care and custody is required.

For, Wisdom is easily seen of them, that love Her, and found of them, that
seek Her. The unfeigned desire of reformation is Her beginning, and the care of
Discipline is love: and love is the keeping of Her laws, and the giving heed
to Her laws is the assurance of immortality. Wisd. 6. 12, 17, 18.

Every way, to ask, to seek, to endeavor, is expected from us. Otherwise, if
we are not kept, if we are quite lost, we may thank our selves for it.

To that purpose, when God tells Joshuah, that no man should be able to stand
before him: does He not add withal, only be thou strong, and of a good
courage? Josh. 1. 5.

Yes, he does so. And we have it four times over, in one Chapter, that we may
be sure to take notice of it.

And the Royal Prophet has an exhortation parallel unto it. Be you strong, and
God shall establish your hearts. Which I may thus paraphrase in the language of
the wise man, Keep thou thy heart, and God will keep it.

If thou, by thy own negligence, and remisnes, art not wanting to good
thoughts, and other good helps, they shall never be wanting to thy Heart. For
whenever they fail, it is only because thou art not vigilant, and intent to
purchase them, to cherish them to increase them.

For, when the light, by which our hearts are enlightened, is hid, and lost,
that we cannot perceive it, (...) (says St Basil) that is, it is not because
the light is spent (for that can never be exhaust) but it is because we have
done somewhat, that makes us not so well disposed to apprehend the light, as we
were before. Or because we are drousie, and dull, and make no use of it.

If we are not careless of our selves, we have the benefit of our Savior's
Prayer, Father keep them in thy name. And of God's own promise. I will not
leave thee, nor forsake thee. But then, we must not leave, nor forsake our
selves.

Therefore if any man think, by magnifying the grace of God, to pull down the
possibility of doing that which God Himself calls upon us so earnestly to do,
he takes a wrong course.

For, his very calling so earnestly upon us, might breed a security of what is
expected from Him: and that, if we be not wanting to our selves, He will not be
wanting for those good Motions, and that gracious Assistance, that conduces to
the performance of those good actions, which he so desires.

For then, His Grace is never withheld, or denied, but upon our former neglect,
and contemp of it. And those denials we may truly reckon to be from our selves,
and not from Him: and therefore rather confess, and bewail, then excuse our
sins.

For, every way, you see, Neither the Malice, and Subtilty of the Devil: Nor
our own natural weakness, to apply the means: Nor the unrulines of our Passions,
and Affections, to interrupt them: Nor the need of Divine Assistance: Nor any
other pretended Impediment must any way take off, but rather increase our best
endeavors for his charge, of keeping the heart.

XXXI. Of the Necessity of keeping the Heart.
AS we have proved it feasible (by removing all Lets, and Pretenses) so now, I
hope. we shall prove it a Necessary Duty [prae omni custodia] above all keeping.

1. This Necessity will best appear in the Inconveniences, and dangers, that
follow upon not keeping it. In which regard, the strongest Antidotes, and
Preservatives had need be applied to the Heart, the strongest Ties, and
Obligations laid upon that. Sin being no where so soon begun, no where so
easily set forward, no where so speedily perfected, as there. For,

1. First, The Actions of the body require some degrees, and continuance, and
opportunities of Time, and Place: but the thoughts of the mind conceive sin in
an instant, without stirring out of their own nest.

2. Again, The Actions of the body require some labor, and it may be, some
fellow laborer too, for the effecting of them: but the Heart alone, without
help, without labor, without company, can entertain, and consummate any
operation of Hers.

3. Lastly, The Actions of the body may be discovered, and hindered by some
others, that come to the notice of them: but the operations of the mind are so
secret to all but God alone, that when we are at the worst, we may seem the
best.

So that a necessary caution it is, in regard of that danger, that may come
from evil Actions. But that is not all.

2. In the best Actions, if the Heart be not looked too, we endanger the
carriage, and may easily fall short of the reward. For, if the Fountain be
corrupt, the streams cannot be clear. If our Hearts displease God, our Actions
cannot be accepted. If they proceed out of constraint, or out of a melancholy
retired discontent, whereby we are fallen out with the world, or out of
Vainglory, or any other by^ respect, it is but lost labor. For, God is a
Spirit, and he will be served in spirit, and in truth. He looks to the Heart,
and to the Modus of every Action, how good, how plausible soever in it self.

In both these regards, it is a necessary duty, that here we urge [prae omni
custodia.]

And yet there are some so far from this careful keeping of the Heart from sin,
that they earnestly labonr, and take pains to actuate, and consummate those
sins, that have there given the onset. Their evil actions present them always
in motion, like the raging, and troubled Sea, that casts out nothing but dirt,
and mire. But, in respect of any good, they are liker to standing pooles. Many
a sweet shower from Heaven falls upon them, and for want of motion, they suffer
them to perish. By which supine carelesnes, they do not only remain
unwholesome, as they were before, but even that good water, that was poured in,
is corrupted, and turned to no use.

O that they would hear the wise man's counsel [de custod a cordis] at least, to
cherish their good thoughts, while they have them. For, it is a shame, that
true knowledge, and gracious admonition should pass through the Heart so often
in vain, as good milk passes through a strainer, that leaves nothing but
dross behind. It is a shame, that they should forsake the Fountain of life,
when it is so near them; and take so much pains to dig those wells that will
hold nothing: while with more ease they might have Wells of living water, and a
good heart, out of which are the issues of Life.

But to prevent this in us, if you please, we will now cast about, what might
be the chiefest means, and helps, by which the heart may, and should be thus
kept, as it is here intended.

Without them we should leave all imperfect. Therefore I will give you a short
view of them all, as near as I can.

XXXII Of the means, and helps of keeping the Heart: and first of the prime,
and superior Means.
AMongst them all the prime and superior means is the immediate presence and
assistance of God.

The very thought of Divine presence is of great moment. (...), the Heathen
could say; but we need no such help.

In this high point, I would entreat you rather to observe, how the Royal
Prophet was affected with the speculation of it, Psalm. 139. where we read thus.
O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me etc. that is, (if I shall
entertain you a while with a brief explication of what he says in the twelve
first verses of that Psalm, which are all spent upon that subject,)

V. 1. O Lord, thou know me as well, as if thou had made great search and
inquiry after me: thou know how I dispose of my self in my times of rest, and
retirednes: and (after that) how I fit my self for employment. Thou discernest
my most intimate and familiar thoughts and intentions, long before they are
actually mine.

v. 2. Thou art privy to my labor, and repose; thou art thoroughly acquainted
with all my actions and proceedings in all the course of my life.

v. 3. There is not a word at my tongues end, but thou can tell it perfectly
before it come out, I need not express it unto thee.

4. Thou do compass me as close on every side, as a city is beset in the
strictest siege. And I can stir as little from thy presence, as if thou had
laid thy hand upon me, to hold me fast.

5, This thy knowledge of me, and my ways, is so wonderful, that I can neither
comprehend it, nor be concealed from it.

6. For whether can I go to hide my self from thy knowledge of me, or from thy
dreadful omnipresence?

If I could mount as high as Heaven, or couch my self as low as Hell:

8. If I had the agility of the nimble wings of the morning, to convey me in a
moment from East to West; and dispose of me in the remotest parts of the Sea.

9. Even there also I must expect to be led by thy hand: no other but thy
gracious conduct must be my guide.

10. If I should think to hide my self from Thee in some dark corner, the
darkest night would be all one (to that purpose) with the clearest day.

11. For to thee (who art the Fountain of Light) the Day, and Night: the
clearest, and the darkest places are all one.

12. So that the abstrusest, and most secret piece about me, my very reins lie
open, and naked to thy view: who did cover me with skin, and flesh, and
compact me with Bones, and sinews, in as secret a place, in my Mother's womb,

This pious Meditation of the Psalmist I was the more willing to express,
(according to the Emphatical importment of his own words) that the thought of
Divine presence might make the deeper impression in our hearts.

And sure, if a man would now and then figure to himself an all-seeing eye
wakeful upon his very thoughts, an ear open to his words, a hand pondering, and
summing up the account of his works; it would be a high degree of custody, and
make a good intent from the heart, put a right tincture upon all that he
thought or said, or did, in matters of any moment.

This the very thought of Divine Presence would do. But if we could join the
comfort of his Divine presence and Assistance together, that would be prae omni
custodia, no custody like it.

This should be our care. I am sure it was his greatest care, that was a man
after God's own heart.

Mine eyes are ever looking toward the Lord, says He Ps. 25. 15. and elsewhere
in several passages.

I have set (or I use to set) God always before me. Unto thee, O Lord, do I
lift up my Soul. Ps. 16. 9. and 25. 1.

It is good for me to hold fast by God. Ps. 73. 28.

O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name: Ps. 86. 11. And more
Emphatically (as the Latin has it Ps. 119. 120. Confige timore tuo carnes
meas,) as if he would say, Pierce me through, as it were, and nail my thoughts
unto thee, from being distracted elsewhere to any thing else.

In which sense St. Paul might say that he was crucified with Christ, that is,
he had nailed his meditations to his Cross.

This should be our care, sicut oculi servorum Our eyes should be still waiting
upon God as the eyes of Servants look to the hands o^ their Masters, Ps. 123.
2. and then his eye^ would be reciprocally watching over us. Oculi Domini super
timentes eum. Ps. 33. 17.

This is tenere se ad Deum, to keep close to God. Of which phrase we hear so
much commendation in St. Aug. de vita beata: and whereupon he says in another
place, Si vis habere custodem non dormientem, Deum elige custodem: If you would
have a Keeper, that shall never slumber, nor sleep, let God be your Keeper.

That is it, that will keep the Heart safe, and confident, like Mount Sion,
that cannot be moved. Psalm. 125. 1.

Especially if this (the most eminent means of our support) be fed, and
maintained with the frequent meditation of the Majesty, Power, VVisdome,
Goodness, and Attributes of God.

Whosoever is taken up with these happy varieties of content, cannot be much at
leisure for the idle excursion of thoughts. He will not easily stoop to such
base employments, nor endure to be rudely shouldred out of that Happiness.

For, if we, when we are possessed with the serious consideration of any
worldly thing, are by that so excluded from intention (for that time) upon
other matters, that neither the Eye, nor the Ear can discharge their natural
functions, upon an object directly before them. Much lesle, when a divine
speculation has taken us up, shall we be able to condescend to those inferior
thoughts, that may endanger the Heart.

XXXIII. Of the subordinate Means, and helps for keeping the Heart. And first
of the Antecedent, and Preparatory Means.
WE have seen the virtue of the Prime, and Superior Means. Under which other
subordinate Means there are. Whereof some are Antecedent, and Preparatory to
the keeping of the Heart, as Purity, and Aequability, that make it fit to be
kept, and worthy of keeping. Other are Actual Preservatives. Of which suo loco.

1. First, We must begin with Purity. And it is the natural beginning in all
courses.

What Physician does not begin with purging before he come to his Cordials, and
Rules of health?

Who puts sweet odors into an impure vessel? And how can the Heart be filled
with those graces that preserve it, until it be a pure Heart? then it may.

Therefore Junius, and some others expound Solomon's words particularly of that.
Keep the Heart, that is (say they) purge it, and keep it, like a fountain from
all filth. For, as our Savior has taught us. Not that which comes into the
mouth defiles a man: but that which comes out of the Heart. Evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, and the like, these come forth of the Heart, and these
defile a man.

And, if you hear St Basil, (...) -- As smoke drives a way bees; as filthy
vapors, and smells drive away pigeons: so does the corruption of the Heart
drive away the Angels, that pitch their tents about us for our defense. If we
would keep those blessed Guardians, or any thing else worth the keeping, we
must keep Purity in the first place.

2. Unto Purity we must add Constancy, and Aequability of disposition (the
second care that we propounded, by way of Preparation) that is. Our thoughts
must not be at random, and extravagant. For, it is not Purity alone, which
makes that true representation, that must be there.

In other cases, you see, Snow is a pure white, and yet cannot do it. Milk is a
pure white, and cannot do it. Water, that inclines to a black color, yet (if
it be not hindered by motion) propter levorem it represents any thing better.

So is it in the Soul. Confusion, and Inaequability is our greatest Impediment,
but (...). Basil.

A settled, and well ordered mind, a serious reducing of our thoughts to one
center, makes way to the keeping of the heart in the right state. Or, at least,
add it to that Purity, that we named before, And both together will make the
heart fit to be kept, and worthy of keeping.

After we have taken order for them, then we come in the next place, to the
particular Means, and Preservatives, by which the heart is actually kept.

XXXIV. The particular subordinate Means of keeping the Heart.
THese may be ranked, in this order.

1. The Fortifying, and Defending of the Senses, the outward passages unto the
Heart.

2. The careful guard, and government of the Affections, her Domestical
Servants.

3. The Opposition, and Repulse of worldly thoughts, the common enemies, that
assail it without.

4. And lastly, The continual supply of good Thoughts, and Meditations, to
employ, and strengthen those Domestical servants, as we called them.

1. The first of these is so necessary, that the wiseman had no sooner
delivered this caution for a careful watch, and custody of the soul but he
presently adds, (for the care of the Senses, and those other parts. that are
commanded by them.) Put away from thee a froward mouth. Let thine eyes look
right on (let no fair appearance turn them awry) Ponder the path of thy feet.
Bow thine ear to understanding. etc. Prove. 4 24, 25, 26.

There Is somewhat, it seems, in the care of the Tongue, and the Feet, that
makes to the safe custody of the Heart. But the Eye, and the Ear, and the rest
of the Senses, above all other must be looked to.

They are the Windows, and the back-doors, wherein as the Enemy may creep
through to offend the Soul: so her own Servants also from thence may creep out
to betray Her.

In both these regards (for the dangers without, and for the revolts within) we
must look well to the Senses; if seriously we intend the custody of the Soul.

God has not mounted the senses into the highest seat of the body, there (like
false spies) to see, and betray. But, like a careful watch, to foresee, and
prevent the imminent dangers. Either by shutting their doors to enemies, that
openly assault; or by keeping aloof off from those that can poison where they
do but touch.

That, in all the Faculties of the Soul and Body, we may be calm, and quiet.

Not tossed about with every breath, that beats at the Ears.

Not disquieted with every fancy, that is taken in at the Eyes.

Not shaked, and affected with every touch

But having all the Senses, as the Organs, and servants of the mind, at the due
command.

This is our first Help, for the securing of the Heart.

2. The second is the guard and government of the Affections, her domestical
servants.

For commonly the Affections are the Rebels of our Nature. (...). (says St
Basil) i e. which do as good as put out the very eyes of the soul, and make a
blind Sampson of the strongest heart.

So that this is a duty, as necessary as any of the other. For in vain does
the Soul command her attendants abroad, if she look not as well to all at
home. There is all the mis-rule, if we take not some exact order of Government.

Now to fight against these Rebels, to prevail against these so potent, and
homebred Sirens, hic labor, hoc opus est. To tame the wildness of those
Affections that must be bridled. To take off the dullness of others, that must
have the spur. To appease Anger, and lust. To oppose pride, and covetousness.
To carry a strict hand over other ways of provocation, and Inticement. And to
endure what we should do in such a task, and conflict: Pars magna Martyrii
est, says St Augustine.

It is a kind of Martyrdom constantly to endure such combats, and not to
yield. Happy is he that can do it best.

And who would not strive for that crown? where He that does not resist, but
plays with his Affections, and Passions, dallies with no other, then a
dangerous fire in his own bosom.

To secure the heart, in this case, we must fly idleness, and too long and
careless intention upon dangerous objects at a dangerous time. And, above all,
we must strive for a due serenitie, and calmeness of Spirit: and remember that
Lesson, which our blessed Savior commended to our practice. Discite a me, quia
mitis sum Learn of me: for I am meek, and lowly in heart. Mat: 11. 29.

All this we must be willing to do, that we may, by degrees, exclude the
obstreperous, and tumultuary accesle of their importunate, and impudent
solicitations.

3. When we have gone thus far, for the safety of the heart: then we must
come to the opposition, and repulse of worldly thoughts, the Enemies, that
hinder, and assault the heart without, and would withdraw it from God.

This must be added to the former, at fit times. For, we cannot give advantage
to the world, but we must take as much from the Spirit.

As it is in the balance (if the one part goes up, the other goes down) so it
is in the heart commonly.

If worldly thoughts fall to the ground, better will ascend into the place of
them: But when we mount them into the highest place, down go the other.

I say, this must be added, at fit times. For otherwise wordly thoughts, and
businesses, and recreations too, have their time, when they are necessary, and
must not be omitted.

Neither are we always alike disposed for heavenly employment.

Nor will the object it self indeed be gazed upon long by us.

And in this Advise, where the wise man says [prae omni custodia] keep thy
heart above all keeping. [Prae omni] is so far from excluding all other
thoughts, and employments, that it rather implies many more, but it puts the
Superlative, upon this above them all.

The heart may have her times of other serious entertainments, or lawful
Recreation. But she must have her time of Privacie, and Retiredness from them
all.

1. Both because the devout heart is the spouse of Christ, and (as St Bernard
speaks Christ does not love, to come to his spouse in the presence of a
multitude.

At least, he will not knock every day at that heart, where there is so much
other business, that there is no leisure to let him in.

2. And then again, because whenever the Soul would mount her self to
heavenly speculations, if she be surprised with worldly affairs, she is like a
bird, that has her feathers limed, Entangled in them, she is not able to use
so much as her natural strength, to elevate her self.

In both these regards, there are seasons, wherein she must be retired to God,
and Her self.

And this is the third of those means, and preservatives, that may be used for
the keeping of the heart.

4. After all these. We have no other care, unless it be this. How there may
be a continual supply of good thoughts, and Meditations, to busy, and
strengthen the heart upon all occasions.

And such a supply there may be, in the daily perusal of two great Books,
upon which all other are but Commentaries) the Book of the Scriptures, and the
Book of the Creatures.

The Royal Prophet made the Nineteenth Psalm in speculation of them Both. The
first part of it begins with the Creation ( The heavens declare the glory of
God. The second part (from the 7. verse) is of the Scriptures.

The Law of the Lord is a perfect law. And so Both those Books are there
commended to us.

1. Whereof, That of the Scriptures is absolutely necessary, as a Rule and
Pattern to them that want a guide, or light it self to the blind. Therefore
we are advised to meditate in that Day and Night. Psalm. 1.

2. And the other of the Creatures must not be neglected, because they were
created indeed to that end, to serve our weak apprehension of God as so many
Spectacles, not to look upon them, and stay there, but thorough them to look
upon God Himself.

And so we may understand that obscure place in the Preacher, (...) that is, He
has given the heart of man a whole world of matter for Meditation so large,
that no man shall ever fully go through it, and find out all the works of
God, though he spend all his life time in that study, from the beginning of it
to to the end. Eecles. 3. 11.

Out of all which plenty we might, every day, select something, to praepossesse
that room in the heart, which otherwise vain, and perhaps worse then vain
fancies will incroach upon.

If we delight in rarities, we might every day pick out some of those real
wonders, which God himself (the God of wonder, and the God of Nature) has
abundantly afforded to entertain our speculation. Whether we look up to
Heaven, or down to Earth: whether we look to other Creatures, or to our
selves: into our bodies, or into our souls: there is matter enough of wonder,
and meditation, to keep our hearts in the fear and live of God.

XXXV. The Close, and Fruit of these last Meditations.
WE have seen, that the Heart may and should be kept, above all keeping. We
have seen what Means, and Helps there are for the keeping of it.

Let us therefore so keep it, as our only treasure, which whosoever has lost
has nothing else to lose or keep.

We are careful enough, that the Body and Apparel, and every thing else
about us, be neat and cleanly kept, and repaired. When are we so forgetful, as
to leave the body one day without meat, and drink, and sleep, and attendance?
Let us do as much for the Heart, and Soul, which is worthy of far more.

Let her be Lodged in a room worthy of Her, Let Her be Fed with her own proper
food. Let her be reposed upon her own pillow, that passes all understanding.

To keep it thus, is to follow the counsel of the wise man, and to prove wiser
then He was. But to employ so precious an Instrument to any base use, is the
Act of a man, that has lost his wits.

I will say more. It is no better then Sacrilege, that a Soul, which has
been offered to God, as a reasonable sacrifice, should (after that) be made an
organ of sensuality, and a Cage for Devils.

No better, did I say? Nay it is far worse. For it is not only the
withholding of a Vessel consecrated to the service of God, but it is an Attempt
upon the Image of God Himself. The Heart here being the Soul, and the Soul a
Character of the Divinity. And therefore not to be prostituted to public
infections, but kept pure, and safe, above all keeping. Our answer to all
Attempts against it, being that which was our first answer in Baptism
[Abrenuncio] I for sake them all. We undertook that once, and failed of it.
Let us now resolve, and do it.

And, that we may be enabled to do it. Let it be our humble prayer, that God
would create a new Heart within us, and then give us strength to keep it, as we
ought. And (to the same end) that He would give us grace to lay sure hold upon
the Prime, and Superior Means, and keep close unto Him, the living God, out
of whom indeed are the issues of Life.

XXXVI. Instructions for those times, wherein we are called to the Church.
HAving hitherto endeavored to fit the Heart, and Soul for more private
devotions and entertainments: we may now take the like care to prepare her for
times of Divine, and Public Service with the Congregation: both for the
further confirming of her self, and the clearer example to others.

And, if we mean to be so serious in this high employment, as the happy
exercise, and the most happy consequence of it does require, good reason there
is, that first our Preparation to the Sanctuary, then our Demeanor there, as
in Gods House, should exceed all other. As the Shekel and measure of the
Sanctuary was double to the ordinary measure.

He that dwells in Heaven has an especial eye upon that place, above all other;
not only to defend it, but to observe our carriage within it. 2 Maco. 3. 39.
Which that it may be the more acceptable, we should persuade our selves, as in
our earthly affairs we often forget our heavenly, so in this heavenly work,
much rather to forget, or neglect our earthly businesses, and address our
selves wholly to the service of God.

For, if he be accursed that does any work of God negligently: how shall he
avoid a curse, that uses not care, and decency, and reverence in the discharge
of holy, and public Duties.

A few dead flies (says the wiseman) corrupt the precious ointment of the
Apothecary: so may a little undecent carriage discredit the noblest, and best
of our Civil, and Religious Actions. Eccles. 10. 1. Therefore should our
Preparation, before we go to the Church, and our Heed, and Discretion there,
be such as may keep us from offering the sacrifice of fools, and with an ill
savor infecting that incense, which is presented before God Himself. It
should do so. And it will do so. And it will be so, if we will follow that Wise
man's counsel, Eccles. 5. 1. vel 4. ult. Observe thy foot, when thou go
into the house of God. that is, Examine thy Affections, and thy course of life,
and be more ready to hear -- where hearing is put for obeying (audire for
obedire) and his meaning is, that Obedience is better then Sacrifice. 1 Samuel:
15. 22. Therefore we should be readier to obey God, then foolishly to persuade
our selves, that without amendment of life, our Sacrifice, or Prayers should
expiate our faults. No, without that Obedience, our very Prayer is an addition
to our sins.

If you are not yet ready for that Wiseman's counsel, will you listen a while
to the advice of the wise son of Syrach Ecclus. 18. 23. not to venture upon the
work of Prayer, or rush into the house of Prayer, without due preparation. For
God being a Spirit, when we come to serve him, he looks first to the Heart.
vide Number. 19. 13. and 2 Chronicles: 23. 19. And if we do not so too, if we be not
well advised what feet (that is, what Affections) bring us into God's house,
that careless tendry of our service is the bold act of them that tempt the
Lord, and renders them more sinful, and so less acceptable unto Him. So
thought wise Solomon, that built the first Temple unto God, the first house of
Prayer.

And so thought the wise son of Syrach, that gave us the first Lesson of
Preparation to Prayer.

He that is wise will hear them, and walk with God alone, (Mic. 6. 8.) before
he presume to walk toward the Church, that so when he is there, he may give him
the honor due to his name, and worship the Lord with holy worship. Ps. 29. 2.
For Holiness becomes his house for ever. Ps. 93. ult.

Aaron had this memorandum of it in the forefront of his Miter. Exodus 28. 36.
and 30 30. And it was the Meaning of that Law given to him and his Sons, when
you go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, (or to the Altar,) wash with
water, that you dye not.

Holiness in the Front, and washing at the entrance were emblemes of that
Purity, and Sanctity of life, which makes our service acceptable unto God, and
without which we must not think to flatter him with outward shows; and
pretenses of Hearing or Preaching, or tendering our Prayers. Jer. 7. 10.

For to the ungodly says God, Why do thou preach my Laws, and take my
covenant into thy mouth. Psalm. 50. 16. And elsewhere.

I cannot away with your Sabbaths, and solemn assemblies. Is. 1. 13.

Such blind Pretenders to the service of God (whether Clergy, or Laity) were
ever more bold then welcome. God has showed us in several places of Scripture
how he likes their room better then their company.

Amongst other places, so he tells them in Malachi, 1. 10. I would some of you
would shut the Church-doors, and keep them out, for I have no pleasure in them,
nor will I accept an offering at their hands (says the Lord of Hosts.)

And again. I will throw the dung of your solemn sacrifices into your faces,
and so let them cart you away with it. Mal. 2. 3.

This is the plain meaning of those words in Malachi, and do not all the
Prophets say as much as this comes to? will you hear some of them? Isay first.

To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? When you come to appear
before me, who required this at your hands? Is. 1. 11, 12.

He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man. He that sacrifices a Lamb, as if
he cut off a dogs head. Is. 66. 3.

To what purpose comes there to me Incense from Sheba? Jer. 6. 20. and again in
the next Chapter: v. 4. Trust not in lying words, The temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. Will you steal etc. and come and
stand before me in this house?

They come as other people use to come, to hear; and show much love with their
mouths, the Sermon is like Music to them, for they hear and do not. Ezekiel. 33.
31, 32.

I will not smell your solemn assemblies: take away from me the noise of your
songs, and melody of your viols. Amos 5. 23.

Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord? will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil? Mic. 6. 6.

The Prophet Haggai gives them a touch of the same mistake, in the question
about the touch of holy flesh, where he would have them informed, that an
impure and disobedient heart pollutes all that is offered upon the holy Altar^
Hag. 2. 11.

If men would now and then think seriously of these and such like places of
Scripture before they go to Church, it would make them carry better intentions,
and affections, and resolutions, then are commonly brought thither by most men
that enter the Church pro forma, and come out no better then they went in.

What I have said will be warrant enough to make this my first Item to my self
and others, that we look first within, quid loquatur in nobis Deus, whether
there be within us an Oracle or Temple fit for God? or if there be not, that we
stay our going toward the Church a while, and go first to our Closets,
reconcile our selves to him, and then go and offer our service there.

For it is in vain to come with that foolish people in Ezekiel, that make a
show of much love to God wish their mouths only, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Is. 58. 2.
Without a right intention of Heart, and purity of Devotion, our mere formal
coming to Church (to hear, or pray, or preach,) will procure us little
acceptance.

Holy David's method would be thought on: I will wash my hands in innocence, O
Lord, and so will I go to thy Altar. Ps. 26. 6. He took the best course to
begin with, [paratum est cor] my heart is ready, Ps. 108. 1. and so to
[cantabo] I will sing and give thanks with the best member that I have.

XXXVII. A second Task in this Preparation.
AFter this first care in our Preparation, a second would be to inflame our
hearts with the love of that holy place, and that holy work, to which it is fit
we should come with ready and cheerful minds. And that may best be done by
borrowing some Light and Heat from those servants of God, that have excelled in
that kind, and especially from the Royal Psalmist, by meditation upon these or
the like streins of his or theirs, wherein we shall see, that they accounted
this place the Joy of their Glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon
they set their minds. Ezekiel. 24. 25.

One thing I have desired of the Lord which I will require, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty of
the Lord, and to visit his Temple. Psalm. 27. 4.

O Lord I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine
Honor dwells.

When shall I come to appear before the presence of my God? Ps. 42. 2.

O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts. My Soul has a desire to
enter into the Courts of the Lord. My heart, and my flesh rejoice in the living
God. Psalm. 84. 2.

I will offer in thy dwelling an oblation with great gladness. Ps. 27. 7.

My lips will be saine, when I sing unto thee, so will my Soul -- Ps. 71. 23.

Give thanks, O Israel, to the Lord in the Congregation, from the ground of the
Heart. Ps. 68. 26.

XXXVIII. Our passage toward the Church, and our entrance into it.
AS we pass by the graves, in the Churchyard, or other Dormitories, we may
(when we are alone, and can do it, without seeming Affection, and Hypocrisy)
put our selves in mind of our Mortality, and the hope of a joyful Resurrection
out of those (...), which are God's Storehouses for the Bodies of his Servants,
that have their Souls in Paradise: or rather His Paradise, his Garden set with
Beds of those flowers, that shall bud out again in the great Day of our general
Spring.

In like manner, as we cast our eye upon the Font, and Pulpit, we may sometime
recall the memory of that solemn vow, that we openly undertook at our first
Initiation into the Church: and of those many Sermons, that have often rubbed
the remembrance of that, with little appearance of success in our practice.

But we must never forget to come in and out and do all in the Church with that
decent, and reverend behavior of our selves, that is due to a place of Gods
more especial presence, and our more peculiar service unto Him.

Whereupon Jacob called his Bethel a place of dread: and the Jews styled
theirs (...) a Palace, or place of Majesty, where they conceived God sitting
between the Cherubim as upon a throne of state, and the Christians called
theirs (in the same sense) (...), and (...): whence we had our Kirk, and
Church. All these names putting us in mind of that which was the very letter of
the Law, that we should reverence Gods Sanctuary. Levit. 19. 30. Though (in it
self) it was no peculiar Act of Law, but rather the Dictate of Reason, that God
should be approached to, and served in the compleatest kind of service, with
all inward, and outward reverence, that is fitting for us. The Holy, and
Princely Prophet carried this thought along with him, when he went to Gods
House, and how does he express it? We will go into thy Tabernacle, and fall
low, on our knees before thy Footstool, (that is, before the Ark. Psalm. 132.
7. And in other words of his, we invite our selves, every morning, to the same
duty [in o Venite adoremus] O come, let us worship, and bow down, (that is,
(...)) and kneel before the Lord our Maker, Psalm. 95. 6. i. e. before him that
made body, and soul, joined them both together, and will expect they should
both be joined together in his service.

Our Invitatory Psalm calls for it by the example of Holy David in the
Tabernacle. That his example prevailed with the Jews, we see it in Solomon's
time. For, as soon as they had a Temple, we find them all (the whole
congregation) bowing themselves, with their faces to the ground, upon the
pavement, and worshipping. 2 Chronicles. 7. 3. and Nehem. 8. 6.

And who knows not, that it was a custom of the Jewish Church, when they were
abroad, to pray toward the Temple: and when they were in the Temple, to
worship toward the Altar. The first we see in Daniel's practice. Dan. 6. 10.
The other confirmed by good K: Hezekiah's command. Incurvate vos coram Altari
hoc. 4 Reg. 18. 22.

If the Christian Church has the like Practice before the holy Table, it is no
more bowing to the Table then K: David or K: Hezekiah's adoration before the
Altar was adoring the Altar in those days: or man's kneeling before his seat
is kneeling to his seat. 2 Chronicles. 29. 29, 30.

And if the Christians Reverence was more then that of the Jews, good reason
for it, we have more engagements, that call for more respect, and might cast us
lower before his Foot^ stool: that first bowed the Heavens, and descended as
low as earth, that hemight raise us as high as Heaven: then in his agony,
bowed again, and fell on his face, to pray for us, that now think it much, to
stoop a little in the Church, when we come to pray for our selves. Mat. 26. 39:

The glorious Saints above, they do it, they bow when they address themselves
before Him. In the fourth of the Revelation you may see them falling down, and
worshipping, and casting their Crowns before the Throne. Rev. 4. 10. They that
pretend to be cunning in the Revelation think they could tell us best, who they
are, whether Caelestial Spirits, or the Reverend Fathers of the Church, that go
there, under the name of (...) (Elders, or Priests.) Whosoever they are, they
are such, whose example we had better follow here, then defer it, till we think
to see them in Heaven.

But, if they will continue as stiff in the knees, as they are in the neck, I
must tell them, the very Devils did it. Marc. 3. 11. They bowed before our
Savior when he was in the state of his humility: shall we be loath to do it,
when he is in his state of glory?

Surely, he that commanded us not to bow to idols, did not mean but we should
bow down to himself. Yet if we doubt of his meaning, let us learn what that
means in the Psalmist, Give the Lord honor due to his name, worship the Lord
with holy worship. Holy worship will have the heart, and due Honor will have
the lowest submissive expression of bodily Service, which is no more then our
bounden Duty to God: and the one will easily follow the other. For as fire will
show it self by smoke, and Faith by good works, so will the inward devotion of
the Soul interpret it self by the outward carriage of the body; that men seeing
our hearty service, may, by our good example be led to glorify our Father which
is in Heaven.

XXXIX. Our timely address, and stay to the end of Divine Service.
LEt us take order that we may be there from the beginning to the end: to come
in with the first, and go out with the last: that our Hearts and Tongues may
bear a part throughout; which is a good means to make us partakers both of the
Absolution at the beginning of Prayer, and the Blessing at the end.

For if we would be loath to rise from Table, before we have dined, or supped;
much more should we be unwilling to deprive our selves of our spiritual Food in
the word of God, and in Prayer: where above all other places, it should be our
Meat and Drink to do the will of our Heavenly Father.

We should rather be willing to wait for the loving Kindness of God in the midst
of his Temple, ps. 48. 8. and follow that of S. Basel, (de abdicatione rerum,)
(...), to let no pretense interrrupt, or take us off from any part of Divine
Service.

XL. At our first Kneeling.
HAving entered into the Church with due reverence, we may at our first kneeling
down present our selves to Almighty God in one of these, or the like short
Ejaculations.

Either in that of King David.

Psalm. 19. 14. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be
now and ever acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer.

Or that of K. Hezekiah.

2 Chronicles. 30. 18. The good Lord pardon every one, that here prepares his heart
to seek after the Lord.

Or,

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, fit us
all for thy service. Revel. 4. 8:

Or,

Merciful Lord, graciously accept us all, that come hither to present our
selves, our souls, and bodies unto thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, that
vouchsafed to present himself bodily in the Temple for us, in great love, and
humility.

Or, (that we may hoc agere.)

O most gracious Lord God, give us grace to make the best use of our time in
thy House, and not to offer the sacrifice of Fools, and so endanger our selves
most, where we may be best fitted for Heaven, where the Lord God Almighty, and
the Lamb, are the Temple thereof. Apoc. 21. 22.

When we are returned from Prayers, say,

Lord, make our earnest and constant endeavors abroad express the heartines
of our public and private Prayers. (...). Hierocles.

XLI. Of public Prayers, and Sermons.
AFter our Reverence and Devotion has made a good entrance; that the rest of
our Employment in God's house may be answerable to that good beginning, it will
not be amiss to say somewhat before hand of public Prayers, and Sermons.

1. Of these, the first thing I would say, is that the Church is the proper
place for them, not any secret Conventicles.

Our Savior commonly made that choice for his Preaching, where it might be
had. He taught daily in their Synagogues.

The Apostles did the like. They went into the Temple at the hour of Prayer.
Act. 3. 1. And for their Preaching there, they had direction to do so from no
less then an Angel, who spoke it in these words: Go, stand, and speak in the
Temple to the People. Act. 5. 20.

2. Another thing to be said of public prayer and preaching is this: that
being public Actions, they should appear to be so by the Auditory: that is,
Prayer should ascend to Heaven not from the Priest alone, as if it were only
his, but from all the People too: their hearts going along with him, and their
tongues declaring it to be theirs also, by joining with him in the Responsals,
and their Amen, which is the seal that confirms it to them. They to be parties,
and partakers in the benefit of that Prayer.

And so for the Sermon: the Preacher should not preach to himself only,
(though his heart should first, and most be affected with it, yet) if it be the
word of God that is delivered by him, as Gods Ambassador at that time, then the
Hearers should lay it up, and give it their Amen, by their Practice, which
seals up the benefit unto them.

3. A third thing we should desire, that we may have all the service, without
mangling, or maiming; have it as Religion and the Church prescribes, not
leaving out Prayers, or Lessons, for the Sermon's sake, but upon special
occasions.

For whatsoever the Sermon may prove, we are sure the Lessons are the word of
God, and God speaks to us by them: which we cannot say of our Sermons, unless
they may be reduced to that Touchstone of the written word of God, and thence
receive their Warrant.

And be the Sermon what it should be, yet they are much mistaken, who think
they have done their Service, if they come soon enough to hear the Sermon: For
the Sermon is the work of another, and tendered in God's behalf to us; but our
service to God, (though it be in both in our hearing and praying, yet is it)
rather in our prayers, and other the like public Duties of the Church. For
which especially Churches were erected, and from which they were called
Oratoria in the Primitive times; and before that, in both Testaments, Domus
Orationis, Houses of Prayer, where we meet him, and make our solemn Addresses
unto him.

4. Our next desire would be, that we may have our Prayers in that Form,
wherein the Church tenders them, without Battologies, and extemporary flashes.
For that which is enjoined by the Church is most safe and warrantable, and
wherein the whole Church joins with us, in the same petition, and the same
terms, beside many other advantages which they have.

And the very proposing of them in a set Form, is that which the Church
learned from God himself.

In times of great affliction, wherein there was need of hearty prayer, it was
God's own direction by the mouth of Hosea: Take unto you words, and return unto
the Lord, and say, Take away all iniquity etc. Hos. 14. 2.

And again by the mouth of Joel, Let the Priests weep, and say, Spare thy
people, O Lord. Joel 2. 17.

And have we not a (...) from our Savior himself, the very word of God. when
you pray, say, Our Father: we must say it, says our Lord himself.

And what if we say it more then once? what if the Collect of the Day come
twice, and the Lords prayer thrice into our Service? Have we not our Saviors
own warrant for it, implied in these words of St Mat: (...) -- Mat. 26 44.

When our Savior was to teach his Apostles (that were to be guides, and
directors to us all) he puts them into this way of a set form, and in his most
earnest prayer, in his very Agony he prays in the same words thrice.

XLII. Of singing the Psalms, or Anthems.
FOr these, I shall only commend 3 Rules, which we may learn from the sweet
Singer of Israel.

1. The first is in [(...)] Sing unto the Lord, ye Saints of his, or holy ones.
Ps. 30. 40. Of all other, this is no task for them that have no Holiness. For,
To sing to the Lord, is not, barely to pronounce, and chant the words of the
Psalm, but from a pure and thankful heart, to make melody unto God. Therefore
holy David invites none to sing, but such as are holy.

Full well he knew, that an Evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit: nor can
the Heart, unles it be first purged, and sanctified, produce any thing to the
praise and glory of God. Our Persons must first be liked: else Praise is not
seemly in the mouth of a Sinner, no more then a Jewel in a swines snout.
Ecclus. 15. 9.

2. The second is [(...)] Sing with understanding. Psalm. 47. 7. that is.

Laying the ground of your Joy in God himself: not in any prosperity or good
success of our own. Bas. in Psalm. 32.

Or, Having a true taste, and relish of what is sung: the mind so distinguishing
the sense and virtue of that which is uttered by the mouth that we may truly
say with the Psalmist.

O how sweet are these words unto my throat. Psalm. 119. (...).

Or lastly, Singing in law and measure. For sure, He that made all things
pondere, numero, and mensura, is not pleased with the irregular noise of
bellowing, and screaming voices, but rather with decent and lovely sounds of
pious, devout, and discreet Singers. Such as if they will have Instruments of
Music too, take order that they may be well tuned, and well-sounding like
David's Cymbals. Psalm. ult.

3. The third is [(...)] Sing praises lustily unto Him, with a good courage.
Ps. 33. 3.

1. (...), sing well, that is (says St Hierome) Make that good in your
Actions, which your tongue expresses, or (as St Basil expounds it) with your
Devotion, and Intention, no way distracted.

2. Then (...), that is, when you exalt Him, put forth all your strength (as
the wise man speaks) Ecclus. 43.

The Hebr: and Greek ((...) and (...) are patheticall terms, and signify such
a joy as cannot be articulate, but is rather expressed in shoutes, and
acclamations (like that of Soldiers in the Camp, upon a notable victory: and
Countrymen in the Field, at the end of a happy harvest) or such a joy as
conceives far more then can be uttered.

(...). He Is a happy man, that has the Art of this Joy. Ps. 89. 16.

And it seems the Christians had it in the first times of the Church. For, St
Jerome says, they were wont so to thunder out their Amen, and sing their
Psalms, that the noise ecchoed with it. They did it with that cheerful noise,
and devotion, as if by their very voice, they would have opened the Heavens.
Their Amen was like a clap of thunder, and their Halelujah like the roaring
waves of the Sea.

The Israelites were before hand with them; in that chearfulnes. For, when they
only received the Arc into the Camp, they shouted with so great a shout, that
the Earth rang again. 1 Samuel 4. 5.

And how they sang before it, at other times, you may guess by Holy David. My
Heart danceth for joy (says he) and in my song will I praise thee. And it is
no wonder if David danced with his heart, and with his feet too. For we read of
one lame from his Mothers womb, and yet as soon as his feet were at liberty, he
was found going into the Temple skipping, and praising God Act. 3. 2. 8.

So did some before us, while we neither dance, nor sing after them. So cold,
or hoarse we are, and so favorable to our selves as if we cared not, that our
Service, and Thankfulness should keep any Analogy, either with the goodness, and
greatness of God, or with the chearfulnes of those, in both Testaments, that
have gone before us, and led us the way.

1. But let us a little bethink our selves, whether it be not a Solecisme, to
sing and not to be cheerful.

2. And whether Praise, and Thankfulness (by the law of Nature) may not call for
Joy, and Alacrity of Spirit.

3. And lastly, whether (for that very cause) this part of service is not both
often, and with good reason performed by singing, playing on Instruments.

Which came not in with the Law. For, we read of their Songs, and Music,
presently after their passage out of the Red Sea, before ever they had Arc, or
Temple, or Law from Mount Sinai.

And if you will hear Calvin (upon Luc. 2. 13.) It is according to the pattern
above, where the Angels are set out playing upon Harps before the Throne.

I wish their Joy, and Alacrity may stir up ours, at least that we would take
up that Resolution of Holy David. Psalm. 71. 21.

My Lips will be feign, when I sing unto Thee, and so will my Soul, which thou
have delivered.

My Soul shall be filled, even as it were with marrow, and fatnes, when my
mouth praises Thee with joyful lips. Psalm. 63. 6.

We may find the good K: Hezekiah following that example, and his people with
Him. 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.

And we shall do no less, if we will give true weight to the words (...) and
(...) which I mentioned before, which signify a kind of unutterable joy.

Such a Joy and Praise agrees properly to none but God, an Honor that fits Him
only, who is in Himself ineffable, and incomprehensible. And therefore as He is
best served with those prayers, that have in them gemitus inenarrabiles (groans
that cannot be expressed) so He is best served with those praises too, that
have in them (...) that is such patheticall deliveries of Joy, and thankfulness,
as no Articulate voice can reach unto.

I said, He is best served with those. I will say more. He cannot well be
served by any, but such as are (in effect) aequivalent to them.

Take the best Praise that ever was delivered by the holiest Saints, and it is
but ex ore infantum, and lactentium, as weak an expression, as if it came out
of the mouth of the babes, and sucklings.

Whatsoever we pen for others, whatsoever we sing out our selves (in regard of
the full expression, that is due to God) it is but like the first titubations,
and ventures at words, which little Infants begin to frame, in imitation of
their Nurses.

Nay the Prophet David would have me go lower yet. For, He that had chanted out
Gods praise in so many sweet Psalms, does yet confess of them all (...) Tacet
tibi Tehillah, that is, a Psalm is a kind of dumb, and silent thing before
Thee. Psalm. 65. 1. Or, the loudest Psalms, and Praises are but as deep
silence. So many several Songs reach not the excellencies of thy goodness. For,
how can they reach that which is infinite? They are but so many several ways
of an eloquent and Divine Silence.

In some such Contemplation as this St Aug: made it a part of his Consessions.
Vae tacentibus de Te, Domine, quoniam etiam loquaces muti sunt. Woe be to them,
that say little in the praise of God: for they that have said most, and sung
loudest, and sweetest, are little better then mute.

For the Lord is great, and cannot worthily be praised Ps. 96. 4.

We may sing well, and we may speak much, and yet come short -- For He is great
above all his works -- Therefore when you glorify the Lord, exalt him as much
as you can, for even yet will he far exceed. And when you exalt him, put forth
all your strength, and be not weary, for you can never go far enough. Ecclus.
27. 28. 30.

Let it be (...). Let it be (...), or what you will, it will fall short of his
Praise. The most we can attain to, is to feel that we want capacity and ability
to conceive, or express the praise of God.

And they that are most expressive of that want, are the best Proficients in
the art of praising God, in (...), and (...), and (...), in singing with art
and understanding.

XLIII. The influence that Preaching, and Prayer, and Reading of the holy
Scripture should have upon our Practice.
AS a Merchant, when he has filled and enriched his Ship, if then he suffer
Shipwreck, he is the more miserable, by how much the more wealth he had in his
ship. So is it with us if we make shipwreck of our selves, when much Prayer and
Preaching has filled and enriched our hearts.

And yet do we often suffer our best merchandise to be taken out the same day
that it was taken in. Not considering that to frequent the Church, unless our
lives be answerable to it, does not so much prove us more religious, as it
procures us a greater punishment, and sends us a little wiser, but deeper into
Hell.

For it is not Learnin^g, and Formality, but true holiness and obedience that
commends us to God, and makes us Christians.

And we may account all our exercises of Hearing, but as so many Keys to open,
and so many hands to let us in to the exercise of some virtue, otherwise of
little value.

To which purpose the Jews had a Proverb, (...) Doctrina sine opere non est
doctrina.

Which was shadowed out in the Law (at the consecrating of the Priests) by
laying the blood first upon the right are, (to show that they must not be deaf
to bear the will of God,) then upon the thumbs of the hands and feet, Exodus 29.
30. to show, that not hearing alone, but doing, and walking accordingly, must
make them perfect.

So that we may conclude, that a good life must be the effect and commendation
of our Preaching, and Hearing, and other public service.

And we may say more, that a good Life is a continual preaching, a continual
praying, and praising of God: (our good example teaching and persuading most
effectually, and our good report filling many men's mouths with praise and
thankfulness unto God.)

Which made Chrysostom say, (tom. 1. 82.) that he whose Actions speak a
heavenly language, ((...),) has in every action a several tongue, and in the
harmony of many Actions the true art of Rhetoric: and those Divine streins of
more then vocal Music, that are so much the more powerful with God and man, by
how much the more real and effectual they are in themselves, and ordered with a
sincere intention and affection of Heart.

XLIV. The necessity of frequent Prayer, both in public, and private.
BEside God's precept to pray continually, and God's promise (Ask, and you
shall have, open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it,) our own necessities, and
the necessities of other men (which the law of Charity binds us to regard) will
prove the necessity of frequent prayer.

1. Our own necessities may bring us to it, both in regard of the good things
which we have, that we may enjoy them, (for we are but Tenants at will for them
all,) and for the good things which we have not: for they are so many, and so
great, that no man has attained perfection.

2. Others necessities should not be forgotten by them, that should (...), and
such are these.

The Christians in distress.

The Jews in blindness.

The Greeks in slavery under the Turk.

The Latins in Popish superstition.

The Pagans infidelity.

The affliction of our Friends. Enemies.


These should not be forgotten.

And thus should we make others enjoy the benefit of our public and private
Devotions, and not frame our prayers for our selves only, and our own
Relations.

XLV. The set Hours of public Prayer.
THese are the rather to be observed, that our Devotions may be accompanied
with the prayers of others in our behalf. In which regard, I think, we should
do well, when our necessary occasions detain us from the public places of
Prayer, yet (as near as we can) in the set times of public prayer, to commence
our suits unto God.

Of the great Elijah 1 Reg. 18. 36. (whose Prayers were so powerful when he
convinced Baal's Prophets by fire, though he was then far from the Temple, yet
we have this observation of the time. It came to pass at the time of the
offering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah the Prophet came near, and said,
The Lord God of Abraham etc. And then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed
the burnt sacrifice. v. 38.

Ezra picked out that time, when he lamented the affinity with strangers: 1
Esdr. 9. 5.

At the evening sacrifice (says he) I arose from my heavines, and fell upon my
knees, and spread out my hands unto the Lord.

The book of Judith has the same note upon her humbling her self by prayer. It
was about the time that the incense of that Evening was offered in Jerusalem.
Jud. 9 1.

And it is worth your observation, how God has met with them, that interrupted
that time. And (when he would do a favor) how he has often made choice of one
of the hours of public Service.

The first of these we find in Samuel. 1 Samuel 7. 8, 10. As he was offering up
the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the
Philistines might easily perceive, that they had better chosen another time. And
it was not long before the Israelites had a sign, that God looked graciously
upon their Sacrifice: for he thundered with a great thunder that day upon the
Philistines, and they were smitten before Israel.

The other we may clearly see in Jehoshaphat's case, 2 Reg 3. 20. when he, and
Jehoram, and the King of Edom, (being distressed for want of water) had
obtained it by Elijah, we read thus. It came to pass in the morning, when the
meat offering was offered, that behold th^re came water by the way of Edom, and
the country was filled with water.

Then again we see it in Daniel's vision. The Angel Gabriel appeared to Daniel,
about the time of the Evening oblation: it is observed, that our Savior
offered himself upon the Cross the same time. And,

The like observation we have in the time of the Maccab: when Onias offered
sacrifice for Heliodorus. 2. Mac. 3. 32.

The like in the Gospel, of the Angel appearing to Zachary, (...). Luc. 1. 8.

And of Paul and Barnabas separated for the Ministry, (...). Act. 13. 2. and
22. 17.

And (then which more cannot be said) the Holy Ghost vouchsafed and chose to
make his visible descent, at that time.

XLVI. The Place.
WE have said enough to make us desirous to keep the Time, and we should
desire as much to keep the Place too.

We find the Apostles keeping of them both. Going up to the Temple at the hour
of Prayer. Act. 3. 1.

Solomon, that built the first Temple, acquaints us with the Privilege of this
place.

The eyes of the Lord are open toward this place, day and night. 1. Reg. 8. 31.

God regards that house more then other places, and vouchsafes his presence
there, in an especial manner. And shall not we regard it and afford our
presence, to meet Him there?

What is the sign, that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go up to the
House of the Lord? says K: Hezekiah to the Prophet Isai. 2. Reg. 20. 8.

That is the first thing that He would wish to do, after his recovery from
sickness.

But, of all other, K: David has most pathetically expressed himself for this
place.

Though he was a King, yet He would not have been loath to have been a
Doorkeeper there.

He thought the very Sparrows happy, that were near it.

And if he had been put to his choice, for one thing, that He would have
desired, it should have been, to dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days
of his life.

This love to the place we find also in the Gospel.

We read of Hannah the Prophetess; in her old days. Luc. 237. (...) -- she
went not far from the Temple.

So of the blessed Apostles, Act. 2. 46. They were daily in the Temple (they
were loath to leave it, when they knew it was ready to leave them.)

So of all the Faithful with them (...).

XLVII. Before our private reading of the Holy Scriptures.
I Will say no more of our public Service: but, because I presume you will
spend some time, every day, in reading a part of the holy Scriptures. Therefore
I would entreat you,

Either, before you begin to read, use the Collect for the second Sunday in
Advent.

Merciful Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning, grant that we may in such wise hear, mark, learn, and inwardly digest
them, that by patience, and comfort of thy holy word, we may embrace and ever
hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou have given us in our
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.

And, after reading, this prayer of Holy David.

O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes. Ps. 119.
5.

O Let thy word be a lanthorn to my feet, and a light to my paths.

Or else, before or after reading, we may recall some one or two of these
sayings (that follow) out of the Holy Scriptures, or out of the Fathers.

Here is the Gate of Heaven. Genesis 28. 17.

Here is the Fountain of Wisdom. Ecclus. 1. 8.

The mouth of the righteous is exercised in this Wisdom. Ps. 37. 31.

The Law of his God is in his heart, and his goings shall not slide.

Here are things, which the Angels desired to peep into. 1 Pet 1. 12.

Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear, and keep the sayings. Rev, 1. 3.
and 22. 7.

A good understanding have all they that do thereafter. Ps. 112. 10.

All that keep it, shall come to life -- Walk in the presence of the light
thereof, that thou may be illuminated. Baruch. 4.

This Commandment is life everlasting. Joh. 12. ult.

Lay up these words in your Heart; and in your Soul. Deuteronomy. 11, 18.

He that hears, and does them, is like a wise man, that built his house upon a
rock. Mat. 7.

What nation is there so great, that has such Statutes, and Judgments. Deuteronomy.
4. 8.

Able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. That the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

Set your Hearts unto all these words. For it is not a vain thing for you. It
is your life, and through this you shall prolong your days. Deuteronomy. 32 46.

Kings, and Governors shall read in this book, all the days of their life,
that they may learn to fear the Lord their God etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 13.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Open thou mine eyes (O Lord) that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.
Ps. 119. y.

Chrysostom. Tom. 1. 1017. (...). i. e. These are Oracles, or Letters sent from
Heaven.

Holy men were the Penmen of what was dictated by the Holy Ghost.

Et 5. (...). A good stomach and desire of mea^ is not a truer sign of bodily
health then of spiritual health a love and delight in reading and meditating on
the word of God which is the food of our Souls.

S: Scriptura cibus est in locis obscurioribu^ quia quasi exponendo glutitur
potus vero est in locis apertioribus, quia it a sorbetur, sicut invenitur.
Gregor. in Job. 6.

The Holy Scripture in the more obscure places is like meat, that requires some
pains to prepare it for the stomach: in easier places it is like drink, that
needs no great preparation to carry it thither. Augustinus in Psalm. 21. and in
Confess. Ap^ri, ^ege. Toll, lege.

Justin Martyr. As God first made the Light, and afterward gathered it into
the Sun: so God first opened the light and know^edge of Himself by immediate
Apparitions, and Angels, etc. and then He reduced the ^ght into the sacred
Scriptures, and made them ^ehiculum lucis, thence must we look for the ^rue
light.

Open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see ^he wonders of thy Law. Psalm. 119. 5.

Testamentum vetus velatio novi, Novum Re^elatio Veteris. Aug. T. 10.

The two Testaments are like the two ^herubims; one looking toward the other i.
e. one expounding the other) booth loo^ing to Christ, who is our Propitiation.
Exodus ^5.

The two Cherubims with their outmost ^ings touched the sides of the House, and
^e other wings touched each other. 2. Chron. ^1.

So the two Testaments touched each other, i. e. expounded each other) and
touched ^e two sides of the House, that is, exten^ed from [in Principio] to
[Veni Domine ^esu] from the Creation to the End of the ^orld.

XLVIII. Of short Ejaculations.
OUr private Reading, and Meditation will easily furnish us with many short
Ejaculatory Prayers, which (of all kind of Devotion) are freest from the
distraction of extravagant thoughts, and therefore fittest to be often used^
especially such as are e re not a, that is, such a^ our several hints, and
occasions shall minister unto us, from sudden, intensive Affections, and
quick vehement Desires: like Darts thrown out with erect attention of mind, or
like speedy wings of vigilant prayer, happily expressed in a piercing kind of
brevitie. These are carefully to be cherished, and made use of.

But, besides these, It will not be amiss to have some praemeditate, and in
store, that may raise our devotion, when we are somewhat in disposed of our
selves.

Such as these, or the like.

O Heavenly Father, teach me that Reverence, Duty, and Love, that befits one,
who, (...) an Enemy is adopted a Son, and Heir to a Heavenly crown.

Sweet Jesu, the life of my Soul, by thy gracious indulgence, and
Inter^ession, assist me i^ following the pattern of thy holy life, and teac^ me
to know Thee, and my self.

O holy, and blessed Spirit, Sanctify m^ Soul, and body. enlighten my
understandin^ with thy Truth. And enrich my Heart with thy comfortable
presence, and assistance.

Most glorious and blessed Trinity. Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hosts, whom
none can see, and not be everlastingly happy. Grant that I may so live, as
longing for the blessed appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by
whom only we hope to attain that happy sight.

But, how long Lord-
Come Lord Jesu, come quickly.
XLIX. The recollection of our selves at Night, and preparation to a Scrutinie.
THe several days of Creation are closed up with God's own review of the
work ^f that Day, (which he saw to be very good.) Gen: 1. 4. 12: 31.

We should all make such a review every Day, that, if we have done well, we may
be ^hankefull to that grace, and mercy of God, that enabled us to do so: and,
if we have done ^l, we may consider, what sorrow for the pre^nt, what
resolution befits us for the time to ^ome.

Such a review has been acknowledged very ^t, and practiced by the light of
Nature.

Hence have we that advice of Pythago^as.

Non prius in dulce^ declinent lumina somnum, Omnia quam longi repetiveris acta
Diei.

And Tully reports it to have been the practice of Cato.

Cato quicquid quoquo Die egerat, viderat, legerat, audierat, vesperi
commemorabat, tanquam diuturni negotii a se rationem exigens.

After this we may recall that which we had in the close of the first Section,
which gives general advice for every day.

L. A Preparative Meditation, and Exhortation to such an Absteinious life, as
may fit us for a happy Death.
THat we be not mistaken, when we suppose our selves in a right course of
Christianity, let us sometimes seriously recall to mind Saint Paul's advise to
his beloved Corinthians, and propose that question to our selves, which he did
to them.

Know you not that they which run in a race, run all, but one receives the
prize. So run that you may obtain. And every one that strives for the Mastery,
is temperate in all things. Now they do it for a corruptible Crown, but we an
incorruptible. 1 Cor. 9, 24, 25.

Wherein his meaning was, that what they knew practiced in common races, and
wrastlings should be applied to a spiritual race, and Christian-like combat.
Which if we will do.

Three things will appear of apparent necessity.

1. He that runs in a race, must be admitted in stadium, a spectator may run,
and be never the nearer to the prize.

2. So admitted, he must resolve of composing himself to run. He that will
prate, or sit, or fool away the time, may loose the credit, and the reward.

3. If he aim at the victory, he must so run, that he may obtain; in a right,
swift, and continued course.

And as a means to all these, he must use abstinence -- abstinere ab omnibus.

If we apply these to a spiritual race and conflict, three things will be
needful to a Christian, in Analogy to them.

1. He must be admitted into the list, and number of those that be capable of a
Crown incorruptible.

Which is done by free Justification, apprehended by the Faith of a true
penitent, and afterward confirmed by good works. For the Heathens, that have no
faith, and Christians that have a dead faith, have no claim to this brabaeum.

This Holy David expresses well, where he says, I will run the way of thy
Command? when thou have set my Heart at liberty. That which sets the heart at
liberty, is that wherein our sins are pardoned, our persons accepted, and so
we fitted to a cursus Theologicus, and then run where we will in God's
Commandments, we are still in the way to a heavenly Crown.

If it had only the name of a Crown there is some Rhetoric in that. It is
the most eminent kind of reward, and set upon the head (the most eminent part
of the body.) we may well use all the projects of the head to attain that
which is to compass the head with honor.

But it is also Corona incorruptibilis; and we should not be loath to purchase
it with a life uncorrupted.

2. When we have thought well of the entrance and Admittance in stadium, which
makes us capable of that reward, we must not stay there.

It is not called Stadium in that sense. It has another name, which implies
motion, and a painful motion too. It is Curriculum and (...), a place of
running, and striving a place of sweating, and toyling to all that are there
without exception.

Qui in Stadio sunt, currunt omnes.
(...). Chrys^ie,
Being come in, we must be employed in such actions as befit the place.

Otherwise, no privileges, no partaking of holy Mysteries will excuse us, more
then they excused the Jews. Who were all baptized to Moses in the clouds, and
in the red Sea: and did eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink of the
same spiritual Rock-But with many of them God was not well pleased. For they
were overthrown in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, etc. And so overthrown,
were ensamples to us. (...). v. 6.

If we exceed them in privileges, we may so in punishments. (...). Chrysostom.
Therefore St Paul, (that had as many privileges as any) says of himself, 1
Cor. 9. 27. (...). And he says to us 1 Cor. 10. 12. (...)- i e. He that
thinks he stands sure enough intra stadium, may be deceived. Therefore Let him
examine himself, and let him not be dismayed, if upon examination, he find
himself down, and much wounded. While he may be received in Stadium again,
his fall, and wounds are curable.

But when the set time of the race is expired, when the company is dissolved,
when the prizes are distributed, there is no more returning in Stadium, or
resolving to run better, after that.

3. Yet further. In this race, and course of life, it is not doing, but so
doing: nor running, but so running, that must be crowned. And that implies a
right, speedy, and continued course.

1. A right course toward the price. Wherein an unstable man (...), that is,
sometimes of this opinion and resolution, and sometimes of that: sometimes
wavers to the right hand, and sometimes to the left) such a one is likely to
make but little speed.

Now that which carries a man right, in a course of Christianity, is a right
Intention that sets him on work, and a heedy Attention, that keeps him close
to it, to his [hoc agere.] That which commonly carries a man out of his right
course, is the violence of his unruly Passions and affections, that over-poise
him, and make him reele out of his way.

Such wavering, and reeling companions are they, that are easily drowned in
sorrow (worldly sorrow) surfetted and besotted with love (carnal love) mad
with anger and other passions, (sinful passions.)

Such men are ill provided for such a right course, as shall bring them to
heaven.

2. But a right course, of it self, will not serve the turn. It must be also
a speedy course. [currunt omnes] A swift and diligent pace is the pace of every
Christian in the right way.

Mal dictus qui negligenter. God has laid his curse, upon a negligent walker
in any way of his.

And with him it is our running that is Crowned. It is our slownesse, that
makes God so often send his Visitations like goades, and spurr^s to incite us
forward. Mala quae hic hic nos premunt, ad Deum ire contendunt. Greg.

It is slownesse that makes us so often fall into the snares of temptation:
which (if our pace were quicker in Christianity) we might easily avoid.

3. Beside a speedy course in the right way. [Sic currite] implies also a
persevering course, For, they that are weary, and give over, before they come
to the end of the race, shall never attain the prize.

We run for a heavenly reward. And if we could be (as the heavens are) in a
continual motion, we should be securer of the reward: which is given to none
but such as persevere, and continue in their race unto the end. Which happy
continuance to the end was shadowed in the Law, by the ornaments of the High
Priests, where the Pomegranets were placed in the extremity of his garment. Now
a Pomegranet has a kind of natural Crown in the top, And a crown, in the
extremity of the holy roabes expresses, in a figure, that the periods, and
ends of our holy Actions must look for a Crown. But what need we see it in a
shadow? We have it clear in our Savior's own word. He that endures to the
end shall be saved: that is, in the language of my text, He that runs to the
end shall be Crowned.

And (wherein we have a difference from these Pagan races) the Crown shall not
be reserved for some one, that a little outstrips the rest: but all constant
runners, in the way of God's Commandments may be Crowned. Heaven is a
Kingdom, that will stand with the multiplicity of Crowns.

To compass all this, Abstin^nce is here set down, as the Means. I Cor. 9.
35. Which the Heathen Runners, and Wrastlers were content to use, for the
purchase of a poor Garland, that withered in a Day, or two. The rather should
we do it, for a Crown incorruptible.

We lost all by eating the forbidden fruit: let us salve all by abstaining from
that which is not forbidden.

As eating then had the curse, so Abstinence now has the blessing. And to
abstain from all (abstinere ab omnibus) is the way to purchase all. I Cor. 9.
35.

But [to abstain from all] may be taken in a large extent. To abstain from
whatsoever may hinder us from being admitted in stadium: hinder us from running
when we are there: from continuing to the end, when we do run: or Abstaining
from too much pleasure, and wantonness, that may infeeble the body and besot the
mind. From too much eating and drinking, that makes us unweldy, and not fit to
run.

And if too much wealth, or other like portage clogge us in the way, from that
too, somewhat must be emptied by our Alms (or some other good deeds) that our
pace may be the quicker.

All this may be couched in [abstaining from all things.] But most of the
Fathers (St Aug: especially) confine it to Abstinence in Diet, in the
aforecited place of St Paul. And so it fits the Similitude there. For, they
that run in a race, abstain from meats (from using them in any excess) because
it would make them pursie, and short winded.

And that this Abstinence is a Means to all intended by the Apostle, I shall
endeavor to show, by a double help, and benefit, that

Abstinence brings to us, seen in the Body, Soul.


1. In the Body, the necessary instrument of the Soul.

2. In the Soul, that has no other way to use, and master the Body.

1. The first, and main Help that by Abstinence, accrues to the Body is, that
it makes it serviceable by being the best Physician to cure, or prevent most
diseases, which otherwise would annoy it.

In which I would be understood sano sensu. For I speak not of those diseases
that are laid upon us for trial: nor of those which proceed from known, or
unknown accidental causes. This being premised, I may say, that Abstinence is a
Supersedeas, or, at least, a cure for most Diseases.

This agrees with Reason. For, our life consisting in the harmony, and
proportion of the Humors, and Elements, a regulate course preserves it: a
disorderly course destroys it.

And it is confirmed by the Testimony, and Practice of most Physicians, who, as
they tell us, that crudity is the mother of most diseases, and more receive
their death's-wound at the Table, then in the Field. So in their Practice they
cure most by Evacuation.

Thereby agreeing, that most diseases proceed from fulness. Which produces
fuliginous exhalations, abundance of blood, putrefaction of crude humors, or
whatsoever we may call the distemper from that meat and drink, which was not
made to dull and oppress, but to recreate, and refresh the spirits, And from
which if there happen any malady, it cannot better be castigated, or prevented
by any thing then by Abstinence.

For Abstinence cures within, where the malady is. It cures without
precipitation, or perturbation of the humors, and without the loss of
precious time. Both which Physic, and exercise are commonly guilty of.

And I doubt not but Abstinence would quickly cure many, that are weak, and
sick, by reason of too various, and too much nourishment, who deceive
themselves, and go a contrary way from the cure: seeking spirituous liquors,
and succulent meats, in a conceit of weakness, and fear of cold diseases. Not
considering, that too much juycie meats oppress nature, and hot wines fill the
head with foggie vapors, whioh being turned into ill matter, and condensed,
become the original of some distempers, which were never feared.

These refreshments are not for such as live at ease, but rather for such as
often spend their spirits in labor, or hard study. For others, moderate
Abstinence is far better; better for their health, and better for the
prolonging of their days.

Which appears in this, that the most austere and abstemious sort of men, in
all ages, (though they lived at ease, and used little exercise) have been the
most healthful, and the longest livers.

2. I must tell you one thing more. To a healthful and long life, Abstinence
adds a light body, agile, and fit for any emploiment. For where the Diet is
moderate, proportioned to the body, the temper, the season; there the
concoction (the work of the Stomach) must needs be good, and so the blood also
good, and the humors pure, untainted, and fit for motion: fit for God's
service, especially fit for [currere] for those services that require a quick
dispatch: that is, for the best and noblest actions, that cannot well be
achieved by a troublesome body. With which I will close up those things which
Abstinence brings to the body.

But Abstinence stretches her virtue farther still, being beneficial to the
whole Man.

And first she derives safety and vigor to the Senses. For instance, where
there is no crude deflux into the nerve and organ of hearing and seeing, there
the Sight and Hearing must ordinarily be more lasting, and more accurate, and
exact, unless it be extinct, and decayed by Age, or Study, or some Accident.

2. Nor does she stay at the Senses. The Affections themselves participate of
that good that proceeds from Abstinence.

Anger, Lust, and Melancholy, must needs be abated, when their ordinary fuel,
that keeps in the fire, is taken away. Grief, Fear, and Heavines must needs be
corrected, when those Humors, that feed them, are drawn dry.

Thus does Abstinence charm the raging spirits; make a man affable, cheerful,
tractable, and reduce all to the right state. In case of lust especially, that
kind of Devil is seldom cast out but by Prayer, and Fasting too.

3. The Benefit of Abstinence goes yet farther, extends it self to the Memory
and Understanding. For whereas Intemperance sends up a cold obstructive humor,
that possesses the Brain, and so dulls the memory, and Apprehensive Faculty,
that both of them weakly apprehend, and hardly retain. On the contrary, a just
and moderate Abstinence quickens the wit, sharpens the Invention, and Judgment,
(as far as the Constitution is capable,) and makes the spirits and apprehension
true, and pure, instar speculi, So that both the species of Earthly things, and
the contemplation of Heavenly is more to the life, and so illuminate, as an
intemperate muddy brain cannot be. for Anima sicca, anima prudens. Wisdom dwells
not where the vapors of Meat and Drink have too much to do.

4. Nay, Abstinence flies higher yet. It makes our Prayers, our Meditations,
our Devotions less distracted, more facile, more intent, more delightsome.

And as Faith is the prime, and inward Foundation; so (of secondary and
external things) Abstinence gives the greatest advantage to all spiritual and
heavenly virtues: So many helps does it supply, so many obstacles does it
remove in every Christian, and Religious employment.

Therefore let not so much be crammed in for the Vegetant, as shall not only
endanger the whole body, but hinder all the superior Faculties, the Senfes,
the Affections, the Memory, the Understanding, and Devotion too.

But rather let us use that Christian Abstinence, without which we cannot be so
fitted to run the race that is set before us, that in the end, we may win the
Prize and Crown of Immortality.

We have reason so to do, in regard of those Advantages, that we see it brings
to the body, and to the Soul.

By all which (if we look upon it with impartial eyes) it is truly amiable, as
most acceptable to God, to Nature, to Reason, to Virtue, to Religion, the
Continence of men, the Chastity of women; the vigor of a living, and the ease
and quiet of a dying man: and not so much the means to a Crown as a crown it
self, and more virtual to the head of him that wears it, but ever ending with a
Crown incorruptible.

LI. Of that Charity, or hearty love of God, which is our best Companion, while
we live, and when we die.
OUr Savior being asked, which was the greatest Commandment, gave this answer
in effect; That the greatest Commandment is to love God with all our heart,
and soul, and mind: that is, as well as we can, or totis viribus, as Saint Luke
has it; ut totius dilectionis impetus eo ourrat, that the whole current of our
love may drive that way, as St. Augustine well expounds it. This is the
greatest, and the next is like unto it, to love others as well as our selves,
not quantum, but sicut, or eo modo, or in ordine ad Deum, in reference and
subordination to our love to God, which is the modus of loving our selves.

God looks at nothing more, then this hearty unfeigned love of him: nor should
we desire any thing more, nothing being more advantageous to our selves.

For it is that Love, which covers the multitude of our sins, and presents us
and all our Actions acceptable to God, who regards nothing that is not derived
from that Fountain.

If that were not Motive enough, who would not love him above all, in whom are
all beauties and loves, in an eminent manner, beyond our apprehension? And in
the fruition of whose love, we have a fair way made to the enjoying of
everything else worth the loving?

But may we not stop a little, when we look upon our selves? What are we (poor
and vile Creatures) that we should aspire or dare to make tendry of our love to
him, with any confidence?

True: But since he will not only accept it, but peremptorily command it, and
command it in the first place, we may and we must frame our selves to do it.
And the more we can improve this Divine Affection, the better we may think our
pains to be spent all the days of our life.

I shall therefore endeavor to help it in this method.

1. First taking a view of Love in general.

2. Then particularly, of Divine love: not omitting the ways and attractives
of them both.

1. Love is the inclination and application of the Heart and mind to that which
is beloved.

Wherein there is no sense of labor, or difficulty, but rather a languor, and
impatience of not having a speedy success of our endeavors to find out, and
enjoy that which is desired. For it is supplied with a continual Fervor, and
dilated with a sweet complacence, and pleasing apprehension of the happiness we
might have in the fruition of what we desire, and long for.

Therefore it does not much need any Motive, or Reward, or any thing else to
maintain it in vigor, but only the hope of acquiring that which is beloved.

There Is none of us all, but have our share more or less in this pleasing
Affection. And it should be our daily prayer, and care, that we be not mistaken
in the object of the Love we pitch upon. To which purpose we should be most
vigilant over those parts, where Love makes the entrance. The ordinary ways
are the Ear, and the Eye.

First, the Ear has a door to admit it. A door, that no Key opens so well as a
good report: That will easily make us love those, whom we never saw:- ut eos
saepe, quos nunquam vidimus, diligamus, says the Orator. No Music can set
another Heart Strings to the same tune with ours, so soon as this.

2. Beside this of the Ear, there is a second, and more frequent passage to
Love, from the Eye, (either the Eye of the Body, or the Understanding, the eye
of the Mind.)

For Love has the same Fountain that our loving Tears have; they come out of
the Eye, and thence fall into the Breast.

So does all Love, from the Eye slide into the Heart: and then it needs no
Letters of recommendation; there it pleads, and conquers for it self.

So it is in all Love, and so it is particularly in Divine love, which is an
inclination, and application of the heart to God.

1. First it comes in at the Ear. Fides ex auditu, says the Apostle, and so
does Love: Amor ex auditu. It begins as that Psalm does, Auribus audivimus,
(Ps. 44. 1.) we have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us.

2. It comes in at the Eye too. For, from the eye of the understanding (by
which we see the worth of what we love) it is conveyed by Faith into that
welcome, which the Heart is easily made ready to embrace it withal.

Now that we are so taken with love at the Eye, it is no wonder, since we hear
our Savior himself say to the Church, in the Canticles, (...) thou have
struck, or affected my very Heart with one of thine eyes. Cant. 4. 9.

They must be holy and devout eyes that can so take him, and we had need to
look to it, that our eyes may be such. And when they are such, that God may yet
divert them from dangerous objects, and vouchsafe his own love to kindle them
withal, that is, the light of his countenance, some gracious aspect from him.
wherein the Soul may see him as the fairest of ten thousand, Cant 5. 10. the
most amiable of all that can be loved,) and hear him with that affection, which
was commonly his, that said, Thy word is sweeter to me, then the honey and the
honey comb: more to be desired then gold, even much fine gold.

And now I may ask, first, concerning the Ear, (the first passage to love,)
who has not heard of the Majesty, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, and other attributes
of God? that are able to ravish the love of any soul. Dies diei eructat
scientiam. There is no speech, or language, but that voice is plainly heard and
understood in a l the world.

If we will make the right use of our Ears, we cannot but advance our love to
God.

2. Then I may ask as much for the eye, the other passage.

Has not every man's eye (the eye of his Body, or of his Understanding) been so
far opened, as to discover some clear beams, some cast of his love, (not only
in the general ways of Providence, but) in the more particular benefits,
mercies, and indulgencies, that are or may be conferred on him, and should be
the attractives of his love; so many ways does he display his Amoris insignia,
his lovetokens.

And the truth is, we should never come to be so happy as to love him, if he
did not invite, and woe our hearts first by his own Favors, and preventing
love; which is the Adamant of Love, and was so powerful in him, that it should
now draw our hearts to heaven, as once it brought him from thence to Earth, to
give us a touch of his ardent love, in his humility and Obedience, and
especially in shedding his dearest blood for our sakes.

All this did he, to win our love to him, without whom we could not love, nay
live, and move, and have any being: and from whom are all the wonders of our
Creation, and Preservation, and all the promises of future, and eternal
Happiness.

This preventing love of his is the hand, by which he draws all men to the
confession of his goodness. And if we add to this the particular favors to our
own persons, we have enough to win our Hearts, and fix our love upon him.

But we notwithstanding are so hard to be won to him, and so ready to forsake
him, upon the allurement of very trifles, that we scarce make a stop to ask our
selves the question, why we tire our love with so many objects, so infinitely
below the value of this one.

For what is it that we would have? Is it Beauty? Then seek the love of him,
the sweetness of whose glorious face is the Joy and Rapture of Angels. The only
vision of him is complete Happiness, and full satisfaction.

Or would we partake of true Riches, or knowledge, or pleasure? Then study the
love of him, who is the unum necessarium to all these ends and purposes.

1. Of whom we are directed to buy that gold, that will make us truly rich.
Apoc. 3.

2. In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom. Col. 2.

3. In whose presence is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures
for evermore. Ps.

Is not all this true? And yet are not we commonly so far from thinking, how to
purchase his love, that we busy our selves most in that which heaps up the
treasure of his wrath, and provokes him to plague us with many fearful
judgments.

Into these dangers we plunge our selves in the persuit of our ugly sins, but
what lovely virtues do we compass with the like hazard, for his sake, that is
Love and Charity it self? Or what excuse can we make for our selves, that we
are not so employed?

Yet, if the purchase of other virtuous Duties may find excuse, this sure, will
find none.

If we are exhorted to Fast, or to Relieve the Poor, or to any other like
Duties: we may perhaps think to excuse them, by the indisposition of our
bodies, or our want of means. etc.

But when we are persuaded to love God, we are put upon that, a ainst which
there is no Apol^gie. He that loves not the Lord Jesus, Let him be Anathema
Maran Athah, that is, liable to the heaviest curse.

Well then. If there be no excuse: What kind of Love shall we present to God?

Now I Will tell you that.

1. The first must be, a weeping Love, in hearty sorrow, for all our past
offenses, and neglects against Him, that should have been the first, and
chiefest object of our Love.

2. Then a solicitous, obedient, careful love follows that: endeavoring a
better observance of divine commands ever after: and renouncing all those
r^bellious Affections, that diverted us from his Love.

3. Add to these a meek, and humble love expressing it self, not only in
our most submisse, and lowly addresses to God, but also by a mild demeanor of
our selves to men, which two are much wanting in these irreligious, fierce, and
angry days: wherein meekness of spirit is a great stranger, and other spirits
walk more ordinarily abroad. abroad.

4. And lastly, Labor for a devout Angelical love, taken up (us much as may
be) both with the practice of what is most pleasing to God in a heavenly
conv^rsation, and innocent course of life: and in many divine contemplations
too: which two make up St Paul's (...), and are a fair praeludium, and
preparation to a celestial life he reaster.

He that studies to proceed, as far as he can, in these, will have little
pleasure, or leisure for such Affections, as trouble most men in the world.

Shall we go over these four again, from the lowest to the highest, and
mark the several footsteps of a growing love.

1. The first we found to be a weeping love, for our past offenses, and
mistakes.

2. The second, a solicitous, preventing love for the time to come.

3. The next, a meek and humble love.

4. The last is, a more Angelical love, or a walking with God, as Enoch did,
in a serious study, and practice of what is most pleasing unto God.

Such a Peripatetick, will not easily be enticed out of that way, to tire
himself in other crocked, and dangerous paths, that lead to the world, the
flesh, and the devil: rather then to walk on in those blessed steps, that
begin in the love, and end in the fruition of God himself.

For, what should bewitch him, to think any walk more healthful, or more
pleasant, then that which leads to Heaven: or any love dearer, then the love of
Him, that is Goodness it self.

It Is true, that to walk in any virtue, is to be in the way to Happiness: but if
you would have a walk beyond all company.

Ambulate in dilectione, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. Walk in love, and he has
set this mark upon that walk [excellentiorem viam] I Will show you a more
excellent way. 1 Cor. 2. ult. i. e. this way of divine love.

It is Honor enough for other Virtues to lead us, by their trust, into this
way.

But this of divine love, is the more excellent, the surest, and the readiest
way to Heaven.

This is our Jacobs Ladder, whereon you may see Angels, and Men ascending and
descending; ascending by the love of God, descending by the love of men.

By which ascent, and descent, Love is made the compendium of all Duties, and
of the ways to Heaven.

Therefore St James calls it the royal way jac. 2. 8.

St Paul the complement of the whole law. Rom 13. 9.

Our Savior himself makes it the Epitome of all. Mat. 22.

And Moses says, quid amplius? -- (what else does the Lord require of thee?)
Deuteronomy. 10. 12.

And well may it have these honorable titles and high commendations, and more
then these as being the root and life of all virtue: whence they grow, and from
whence if they are cut off, they wither, and dye, sor want of true sap and
moisture.

Of that value, it is here, on earth. Nay in Heaven it is the Seraphicall
Virtue, that inflames, and delights the Seraphims, and thence gives the name to
them.

Well may it be to us the Queen of all virtues, whence they have their glory,
and luster, as the Moon has from the Sun.

Lastly, It is the bond of perfection: when we are fastened with that, nothing
can separate us from the love of God.

Not the Relation of any love below. For, He that loves Father, or Mother more
then me, is not worthy of me, says our Savior.

Not the possession of any estate below. For, We have left all to follow thee,
say his Disciples. Mat. 10.

Not the admiration of any thing above, o^ below. Neither Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come. No^ height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of Go^ Romans 8. 38.

What shall we say more of this love? It has such pre-eminence above all other
virtues, that the Wise man, in his Love-song, compares it to the Banner, the
most eminent thing in all the Army. Vexillum ejus super me amor, under which we
venture our lives for his sake.

And with this eminence it has such value and esteem, that (without it)
nothing is of any value: Neither Circumcifion availes any thing, nor
uncircumcision, etc. Gal. 5. but faith, that works by love, (that is, a lively
working Faith, that is set on work by this Love.)

So little hope there is for any thing else to be esteemed, though we could
come in with long Catalogues of our worth in any kind.

If we should boast our Nobility, we should be easily answered by St. John, 1 John 4. 8. Qui diligit, ex Deo natus est. Every one that loves, is born of God:
and to be born of him, is true Nobility.

If we could show our greatness in Riches, Honor, Knowledge, or any other way,
St. Paul would answer all with Nihil prodest, 1 Cor. 13. Si linguis hominum and
Angelorum. Though I speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and have not love,
I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And though I have the
gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and have all
Faith, so that I could move Mountains, if I have not Love, it profits nothing.

Therefore, above all other things, let us beg this of Almighty God, that he
would vouchsafe his own love, to kindle ours with all; the light of his
countenance, some gracious aspect from himself, that may draw the soul to his
love.

If this be our hearty prayer, there will be nothing wanting on God's part,
while we are not wanting to our selves.

But there is the hazard. We may be careless, and perverse, doting upon somewhat
that has a fair outside, but within a sting, and poison, that is accompanied
with a worm that never dies.

In this dotage, our love has an ear, and an eye, easily opened to the
seeming-sweet inticements of sin; but no ear for the best charmer, (charm he
never so wisely,) nor eye for him that is the delight of Heaven, and daily
invites us to a love, attended with that security, and delight, and advantage,
that is not to be found in any other love.

1. For Security first. It is so free from hazard, that in this love, and only
in this, it is a high virtue to coeceed, (to be sick with love, to be in
Raptures, and Ecstafies of Love.) As we may see the Church is in the Canticles,
and is still loved the better for it.

2. Then for Delight. What greater delight can you conceive, then David took in
his divine love, when He set his Harp and his Heart to the tune of (...). Psalm.
116.

And (...) I love thee dearly, O Lord: As the Heart longs after the
Water-brook, Ps. 18. Ps. 42.

Such were holy David's loves, and delights.

The like had St. John the beloved Disciple, who in every Epistle, in every
Chapter pleases himself, to descant upon holy Love.

And St. Peter being woed with our Saviors question (love thou Me) was able,
to say Tu nosti. -- Thou know, O Lord, that I love thee.

Saint Paul was of his mind, accounting all but loss for the love of God.
(...). Philip. 3. 8.

And, after them, thousand of Martyrs and holy Saints that apprehended more
delight in those celestial flames, that kindled this fire within them, then
the fear of other material flames, that turned their bodies into ashes, and so
delivered them from the assaults of those dangerous Loves without them, that
were ad oppositum unto this.

To all those blessed Souls, the Love of God was sweeter then life it self,
and, in some stronger then ever lasting death, if so we may understand the love
of Moses and St. Paul, who, it seems could have been content to have been
blotted out of the book of Life, and made Anathema from Christ, if that might
any way promote their Loves, and the Honor, and Glory of Him they Loved.

Here Is a Love, that may take the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, and prevail
for any thing. For what can be denied to such a Love?

3. And this brings us to the Third Motive, the Profit, and the Advantage, that
accrues to this Divine Love, to which all things are pervious.

For, bring as great a sinner as Mary Magdalene, (that had been a City-sinner,
peccatrix in Civitate, and the unclean Cage of Seven Devils) yet, if his
Repentance bring with it Mary Magdalene's Love, he need not doubt of the same
happy success, that she had, quia ditexit multum.

This Hope we gather out of the Gospel. And (before we came to it in the
Gospel) the body of the Law it self carried so much Hope in those Tables of
Stone, as might break our Stony Hearts in this Love. For how read we there? He
visites sin to the Third and Fourth Generation of them, that Hate Him. But what
does He for them that Love Him? He shows mercy to thousands, in them that Love
Him.

And this Love reaches further yet. Not only to show Mercy, but all manner of
Blessings. All are to be had for the price of Love.

For, What else does God require of you, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 10, 12. that is,
Lay down that, and ^e all.

Dii omnia Laboribus vendunt: the Heathen were wont to say, That God would sell
all for Labor: We rather say, God will part with any thing for Love.

Wisdom for Love,

Sapientiam praebet diligentibus.

Joy for Love.

Thou have loved Righteousness (or to Love what God loves, and Hate what He
hates) therefore will the Lord Anoint thee with the Oil of gladness, above
thy fellows.

Protection for Love.

Because he has set his Love upon Me, therefore will I deliver him, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 91, 14. 16. And He concludes as we would have Him. With long
life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation. (that is complete
deliverance indeed)

And when He comes to show that, what shall we then see, but the rewards of our
Love? That which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered
into the heart of man, that has he prepared (for whom think you?) for them
that love Him.

This high reward should elevate our Love, as high as toto Cord, to love him
above all, that is, to love Him as much as we can, and as some others that have
gone before us in this Love. I will name only the Royal Prophet to whom God
himself gave this Testimony, My Servant David followed me with all his heart,
to do that only, which was right in mine eyes. 1 Reg. 23. 3. Which is the
same, that was undertaken by Good King Josiah, and his people, to walk after
the Lord, with all their hearts, and all their souls.

Such as these had the habit of Divine Love, and that is all we can hope for
here.

For to have a heart ever in actual elevation of it self to God, that is not
for us below, that is the perfection we hope for in heaven.

The nearer we come to it here, the better. And (to that end) to our best
endeavor we must add our fervent Prayers, that God would shed this love in
our heart by the Holy Ghost, and keep us in the same Love.

For he that abides in Love, abides in God, and God in him.

Will all this that has been said, advance our desire and delight in this
Divine Love? All that has been said of the Security, Solace, and Advantage,
added to the Dignity, and Value of it.

God grant it may be so. Amen.

Let that be the Rule of our Honor and Respect to us, Let that captivate, all
the faculties of our bodies and souls, and command all our Affections.

In that bright flame, let our foolish, wandering desires perish: as the silly
Flies do, that hover about the clear flame of a Candle.

Let this be our (...) and (...).

While we live,

Let it be the touchstone of our Actions, The Solace of our Hearts, The Fire to
warm our Affections.

And when we dye,

Let it be the Fiery Chariot to mount us up into Heaven.

Let us breath out the Soul, in some Ejaculation of this Divine Love, and so
pass to the Blessed Fruition of Him.

Which Happiness may He grant, in whom our best love is accepted: In whose
Presence is Fullness of Joy: and to whom we therefore desire to ascribe all
Honor and Glory.

The Peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep our Hearts and Minds,
in the knowledge and love of God, and of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Transition to what follows in the Appendix.
THese Meditations were primarily intended for such as live a Collegiate, and
speculative kind of life, freest for Retirements, Out of which commonly are
taken the fittest Spies, and Intelligencers for the Kingdom of Heaven. In such
men, rather then others, we expect as hearty desires, and serious resolutions
of a constant progress in Piety, as appeared in Caeleb, and Josuah toward the
Land of Promise. For they, being in a more Regular course of life, begin every
Morning in via Sacra, that is, in the way that leads to Gods House, where they
are daily furnished with excellent Sermons and Prayers: I mean with the Lessons
duly read out of the word of God, and with the Common Prayers of the Church,
the best expressions of our daily wants. Who would not think such men in a fair
way, in due time to be received into the Promised Land, with Joy, and
Blessedness; while many other straglers in the Common Road, demurre so long
upon it, that they often loose themselves at last, by diverting into some
Wilderness of Trouble and vexation.

Those of the first rank, in a better Retired course, (in some other
employment) so frequently found in viis Domini, are, or should be, most of
them, of David's mind, and men after Gods own Heart, first seeking the Kingdom
of God, and the Righteousness thereof, resolving to follow David, rather then
Saul, in hope they shall not end like Saul, but as David did.

For Saul began with seeking, and following after Asses, though he quickly
stumbled upon a higher employment then he knew well how to manage: but David's
walking so much in lege Domini, proved to be the better choice, and got him at
last as good a Title as Readiness was, upon better terms, and with a better
blessing, and seconded with a Heavenly crown.

Indeed a man might guess, that Saul dreamed of some such Happiness sometimes,
because we read of some of his Enthusiasms, and some of his accidental
employments in good company. Though it was so seldom, alas! that all wondered
at it, and it begat a Proverb [is Saul also among the Prophets] But when he
fell once (to the purpose) upon worse courses, and followed the bias of his own
inclinations, his punishment followed as hard after them, like a Fury, and
haunted him to death, as appears by his own last words (...) a
costly-embroidered Coat has laid fast hold on me, and will do so, while my
life and soul is within me: which (in the force and weight of the original
words) seems to bear this meaning. My enemies do now compass me about, and
which way soever I look, I see nothing but the grim picture of Death. But my
greatest anguish is from my guilty Conscience, which represents unto me the
likeness of such an Embroidered Coat, as I have seen the High Priest wear upon
his Ephod. That puts me in mind of my rashly Murdering of many innocent Priests
(whose Coat I should have somewhat regarded) and doing it upon a vain and
slender pretense, by the hand of Doeg the Edomite, who after he had slain no
less then 85 persons of that Holy Order, then smote the whole City of the
Priests etc. The sad memory of this is now the worst sword that can go through
me. Therefore, any Sword, in this extremity, shall have leave to rid me, if
it can, from this ghastly fight.

Thus ended Saul in the face of his Profane Enemies, without any Priest to
assist him: which is enough to fright all others out of his careless ways.

After his Death, the Crown was set upon David's head. Whose constant Pious
Life, and Holy Devotions (in Hymns, Psalms, and Spiritual Songs) are left, as
the best Patterns, Directions, and Encouragements to all Posterity. And we are
sure enough, that he himself, after his own use of them (to show the difference
betwixt His end, and Readiness) was happily assured to be one of the Heavenly
Quire above, and there Crowned again with an immortal Crown of Glory. David is
an ancient Pattern, a Royal Prophet, and Grand Guide to such, as are willing to
fight the Battles of the Lord, in their Pilgrimage toward the true Land of
Promise,

If we would have another, an Eminent Holy Person of our Time, and Profession,
and Country, whose memory is yet fresh amongst us: In the Appendix I will
endeavor to represent Him unto you, and withal, to acquaint you with
something, that may be useful to your Evening-Devotions.

AN APPENDIX To the Directions For Private DEVOTIONS. And Retirements.

By DAVID STOKES, D. D. and Fellow of Eaton College.

Isai. 26. 20. Come my people enter thou into thy Chamber and shut thy doors
about thee. Amos 4. 12. Prepare to meet thy God O Israel. Psalm. 4. 4. Stand in
awe, and sin not, commune with your own hearts and in your Chamber and be
still. Micah 6. 8. He has showed, O man, what is good. OXFORD, Printed by A.
and L. LICHFIELD, Printers to the University, for R. DAVIS. 1668.

An APPENDIX To the Directions for PRIVATE DEVOTIONS And RETIREMENTS.
BEFORE I remove my Pen far from my Paper, I desire a word or two with
Scholars, apart; with those especially, of our Profession, that have most need
of daily Prayers and Devotions, to draw down the continual blessings, and
assistance of Almighty God; For I would recall to their memories, an
extraordinary remarkable Person, that besides his common observance of the
hours of Public Divine Service) was wont, every day, to pick out some hours
also for Private Meditations, and retiredness to God, and his soul; nor only in
occasional Soliloquies and short Ejaculations (which exceed all ways of
premeditation) but beside them too, in Penitential, Eucharisticall, and
other-like Formulae's and set expressions of a good heart, as in a daily
Sacrifice pleasing and acceptable unto God. Why should I keep you any longer
from the Precious Perfume of his sweet Name? Such a one was the most Learned
and Reverend Lord Bishop Andrews, that singular Linguist, Incomparable
Preacher, and (...); in his time (...), (that is, the greatest, and most
remarkable Divine of that age.)

It is not long since he appeared amongst us, as a burning and shining light,
or a Star of so great a magnitude, and in so high a Sphere, that he could not
but be taken notice of; yet was he (more or less) locked up, every day in some
Private Holy Retiredness, in the midst of his great and public employments,
Being Bishop of Winchester, Lord Almoner, Dean of the Chapel, and Privy
Counselor to King James, after he had been first Dean of Westminster, then
Bishop of Chichester, then Bishop of Elie. His Charitable, and every way,
exemplary life, and his Pious and Learned works, speak him best and loudest, as
you may be better informed by that R. R. and Worthy Prelate, the Lord Bishop
Buckeridge, in his Funeral Sermon, which is Printed at the end of Bishop
Andrews his Sermons in folio. I have the more reason, with all thankfulness, to
make Honorable mention of Him, because he was pleased to make himself the
chiefest Guide, and encourager of my Studies, and put me into the happiest
Method, and order of them.

But what speak I of my poor self, or the helps that I had from that walking
Library, and Miracle of Learning and Goodness? He was a rare Pattern of true
Piety, and constant Religious Devotion, to this whole Church.

Therefore we may the easier be persuaded, to follow, and make use of, such
choice Papers of his, as may be found out: which is as good, as the observing
the light of his Candle, and treading in the footsteps of his blessed, and
holy ways; Wherein if I can further my self, and do you any Service, it shall
be my greatest task, at this time.

I will begin with a short Item, that he used to give himself, upon his
Preaching days: Seconded with a Devout Prayer out of Fulgentius (l. 1: ad
Mon.)! Praedicator laboret, ut libenter, ut intelligenter, and obedienter,
audiatur; Et hoc se posse magis Pietate Orationum, quam Orationis facultate,
non dubitet, orando pro se, ac illis, quos est allocuturus; Sit prius Orator
quam Doctor; and devote acccedens, prius quam exerat proferentem linguam, ad
Deum elevet animam sitientem; ut eructer, quod inde biberit and effundat quod
impleverit.

Ergo, a vero Domino, ac Magistro nostro postulare non desino, ut ea me, sive
per eloquia Scripturarum suarum, sive per Sermocinationem fratrum: sive per
Inspirationis suae internam suavioremque doctrinam, docere dignetur, quae sic
proponam, sic asseram, ut in Propositionibus, and Assertionibus meis, verirati
semper inhaeream, ab hac ipsissima veritate postulo, doceri multo plura quae
nescio, a quo accepi pauca quae scio.

Ipsam rogo, ut (proeveniente ac subsequente misericordia) quaecunque
salubriter scienda nescio, doceat me; in his quae vera novi custodiat me, in
quibus, ut homo fallor, corrigat me; in quibus veris titubo, confirmat me, and
a falsis and noxiis eripiat me, and ea faciat de ore meo procedere, quae sunt,
coram ipsa veritate, principaliter grata, sic fiant fidelibus cunctis accepta,
per Jesum Christum, Dominum, ac Servatorem nostrum.

These I found written with his own hand (in his Hebrew Bible, in a little
quarto sine punctis) And I wish all Preachers would make use of them, before
they venture into the Pulpit, whither how few come with such Devotion in his
spirit, and Religious affection? and who brings thither such elaborate Sermons
as smell of the Candle, and deserve to be read by all Posterity for ever; And
yet who has not heard of Maledictus qui negligenter opus Domini -- And (...).

But, whatsoever others can, or will do, we find him careful and devout, in
that great part of his Ministerial Function. And the like, will now be seen by
degrees in his other more General Christian Duties, For, in all his approaches
to God, that might be said of him which, Mal. 2. 5. God himself said (of
Phineas and some of his rank, after him) A facie nominis mei pavebat (i. e.
magna cum Religioue accedebat ad Deum) As you will see in what now follows.

(...) Meditationum ante Preces Poenitentiales, that is, Several Hints of
Pious, and Previous Meditations before his Penitential Prayers.
Luc. 10, 41.(...) Act. 6. 4.(...) Luc. 21, 36.(...) Ecclus. 13, 14. Per omnem
vitam tuam dilige Deum and invoca Eum pro salute tua. Ecclus. 7. 17. Humilia
valde spiritum tuum quoniam vindicta carnis impii, ignis and vermis. Joh. 3,
27. (...) Cyprian. Si ille orabat qui sine peccato erat, quanto magis
Peccatorem orare oporter? Idem. Deus autem non vocis sed oordis auditor est.
August. Plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur. Beda. Ideo Christus ingemuit, ut
nobis gemendi daret exemplum. Arnob. Non desiderat Deus nos supplices esse, aut
amat substerni; Vtilitas haec nostra est; and commodi nostri rationem habet.
Aug. Ascendit Precatio, descendit Miseratio. Ambr. Vberior est Dei gratia quam
Precatio, semper plus tribuit Deus quam rogatur.

Jubet Deus ut petas, and Docet quid petas, and Promittit quod petis, and
Displicet ei, si non petis; and Tu non Petis tamen?

Oration est Breviarium fidei: Interpres Spei.

Non passibus, sed Precibus itur ad Deum.

Fides fundit Orationem and Fundatur in Oratione.

Col. 4. 21. Perge igitur (...). Luc. 18. 1. (...) Joh. 4. 23. -- (...).


Oration Praeparatoria.
Domine paratum est cor meum:
(Sic Psaltes Psalm. 108. 1.)
Sed Domine metuo ne meum non sit,
Cupio certe and doleo si minus,
Vtinam esset par atum: Hei mihi quod non est.
Domine, dispono me, and praeparo,
Adjuva dispositione^ and Praeparat. mea^ supple,
Ponam Peccata mea coram me
Vt non sint coram te.
Confessio Peccatorum.
Ecce me Domine --
(^his his sad Formula Poenitentialis, which I desire you to observe, before
I Will show you any more of it, has [recogitabo] in the front, and is closed up
with [extendam enim per omnes annos] by which it appears to be like King
David's Penitential Psalm, that had the Title (...) [i. e. in commemorationem]
because after the pardon of his sins, it was often to be repeated, as a
Memorandum, not so much to beg remission so often from God as to humble the
penitent, with recollecting the memory of that sad occasion, upon which it was
made; and accordingly you will perceive, how it is filled up with bitter tears,
and sighs, and remorce, and humble expressions.)

Ecce me Domine,
Ecce Peccatorum Maximum. Pessimum. Miserrimum.

Recogitabo Tibi omnia peccata mea in Amaritudine Animae meae.
O utinam in Amaritud. amarissima.
Sicut pullus hirundinis trinsabo,
Gemam velut columba
Ut avertatur a me furor tuus.
Quia peccavi graviter,
Graviter and saepe peecavi Tibi.
Et quid dicam jam?
Qui sic, pro porris and alliis,
Panem Angelorum. --
Qui sic pro porcorum siliquis
Mensam Paternam? --
Uae misero mihi! vae insensato.
Quis me fascinavit
Ut sic desiperem?
Totus itaque confusus -- Nec dignus nominare Nomen Tuum Nec invocare Nec in
cord cogitare
Absque ingenita tua Bonitate,
S^d enim illa fretus, Supplex revertor ad te, Demissus Prostratus
Nec Peto ut facias,
Nisi quod fecisti saepe
Et facis libentissime,
Quoa nisi feceris iterumque iterumque
Non subsistet ulla caro,
Nemo sustinebit.
Sed toties relapsus, qua front, qua mente
Reverti jam potero?
Nulla; totus enim confusus
Confusione magna opertus incedo sedeo jaceo

Nec auderem facere
Nec facerem, qui^ desperarem poenitus
Et quod desperantes faciunt, facerem,
Nisi quia spes adhuc reliqua.
Qu^ Spes?
Usque ad septuagies septies
Porrigere Te misericordiam Tuam,
Et ultra,
H^nc enim mensuram nobis commendasti.
Nobisne ut nos inter nos eam praestare,
Tute vero eandem ut non praestes?
Praestabis vero and multo magis.
Nam tua nostram misericordiam excedit
Quantum tu nos.
Illa ergo fretus, a long stans provolvo me,
Et demisse (ut par est) humillim^q
Percutiens illud
(Quod me non satis Percutit) cor meum,
Dico ingemino iterumque iterumque,
Propitius esto Domine, mihi Peccatori, Mihi miserrimo Peccatori, Mihi
Peccatorum primo, Mihi toti Peccato, Peccato (...),

O cui nunquam, sine spe veniae, supplicatur!
Tu vero ut propitius sis, and ego non doleam,
Non peto.
Doleo enim utcunque.
Metuo quidem ut satis.
Gauderem si magis.
Cupio ut magis possem, and
Doleo quia magis non possum.
Fateor dolendum dolorem meum,
Et doleo ipse tam dolendum.
Et o quis mihi det, ut plus, magis quam possem.
Ego si penes me esset, praestarem,
Sed penes me non est.
In potestate quidem me a est
Appretiare quod potius and magis,
Uelle etiam ut potius, and magis,
Velle mihi adjaces, perficere autem non invenio,
Tu Domine da, penes te est ut des.
Tu qui vertis silicem in aquas stagnantes,
Da lachrymas, da fontem capiti meo,
Da gratiam lachrymarum.
Rorate coeli desuper,
Et Rigate ariditatem deserti mei.
Da Domine gratiam hanc.
Nullum mihi donum gratius,
Non si opes multas,
Non si terrena, vel optima:
Da mihi lachrymas
Quales Davidi olim, vel Jeremiae,
Quales Magdalenae vel Petro indulsisti,
Saltem stillantem oculum,
Ne totus sim silex.
Non ut stratum meum lavare possim,
Non ut pedes tuos,
Non copiose (ut Jeremias)
Non amare (ut Petrus)
(Quanquam o si sic!)
At vel lachrymulam saltem unam
Atque alteram supple,
Quam tu in utre tuo recondas,
Et in commentarios tuos reponas.
Sin ne hoc impetro, ah pumex!
Ah me vere calcem, in aqua frigida fervente^,
Ubi non oportet, dolentem satis,
Ubi maxim oportet, frigidum, aridum, emortuum.
Saltem de lachrymis Christi tui imperti mihi aliquas,
Quas, in diebus carnis suae, fudit ubertim.
Imperti o mihi de iis!
Supersunt in illo mihi, quae in me mihi de sunt,
O Pater misericordiarum,
Obsecro viscera Miserationum tuarum Ne me Vermem immundum ne me despice Canem
Mortuum Cadaver putidum
Quin respice me Domine,
Oculis illis respice
quibus Magdalenam in convivio Petrum in atrio Latronem in patibulo

Ut cum Petro defleam Latrone confitear Magdalena diligam,

Diligam te plurimum
Ut cui remissa sunt plurima.
Parce quaeso Domine, Parce paenitenti,
Certe Poenitere disponenti and cupienti, Peccata cum amaritudine recogitanti,
Sibi-ipside Peccatis admissis indignanti, Passionis tuae amarissimae recordanti,

Eique adhaerenti,
Miserere Peccatoris maximi
Ac proin Misericordia maxima indigeutis
Et tibi maxima est,
Ad coelos usque pertingens
Eripiens de inferno inferiori,
Mirifica est misericordia tua,
Mirifica misericordiam tuam erga me.
Quam si glorificare vis in immensum
Praetende mihi eam.
Nunquam ea in cujusquam Peccatoris venia
Magis gloriosa aut fuit aut futura est.

Domine profiteor dolere me (quod and tu nosti)
Sed peccasse me plus, magis,
Deest mihi dolor tantus, deest plane
Long absum ab eo, quem par est esse,
Multum peccare possum,
Multum dolere non possum,
O ariditas mea! ariditas mea! vae m^hi
Non possum multum, sed cupio multum,
Scio enim nec multum, satis multum esse.
Vtinam is dolor suppeteret mihi.
Sed nequeo impetrare a me
Exarui, exarui, velut testa,
Tu Domine adauge quem habeo fontem lachrymaru^ supple que^ non habeo
Interim, cum mihi promptus sit animus
Acceptum habeas me, secundum quod habeo,
Extendam enim quia intendere non possum magis
Per omnes annos vitae meae.
Oratiuncula post Confessionem.
O Servator mi Christ, Servator mi.
Quis mihi det, ut prius moriar, quam Te denuo offendam
Christ Servator mi, O Servator mi.
O Domine, Novum supervenisse spiritum
Nova vitae ratio demonstret;
Nam poenitentia vera, nova vita,
Et vera confessio, sine intermissione penitere,
Observando Sabbatum perpetuum
A Peccato ejusque Occasion, Fomite, Periculo.

Sicut enim Poenitentia destruit vetera Peccata,
Sic nova Peccata Poenitentiam.
I have seen an imperfect Copy of an other Confession, in which, were these Two
following Meditations, concluded with Penitential Devotions.

1. Meditatio extremi Judicii.
O quam tremendum est Judicium tuum, Domine
Positis Thronis Introductis Hominibus. Adstantibus Angelis
Apertis libris Manifestis tenebraru^ occultis. Investigatis operibus Indagatis
cogitationibus
Quale Judicium erit in me?
Judex incorruptus,
Tribunal horrendum.
Defensio fine excusatione,
Argumenta inevitabilia.
Supplicium asperum,
Gehenna sempiterna,
Angeli immites.
Infernum dilatans os.
Flumen ignis stridens (ignis qui non extinguitur)
Carcer tenebrosus. Tenebrae prorsus exoticae.
Vermiculus irrequietus.
Vincula indissolubilia.
Chaos immensurabile.
Murus, quem transgredi non possumus.
Clamor inconsolabilis.
Nullus qui assistat, patrocinetur, liberet.
Sed, Domine poenitet, poenitet Domine.
Adjuva impenitentiam meam,
Et cor meum magis adhuc
Magisque Contere Psalm. 5. 17 Scinde, Joel 2. 13. Compunge, Act. 2. 23.

O hi me! Apage. Abrenuncio.
Ecce Domine quod dijudico egomet me,
Dignum, and reum aeterni supplicii,
Omniumque difficultatum hujus mundi.
Meritus sum mortem,
Sed appello, A te Domine, ad te Domine,
A te Justo, ad te Misericordem,
A Solio Justitiae, ad Thronum Gratiae.
Admit, Domine, provocationem hanc,
Ni admiseris perimus;
Et o Domine, non ad Te pertinet, si perimus?
Qui omnes vis salvos, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Qui neminem vis perire, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Ecce Domine, me proprio Judicio condemnatum.
Ps. 4. 3. Et o Domine,
Ne intres tu in Judicium cum servo tuo,
Humilior sub potenti manu tua.
Erravi, sicut ovis quae periit.
(ut onager potius, aut vitulus indomitus)
Nec extimui Incomprehensibilitatem gloriae the
Nec venerabilitatem Praesentiae.
Nec Potentiam tremendam.
Nec Exquisitam Justitiam.
Nec Bonitatem amabilem.
Hujus rei gratia, flecto genua mea ad te, Ephesians. 3.
Transeat calixiste.
De profundis clamavi ad Te Domine: Ps. 130.
Domine, exaudi orationem meam.
2. Meditatio naturalis Infirmitatis.
Miserere mei, Domine, quia infirmus sum Ps. 6. 2.
Memorare, quae mea substantia, 89. 47.
Et recordare, quod Caro, sum 78. 41.
Spiritus vadens, and non rediens.
Sicut foenum dies mei, 203 15.
Spiritus transibit in me, and non, subsistam,
Nec cognoscam amplius locum meum v. 16.
Ego enim Pulvis, and Cinis Genesis 18. 27.
Foenum, and Flos Isai. 40. 7.
Putredo, and Vermis Job 17. 14.
Advena, and Peregrinus Psalm. 39. 13.
Habitans domum luteam Job. 14. 19.
Cujus dies parui, and mali Genesis 47. 9.
Hodie, and non cras Prove. 27. 1.
Mane, and non usque ad vesperam Isa. 38, 13.
In corpore peccati, Romans 6. 6.
In mundo corruptionis 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Repletus miseriis, sed brevis vitoe.
Velut Flos, qui egreditur, and conteritur. Vmbra, quoe nunqua^ in eode^ statu
permanet

Memor esto hujus, and miserere mei, Deus.
Ne perdas cum impiis anima^ mea^, Ps. 26. 9.
Ne in furore tuo argu^as me; 6. 1.
Propter magnam Misericordiam tuam,
Propter multitudinem miserationum tuaruna,
Propter Divitias Abundantiam Superabundantiam
Misericordiarum tuarum.
Propter miseriam, and infirmitatem, meam Propter Poenitentiam, and oratione^
Maxim aute^ propter Teipsum, and Jesum tuum
Propitius esto mihi Peccatori.
Exaudi Domine. Propitius esto Domine, Dan. 9. 19
Intend, and fac; fac and ne moreris
Propter Teipsum Domine.
These Two last Meditations, I find thus rendered in the Learned Bishop's Greek
Papers, with some advantage, and enlargement.

Meditatio Prima
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) Luc. 18. 19.
(...) Jer. 31. 19.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Meditatio Secunda.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), (Psa. 30.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When he had, with strong cries, and tears, begged pardon and a blessing upon
himself, while he lay prostrate upon the ground ((...) is his own word) Then,
raising his body, and spirit, he cast his Episcopal eye upon others, and in
their behalf, offered the sacrifice of Intercession, in a fervent prayer, and
supplication for all men, according to the Apostolical advice 1 Timothy 2. 1. And
he did it with such preparation, and in such manner as you shall now see, out
of his own Papers.

Meditationum (...) ante Intercessionem.
2 Cor. 9. 15. (...). Aug. (Inenarrabile donum Dei esse dicit Apostolus, dum
plurimi sibi mutuis succurrunt officiis and pro semutuo orant, and gratias
agunt.) 1 Samuel 12. 23. (...), inquit Samuel: Hieron. In praesenti saeculo,
scimus nos orationibus posse adjuvari, cum autem ante tribunal Christi
venerimus, nec Job, nec Daniel, nec Noah pro nobis rogare possunt, sed
unusquisque port at onus suum, Romans 8. 26. (...). Aug. contra Max. Postulat
spiritus pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus: number tuus velmeus spiritus est
inenarrabilis? qui saepe nullus, saepe frigidus est; sed quia nullus est dies,
nullum momentum, quo non a sanctis supplicatur Deo, ab uno ferventius, ab alio
tepidius: and quia omnes unam Columbam constituunt, Hinc fiunt gemitus
inenarrabiles nempe, ex omnibus in commune gemitibus, qui omnibus in Ecclesiae
corpore constitutis prosunt. Qui pro aliis orat, pro se laborat
Si pro te solus rogas, rogabis pro te solus,
Si oras pro omnibus, omnes orabunt pro te.
(...), Intercessio.
Audi nos, Domine.
Pro universa Creatura,
Pro temporibus salubribus, fructiferis, pacatis.
Pro genere humano,
Pro conversione, Judaeoru^ Turcaru^ Ethnicoru^
ad veritatis cognitionem.
Pro auxilio, and consolatione omnium
Quibus animo, aut corpore male est
Qui in egestate, perplexi sunt.

Promodestia, and moderatione eornm
Qui Tranquillo animo Vegeto corporo In rerum affluentia Explicato consilie
sunt
Pro Christianis omnibus Qui in Veritate sunt, and Gratia, ut confirmentur. Qui
in errore, and peccato, ut redeant in viam.

Pro Ecclesiis per Orbem Terrarum ut in Vnitate, and stabilitate sint.
Pro nostra
Vt omnes Haereses Schismata, and scandala publica, privata, amoveantur.

Pro Clero,
Ut, alios docentes, ipsi discant (...), (...).

Pro Populo,
Ne plus sapiat, quam oportet,
Ut persuadeatur ratione,
Et cedat Authoritati.
Pro Politiis,
Et firmitate, ac pace earum.
Pro Regno. Municipio. Vrbe nostra,
O Domine (...) salvum fac. (...) been prosperare.

Pro Consilii Prudentia. Judicii Aequitate. Exercitus Fortitudine.

Pro Agricolis. Mercatoribus. Artificibus.
Etiam usque ad Arts sordidas, and mendicantes.
Pro Sobole succrescente
Sive in Academiis, Scholis.

Ut quomodo aetate, sic etiam sapientia,
Et gratia proficiant
Apud Deum, and Hominem.
Pro iis,
Quos commendat nobis Naturae propinquitas. Vicinia Loci. Beneficentia.
Amicitia moralis. Christiana Charitas. Promissum nostrum.

Pro iis quos difficultas aliqua permit, qui, negotiis male pressi, or are non
valent qui sese Precibus nostris co^mendarunt. quibus cura demandat a Ecclesiae.

Vel Reipub. vel Familiae.
Praecip^e vero
Pro iis qui in extremo discrimine sunt, auxilio tuo maxim indigent.

Pro iis quibus insigne aliquod opus prae manibus est
Vnde Nomini Tue gloria adventura, Ecclesiae Tuae pax
Pro iis qui Beneficos se praebent
Erga Res sacras Pauperes, and egenas.

Read illis septuplum in sinum illorum.
Animae eorum in bonis demorentur. and
Semen eorum haereditent terram.
Vt omnibus Benefactoribus nostris
Aeterna bona retribuas.
Vt miserias Pauperum, and Captivorum intueri,
Et relevare digneris.
Vt lapsus carnis fragiles
Benigna compassione recolas.
Vt obsequium servitat is nostrae rationabile
Acceptum habeas.
Vt mentes nostras ad coelestia desideriae
Erigas.
Vt oculos Misericordiae tuae super nos
Reducere digneris.
Vt anim as nostras ab aeterna damnatione
Eripias.
Te Rogamus,
Audi nos, Domine.
Here I find most papers of the Greek Copies much altered and enlarged, but
very worthy your perusal, and your frequent use too. And in hope, that you will
be of my mind, I represent them thus.

(...).
(...)
(...)
((...),
(...). Psalm. 145. 5.
(...), Ps. 147. 9.)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
When the Pious, and Charitable Bishop had thus interceded for others, then,
modestly, and humbly, as it were at the feet of them ((...) are his own words
elsewhere) He placed this following Petition, in his own behalf; And in the
close of it, he gave himself a memorandum of our Saviors words to his
Disciples (Luc. 11, 2:) When you pray, say, Our Father, which art in Heaven --
Those words of our Savior, were motive enough to him, to close-up his prayers
there with the Lord's Prayer. Therefore I will now set down the manner, how he
continued it with the former Intercession, and how he closed it up at last.

(...),
(...)
((...))
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...), -- etc.
In the next place, we may see his (...), or (...); that is Gratiarum Actiones,
and His Praeparations to them.

Meditationum (...) ante (...).
(...). Ecclus. 15. 9.

(...), Psalm. 52. 10. (i. e.) The Saints like it well, and God likes it best
from them: from such as can worship him with holy worship.

Confiteantur tibi omnia opera tua. Psalm. 89. 16. (i. e. All may confess the
truth, but Sancti tui benedicant tibi: they have more ties of greater
thankfulness, and are fitter to express it, which others have not the skill to
do.

(...), Psalm. 89, 16. (i. e.) He is a happy man, that has learned that art, in
which we shall never excel till we are fitted for the Quire above: For who can
fing the Lords song in a strange land?

(...). Judith 16. 16.

All Sacrifice is to little for a sweet savor to him.

(...). Ecclus. 43. 31. and verse. 34.

We may speak much, and yet come short, therefore Exalt him as much as you can.
Put forth all your strength, and be not weary, for you can never go far enough.

Vaetacentibus de te Domine quoniam etiam loquaces muti sunt. Aug. Confess. l. 1.

(...) tacet tibi laus vel Psalmus.

i. e. Opera tua non attingit, plus hebet silentij and videtur procedere ^x ore
lactentium. Psalm. 8. 2.

(...), Baruch 4. 28.

Ut antea in peccatis, sic jam in bonis operibus and laudibus Dei abundemus.

(...), -- etc.

Oration Praeparatoria, ante (...).

Faec me, Domine, Poenitentiae meae, Laudibusque Tuis vacare ((...).

Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum annuntiabit laudem Tuam.

Sed peccantem me, Domine, and prorsus indignum, magis deceret, coram te jacere
prostratum, ac cum fletu, ac gemitu, peccatorum venia^ postulare, quam te ore
polluto laudare.

Verum de ingenita tua Bonitate confido.
O suscipe lauds quas decantare desidero
Indignus peccator,
Certe indignas,
Sed utinam devotus, and Tibi gratus.
Gratiarum actio.
Quod sum, Vivo Ratione praeditus Civilis Christianus
Liber Ingenuus Honesta stirpe Mentis compos Sensuum Membrorum


Enutritus Libere educatus Literatus Pro Redemptione, Regeneratione,
Catechismo, Vocatione, Patientia tua, Compunctione mea,
Preventione tua. Curatione Parentibus bonis, Magistris doctis, Benefactoribus,
Amicis, Domesticis fidelibus. Beneficiis quae accepi Siquid been egi
Consolatione praesenti, Fiducia futura. Donis Naturae. Fortunae. Gratiae.
Omnibus qui mihi Scriptis, Concionibus, profuerunt Precibus, Colloquiis,
Reprehensione, Exemplis. Jnjuriis, Liberatione a Periculo, Ab Insania,
Inquietudine: Sanitate Mentis. Corporis

Statu competenti. Hisce omnibus, omnibusque aliis Cognitis vel Incognitis,
Quae Recordor, vel obliviscor.
Confiteor tibi, and confitebor Benedico, and benedicam, Gratias ago, and
Gratias agam. Omnibus diebus Vitae meae.
Haec (...) graece paulo aliter se habet.
(...)

(...)

Aliud gratissimae and devotissimae Animae Sacrificium Eucharisticum.
(...) --
(But what if I should not deliver this in Latin or Greek, which two languages
the learned Bishop was commonly wont to use in his Closet (and to whom all
useful languages were as familiar as his own tongue.) Methinks I should speak
a little English, in love to my Countrymen, and to let them see how easily (by
the help of some linguist, and the use of their Bibles) they might partake of
some of these, and other-like Devotions, to the great benefit of themselves,
and their Interpreters, and all their Friends.

Blessed be God, the Creator, Preserver, and Governor of all things.

Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion from Generation to
generation, Dan. 4. 3.

He is the blessed, and only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Who
only has Immortlity, dwelling in a light, which no man can approach unto 1 Timothy 6. 15.

And (though He has his dwelling so high) yet he humbles Himself to behold the
things that are in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 113. 5.

Taking the Wise in their own craftiness, Job. 5. 13.

Pulling down the Mighty from their seats, and exalting them of low degree,

Filling the hungry with good things, and sending the rich empty away. Luke 1.
52.

Lord, what is man, that thou have such respect unto him, and the Son of man,
that Thou do so regard him? Psalm. 144. 3.

Blessed be the God of the Spirits of all flesh, Numb. 16. 22.

In whom we live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17. 23.

Who would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4.

Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2
Pet. 3. 9,

For his thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our ways, His ways, Isai. 55. 8.

He being God and not man. (i. e.) As God exceeds man, so do His mercies
exceed the mercyes of man, Hos. 11. 9.

O that men wonld therefore praise the Lord for his goodness

And offer unto him the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving: and tell out His works with
gladness. Psalm. 107. 21.

O give thanks unto the Lord, For He is gracious, and his Mercy endures for
ever, Psalm. 106. 1.

Who can express the noble acts of the Lord? (but, who would not desire to
express them?)

It Is good to keep close the secrets of a King: but it is Honorable to declare
the works of God, Tobit. 12. 11.

Let Us all be glad, and rejoice, and give Honor to Him, Apoc. 19. 7.

As for my soul, It shall be satisfied, as it were with marrow and fatness,
Psalm. 63. 6.

Therefore let my mouth be filled wirh thy praise, that I may sing of thy glory
and honor, All the day long, Psalm. 71. 7.

This is the happiness of the 4 Creatures in the Revelation. They rest not day
nor night saying. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and
is to come, Apoc. 4. 8.

I draw toward the end of my task. You have seen the good Bishop's Domestical
Devotions. I will now let you see the like, before His going out of Town, and
then how He closed up the day, and prepared for Night.

Oration peregre profecturi.
Qui puerum Abrahae ductu Angeli,
Qui magorum iter ductu Stellae,
Qui Petrum fluctuantem,
Qui Paulum navigantem --
Adesto, Domine, mihi, and Dirige mihi viam,
Conduc, and Deduc, and Reduc.
(...).
(...)
(...).
Monita, and Meditationes Praeparatoriae in Vespertina ad Deum Elevatione
mentis.

In Bello Cantus est. (...), ad agendum acco^modatus. (...), quo palantes
revocantur: sic


Men's humana ut mane excitanda, ita ad vesperu^ quasi Anacletico ad se,
Ducemque suu^ revocanda.

Per Scrutinium, and Inquisitionem, vel examen sui. Preces, and Gratiarum
Actiones.


1. Scrutinium, and Inquisitio, vel Examen.
Aug. Vir bonus praeponit scire infirmitatem suam magis quam scire fundamenta
terrae, and fastigia coeli.

Illa vero scientia infirmitatis suae, non paratur absque inquisitione
diligenti, sine qua coecus plerumque est animus, atque in propriis nihil videt.

Cicero. Multae sunt in animo latebrae, multique recessus, and

Seneca. Deprehendas te oportet, antequam emendes.

Ignotum ulcus in deterius abit, and curatione destituitur.

Jer. 17. 9. (...) --

Cor profundum est and tortuosum.

Homo vetus mill involucris obtegitur.

Itaque (...). Attend Tibi ipsi. Hoc autem maxim inquirendum,

Quid hodie Egeris, Dixeris, Legeris, Scripseris.

quod deceat Christianum, Sacerdotem. Patrem, etc. confirmet fidem, obedientiam
augeat Scientiam. vel Regimen animi, corporis.
operetur Salutem tuum, aliorum.




Deum ipsum videmus singulos primae Creationis dies non aliter claudentem, quam
per recognitionem operum cujusque diei.

Et vidit quod bona essent, Genesis 1.

Cicero. Cato diurni negotii a se rationem exigebat. and Pythagoras etiam.

Ausonius ex Pythag.

Nec prius in dulcem declinent lumina somnu^, Omnia quam longi repetiveris acta
die.

Rex David, exacto die, meditabatur, (...).

In hoc Areopagitico and nocturno Examine,
Vide ne Patronum te ostendas peccatorum sed judicem.
Et in tribunali mentis Tuae dic,
(Dic cum dolor and indignatione)
Iniquitatem meum agnosco, Domine, Psalm. 51.
O! Quis dabit menti meae flagella,
Quae peccatis meis non parcant? Ecclus. 23. 2.
'El (...). 1 Cor. 11: 31
Oration est (...), dormientiu^ custos. (...) vigilantiu^ fidueia.
Gr. Nys.
Neque eum tutum arbitramur qui non fueric
Orationis armis praesidioque munitus,
Recte igitur Rab. J. de poenitentia non in crastinum differenda.
(...) (i. e.)
Ecce spes fructus and salutis falsa tibi erit in aeternum nisi animam tuam
etiam hac nocte eripueris.

Et hujusmodi examen si per aliquot dies aut unum saltem mensem fiat (cum
poenitentia) sufficient ut perfectus virtutis habitus generetur.

And now (my Lords papers failing me) I must make use of my own pains, and my
English tongue again, for the present help of those of whom I would, but cannot
otherwise be understood.

Can we carelessly cast our eyes over such powerful Motives to a nocturnal
scrutiny, and Inquisition into our sinful souls? Dare we venture to fleep in
sin, and so perhaps to loose those souls, before we know where to find them
again? May we not (in such a necessary task) prevail with our selves, to bestow
a piece of a night, or two, in that employment, which is able to make them
prove the happiest nights, that ever we spent in our lives. There was a time
when the Royal Prophet found it so, that (many a night) watered his bed with
his tears, or rather made it swim, (so emphatically does he himself express
it, (Psalm. 6. 7.) with an Hyperbole) (...).

Would not St Aug. make us fear, that the omitting, or deferring of that
Scrutiny may bring us into extreme hazard? For he has said, that which may
prove too true, in many, Poenitentia, quae ab infirmo petitur, infirma est,
quae autem a moriente petitur, timeo ne ipsa moriatur. that is, It is best to
make strict examination, and complete our Repentance, while we are in health,
and have time enough to look into all that is past, and prevent all Relapses
into the like sins hereafter. For the future is a time most uncertain to us,
and wherein we know not what, Indisposition, Sicknesses, Hindrances, or
Obstructions may suddenly fall out, though we might chance to live longer. Now
therefore, while it is called to day, and our day, lest us make haste to break
off our sins, and let us take a penitential Psalm into our mouths, or one of
the public Confessions (in the first or second Service) or one out of the good
Bishop's Penitential papers. And make a sad, and serious resolution, for
present and real amendment of life, and have a great care against all Relapses
into sin (especially into our darling, and habitual sins) without which
Intention and Resolution, all our Nocturnal Scrutinies, will be fruitless and
to no purpose.

Shall I say a little more to help you forward?

First then, I will propose several places of Holy Writ, wherein we are most
earnestly admonished, to beware of Relapses.

2. After you have chewed a little, upon them Iwill prescribe a Prophetical
Antidote, by way of prevention, against the foul returns of sin.

1. The First shall begin with the words of the two great Apostles.

Grow in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18.

Receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1,

-- Giveing all diligence add to your Faith Virtue, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5.

He that lacks these things is blind -- and has forgotten that he was purged
from his old sins. verse 9.

-- If they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

For it had been better for them, not to have known the way of Righteousness,
then after they had known it, to turn from the holy Commandment -- But it is
happened to them, according to the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his own
vomit, etc.

Continue thou in the things, that thou have learned, 1 Timothy 3. 14.

Be not shaken in mind, -- 2 These. 2. 2.

If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a transgressor,
Gal. 2. 18.

What these two chief Apostles have said, we may find to be the frequent advise
of holy Scripture elsewhere.

Such as return back to their own wickedness, the Lord will lead them forth
with evil doers, (i. e. to be punished with them) Psalm. 123. ult.

When the Righteous turns away -- etc. Ezekiel. 18. 29.

He that has washed himself after the touching of a dead body; if he touch it
again, what avails his washing? Ecclus. 34. 25.

No man having put his hand to the Plow, and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of God. Luke 9. 61.

Therefore let not your goodness be as a morning cloud, or the early dew (that
soon vanish away) Hos. 6. 4.

What God has cleansed, do not thou make common. Act. 10. 15.

Be not weary of thy repenting of thy sin, least God be weary of his repenting
of thy punishment Jer. 16. 6.

Turn not your backs, and start not aside like a broken Bow, Psalm. 78. 5.

Slide not back, as a backsliding Heifer, Hos. 4. 16.

But follow on to know the Lord, cap. 6. 3.

And bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, Mat. 3. 8.

Walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and glory, 2 These.
2, 12.

O how I wish, that all men would make good use of all that refers to this
Inquisition, and narrow search into the state of our souls; that should have
more care taken upon them then is ordinarily spent upon the body every day.
Therefore, I hope, none will be offended, that I mustered up so many good
Admonitions together, with such a noise about your ears, as it were, with so
many Drums and Trumpets (at such an unseasonable time of the night) rather to
keep you waking, then to afford some help toward your quiet rest.

I think indeed, the first night (though you make choice of a Fasting night)
wherein you settle your selves, to the purpose, about this most Christian, and
most necessary expression of our duty unto God, and love to our selves, will
prove full of trouble, for that part of the night: and your prayers may seem to
be the voice of crying (as the Royal Prophet speaks of his, in his several
nights, Psalm. 8. 6.) But this is your happiness, that such a troublesome, and
sad piece of such a night, may (by God's blessing) work as great a Miracle, as
the turning the Water into Wine, and the changing a Face sullied with salt
tears, into a most cheerful countenance.

The solitariness of that part of a night, may be answered with the company of
a merry heart of our own (which is a continual Feast) all the days, and nights
of our life. And (after this uncertain life ended) it may be crowned with
everlasting Joy and Happiness, in that only place of bliss, where all tears
shall at once be wiped quite away from all faces; and all hearts completely
filled with true Joy.

2. In hope of this belief in you, I will now go on to that, which I promised
in the second place, Of an Antidote and Preservative against future Relapses,
worthy to be remembered every night: You shall receive it from the hands of St.
Basil, that you may know to whom you are beholden for it.

(...) -- etc. Basil. Regul. brev. Interogat. 28.

That is, If a man has repented of a sin, and after fallen into the same sin
again, it is a sign, that he pulled not that sin up by the roots.

For there are some sins rooted, and grounded in other sins (as Envy, and
Contention in Pride, and Vain glory) In all such, till the root be quite pulled
up, and Humility set in the place of it; cut the branches as you please, some
what will bud up, and appear again.

And as some sins are the root of others, so some sins are the food of
others; as we use to say (sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus) Lust uses to
feed well, to fare deliciously and plentifully. Therefore there is a Devil that
cannor be cast out but by prayer and Fasting. And we may safely say, that
Fullness of Bread, and Idleness, as they are the Sepulchers of many Virtues; so
they are the Cherishers of most Vices. But when we know the true Root, and
Cause, and Food of a Disease, it is half cured. It grows late, and we need say
no more of this, Verbum sapienti.

You may think, that I am ready to take my leave of you, and bid you Good
night, adding not a word more of that hard Scrutiny, or what else, belonging to
it, may fit it for a happy conclusion. And indeed, I and all the world must
leave you, when you are for that business, which (though it be most profitable)
is the most unpleasing to us all, that are great sinners.

Yet, that I may take my leave the more charitable, and that you may find the
better night, I will say one word more (a word of Comfort.)

If in the foot of your account, you find sins so great, and so many, that
great and many terrors begin to disturb you. Strive to arm your selves with
all the armor of God, and be not so much affrighted, as encouraged to go on.
For if your inward eyes (with the use of your best optic Instruments) have
found out so many of your own sins, or multitudes of your worst enemies: let
your other eyes (by the help of your prayers) furnish you with as good store of
the best weapons, that can be used, in your defense.

Lachrimae arma. Prayers and Tears are the weapons that David used so long,
that he washed his bed with them. Psalm. 6, 6, 7.

Tears are the weapons that Mary Magdalen's Eyes had such plenty of, that she
could wash our Saviors feet with them.

Bitter Tears are the weapons made Peter go out of the place where he denied
his Savior, into a fitter place, wherein he might presently beg that mercy of
God, that charmed the Devil from ever haunting of him, with the memory of that
foul Denial.

And if you fain would, but cannot weep as they did, think of those Prayers
(without any mention of tears) that long before these Weepers were born,
turned Jacob into Israel, and moved God to let him and us know, that the Lord
of Hosts was overcome with his importunate way of [non dimittam nisi -- ]
which showed the power of his Prayers, that won him the Name of Israel.

And let us prove out selves true Israelites, by so following of him; if we can
extort no Tears, or so few dropps as cannot be poured into God's bottle, and
entitle us to the name of Followers of the other great Champions. For if we can
begin with no weapons of Tears, but (without them) broken and sorrowful
penitent Hearts, yet, if we resolve to fight the more valiantly hereafter,
under Christ's banner, in the use of some other spiritual weapons, doubt not
but the Father of all Mercyes, and Mercy it self, will graciously receive us;
having invited all so freely to come to Him, that are weary and heavy laden
with the unsupportable burden of their sins: and having not by his tears
only, but by his precious blood so fully satisfied for poor penitent sinners.

I am not sorry that I have showed you the way how to be (...), and use such
weapons in your prayers, since God Himself has showed us the way, how he may
be overcome. And, I hope, you are not sorry, that I have showed you the way,
how to make the night of your Scrutiny (whenever you make choice of it) a
happy and joyful night, in the close,

But when you have well passed over the time of your Scrutiny (in all the
nights after) a short Meditation of the Affinity that is between Sleep and
Death, will easily produce a Prayer and Resolution, with an eye to that, before
you make to much haste to lie down, and rest in your bed, between those sheets,
that may prove your winding sheets, for ought you know.

A further supply for the Evening, you may take out of the pious Bishops
Devotions, which shall now follow, that you may see, how he usually prepared
himself for his quiet sleep and rest, after his daily labors. I wish, all may
use them whith his spirit: and remember that like the winding up again of the
Clock, such is the necessary Recollection of our selves at night, after the
disturbances and discomposing of our selves in the day time, by the ordinary
employment, and duties of our Calling, and our occasional Commerce with other
men.

In this task, our best method will be

1. First to reflect upon our sins of the day.

2. Then upon the hazard of the night, against which we had need to be armed by
our prayers.

3. Then upon the blessing and praising of God, for his former works of mercy
and providence; and the confidence which we have in his custody of us this
night, and for ever.

In this part I find no papers of the good Bishop, but only in Greek, which I
shall rerepresent in that order. 1 (...). 2. (...). 3. (...) or, (...)


1. (...).
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
2. (...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
((...))
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Amongst the^e preparations for night, the very thoughts of the affinity
betwixt Sleep and Death, or the Bed and the Grave, produced these following
Ejaculations and Prayers, against the sudden and violent approach of Death.

(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
(...),
(...)
(...).
Such true Devotions and Prayers are the surest means to procure a Guard of
blessed Angels against the greatest dangers of the darkest times. Surer then
Salomons valiant men that walked about his Bed every one with his Sword upon
his Thigh, because of the perils of the night. Therefore the pious Bishop
thought of no confidence, and no repose like that of the Royal Prophet. (...).

In this confidence he might well conclude his Prayers thus.

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
3. (...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
We are now coming to the incomparable Bishop's last Hymn, and sweetest Anthemn
in which he was wont to shut up and conclude the Devotions of the whole day.

Hark, Hark! stand a little and listen, and admire, for it is a full Anthemn,
and all his best faculties of body and soul make up a Consort in the delivery
of it, with all his skill and strength. Observe the Deepness of the Base, and
the Height of the Trebles; I mean, the Lov Descent of his Reverence and
Humility, with the High Strain of his Joys and Thankfulness, while he Sings a
Requiem to his body and soul, in a full expression of his service, and the
glory which he heartily ascribes unto his God.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Is not this rare Music? Is it not far above the strange imaginary Music of
the Spheres? Does it not exceed the natural Consort of the pretty chirping
Birds, that seem all to join together, in a kind of Martens, and Evensong to
the Honor, and Glory of the All-creatour, that opens his liberal Hands, every
day, to fill all things living with plenty. Nay, does it not emulate our Church
Music (the chiefest Music in the world) and the best kind of that Music,
when the skillfull Artists join the sweetest Voices, with the variety of sweet
Instruments?

Why shall we not then think, this Musical close of all his other Devotions to
be his Introduction to conduct him and welcome him to the Heavenly Quire
above, to be made acquainted with their Halelujah's, and Trisagium's, and
Doxologies, and other ways of Divine rapture, which cannor be learned, or
practiced, but in that place, whereof the Holy Land was but a Figure (For how
can we learn, or sing the Lords song in a strange Land?

After this Anthem, I can furnish you with no more out of the holy Bishop's
papers; God be thanked for these, which I have received from several hands, and
laid together, to be ready for your use, in your private Closets, where somewhat
would be done, besides that which others see you do, in God's House.

But if you know not how to use them, yet may you, perhaps, be willing (after
your Scrutiny or Inquisition) to go on with, these short Meditations and
Prayers, and Thanksgivings that follow here, contracted into a narrow room,
for your accommodation.

Meditations, Prayers. and praises of God, which may be used (after the
Scrutiny) before you go to Bed.
Psalm. 139.
verse. 1. O Lord thou have searched me out, and known me, Thou know my
down-sitting, and mine up-rising. Thou understandest my thoughts long before.
2. Thou art about my Path, and about my Bed: and spiest all my ways.
3. For lo there is not a word in my tongue, but thou, Lord, know them
altogether.
4. For thou have fashioned me behind, and before, and laid thine hand upon me.
5 Such knowledge is too wonderful, and excellent, for me: I cannot attain unto
it.
6. Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit: or whither then shall I go from
thy presence?
7. If I climb up into Heaven, Thou art there: if I go down to Hell, thou art
there also.
8. If I take the wings of the Morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of
the Sea.
9. Even there also shall thy hand Lead me: and thy right shall hold me.
10. If I say, Peradventure the darkness shall cover me: Then shall my night be
turned to day.
11. Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as
the day: The darkness and light to Thee are both alike,
12. For my Reins are thine: Thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb.
13. I will give thanks unto Thee, for I am fearfully, and wonderfully made:
Marvelous are Thy works, and that my soul knows right well.
14. My Bones are not hid from Thee: though I be made secretly beneath in the
Earth.
15. Thine Eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect: And in thy Book were
all my Members written.
16. Which, day after day, were fashioned: When as yet there was none of them.
17. How dear are thy Counsels unto me, O God, O how great is the sum of them?
18. If I tell them, they are more in number? then the sand of the Sea: When I
wake up, I am present with Thee.
So said the holy Prophet, one of the chiefest Seers of Israel. What shall we
say, that have had no such Heavenly Visions, and clear illuminations as he had;
nor will have Tongues so like the Pen of a ready writer, as his was; we can
discover but little of the wonders of our Creation, How then shall we be able
to conceive, and express how wonderfully we are redeemed with a Costly and
Mighty Salvation, and Miraculously preserved in Sad, and Perilous times, unto
this day.

Yet let us, endeavor, at least, to praise the Lord, and rouse up our souls
to it, as he did.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his Benefits.

Who pardons all thy sins (thy great sins) and heals all thine
infirmities (thy manifold infirmities)

Who crowns thee every day with mercy, and Loving kindness.

Who shadoves thee from the dangers of every night. Who renewes thy strength
every morning, like that of the Eagle: that thou may cheerfully go through
the works of thy Calling.

In this manner, and for ever praise the Lord, O my soul.

And O that all others would join with me, to magnify the Lord together, as it
was that holy Prophets earnest wish.

O that we might all praise Him,

In the Angels and Churches Hymn.

O that we might with Angels, and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven
laud and magnify Thy Holy Name O Blessed Lord. Evermore Honoring and Praising
Thee. Evermore Worshipping and Glorifiing Thy Blessed Name, For all Thy great
Mercies, rejoicing in Thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
which was, and which is, and which is to come, Heaven and Earth are full of Thy
Glory.

Glory be to Thee O Lord most High.

And let all in Heaven and Earth say,

Amen, Amen. Halelujah.

After the Hymn, if you are not inclinable to sleep, then (that the better use
may be made of your last Prayers and Meditations, concerning the wonders of our
Creation, Preservation, and Divine Omni-present Assistance) I will furnish you
with a short Paraphrastical Exposition of those Verses of the 139 Psalm, which
I commended to you before, as fit for the time.

A Paraphrastical Exposition of some Uerses in the 139 Psalm.
1. O Lord, thou know me as well, as if thou had made a narrow search and
strict examination of all my inward parts, Thou art privy to my times of Rest
and Retirement, and (after them) thou see, how I fit my self for employment,
and how I demean my self in it; Thou observest my intimate and familiar
thoughts, and inclinations and intentions, long before they are actually mine.

2. Thou art no stranger to my labor in the day, or my repose, sleep, and
dreams, in the night; Thou art thoroughly acquainted will all my recreations,
and all my best, and worst actions, and all my faillures, or more perfect
proceedings in the whole course of my life.

3. There is not a word at my tongues end but thou can discern it wholely,
and infallibly, before it come out; Thou have no need that I should express it
unto Thee, for Thou, Lord, know it better then I do; And as well do Thou
know, and observe what care I use, not only in the governing of my thoughts and
deeds, but also in the bridleing and regulating of my Tongue, which I keep not
in with good heed, besides, the hedge of my Teeth (which is my Monitor to warn
me of it) all my Religion will prove vain, and of no esteem, in thy pure eyes,
who art the great Judge, and rewarder of all.

4. Thou do compass me as close on every side (as a City is beset in the
straitest siege) I can stir as little from thy Presence, as if thou had
laid thy hands upon me to hold me fast.

5. This Thy knowledge of me, and of all my thoughts, words, and deeds, is so
high above my capacity: that I can neither comprehend it nor hinder it, nor be
concealed from it.

6. For whether can I go to hide my self from thy knowledge of me; How can I
be secured from thy dreadful omnipresence (that frights thine enemies) or
deprived of thy comfortable omnipresence (which is the unspeakable defense of
thy servants)

7. 8. If I could mount my self as high as Heaven, or couch my self as low as
Hell, If I were as nimble and swift, as Light it self (which is like the wings
of the morning) and could be conveyed in a moment from East to West, land
disposed of in the most remotest parts of the Sea

9. Even there must I expect to be led by Thy hand, and no other, but Thy
gracious conduct could be my guide.

10. If I should think to hide my self in some dark corner, the darkest night
would not therein differ from the clearest day.

11. For to Thee (the glorious Fountain of Light) the day and night (the
clearest, and the darkest places) are all one.

12. And the abstrusest, and most secret parts about me (my very Reins, the
seat of Affections, and Original Inclinations to sin) lie all open, and naked
to thy view, who did cover me with flesh, and compact me with bones, and
sinews, in a secret place, in my Mothers womb:

13. So that if there were no other cause, yet for my very Creation alone, I am
bound, with all thankfulness to admire, and bless, and praise thy holy Name.
My soul cannot but be affected, with that strange, and curious workmanship,
even to astonishment and amazement.

14. For there is not so much as the least bone, or member of my body, but
takes along with it, an apparent stamp, and impression of thy divine Power and
Wisdom, while my body it self (to say nothing of the rare faculties of the
soul) was so cunningly, and secretly wrought and imbroidered with Veins and
Sinews, Arteries, and other incomparable varieties of necessary parts; which
as they were first framed, and molded secretly in my Mothers womb: so are they
not now, all of them, exposed to the view of every eye, but show themselves
only, by the use that is made of them.

15. All this frame, and substance of the body, lay open and naked to thy
all-seeing eye, while it was yet an imperfect Embryo, under the hand of thy
mighty power, and unsearchable wisdom, that lap'd up all the several parts,
rolling and winding them up together, as orderly, and exactly, to their
complete number, as if they had been all Registered in a Book, with directions
how, and in what method, they should be placed.

16. All this seemed to be so punctually contrived (before they had their right
frame and fashion) that they might be day by day, molded and ordered, by a
strict, and insensible way of growing to perfection.

17. O how dear and precious should all these things (that belong to thy
Creation, and Providence) be in my sight, that seem (in my poor apprehension)
as the effect of much thought, advice, and contrivance, in the variety of so
many several parts and ways, that I should be never able to recollect the
sum of them

18. Should I venture upon it, with my poor Arithmetic, I were as good settle
my self to number the sand of the Sea; In various meditation of them, I may
lull my self a sleep, and yet when I awake, return to Thee again, in a fresh
way of Rapture and Admiration, of thy wonderful works: And if this were my
employment every day, and constant entertainment of my thoughts every night:
Yet were it too impossible for me, in the course of my whole life to comprehend.

A TABLE Containing The Heads and Chapters In this Book.
General advice more briefly set down for their sakes that have much other
business. page 1. Ejaculations to be used in the Morning when we are awake. p.
1. Ejaculations to be used when we are retired into our Closets, p. 2. A short
Sermon, taken chiefly out of the First and Last words of Ecclesiastes. p. 2. A
Short Set Form of Devotion to be used before we leave our Closets. p. 4. Advice
concerning our duty at the time of public Prayer. p. 5. Advice concerning our
duty after our return from public Service. p. 5. Particular Advice for times
of Retirement, Meditation and Devotion. p. 8. Chap. 1. The need we have of
several holy Retirements. p. 8. Chap. 2. The frequency and constancy of this
holy employment. p. 10. Chap. 3. Incitements to Morning Devotion, drawn from
the Example and Advice of others. p. 14. Chap. 4. The entertainment of our
selves at our Waking, Looking up, Attirring, Washing, etc. p. 17. 1.
Meditations when we wake and look up. p. 17. 2. When we put on our Apparel. p.
20. 3. At the time of Washing. p. 21. 4. When we use the Looking Glass. p. 23.
Chap. 5. Preparation to our Set Devotions as soon as we are ready, p. 25. Chap.
6. A previous consideration of Prayer in General, and the best Motives to the
use of it. p. 26. Chap. 7. Other preparatory Meditations before Prayers in the
Morning, or at any other time. p. 27. Chap. 8. A further supply of such
preparatory Meditations as may make us fitter to be heard in our Prayers. p.
30. Chap. 9. Another sure way of preparation from our love to God and delight
in Him. p. 31. Chap. 10. Other means to facilitate our our access to God by
Prayer. p. 34. Chap. 11. Caveats for the matter and manner of Prayer. p. 36.
Chap. 12. The close of the last Meditation, with a return to the time. p. 44.
Chap. 13. Preparatory Ejaculations fit to be used when we compose our selves
for Prayer. p. 44. Chap. 14. Confessio cum precatione. p. 46. Pro remissione
peccatorum. p. 47. Chap. 15. A Morning Devotion framed according to St. Basil's
direction, and the rare pattern of the sweet Singer of Israel. p. 50. Chap. 16.
Some places of Scripture that may afford us matter of Meditation fit to prepare
us for the works of our Calling. p. 54. Chap 17. Our daily duty, and the short
time allotted to us. p. 56. Chap. 18. A view of our frailty taken from the
consideration of our first materials. p. 61. Chap. 19. The fullness of our
misery amplified by way of instance. p. 65. Chap. 20. The close and fruit of
the former Meditation. p. 71. A Morning Prayer. p 73. Chap. 21. The fullness of
misery here answered with the best fullness hereafter. p. 74. Chap. 22. The same
happiness expressed under the promise of the Vision of God. p. 79. Chap. 23.
The means of attaining the former happiness. p. 82. Chap. 24. Another
reflection uqon the proposal of the first means. p. 92. Chap. 25. The second
means of attaining the happiness that was promised out of Heb. 12. 14. p. 98.
Chap. 26. Another reflection upon the proposal of the second means. p. 102.
Chap. 27. Another view of this means with a fuller expression of the extent of
it out of Psalm. 34. 13. p. 106. Chap. 28. A Transition of what immediately
follows, with the design of it, and therein first a defense from assaults
without us. p. 114. Chap. 29. Advice concerning the dangers from within us. p.
122. Chap. 30. Of the particular consequences implied in the former advice, and
the delivery of it, and first of the possibility of keeping the heart. p. 127.
Chap. 31. Of the necessity of keeping the heart. p. 138. Chap. 32. Of the
means and helps of keeping the heart, and first of the prime and superior
means. p. 141. Chap. 33. Of the subordinate means and helps for keeping the
heart, and first of the antecedent and preparatory means. p. 146. Chap. 34.
The particular subordinate means of keeping the heart. p. 148. Chap. 35. The
close and fruit of the last Meditations. p. 155. Chap. 36. Instructions for
those times, wherei^ we are called to the Church. p. 156. Chap. 37. A second
Task in this Preparation p. 162. Chap. 38. Our passage toward the Church and
our entrance into it. p. 163. Chap. 39. Our timely address, and stay to the
end of Divine Service. p. 167. Chap. 40. At our first Kneeling. p. 168. Chap.
41. Of public Prayers and Sermons p. 170. Chap. 42. Of finging the Psalms or
Anthems. p. 173. Chap. 43. The influence that Preaching, and Praying, and
Reading of the holy Scripture should have upon our practice. p. 179. Chap. 44.
The necessity of frequent Prayer, both of public and private. p. 181. Chap.
45. The set Hours of public Prayer, Chap. 46. The Place. p. 184. Chap. 47.
Before our private reading of the holy Scriptures. p. 186. Chap. 48. Of short
Ejaculations. p. 190. Chap. 49. The recollection of our selves at Night, and
preparation to a Scrutiny. p. 161. Chap. 50. A Preparative Meditation, and
Exhortation to such an Abstemious life, as may fit us for a happy Death. p.
192. Chap. 51. Of that Charity, or hearty love of God, which is our best
Companion, while we live, and when we die, p. 204.
FINIS.

