BABILONS DEFENSE Broken down, and one of Antichrists Warriors DEFEATED: In an
Answer to a Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, THE QVAKER-JESVIT: OR, Popery in
Quakerisme: Put forth by one William Brownsword, who calls himself Minister of
the Gospel at Kendal. In which the Doctrines of the Quakers (so called) are
more truly stated than he has stated them; and fully manifested, and clearly
proved by the Holy Scriptures to be the sound doctrines of Truth: In opposition
to his false Slanders of them to be Popery. In which also, it is fully
manifest, that our practices are the practices of truth, for which we have the
holy Prophets and Ministers of Christ for our Example. Wherein it is clearly
manifest, that he has no more true ground, to compare us to the Monks, than
the Enemies of truth had, (in Generations past) to compare the holy Prophets to
Idolators, who practiced such things in obedience to God, in their Age, as we
practice in obedience to God in our Age, being a true testimony, that many of
the things that he has said concerning us, and our Religion, are false. With a
few Queries to him concerning those Doctrines and Practices, in which he has
compared us with the Papists.

By John Stoery.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake,

Mat. 5. 11. As many were astonished at thee (his visage was so marred, more than
any man, and his form more than the sons of men,)

Isai. 52. 14. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660.

Babylons Defense broken down, and one of Antichrists Warriors Defeated. In an
Answer to a Slanderous Pamphlet, Entitled, The Quaker-Jesuite, Or, Popery in
Quakerisme, etc.
WHereas a Lying Pamphlet being come to my hands of William Brownswords, who
professes himself to be a Minister of the Gospel at Kendal; but his Fruits and
Practices does rather demonstrate him to be a Minister of Antichrist, and of
that Generation that cried, Report, and we will report it, who ever did and
does report their lies, and slanders against the Innocent, to make the truth
odious, who are of that generation that shuts the Kingdom of God against men,
neither entering (by Christ the light) themselves, nor suffering them that
would; but endeavors to persuade people that it is Popery, and dangerous to
hearken to the light of Christ within them, and so endeavors to divert them
from the means of recovery out of the shadow of death and gross darkness,
which has over spread the whole world; out of which there is no way or means,
but in and through Jesus, who is the true light of the world; and did so
testify of himself, that all people might believe in him, to have Life and
Salvation, who redeems mankind out of sin, and saves from destruction, and
gives Eternal Life to as many as believes in him, and leads out of darkness
all them that follow him; in whose light all Nations of them that are saved
must walk: In which light, is the Saints Union known, and the Blood of the Lamb
witnessed, which was shed for many to remit sin. And thou who would instigate
people against the light of Jesus, and endeavors to persuade that it is Popery
to exhort people to hearken to the spirit of truth, or light of Christ in them;
neither enters by him thy self, nor is willing to suffer others; but the day is
appeared, and the everlasting light is manifesting which will discover all thy
deceits, and thy refuge of lies shall be swept away, and thy slanders will
return upon thy own head, in the day when the Lord pleads with thee for all thy
hard speeches, and rewards thee according to thy doings.

Whereas, Thou calls thy Pamphlet, the Quaker-Jesuite, Or, Popery in Quakerisme.

Answer, The people of God who are by the world, in scorn called Quakers, do
deny thee and the Jesuits, and all theirs and thy doctrines, that are contrary
to the truth, and distructive to men's salvation; and as for thy saying, there
is Popery in Quakerisme; No Popery thou have or can prove to be amongst us,
or any doctrines that is contrary to the holy Scriptures and Gospel of Christ;
therefore will these thy sayings and slandrous words, that there is Popery in
Quakerisme, return upon thy own head, and be thy burden at last, Except thou
confess thy fault and Repent.

And whereas, thou further calls thy Pamphlet, A clear discovery, that their
doctrines, with their proofs and arguments, are fetch out of the Counsel of
Trent, Bellarmine, and others.

Answ. Our doctrines which are the wholesome doctrines of the Gospel of Christ,
which we have not received of man, neither were taught by men, but by the
Revelation of Christ, are not fetch out of the Counsel of Trent, Bellarmine and
others; but it is no wonder, that thou being blind, says that our doctrines
are fetch out of the Counsel of Trent, Bellarmine and others, when thou say
those good and wholesome sayings, Of the holy Scriptures and Apostles of
Christ, which thou thy self have quoted as proofs, which we bring for our
doctrines, are fetch out of the Counsel of Trent, Ballarmine and others, was
the Counsel of Trent, Ballarmine and others, the Original of those Scriptures?
or are they Popery? and we Papists for bringing them to bear testimony of our
doctrines? Can thou behold thy work again, and not be ashamed, when thou
see thy folly and Ignorance made manifest unto all that have the least
measure of true knowledge? Is thy Pamphlet a clear discovery, that our
arguments are fetch out of the Counsel of Trent, when here is not not any of
our arguments in all thy Pamphlet; but only a few doctrines stated in such a
manner, as has pleased thee to state them; but our doctrines, which are the
wholesome doctrines of truth, which thou have not, nor can not disprove; but
thy own self have quoted the Scriptures, which does in effect prove the things
of which we say. Therefore let that mouth be for ever stopped that says they
and their proofs, which is the words of the holy Scriptures, are fetch out of
the Council of Trent, Bellarmine and others; And so thy slanders of us, and our
doctrines, and the holy Scriptures, shall return back upon thy own head, until
thou confess thy folly and repent, and do no more so wickedly.

And thou further says, that their practices are fetched out of the Rules of
Popish Monks.

Answ. It is utterly false, for our practices have we not received as
traditions from them, neither do we walk by their rules, but by the rules of
the Spirit of Truth, by which we are led from that which is evil, and through
which we receive power to practice that which is good, which spirit is become
our leader into all truth, and will abide with us for ever.

Whereas thou begins thy Disswasive Exhortation; saying, Beloved, The respect
that I bear to your Souls, the Trvth's, and Church of Christ, much endangered
by secret and unweared actings of the Emissaries of Rome.

Answ: Though thou do endeavor in this thy Disswasive Exhortation, to
persuade the Inhabitants of Kendall; That we called Quakers, are Romes
Emissaries; by which the Truths of Christ are much endangered; yet, Romes
Emissaries we are not, neither are the Truths of Christ endangered, or opposed
by us, as thou thy self have confessed in the fourth position of the leaventh
page of thy Pamphlet; where thou confesses, We never opposed any fundamental
truths that thou heardest of; Therefore in this position, thou have cleared us
from being Romes Emissaries by which truth is endangered, which in thy
Disswasive Exhortation, thou have endeavored to persuade the Inhabitants of
Kendall we are, Here the Inhabitants of Kendall may see thy envy and
confusion, who would have them to believe, That we are such by whom the truth
is endangered; And yet thy own tongue in contradicting thy envious disswasion
is made to clear us, saying, That we never opposed any fundamental truths
that ever thou heardest of, which is truth, For fundamental truths we have not
opposed at any time; And as concerning the Church of Christ; I say this; It is
builded upon the Rock, which Romes Emissaries, nor the gates of Hell can never
prevail against; For all who are of the true Church and body of which Christ
Jesus is the head, and in his light dwells and walks, by it they see and is
able to diserne betwixt Truth, and Error, the doctrines of Christ, and the
doctrines which are preached by the Papi^s and thee, which thou would
instigate into the inhabitants of Kendall, to cause them to believe that we
their country men, well known to some of them are Papists and that our
doctrines are Popery; but all thy labor in slandring us, is in vain, and thy
asserting that our doctrines are Popery, to no purpose; for thou neither have,
or ever can confute them by the holy Scripture and Truth, therefore in the
end thy slanders will return upon thy own head, and unrighteous sayings be thy
burden, whereas, thou speaks of a Quaker Jesuit at Bristol, mentioned by Mr.
Prynne as thou calls him; That his sayings was made appear to be false and a
slander, I shall refer the Reader to the Answer of his scandallous paper,
Entitled, The Quakers unmasked, Put forth by William Prinne, wherein his
slanders is made to appear, and he is found with a lie in his mouth.

Whereas thou goes on; saying, occasioned a late serious public disswasive of
you from the Church and Doctrines of Romes under what name soever, and by
whomsoever they were propounded to you, and especially as they are propounded
by the Quakers.

Answ. It is utterly false, to say the Quakers propounds Romes Doctrines,
either to the Inhabitants of Kendal, or any other people; for no other
doctrines have we preached, but the doctrines of Christ, which we are able to
prove, and maintain by the sound Arguments of Truth and Scriptures, to be the
doctrines that tends to the Salvation of Souls; And when thou writes again,
give under thy hand positively, what doctrines they are, thou calls Romes
doctrines, propounded by the Quakers: and name the man or men that is owned to
be Ministers of Christ among us, that thou call'st Quakers that did propound or
preach them: and till then, let this slander reture into the unclean bottle,
from whence this, and all the rest of thy slanders has come.

And thou say, the charge of false-hood against me by them, has produced
this demonstration of the truth of what I had publicly asserted, which I hope
will tend to settle you against their way.

Answ. This demonstration of Lies and Slanders, does not any way clear thee,
from my charge against thee, in the ^ight of any, who rightly understands the
controversy betwixt thee and us, but rather is an adding sin to sin, and a
heaping up wrath unto thy self, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God; for the thing that was desired of thee by me, was,
as thou behind our backs had devulged publicly in the Steeple-House, that our
principles and doctrines was Popery, That thou would give us a fair Meeting,
where all might hear the discourse betwixt there and us; And if thou could by
the Scriptures prove our doctrines to be Popery, or contrary to the Scriptures,
and distructive to men's Salvation, then would we lay them down; if not, (but we
on the contrary, could manifest our doctrines to be truth, and according to the
Scriptures) then as thou had publicly spoken against our doctrines calling
them Popery; thou should publicly confess thy fault; and this was the
substance of what I said to thee in the street of Kendal; and thou being not
able to manifest that to be true, which thou had publicly asserted concerning
our principles and doctrines, this charge is still good against thee, till thou
publicly acknowledge thou have wronged us.

And whereas thou further say, in these doctrines which are peculiarly
Romes, does the doctrines of the Quakers conspire, and may therefore be called
Popery without falsehood.

Answ. I say of this as of the rest of thy slanders, that it is altogether
untrue, for no doctrines do we preach and hold forth, but the doctrines of the
Gospel of Christ; and for the defense of them and manifestation that they are
true against thee, and all that oppose them; we can bring pertinent testimonies
out of the holy sayings of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles Words, who
preached the same Gospel and Doctrines before us; and no doctrine of ours, if
rightly stated, and as we preach them, have thou paralleled with the Papist and
their doctrines, but thou might as well have paralleled the doctrine of the
Apostles, with the doctrine of the Papist, as it will after more fully appear
in our own stating, the vindication and proof of our doctrines to be true,
which thou have not, neither ever can confute or disprove by the truth or
Scriptures; Therefore thy slander of our doctrines will return back upon thy
self, having replied against some of thy slanders and untruths, cast upon us
and our doctrines; I shall go on to the right stating, and more full
manifestation of our doctrines, to be the sound and wholesome doctines of
Truth; though thou have paralleled them with the Papists, that it may appear
more fully, that wherein thou have paralleled our doctrines, with any thing
they say which is truths in themselves, thou might as well a paralleled the
Apostles with them, because they may hold some of the same truths in the
unrighteousness which the Apostles held forth, and we hold in the
righteousness, and thou thy self confesses they hold some truths.

I. Doctrine, that light which John came for a witness of, that all men
through his testimony might believe, which does light every man that comes into
the world, which is Jesus. Is sufficient to convince of sin, and lead to
repentance all them the to his call hearken; and is able to save to the utmost,
all them that his light, love and obey; for the Author to the Hebrews, speaking
concerning Jesus the true light of the world; that lights every man, says
he, being made perfect he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them
that obey him, Heb. 4. 9. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

II. Doctrine, we say that the perfection of the Saints was and is attainable
in and through Christ, even while they were and are upon the Earth, or else the
work for which the true Ministry was given, had been void, if the work for
which they were begifted among the Saints, (which was, Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13.
For the edifying of the body of Christ, till they came all to the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ.) Could not have been
accomplished while they were upon the Earth, but Saints are redeemed from Sin,
and have escaped the pollutions of the world, and by the word of God are
sanctified according to what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of
you, but you are washed; but you are sanctified, but you are justified; in the
name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And Jude in his general
Epistle to the Saints, says, they are santified by God the Father, and
preserved in Christ Jesus; And the Author to the Hebrews speaking of himself
and the Saints, says, by the will of God we are sanctified, through the
offering of the body of Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 10. And the same Author
says in the 14th of the same chapter, by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, and yet he and the Saints that was sanctified
and perfected for ever, even while they were upon the earth, and preached it,
and exhorted the Saints to press after it, were not Papists, nor rightly could
be compared with Idolators in their Generation; no more can we that preaches
perfection, and exhort to press after it, and believe it to be attainable in
and through Christ, be rightly compared to the Papists in our Generation.

And as concerning the third, which thou states as out of our Doctrines, in
which thou compares us with the Papists, we do deny it; it is not any of our
Doctrines, either held or preached by us, as thou have stated it; and in
stating, that we hold Justification by obedience, thou have not done honestly;
was not thou formerly answered? that we are not justified by any obedience that
is of the Creature, but by the free gift of God in Christ. Therefore I further
say, that we are not justified by our obedience, or for our obedience; but in
and through the Lord Jesus Christ to whom we are obedient.

Whereas thou further says, and eminent speaker among them in the hearing of
multitudes, asserted, that the righteousness that was wrought by the Power of
God in the hearts of the Gentiles, mentioned Romans 2. 14. 15. is a
righteousness whereby they were justified in the sight of God; Answ. To this I
say concerning the Gentiles, in doing well and working righteousness, they
were accepted and justified in the sight of God, according to that of the
Apostle, where he says, God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he
that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him, Acts 10. 34.
35. Whereas thou say in the hearing of multitudes, why do thou call so few
people as were there multitudes, except thou would have some to believe, thou
gave us a fair meeting in some public place, which thou denied to do, though
much urged to it, but it is no wonder seeing thou had accused our doctrines to
be Popery, and our practices to be fetched out of the rules of Popish Monks;
altogether without any true ground, as is and will be fully manifest by the
proof of our doctrines to be sound and true, and our practices to have example
among the Prophets and Ministers of Christ.

And whereas thou accuses James Naylor in the fifth page of his Book, tituled
The salutation to the Seed, To say the Doctrine of Faith is the work of the
Devil.

Answ. Thy Accusation is utterly false, as that page of his Book, and all that
reads it may bear Testimony against the^.

And whereas in the fourth thou speaks of Judas, Being a godly man until Christ
gave him the Sop, the Devil thereupon entered into him.

Answ. In that thou have stated these words again thou have not done honestly,
because thou have formerly been answered, that we did not own this Principle as
it is stated, (to wit) That Judas was a godly man till he received the Sop; and
we had ground for the denying of this Principle and others as they were stated,
because the young men themselves did affirm, they were not so written as they
spoke them; but this we do affirm, that Judas who was numbered with the
Apostles, and had obtained part of the Ministry, and others fell away; as we
can fully prove by the Scriptures of truth, where it is said Acts 1. 25. That
he may take part of this Ministry, from which Judas by transgression fell; and
Heb. 4. 5, 6. and 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. where it it is said, It had been better
for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, then after they have known
it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, but it is happened
unto them according to the true Proverb, the Dog is turned to his vomit again,
and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire; more Scriptures might
have been mentioned, as Ezekiel. 18. 24. and others; but by the mouth of two or
three witnesses every truth shall be confirmed, but these Scriptures I have not
asserted, to plead for falling away from grace and truth, but to bear witness
to the truth of our judgment in this particular, and to manifest the
wickedness of our adversary, who counts that Popery, that is plain Scriptures,
as some of which he himself has quoted, does bear testimony; but it is no
wonder, seeing he says, the proofs themselves which is Scriptures, is fetched
out of the Council of Trent, Bellarmine and others.

Fifthly, that Pagans, and Turks, living justly and honestly, may be justified
and saved.

To which I say further, that there is no respect of persons with God, but in
every Nation, whether they be Jews, or Gentiles, Turks, or Pagans, yet if they
fear God and work righteousness, of him they are accepted, and whether he be a
Turk, or Pagan, if he come to believe in Christ, and follow his Spirit and
light, which leads to live justly and honestly, he may be justified and saved
in and through Christ; And this doctrine is no Popery, nor rightly can be
paralleled with theirs, any more than the Apostles doctrine; was to be
paralleled with the Papists, Acts 10. 34. where Peter says of a truth, I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons.

Sixthly, where thou say, there is no absolute decree of Election, and
reprobation from Eternity, and say, see a late Confession of Faith by
Buroughs.

To this I say there is no such position in his confession of faith, as thou
here has asserted; but that we do believe that their is a state of Election
and Reprobation, as is there confessed, and faithfully acknowledged.

Seaventhly thou say, that the Scriptures are not the Rule, this is charged
upon them by the Ministers of New Castle, as thou say.

To this I say, as many as are begotten of the immortal seed to a lively hope,
by the word of God which abides for ever; are his sons and children, and such
are led by the Spirit of God, and it is their rule and not the letter; Romans 8.
14. and yet such are not Papists, nor to be paralleled with Bellarmine, who
shows the Scriptures are not necessary, for they acknowledge that they are
necessary, that the man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly furnished, unto
all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 17.

Eighthly, thou compares us to the papists, for saying the baptism of Infants
is not to be proved by the Scripture, and quotes Bellarmine for calling it a
tradition, that is no where written.

To this I say though we are no Papists, yet I believe that Bellarmine
confesses in this thing more truth than thou, for it is very like it is a
tradition, which in its beginning was instituted by the Papists Church; yet
however this I am sure of, that it is not recorded in the Scriptures of truth,
that ever God commanded it, or any of his Ministers whom he sent forth
practiced it, therefore the Papist and thou that preaches it up as an ordinance
of God, is required to prove (if you can) when God ordained it, or any of his
Apostles practiced it, and if you cannot, Confess you have taught for
ordinances, men's traditions, and seeing the Papists do confess it is a
tradition, well may you Protestants do the same, for you had the practice of
sprinkling Infants from them, and in this you have drunk the whores cup.

Ninethly, whereas thou say, that one day of seven which we call the Lords
day, is no more than any other day, and that it is without divine Authority.

To this I say further, there is no command of God in the Scriptures, for
observing the first day of the week as a Sabbath of rest, by ceasing from all
bodyly labor, of man servant, or maid servant, cattle and stranger that is
within our gates, as there was a command of God to the Jews to observe the
seventh day, and keep it holy to the Lord for a Sabbath of rest to them; their
sons and daughters, man-servants, and maidservant, cattle, and stranger, that
was within their gates, which Sabbath unto them was a sign: and thou further
say, we make it Tipecal, in which thou compares us to Bellarmine, which
comparison is altogether unequal, for though Bellarmine counted it Tipical, yet
we make it not Tipecal, for it was the seventh day, and not the first day
which we say was a sign: and concerning the first day of the week, if thou
hold that it was commanded by divine Authority, as the seventh day once was;
when thou writes again, show when it was commanded, and where the holy
Scriptures testifies of any such Command.

Tenthly, whereas thou say, that we say the Lords Supper as administered in
your Churches, is nothing but a bit of bread and wine, and that we speak
scornfully of it.

To this I say, when thou writes again, I desire thee to show us an example if
thou can, where ever the Apostles and true Church met together in a Steeple
House, or Idols Temple, and broke bread in such a form and manner among
unconverted people as you do? calling it the Lords Supper, or a Sacrament? but
the Lords Supper, which is so in truth we do freely own; and whereas thou
compares us with the Papists, in saying, we speak scornfully of that which you
call the Lords Supper; in this I say, thy comparing of us with them is
altogether unequal, for we do not speak scornfully of it; but where we see
either the Papists, or you in an error, we do rather pity you than scorn you;
and desires that you may be recovered out of all error, and be saved in the day
of the Lord; yet we do despise and reject the vain traditions of men, which is
practiced for the worship of God by you.

Eleventhly, thou say, that we affirm that Protestants Ministers, are no
Ministers of Christ, that we use the vilest Language against you; that we can
invent, deny your call, and say you came from Rome, etc.

Answ. If thou meanest by Protestant Ministers; of such of you, as seeks for
your gain from your quarters, and Preaches for hire, and makes a bargain for so
much a year, these practices, being the same as the false Prophets and Papists
are in, does in some measure demonstrate that your beginning was from Rome, for
no example can you show for those practices aforementioned, among all the Holy
Prophets or Ministers of Christ, that have been since the beginning.

And whereas thou say, that we use the vilest language that we can invent
against you.

I Answer, this is utterly false, for no vile language do we use or invent
against you; but the language of truth, telling you plainly without flattering
of the evil of your ways, that you may repent, and in thus doing we have the
holy Prophets of old for our example.

Twelfly, that we have the same spirit of Infallability, that the Apostles had.

To this I say further, both we and all Gods children, who are of the little
flock, have the same Infallible Spirit, according to its measure and
manifestation, which is given to every child of God to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12. 7. and both thou, and all that say they have it not, but counts it Popery,
for any to confess they have it, art so far from being a Minister of Christ,
that both thou and they that have it not, are not yet of his flock, for the
Apostle says plainly, if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, Romans 8. 9. and yet he was no Papist, nor with them to be paralleled, no
more are we that confess we have the Spirit of Christ.

I having rightly stated, and vindicated our doctrines against thy slanders,
and proved them by the holy Scriptures to be the wholesome and sound doctrines
of the Gospel; I shall go on to lay open, and reply against thy slanders and
falsities concerning us, in which thou have compared us with the Popish Monks;
but it had been more wisdom, and more like a Minister of Christ, to enquired
truly into our practices, before thou had given judgment upon us, or have
compared us to the Popish Monks, in whose discipiline thou say, we seem to
be admirably instructed, as will appear by thy following parallels.

Answ. those false parallels, and thy unrighteous judgment of us without
knowledge, will not make it appear that we are instructed in the practice and
discipline of Popish Monks; whose practice and discipline we deny, but rather
will discover thy folly, and manifest thy unrighteous judgment concerning our
practices; for which we have example out of the holy Scriptures.

First, thou say, we lay much stress upon mean and plain Apparel.

Answ. Thou have altogether mist in this thy judgment of us, for no stresse do
we lay upon any visible thing for salvation; but in and through Christ only
and alone, have we Salvation and life Eternal; and as for apparel and raiment
we take no thought, and whether it be mean or not mean apparel which the Lord
affords us, with it we are content, yet our Religion that we are of, does keep
us out of the vanities and pride of the world, of which their foolishness in
apparel does many times signify.

Secondly thou say, that we practice silence, especially at some times, and
lay much of our Religion upon it.

Answ. Thy judgment in this thing; as in many others altogether false, for our
Religion did we never lay upon silence, yet we have practiced, and do practice,
waiting in the will and council of God, until his mind and word be revealed to
us, whereby we may edify, and build up one another in the most holy faith, upon
that foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus himself being the
chief Corner Stone.

Thirdly thou say, that we practice fasting much, in our entrance upon this
way, and afterward as a special means of spiritual knowledge, viz. James
Parnell in Colchester Goal.

Answ. That we have practiced fasting and prayer, that we shall not deny but
freely confess; yet in so doing, we are no more to be compared to the Monks,
than was those holy men to be compared with them, (to wit) David, and Daniel,
and many others that might be Instanced, Psalm. 109. 24. where David says, my
knees are weak through fasting, and my flesh fails of fatness, and Dan. 10. 3.
where he says, I eat no pleasant bread, neither came flesh or wine within my
mouth, neither did anoint my self at all, till three whole weeks were
fulfilled; these holy men, and many more have we for our Example, which if
they were now upon Earth, would be judged to be Popish Monks, by that spirit
which now judges us, and thou say, afterward as a special means of
spiritual knowledge.

In this as in the rest, thou have given false judgment altogether, though we
have practiced fasting and prayer; yet we never esteemed it, as the special
means of spiritual knowledge. And whereas thou further speaks of James Parnel,
in Colechester Goal; To this I say, the blood of the Innocent servant of the
Lord, will come upon this Generation of hireling Priests, and envious Teachers,
who has been a great cause of stirring up the Magistrates, to all the
persecutions and sufferings, that have been afflicted upon the servants of the
Lord, who have not counted their lives dear unto themselves, that they might
finish their course with joy, and testimony, which they had received of the
Lord Jesus, but have even laid down their lives, as a seal of their testimony,
as James Parnel, and others.

Fourthly thou say, we run up and down naked, though not constantly, but at
sometimes.

Answ. I say, thou can no more truly compare them that have gone naked in
obedience to the command of the Lord, for a sign and a wonder unto the world,
(whose false coverrings must be stripped off, and all their secret evils
manifest, and their shame made openly to appear) to the Grandfather of the
Jesuits in this age, than thou can compare, Isaiah and Micah, true prophets
to Idolaters in their age, who went naked and barefoot three years, for a sign
and a wonder upon Egypt, and Ethiopia, Isaiah 20. and the true Prophet Micah,
who said, I will wail and howl, and go stripped and naked, Micah 1. 8.

Fifthly thou says, we cast off respect due to our Parents and Relations,
witness the complaint I have heard of some of their Parents against them.

Answ. Whatsoever thou have heard, The practice of the obedience of many
children to their Parents, may be a witness against thee; that they do not
cast of the respect due to their Parents and Relations, many of their Parents
would even testify the same, that their children who walks in the truth, unto
them is not disobedient.

Sixthly thou say, we ascribe great perfection to our selves, calling all
other men the men of the world, but says, they themselves are perfect.

Answ. This assertion of thine concerning us, is absolutely false, as thy
others has been; for unto self, or our selves, we do not ascribe any
perfection, but say that perfection is attainable, in and through Christ only,
who teaches us, and all that follow him, to deny our selves, though thou have
said concerning us, that they themselves are perfect; and have asserted that
thy self, for which thou would condemn us, of which we are not guilty, and so
this slander of us will return back upon thy self, (that we ascribe perfection
to our selves) as the others has done.

Seaventhly thou say, Quakers lay claim to vision and Revelations, and
boasts more of inward spiritual discoveries, than other men.

Answ. We must confess, that we have seen visions, and have had revelations,
by which the mind of God has been known, and the things of his Kingdom opened
to us, and in us, yet have thou no more true ground to compare us to Monks and
Nuns, because we have had true visions, than thou have to compare Abraham and
Jacob and others, to the Monks and Nuns; for the word of the Lord came to
Abraham in a vision, saying, I am thy Shield, and exceeding great Reward, Genesis
15. 8. 1. and the vision of Isaiah the Son of Amos, which he saw concerning
Juda and Jerusalem, Isai. 1. 1. but thy saying, that we boast of more spiritual
discoveries than other men; It is utterly false, for of such things we do not
boast, and thou goes on telling of one grossly dealt with by an evil spirit,
and thou say, witness John Gilpin, To this I say, all lying visions and
dreams, and such as are dealt with, and led with the evil spirit, as was John
Gilpin, we do deny; for he never was of us, but a profane man of the world,
and one with the hirelings against us.

Eighthly, thou say, they place their Religion in mere circumstances and
formalities, leaving off of hattbands, ribbons, lace, thou-ing persons, but are
wanting, in the true esteem of the true practice of Religion.

Answ. Thy assertion, that we place Religion in those things aforementioned, is
utterly false, as the rest of thy assertions of us, and our Religion has been;
for our Religion is not placed in Circumstances, as thou have falsely asserted,
but in the Power of God, by which we are kept unspotted from the world. And
whereas thou accuses us, to be wanting in the esteem of true practices of
Religion; when thou writes again, set down in particular what those practices
are, which thou calls, or can prove to be the true practices of Religion, which
thou accuses us, to be wanting in the esteem of.

Ninethly thou say, they carry a show of self-denial, abnegation of the
world, contempt of riches, envy against the Ministers of Christ, for having
maintenance, as if themselves had nothing; yet thrives fast, pays their debts,
makes purchases, getts good Estates, wear of late rich Clothes.

Answ. Thy assertion in this is utterly false, as the rest have been, for we do
not envy against the Ministers of Christ for having maintenance, but
acknowledge that they that preach the Gospel may live of the Gospel, according
to Gods Ordinance, and they that sow spiritual things, may reap carnal things;
but having food and raiment, are therewith to be content, and there is no
example amongst them, for being hired at a Parish, or making a bargain for so
much as fourscore, or a hundred pounds, more or less as they can get it by the
year, or tithes of all the people possesses, as the hireling Priests and
Papists in England have done; and for thy saying, they thrive fast, and paying
depts, and gets good estates; to which I say, when thou writes again, instance
one that is owned as a Minister amongst us, (that through gain made of the
Ministry) who had nothing, that has done any of these things aforementioned,
and till then, let this slander return back upon thy self, as the rest have
done, and if God bless any of his people with outward increase, why do thou
envious wretch reproach them because of Gods mercyes? Thou say further, that
we wear rich Clothes. To this I say, how fully have thou contradicted thy self,
in the first of thy assertions, in which thou paralleled us with the Monks, in
thy saying, that we lay much stress upon plain and mean apparel, and now have
so far forgotten thy self, that the same tongue says now, we wear rich
Clothes, but in this thy envy against the truth is manifest; and however they
go that walk in it, whether well in clothes, or mean in clothes, it will not
please thee, nor the envyous generation that loves not their neighbor as their
selves.

And further thou tells, of having stocks of money; out of which thou supposes
we have great and large sumes, when we have a mind to travel.

To which I shall answer, thy supposition is false, as the rest of thy sayings
have been; and if there be any such thing as stocks of money for the
maintaining of the poor, and other necessary uses among Friends; is not this of
good report, and like Saints, more than they in your Churches, where your
Members is like to starve, and begs?

Tenthly thou say, we are a seduced people, and active in seducing others,
being ignorant and unlearned, yet an importunant, and unweared people,
compassing Sea and Land, to make one proselyte, yet not for themselves, but for
those Sophisters of Rome, whose factors they are.

Answ. This is altogether false, as the rest of thy slanders have been, for
Romes Factors we are not, nor for them do we make proselytes.

And for thy saying, that we are a seducing people, and acting in seducing
others; I Answer, this is altogether false, as thy other assertions concerning
us has been, for we are not seduced, nor active in seducing others; nor yet
ignorant and unlearned in the things that appertains to Gods Kingdom, our
Salvation, and the Salvation of them that hears us.

Eleaventhly, thou say, now I hope I have made it evident, that the hand of
a Jesuit is in the Quakers Religion; how could they else be so well verst in
their absurd doctrines?

Answ. The hope of the hypocrite is vain, and his trust is like the spiders
web, for thou neither have, or can manifest the hand of of a Jesuit to be in
our Religion; nor any doctrine that is truly ours, have thou manifest to be
absurd, or proved to be contrary to the truth and doctrines of the Gospel of
Christ; But it is manifest, thou art verst in the Papists writings and
doctrines, otherwise thou could not have stated so many of them, and their
practices; therefore thy saying that we are verst in their absurd doctrines,
is false, and may return upon thy self, who art guilty therein: and thou goes
on saying, I will conclude with a re-inforcement, of my disswasive of you, from
their doctrines and practices; They are from Antichrist, therefore avoid them.

Answ. Our doctrines, which is the doctrines of truth, and our practices, for
which we have example among the Prophets and Ministers of Christ; all the lies
and slanders, which thou and all the Merchants of Babylon can cast upon us, or
upon our doctrines, cannot dissuade from our way, (which is the way of God) any
of them who has the least measure of true knowledge; therefore the adding thy
reasons, as thou calls them, to imprint in people, a deep hatred against our
way, which is truth, shall not be effectual, for thy refuge of lies shall be
swept away; and unrighteous slanders turned back upon thy own head, in the
dreadful day of the Lord when he rewards thee, and all the wicked according to
their doings.

In the first of thy reasons, thou say, they are miserably divided among
themselves about their principles.

Answ. This is false, for we who are in the truth, and walks in the light, have
unity, and are not divided amongst our selves about our principles; though we
did deny several of those things, as they were stated, having good reason so to
do, because they were stated in thy manner, and as thou our adversary pleased
to state them and the young men affirm not in the very same words, and form as
they spoke them. Whereas thou say, the fourth of these reasons was again
owned in a discourse, (viz) that we are justified by obedience; To which I say,
it is utterly false, for no such thing was owned by any of us, neither of it
was there any discourse betwixt thee and us that day.

And whereas thou further calls it a contradiction, to say that every man is
lighted with the true light which is Christ. And yet not spiritually enlightened
with the knowledge of God.

Answ. In this, thy ignorance, and want of understanding in the things of God,
is manifest; in calling that a contradiction, which is no contradiction; for
both these sayings in effect may be proved by plain words of Scriptures, as
John 1. 9. where it is said, that was the true light that lights every man
that comes into the world; and Jeremiah says, pour out thy wrath upon the
heathen that know thee not, Jer. 10. 25. So it is evident, that the heathen
know not God, therefore may it truly be said, without contradicting John's
testimony, that every one is not enlightened with the spiritual knowledge of
God, though that testimony is true, that says, the true light that lights
every man, yet every man does not believe in, and receive the light which
manifests those evil deeds, for which he is reproved; therefore every man
has not the knowledge of God, because some rejects his Light which would give
the knowledge of him.

And thou goes on and say, their doctrines which they broach with
confidence, among their silly credulous followers, they will not dare to own
before others.

Answ. For our doctrines and testimonies, that we have given of Christ the true
light of the world, we both dare, and have openly owned before the world;
Therefore, this accusation is utterly false, and no true ground thou have to
say so concerning us; but thou may imagine thou have some ground, because we
would not be tied to express our selves, concerning the light in such a way and
manner, as thou would have prescribed to us, or have our principles stated in a
form of words, to which thou would have limited us.

And thou goes on in thy false accusations, saying, that which has been vainly
attempted by Antichrist, is their very design, if accomplished; do but think
how the Papists would rejoice in it.

Answ. That which has been attempted by Antichrist, is not our design;
neither in the accomplishment of our ends and desires, will either he or the
Papists rejoice; for our ends and and desire is, that people may be brought
from under Satan's dominions, and led out of the Ignorance and gross darkness,
that has long covered the inhabitants of the earth, into the true knowledge of
the living God, that they may him worship and glorify, in spirit and in truth.

And in the fourth, thou say, they never yet that I have heard of, did
oppose any of those fundamental truths we have preached unto you.

Answ. In this thou have cleared us from the great slander, which in the former
thou cast upon us, for we never did, nor do oppose any fundamental truths,
though both you, and the Papists, may hold them, and preach them in the
unrighteousness. Thus contradicting of thy false sayings, in thy third reason
thou have cleared us, and so what has been attempted by Antichrist, and false
Ministers against fundamental truths, was never our design, as thy self have
confessed, that we never opposed any fundamental truths that ever thou heard
of, yet though we have not opposed any fundamental sayings of Christ and his
Apostles spoken by you; yet we have opposed those fundamental errors spoken by
you; as witness that fundamental errors spoken by thee, in our conference at
Kendal, (viz) that there is in every man a natural light, that gives them some
measure of the knowledge of God.

And this I did oppose thee in; and shall bear my testimony against it, for it
is an error in the fundamental, even in that which concerns the eternal life of
souls, when time shall be no more: for if this were true (viz) that every man
by a natural light has a measure of the knowledge of God; then everyman had
eternal life, and all drunkards and profane persons upon earth, were in a
state of happiness.

And as concerning thy reproachful sayings in thy Epilogue, thou calls us the
Popes very Pedlars, to sell off his corrupt wares in stalls, which would never
off in shops.

Answ. Thy jeers, and unrighteous sayings concerning us, will return upon thy
own head; for the Pope we deny, and his corrupt wares we deny; amongst us
neither his nor thine, is of any estimation, but me thinks thou and thy
brethren, who have been made Ministers by natural educacation, and humane
learning and arts, and having got the Mass-house, which originally appertaining
to the Papists, which they founded and consecrated for their Idolatrous
worship, in which you now sell your wares, for which you receive the same price
and wages, which was once esteemed due to the Pope, and his Clergy: therefore
if any in the Nation be his Pedlars, Mountebanks, and drudges; you are to be
suspected.

And thou further say, I might have filled sheets with their fastings and
visions, and impulses to strange actions.

To this I say, when thou writes again, say all that thou can concerning our
fastings and visions, and cease to slander in the dark, by which thou
endeavors to persuade the Ignorant, that thou could manifest some great evils
concerning our fastings and visions.

Whereas thou speaks of impulses and strange actions:

To this I say, impulses and actions, that is out of truth and Power of God, is
denied by us, and all that is excercised therein.

And thou further say, do you of this place consider, and such of you as
have been former professors, look back to your profession; your Apostasy has
been the grief of many.

To this I say, how can there be an Apostasy, and falling from the truth, of
any, if they never have been in the truth; and though the people of God at
Kendall, that is gathered from the false Shepherds and hirelings, be not fallen
from the Truth and Grace of Christ; yet thy speaking that they are Apostatized,
and bidding them return from whence they are fallen; does clearly demonstrate
that thou admits that their may be a falling away; which is the very same
thing, that thou have denied of ours as an error; and for asserting that some
fell away; thou have compared us to the Papists; can thou behold this again,
and not see thy self in confusion, one while building up, and another while
throwing down? for if thou do not believe that their can be a falling from
true grace; why do thou exhort them to return, from whence thou say they
are fallen?

A few Questions to thee William Brownsword, who say our doctrines are
Popery; which we have proved by the Scriptures to be the doctrines of truth,
and can no more rightly be compared to the doctrines of the Papists, than the
doctrines of the Apostles can be compared with the doctrines of the Papists:
Therefore thou art desired to answer these questions, in plainness, without
shuffling or evading; that so the ground of thy judgment may be more fully
manifest to all. And what reason thou have to parallel our doctrines and
practices, with the doctrines and practices of the Papists: Seeing we of all
people do not only testify against the corrupt doctrines, and practices of the
Papists in other Nations, but also against the Relics of Popery in this
Nation, that is found amongst the hireling Priests and Ministers, that is made
by the will of man, and not by the will of God, and gift of the Holy Ghost.

I. Query. Whether it is Popery to affirm, that Jesus the true light does light
every man that comes into the world, yea or nay? II. Query. And whether it is
Popery to affirm, that the true light of the world, that lights every man,
which is Jesus, is sufficient to lead to repentance, and save them that
believe, yea or nay? III. Query. And whether Christ Jesus, may not be as truly
preached in this age, the leader of mankind out of Ignorance and darkness;
under that denomination, and by that name, the light of the world? as by any
other name under which the Prophets, and Apostels preached him in ages past,
yea or nay? IV. Query. And whether it was, and is popery to affirm, that ever
the Saints was, or can be perfected while they are upon the Earth, yea or nay?
V. Query. And whether it is Popery to affirm, that Christ Jesus who is made of
God; Righteousness to the Saints, is within them the hope of Glory, yea or
nay? VI. Query. And if Christ Jesus, Gods Righteousness, be in Saints the hope
of Glory, then is it Popery to affirm, that the righteousness through which
Saints is justified, is revealed within them, yea or nay? VII. Query. Whether
it is Popery to affirm, that some that had known the way of Righteousness, and
tasted of the good Word of God, did fall away, yea or nay? VIII. Query. And
whether it is Popery to say, That none is shut out, and reprobated to damnation
and misery before they were born? IX. Query. And whether it is Popery to
affirm, That the holy Scriptures are not the Rule of unbelievers; seeing thou
seemed to blame some for saying, It was not? X. Query. And whether it is Popery
to affirm, That God has not commanded the Gentiles to observe the first day of
the week for a Sabbath of rest; as he once commanded the Jews to observe the
seventh day for a Sabbath day of rest, yea or nay? XI. Query. And whether it is
Popery To deny, that God commanded the Baptism of Infants? Or that ever any of
his Apostles practiced it? Or that the Scriptures of truth testifies of it, yea
or nay? XII. Query. And whether it is Popery to affirm, that the Scriptures of
truth speaks not of a Sacrament, which you and the Papists so much plead for,
yea or nay? XIII. Query. And whether it is Popery for to affirm, that they are
no Ministers of Christ, which seeks their gain from their parishes and
quarters; Preaches for hire, Divines for money, and makes a bargain for so much
by the year, though amongst you such may be called Protestant Ministers? XIV.
Query. And whether all are Papists, that confess that they have, and are led
and taught, by the Infallible Spirit of Christ, yea or nay? XV. Query. And
whether all are Papists, that go in plain and moddest apparel; without ribbons
and lace, and such like costly array? which serves only to please the vain
mind, and to satisfy the lust, which leads the creature from God, and is of the
world, seeing for going in mean apparel, thou accused us to lay much stress
upon it, and compared us to the Monks? XVI. Qu. And whether they are all
Papists that met together in the Name of the Lord, and in silence waits in his
counsel, till his mind and Word be revealed, whereby they may edify one
another, seeing for meeting sometimes in silence, thou have accused us, to lay
our Religion upon it, and compared us to the Monks? XVII. Qu. And whether all
that have, and do use fasting and prayer, be Papists, yea or nay? Seeing thou
have compared us to the Monks for fasting, and also have falsely said, we use it
as a special means of spiritual knowledge. XVIII. Qu. And whether all that have
gone up and down naked, have been and are Papists, yea or nay? Seeing some
among us have been commanded to do so, for which thou compares us to the
Papists? XIX. Qu. And whether all that have ceased to wear Ribbons and Lace
upon their apparel, which is not needful, and do not respect persons, which
says Thee and Thou to rich and poor, are Papists? Answer in plainness yea or
nay? Seeing thou have falsely accused us for so doing, to place our Religion in
circumstances, and compared us to the Papists. XX. Qu. And whether it is not
confusion, to say we lay much stress upon mean and plain apparel; and yet a
little after to say we wear rich clothes? Answer in plainness, yea or nay? XXI.
Qu. Whether all are Papists that have gone through several Countries, preaching
the glad tidings of Salvation, and yet have not fainted, yea or nay? seeing for
being unwearied, thou compares us to the Monks? XXII. Qu. And whether the
things before queried, does rightly denominate a Papist, and is the ground of
his being so called? Answer in plainness, yea or nay?
A Postscript. To William Brownsword, and his Parishioners in Kendall.
AS concerning thy book sent abroad by thee in opposition to the Lords Truth
and his People, we have seen, read, and considered, and do find it light and
empty, and a dry confused piece, even as a little old scrap of Babylons
treasure, worth nothing at all, except to show the Authors weakness and
ignorance, and to give occasion against himself, that he may be beat with his
own weapon: and certain it is, that his work (his Quaker-Jesuite I mean) will
not effect the end and purpose intended by him) but the Lord shall turn the end
backwards upon him, and by that through which he has thought to dishonor the
truth, and to make it odious among people, even thereby shall the truth gain an
advantage, and appear in more beauty, and be more desirable unto many, so that
thy evil intent shall redound back upon thee; and doubtless some of thine own
Flock, when they have compared thine with its Answer, they shall see the
weakness and wickedness of the one, and the truth plainly proved in the other,
and the disadvantage will be thine; for alas thou art a weak man, and many of
thy Brethren in iniquity, to whom thou can not be compared for matter of wit
and subtilty, but art short of them, even as an Infant is of a man, and they
have appeared in much more fair means and politic way than thou have done,
and yet their work, brought forth in the height of great wit and knowledge,
have been rejected by us, and through the Wisdom of God confounded, and their
bravest work taken as our spoil of Babylons treasure; and then how should
thou and thy weak silly piece be otherwise than trampled under our feet? and
what art thou feeble child of Babylon that thou should thus adventure to come
forth into public view, wrapped in an old threadbare garment; (Quaker-Jesuite
Popery in Quakerisme, etc.) and under this have thou covered a malicious heart,
which the Lord will judge, and bring thee to feel the weight of thine own
iniquities in his dreadful day.

Alas friend, we are far otherwise known through this Nation, and about Kendal
especially, we are known to be none such as thou have falsely reputed us, not
Papists; but on the contrary, we are known to be such who have many of us
zealously professed the Lord, and earnestly sought after him, even from the
days of our childhood, and if any have whereof to glory in matter of outward
profession, we might have something to say, as being such who desired after
God, in our souls, in much sincerity of heart, and worshipped him after the
strictest manner then held forth, and this from our Infancy; and upon what
ground thou should charge us with being Jesuits and Papists, I know not,
except it be to prove and show thy self both ignorant, slanderous, and
ridiculous amongst thy own hearers, who doubtless some of them may say, we know
they are not such as thou have said, and the Witness in their consciences may
prove thee a liar, and outdate thy book as an old Almanac, ^it for the fire;
and thou have wholly missed thy mark, if thou thoughtest to lay a
stumbling block before thy Flock, concerning us, by this means of accusing of
us falsely, this shall do thee no good, but turn to an offense against thy own
self; and as thou thought to do to others, so shall it be done to thee, and
thou and thy work shall be rejected; the one as ignorant and vain, the other as
ignorance and vanity, for we are known to thy hearers to be neither Jesuits nor
Papists, but they can tell that thou art a false accuser in this, And for thee
to accuse us where we have been so well known, renders thy self both ignorant
and hateful; And it does many ways appear, That we are not Papists, partly
as I have said we were not such in the days of our Infancy, neither educated
nor practiced therein, but were zealous against Popery, even from our
childhood, as the People of Kendal very well knows, who can witness for us, and
against thee, that we were neither such, nor yet lovers of them, but were
altogether zealous against them from our childhood, as I have said.

And it is evident, we have been no such since we were reproached by the name
of Quakers, for we have given diverse testimonies by writing in diverse
particular books, which I might mention against the Church of Rome, as knowing
Her not to be the true Church of Christ, but a false Church, made up of
Apostates originally, and being Idolators in their Worship, Church, Ministry,
and whole Religion, this testimony we have borne at sundry times, and upon
diverse occasions; sometimes we have given our testimony by writing against
them, plain affirmations; and sometimes in answer to their writings against us,
and diverse of us have been moved to go into their Dominions, and declare the
Word of the Lord against their Idolatryes.

And also diverse of our friends forbearing their witness against the Church of
Rome, have suffered great and cruel things, some until death, and some at this
day are in their Inquisitions and Goals, and under suffering by them, even for
this cause, for we have a large testimony and witness to give against the
Church of Rome.

And by what we have testified in word and writing, and by what we have
suffered from them for so doing, it well appears, that we are not Jesuits nor
Papists; and with what face thou could accuse us, it makes us to wonder at thy
impudency, seeing thou have so little ground for it, but have upon thy malice
thus falsely accused us, without any just cause at all; but this thy work which
thou have done, shall return into thy own bosom, with the reward of Judgment,
except thou repent, and sin no more.

Yes, but say thou, you are Papists, for why? Such and such doctrines and
practices you hold forth, and the like is held forth by the Papists, and this
proves that you are so.

Answ. Alas friend, thou have mightily discovered thy ignorance and folly in
thus proceeding, and in thus judging; for doubtless the Papists may hold the
profession of some truths in doctrines and practices unto this day, even as thy
own Brethren did confess at a certain Meeting of Dispute, they affirmed to me,
that there were many saving truths held by the Church of Rome; and seeing that
they hold that Christ Jesus is the Savior of the World, and that by him people
comes to eternal life, and that he was born, and died, and rose again; and
seeing they hold that Saints must deny the world, and forsake sin, and the evil
of the world: These doctrines and practices, with many others, they do hold in
words and appearance, which are saving doctrines and practices in themselves,
though not to them; but because they hold these things, must the People of God
either deny these doctrines and practices, or else be accounted Jesuits and
Papists for holding of them? And would not this be unrighteous Judgment
according to which thou have judged us? But I must tell thee, we do hold the
truth in righteousness, both in doctrine and practices, even upon this account,
because the Spirit of the Lord has, and does lead us into all truth, both in
doctrine and practices: And though the Papists may hold the profession of the
same truth in words and outward appearance, yet this is no ground for us to
deny the truth as it is in Jesus, nor yet a sufficient ground for thee to
accuse us to be Papists; but because thou art both ignorant and wicked,
therefore thou have thus proceeded, and thy work is a very scorn to many that
are not Quakers, and they see thy error and ignorance in thy proceedings.

And would thou thus be dealt withal? And you Priests of England, shall we
judge you according to thine own rule? might not I lay you to the line of
Judgment? and may not I instnace many particular things both in doctrines and
practices, which are held forth by the Ministers and Church of England, and the
Jesuits and Papists they hold the very same? and shall we therefore conclude
lawfully, that all the Ministers of England and their People are Papists? Oh
man! behold thy folly, and what a snare thou have laid for thy self, and how
thou art fallen into the pit which thou have dug for others. And further
consider, some of those doctrines and practices which thou have charged upon
us, are proveable and exemplary in the Scriptures, even by the Apostles who
held forth and practiced the same things, and because we hold and practice the
same; therefore we are accounted Papists, from this rule, because the Papists
profess the same; like as if it were error to say, Christ is the Son of God,
because the Devil said so; and like as if it were an error to believe there is
a God, because the Devils believe so; and by thy false proposed rule, thou
might have proved the one as soon as the other, and thou might have said the
Quakers are Devils, why? because the Devils confessed Christ, and they believe
there is a God, and therefore they are devils; and would this be good Logic?
And such is thy Logic, thou illiterate man: Why this is thy work, the Papists
they hold such and such things, and the Quakers they hold the same, and
therefore the Quakers are Papists: Behold the substance of thy work, thou vain
man! thou, and thy work are both ridiculous to sober-minded people.

Now indeed if thou could have instanced such doctrines and practices held
forth by us, which the Papists do hold forth, which is neither provable nor
exemplary in the Scriptures, then thy color had been more fair, and thy
pretense more spacious: But because thou have truly instanced nothing against
us, neither in doctrine nor practice, but what we can prove sufficiently by the
Scriptures; therefore thy work is invalid, even to many that are not of us:
For, say they, if this be Popery to follow the example of the Apostles in
doctrine and practices, its better to be a Papist then a Protestant, for why?
the Protestants holds forth many doctrines and practices which are not
proveable by the Scriptures: and I might instance in many things, that this is
true, even that you Ministers of England does hold forth in doctrine and
practice, many things which is not proveable by the Scriptures, but in some
things even contrary to the Scriptures.

And what if I should compare thee and thy Brethren in some of your doctrines
and practices which you hold, and the Papists hold the same, which is not
according, nor proveable by the Scriptures, will not the conclusion fall upon
thee and you, that you are Popish Jesuits, and like unto them; as instance a
few things amongst many: you are made Ministers by Natural Learning and
Languages, through the attainment of such Arts and Sciences at Schools and
Colleges, which the Apostles were not, and not by the immediate gift of the
Spirit of God, as the Apostles were; and in this very way and manner are the
Ministers of the Church of Rome, made and sent forth. And moreover, by the
Authority of the Church of Rome, and by the Papists were your Colleges builded
and ordained for the very use and end which you make of them; and those
Revenues, as Tithes, and other things which you yet uphold, even your orders,
habits, and formalities at Schools, were given and ordained even in the days
of Popery, and by the Whore of Romes Authority; and you are in the very
practice of that which they practiced in this particular, and you hold up and
maintain that which the Papists instituted and first ordained, and therefore
are not you Papists and upholders of Popery, let the witness in every man's
conscience judge, for you are doing and upholding the very same things which
the Papists do, which the Apostles never did, and by thine own rule you are
therefore Papists.

Again, you are maintained in your Ministry by Tithes, Gleab-lands, Easter
reckonings, yearly stipends, and so much by the year, and settled in a
Parochial way; and thus were never the Apostles, nor found in such practices;
but the Jesuits and Papists, they are in the practice of such things that
first instituted and ordained them in this Nation; and herein you follow their
example, and not the example of the Scriptures; and therefore we may conclude
that you are Papists, and follows their spirit, and you practice what they
practiced, even without any example at all in the Scriptures.

Again, you sprinkle Infants, and says, it is the Baptism into the Visible
Church, and Original Sin is thereby washed away, and it is a Seal and a Sign of
Regeneration, and of the Covenant, and this practice and doctrine the Papists
hold forth, and were indeed the first Founders and Ordainers of this practice
and doctrine, and it has never been proved yet to us from the Scriptures, but
you hold it forth, and the Papists they hold forth the same; and therefore it
may be concluded, that you are Papists, and yet upholds Popery, by these and
many other things that I might mention, which you do, and the Papists do the
same, and without any proof or example in the Scriptures, or any of the
Apostles does fully demonstrate, that you are more guilty of Popery then we
are, and Popery remains yet amongst you, and these practices are but a few of
many I might mention; and this is but a hint at things which more largely might
be spoken to, and it is occasioned upon thee by thine own proceedings.

And I must tell thee, that you are a company of shameless men, to cry out
against the Church of Rome, for is not She your Mother? and did not your
Religion, your Church, and Ministry, and Worship, for the most part of it
spring out of her bowels? Yea, it may easily be proved, that the general part
of your Worship does consist of such practices brought forth in such a manner
as was first instituted by the Whore of Rome, both the practices themselves,
and the very manner of their performances, and this may easily be proved; and
therefore you are shameless men to cry out of your Mother who has made such
fair provision for you, She has instituted and taught you a way for making of
Ministers, and She has instituted and taught you a way of maintenance by
Tithes, and so much a year, and she has provided you your very houses for
worshipping in; for your Churches were her Mass-houses not many years ago: And
thus She (the Whore of Rome, your Mother) has made a large provision for you,
She has taught you a way of Baptism, as I have mentioned, and she has taught
you also the way of persecuting people for good conscience sake; it was She
that killed and destroyed persons for good conscience sake; and it was She that
forced and imposed Faith and practices upon peoples consciences, contrary to
the Spirit of God, which you Ministers yet practices in part. Many things I
might instance to illustrate you to be like unto the Papists, and even such as
have sprung out of the Church of Rome: But the Nation is begun already to see
your shame and folly, and if I were silent, the Lord will not forget to repay
his enemies with vengeance, and the day of the Lord is at hand, wherein his
Judgments shall be known in the earth. And thus I have measured thee according
to thy own rule, and I do leave it to the Witness of God in thy own Conscience,
and to all thy Parishioners, to whom indeed I do wish well, and that they might
come to the knowledge of the things that belongs unto eternal life, that they
might be saved. And ye people of Kendall, and there abouts: Oh that you would
consider! Oh that you would come to be taught of the Lord, and every one of you
to receive the Spirit of God, which is the free gift of God, that it might lead
you into all truth, according to the promise of the Lord; for this is his
promise, That all his Children shall be taught of him, his Law shall be written
in their hearts, and his Spirit put in their inward parts; and they shall all
be taught of the Lord, and his Spirit shall lead them in all the ways of
righteousness: Oh! how long will it be ere you come out of Idolatry, and out
of Antichristian ways, which long you have walked in, and not only you, but
all Christian Nations, for great has been that darkness that has been upon
the world since the Apostles days; for Christ in his days, he said, False
Prophets should come, and should arise, and deceive many; and the Apostle John,
he said in his time, that there was then already many false Prophets gone out
into the world, and the world went after them: and the false Prophets which
Christ prophesied of should come, in the last times, the Apostles saw were
already come, and coming in their days, and it was then the last time, 1 John
4. and such were they, as you may read, that were covetous, and taught for
filthy lucre, and through covetousness made merchandise of people, and such
were they that preached for hire, such as these, even Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, Christ said should come, and the Apostles saw were coming in, even
in their days; and abundance of such as these have overspread the Christian
Nations, for many ages; so it is not as though the false Prophets were but
coming now, for that Scripture signifies, and plainly says, that the false
Prophets and Antichrist did come in, even in the Apostles days, and most of
the Apostles themselves were Martyred, and the Churches of Asia were running
into Idolatry and backsliding from the truth, even before the Apostles
decease; and John in the Revelations, he saw what was to come to pass, that
Power should be given to the Beast, and to the Dragon, (the Devil) over all
Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, and that the Martyrs blood should be shed, and
the Witness slain, and the Woman, the true Church, should fly into the
Wilderness; and that the Whore, the false Church, should cause all Nations,
even the Kings of the earth, should drink the Whores Cup, and Antichri^t should
rule, and My^ery Babylon, as a Queen, should sit upon Peoples, Multitudes, and
Nations, and the Saints Blood should be drunk by the false Church, the Whore.
These things John saw was to come to pass in his time, as you may read in the
Revelations; and since John's days, within these sixteen hundred years we know
they have been brought to pass and fulfilled; so the present time is not now,
as though deceivers were but newly comed in, for the Nations of the earth have
long been deceived by Antichrist in sheeps clothing, and the Lord is now again
gathering People from them; so be not deceived in your hearts, neither be ye
ignorant concerning the times and seasons, for its the time of the Woman's
returning out of the wilderness, and she shall be adorned with the same gifts
and parts that she had in the Apostles days, and all shall walk in the light
of the Lamb, and the marriage of the Lamb shall come, and the Devil shall be
chained to deceive the Nations no more; these things will the Lord bring to
pass, and we are happened to be even in the beginning of this time of the
Churches returning, and the fulfilling Gods promises; for the light of the Lord
has appeared, and the everlasting Gospel must be preached again through the
world, and this is Gods promises, as you may read in the Revelations; Therefore
be not ignorant, but now consider, and let the fear of God be in your hearts,
for the day of vengeance will suddenly come upon the ungodly, and them that are
not prepared but wants the Oil in their own Lamps, they shall be shut out and
left in utter darkness; therefore consider now you have time, the day of the
Lord is at hand.

And yet though great darkness has been over the Nations, yet the Lord had his
people; that is, a few in every Nation, and some in every age, that were
sincere in their hearts, and did fear the Lord in Spirit, and did desire after
him, and that were in a measure humble before him; some such have been among
Papists, and Protestants in all ages, who have according to their present time,
been zealous in their way toward God: and such have been dear to the Lord at
all times, who sought after him, and suffered for him, for their present
testimony against sin and iniquity, as it was manifest to them: and such
sincerity of heart in any, we never have judged. Though we say, as for the
matter of Government, Discipline or Ordinances; and as for Ministry, the Call
to it, and maintenance of it: all this, both among Papists and Protestants of
all sorts for the generality of it, has been wholly Antichristian. Their
Church Government, Ordinances, Worship, their Ministry, its Call, its
Maintenance, has been Antichristian, and not according to the example of the
Apostles. And this we judge, even by the Spirit of the Lord; Though the
sincerity in no man, nor amongst any sort of people do we judge: yet the
constitution of Churches, and the Worship and Ordinances, and Ministry as it
has stood for many ages, both among Papists and Protestants we do judge, and
deny by the Spirit of the Lord.

Much more might be said as in these things, but if any of you Parishioners of
Kendall desire any further knowledge of these things, or to be acquainted with
our Principles, we have given forth diverse Books (though they have been
rejected hitherto) yet the time is at hand when those truths which we have
declared both by word and writing, shall be precious throughout the world. And
we do not impose our Religion upon people by force of external laws, as Papists
and Protestants have done by Antichrian power: But we do leave what we declare
by word or writing to the witness of God, even in all men's consciences thereby
to be approved, and though we have been sufferers, and yet may for good
conscience sake; yet we are not ashamed of the truths which the Lord has given
us the knowledge of: But in all boldness, and in the fear of God we
confidently give forth our witness by the Spirit of the Lord.

And as for this our answer, it is sufficient to you, and your Minister, and no
more needs be said till we hear a reply, and further then it is possible, the
testimony of truth may be given, and I would desire that you and he would
sincerely compare this, and his together, and then judge of the one, and of the
other, even by the witness of God in your own consciences.

Here follows certain proposalls, which was sent to William Brownsword about a
year ago, which are worthy here of Inserting, that he may yet answer to these
things; for he would neither meet me to dispute these things, nor give me any
answer by writing. And indeed, it had been more equitable for him, first to
have answered these things, than to have gone and sent forth such a foolish
book against us: and all these things being compared together, I doubt not but
some of you may be truly Informed, and your understandings opened; which is my
earnest desire, that so it may be unto you, and that ye may come to a good
understanding, and perfectly disern between truth, and error, and true Ministers
of Christ, and deceivers.

London, the 12th Month, 59.
FOrasmuch as a Paper I have seen, which is given abroad in the Country: the
substance of which, (as the Subscribers say) is an earnest and Cordial
invitation, and free Call to one which they name Mr. William Brownsword, to
exercise his Ministry at Kendall: And now in the behalf of the Parishoners,
amongst whom this Paper goes abroad to obtain the Subscription of their hands,
This following Paper am I moved to send to the said William Brownsword, and to
others of the Inhabitants of Kendall, that are of his party, for them to
consider of it, and to compare it with the former Paper, and I shall wait,
expecting his, and their Answer.

I am a lover of your Souls, and a friend to Righteousness, and daily
travelleth in the work of the Gospel, to the intent that Sinners may be
converted to God, and the Saints strengthened in the Faith, which gives them
victory over the world; and I wait for Sions Redemption, and for the overthrow
of great Babylon, that has ruled over the Kings of the Earth: and whereas it
is manifest to me, that there is a great dissatisfaction in the spirits of
people in this Town and Country hereabouts, concerning the Ministry; and the
great cry is, who is a true Minister of Christ, and who is is not? some crying
up one man, and some another: and it appears to me, that there is a great
strife in the minds of people about Ministers, and Ministry; and about the
Worship of God and Religion: some saying, This is the way; others saying, That
is the way; and some crying, This is Truth; and others crying, That is Heresy.
Now to the intent, that all people may be satisfied, and that the way of Truth
may be clearly known from all the false ways of Error; and that the true
Ministers, and Ministry ma be perfectly known, and distinguished from all false
Ministries, and that the Truth may be exalted over all, and all Deceit
confounded.

Upon these Considerations, with that dear and tender love which is in my
heart, unto the souls of all people, but more particularly to the people of
this my native Country; therefore upon these accounts, I am moved of the Lord
to send these unto thee, that thou would meet me in some public place in the
Town, or at the Steeple-house, where the people of the Town and Country may
conveniently come together, to hear our discourse of these things which is
doubtful to them, that they may be satisfied as aforesaid; and these things I
do propose, which I do Judge are things which are most needful that the people
should be informed in: and no Question, but the unfolding of these Particulars
underwritten, by the Spirit of the Lord, in sober Arguments may tend to
satisfy many.

FIrst, Whether thou can prove thy Call to the Minis^ry to be the same, and
by the same means as the Ministers of Christ was in the days of the Apostles,
in the true Christian Churches?

Secondly, Whether the maintenance of thy Ministry, and practice in thy
Ministry, and the fruits and effects of thy Ministry, be the very same as was
the maintenance, and practice, and fruits and effects of the Ministers of
Christ, and of the Apostles, in the time of the true Churches before the
Apostasy? And if these things thou can prove, then he that denies thee and
thy Ministry, shall be accounted a transgressor, and thou shall be free.

Thirdly, What are the marks and evident tokens of the false Ministers? and
whether thou can clear thy self according to the Scriptures, from all the
signs and tokens of a false Minister and deceiver? and will thou be tried
according to the Scriptures?

Fourthly, Whether any man without the gift of the Holy Ghost, can be a
Minister of Christ, and of the Gospel? and whether through thy Ministry sons
and daughters do receive the pourings forth of the Spirit upon them, as in the
days of the true Churches of old? and whether the anointing that teaches all
things, dwells in every member of that Church whereof thou art a Minister.

Fifthly, What the true state of the true Church is at present, and has been
for many ages? and whether the Church of England, as it stood in the time of
Prelacy, or as it now stands in Presbytery, be the true Church of Christ, the
Lambs wife? or who are the true Church? and what name of people does the true
Church of Christ go under at this day?

Sixthly, Whether the time has been, or now is, or is yet to come, that the
true woman fled into the Wilderness? and what is the Wilderness, into which she
was to fly? and what is the state of the true Church at this time? and if she
has been fled into the Wilderness, how much of the time is expired that she
was there to remain? and what was these flocks with which the Dragon did pursue
her? and how was the Dragon in Heaven? and how and when was he cast out into
the earth?

And these things, with some others which I have to propound, being fully opened
in the way of a fair and sober dispute, may try thy Ministry, and satisfy many
that are doubting, and truth be made manifest, and deceit confounded.

And these things I am willing to travel through in discourse with thee, the
said William Brownsword; or any other that shall accept of the Propositions,
with the consent of the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town, who may preserve the
place and people in peace and soberness; also provided, that each of us on both
parts may have full deliberation to speak forth our minds pertinently to the
matter, and that each may have silence from the other, whilst the other is a
speaking; and that all fair and sober dealing be amongst us, and the fear of
God: but if these things proposed for subjects to dispute, be not agreed to, to
fall upon; then any other particulars which is necessary for edification, which
may be named by the Mayor or any other sober man in Kendal, provided I may
propound one thing for another: And send thy Answer to this, whether thou agree
to it or not; if thou or any other do consent hereunto, let the time be
appointed, to be in a convenient time after the date hereof; and I shall expect
an Answer to this, either in agreement to dispute these Particulars, or to give
me an Answer to the Queries in writeing, and I shall wait for an Answer hereof.

The 12th day of the 12th month, 1659. E. BVRROVGH.

THE END.

