CONSOLATION IN LIFE and DEATH, Wherein is showed, That Interest in Christ, is
a ground of Comfort under all the Troubles of Life, and Terrors of death. How
they that have an Interest in Christ, may retain the same!

Begun in A Funeral Sermon, occasioned by the death of Mrs. Ellen Asty, and
since much enlarged.

By Owen Stockton, late Minister of the Gospel at Colchester in Essex.

TOGETHER With the Life of the said Mrs. Ellen Asty,

Romans 8. v. 38. For I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come.

Romans 8. v. 39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

London, Printed by J. R. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns, at
the lower end of Cheapside. 1681.

To the Worthily Honored John Clark, of Bury in Suffolk, Esquire.
SIR,
IT is your seriousness in Religion, together with your intimate Acquaintance
with, and respect for, Reverend Mr. Owen Stockton, that occasioneth the
prefixing your name to the ensuing Treatise, of which he was the Author. He was
one, mighty in the Scriptures, whose Life was much desired, and his Death much
lamented. As you delighted to hear him Preach when he was alive; So I doubt
not, but he being dead, you are willing to hear him yet speaking; especially in
a word of Consolation against the troubles of Life, and the fears and terrors
of Death.

I hope the Lord has delivered your self from the Sting of Death, but yet you
may need some help against the fear of it. Take a survey of your Mercy, that
you are not under the unhappiness of Christless Souls, who, through the fear of
Death, are all their life time subject to Bondage.

It is said, that the Indians being alarmed with the Approaches of Death by
its Arrestment, so as all hope of recovery is past, then to behold and hear
their throbbing sobs, and deep-fetched sighs, their grief-wrung hands, and
tear-bedewed cheeks, their doleful cries, would draw tears from Adamantine
Eyes, that be but Spectators of their mournful Obsequies.

Indeed it is unexpressibly sad, to be under a Conviction (as many are) of the
immortality of a never dying Soul, and yet to be Strangers to the promise of
Eternal Life. Such must needs be Mourners without hope.

All the Cordials in the World in this case, will not afford the least drop of
refreshment to such disconsolate Souls: nor will a Righteousness of our own be
a sure bottom for Comfort against that last Enemy Death.

But behold, here is a way deciphered, whereby we may not only be helped to
leave Riches, Friends, Wife, Children, Houses, Lands, and depart in peace, but
also with exceeding joy. [Interest in Christ] will be a means to turn Death the
King of Terrors into the King of Comforts; it will make it of a bitter Enemy, a
familiar Friend, an Outlet to Affliction, and a Portal to Glory.

How that [Interest] conduces to the fitting a Soul with Consolation, is
discovered here, by this eminent Servant, and Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr.
Owen Stockton, in a Funeral Sermon upon the Death of Mrs. Ellen Asty, (the
Relict of that Reverend Mr. Asty, late of Stratford in Suffolk) which
afterward he much enlarged, and so left it under his own hand. It was intended
that the said Mr. Stockton should have printed it together with her Life; but
Death arresting him, before he had Accomplished that work; Providence has cast
it upon my hands to draw her Portraiture out of the papers which were in his
hands to that end; which I have done accordingly, and here present it to your
self, and to public view. I must say further, that this is a Branch, or part
of a Treatise of his, on the same Text, entitled [the best Interest], which
probably will follow speedily. This, and that together, complete the Subject,
yet either of them might have appeared to the Reader, as a perfect and distinct
Treatise, had I not hinted thus much.

I shall only add, that my ardent desire is, that the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, may bless you with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly
places in Christ, so prays,

September 1. 1681. Honored Sir, Your Servant in the Gospel, Sam. Petto.

Errata.
PAge 3. l. 25. dele for. p. 23. l. 26. r. there are. p. 29. l. 12. r. grace.
p. 37. l. 29. dele should. p. 42. l. 16. for ready r. really. p. 44. l. 3. for
upon r. yea. p. 59. l. 10. for sight r. fight. p. 60. l. 28. r. carried on. p.
70. l. 13. r. trusting. p. 88. l. 13 for here r. how. p. 96. l. 17. for
preserving r. preferring.

In Mrs. Astys Life,

Page 8. l. 26. dele never. p. 9. l. 15. r. uprightness. p. 10. l. 16. r. never
seemed.

CONSOLATION IN LIFE and DEATH.
Cant. 2.16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lilies.


THis Book contains a Discourse concerning Jesus Christ, and his Church.
Sometimes Christ is brought in speaking of his Church, and sometimes, to his
Church. And at other times the Church is brought in speaking of Christ, and
sometimes to Christ.

In this Text the Spouse of Christ is brought in speaking concerning Christ,
and expressing her grounds of Consolation, that she had, both under the
troubles of Life, and the danger of Death. The troubles of the Church are set
out. Chap. 1.6. She was black, because the Sun had looked upon her, which
signifies the scorching persecutions, that the Lord suffers to come upon the
Church, to try the Faith and Patience of his Servants. And she met with much
anger and hard usage from her Mothers Children, that is, those that professed
the same Faith with her self, my Mothers Children were angry with me, and made
me the Keepers of their Vineyards, and would not suffer her to keep her own
Vineyard. Her troubles are further set out. Chap. 2. v. 2. As a Lilie among
Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters, that is, compassed about on every
side with sharp and sore troubles, that did prick, and grieve, like Thorns, or
that her lot and habitation was in the midst of evil Men, who were like Thorns
in her side. Her inward troubles are touched on, which did proceed from her
abundant love to Christ: v. 5. I am sick of love. Sickness makes a man
restless, such was her condition, a restless condition.

Her troubles are also set out, v. 15. There were Foxes abroad, that made spoil
of the Vines. And these Foxes were of two sorts.

1. False Teachers, that did by false Doctrine corrupt and spoil the Vines.
Ezekiel. 13.4. Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes, that is, the false
Prophets; for the true Prophets support and cherish the Vines, they are the
false Prophets, that spoil the Vines. 2, Subtle and cruel Persecutors, that
seek after the lives of the Saints, are these Foxes, Luke 13.31, 32.
Sect. 1. The Division of the Words with the Doctrines.

In the words we have 1. The Title given to Christ [my Beloved] or as the
Dutch, my best Beloved, or as one unice dilectus, my only Beloved. Whatever
apprehensions other men may have of Christ, though they see no beauty, or
comeliness, why they should desire him, though he be to them a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense, though they make light of him, and reject
him; yet gracious Souls love Christ, yea, he is their best Beloved; they love
him above all things and persons in the World. 2. We have the claim that is
laid to Christ, My Beloved is mine. I have a special and peculiar interest in
him, he is mine, as much as any thing, that I have, is mine, my Beloved is
mine, I can, I do, I will lay claim to him, as my own, Psalm. 67.6. God, even
our own God shall bless us. 3. The Confidence the Spouse had of her special and
peculiar interest in Christ. It is not, I hope he is mine, or by way of desire,
O that he were mine, but it is spoken with much confidence, my Beloved is mine.
Isaiah 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father. 4. Here is Christ's Interest in his
Church, I am his. I am not, I will not be mine own, but I am his. I am not the
Worlds, but he has chosen and called me out of the world, I am his. 5. Christ's
familiar converse with his Church, he feeds among the Lilies, that is, he
affords his presence to them, he converseth familiarly with them, as persons
do that feed together. 6. The persons among whom Christ feeds, they that are
his, those that love him, those that resemble the Lilies, that is, humble
Souls, such as walk innocently, such as are fruitful. It Is Plinys Observation,
Lilio nihil faecundius, such as are like Christ, the lilie of the Valleys, meek
and lowly in heart. 7. The Consolation the Church has under all the troubles
of this Life, and the fears of Death, and that arises from two Heads.
1. Her interest in Christ, my Beloved is mine. 2. The enjoyment of Christ's
presence, he feeds among the Lilies. Feeding implies 1. His presence and
familiar converse with her. 2. His delight in her, feeding signifies delight,
John 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me. 3. His ministering
inward and spiritual Comforts. Judge. 19.5. Comfort thine heart with a morsel of
bread. And inward supports. Psalm. 104.15. Bread which strengthens man's heart.
Observe. 1. Jesus Christ and Gracious Souls have a mutual interest, each in
other, Christ is theirs, and they are his. 2. Such as believe in Christ may
come to a sure and certain Knowledge of their Interest in Christ, they may be
able to say with much confidence, Christ is mine, and I am his. 3. Every true
Believer has a great love to Jesus Christ, yea he loves Christ above all
things and persons in the whole world. My beloved, or as some render it, my
best beloved. 4. It is the work and office of Faith, to appropriate, and apply
Christ to a man's own Soul. My beloved is mine. 5. The Lord Jesus Christ feeds
among the Lilies, that is, converseth with them, delights in them,
Communicates Spiritual comforts and supports to them. 6. It is a great comfort
to the Saints in an evil day, when they are as a Lilie among Thorns, that
Christ feeds among the Lilies.




The Observation insisted on is.

Doct. Interest in Christ is a ground of strong Consolation under all the
troubles of this life, and the dangers and approaches of Death.

When it was a time of persecution, and there were Thorns on every side, and
the Foxes spoiling the Vines, the Spouse could triumph in this, My Beloved is
mine, and I am his, Luke 1.47. The Virgin Mary went through sore afflictions as
sharp, as if she had a Sword run through her. Luke 2.35. yet her Spirit could
rejoice in God her Savior. Paul when shut up in Prison, could, and did rejoice
in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.13. compared with Phil. 3.3. We rejoice in Christ
Jesus. Cant. 8.5. The Wilderness, a place of great troubles, and a land of the
shadow of Death, that is, where they walked almost continually in danger of
death. Jer. 2.6. yet under all the troubles of the wilderness, and the shadow
of death, there was refreshment by leaning on Christ. 2 Samuel 30.6. David was in
great distress, that he wept till he could weep no more, and was in danger of
death, yet he could encourage himself in the Lord his God. Cant. 2.2.3. As a
Lilie among Thorns, yet there, I sat down under his shadow with great delight.
Psalm. 23.1.4. The Lord is my Shepherd, and what then? though I walk through the
Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil.

Sect. 2. What is meant by an Interest in Christ? How Christ becomes ours, how
we become Christ's.

For the farther clearing hereof, that an Interest in Christ is a ground of
strong Consolation under all the troubles of this life, and against the Fears
and Terrors of Death, it will be expedient to enquire, what is meant by an
Interest in Christ. And how Christ becomes ours, and how we become his. To that
end we may take notice of a three fold Interest in Christ.

1. A general interest which is common to all men, the evil, as well as the
good, an interest by virtue of Creation, and of Christ's being Lord of all. The,
Son as well as the Father, was the Creator of Mankind, and all other
creatures. Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him; and without him was not any
thing made that was. And not only by Creation has Christ a right to all
Mankind, but as Mediator he is Lord of all, and is made Judge of the quick and
dead, and has power over all flesh. Act. 10.36. Preaching Peace by Jesus
Christ, he is Lord of all, Joh. 3.35. The Father loves the Son, and has given
all things into his hands. Joh. 17.2. Thou have given him power over all flesh.
This general interest in part, as his creatures, or as subjects of his
Mediatory Kingdom, is not that interest, which is a ground of Consolation. For
he rules by his power in the midst of his Enemies. Psalm. 110.2. Rule thou in
the midst of thine Enemies. 2. There is a Titular Interest in Christ, when men
profess themselves to be Christ's, and profess, and say that Christ is theirs,
but they are not his, neither is he theirs in truth. Joh. 1.11. He came to his
own, and his own recieved him not. The Jews are called Christ's own, because
they professed themselves to be the people of God, but many of them were not
his people. Joh. 8.54, 55. Ye say that he is your God, yet ye have not known
him Many lay claim to God as their God, and to Christ as their Savior, that
have no real interest in God and Christ. 3. There is a special saving interest
in Christ as our Redeemer, which is, when a man is made a partaker of Christ,
united to Christ, and has a real and actual right to all the saving benefits
of Christ. Heb. 3.14 We are made partakers of Christ. They that are thus
Interested in Christ, are said to be in Christ, and by virtue of their Union
with him, they have a right to all his saving benefits. 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are
ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. To be thus interested in Christ is not common
to all men, but it is a special privilege belonging to a peculiar people. Tit.
2.14. who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
parifie unto himself a peculiar people. As concerning this saving interest in
Christ, we find some men are Christ owned by him for his own. 1 Cor. 3.23. ye
are Christ's; Joh. 13.1. Jesus having loved his own, loved them unto the end.
Some men are none of Christ's, Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his; but are without any part or portion in Christ. Ephesians.
2.12. At that time ye were without Christ, some men have a part with Christ,
some have no part at all in him or with him, Joh. 13.8. If I wash thee not thou
have no part with me. To open the nature of this saving Interest in Christ more
fully, I shall resolve these two questions. 1. How Christ becomes ours. 2. How
we become his.
How does Christ become ours.

A. 1. By the Fathers giving him to be a propitiation for our sins, and Christ's
giving himself to die for our sins, God the Father gave Christ to be the
propitiation for our sins. Joh. 16.8. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that
he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. And as God
gave Christ, so Christ gave himself to be a Sacrifice and ransom for us. There
was his own consent to this Gift, the giving himself to die for our sins. Gal.
2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us
-- 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself for a ransom for all.

2. Christ becomes ours by effectual calling, for when God calls us
effectually, he calls us to fellowship with Christ, that is, to be partakers of
Christ, and all his saving benefits. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye
were called to the Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. When Christ
dyed, he gave himself for us, when we are effectually called, he gives himself
to us. By the death of Christ there was an impetration or purchase of all
things, that were necessary to our Salvation. In our effectual calling there is
an application of Christ, and all the benefits purchased by Christ to our own
Souls. As soon as we are effectually called, Christ becomes ours, and all his
benefits become ours, we have an actual right to an interest and propriety in
Christ, and in all his saving benefits. 1 Cor. 1.26. Ye see your calling,
brethren -- All are yours, and ye are Christ's. 1 Cor. 3.22.23. They that are
effectually called, Christ is theirs, and all the benefits of Christ are
theirs. I add this word effectual, because many are outwardly called by the
Gospel, who are not inwardly and effectually called to Fellowship with Christ,
now this effectual calling whereby we are made partakers of Christ, and his
saving benefits, consists of these three Branches.

1. Illumination, when God calls us effectually, he brings us out of our
ignorance and darkness, and gives us the knowledge of himself and his Son Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 2.9. Who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous
light. The knowledge of Christ, and God in Christ, is a great furtherance of
our being partakers of Christ, and his saving benefits, for through the
knowledge of Christ are communicated to us, all things pertaining to Life and
Godliness. 2 Pet. 1.3. According as his divine power has given us all things
pertaining to Life and Godliness through the knowledge of him that has called
us to glory and virtue. 2. The loosening and taking off the heart from all
things that hinder the Soul from coming to and following after Jesus Christ A
man is called off from all that hinders his closeing with Christ, whether they
be worldly lusts, or fleshly lusts, or relying upon our own Righteousness, or
any other impediments. A man is made to leave all to enjoy Christ; when Christ
called Levi, he left all for to go after Christ. Luke 5.27, 28. He said unto
him follow me; and he left all, rose up, and followed him. When Christ called
James and John, they left their Father, their Servants, their Ship and there
Nets and all to follow Christ. Mark 1.20. He called them, and they left their
Father Zebedee in the Ship with the hired Servants, and went after him. When
the Lord had called the Apostle Paul, he was willing to suffer the loss of all
things that came in competition with Christ, so that he might win Christ; Phil.
3.8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things,
and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. 3. When God calls a man
effectually, he calls him to believe in Christ; he calls him to come to Christ,
and to accept of Christ as offered in the Gospel, and to rely upon him alone
for his Salvation. Joh. 6.45. Every man that has heard, and learned of the
Father, comes unto me. The Father calls us to come to his Son; and every one
that hears this call effectually comes to Jesus Christ. Now they that are
thus called to the knowledge and faith of Christ are made partakers of Christ
and all his saving benefits, for by Faith Christ dwells in our hearts. Ephesians.
3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. And they that are thus
called, shall have remission of sins, and eternal life. Romans 8.30. Whom he
called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
3. Christ becomes ours by our recieving him. The Spirit of God makes a free
offer of Christ to every one that is willing to have him; Rev. 22.17. The
Spirit says come -- And let him that is a thirst come; And whoever will, let
him take the Water of Life freely. When we recieve Jesus Christ thus offered
to us he becomes ours, and we become his, Joh. 1.12. To as many as recieved
him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe
on his name. When we recieve Christ, he becomes our Savior, and God becomes
our Father, and we become his Sons. Now this recieving Christ implies these 3
things.

(1.) Our recieving that Testimony which is given of Christ in the Gospel
concerning the person, offices, death, and sufferings of Christ, and the
benefits that we have thereby. As namely, that Jesus of Nazareth was God
manifest in the Flesh, the Son of God, as well as the Son of man, that he is
that Savior that was foretold and promised should come into the World to save
lost man, that he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God tomake intercession
for us; that God has made him both Lord and Christ, and exalted him to be a
Prince and a Savior, etc. Now then we recieve his Testimony, when we believe
the truth of those things which are revealed in the Gospel concerning Jesus
Christ, Joh. 3.33. He that has received his Testimony, has set to his Seal,
that he is true. Thus we receive Christ, when we believe the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and continue therein. And this is necessary to our enjoying an Interest
in Christ. 2 John 9. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father, and the Son. (2.) We recieve Jesus Christ by the consent of our
Wills. When our Wills consent to take this Jesus for our Lord and Savior, as
he is offered to us in the Gospel, and we are willing to be ruled by him, and
to be saved by him in his own way. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely. The great work is to porswade and bring over the will to
Christ, to make a man willing to have Christ for his Lord and Savior, and to
be willing to to be saved by him in Life and Death in his own way. The
averseness of the will, to accept of Christ for our Lord and Savior, we may
see from such Scriptures as these. Ps. 81.11. Israel would none of me. Luke
19.14. We will not have this man reign over us. Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come
unto me that ye might have life. It is the work of God, yea the power of God,
that is required to make a man willing to have Christ for his Lord and Savior,
Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you, both to will and to do, of his own
good pleasure. Ps. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.
When our wills consent to take Christ as he offers himself to us, he becomes
ours. As the consenting to the enticeing of Sinners, makes us one with them,
and makes us partakers of their evil deeds. Ps. 51.18. 2 John ver. 11. And
therefore Solomon advises, Pro. 1.10. My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent
thou not. So by our consenting to receive Christ, when he offers himself to us,
and wooeth, and entreats us to accept him, we become one with, and are made
partakers of his benefits. As it is in Marriage, it is not wooing and waiting,
but consenting that makes up the Match. So it is in the mystical Marriage, it
is not inviting and calling, and waiting, but consenting makes up the Match.
3. We receive Christ for our Savior, when we rely upon him, and trust in him
for Salvation, and all things requisite unto Salvation. When we look upon him
as the only Savior, and as an all-sufficient Savior, and do trust in him for
our eternal Salvation. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye trusted after ye heard the word of
truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. Ps. 86.2. O thou my God, save thy Servant
that trusts in thee.

The Lord was displeased with the Israelites, when they did not trust in his
Salvation. Psalm. 78.21, 22. The Lord was wroth, because they believed not in
God, nor trusted in his Salvation. In these three things consists this duty
of receiving Christ.

1. In the assent of the mind, to the truth of those things that are revealed
concerning Christ in the Gospel. 2. In the consent of the will to take this
Jesus for our Lord and Savior. 3. In the relyance or trust of the heart on
Christ for Salvation. 4. Christ becomes ours, by our entering into Covenant
with God. When upon the call of the Gospel we come to Christ, and believe in
Christ, then we enter into Covenant with God, then God makes an everlasting
Covenant with us. Isa. 55.3. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your
souls shall live, and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the
sure Mercies of David. And when the Lord takes us into his Covenant, then Jesus
Christ becomes ours, and all his saving benefits become ours. For one main
branch of the covenant is to give us Christ and all his saving benefits. Isa.
42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the
Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, and to bring out the Prisoners from the
Prison. The great promise of the new covenant is, I will be your God. Ezekiel.
36.28. And when the Lord promises to be our God, in that promise God the
Father engages himself to be our Father, and God the Son engages to be our
Savior and our Redeemer, and God the Holy Ghost engages to be our comforter.
How do we become Christ's.

I. By the donation of the Father. God the Father chose out of the children of
men whom he saw good, and gave them to Jesus Christ to be his peculiar people,
to be redeemed and saved by him. Joh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave
them me. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen generation, a peculiar people. All that
God chose to eternal life, he gave to Christ to redeem them. So that all that
are Christ's are the Fathers, and all that are the Fathers by election, are the
Sons by redemption. Joh. 17.10. All mine are thine, and thine are mine. II. We
are Christ's by Redemption; He bought us with a price, he purchased us with his
own blood, he bought us Body and Soul for himself with a great price. 1 Cor.
6.19, 20. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify
God in your body and in your Spirits which are Gods. The price that Christ gave
for this purchase, was his own blood; Act. 20.28. To feed the Church of God
which he has purchased with his own blood. III. We become Christ's by the
Spirits causing and enabling us to give our selves to Christ, We become Christ's
by a voluntary resignation of our own selves unto him. 2 Cor. 8.5. First gave
their own selves unto the Lord. Isa. 44.5. One shall say I am the Lord, and
another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord. that is, shall surely and
firmly engage himself to be the Lords Servant; Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly I am
thy Servant, I am thy Servant. IIII. We become Christ's by virtue of the
covenant. He enters into covenant with us, that he will graciously accept us to
be his. Ezekiel. 16.8. I entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God,
and thou becamest mine. It is part of Gods Covenant that he will accept of us
for his people. Heb. 8.10. Ye shall be to me a people. And as the Lord makes a
covenant with us to accept us for his, so we make a covenant with the Lord that
we will become his people, and continue his for ever. 2 King. 11.17. Jehoiada
made a covenant between the Lord and the King and the People, that they should
be the Lords People.
Sect. 3. Several grounds of Consolation against the troubles of Life, and the
fears and terrors of Death, arising from an interest in Christ.

We have seen what is meant by an interest in Christ, namely an actual right
to, and propriety in Christ himself, as our Redeemer; and a right to, and
propriety in all the saving benefits purchased by his Blood. We have seen also
how Christ becomes ours, and how we become his. Now let us consider what solid
grounds of comfort we may have both against the fears and terrors of Death,
and the troubles of Life from our Redemption by Christ, or from interest in
Christ, and those saving benefits which he has purchased for us.

I. Jesus Christ has fully, perfectly, and for ever reconciled unto God all
that are his. The elect as well as others were by nature the Children of wrath.
Ephesians. 2.3. But by the Death and sufferings of Christ, they are redeemed from the
wrath of God, both for present, and time to come. Romans 5.9. Being now justified
by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. 1 These 1.10. Even Jesus
which has delivered us from wrath to come. Our Lord Jesus Christ has by his
Death and sufferings fully reconciled all that are his, unto God for ever, Col.
1.19, 20. Having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, etc. All that are Christ's, whether they be such as are
already in Heaven, or such as are still upon the Earth, were reconciled to God
by that blood that he shed upon the cross. All that are Christ's in all ages of
the world, and in all places of the world are reconciled to God by Christ. 2
Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. And as Christ
has reconciled all that are his unto God, so he has fully and perfectly
reconciled them to God, and that for ever, by his offering up himself a
Sacrifice to God for them. Heb. 10.14. For by one offering he has perfected,
for ever them that are sanctified. I shall open this fullness and perfection of
this Reconciliation in three or four particulars.

1. Jesus Christ by his Death has so fully reconciled all that are his unto
God; that he is pacified toward them, notwithstanding all their offenses,
whether original or actual, and will not impute any one of their offenses to
them 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them. The nature of reconciliation lies in
pacifying God for the offense our sins have caused, and this pacification
Christ our High Priest has wrought for us, Heb. 2.17. That he might be a
merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. And this pacification is so full,
that it is a pacification for all offenses. Ezekiel. 16.63. I am pacified toward;
thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord. 2. Jesus Christ has so fully
reconciled all that are his unto God, that God has laid aside all his wrath
against them, and retains no fury at all against them. Psalm. 85.3. Thou have
taken away all thy wrath, thou have turned thy self from the fierceness of
thine anger. Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me. 3. Jesus Christ has so fully
reconciled all that are his unto God, that the Lord has sworn that he will be
wroth with them no more. Isa. 54.9, 17. This is as the waters of Noah unto me,
for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the Earth,
so I have sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. -- This
is the heritage of the Servants of the Lord. But some may say, are not some of
the Servants of Christ chastned very sorely, and do they not complain, that the
wrath of God lies hard upon them as Heman. Psalm. 88.7.16.
How then is God true to his Oath, that he will be wroth with them no more.

A. 1. The rebukes and chastnings of the Members of Christ, do not come from
wrath, but love. Rev. 3.19. Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten.

2. The people of God are subject to mistakes, when they judge according to
sense, and not according to what is revealed in the word of God; when they
judge according to sense and feeling, they may think many providence of God,
to be expressions of his wrath, which they might understand to be all Mercy,
and to have no wrath in them, if they did judge according to Faith, and
according to what they find in the word of God. For there we read that All the
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his Covenant, and his
Testimonies. Ps. 25.10.

3. When the Lord swears that he will not be wroth, nor rebuke his Servants, it
is to be understood of Eternal wrath, that he will not rebuke them, so as to
destroy, for so rebuking is sometimes understood, namely of eternal
destruction. Ps. 9.5. Thou have rebuked the Heathen, thou have destroyed the
wicked, thou have put out their name for ever and ever. For this is like the
Oath of God concerning the waters that covered the Earth in Noah's time. God
has sworn that the Waters shall no more cover the Earth to destroy the Earth
as it did in Noah's Flood, yet notwithstanding this Oath, God does often
chasten the Inhabitants of the Earth, with unseasonable rain and floods, but
not such as shall destroy the world. So when the Lord swears, that he will not
be wrath with, or rebuke his Servants, it is of eternal wrath, of casting them
away for ever; yet he may, and often does chasten them, with temporal
chastisements.

4. Jesus Christ has so fully reconciled all that are his unto God, that he
has not only pacified his Fathers Anger, but he has restored, and brought
them into the love and favor of God, Romans 5.1, 2. By whom also we have access
by Faith into this grace wherein we stand. By grace here is meant the love and
favor of God, and by Christ we have not only peace with God, but access into
and continuance in the grace and favor of God. By Christ we are brought into
an higher degree of the love and favor of God, than Adam did enjoy while he
was in innocence. For we are under a better Covenant, and have better promises
than Adam had, Adam was in the favor of God, yet so as he was capable of
losing the favor of God, and being a child of wrath; And by his fall he did
lose the love of God. But they that are Christ's are so confirmed in the love of
God, that Gods loving kindness shall never depart from them. Isa. 54.10. The
Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, nor the Covenant of my peace be removed says the Lord that
has mercy on thee. And as God will not of himself take away his loving
kindness, so neither can any creature in Hell or on Earth, separate us from the
love of God. Romans 8.38, 39. I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present nor things to come,
nor height nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.

Now our reconciliation to God by Jesus Christ is a ground of joy and strong
consolation against the terrors of Death, and troubles of Life. Romans 5.11. We
joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now recieved an
atonement. When we understand that our Lord Jesus Christ has made an atonement
for us, this may fill our hearts with joy, when death looks us in the face;
when other men tremble at the thoughts of God, they that are reconciled to him
may joy in God, both while they live and when they dye. In the next verse, the
Apostle speaks of death entering into the world by sin, and passing upon all
men, for that all have sinned. ver. 12. And in the 3d. and 4th. verses he
speaks of the tribulations we are liable to in this life. We glory in
Tribulations. Yet in all our tribulations, and when we see death approaching
and passing upon us, we may joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom we
have received an atonement.

The knowledge of Gods love to our Souls may cause us to glory and rejoice in
the Lord in times of greatest mortality, when Death is coming in at our
Windows, and entered into our houses, and cuts off both young and old, and there
such a multitude of dead corpses that there are none to bury them. Jer. 9.21,
22.24. Death is come up into our Windows, and is entered into our Palaces, to
cut off the children from without, and the young men from the streets, speak,
thus says the Lord, even the Carcasses of men shall fall as dung upon the open
field, and as the handful after the harvest man, and none shall gather them --
But let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows and understands me.
We see here that a man may attain to glory in dismal and dark days, in times of
greatest mortality, when death is cutting down multitudes in all places, our
houses, the streets, the fields, and we may see in what a man may glory at such
a time, and that is in the knowledge of Gods love; Let him glory in this that
he knows and understands me that I am the Lord that exercises loving
kindness. It was a great comfort to Jacob, when he understood that Esau was
reconciled to him; while he apprehended his brother to be offended, and that he
came to meet in displeasure, he was greatly afraid and distressed. Genesis 32.7.
But when he saw his Brother was pleased with him, that made him exceeding
joyful, even as if he had a sight of the face of God. Gen 33.10. I have seen
thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.
If reconciliation with an offended brother be such a ground of comfort, what is
reconciliation with an offended God? Solomon speaks highly of the favor of a
King, that is like life to a dying man, and like the Rain to the thirsty
ground, very grateful and refreshing. Prove. 16.15. In the light of the Kings
Countenance is Life, and his favor is as a Cloud of the latter Rain. If there
be such joy in the favor of an Earthly King, what joy is there in the favor
of the King of Kings. Reconciliation with God affords strong Consolation
against the Fears and Terrors of Death several ways.

1. Because such as are reconciled to God by the death of Christ shall
assuredly be saved by Christ. Romans 5.10. For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his Life. 2. Because when God is reconciled to us, and his wrath
turned away from us, we may trust in him for Salvation, and all other good
things, without being afraid of what death or men, or devils, or any creatures
can do unto us; Isa. 12.1, 2. O Lord I will praise thee, though thou wast angry
with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou have comforted me; Behold God is
my Salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid. When God is reconciled to us, we
need not fear what man can do to us. Psalm. 118.7. The Lord is on my side, I
will not fear. What can man do unto me? Man can kill the body, and man can
torture the body, but death cannot hurt a man reconciled to God. When God is
reconciled we may triumph over all our enemies, not only over man, but over
death and the grave, and the devils, and Hell it self. Romans 8.31. What shall we
then say to these things, if God be for us, who can be against us?
II. Jesus Christ by his death has obtained for all that are his, a free full,
perpetual pardon of all their sins, and this is a ground of strong consolation
under the troubles of the world, and all the fears and terrors of death. The
great end of Christ's death was to expiate our sins, and to obtain for us
forgiveness of sins. 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ dyed for our sins according to the
Scriptures. Gal. 1.4. Who gave himself for our sins. 1 John 3.5. And ye know
that he was manifest to take away our sins Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the world. Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the
world has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Now
concerning this pardon which our Lord Jesus has obtained by his offering up
himself a Sacrifice for us, let us observe these four things.

1. It is a full and general pardon of all and every one of our sins; 1 John
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. All sorts of
sins, sins of Omission and Commission, sins of Ignorance, and sins against
light, original and actual sins are cleansed away by the Blood of Christ, and
every particular sin, great and small is cleansed by the Blood of Christ. Tit.
2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity. He
did not design our Redemption from some one sin, or from many, but to redeem us
from all iniquity by his giving himself to death for us. This was typified by
the escape goat, over him Aaron laid his hands, and confessed all the sins, and
all the aggravations that were in the sins of the Children of Israel, and the
goat bore away all their iniquities into the land of forgetfulness. Lev. 16.21,
22. Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess
over him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins. -- And the goat shall bear upon him all their
iniquities into a Land not inhabited. This did signify Gods laying all our
sins upon Christ. Isa. 53.6. And Christ making satisfaction for them all,
bearing them all away by his death. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self, bare our
sins in his own body upon the tree. The discharge that Christ by his death has
obtained for us, is a full discharge. Whatever sin may be charged upon us, by
the Law, by Conscience, by Satan, who is our accuser; by the justice of God,
all is discharged, and quitted, and answered by the death of Christ. Romans 8.33,
34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect. It is God that
justifies -- It is Christ that dyed.

Out of respect to the Death of Christ, God will forgive us all our trespasses,
how many, or how great soever they have been. Col. 2.13. Having forgiven you
all trespasses. Ps. 103.3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities. Ps. 85.2. Thou
have forgiven all the iniquities of thy people, thou have covered all our sin.
And that we may be the more fully assured that the pardon which our Lord Jesus
has obtained for us, is a full and general pardon of all offenses, the Lord
has obliged himself by many promises for Christ's sake, to pardon all, and
every one of our sins. Jer. 33.8. I will cleanse them from all their Iniquity,
whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their Iniquities,
whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Ezekiel.
36.25. From all your filthiness, and all your Idols I will cleanse you.

2. Our Lord Jesus has obtained of God, that this general pardon shall be for
ever, that all our sins should be forgiven for ever, and never be remembered
against us to Eternity. Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,
and their sins, and their Iniquities will I remember no more. And this is
employed in such promises as these. Mich. 7.19. Thou will cast all their sins
into the depths of the Sea: that is, as Drusius observ's, aeterna oblivione
delebit memoriam peccatorum nostrorum. He will blot out the remembrance of our
sins for ever. Those things that are cast into the depths of the Sea, are
wholly, and for ever, taken out of our sight. Psalm. 103.12. As far as the East
is from the West, so far has he removed our transgressious from us. That is,
so far, as they shall never be laid to our charge any more. For the East and
West are at that great distance, that they shall never come together. Ezekiel.
33.16. None of the sins that he has committed, shall be mentioned to him.

3. The Lord Jesus has obtained a general, and perpetual pardon of all
offenses, upon terms of free grace, without any respect to merit or worthiness
in us, that are partakers of it. Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we
have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of his grace. It is from grace, free-graces, the riches of grace, that
we have pardon of our Sins, through the blood of Christ. It is not for our
sakes, but for his own sake, and his Sons sake, that the Lord pardons our sins.
Isa. 43.25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember t^y sin Ephesians. 4.32. God, for Christ's sake, has
forgiven you.

4. This free, this everlasting, this general pardon of all offenses, our Lord
Jesus Christ has purchased for all that are his; that is, for all that do, and
all that shall believe in him, in all places, and all ages of the world. Act.
13.39. By him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Acts 10.43. To him gave all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins.

Now this free, this everlasting, this full and general pardon, which our Lord
Jesus Christ has obtained for all that are his, by shedding his blood for
them, is a ground of strong consolation under all the troubles of life, and all
fears and terrors of death. Romans 5.1, 3. Being therefore justified by Faith --
We glory in Tribulations. Justified persons, whose sins are remitted through
the blood of Christ, may glory not only when they are got out of their
troubles, but when they are in the midst of all their tribulations. Isa. 33.24.
The Inhabitant shall not say I am sick, the people that dwell therein, shall be
forgiven their iniquities. It is not said the Inhabitant shall be without
sickness. The greatest of Gods favorites are liable to sickness, as well as
other men. Daniel was a man, greatly beloved, yet he was sick and faint many
days. Dan. 8.27. I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days. And it is said
of Lazarus, John 11.3. Lord, he, whom thou love, is sick. Justified persons
are often times sick, as well as other men, but the pardon of sin, does so
sweeten their affliction, that they shall not say I am sick; that is, they
shall not say by way of complaint, and discontent. Sin unpardoned, makes
afflictions like gall and wormwood, that is, exceeding bitter. Lam. 3.5, 15,
42. He bath compassed me with gall -- He has filled me with bitterness, he
has made me drunken with worm wood -- We have transgressed and rebelled, and
thou have not pardoned But pardon of sin does so sweeten the bitterest
afflictions, that it takes away all causes of complaint under the rod of God.
The Inhabitant shall not say I am sick, and why is it, because there is no
sickness? No, but because the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their
iniquity. When a man is taken sick, and his sickness for ought he knows,
may be his death sickness; when he is so sick, that he cannot go, or stand, or
set up, but is confined to his Bed: if his sins be forgiven him, he may be of
good cheer. Math. 9.2. Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. Here is
a sick man, his sickness was very uncomfortable, he was sick of the Palsy, he
was brought very low, he kept his Bed, there was no way for his recovery but a
miracle; yet before Christ gave him any intimation of his purpose to heal him,
he bid him be of good cheer, and why! because his sins were forgiven him.

This pardon of all our sins, which is obtained for us by our Lord Jesus
Christ, may comfort us against all the fears and terrors of Death, on several
accounts.

(1.) When our sins are pardoned, the sting of Death is taken away. For the
sting of Death is sin. 1 Cor. 15.56. And when Sin is forgiven, Death has lost
its sting, and when the sting of Death is taken away, we need not be afraid of
Death, it can do us no harm. (2.) When our sins are pardoned, we may be
assured our Souls shall be saved; for God glorifieth all whom he justifies.
Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified. Tit. 3.7. That being
justified by his grace, we should be made Heirs, according to the hope of
eternal life. 3. Jesus Christ, by his death and sufferings, has obtained for
all that are his, freedom from eternal condemnation, and this is a ground of
strong consolation under all the troubles of this life, and against the fears
and terrors of Death. There is not any one person that belongs to Christ,
that has an interest in Christ, that shall come into condemnation. Romans 8.1.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. That
our Lord Jesus Christ has redeemed all that are his from eternal condemnation,
is evident several ways. 1. Because Christ dyed for us, Romans 8.34. Who shall
condemn? It is Christ that dyed. The Death of Christ is our security from
Eternal Death. He laid down his life on purpose to ransom us from Eternal
condemnation. Math. 20.28. The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for
many; out of respect to, and for the sake of this ransom, God will deliver all
that are Christ's, from going down into the bottomless pit. Job 33.24. Deliver
him from going down into the pit, for I have found a ransom. 2. The ground and
cause of our Condemnation is taken away by the Death of Christ, which is sin.
For God condemns no man but for sin; and therefore Christ having by his Death
taken away our sins, has taken away condemnation from us. 3. God out of
respect to the death and sufferings of Christ has promised, that none that
believe in Christ shall come into condemnation. Joh. 3.16, 18. God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes on him should
not perish, but should have everlasting life -- He that believes on him is not
condemned. Job. 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word,
and believes on him that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from Death unto Life. 4. The Keys of Hell are
in the hands of Jesus Christ, he has power to cast into Hell, and to keep out
of Hell whom he pleases. Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives and was dead, and
behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death
And if the Keys of Hell be in the hands of Christ, then all they that are
Christ's are upon sure grounds, that they shall not come into condemnation, for
he will not in any wife cast any of his Members into eternal torments. Joh.
6.37. Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.

And seeing all they that are Christ's are redeemed from eternal condemnation,
this may comfort them under all the troubles of this world, and against the
fears and terrors of Death. It may scatter and dispel all our sorrows, and fill
our hearts with joy and gladness when we understand and believe that we are
ransomed and delivered from eternal torments. Isa. 35.10. The ransomed of the
Lord shall return and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting joy upon their
heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away. This has relation to the deliverance of the Jews out of the Babylonian
Captivity, which was a type of our deliverance from eternal misery; when God
brought them out of their captivity, they were filled with joy and singing.
Psalm. 126.1, 2. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, Then was our
mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing. Now if there were such
joy and singing by the ransomed of the Lord, that were delivered from Babylon,
what joy and gladness may arise to the ransomed of the Lord from their
deliverance from Hell torments? Hell is a worse place than Babylon, the
captivity of Babylon was but for 70 years, but Hell torments are for Eternity.
David speaks of his deliverance from Hell as an unexpressible Mercy. and that
he would praise God with all his heart, and glorify him for evermore, for such
a great mercy. Psalm. 86.12, 13. I will praise thee O Lord my God with all my
heart, and I will glorify thy name for evermore, for great is thy mercy toward
me, and thou have delivered my Soul from the lowest Hell. And this his
deliverance from the lowest Hell was a comfort to him, when the proud rose up
against him, and the assemblies of violent men sought after his Soul. ver.
14.17. When we know and believe that we are freed from condemnation by the
death of Christ, this may cause us to triumph over death, when we are killed
all the day long, and counted as Sheep for the slaughter. Romans 8.34, 36, 37.
Who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed -- For thy sake we are killed all the
day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the slaughter, Nay in all these things
we are more then Conquerors through him that loved us. When we are freed from
condemnation, we may triumph over Death, though we walk in danger of Death all
the day long, more than Conquerours triumph over their conquered enemies.

IV. They that are Christ's have a sure and undoubted right to eternal life, and
that sure hope which they have of eternal life is a ground of strong
consolation under all the troubles of this life, and against the fears and
terrors of Death. They that are Christ's have a sure and undoubted right to
Eternal Life 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life. It is not said, he
shall have Life, but he has Life, that is, he may be as sure of it, as if he
had it already. He has an undoubted right, an unquestionable Title to eternal
life. He has it in the purpose and decree of God, he has it in the promise of
God; And that by life here, is meant eternal life is evident from the following
words; they that have Christ dwelling in their hearts by Faith, have a sure
ground and foundation for their hope of eternal glory. Col. 1.27. Christ in you
the hope of Glory. That all that are Christ's have an undoubted right to, and
sure grounds to hope for eternal Life; may be demonstrated several ways.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ dyed on purpose that he might purchase and procure
eternal life for all that should believe on him. Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses listed
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life. By the
lifting up of the Son of man is meant his suffering death upon the Cross. Joh.
12.32, 33. And this death he suffered that he might purchase eternal life for
all that should believe on him. 1 These. 5.9, 10. God has not appointed us unto
wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that
whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. 2. Our Lord Jesus
Christ interceedeth with his Father on the behalf of all those that are given
to him, that they may be with him where he is, that is, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Joh. 17 24. Father I will, that they also whom thou have given me be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me.
And what Christ asked of his Father shall assuredly be granted. Joh. 11.42. I
know that thou hear me always. 3. God for Christ's sake has promised eternal
life to all that are Christ's, that is, to all persons that do or shall believe
on Christ to the end of the World. Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the world that
he gave his only begotten Son this whosoever believes on him should not perish
but have everlasting life. 1 John 2.25. And this is the promise, that he has
promised us eternal life. And the promise of God is a sure ground to hope for
eternal life. Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie
promised before the World began. 4. Our Lord Jesus Christ has power over all
flesh given to him by the Father, that he may give eternal life to all that are
given to him by the Father. Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life, to as many as thou have given him. And
therefore they that are Christ's may be assured that they shall have eternal
life, seeing Christ has power to give eternal life to whom he will, and this
power over all flesh was given him purposely that he might give eternal life to
all that were given him by the Father. 5. God has given us this record
concerning his Son, that eternal life is in his Son, and that eternal life is
his free gift, and that he will give it to all that have his Son, and if we do
not believe this record that God has given of his Son we should make God a
Liar. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. He that believes not God has made him a Liar,
because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. And this is the
record that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, he
that has the Son has Life. Eternal Life is in Christ, and therefore if we
believe the record that God has given of his Son, namely that God has given
us eternal life, and that this life is in his Son, we must then conclude it as
a certain truth, that he that has the Son, has Life.
Now seeing such as have an interest in Christ, have sure grounds to hope for
eternal life, it follows hence that they have good grounds of strong
consolation under all the troubles of this life, and also against the fears and
terrors of Death For hope of eternal life will help us to rejoice greatly in
the midst of all our troubles. Romans 5.2, 3 We rejoice in hope of the glory of
God, and not only so, but we glory in tribulations. When we have good hope of
the glory of God, that is, of enjoying the Kingdom of Heaven, which is a most
glorious Kingdom, we may rejoice and glory in the midst of our greatest
tribulations. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 6. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a
lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you: wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season if need be,
ye are in heariness through manifold temptations. Here is joy, great joy in the
midst of manifold temptations that did cause heaviness, and whence did this joy
proceed? from a lively hope of an heavenly inheritance. Wherein ye greatly
rejoice -- That is, in which hope, or in hope of which inheritance. So Heb.
10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that
ye have in Heaven a better and more enduring substance. The spoiling of our
goods for which we have labored many years is wont to cause sorrow and
lamentation Jer. 9.19. A voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, how are we
spoiled! yet the hope of a reward in Heaven will help us to take the spoiling
of our goods joyfully.

The hope of eternal life will take away the fears and terrors of Death, when a
man has good hope of his Salvation, it will be no trouble, no terror to such a
man to dye, but he may dye in peace. Luke 2.29, 30. Lord now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. The hope of
eternal life will so far take off the fear and terrors of death, that it will
make us desire and long for our dissolution, that we may be with Christ in
Heaven. Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is
far better. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands eternal in the heavens. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven.

V. They that are Christ's shall have the Lords presence with them, under the
troubles which they meet with while they live, and also when they come to die.
Our sins made a separation between God and our Souls. Isa. 59.2. But the
sufferings of Christ have made up this breach. 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also
suffered once for sins, the just for the unjust, that we might be brought unto
God. One of the names given to Christ was Emmanuel, which being interpreted is
God with us. Math. 1.23. Whereas by the fall of Adam God was against us, and
was separated from us, through Christ he is reconciled to us, and is become
with us, a God that will afford us his presence; That such as are Christ's shall
have the presence of God and Christ with them under all their troubles, yea at
all times both while they live and when they dye. See Heb. 13.5. He has said I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. And what he has said he will surely
perform it. If he will never leave nor forsake us, then at no time of life, nor
at the hour of death. Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always to the end of the
world. Here is a note of attention set before this promise, that the Members of
Christ may take notice of it for their comfort and encouragement. Lo I am with
you -- I that have all power in Heaven and in Earth given to me, I am with you,
how long? always to the end of the world, not only with his Apostles and
Disciples that lived in those days, but with all his Ministers and Members to
the end of the world, and at all times. And more especially in times of
trouble, the Lord has promised his presence to such as belong to Christ. Ps.
91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be with him in
trouble. Isa. 43.1, 2. Fear not, For I have redeemed thee, I have called thee
by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

Now the presence of God going along with us, will comfort us, living and
dying; it will be our refreshment under all manner of troubles. Exodus 33.14. My
presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. Moses was forty years
in the Wilderness with the Israelites, who were a froward people, and both the
difficulties of the place in which he walked, and the difficulties of the
people among whom he walked, created him much vexation and trouble; but under
his troubles he found ease and comfort from the presence of God, going with
him. A man that has the Almighty, All-sufficient God with him, need not fear
any thing. Isa. 4.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be thou not dismayed,
for I am thy God. He need not fear any kind of Death, or any kind of troubles;
he need not fear Men or Devils: for God can do more for us, then all Creatures
can do against us. This was David's consolation against the fear of Death, that
he had God with him, and did so raise his courage, that he feared no evil, when
he was passing through the Valley of the shadow of Death. Ps. 23.4. Yea, though
I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil, for thou
art with me.

Obs. It is true may some say, If God were with us, this would raise our Faith,
dispel our fears, put joy and gladness into our hearts, under all our troubles,
living and dying; but we cannot find God is with us. Yea, many that have an
interest in Christ, find God standing afar off, and hideing himself in time of
trouble: as we see, Ps. 10.2. Isa. 49.14.

A. The Lord is alway's ready and truly, though not always sensibly present
with them. Ps. 125.2. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord
is round about his people, from henceforth, even for ever. The Lord is for ever
with, and round about his people; although sometimes their eyes are held, and
they perceive it not. And then their Faith is weak, so that judging by Sense,
rather than by Faith, they think God has forsaken them, when as he is
graciously with them, and they know it not. What Jacob said of the place where
he lodged, Genesis 28.16. Surely the Lord was in this place, and I knew it not.
The same may be said of some persons, Surely the Lord is with them, and they
know it not. Now the Lord is always with his people these two ways, even when
they are ready to say that he has forsaken them.

1. He is present with them in respect of his love and favor. Isa. 54.10. My
kindness shall not depart from thee. Ps. 89.33. Nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not utterly take away from him. Joh. 13.1. Jesus having loved his own,
loved them to the end. 2. The Lord is always present with his people by inward
supports, and secret upholdings of them. Deuteronomy. 33.27. The eternal God is thy
refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms -- Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not,
for I am with thee -- I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. Ps. 73.23. Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have
holden me by my right hand. Though David was ready to say in his have, that he
was cast out of Gods sight, yet he found upon recollecting himself, that he was
continually with God, and upheld by him.
6. Interest in Christ is a ground of strong consolation under all sorts of
troubles, and also against the terrors of Death, because they that are Christ's
are in covenant with God, and are heirs of all the promises. They are in
Covenant with God, Ezekiel. 16.8. I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant
with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. They are Heirs of all
the promises. Gal. 3.29. And if you be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him
are yea, and in him Amen to the glory of God by us. If all the promises of God
be upon, and Amen in Christ, then when Christ is ours, all the promises of God
are ours. And this is a ground of strong consolation under all manner of
troubles to be in covenant with God, and to have an interest in all the
promises of God. For the Scripture is full of great and precious promises,
promises of all good things pertaining to this life, and the life which is to
come; and to have an interest in all these promises, is a matter of unspeakable
joy. By acquaintance with the covenant and promise of God, our Souls may dwell
at ease, whatever troubles come upon our outward man. Ps. 25.13, 14. His Soul
shall dwell at ease -- and he will show them his Covenant. The Psalmist
speaking of a man that fears God, says, his Soul shall dwell at ease -- and
then shows how this is brought to pass, and that is, by acquaintance with the
Covenant, He will show them his Covenant. The dwelling of the Soul at ease,
implies the abundance and continuance of inward and Spiritual comforts, which
are enjoyed by our acquaintance with the Covenant, The promises are sweet
Cordials, which refresh the Soul in times of greatest distress. Ps. 60.6. God
has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice. In the three first verses, there
are sad complaints of grievous afflictions, O God thou have cast us off, thou
have scattered us, thou have been displeased -- Thou have made the Earth
tremble, thou have broken it -- Thou have showed thy people hard things, thou
have made us to drink the wine of astonishment. Now what will comfort a man at
such a time as this? What will make a man rejoice under such amazing
providence, when God seems to cast off, and be displeased? when God scatters
his people, shows them hard things, makes them drink the Wine of astonishment,
when the very Earth trembles at Gods judgments? The promises of God will
comfort in such a dark day as this is, God has spoken in his holiness, I will
rejoice. When David was in a persecuted condition, and they that persecuted
him, were no mean men, but great Persons, Princes, Saul, and his Courtiers, he
had exceeding great joy in the Promises of God, Psalm. 119.161, 162. Princes
have persecuted me without a cause -- I rejoice at thy word as one that finds
great spoil. When David was in a dying condition, he found strong consolation
from his interest in Gods covenant. 2 Samuel 23.1, 5. Now these be the last words
of David -- Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my
desire, and all my Salvation, although he make it not to grow. See what was
David's comfort, when he was speaking his last words, it was his interest in the
Everlasting Covenant. He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, and the
assurance he had of his Salvation by virtue of this Covenant. This is all my
Salvation.

7. Interest in Christ is a ground of strong consolation under all sorts of
troubles, and against the terrors of Death; because when Christ is ours, all
his saving benefits are ours. As Ahab said to Benhadad, 1 King. 20.4. I am
thine, and all that I have. So may I say, If Christ be thine, all that Christ
has is thine. Hence such as are interested in Christ, are said to be joint
heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. When Christ is ours, all things are ours, things
present, and things to come, life and death, this world, and the world to come;
adversity and prosperity, all things are ours, ordained and designed for our
good. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And if this will not
comfort us to hear that life and death, things present, and things to come, the
Kingdom of Heaven, and all things are ours, what else will. When Christ is
ours, his Righteousness is ours. Phil. 3.9. His blood, and all that he has
purchased with his blood, all his merits are ours, and his intercession is
ours. God is our Father, the Spirit is our comforter, Heaven is our
Inheritance, yea, all good things are ours.

Obs. How is this true, that they are Christ's, have all things, when as many
that are Christ's, are full of wants; they want Riches, Friends, etc. and in
great straits, and have suffered the loss of all things for Christ; and can
these be consistent together, that a man should have all things, and yet want
many things.

A. 1. They that are Christ's, have all things vertually in that contentment and
satisfaction which they have in Christ, and from Christ. They are, or may be as
well contented, as if they had all the world. Thus it was with the Apostle in
his wants and straits, when he was as poor to outward appearance, as a man that
has nothing; he was as well contented, as if he had possessed the whole world.
2 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things. A man that has
a contented mind, is as well satisfied, as if he had all the world. Genesis 33.11.
Take I pray thee my blessing, that is brought unto thee, because God has dealt
graciously with me, and I have enough. The Hebrew is li chol, I have all
things. Hence note that they have enough, that have contented and satisfied
minds, they have all things.

2. They that are Christ's, have all things in the providential care of God,
though they be poor, and in straits, and have suffered the loss of all things,
the providence of God takes care of them to supply them with all things that
are needful, with all things that are good for them. 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all
your care upon him, for he cares for you. The providence of God takes such
care for us in all things, that we need not trouble our selves with anxious
thoughts, or cares about any thing, but may cast all our care upon the Lord.
The Providence of God does, and will take care of us, to supply us with all
needful things, and all things that are good for us. Phil 4.19. My God shall
supply all your need, according to his riches in glory, by Jesus Christ.

3. They have all things in the Covenant and Promise of God. For in the
Covenant there are all things promised, that they do, or can desire. 2 Samuel
23.5. He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, and this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire. We cannot desire more then Grace and Glory, and
all good things, now these are all promised to us. Ps. 84.11. The Lord God is a
Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly. And what things are ours by promise,
are ours by a better, and a more sure tenure, then what is ours by actual
possession without a promise, because what we have in our possession, may be
lost, may be taken from us, but the promises no creature can take from us.

4. They have all things eminently and transcendently in God and Christ, in
having God for their portion, and Christ for their Savior. What Solomon says
of money. Eccl. 10.19. Money answers all things. The same may be said as truly
of God and Christ; God answers all things, and Christ answers all things.
When we enjoy God who is the fountain of all good, in the enjoyment of him, for
our God, we do inherit all things. Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit
all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. They have all things
in Christ their head, what the head has, the head has it for the good of the
Members. Now Christ our head has all things for the good of his church. Ephesians.
1.22. And gave him to be the head over all things in the Church.

5. They have the good of all things, though not the actual possession of all
things. Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to them,
that love God. Yea their very wants are for their good; for they put them upon
living by Faith, and stir up in them a Spirit of Prayer, and keep them humble,
etc.

6. They are heirs of all things, though they are not come to the full
enjoyment of their inheritance; for they are joint heirs with Christ. Romans
8.17. If children then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. And
Christ is heir of all things. Heb. 1.2. Has in these last days spoken to us by
his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things. The heir while a child is
Lord of all, though he has not the actual possession of his inheritance. Gal.
4.1. So it is with us, we are heirs of all things by virtue of our Union with
Christ, though we have not the actual possession of our inheritance.

8. Interest in Christ is a ground of strong consolation, under all troubles of
life and terrors of death, because all that are Christ's are blessed in and by
Christ, and are so blessed as no troubles, nor death it self can make them
miserable, but after their Union with Christ, they are blessed, and shall
continue blessed for ever. I shall open the blessedness of such as are Christ's
in these particulars.

(1.) All that are Christ's, are in a most blessed and happy condition. Psalm.
2.12. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Gal. 3.8. In thee shall
all Nations be blessed. That is, in thy seed that shall proceed out of thy
loins, that is, the promised Messiah, as appears from Act. 3.25, 26. By all
Nations being blessed in Christ, we are to understand all persons in all
Nations that believe on Christ, as the following words show. ver. 9. So then
they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham; what Laban said
concerning Jacob. Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience, that the Lord has
blessed me for thy sake. That may they that are Christ's say concerning Christ,
I have learned by experience that the Lord has blessed me for Christ's sake.
(2.) They that are Christ's are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ
Jesus. Ephesians 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.
Spiritual blessings are the best blessings, now God has not only blessed us
with some, with many, but with all spiritual blessings, and that not only all
spiritual blessings which are enjoyed in this life, but with all spiritual
blessings which are reserved for us in heavenly places. And we are blessed with
all these spiritual blessings both pertaining to this life, and to be enjoyed
in heavenly places in the life to come, in Christ Jesus. Which is better than
if we had them in our own hands. For Adam had all blessings in his own hands,
and lost them, but what is put into the hands of Christ he will keep safe for
ever. (3.) That blessedness which we have in and by Jesus Christ, is eternal
blesledness. Besides that blessedness which they that are Christ's have in this
life, all the blessings of the Kingdom of Heaven are prepared for them, and
shall be given to them for their inheritance. Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
His blessing is eternal life. God has blessed us in Christ with the highest
blessings he had to give, and we were capable to recieve, and that for ever.
For through Christ he has given himself unto us, to be our God. Ezekiel. 36.28. I
will be your God. And he has promised to give us his Kingdom. Luke 12.32. Fear
not little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.
And what greater blessings has God to give than himself and his Kingdom. And
therefore what is said of David? Psalm. 21.6. Thou have made him most blessed
for ever. The same may be said of all that are Christ's, God has not only made
them blessed, but has made them most blessed for ever; for they that come to
Christ upon the call of the Gospel are made partakers of the sure mercies of
David. Isa. 53.3.
4. It is the immutable purpose and unalterable promise of God to make all the
Members of Christ most blessed for ever, and he has confirmed the immutability
of his counsel and promise with his oath: which may give strong consolation to
all that in the sense of their lost and undone condition have fled for refuge
to Jesus Christ, that by and in him they may obtain Life and Salvation. Heb.
6.13, 14, 17.18. This portion of Scripture setting forth the great assurance
which God has given all that believe in Christ, that he will make them blessed
and happy for ever, which is a foundation of strong consolation, I shall
observe several things out of it.

1. God made a promise to Abraham that in blessing he would bless him, that is,
that he would give him all things requisite to true blessedness, that he would
make him most happy and blessed for ever, that he would never leave off
blessing him, but would bless him for ever. This includes the promise of
eternal life, for no man is a blessed man, but he that shall have eternal life,
all others are under Gods curse, Mat. 25.34, 41. The blessings of Heaven are
the main part of our blessedness. Mat. 5.3.

2. God confirmed this promise of giving Abraham all things requisite to true
blessedness, with the greatest oath that he could swear. For, because he could
swear by no greater, he swear by himself, saying, surely blessing I will bless
thee. surely, that is, surely as I live, as sure as I am God, I will bless
thee, and make thee blessed for ever.

3. This promise and this oath were not only made to Abraham, but intended for
the strengthening of the Faith, and the consolation of all the heirs of promise
to the end of the world. Wherein, that is in which promise, God willing to show
to the heirs of promise -- It Is not said to show to Abraham, but to show to the
heirs of promise, confirmed it with an oath, so that the promise and oath of
God are intended for all the heirs of promise. That we might have a strong
consolation. It Is not said Abraham, so that the oath and promise of God is as
much for our comfort as Abraham's.

4. Gods oath added to his promise shows that his counsel and decree for
blessing Abraham and all the heirs of promise is immutable, he will not alter
his purpose or promise of blessing any of the heirs of promise.

5. God is abundantly willing that the heirs of promise should know the
immutability of his counsel of giving them all things requisite to true
blessedness.

6. Such as have fled to Christ for refuge, to be saved from wrath to come, and
to give them eternal life may have strong consolation. That we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us.

By fleeing for refuge we may understand fleeing to Christ, that we may escape
from wrath to come, and may obtain eternal life and Salvation. The Cities of
refuge under the law, whether the Manslayer was to flee that he might be
preserved from the avenger of Blood, did typifie Christ to whom we are to flee
for refuge that we may escape the wrath and vengeance of God, which is due to
us for our sins. Eternal Life is the hope which is set before us to be laid
hold upon. Tit. 2.13. Looking for that blessed hope -- That is for eternal
life. Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life -- This hope is set before us in the
Gospel. Col. 1.5. For the hope which is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye
heard before in the word of the Truth of the Gospel. And therefore it is called
the hope of the Gospel ver. 23. And be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel. This is the hope we are to lay hold upon. 1 Timothy 6.12. Lay hold upon
Eternal Life. So that our fleeing for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before
us, is this, our fleeing unto Jesus Christ that we may escape that wrath which
is due to us for our sins, and that we may in him and through him obtain
Eternal Life and Salvation.

7. They that have thus fled for refuge, have the promise and oath of God,
which are two immutable things, to assure them that God in blessing will bless
them. For the oath and promise is to them as well as unto Abraham; and what
does this imply, Surely blessing I will bless thee. A. Surely I will pardon all
thy sins. Romans 4.7, 8. And surely I will give thee eternal life. Mat. 25.34.
and 5.3. And surely I will pour out my Spirit upon thee. Isa. 44.3. Gal. 3.14.
And surely I will turn thee from thine iniquities. Acts 3.26. And surely I will
give thee all good things. Ps. 21.3. And surely I will make thee a blessed man
for ever. 1 Chronicles. 17.27.

8. These two immutable things, the promise and the oath of God, as sure as he
lives to bless for ever all that flee to Christ for eternal life, this may
give them strong consolation, yea this may give them such strong consolation as
no troubles, nothing whatever shall make void their comfort; which is the next
head I am to speak to.

(5.) The blessed estate and condition of such as have an interest in Christ is
made so sure, and so firmly settled upon them, that no troubles of this life,
nor Death it self can make void their blessedness. They are and continue
blessed under all their afflictions and temptations, as well as in their
greatest prosperity. Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastneth O
Lord, and teach out of thy Law. Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures
Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall recieve the Crown of Life which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. They are and continue blessed, when
they dye as well as while they live. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die
in the Lord. Death is so far from making void the blessedness of those that are
Christ's, that it puts them into the actual possession of the Blessings of
Heaven, which is far greater blessedness then they enjoyed, whilst they were in
this world.

Now the favor which God has shown to those that are Christ's in bestowing all
this blessedness upon them, and in making them most blessed for ever, is a
ground of exceeding great joy. Psalm. 21.6. Thou have made him most blessed for
ever, thou have made him exceeding glad with thy countenance. This blessedness
which is confirmed to them that are Christ's by two immutable things, the oath
and the promise of God is a ground of strong consolation in all estates and
conditions, of such strong Consolation as cannot be made void by any troubles
or by death it self, as has been already showed from Heb. 6.13, 14, 17, 18.

Sect. 3. More grounds of consolation against the troubles of the world, to
such as have an interest in Christ.

Seeing the way to Heaven lies through many tribulations, and experience
shows it is an hard matter for Christians to bear up cheerfully under the
manifold troubles they meet with in this world, I shall add some more grounds
of comfort for such as have an interest in Christ, against all the troubles
they are liable to in this world.

. The World is conquered by Christ. what comfort arises hence.

1. It is a great comfort to a Christian under the troubles of the world, to
consider that Christ has overcome the World. Joh. 16.32. In the world ye shall
have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. By the world
which Christ has overcome we may understand all things that are in the world
which hinder the peace, Consolation and Salvation of the Members of Christ, as
the Prince of the World, which is a Title given to Satan, the Rulers of the
world, the men of the world, the troubles of the world, the temptations of the
world, the corruptions that are in the world through Lust. All that is in the
world, which is contrary to us, Christ has overcome for us. Now Christ's
overcoming the world is a ground of comfort against the troubles of the world
on several accounts, as.

1. Jesus Christ having overcome the world, the whole world with all things in
the world, is now at his disposal. The Prince of the world, and all the powers
of the world, and all the men of the world can do nothing in the world but by
the permission of Christ. He is Prince of the Kings of the earth, and governs
and overrules all their counsels and designs. Rev. 1.5. Jesus Christ the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth. The men of the world can do nothing against
any of the Members of Christ, though they be great men, though Rulers, but what
he gives them power to do. Joh. 19.11. Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above. What Christ says here of
himself concerning Pilate, is true of all his Members, concerning all the
Rulers of the world, they can have no power at all against any of the Members
of Christ, except it be given them from above, and this is a great quieting to
the hearts of the People of God against the men and troubles of the world. 2.
Jesus Christ who overcame the World is the Captain of our Salvation. Heb. 2.10.
And he did not only overcome the world for himself, but for us, Gal. 1.4. Who
gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world, according to the will of God and our Father. By his Conquest he obtained
our deliverance from this present evil world. We may expect while we are in the
world sharp Conflicts with the troubles of the world. Heb. 10.32. Ye endured a
great sight of Afflictions. But this is our comfort, we have to do with a
Conquered Enemy, an Enemy that may oppose us, but shall not hurt us. Luke
10.19. Behold I give unto you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and
over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
Serpents are an emblem of subtle enemies. Genesis 3.1. Now the Serpent was more
subtle than any Beast of the Field. Mat. 10.16. Be wise as Serpents. And of
cruel enemies that seek our destruction. 1 Cor. 10.9. They were destroyed of
Serpents. The worst of men are compared to Scorpions. Ezekiel. 2.6. And thou Son
of man be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though Briars
and Thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions. Scorpions here
signifies wicked men which spoke big words against the Prophet. Now by the help
of Christ we shall tread on those enemies that are like Serpents and Scorpions,
and all the power of the enemy, so far as nothing shall by any means hurt us.
And there are three negatives in the Greek, which is the more remarkable to
assure us of the truth of what is spoken. 3. Jesus Christ who has overcome the
World, will enable us through Faith in him to overcome the world our selves. 1 John 5.4.5. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the World, and this is the
Victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes
the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God. 4. By Christ;
overcoming the world, the world is become ours, the troubles of the world which
would of themselves hinder our Salvation, shall be made through the Conquest of
Christ to further our Salvation. Phil. 1.19. I know that this shall turn to my
Salvation. The Apostle speaks of his Bonds, and of the afflictions some evil
minded men thought to add to his Bonds; ver 13.16. And he knew that his
afflictions should be so far from hindering, that it should be a furtherance of
his Salvation. See also 2 Cor. 1.6. Whether we be afflicted it is for your
Consolation and Salvation, which is effectual in enduring the same sufferings
which we also suffer. The Salvation of the Corinthians was effectual, that is
powerfully promoted, effectually carried by enduring the same sufferings, which
the Apostle endured. Hence the World through Christ is said to be ours, as well
as all other things. 1 Cor. 1.21, 22, 23. Because even the troubles of the
World are through Christ made to work for our advantage.
. The intercession of Christ, a ground of comfort against the troubles of the
World.

II. The intercession of Christ is a ground of comfort against the troubles of
the World. Joh 17.9, 13. I pray for them whom thou have given me -- And these
things I speak in the World, that they might have my joy fulfilled in
themselves. He acquainted them with his praying for them, on purpose that their
hearts might be filled with joy. It is a comfort to such as are in affliction
to hear that good men are always mindful of them in their Prayers to God. 1
These. 3.6, 7. You have a good remembrance of us always -- Therefore Brethren
we were comforted over you in all our affliction and distress by your Faith. If
it were good tidings to the Apostle to hear that the Thessalonians had good
remembrance of him always, and that which did comfort him in all his affliction
and distress. How much more may it comfort us in all our affliction and
distress to hear that Jesus Christ has good remembrance of us always, and
ever lives to make intercession for us. For (1.) Though Christ be in Heaven
and we are upon the Earth, he bears us upon his heart continually. This was
typified by the high Priest under the Law, Aaron bore the names and the
judgment of the Children of Israel upon his heart continually, when he went
into the holy place; Exodus 28.29, 30. And Aaron shall bear the names of the
Children of Israel upon the Breast plate of judgment upon his heart, when he
goes in unto the holy place for a memorial before the Lord continually -- And
shall bear the judgment of the Children of Israel before the Lord continually.
Aaron the high Priest was a Type of Christ who is our great high Priest. Heb.
4.14. Aarons going in unto the holy place was a Type of Christ's ascending into
Heaven. Heb. 9.24. What Aaron did Typically when he entered into the holy place,
that Christ does really for us now he is in Heaven. And what was it that Aaron
did when he went into the holy place. 1. He bore the names, and he bore the
judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart. The judgment of the Children
of Israel may signify all their causes, their affairs, their condition; this
teaches us, Christ our high Priest knows his by name, and that both their
persons and conditions are born upon his heart. 2 Aaron bore the names and
judgments of the Children of Israel upon his heart at all times when he went
into the holy place; twice it is mentioned, that he bore them continually which
teaches us that neither our persons or conditions are at any time forgotten of
Christ, but they are upon his heart continually now that he is in Heaven. Psalm.
73.23. I am continually with thee. That is, continually upon thy heart, under
thy care. And as David was, so are we continually with Christ. 3. Aaron bore
both the names and judgment of the Children of Israel for a memorial before the
Lord continually. So Christ our high Priest, as he carries our persons and
conditions upon his own heart, so he continually presents our case and
condition before his Father. The Apostle said, 2 Cor. 7.3. You are in our
hearts to die and live with you. The like may be said of Christ concerning all
that are his; They are so much in the heart of Christ that he dyed for them,
and now that he is raised from the dead, they are so much on his heart that he
will live with them for evermore. The Church of Christ is more upon the heart
of Christ than the Church of Corinth was upon Paul's heart. Now if the Saints
had such a Room in Paul's heart, that it was in his heart to live and dye with
them, then how much are all the Saints upon the heart of Christ. What the Lord
says of Solomon's Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. Mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be
there perpetually. The same is true of all Christians that are the Temple of
God. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the Living God. The eyes of the Lord and
the heart of the Lord shall be upon them perpetually. Christ's bearing us upon
his heart is set forth by his carrying his Lambs in his Bosom. Isa. 40.11. He
shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his Arm,
and carry them in his Bosom. It is not said, he shall put them but he shall
carry them in his Bosom, intimating that not only strong Christians, but the
weakest and most feeble, and shiftless are always born upon his heart. And in
doing this he fulfills his Peoples Prayers, for they desire to be set as a Seal
upon the heart of Christ Cant. 8.8. Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as a
Seal upon thine Arm. The Seal makes and leaves an impression upon the Wax, and
all the cuts and engravings on the Seal are imprinted on the Wax, it is as if
the Spouse should have said, carry me upon thy heart as men use to carry Seals
which they are very chary of, and that there be deep and abiding impressions of
all my troubles graven upon thy heart, set me as a Seal upon thine Arm, that is
manifest the love of thine heart by thy actings toward me and for me, put
forth thy power to help me in all my troubles. The Apostle had great confidence
that God would give preserving grace to the Philippians, because they were much
in his heart to pray for them every time he went to the Throne of Grace. Phil.
1.4, 6, 7. Always in every Prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy
-- Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; even as it is meet for me
to think this of you all, because I have you in my heart. If the Apostle Paul
had such confidence of the Philippians welfare, because he had them in his
heart, what confidence may we have in all our troubles, from Christ's having us
in his heart, and bearing us upon his heart continually, and ever living to
make intercession for us.
(2) Our Lord Jesus Christ in his intercession represents to his Father our
troubles and dangers that we are exposed to while we are in the World, and our
shiftless condition, and the hatred we meet with from the World, and prays his
Father to keep us by his divine power, he prays not that we should be taken out
of the World while we have service to do in the World, but that we may be kept
from the evils, we are liable to in the World. Joh. 17.9.11, 14, 15. Where
observe 1. The Persons for whom Christ interceedeth, and they are all that are
his; ver. 9.10. I pray for them: I pray not for the World, but for them which
thou have given me, for they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are
mine. 2. He represents to his Father, the dangers they are in by being in the
World, where they are hated, and want his presence with them. ver. 11.14. And
now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world -- I have given them
thy Word, and the world has hated them. 3. He commits them to his Fathers
care, and prays him to keep them by his divine power. ver. 11. Holy Father,
keep through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me. That which he
mainly prayed for, was not that they should be taken out of the world, but kept
from the evil. ver. 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the
World, but keep them from the evil. 4. The Arguments he uses in Prayer, they
are all mine, and all thine, and they glorify me. ver. 10. All mine are thine,
and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. 5. This Prayer of Christ for
his, wherein he has prayed to his Father to keep them in his name, whilst they
are in this world was recorded on purpose to comfort our hearts under our
troubles. ver. 13. These things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy
fulfilled in themselves. And this Prayer of Christ was made not only for his
Disciples, that were then living, but for all, that should afterward believe on
him to the end of the World. ver. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also, which shall believe on me through their word. And what Christ prayed
for, God will assuredly grant. Joh. 11.42. I know that thou hear me always.



Obj. But how is the intercession of Christ a ground of comfort against the
troubles of the world, when notwithstanding the Prayer of Christ, that they,
that are his, may be kept from the evil they fall into as many and as great
troubles as other men?

A. 1. Many troubles and afflictions are kept off, at the intercession of
Christ, from those that are his; For such is the malice of Satan and wicked men
against the Saints, that they would do them an hundred fold more mischief than
they do, if God should not restrain them, Ps. 124.2.3, 4, 5. Laban would have
done Jacob much hurt; but God would not suffer him to hurt him. Genesis 31.7. Your
Father has deceived me, and changed my wages ten times, but God suffered him
not to hurt me. The Israelites when few in number, when they went up and down
from one place and one Kingdom to another, were liable to many injuries, but
God prevented the malice of their adversaries. Psalm. 105.14. He suffered no man
to do them wrong.

2. When God does not keep off troubles and afflictions from the Members of
Christ, which is not absolutely prayed for, God at the intercession of Christ
keeps off the evil of trouble from the members of Christ. The evil of trouble
is, when troubles make us sin against God, and forsake the ways of God. Mat.
13.21. When Tribulation or Persecution arises because of thy word, by and by
he is offended, that is, falls away as another Evangelist expresses it. 2
King. 6.33. Behold this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for the Lord any
longer. The evil of troubles is when men fret, and curse, and blaspheme the
name of God because of their troubles; as Isa. 8.21. Rev. 16.10.11. Now the
Members of Christ are kept from these evils under their troubles.

3. At the intercession of Christ the nature of troubles and afflictions are
changed, they are not evils but good things to the People of God. Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

4. At the intercession of Christ they that are Christ's are upheld under their
troubles, and kept from fainting. Keep through thine own name those, whom thou
have given me. Though we be not kept from trouble, yet Christ's Prayer is
answered, if we be kept by the power of God in our troubles, kept from falling,
kept from fainting. Now God, for Christ's sake, keeps his people from falling
and fainting under their troubles. Psalm. 94.18. When I said, my Foot slippeth:
thy Mercy, O Lord, held me up. Psalm. 116.8. Thou have delivered my feet from
falling -- Psalm. 118.13. Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the
Lord helped me.

(3.) The intercession of Christ is a ground of comfort under all our troubles,
because he interceedeth with his Father, that the Spirit, the comforter, may be
sent down into our hearts, to abide with us for ever. Joh. 14.1.16, 17. Let not
your heart be troubled -- I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth. The
Lord Jesus foreseeing that his Disciples would meet with many Tribulations,
that their hearts might not be troubled, proposes many grounds of comfort to
them, among others this is a principal one, that he would interceed with his
Father to give them his holy Spirit to be their Comforter, to make his abode
with them for ever. But some may say, though the Spirit, the Comforter, be sent
down into our hearts to abide with us for ever, yet many of the Servants of
Christ that have the comforter, want the comforts of the Spirit in their
troubles.

Q. What shall we do that we may get the comforts of the Spirit in our
afflictions.

A. 1. Walk in the fear of God, both before trouble comes, and when you walk in
the midst of trouble, for such as walk in the fear of God, enjoy the comforts
of the holy Ghost. Act. 9.31. VValking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost.

2. Give your selves to prayer in the day of trouble. Joh. 16.24. Ask, and ye
shall recieve, that your joy may be full. Christ told his Disciples, ver. 20.
That they should weep, and lament, and be sorrowful, but their forrow should be
turned into joy, and here he directs them the way to get comfort under their
sorrows, which was by Praver, Ask, and ye shall recieve, that your joy may be
full.

3. Call to mind, apply, and meditate upon the gracious promises of God. The
Spirit comforts us by and through the word, and more especially by the
promises. It was through the word that David had the Spirits comforts in his
affliction. Psalm. 119.49, 50. Remember thy word unto thy Servant, wherein thou
have caused me to hope this is my comfort in mine affliction. So also the
Prophet Jeremiah had the comforts of the Spirit through the word. Jer. 15.16.
Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and
the rejoicing of my heart.

4. Keep up, and act your Faith in God through Christ in all your troubles, for
trustings in God brings the joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost into our
hearts. Psalm. 13.5. I have trusted in thy Mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy
Salvation. In the 3d. verse he complained of his sorrows, that he had sorrows
in his heart daily, but having strengthened his Faith by the consideration of
the mercy of God, he concluded that God would put joy and gladness into his
heart. My heart shall rejoice -- Romans 15.13. The God of Peace fill you with all
joy and peace in believing -- There is joy, all joy, a fullness of all joy comes
in by believing.

(4.) The intercession of Christ is a ground of comfort against the troubles of
the world, because it is our security that they shall not cause our Faith to
fail. Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat: but I have prayed for thee,
that thy Faith fail not. -- Peter was greatly affrighted at the sufferings of
Christ. The fear of the Cross made him fall in a dreadful manner, three times
he denied his Master, and cursed, and swore that he did not know the man. But
though he was grievously foiled, yet by the Prayer of Christ his Faith was
supported that it did not fail. Not only our Flesh and our Hearts would fail,
but our Faith also, if it were not preserved by the intercession of Jesus
Christ.

All troubles are sanctified to those that are Christ's. This is a ground of
great Consolation.

III. All troubles and afflictions, whatsoever befall those that are Christ's,
are sanctified to them, and shall work together for their good, and this is a
ground of comfort under all the troubles of this World, that they shall be
sanctified to us, and work for our good. Jesus Christ is made, of God,
Sanctification to all such as are in him. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption. When Christ is said to be made of God, sanctification to such
as are in him, the meaning is, that he is appointed by God to sanctify our
persons and our conditions. Our Lord Jesus has taken the curse from our
Crosses, and turned them into Blessings. So that we are not now to look upon
our corrections, as our misery; but rather as conducing to our happiness. Job.
5.17. Behold happy is the man whom God corrects. That all our afflictions are
sanctified by Jesus Christ appears thus, because none of them shall do us
hurt, but they shall all work together for our good. Romans 8.28. And we know
that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are
the called according to his purpose. There is a threesold good which is wrought
for us by our afflictions.

1. They purge out our sins. Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away their sin. And this is
greatly for our good to be purged from our sins, which are the chiefest of
evils. 2. They promote and increase the graces of the Spirit of God in our
hearts, and make us partakers of his Holiness, and that is much for our profit
to be made more Holy. Heb. 12.10. They verily for a few days chastned us after
their own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
Holiness. 3. They increase our glory in the world to come for ever. 2 Cor.
4.17. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding et^^nal weight of glory. Now the knowledge of this, that all our
afflictions are sent to do us good, and that they shall all work together for
our good, is a ground of great comfort under all our troubles. Romans 5.3, 4. We
glory in Tribulations also, knowing that Tribulation works Patience; and
Patience Experience, and Experience Hope. Upon this account the Apostle James
exhorts us to count it joy, yea all joy when we fall into diverse temptations,
because we know that our Trials shall work patience in us. Jam. 1.2, 3. My
Brethren count it all joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations, knowing this,
that the trying of your Faith works Patience. Now if this single benefit, the
increasing of our Patience, be such a ground of joy, how may it increase our
joy, when we consider that not only Patience, but our other graces also, and
not our graces but our glory in Heaven shall be augmented for ever, by our
momentary afflictions which we go through in this World. The Apostle writing to
the Hebrews encourages to cheerfulness in their sufferings, because they were
for their profit. Heb. 12.10, 11. He chastneth us for our profit -- Wherefore
lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees. Though a man was in a
dejected condition, with hands hanging down, and in a fainting condition, his
knees waxing feeble under his burdens, yet the consideration that he is
chastned for his profit may revive him, and make him lift up his hands that
hang down, and strengthen his feeble knees.
. The Lord Jesus will not leave us comfortless in our troubles. How Christ
comforts his people.

IV. Though we meet with many troubles in the World, this may cheer our hearts
under all of them, that our Lord Jesus Christ has promised, he will not leave
us comfortless in our troubles, but he will give us peace and comfort in
himself, and from himself when we meet with troubles in the World. Joh. 14.18.
I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. Joh. 16.33. These things
I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in the world ye shall
have Tribulation. Isa. 66.13. As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I
comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. The Affections of a Mother
are very great and tender toward her Child, especially toward her sick and
afflicted Child, she will spare no pains, no cost for that which may comfort
her sick Child. The affections of a Nurse are great. 1 These. 2.7, 8. But of a
Mother far greater. Now as readily, as affectionately as a Mother comforts her
afflicted Child, so has the Lord promised to comfort his afflicted people. And
ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. That is to be observed, for this Prophet
had foretold great judgments and desolations should come upon Jerasalem. As
Isa. 3.8. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen. Isa. 24.3, 11. The Land
shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled. All joy is darkened, and the
mirth of the Land is gone. Isa. 64.10. Thy Holy Cities are a Wilderness, Zion
is a Wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation. Yet though these Ruins and
Desolations were coming upon Jerusalem, that the Land should be utterly
spoiled, all joy be darkened, and the mirth of the Land quite gone; yet the Lord
promises to comfort his people in Jerusalem. We that have such promises, may
rest upon God, that for Christ's sake he will comfort us in all our
tribulations. Mich. 7.8. When I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light
unto me. Afflictions and troubles are set out by the name of darkness. Isa.
45.7. Joy and Comfort are expressed by the name of light, Psalm. 97.11. So that
the meaning is, when I am in trouble and distress, the Lord shall give me
comfort. Ps. 38.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me.

Obj. But do we not see, that notwithstanding these promises, and the
confidences of the people of God, that God will comfort them in their
afflictions; yet they are often times under very great sorrows and heaviness.

A. 1. The people of God have Flesh, as well as Spirit; though the Spirit be
willing to love the cross, the Flesh is weak, though the Spirit rejoices in
God, the Flesh feeling the smart of the Rod, mourns.

2. Their sorrows do not last always, but are soon turned into joy. Joh.
16.20. Ye shall weep and lament -- but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
Christ does not promise his Disciples, that they shall have no sorrows, no
cause of weeping; but this he promises, that they shall not be left
comfortless under their sorrows, for their sorrow shall be turned into joy.
Psalm. 30.5, 11. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

3. Even while the people of God are mourning, they are sowing the seeds of joy
and comfort, and shall doubtless reap the fruit of their sorrows in more
abundant consolations. Ps. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoyceing, bringing his sheaves with him. There is much more reaped
than was sown: A little quantity of seed yields whole Cartloads of Corn.

To open this more fully, of Christ's promising not to leave his people
comfortless in their troubles: I will show you several ways, whereby Christ
comforts his Members, and gives them peace under their greatest troubles.

1. By shedding abroad the love of God in their hearts, by the Holy Ghost,
which he gives unto them. Romans 5.3, 5. We glory in tribulation -- because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us. By shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts, understand the
manifesting of Gods love to our souls, the giving us the knowledge and
understanding of the love of God, which does wonderfully affect the heart with
joy and gladness. Psalm. 42.7, 8. All thy waves and thy billows are gone over
me, yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the
night, his Song shall be with me. Two things are here worthy of our
observation. 1. David did believe, that in his greatest distresses, when all
Gods waves and billows went over him, God would express and manifest his love
to him -- yet the Lord will command his loving kindness. The commanding his
loving kindness, implies the powerful expressions of his love. Where the word
of a King is, there is power. Eccl. 8.4. And the abiding impressions of his
love. Ps. 33.9. He commanded, and it stood fast. And the speedy manifestation
of his love. For when God gives a command to things to be done, it implies
speed. Ps. 147.15. He sends forth his Commandment upon the Earth, his word
runs very swiftly. 2. David did believe that the manifestation of the love
of God would be such a comfort to him, that it would make his heart to sing for
joy in his greatest distresses; yet the Lord shall command his loving kindness,
and in the night his song shall be with me.
2. Jesus Christ comforts and refreshes his Members in their troubles, by
those gracious visits which he gives them in their afflictions. Job. 10.12. Thy
visitation has preserved my Spirit. John 16.22. And ye now have sorrow, but I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes
from you. A visit from a good man is very comfortable in a day of trouble. 2
Cor. 7.5, 6. Our flesh had no rest, we were troubled on every side, without
were fightings, within were fears. Nevertheless God that comfort them that
are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus. If a visit from a good man
be so refreshing, that it will comfort us when we are troubled on every side,
when we have fightings without, and fears within, then how comfortable is a
visit from Christ in the day of trouble. But how does Christ visit his
afflicted people? what are those visits of Christ, which he gives his people in
their affliction.
A. 1. Christ visits his people with his word, by bringing suitable and
encouraging promises to them in a day of distress. Lam. 3.54, 57. Waters flowed
over mine head, then I said I am cut off -- Thou drewest near in the day that I
called upon thee, thou saidest, fear not. Thus the Lord visited Abraham with a
suitable word of promise. Genesis 15.1. After these things the word of the Lord
came to Abraham in a Vision, saying, Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy
exceeding great reward. And these are sweet visits which do greatly rejoice the
heart. Psalm. 119.162. I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoil.

2. Jesus Christ visits his people in their afflictions, by his Spirit, the
teachings, the revivings, the supports of his Spirit. Cant. 2.6. His left hand
is under my head, his right hand does embrace me. Isa 41.10. Fear thou not, for
I am with thee -- I will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee. Isa. 57.15. I
dwell with him that is of a contrite and an humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit
of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

3. The Lord Jesus visits his afflicted people when he answers their Prayers,
and fulfils his own promises. Genesis 21.1. And the Lord visited Sarah as he had
said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.

4. The Lord visits his afflicted people, when he raises up deliverance for
them out of their troubles. Psalm. 106.4. O visit me with thy Salvation. And
such visits when God saves his people out of their troubles cause great joy.
Psalm. 21.1. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy Salvation
how greatly shall he rejoice?

3. As Christ comforts his afflicted people by the gracious visits which he
gives them, so also by raising and strengthening their Faith in times of
trouble, and causing them to stay themselves upon God in an evil day: For the
staying the mind upon God is a means to keep the Soul in peace under the
greatest dangers. Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee.

4. Jesus Christ comfort his afflicted people with the hope of Eternal Life,
which he promises to such as are in a suffering condition, if they continue
faithful to the death. Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall
suffer, be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. Romans 5.2. And rejoice in
hope of the glory of God.

Use I. If an interest in Christ be such a ground of Consolation, then here is
reproof.

(1.) For those that content themselves with a Worldly Interest, and take no
care no pains to get an interest in Christ, but neglect Christ. Such men's case
is sad, For 1. The world is a poor portion, for all worldly enjoyments
abstracted from God and Christ are nothing but vanity and vexation of Spirit.
2. All the world will avail a man nothing when he comes to dye. It will give no
ease to a troubled Conscience, no pardon of Sin, no help to Heaven. 1 Timothy 6.7.
We can carry nothing of it away with us into another world. 3. They that have
neglected Christ and the Salvation purchased by Christ, shall not escape the
wrath of God in the other World. Heb. 2.3.
(2.) For those that have an interest in Christ, and yet live very
discontentedly; either for want of some things which they desire, as Parts,
Riches, Friends, a settled Condition, or for the loss of some things; which God
has taken away from them, or because of some crosses or troubles that they
meet with in the World.
Use II. Of Examination, Have we a true saving interest in Christ? can we say
Christ is ours and we are his?

Quest. How may we know, whither Christ be ours?

A. 1. If we love him. Cant. 2.16. My Beloved is mine; and if our love to him
exceed our love to all other things, and persons in the World, if he be our
best Beloved. Christ does not own those as having an interest him, that love
any thing above him. Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more than me,
is not worthy of me. That such as love God and Christ above all things, have a
saving interest in Christ, is evident, because eternal Life is promised to
them. Jam. 2.5. Heirs of the Kingdom which God has promised to those that love
him.

Quest. How shall we know that we love Christ above all things?

A. 1. When we desire Christ above all things in the world. Psalm. 73.25. So
that if God should ask us, as he did Solomon, what shall I give thee? we would
say, Lord, give us thy self for our God, and thy Son for our Savior.

2. When we esteem Christ above all things, so as that we count them as dung,
in comparison of Christ, and are willing to part with any thing, so that we may
win Christ. Philip. 3.8.

3. When the love of God in Christ puts more joy and gladness into our hearts,
than the enjoyment of all the world; or, it would be a greater joy to us, than
the whole world; if God would manifest his love to us. Psalm. 4. 6, 7.

(2.) If we are Christ's, then Christ is ours; that is another Character in the
Text. Cant. 2. 16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Now we may know we are
Christ's.

1. If we have solemnly given up our selves to Christ, with a sincere heart,
without any secret reserves of any Lust, resolving that by the help of his
grace we will deny our selves, take up our Cross, and follow him. 2 Cor. 8.5.
Mark 8.34. 2. If his interest will prevail with us beyond our own interest, and
his will above our own wills; if his word be our rule, and his glory our end,
that is a good evidence that we are Christ's. Isa. 63.19. We are thine, thou
never bear rule over them. As much as to say, they are the Lords, over whom
the Lord bears rule. Psalm. 119.94. I am thine -- I have sought thy precepts.
When in doubtful Cases we seek out the will of Christ, and follow the will of
Christ, that shows us to be his. 3. When we are Christ's Servants. Act. 27. 23.
Whose I am, and whom I serve. And the great end why we desire to live, is to
do service for Christ. Phil. 1.21. 4. When we are tender and careful of Christ's
glory. John 17.10. I am glorified in them that are mine and thine.
(3.) The Spirit of Christ sent down into our Hearts, is a certain Evidence of
an interest in Christ. 1 John 3.24. Hereby we know, that he abides in us, by
the Spirit that he has given us. Romans 8. v. 9.

Q. How shall we know that we have the Spirit of Christ?

A. 1. If we have an obediential frame of heart. Ezekiel 36.27. compared with Romans
8. 7. The carnal heart is enmity to the Law of God, and therefore when we are
caused to obey Gods Statutes, that is from the Spirit put within us.

2. We may know we have the Spirit, by the fruits of the Spirit, which are
Faith, Love, Peace, Joy, Long-suffering, etc. Gal. 5. 22, 23, etc.

Use. III. Of Exhortation.

Exhort. 1. To such as want an interest in Christ, that they would above all
things seek to get Christ. What Solomon says of Wisdom Prove. 4.7. The same may
I say of Jesus Christ, who is called the Wisdom of God. Jesus Christ is the
principal thing, therefore above all things, get Jesus Christ.

Exhort. 2. To such as have an interest in Christ, to labor for the knowledge
of it, that every one may be able to say, Christ is mine, and I am his.

Q. How shall we attain to the knowledge of our interest in Christ?

A. 1. Examine your selves by those Characters the Scripture gives of an
interest in Christ, and more particularly about your Faith. 2 Cor. 13.5. And if
you cannot make any clear work hereof at one time, try what you can do at
another.

2. Pray earnestly to God, to manifest your interest in Christ. It is in his
light that we see light. Psalm. 36.9. Pray as David, Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my
Soul, I am thy Salvation. And if you cannot obtain the knowledge of your
interest in Christ, by much seeking to God, yet follow on to seek him, and then
in Gods good time, you shall know the Lord to be your God in Christ. Hos 6.3.
Isa. 24.9. Zech. 13.9.

3. Accustom your self to trust in God in all your straits, fears, dangers, and
temptations. For the more you trust in God, the sooner you shall come to the
knowledge of your interest in God Psalm. 16.1, 2. [In thee do I put my trust] O
my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, [thou art my Lord] Psalm. 31.14. But I
trusted in thee, O Lord, I said thou art my God.

4. Learn to deny your selves for Christ: for the more you are exercifed in
self-denial, the sooner you shall attain to know your interest in Christ. After
Abraham had denied himself of taking a reward from the King of Sodom, God came
to him with a promise, to assure him of his interest in God. Genesis 15.1. After
these things the word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a Vision, saying, Fear
not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.

5. Set your love upon Christ. The Spouse finding in her heart an ardent love
to Christ, could say, Cant. 2.16. My Beloved is mine. To such as love Christ,
there is a promise, that he will manifest himself to their Souls. John 14.21.

6. Labor to order your Conversation aright, and to live righteously and
holily. Psalm. 50.23. Isa. 32.17.

7. Attend frequently that sealing ordinance of the Lords upper; the neglect or
careless use whereof, is the reason so few Christians attain to assurance of
their interest in Christ.

Exhort. 3. Learn how to fetch comfort from Christ in all troubles. How to
retain the knowledge of your interest in Christ. What you should do, that
cannot make out your interest in Christ in a day of trouble, and at an hour of
death.

I have shown that there is comfort to be had in Christ, for such as have an
interest in him, not only under outward, but also under Soul troubles. Now I
shall conclude this discourse, with the resolution of three questions.

1. How may we fetch comfort from Christ in all our troubles. 2. How may such
as have attained the knowlede of their interest in Christ, retain the same. 3.
What shall they do, that want the knowledge of their interest in Christ.
Sect. 1. How may we fetch comfort from Christ in all our troubles, both inward
and outward.

1. Get Acquaintance with Christ, and those benefits we have by Christ. The
more we have of the knowledge of Christ, the more peace and comfort we shall
have in our Souls. 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through
the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord. As grace, so peace also is
multiplied, given abundantly through the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ.
And as the knowledge of Christ tends much to the multiplying of peace and
comfort, so also does the knowledge of the benefits that we have by Christ,
very much promote our comfort under all our troubles, as I might show, by
instancing in the several benefits we have by Christ, I will mention three or
four.

(1.) By Christ we are reconciled to God, and have an atonement made for our
Souls. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. The knowledge of
this atonement which Christ has made for us, will fill our hearts with joy
and gladness. Romans 5.11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
we have now received the atonement. (2.) By Christ we have remission of all
our sins. Act. 13.38, 39. And the knowledge of remission of sins is a ground of
joy in all troubles. Matthew. 9.2. Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee. (3.) By Christ, our persons and services are accepted of God, Ephesians. 1.6.
And the acceptance of our persons and services, may put great joy and gladness
into our hearts. Eccl. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy
Wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy works. (4.) By Jesus Christ,
we have a perfect, and complete righteousness. Romans 10.4. And this is matter of
great joy. Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall be
joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the Garments of Salvation, he
has covered me with the robe of righteousness. (5.) By Christ, we have
boldness to hope for eternal life. Heb. 10.19. And hope of eternal life, is a
ground of great joy in all our troubles. Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope of the
glory of God. (6.) By Christ there is a new Covenant established, full of
precious promises. And the knowledge of the Covenant lays a foundation for
peace and comfort in all troubles. Psalm. 25.13, 14. His Soul shall dwell at
ease -- He will show them his Covenant. To be at ease, intimates a relief
against all sorts of Malidies, for if there be any thing that disquiets the
Soul, it is not at ease. Dwelling at ease, implies a permanency of Spiritual
comforts. Now here comes the Soul to dwell at ease, when the outward man is
exposed to variety of troubles? It is by being acquainted with the Covenant.
II. If you would fetch comfort from Christ under all troubles, get, and keep
clear apprehensions of your interest in Christ, and in those benefits which he
has purchased with his blood. Darkness and doubts about our interest hinder
our comfort, but when we know Christ to be ours, our Savior, and our Redeemer;
this will make our Souls greatly to rejoice under all our troubles. Luke 1.47.
My Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. 1 Samuel 30.6. David was greatly
distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him -- But David encouraged himself
in the Lord his God. Ps. 27. 1. The Lord is my light and my Salvation, whom
shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid.

III. Keep in remembrance, and meditate on the benefits you have by Christ, as
Reconciliation with God, Remission of sins, Adoption, Sanctification, Eternal
life, etc. For those things that are forgotten, and out of mind, yield no
comfort to us. It is the remembrance and meditating on Christ, and the benefits
of Christ, that brings in sweetness, and Soul-satisfying comforts. Ps. 104.34.
My meditation of him shall be sweet. Ps. 63.5, 6. My Soul shall be satisfied,
as with marrow and fatness; when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on
thee in the night watches. Ps. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within
me, thy comforts delight my Soul.

IV. In all your troubles, both inward and outward, keep up your Faith in
Christ, and in God, through Christ. Trust in God, that for Christ's sake, he
will give you all the blessings purchased with the blood of Christ, and
promised in the new Covenant. For this is the way to keep your hearts from
being troubled, and to fill your Souls with peace and joy. Romans 15.13. Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. Isa. 26.3. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in
thee. 1 Pet. 1.8. In whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. John 14.1. Let not your heart be
troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. Upon hearing this Exhortation,
let not your hearts be troubled, the Disciples might have replied, Lord, have
thou not told us that in the world we shall have tribulation, that we shall be
hated of all men, for thy names sake, and that we shall be cast out of the
Synagogue, and that men shall lay hands on us, and put us into Prisons; and we
shall be brought before Kings and Rulers, and that men will think, they do God
good service, when they kill us: How shall we keep our hearts from being
troubled, when all these troubles come upon us? As a remedy against their
hearts being troubled; he bids them believe on God, and on himself. Believe on
God, believe also on me.

V. In all your distresses, give your selves to Prayer, for that is the way to
be filled with comforts, and to have your sorrows turned into joy. John 16.20,
24. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep, and lament, but the
world shall rejoice, and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. And what counsel and direction does he give them, that their sorrow
may be turned into joy? It is to give themselves unto Prayer. Ask, and ye shall
recieve, that your joy may be full. The like direction the Apostle gives us for
keeping our minds from all kind of troublesome cares, and for the obtaining
that peace, which passes all understanding, and that is, to give our selves to
Prayer Phil. 4.6, 7. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God. And
the peace of Goa which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus.

VI. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in your hearts, that you may have some
suitable promises, to have recourse unto in all your troubles, for that will
give you abiding peace, and strong Consolation in all your troubles. Col. 3.15,
16. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts -- But some may say, how shall we
attain to this, to have the peace of God rule in our hearts? the following
words show this, Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom. By
the peace of God we may understand, not only that peace which God commands us
to have one with another, but that peace which God gives in our own hearts and
Consciences, as it is taken. Phil. 4.7. Then the peace of God rules in our
hearts, when it keeps our hearts quiet, under all troubles, so as no troubles
are able to disturb and break our peace. Now the way to attain to this is, to
let the word of Christ dwell in us richly in all Wisdom. Then the word of
Christ dwells with us, when it abides in our hearts, we are acquainted with it,
and we converse daily with it, as we do with those that dwell in the same house
with us. Then it dwells in us richly, when we are well stored with the promises
of the word, when we have promises suitable to every condition, and every
trouble that we pass through. Then it dwells with us in all Wisdom, when we
have the right understanding of the word, and know how to make use of it upon
all occasions, as we stand in need of it. It was by the word that David found
comfort in all his afflictions. Psalm. 119 49, 50. Remember thy word unto thy
Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. It was also from the word of
God, that Jeremiah had his comforts under his greatest sorrows, when he
complained that his pain was perpetual, and his wound incurable. Jer. 15.16.
Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and
rejoicing of mine heart. And that it was a time of great distress with the
Prophet, when Gods word was the joy and rejoicing of his heart, is evident from
ver. 18. Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, that refuses to be
healed.

VII. Walk in the fear of God, and hold fast your integrity in all your
troubles, and then you shall have the comforts of the Holy Ghost, and the light
of Consolation shall arise upon you in the darkest days. Act. 9.31. Walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. Psalm. 112.4. Unto
the Upright there arises Light in Darkness. Though you suffer for
Righteousness sake, yet love Righteousness and hate Iniquity, and in so doing,
the Lord will anoint you with the Oil of joy and gladness. Psalm. 45 7. Thou
love Righteousness, and hate Wickedness, therefore God, thy God has
anointed thee with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows.

VIII. When by your sins and backslidings you have lost your comforts, humble
your Souls for your sins, and the Lord will restore your lost comforts. Isa.
57.18. I will restore comforts to him, and to his Mourners. Mat. 5.4. Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

IX. Keep up the belief and persuasion of Gods Love to your Souls through
Christ, notwithstanding all the troubles that come upon your inward or outward
man, for the apprehension of Gods love will fill your hearts with joy and
gladness, and be a ground of everlasting Joy to your Souls. Act 2.28. Thou
shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. 2 These. 2.16. God even our
Father which has loved us and given us everlasting Consolation. Joh 13.1.
Jesus loves his own, and that to the end, even whilst in a sinful and
troublesome world. The knowledge of the love of God in Christ, causes abiding
joy, and sulness of joy. Joh. 15.9, 11. As the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you -- These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.

Sect. 2. How may such as have gotten the knowledge of their interest in
Christ, retain the knowledge and persuasion of their interest in Christ.

It is of great use in the Life of Faith, and the promoting our Spiritual
comfort, not only to get the knowledge of our interest in Christ, and his
saving benefits, but also to retain this knowledge. And because this is not
easily done, I shall lay down some helps thereto.

. What are good grounds to lay claim to an interest in Christ.

I. Understand, and be clear in your grounds, on which you lay claim to an
interest in Christ, and Salvation by Christ, and see that they be solid,
consonant to the Scriptures, and such as will hold and abide in an hour of
temptation. And if you ask, what are good and sure grounds for claiming an
interest in Christ? I answer.

1. The free and general offer of Christ and Salvation by Christ, made in the
Gospel to every one, that is willing to recieve. Rev. 22.17. And whosoever
will, let him take the water of life freely. 2. The testimony of our own
Consciences, that we do willingly, cordially, and thankfully accept of Christ,
as God offers him to us in the Gospel; Our Consciences know what actings there
are in our Souls, toward God and Christ, whether we choose the Lord for our God
and Portion, and whether we accept of Christ for our Savior and Redeemer, or
whether we refuse and reject him. Psalm. 16.2. O my Soul, thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my God. Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion says my Soul --
Now this Testimony of our Consciences, that we do accept of Christ on the terms
of the Gospel, to be ruled and saved by him, in his own way, is a good ground
of comfort, and may embolden us to hope that God does accept us in Christ. 2
Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience. 1 John 3.21.
Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. When
I speak of the Testimony of Conscience witnessing our accepting of Christ on
the terms of the Gospel, understand it of a Conscience enlightened by the word
and Spirit, with the knowledge of Christ. (2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have
believed) and the knowledge of the terms on which God offers Salvation by
Christ, for if we know not the terms on which Christ is offered to us, how can
our Consciences witness to us, that we do close with the terms of the Gospel.
3. The grant or promise of God in the Gospel to all that recieve Christ, that
he shall be theirs, and they shall be his. Joh 1.12. As many as recieved him,
to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on
his name. Here is a privilege granted and promised to all that do or shall
recieve Christ, how many soever they be, that they shall become the Sons of
God, God will become their Father in Christ, and will own them for his
children. Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast him out. In
this promise is employed, that such as on the call of the Gospel close with
Christ, he will bestow himself, and all his benefits on them for theirs, and he
will own them for his. 4. Our finding in our selves, those marks or characters,
which the Scriptures give of such as have a saving interest in Christ, which
will evidence to us, that we have rightly recieved or closed with Christ. As
namely our having the Spirit of Christ given to us. 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. Our
loving and preserving Christ above all things. Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine,
and I am his. But of these Scripture characters I have spoken before.
. Christ becomes theirs by covenant that accept of him. How conduces this to
our comfort?

2. If you would hold the persuasion of your interest in Christ, as you must
look to your grounds on which you lay claim to an interest in Christ, so also
it will be of great use to you to understand the nature of that covenant which
Christ makes with you, when you come to him and accept of him on the terms of
the Gospel. The Lord Jesus takes all those that come to him upon the call and
invitation of the Gospel, into an everlasting covenant. Isa. 55.1, 3. Ho, every
one that thirsts, come ye to the waters -- Incline your ear, and come unto me
-- And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Concerning this covenant which the Lord makes with those that come to
Christ, we may observe these three or four things.

1. This covenant is to give us Christ himself, and all his saving benefits for
ever, I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of
David. Christ the Son of David, is called by the name of David. Hos. 3.5. Ezekiel.
34.24. And so the sure mercies of David, are all those Mercies and Blessings
which Jesus Christ has purchased for us, and made sure to us by an everlasting
covenant, it is as much as to say, I will enter covenant to give you my self,
and all my benefits. That this covenant which Christ inters into, with those
that come to him, is to give us an eternal interest in himself, and all his
benefits. We may see Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea,
I will betroth thee unto me in Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in Mercies,
I will even betroth thee unto me in Faithfulness. To open this Scripture
consider. 1. What it is for the Lord to betroth us unto himself. It is to
engage himself to us to be ours, and to take us for his. 2. For how long a time
the Lord engages himself to us, and that is for ever. I will betroth thee unto
me for ever. 3. The manner how he will betroth us to himself; in Righteousness,
in Judgment, in Mercies, in Faithfulness. It is a most sure contract, made out
of infinite mercy, and managed with Wisdom, and Judgment, and shall be
Righteously and Faithfully observed. 4. The persons that the Lord will betroth
to himself, are those who are willing to be divorced from their sins, and to
accept of Christ for their Husband -- ver. 7.19. I will go and return to my
first Husband -- I will betroth thee to me -- They whom God takes into
Covenant with himself. ver. 18.19. I will make a Covenant for them -- And I
will betroth thee to me for ever. And it is also to be observed, that the Lord
repeats this three times -- I will betroth thee, yea I will betroth thee, I
will even betroth thee unto me, that we may rest satisfied that our former sins
though great, shall not hinder us on our Repentance, from this great privilege
of being betrothed to the Lord for ever. That the covenant is to give a mutual
and eternal interest, that is, that the Lord will be ours for ever, and take us
for his for ever, you may see. Ezekiel. 36.28. Yeshallbe my people, and I will be
your God. Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and for ever Lam. 3.31. The
Lord will not cast off for ever. 1 Samuel 12.22. The Lord will not forsake his
People, for his great names sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you
his people.
2. This Covenant which the Lord Jesus Christ makes with us upon our coming to
him, wherein he engages to be ours, and to take us for his for ever, is a
sure, and everlasting covenant; 2 Samuel 23.5. More firm and steadfast than the
Hills and Mountains, which shall all be removed out of their places, sooner
than Gods covenant shall be removed from us. Isa. 54.10. For the Mountains
shall depart, and the Hills shall be removed, but my kindness shall not depart
from thee, nor the Covenant of my peace be removed says the Lord, that has
Mercy on thee. 3. The failings and backslidings of the Members of Christ,
shall not make void this everlasting covenant, he will chasten them for their
sins and backslidings, but he will not break his covenant with them. Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
judgments, if they break my Statutes and keep not my Commandments; then will I
visit their Transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes;
nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my
Faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my Lips.
. No doubts, about our Spiritual estate, to be indulged, or admitted, but upon
Scripture grounds.

3. After you have closed with Christ, and God has cleared up to your Souls
your interest in Christ, by his Word and Spirit, admit no doubts about your
interest in Christ, but upon Scripture grounds. Satan labors what he can, to
keep us in a doubting condition, all our days; because doubts of this nature,
hinder our comfort, weaken our faith, and are impediments to our glorifying
God: And therefore after clearest evidences of our interest in Christ, he will
be thrusting doubts into our minds, whether webe Christ's, yea, or no; that he
may puzzleus herein as long as we live. After our Lord Jesus Christ had it
witnessed to him from Heaven, that he was the Son of God. Matthew. 3.17. And lo a
voice from Heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
The Devil tempted him twice with doubts about his Sonship. Matthew. 4.3, 6. If
thou be the Son of God -- if thou be the Son of God. Now if Satan adventured to
suggest doubts to our Lord Jesus Christ, after he had his Sonship witnessed in
an extraordinary manner, even by his Fathers voice, speaking from Heaven to
him, it is no marvail if he be often suggesting doubts to us about our interest
in Christ, after clearest manifestations thereof. Wherefore it will be our
wisdom to examine all our doubts, to see whether there be real grounds from the
Holy Scriptures for such doubts, and if there be not, then to reject them as
the suggestions of Satan, and the sinful fruit of our own unbelieving,
mistrustful hearts. As Christ said to Peter, Matthew. 14.31. O thou of little
faith, wherefore did thou doubt? So should we say to our own hearts, when
doubts arise in our hearts; wherefore do I doubt? Have I cause from the word of
God, to question my interest in Christ, because of this, or that, which is
suggested to me? If not, reject those doubts as causeless, and as proceeding
from Satan.

. Interest in Christ is consistent with great imperfections, sore afflictions,
dreadful temptations, conflicts between the Flesh and Spirit, want of
influences, succeslesness in Holy Duties, and the hideings of Gods face.

4. It is of great use to the holding fast the persuasion of our interest in
Christ, to have a right understanding of the State and Condition of a Christian
in this present evil world. A man may be united unto Christ, and have a saving
interest in him, and yet be sensible of many and great imperfections, and be
exercised with sharp afflictions, and dreadful temptations; he may feel a law
in his Members, warring against the law of his mind, and find great conflicts
between the Flesh, and the Spirit; he may feel great dryness, and want of
Spiritual influences, and be under the hideings of Gods face, and meet with
other exercises of his Faith, and notwithstanding all these things, he may be
Christ's, and Christ may be his. As I shall show by instanceing in the several
particulars.

1. A man may be sensible of much imperfection in himself, he may find very
great defects in his best duties, and yet be one that has a saving interest in
Christ, God may be his Father, and he may be one of Gods Children. Isa. 64.6,
8. We are all as an unclean thing, and our righteousnesses are as filthy rags
-- But now O Lord, thou art our Father. There are Babes in Christ, as well as
young Men and Fathers, and they that are but Babes in Christ, are so full of
imperfections, that in some things they seem more like to carnal men, than
Spiritual: 1 Cor. 3.1. And I brethren could not speak unto you, as unto
spiritual, but as unto carrnal, even as unto babes in Christ, yet these Babes
in Christ, that had much carnality in them, were truly interested in Christ, as
we may see, ver. 23. ye are Christ's. 2. A man may be exercised with sharp and
sore afflictions, such as may melt, and break his heart, and yet have a saving
interest in Christ. Cant. 2.2, 16. As a Lilie among Thorns, so is my love among
the Daughters -- My beloved is mine, and I am his. When the Spouse was a Lilie
among Thorns, that is, compassed about with sharp afflictions, which did prick,
and grieve her like Thorns, she was Christ's Love, and Christ was hers, and she
was his. When David was afflicted very much, and his troubles such, as melted
his Soul, and broke his heart, he did not question his interest, because of his
afflictions, but could and did own it, that he was the Lords. Psalm. 119.28,
107. My Soul melts for heaviness -- I am afflicted very much -- compared with
ver. 94. I am thine, save me.
A man may be exercised with horrid and dreadful temptations, and yet be one
that has an interest in Christ. The Apostle Paul, who was a chosen Vessel, and
had an undoubted interest in Christ; was under the buffettings of Satan, which
were as grievous to his Soul, as a Thorn is grievous to the Flesh. 2 Cor. 12.7.
There was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet
me, lest I should be exalted above measure. Our Lord Jesus himself, was tempted
by Satan to great, and grievous sins, to get bread when he was hungry, to cast
down himself from a Pinnacle of the Temple, which was in effect to have
destroyed himself, and to fall down, and worship the Devil. And what worse sin
than to worship the Devil? Matthew. 4.6, 9. Now if Satan adventured to tempt our
Lord Jesus Christ to such horrid sins as these are; We need not wonder if he
assault his Members with temptations to the worst of sins, as Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Atheism, Self-Murder, and the like.

4. A man may have a saving interest in Christ, and yet feel in himself the
indwelling corruption, which may incline him to that which is evil, and hinder
him in doing that good, which he desires to do. He may feel the lustings of
the Flesh, opposing the workings of the Spirit of Grace: He may feel the Law in
his Members, warring against the Law of his Mind, and sometimes leading him
Captive to the Law of Sin, and yet be one that is made a partaker of the saving
benefits of Christ. We find the Apostle Paul uttering such complaints as these.
Sin dwells in me -- The good that I would, that I do not, but the evil which
I would not, that I do -- I find a Law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me. I see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my
mind, and bringing me into Captivity, to the Law of sin which is in my Members.
Romans 7.17, 19, 21, 23. Yet at the same time that he uttered these complaints,
he did look upon himself to be Christ's, and did bless God for his interest in
Christ, and the benefits he had by Christ, ver. 25. I thank God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The Galatians felt in themselves the lustings of the Flesh
against the Spirit, whereby they were hindered in well-doing. Gal. 5.17. The
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these
are contrary, the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would. Yet these Persons, that felt these conflicts between the Flesh and the
Spirit, were the Children of God through Faith in Jesus Christ. Gal. 3 26. Ye
are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

5. A man may be sensible of much dryness, and be under a great want of the
influences of the Spirit of Grace, and yet he may have a saving interest in
Christ, and God may be his God and Father in Christ. Psalm. 119.83, 94. I am
become like a bottle in the smoke -- I am thine, save me -- When the Psalmist
found himself like a bottle in the smoke, that is in a withered, dry, parched
condition, he did, notwithstanding his dry and withered condition, believe
himself to be the Lords -- I am thine, save me. So also Psalm. 32.4, 7. My
moisture is turned into the drought of Summer -- Thou art my hiding place. He
did believe his interest in God, though he found himself in such a dry
condition, that he complained his moisture was turned into the drought of
Summer, that is, was so gone, as he could not discern any remaining in him. An
example of believing God to be our Father, in, and through Christ, under a
suspension of influencees, we have Isa. 63.15, 16. Where is thy zeal and thy
strength, and the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me, are
they restrained! Doubtless thou art our Father -- Thou O Lord art our Father,
our Redeemer.

6. A man may be under the withdrawings of God, the Lord may hide his face from
him, and though he seek the Lord, he may give no answers to his Prayers, and
yet God may be his Father in Christ, and he may have a saving interest in
Christ. Isa. 64.7, 8. Thou have hid thy face from us -- But now O Lord, thou
art our Father. Cant. 2.16. Compared with Cant. 5.6. My beloved is mine. and I
am his -- I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was
gone -- I sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but He gave me no
answer.

7. A man may be succesless in Holy Duties, he may not find what his Soul seeks
after in Gods Ordinances, and yet Christ's may be his, and he may be Christ's.
Cant. 2.16. Compared with Cant. 3.1. My beloved is mine, and I am his. By night
on my bed, I sought him whom my Soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not.
Here is earnestness, and continuance in seeking Christ, I sought him, I sought
him, it is mentioned twice. Here is sincerity in seeking Christ, a seeking him
out of love, and yet no success, but I found him not. Isa. 49.4. I have
labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught, yet surely my judgment is
with the Lord, and my work with my God. Here is labor in vain as to men, and a
spending our strength for naught, and yet a claiming an interest in God.

8. A man that has a saving interest in Christ, may be under various and
different tempers, and frames of Spirit. He may have his Ups, and his Downs,
sometimes his heart may be in a raised elevated frame, he may have such an high
measure of Faith, as to fear nothing. Isa. 12.2. Behold God is my Salvation, I
will trust, and not be afraid. Ps. 27.1. The Lord is my Light and Salvation,
whom shall I fear! At another time the same person may be in a very low and
dejected frame, that his Soul may as it were cleave to the dust. Ps. 119.26. My
soul cleaves to the Dust. Psalm. 42.6. O my God, my Soul is cast down within
me. At one time he may have sweet peace and comfort, Ps. 94.19. Thy comforts
delight my Soul. Another time he may be in a disturbed, disquieted frame, and
go mourning all the day long. Ps. 42.11. Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me; Ps. 38.6. I am troubled, I am bowed down
greatly, I go mourning all the day long. At one time he may be in a lively
frame, and have earnest longings and breathings after God. Ps. 42.1, 2. As the
heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God. My
Soul thirsts for God -- At another time he may be in a dead, dull, and stupid
frame, Ps. 73.22. I was as a beast before thee. Ps. 143.3, 4. He has made me
to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead -- My heart within me
is desolate. Ps. 102.4. My heart is smitten, and withered like grass. At one
time he may be in a melting broken frame, at another time in such an hardened
frame, that he may wonder to see how hard his heart is. Isa. 63.16, 17.
Doubtless thou art our Father -- O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy
ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear. At one time he may walk in the
light of Gods countenance. Psalm. 21.6. Thou have made him exceeding glad with
thy countenance. At another time he may be under the hidings of Gods face, and
that for so long a time, as to fear that God will never return to him again.
Ps. 13.1. How long will thou forget me, (O Lord) for ever? How long will thou
hide thy face from me? Thus we see how the Children of God are liable to
variety of changes in their Spiritual state, and in the frame of their hearts,
only let this be added also, when ever their hearts are out of frame, they are
unquiet and troubled, and cannot be at rest till they get into a good frame
again. Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.

9. A man may be in a very dark and distressed condition, and want the presence
of God, and think himself forsaken of God, and yet be one that has a saving
interest in Christ. Isa. 50.10. Who is there among you that fears the Lord --
that walks in darkness, and sees no Light -- let him stay himself upon his
God. The Lord is his God that hears him, though he walk in darkness, and
cannot apprehend it. Joh. 6.17. It was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them.
They were Christ's own Disciples that wanted Christ's presence when they were at
Sea, in a dark night, when there was a great Tempest that endangered their
Lives. See also Isa. 49.14, 15, 16.

. It is a great help to hold in our interest in Christ, to commune often with
our own hearts about our Spiritual estate.

5. Another help to the holding the persuasion of our interest in Christ, is to
commune often with our own hearts, about our Spiritual state, and the grounds
of our claiming an interest in Christ, and our performance of those terms which
the Gospel proposes in order to our enjoying the saving benefits of Christ, as
namely whether we do indeed believe on him, and repent of our sins, and obey
Christ as our Lord, and love and prefer him above all things, and deny our
selves, and take up our Cross, and follow him. For 1. The oftener we search our
selves, and commune with our own hearts, the clearer Knowledge we shall have of
our Spiritual state. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the
Faith, know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you. If we be
doubtful and desirous to know whether Christ be in us, the way to come unto
this knowledge is to examine our selves, whether we be in the Faith. What the
Psalmist says of Gods searching him; Psalm. 139.1. O Lord, thou have searched
me, and known me. The same is true of searching our selves, by searching our
selves we shall know our selves. As Solomon by communing with his own heart,
grew in Wisdom and Experience. Eccl. 1.16. I communed with mine own heart --
Yea my heart had great Experience of Wisdom and Knowledge; So shall we have
great experience and knowledge of our hearts, if we do often commune with them.
2. While we are communing with our own hearts about our Spiritual Estate, it
pleases the Lord often times to draw War to us, and to illuminate our minds, and
to evidence to us the Graces that are wrought in us. As it fared with the two
Disciples. Luke 24.15. And it came to pass, that while they communed together,
and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. So it often comes to
pass with the Children of God, whilst they are Communing and Reasoning with
their own hearts, that Jesus Christ draws near to them with his Holy Spirit,
and seals up Instruction to them. And as it was with Moses, when he turned
aside to see and consider that great work of God, a Bush burning and not
consumed, when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see the work of God. God
spoke to Moses, and revealed himself to him. Exodus 3.3, 4, 6. So it is here,
when we turn aside from our worldly affairs to commune with our own hearts,
about the workings of Gods grace upon our Souls, he reveals and discovers to us
our covenant interest in himself. 3. Communing with our own hearts, and
recollecting former experiences of Gods gracious dealings with us, will still
those troubled thoughts which arise in our minds about our Spiritual and
Eternal State. Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own heart upon your Bed, and be
still. When the Psalmist was in a troubled condition, and had many sad
thoughts, as if God would cast him off for ever, and show him no Mercy, he was
quieted when he communed with his own heart, and recollected Gods gracious
dealings with him in former days. Psalm. 77.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 4. Frequent
communing with our own hearts, will discover our irregular walkings, and put us
upon returning to God after we have gone astray; Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my
ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. And turning to God, and walking
in his ways, will preserve our peace, and maintain a Spirit of Adoption in us.
Jer. 3.19. Thou shall call me my Father, and shall not turn away. If we would
call God our Father, we must be careful we do not turn away from the Lord.


. Get Scruples resolved.

6. See what are your most material doubts and scruples, which make you call in
question your Interest in Christ, and beg of God to resolve those doubts, and
remove those scruples, and observe what Resolution God gives you by his Word
and Spirit, after you sought to him by Prayer. For after Prayer God is wont to
give us intimation of our Interest in himself and his Son, and to give us
boldness to claim our interest in him. Zech. 13.9. They shall call and I will
hear them, I will say, it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God.
Such intimations of our Interest in God and Christ, and such encouragements to
claim Interest in God as are given in after Prayer, are to be carefully
observed and recorded safely, for they may be of great use to us; what was said
in the fourth direction about the state of a Christian in this present evil
world, may be of great use to the resolving scruples about our Interest in
Christ. And also what is added after the use of Examination.

. What to do when we cannot get our doubts and scruples answered.

7. When your doubts and scruples, and darkness are of that nature, that you
cannot come to a Resolution about your interest in Christ, close a new with
Jesus Christ. Seeing your selves under the offer of Christ in the gospel, say
thus within your selves, though I cannot make out that Christ is mine, I see God
offers him freely to me, and therefore I will now accept of him that he may be
mine; and I do and will in a solemn manner engage my self to him to be his.
This will cut those knots in sunder which we cannot untie. And a frequent
renewal of our choice of Christ for our Lord and Savior, our renewed
acceptance of him upon the terms of the Gospel, with mature deliberation and
judgment, and solemn surrendering our selves to Christ to be his, would tend
much to the clearing our interest. Psalm. 119.30, 94. I have chosen the way of
truth -- I am thine. David who had chosen God to be his God, and the ways of
God to be the ways that he would walk in, could with an holy boldness say unto
God, I am thine, save me.

. An Holy Conversation is a means to preserve the Assurance of our Interest in
Christ.

8. If we would retain the persuasion of our Interest in Christ, we must be
careful to order our Conversations aright, and walk as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, for an Holy Conversation is a special means to obtain the assurance of
our Salvation. Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will
I show the Salvation of God. Isa. 32.17. The work of Righteousness shall be
Peace, and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. I
might instance here in some particular branches of Righteousness, which tend to
the breeding and preserving of an assurance of our being in a state of Grace
and Salvation; as walking in Love, and being ready to do all offices of Love
one for another. 1 John 3.18.19. My little Children, let us not love in Word or
in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth. And hereby we know that we are of the
Truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. This is the way, not only to get
assurance, but to keep it to the end of our days, to show our love in our
diligence, in Ministering to the Saints as we have ability, and as their
necessity requires. Heb. 6.10, 11. Another Grace that will much further our
Assurance, as trusting in God in all distresses and dangers, and living by
Faith on Gods promises. Psalm. 31.14. I trusted in thee, I said thou art my God.
The more we accustom our selves to trust in God, the more confidently we shall
be enabled to call God our God. Another grace that will further our assurance
is Uprightness; when we walk in our Integrity, that will scatter and dispel
fears, and bring in comfort. Psalm. 112.4. Unto the Upright there arises Light
in Darkness. But I shall add no more upon this question.

Sect. 3. What they should do, that cannot make out their interest in Christ, in
a time of trouble, and at the hour of Death.

Obj. It may be some will say, it is true, they that have an interest in
Christ, and know it may be of good cheer under all the troubles of this Life,
and when they are to pass through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, but what
shall I do in an evil day, and at the hour of Death, that cannot to this day,
nor ever could make it out that I have a saving interest in Christ.

. Prayer a means to clear interest. Encouragements to pray for this mercy.

A. 1. Pray to God to make clear, to your Souls, your interest in himself, and
his Son Jesus Christ. Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my Soul I am thy Salvation. That
which David asks is not, be thou my Salvation, but it is the satisfying his Soul
with the knowledge that God was his Savior, and would give him Salvation. Say
unto my Soul -- That is, Lord persuade my Soul, Lord give my Soul satisfaction
in this great case, that thou art my Savior, and wilt confer Salvation upon
me. And what David prayed for in this kind, that may we pray for also. And for
our encouragement to pray for the knowledge of your interest in Christ,
consider these things.

1. Prayer is a means of Gods own appointing, not only for the obtaining of the
favor of God, but also for the obtaining of the comfortable apprehensions of
Gods love in Christ. Job. 33.26. He shall pray unto God, and he shall be
favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy. Here is a double
blessing promised unto the man that prays unto God, he shall obtain the
favor of God, and he shall see his face with joy, that is, he shall obtain the
knowledge of Gods love to his Soul, which shall put great joy and gladness into
his heart. 2. The knowledge of our interest in God as our Father, and in Christ
as our Savior and Redeemer, is promised in the new Covenant; and what the Lord
has promised, we may pray in Faith and Hope that we shall attain it. See
promises to this purpose; Isa. 60.16. Thou shall know that I the Lord am thy
Savior, and thy Redeemer. That which is here promised, is not, I will be thy
Savior and thy Redeemer, but the knowledge of our interest in Christ as our
Savior, and our Redeemer. It is not said, thou shall know that I am the
Savior of my people, or the Savior of those that trust in me, Thon shall know
that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer. Another promise of clearing
our interest in Christ, we have, Joh. 14.20. At that day ye shall know that I
am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. At that day, what day is here
meant? some understand it of the future life, when we shall live with Christ in
Glory, spoken of in the foregoing verse, because I live, ye shall live also, at
that day ye shall know -- And doubtless the full accomplishment of this promise
is the privilege of the other life, to have a perfect understanding of the
mystical Union, between the Father and the Son, and between Christ and
Believers. But it has also a respect to clearing our Union with Christ in this
life; at that day, that is after I am risen from the dead, and gone to the
Father, and at that day, that you set your love upon me, and keep my
Commandments, and I shall pray the Father, and he shall send you another
comforter, even the Spirit of truth, he shall make it known to you, that I am
in you, and you in me. It may also relate to ver. 13, 14. When you shall
earnestly pray to the Father in my name, to have your union cleared, in that
day you shall know that I am in you, and you in me. If any say, I have prayed
to God to clear my Union with, and my Interest in Christ, and still I am in the
dark about this matter. I answer, You must continue to seek this mercy, the
knowledge of your interest in God and Christ, and that is the way to obtain it.
Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord --
. Such as cannot make out their Interest in Christ, should close with Christ,
that they may have an Interest in him.

2. If you cant, nor ever could make out your Interest in Christ, yea, suppose
it be so that you have no interest in him, come in now, and close with him. The
door of Hope still stands open to your Souls. It is yet an accepted time, and a
day of Salvation. God still continues to offer Christ to your Souls, and prays
you to accept of him, 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you in Christ's stead, be you
reconciled to God. If at length, after a long neglecting of Christ, you will
come in, and close with him, you shall be saved by him. Heb. 4.7. To day, after
so long a time, as it is said, to day if you will bear his voice, harden not
your hearts.

Those that had stood all the day idle, even to the last hour, were invited to
go into the Vineyard, and going upon the invitation, had their reward. Matthew.
20.6, 7, 9. And about the eleventh hour, he went out, and found others standing
idle, and says unto them, why stand ye here all the day idle -- Go ye also
into the Vineyard, and whatever is right, that shall ye receive. And when they
came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.
This penny is by the generality of Interpreters agreed to be eternal life, and
this eternal life shall be given to those that come into Christ at the last
hour of the day, though the former part of their time has been spent in
ideleness. But some may say, if a man has reflected, and lived without God in
the day of his prosperity, is there hope if such a man turn to God in the day
of trouble, that God will be found of him, and be gracious unto him: I answer:
There is hope for such as have neglected God along time, if they turn to him in
the day of their trouble, that he will be gracious unto them. 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 4.
Now for a long season, Israel has been without the true God -- But when they
in their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel, he was found of them.

. Such as want Evidence of their interest in Christ, ought to trust in him for
Salvation. What grounds have such to trust in Christ?

3. Though you want evidence of your interest in Christ, in a time of trouble,
and at the hour of Death; yet if you be such as live in the fear of God, such
as desire to be saved by Christ in his own way, and upon his own Terms, you
may, yea, you ought to trust in Christ for eternal Salvation. Isa. 50.10. Who
is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servants, that
walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay upon his God. A man that truly fears God, may be in great darkness
about his Spiritual State, he may have no light, that is, no Evidence of his
interest in God, and the promises, and so be in a very uncomfortable condition,
yet such ought to trust in Christ.

If any say, what grounds has a man that follows after Righteousness, and
desires to live in the fear of God, and yet wants evidence of his Interest
in Christ, and the promises of God, to trust in Christ for his Salvation?

. Grounds of trusting in Christ for Salvation for such as are in a dark
condition, as to their Interest in Christ.

A. 1. God sends his Son into the World, to take our nature upon him, and to
die for our Sins for this very end and purpose, to seek and to save Sinners,
who were in a lost, and undone condition. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief. Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seek,
and to save that which is lost. 1 John 4.14. We have seen, and do testify
that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World. John 3.17. God
sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved. These general expressions to save the World, to
save Sinners, to save that which was lost, opens a door of hope to such as
cannot see their interest in Christ, but see themselves lost Sinners, and
hearing that the Father sent his Son to be the Savior of the world, to save
lost sinners, i^ shows them that there is hope for their Souls, that they may
obtain Salvation By Jesus Christ.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Savior of the world, and who came into
the world purposely to save sinners, is an all-sufficient Savior, able to save
unto the uttermost all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. He is able to save
them unto the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing He ever lives to
make intercession for them. He is able to save to the uttermost, that is to
save perfectly, to save eternally, to give all things requisite to Salvation,
he is able to justify, sanctify, and bring unto glory all that come unto him.
For his blood is available to take away the greatest sins of the greatest
sinners in the whole world. John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away
the sin of the world. And his Spirit is able to sanctify the worst and most
polluted Sinners. The Corinthians were the chief of Sinners, Extortioners,
Drunkards, Adulterors, Abusers of themselves with mankind, with other
abominations; yet they were sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, of great
sinners made eminent Saints. 1 Cor. 62.10, 11.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ inviteth, and calls all distressed Persons in all
places, that see themselves in a perishing undone condition, to look to him,
and to come to him for Salvation. Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all
the ends of Earth. That is, let all Persons from one end of the Earth to the
other, that find a want of Salvation, look unto me, and I will save them.
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.

4. The Lord commands us to trust in his Son for the giving us eternal life.
1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment that we should believe on the name of his
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us Commandment. And he is
displeased with those that do not rely on him for their Salvation. Ps. 78.21,
22. The Lord was wroth -- and anger came up against Israel, because they
believed not in God, and trusted not in his Salvation.

5. We have God promises, yea, many promises, that he will give eternal life,
and blessedness to all, whosoever they be that believe and trust in his Son,
Ps. 2.12. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Joh. 3.16. God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Joh. 6.47. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me, has everlasting life.

. The plea of such as cannot trust in Christ for Salvation, for want of
Sanctification.

Obj. 1. None shall be saved by Christ, but such as are sanctified, and in a
state of Grace, but I want evidences of my being sanctified, and being in a
state of Grace, how then can I trust in Christ to save me?

A. 1. It is true, that Christ sanctifies all whom he saves, for without
Holiness, no man whatsoever shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which, no man shall see the Lord. If a man live
and dye in his sins without repentance, and yet trust in Christ for Salvation,
he does but delude himself; for our Lord Jesus tells us expressly, that all
that do not repent, shall surely perish. Luke 13.3. I tell you nay, but except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

2. Though you want evidences of your Sanctification, yet, do you not find
ardent desires of Sanctification; do you not find hungrings and thirstings
after Righteousness? Such as hunger and thirst after Righteousness, are in a
blessed condition, as well as they that have attained Righteousness. Matthew.
5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they
shall be filled. Spiritual desires are an argument of the Grace of God bestowed
upon us. The gracious estate of the Servants of God is sometimes set out by
their desires. Isa. 26.8. The desire of our Souls is to thee, and to the
remembrance of thy name. Neh. 1.11. Thy Servants who desire to fear thy name --
Then our desires argue a gracious state, when our desires of God, and the
things of God exceed our desires of other things. Ps. 73.25. Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee.

3. If you find in your self a want of Sanctification, know this, that you are
to trust in Christ for Sanctification, as well as Salvation. 1 Cor. 1.30. Of
him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Sanctification. Now if
Christ be made of God unto us Sanctification, then we may, we ought to trust in
Christ for Sanctification, as well as other Blessings.

Use last. Learn hence, that they which have gotten their interest in Christ
cleared to their Souls need not to be afraid of death, but may depart in peace:
A confirmation hereof we have in the example of this our deceased Sister, Mrs.
Ellen Asty, who was a Mother in Israel; who was so much above the fear of
Death, that when I was with her, a few days before she dyed, she used these
expressions. I can cheerfully embrace death, I should not be afraid of death,
if I should see him coming in at the Windows, if I should see him come into my
Chamber, for my beloved is mine, and I am his, and therefore she knew he would
not condemn her. And having found abundance of comfort in her interest in
Christ, she was desirous that this Text might be Preached on at her Funeral, My
beloved is mine, and I am his, (I suppose) that others might be stirred up to
get an interest in Christ, and to get their interest made out. Several things
have been observed, wherein she may be exemplary to others, as may be seen in
the account of her life, which follows.

THE LIFE OF Mrs. Ellen Asty, THE Late Wife of Mr. Asty of Stratford in
Suffolk, Deceased.

Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord.

Printed by J. R. 1681.

THE LIFE OF Mrs. Ellen Asty, THE Wife of Mr. Asty, late Minister of the Gospel
in Essex.
IT is exceedingly pleasant unto many, to be beholding the Pictures of their
dearest Friends, when their persons are removed out of their sight, and laid in
the silent dust, and it has been found more than a little profitable unto
surviving Friends, to be reading over the lives of the most eminent Saints
departed, as hereby being dead, they yet speak, and become still as living
patterns for their imitation. It is said, The memory of the just is Blessed.
Prove. 10.7. And it may be said of this pious Matron, as of Demetrius. 3 John
1.12. She has a good report of all men, and of the truth it self. As to her
Birth and Education, much might be spoken. She was the Daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bently, her Father an eminent Godly Minister, her Mother a very Gracious, Holy
Gentlewoman, who lived at Plumsted in Norfolk, who brought her up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. She remembered her Creator in the days of
her youth, and chose him to be hers betimes. The Lord was pleased to begin a
work of Grace so early upon her heart, and ripen it so fast, that whilst she
was young, and Nature not grown to its perfection, she was a well grown
Christian in gracious experiences, excelling many who set out for Jesus Christ
long before her: that she became a pattern of piety to others: yea, the whole
Family where she lived, before she entered into a married estate, and many out
of it, (even such as occasionally came into it) were much the better for her,
and Blessed God that they had acquaintance with her, valuing her Grace and
Judgment in the deep matters of the Gospel. She was the wife of Mr. Asty, a
laborious Minister of the Gospel, whom God made much use of in the Conversion
of many sinners, and building up others in Grace and Holiness, who were already
brought home to Jesus Christ. When she was first married, several Gentlewomen
sent their Daughters to be with her, that they might live under her
instructions, and the Lord made her very useful to them.

She was eminent for her deportment, and carriage in all Relations: some who
had intimate acquaintance with her, do testify, that she was dutiful to her
Parents, an obedient and loving Wife to her Husband, a tender hearted Mother to
her Children, (one said) never did any bear the Souls of her Children, and
Childrens Children, more upon their hearts than she did; never was any more
concerned for their Souls, nor did more Travel in Birth, than she, till she
could see that in Christ they were born again; never any more concerned for the
Souls of those committed to her charge (though but servants,) than she was.

Some Ministers, and others who knew her Conversation, testify of her gracious
carriage and behavior, in her various conditions, in the course of her Life,
as follows.

She was very knowing in the things of Jesus Christ, and her knowledge was
experimental, growing, humbling, and practical, a well grounded Professor, and
an honor and glory to her Profession.

She had a sound Judgment, a well enlightened understanding, in the mystery of
godliness.

She had the Scriptures (the Fountain of saving knowledge) in very high
estimation, and daily to the last, diligently searched into them, not one day
passed but she read, or had read to her, some portions of them, which she made
matter of meditation, and when her weaknesses were so great, and her eyes so
failed in the latter part of her life, that she could not read her self, she
called one to read to her, weighed all her actions by the Scriptures as her
Rule, considered her warrant, call and command from God, for all she did, and
acted in all, in obedience thereunto.

She would often be telling others, how in their way they might serve the Lord,
though the work of their place was never so mean and low, if they did consider
the precepts and rules, which God had given referring to such a Relation,
place, employ, or condition wherein they stood, and acted in obedience to his
will therein.

She outwent most Christians in her strictness on the Lords day, the whole time
was spent in public and private exercises, and would allow nothing that was
secular and aliene to Religion to be done in her Family, that was not of
indispensible necessity on that day, and always had a more than ordinary
preparation in her house the day before, that those in her family might have no
temptation in that respect, to violate any part of the sacred time of that day.

She was very exact as to her words, and discourses on that day, not opening
her Lips to speak any thing that wasnot suitable and agreeable to the holiness
of that day, and it was a great burden and affliction to her Spirit, which she
could not bear, but mourned under, to hear others give their tongues a liberty
to speak any thing unsuitable and heterogeneal to the day, she did highly prize
all the ordinances of Jesus Christ, they were sweeter to her than the honey, or
the honey Comb; more desirable than her appointed food, never so much in her
element as when waiting upon the Lord, either in public or private
opportunities, and to the last would venture through all difficulties, and bear
up under great weaknesses, in duties of Christian Communion, and could not live
without them; her love to them and delight in them, was as strong and fresh in
her old age, as in the day of her Espousals, when she first set out, and began
to taste that the Lord was gracious. It is not to be spoken how she hazarded her
weak body to hear Sermons, to attend upon the Lord in all opportunities
enjoyable. ^t was generally observed in Stratford, that ^he was sick indeed, if
she was not at the word; either on the Lords day, or at Church meetings on the
week day. Nothing but a very afflictive hand of God kept her at home. It was
her daily study how to glorify God in every condition, and under every
dispensation, that was either prosperous or adverse, that was principally her
study, how and in what way God might be most honored, and his name advanced by
her.

She had a heart for Universal Obedience, walking as Elizabeth in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless. She evidenced that she was
a friend to Jesus Christ by doing whatever he commandded her, and through that
friendship between Christ and her, she found she could do nothing so well as
the will of Christ, and found that obedience easy; loved Jesus Christ with a
superlative love, and served him not with half an a heart, but sincerely with
the whole heart, yea delighted in serving of him, she had a Law within,
suitable to the Law without, which rendered it natural to her, to act
graciously; Jesus Christ was her Life, his Grace and Image were implanted in
her Soul, that from a Spirit of love to him, even in old age, when weak and
sickly, she acted for Christ yea above her strength, he was in her so much by
his Spirit, that she thought nothing too much to do for him and his. She was
full of good projects and designs for Jesus Christ, loved to visit the sick and
afflicted, and those who walked in darkness, as to their spiritual conditions,
loved to acquaint themselves with her; who by a great treasure of experiences,
was able to afford Counsel, and comfort to them. A Christian able to speak a
word in season, to the relief of any soul under spiritual burdens and
pressures; And as ready to impart what Jesus Christ had Communicated unto her,
and the Lord Communicated the more to her, because she was so free to
Communicate to others, laying up her experiences as for her own good, so for
others, that they might be comforted with the same comforts, that she was
comforted with-all. Her discourse never tended to self applause or
commendation, neither was it burdensome, frothy or unsuitable, but always
savoury Christian and profitable, commanding the ears of all about her; In her
Family she was frequently taking opportunities in the day time and evening, and
when ever she thought it seasonable, to be speaking of the things of God of the
excellency of Jesus Christ; of the way of Life by him; opening the miserable
condition of a soul out of Jesus Christ, setting forth the evil of sin, the
immortality of the Soul, the sufferings and eternity of the punishment of Hell,
to her Children, Servants, and those that lived with her, and was daily
dropping in and working upon them, to make them serious and considerate, and as
God had given her a choice gift that way, so he made a great use thereof; her
counsels, warnings, threatenings, invitations, and holy instructions were made
singularly advantageous and useful, to the convincing, quickening and edifying
those committed to her charge, so as they had cause for ever to bless God for
the gracious words which proceeded out of her mouth.

She was always taking of opportunities, to be calling upon those in a natural
estate, to mind the great concerns of their Souls, and to be exciting,
provoking, encouraging and strengthening those, whose face was Zion ward, her
words were as choice Silver, seasoned with Grace, mostly Scriptural.

The Sermons that she heard on the Lords day, or Week day, were much the
Subject matter of her discourse.

The Light of Gospel Grace and Truth did so shine in her, as that her presence
laid a restraint upon Sinners, it was a curb unto vain Persons, if they came
into the Room where she was present.

She was exact, and much in private Duties every day, and yet so prudent in the
singling out of the time, as that the place in the Family wherein she stood,
never missed her. She had at all times a due respect to the duties of both
Tables; and both in her Life and Discourses, showed how inseparable they were,
commending to all persons with whom she had to do, the necessary and
indispensible observation of both: She looked upon time as a precious thing
that was not to run waste, and was diligent in the improvement of the Sands of
every hour, so as there was no part of her Life from Morning unto Evening, that
was an empty space; but was laid out either in doing, or recieving good. Like
the Summer she brought forth every thing in its season, wisely forecasting, and
timeing whatsoever she had the ordering of.

She studied to excel in faithfulness and uprigh ness in all she undertook,
like Nathaniel she was without allowed guile, had the Testimony of her
Conscience, that in simplicity, and Godly sincerity, she had her Conversation
in the World; very zealous for the truth of Jesus Christ, following the Lamb
whithersoever he went.

She had a very public Spirit, minding the good of others where she lived;
much taken up about the welfare of the Nation, and was deeply concerned for the
interest of Christ all the world over, daily bore Zion, and the work that God
was doing in the world upon her heart, and laid out her self much in Prayer for
those things.

She had a large heart for Jesus Christ, and for all that were his, though of
differing persuasions, always putting the best construction upon every thing
but sin, was no way censorious, or ready harshly to judge others, but did most
fairly coustrue their actions and carriaages, speaking modestly, and moderately
of them, Gospel Charity ruling her Spirit in all, wonderful affable, and
courteous, so as the Grace and sweetness in her words and carriage, did win
upon all that she conversed with, that they loved her, and said that she was
made up of love.

She by Grace was enabled to Regulate her affections; had a choice poise
continually upon her Spirit, that she seldom or never roiled or was disturbed,
but walked in an even and composed frame, though none more sympathizing, loving
tender and affectionate than she, yet were her affections always in order, and
under command, free from excessive and disturbing passions, that do often put
the strings of the Spirits of most men and women out of tune; and so render
them unfit for what they are called too, in the place wherein the Lord has set
them.

She had a fresh remembrance of the means, and methods of the Lords dealing
with her in bringing her Soul unto him, and of her many experiences she had of
his grace and love toward her.

She lived much in Communion with God, there was an unspeakable intercourse
between God and her Soul every day. She would do nothing till she had spread it
before the Lord, and knew his mind, and in things not only small but weighty;
She had such intimations from the Lord of his will, and his secret was so with
her, as she before hand knew the mind of God, because God had told hereby his
Spirit, for she gave not over till he had signified by his spirit upon her
Spirit, what was his pleasure, what he would do, or what he would have done,
and God did marvelously herein condescend to her, not once, but frequently, or
from time to time; she was far from Euthusiasme, but had such intimacy with the
Lord, that she went daily to him for some word, some manifestation of himself
to bear up her Spirit that day, and he gave in either a word of promise, or let
out something of his attributes to her, discovered of his Wisdom, Power,
Faithfulness, Allsufficiency, Unchangableness, and the like, wherewith her
inward man was fed and strengthened, and when her Family concerns were more, she
arose the earlier, and though attended with the greatest weakness, yet always
began the day with God, and would not omit the seasons for private Communion
with the Lord, neither indeed could she live without them, they being the life
of her Spirit.

She lived in an eminent exercise of many graces of the Spirit. She was well
instructed in the mystery of the life of Faith, lived in a daily dependence
upon God for all, in her greatest fullness she lived not upon the creature but
upon God, and recieved all from him in the way of Faith and Prayer, in every
strait she had recourse to the Al-sufficiency of God, and would often say, the
creature runs into emptiness, and the streams they dried up, but the Fountain
was ever full and flowing, and in all losses and changes blessed her self in
God her portion, who was a faithful Covenant, keeping God for ever; she went to
the Wisdom of God to be directed, and waited there for Counsel every day, her
faith advanced into assurance of the love of God which she enjoyed most part of
her days, and thence issued spiritual and unmixed comforts: as she walked
circumspectly being careful not to provoke the Lord, so he witnessed his love
to her, and filled her Soul with strong Consolation, that she had a Heaven out
of it is place, even hereupon Earth, she was in the Banqueting house of Jesus
Christ, in his Wine Cellar, where his Banner over her was Love. In a Letter of
her own she said; I have not only heard that God is good, but I have had many
experiences of his Love and Faithfulness to me in all my streights, and
Widdow-hood condition: I may say the Life of Faith is the sweetest Life in the
World, as it is a Life that brings much glory to God, so much comfort to our
selves.

How full of Love she was to Jesus Christ is already manifested in her
carefulness to keep his Commandments, and also in her love to the Members of
Christ, both that and also her Humility, and self-denial appeared in that, in
her highest actings and best frame she disowned her self, and leaned only upon
Jesus Christ, trusted only in him, gloried in nothing but in Christ, in the
Cross of Christ, in the Righteousness of Christ, in the Love of Christ: not in
what she did for Christ, though she did much, and delighted in so doing, but
she gloried in the Grace of Christ that did much for her, he and his
Righteousness were all her life and comfort, she had an eye upon the Incense,
the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ in all her approaches to God, being
ashamed of the mixture of sin, those weaknesses and imperfections that were in
her best performances; notwithstanding all her strictness and exactness, she
lay as low before the Lord in the sense of her own vileness, emptiness,
nothingness, as if there were nothing in her.

She was much in exalting of Jesus Christ, his merits and grace, admiring what
he had done for sinners, touching their reconciliation to God, the remission of
sin, their standing and privileges in grace here, and the glory that is to be
revealed, relying on the freeness and fullness of his grace alone, as if she had
done or were able to do nothing, she did set the Crown on his head in all,
always saw that in her self which kept her low and humble before the Lord, and
nothing in her own eyes.

She excelled in, and was a pattern of Patience under all her troubles, her
afflictions were many and long, often at the very mouth of the Grave, in the
latter part of her time seldom enjoyed a well day, yet never murmured; thought
her afflictions small, bore them with a cheerful Spirit; was always submissive
to the will of God, always thought and spoke well of God, and justified him in
all her Trials.

She was wonderfully melted into the will of God, and lived always out of her
own will resigned up to God, to be disposed of as he pleased, and was greatly
satisfied in what he chose for her, she has said, the will of God is sweet to
her in every condition, and under much bodily weakness, if the Lord would have
her live to be sick she was content, yet latter ward was mostly tried in the
Fire of affliction, when her Husband laid down his living upon the account of
Nonconformity in stead of repining, she said she was glad they had such a
house, and accommodations to leave for Christ, and with all freeness and
readiness resigned up all to him. She was sorely tried in the loss of her
dearest Relations and choicest comforts in this World, but she was prepared to
be any thing that God would have her be, and that with all alacrity and
cheerfulness of Spirit.

She had a lively hope of future mercy; of the life to come: she said she
scarce knew how to live out of Heaven, from Jesus Christ always groaning in the
body, to be delivered from the body of sin and death, and to be with Jesus. As
she set out at first, so she continued in the vigorous and constant exercise of
all grace, not loosing the life, nor abating or impairing the strength thereof
in old age, under the decays of nature, but in the 73 of her age, she slept or
dyed in Jesus, and her Soul was gathered to the Spirits of just men made
perfect.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Hundred select Sermons on several Texts, by Tho. Horton, D. D.

Sermons on 4 select Psalms, viz. 4th. 42, 51, 63. by Tho. Horton, D. D.

Mr. Baxters Christian Directory.

Sermons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Collossians, by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwins, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to
Cornelius; and circumspect walking, By Dr. Tho Tailor.

A Practical Exposition on the 3d. Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by
Anthony Burgess.

Dr. Donns 40 Sermons, being his 3 Volumes.

Pareus Exposition on the Revelations.

General Martyrologia, with the Lives of 32 English Divines, by Sam. Clark.

A Narrative of the Horrid Popish Plot.

-- A Narrative of Knox and Lane.

-- The Witch of Endor.

-- Popes Warehouse. All four Published by Dr. Titus Oats.

Robert Jenneson Esquire; His Narrative.

Dugdales Narrative.

Mr. Tho. Dangerfields of the Sham Presbyterian Plot.

Smiths Account of the 14 Popish Malefactors in Newgate.

Animadversions on the 5 Jesuits Speeches. The Excommunicated Prince, a Tragedy
as it was acted by his Holinesses Servants, By Captain William Bedlow.

Protestant Conformist plea for moderation.

A Conference between a Bensalion Bishop, and an English Doctor concerning
Church Government.

A Caution to all English Protestants.

A Lenetive for the Clergy.

Broughtons Works published by Dr. Lightfoot.

Books 4 to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, By George Swinnock.
M. A.

An Antidote against Quakerism, by Stephen Scandret.

An Exposition of the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by William Greenhil.

The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley. Gods holy Mind, touching matters
Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also an Exposition on the Lords
Prayer, by Edward Elton, B. D.

The fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines
and deeds of the Jesuits, exposed to view for the sake of London.

Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with a Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method,
by Sylvanus Morgan.

Regimen sanitatis salemi, or the Regiment of Health, containing Directions and
instructions for the guide and government of man's life.

A seasonable Apology for Religion, by Matthew Pool.

Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, by
J. S.

The Practical Divinity of the Papist discovered, to be destructive to true
Religion, and men's Souls, by J. Clarkson.

A Case of Conscience, viz. whether it be lawful for any person to act contrary
to the opinion of his own Conscience, formed from arguments that to him appear
very probable, though not necessary or demonstrative, by Dr. Collings.

The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods hand, and the good-mans mercy
to the bruit-Creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho. Hodges. B. D.

Certain Considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity among Protestants.

Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection.

Funeral Sermons,
Mr. James Janeway, by Nath. Vincent.

The Lady Susanna Keate's, by Richard Kidder, M. A.

Mr. Cautons, by Mr. Henry Hurst, and Mr. Nath. Vincent.

Mr. Sorrels, by Mr. Benj. Smith.

Mr. Wadsworth, by Mr. R. Bragg.

Mr. Newcomens, by Mr. Fairson.

Mr. Thomas Vincents, by Mr. Slater.

Mr. Corbets, by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Mr. Bakers, by Mr. Nath. Vincent.

Mr. Marshalls, by Mr. Tomlins.

Mr. Johnsons, by Mr. Loid.

Mrs. Fishers, by Mr. Scot.

Dr. Whittakers, by Dr. Annesly.

Mr. Wells, by Mr. Thomas Watson.

Mr. Stubs, by Mr. Watson.

Mr. Stubs, by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Hodges Vanity of man as mortal.

Mrs. Lies, by Mr. Lamb.

Virtuous Daughter by Brion.

Sir Thomas Viners by Dr. Spurslow.

Mr. Perns, by Ainsworth.

Work and Reward of a Christian, by R. Raworth.

Mr. Wests Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Cole.

Mr. Webbs, by Mr. David Burges.

Baxters which is the true Church;

Hodges Creatures goodness.

Naked Truth.

Doolitles Protestants Answ. to a Popish Quest.

Mr. Kidders Charity directed.

Scholars address against Pluralities.

Dr. Crossmans Sermon.

Humphrys peaceable disquisitions.

Hodges considerations to promote peace.

An Endeavor for Peace; among Protestants.

A conference between a Papist and a Jew; and a Protestant and a Jew.

An Essay for the Education of Gentlewomen.

A warning for Servants or the Case of Margaret Clark.

An Answer to Dr. Stilling fleets Sermon by the peaceable design.

A Discourse of Pluralities.

A Discourse of Excommunication.

The middle way of Predetermination;

Popery an Enemy to Truth by Mr. Sheldreck

Dr. Dumoulins conformity of Independent Government to the Ancient Primitive
Christians.

Excommunication Excommunicated in a Dialogue between a Doctor of both Laws.

The Case of the Protestants in England under a Popish Prince.

A rebuke to Informers.

A modest Inquiry into Dr. Stilling fleet Historical mistakes.

The State of Blessedness.

An Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Book by J. H.

Liberty of Conscience in order to universal peace.

The Lords voice crying to England.

Life of Herod the Great.

A Manifesto, or an Account of the State, and differences between the King of
Denmark and Norway and the Duke of Slesmick.

Phelps Innocencies reward.

Materials for Union.

A sheet of Union.

Rosses Mestogogus Poaeticus.

Phelps on the Revelations.

Gilaspys Ark of the Covenant.

Present State of New England.

Dr. Collings of Providence.

Froysells Sermons of Grace and Temptations.

Yarringtons Englands Improvement, First part.

-- Idem second part.

Meaning of the Revelation, by John Hayter.

The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London.

Four useful discourses: (1) The art of improving a full and prosperous
condition for the glory of God; being an appendix to the art of Contentment in
three Sermons, on Philip. 4.12. (2) Christian submission, on 1 Samuel 3.18.
Philip. 1.21. (4) The Gospel of peace sent to the sons of peace, in six
Sermons, on Luke 10.5, 6. by Jeremiah Buroughs.

Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems.

A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.

The new World; or new reformed Church, by Doctor Homes.

The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Brian.

The Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our Nature: by Dr. Rich. Sibbs.

The unity and essence of the Catholic Church visible, by Mr. Hudson.

Brightman on Revelations, Canticles and Daniel.

Canaans Calamity.

The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular Beleiving soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant. by John Collins, D. D.

Large 8 vo.
The sure mercies of David by Nath. Heywood.

Heaven or Hell here in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent.

Closet-Prayer a Christians duty; all three by O. Heywood.

A practical discourse of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of
Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet.

Of quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwheile.

The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with
Christ; by Richard Stedman. M. A.

Sober Singularity, by the same Author.

Heaven taken by Storm. by Tho. Watson.

The Child's Delight; together with an English Grammar.

Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie.

Aesops Fables, with morals thereupon in English Verse.

The Young-mans Instructor, and the Oldmans remembrancer; being an Explanation
of the Assemblies Catechism.

Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolittle.

Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by William Whitaker.

The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry Sermons, preached at
St. James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton.

The life and death of Edmund Stanton D. D. To which is added a Treatise of
Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger.

Sin the Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning.
M. A.

Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by J. Norman.

The faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events of his
Word; or a second part of the fulfilling of the Scripture.

The immortality of the Soul explained and proved by Scripture and Reason; to
which is added Faiths-triumph over the fears of death; by Tho. Wadsworth.

A Treatise of the incomparableness of God, in his Being, Attributes, Works,
and Word; by George Swinnock, M. A.

A discourse of the original, etc. of the Cossacks.

The generation of Seekers; or the right manner of the Saints addresses to the
throne of Grace, with an Exposition on the Lords-Prayer.

The administration of Cardinal Ximones.

An Essay to facilitate the Education of Youth, by bringing down the rudiments
of Grammar to the sense of seeing which ought to be improved by Syncrisis; by
Mr. Lewis of Totenham.

An Artificial Vestibulum; wherein the sense of Janua Linguarum is contained,
compiled into plain and short sentences in English, for the great ease of
Masters, and Expeditious progress of Scholars, by M. Lewis.

Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Looking glass, in which the admirers of Mr.
Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy, Judgment, Orthodoxy.

A discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered their Nature, Causes,
and Cure; by George Swinnock.

His Majesty's Propriety in the British Seas vindicated.

Quakerism no Christianity; or a through-Quaker no Christian, proved by their
Princrples, and confirmed by Scripture; by J. Faldo.

Differences about Water Baptism no bar to Communion; by Jo. Bunian

The Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues, qualities and properties of
Simples; the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto is added the Complete
Herbalist.

Judge Dodaridge's laws of Nobility and Peerage.

Dinglys Spiritual Feast.

Solitude improved by Divine Meditation; by Matthew. Ranew.

A Murderer punished and pardoned, or Tho. Savage his life and death; with his
Funeral sermon.

Hurst Revival Grace.

Buryes Husbandmans Companion.

-- help to holy walking;

Hanmers view of Antiquity,

Nomenclaturas.

Wases Grammar.

Vincent of Conscience.

Gouges Principles of Christian Religion.

-- Christian Direction.

-- Word to Saints and Sinners.

-- Young man's guide.

-- Christian Householder.

Perrots Englands duty.

The Nonconformists vindicated.

Wadsworths remains.

Shepherdy Spiritualized.

Calamys Art of divine Meditation.

Faldos Quakerism no Christianity.

-- vindication of 21 Divines.

Small 8vo.
A defense against the fear of death; by Zach. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed, by William Gearing.

The Godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mrs. Moors evidences for Heaven: by Edmund Calamy.

The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried and cast, by M.
Mead.

The true bounds of Christian-freedom: or a discourse showing the extent and
restraints of Christian-liberty, by S. Bolton, D. D.

The sinfulness of Sin and fullness of Christ, in two Sermons; by Will. Bridge.

A Plea for the godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency.

The holy Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

A Treatise of self-denial. All three by Tho. Watson.

The life and death of Tho. Wilson of Maidstone in Kent.

The Life and Death of Dr. Samuel VVinter.

A Covert from the Storm, or the fearful encouraged in the day of Trouble.

Worthy-walking pressed upon all that have heard the Call of the Gospel.

The Spirit of Prayer. All three by Nath. Vincent.

The inseparable union between Christ and a Believer, by Tho. Peck.

A discourse of Excuses, setting forth the variety and vanity of them, the sin
and misery brought in by them, by John Sheffield.

Invisible reality, demonstrated in the holy life and triumphant death of Mr.
J. Janeway.

The Saints encouragement to diligence in Christ's service: both by Mr. James
Janeway.

A discourse concerning the Education of Children.

Convivium Caeleste; a plain and familiar discourse concerning the Lords
Supper; both by R. Kidder.

The Saints perseverance asserted in its Positive-ground against Mr. Ives, by
Tho. Danson.

A Wedding-ring fit for the Finger; by Will. Secker.

An Explanation of the shorter-Catechism of the Assembly of Divines; by Tho.
Lie.

The life and death of Tho. Hall.

A Plea for the Non-Conformists, tending to vindicate them from Schism, by a
Doctor in Divinity.

The flat opposition of Popery to Scripture; by J. N. Chaplain to a Person of
Honor.

The Weavers Pocket book, or Weaving spiritualized by J. C. D. D.

Two disputations of Original sin; by Richard Baxter.

The History of Moderation.

The welcome Communicant.

The little-peace-maker discovering foolish Pride, the Makebate.

Philadelphia; or a Treatise of Brotherly love; by Mr. Gearing.

Reformation or Ruin, being certain Sermons on Levit. 26.23, ^3. by Tho.
Hotchkis.

The Riches of Grace displayed; to which is added the privilege of Passive
obedience; and 52 proposals in order to help on Heart-humiliation; by Will.
Bagshaw.

The parable of the great Supper opened in 17 Sermons, by John Crump.

A present for Teeming-women, by J. Oliver.

Nonconformity without Controversy; by Benj. Baxter.

A Treatise of Closet-Prayer; by Richard Mayo.

The Religious Family; by Philip Lamb.

A discourse of the prodigious Abstinence of Martha Tailor.

Index biblicus multi-jugus, or a Table of the holy Scripture; wherein each of
its Books, Chapters and particular matters are distinguished and Epitomized.

The day of Grace, with the Conversion of a Sinner; by Nathanael Vincent.

An easy and useful Grammar for the learning of the French Tongue, by Mr.
Gosthead, Gentleman.

The Miners Monitor, or advice to those that are employed about the Mines.

A Protestant Catechism for litte Children.

A Scripture Catechism, by Samuel Petto.

A Catechism according to the Church of England.

Nero Tragidea.

Cornelianum dolium.

Wilsons Catechism.

Elenchuus motuum nuperorum in Anglia.

Cackaines Poems.

Croftons Foelix Scelus; or prospering-profaneness provoking holy conference,
by Zach. Crofton.

Gramaticus Analyticus, by the same Author.

Alexanders advice to his Son.

H. Excellency of Christ set forth.

Phelps Caveat against Drunkenness.

-- Lamentation for the loss of a good man.

-- Antidote against desperation.

Bury against Drunkenness.

Wadsworths last warning to Sinners.

Dr. Wilkinsons Counsels and Comforts to afflicted Consciences.

Cappello and Bianco, a Romance.

Calys Glimpse of Eternity.

Period of humane Life.

Defense of Period of humane Life, both written by the Author of the whole Duty
of man, etc.

An Answer to the period of humane Life.

Survey Quakerism.

Tho. Vincents Explication of the Assemblies Catechism.

Vincent on Prayer.

-- On Conversion and day of Grace.

-- Covert from storm.

-- Worthy Walking.

Parsons Letter to VVem.

Adams Catechism.

Lambs New Years Gift

Perks way to mend the World.

Burys Antidote against the fear of Death.

Mr. Corbets Kingdom, God among men, with a Tract of Schism.

Self-imployment in Secret, by John Corbet.

Solomon's Proverbs.

Traughtons Popery, the grand Apostasy.

Heywoods Christ displayed.

Bishop Reignolds Meditations.

Mr. Edward Wests Legacy.

Gerhard on Death.

Whole Duty of Youth.

Welcome Communicant.

Ames Marrow Divinity.

Tho. Vincent against the Quakers, being the sandy Foundation shaken.

A warning to young men, or Brinkhursts Narrative.

Mr. Kidders help to smallest Children in their understanding of the
Church-Catechism.

Thomas Vincents Himns.

Bartlet on the Sacrament.

Greens needful preparatory to the Lords Supper.

Dr. Collings of ordinary matter of Prayer.

Wilsons Child's Trade.

Scondrets Catechism.

Sheffiields Catechism.

Much in a little, or an abstract of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof for
Infants Baptism.

Some brief Directions for the improvement of Infants Baptism.

Books Twelves.
Drexellius Repository.

Meads Spiritual Wisdom.

Nathanael Vincents little Child's Catechism.

The duty of Parents toward their Children.

A little book for little Children.

A method and instruction for the Art of divine Meditation. All three by Tho.
White.

The considerations of Drexelius on Eternity.

The shadow of the Tree of Life, by M. M.

The Psalms of David newly translated: more plain, smooth and agreeable to the
Text than any heretofore.

Mr. Henry Lukin's Life of Faith.

FINIS.

