A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, March the 1 st. 1690/1. By
the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester. Published by
Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1691.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN At WHITE HALL, March the 1st. 1690/1.
S. LUKE VI. 46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
say?
THese few Words contain in them a smart and serious Expostulation of our
Blessed Savior, with such who professed great Kindness to him in their Words,
but showed no Regard to his Commands. They owned him to be the Messiah, and
depended upon him for their Happiness, and were willing enough to be known to
be his Disciples and Followers, but yet his Doctrine made little Impression on
their Minds, and scarce any Alteration in the Course of their Lives. They loved
to be where Christ was, to hear his Doctrine, to see his Miracles, to observe
his Conversation, to admire what he did and said; but herein lay the whole of
their Religion; for although they named the name of Christ, and it may be
rejoiced and gloried in it, yet they did not depart from iniquity. Now,
considering the Circumstances of that time, this seems to have been an
unaccountable kind of Hypocrisy. For their calling Christ Lord, Lord, spoiled
their Interest in this World; and not doing what he said, debarred, them from
the hopes of Happiness by him in another. For, if they owned him to be their
Lord, they were bound to believe him in what he declared; and there is nothing
he does more expressly warn men of than hoping to be saved by him without
obeying his Commands. Matt. 7. 21.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Which is
shorter expressed, but to the same purpose here by S. Luke; And why call ye me
Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? As though he had said to them,
It is in vain to think to please and flatter me with your Words, when your
Actions are disagreeable to them. To call me Lord, Lord, is to own my Authority
in commanding you; but to do this, and yet wilfully to disobey me, is to show
your Hypocrisy and Folly together.

Which Expostulation of Christ, was not confined to that time, no more than his
Commands were; but it has always the same Force, where Persons are guilty of
the same Folly. For, although now none can plead for themselves, as they did,
Luke 13. 26.
We have eaten and drank in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets;
yet we may build as presumptuous hopes upon Privileges of another kind, which
may be as ineffectual to our Salvation, as these were when Christ said to those
very Persons, v. 27.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. We all bear the Name of Christ, and
own his Doctrine, and partake of his Sacraments; and in one of them profess to
eat and drink in his Presence, and at his Table, and renew our solemn Baptismal
Vow and Covenant with him as our Lord and Savior; and so we pray to him and
profess to depend upon him for our Salvation; and therefore we are as deeply
concerned in the Scope and Design of these Words, as ever the Jews were to whom
our Savior spoke them.

But that I may the better Apply them to the Consciences of all those who hear
me this Day, and to make my Discourse more Useful and Practical, I shall
single out some of the most Remarkable Instances of those Duties, which Christ
has enjoined to his Disciples of all Ages and Nations; and then show how just
and reasonable it is that all who call Christ Lord, Lord, should do what he
says about them; and yet that the Generality of those who do so, do very
little Mind or Regard them.

The main part of those Duties which Christ requires from all his Disciples may
be reduced to these three Heads:

I. Such as relate to the Government of our Passions. II. To the Government of
our Speech. III. To the Government of our Actions; so, as that we lead a Sober,
Righteous and Godly Life.
I. As to the Government of our Passions. And that may be considered three ways.

1. As to the things which are apt to Provoke us. 2. As to the things which are
apt to Tempt us. 3. As to the things which Concern us, in respect of our
Condition in this World.
(1) As to the things which are apt to Provoke us. Such is the frame of human
Nature, that we are very tender and sensible not only of any real Hurt or
Injury which may be done to our Bodies or Estates, but of any thing we
apprehend may do so, or that touches upon our Reputation. And where the Injury
is real, yet that which often touches most to the quick, is the Contempt which
is expressed in it. For, if the same thing be done by one, we are satisfied did
it not out of any Unkindness or Ill Will, the matter is easily passed over, and
makes no breach or difference between them. But, if it be intended for an
Affront, although it be never so little, then the brisker men's Spirits are, and
the higher Opinion they have of themselves, so much deeper Impression is
presently made in the Mind; and that inflames the Heart and puts the Blood and
Spirits into a quicker Motion in order to the Returning the Affront on him that
gave it. But there is a considerable difference in Men's Tempers to be observed;
some are very quick and hasty, others are slower in the beginning, but more
violent afterward; the Passions in the former, are like a Flash of Gunpowder,
which begins suddenly, makes a great Noise and is soon over; but the other are
like a burning Fever, which is lower at first, but rises by degrees, till the
whole body be in a Flame. The one is more troublesome, but the other more
dangerous; the Care of the one must be in the Beginning; of the other in the
Continuance of Passion, lest it turn into Hatred, Malice and Revenge. But, what
through the Natural Heat of Temper in some, the Jealousy and Suspicion in
others, the crossing each others Designs and Inclinations, the misconstruction
of Words and Actions, the Carelessness of some and the Frowardness and
Peevishness of others, Mankind are apt to lead very uneasy Lives with respect
to one another; and must do so unless they look after the Government of
themselves as to real or imaginary Provocations.

There are two Things I shall therefore speak to,

(1) That it is Reasonable that a Restraint should be laid on Men's violent
Passions. (2) That Christ has laid no unreasonable Restraint upon them.
(1) That it is Reasonable that a Restraint should be laid on Men's violent
Passions. And that on a twofold Account.

(1) With Respect to the common Tranquillity of human Life. (2) To the
particular Tranquillity of our own Minds.
(1) To the common Tranquillity of human Life. The great Comfort and Pleasure
of it depends on the mutual benefit Men have from Society with one another.
This cannot be enjoyed without particular Persons abridging themselves of some
natural Rights for a common Benefit. If we could suppose no such thing as
Government or Society among men, we must suppose nothing but Disorder and
Confusion; every one being his own Judge and Executioner too in case of any
apprehended Wrong or Injury done to him. Which condition of Life having all
imaginable Uneasiness attending it, by perpetual Fears and Jealousies and
Mistrusts of one another Powers, there was a Necessity that they must come to
some common Terms of Agreement with each other; so as to fix their Rights and
to establish a just Measure of Proceeding in case of Wrong. For every Man's
Revenging his own Injury according to his own Judgment, was one of those great
Inconveniences, which was to be remedied by Society, Laws and Government. And
Mankinds entering into Society for this End, does suppose it possible for them
to keep under their violent Passions; and to submit their private Injuries to
the equal Arbitration of Laws; or else they are made to no purpose, unless it
be to punish men for what they cannot avoid. For many of those Crimes which all
the Laws of Mankind do punish, as wilful Murder, may be committed through the
force of a violent Passion; and if that be irresistible, then the Laws which
punish it are not founded on Reason and Justice. But if such Laws are very Just
and Reasonable, as no doubt they are, then all Mankind are agreed that Men's
violent Passions may and ought to be Restrained in some Cases. The only Dispute
then remaining is, whether it may not be as fitting to restrain our Passions in
such Cases, which the Law takes no notice of. For, there is a Superior Law,
viz. that of Reason whereby we are to be Governed; and the Public Laws do not
forbid or punish Offenses because they are unreasonable, but because they are
dangerous and hurtful to human Society. And if it be allowed to be fitting and
necessary for men to keep their Passions within the Compass of Laws, why not
within the Conduct of Reason? Especially, when a great deal of Disorder may
happen, and disturbance of the Peace and Quiet of human Society, by the
Violence of Passions, which may be out of the Reach of human Laws. And every
Man is bound by virtue of his being in Society, to preserve the Tranquillity of
it as much as he can.

(2) The Tranquillity of our own Minds depends upon it. And certainly, that is
a very Reasonable Motive for the Government of our Passions, since those are
the Occasions of all the Storms and Tempests within our breasts. For the
Government of Reason is calm, even and serene, full of Peace and all the
Blessings which follow it; but the Government of Passion is tyrannical and
boisterous, uncertain and troublesome; never free from doing Mischief to it
self or others. The greatest Pleasure of Passion is Revenge; and yet that is so
unnatural, so full of anxiety and fear of the Consequents of it, that he who
can subdue this unruly Passion has more real Pleasure and Satisfaction in his
mind, than he who seeks to gratify it most. For, if he be disappointed, then
he must be uneasy by failing of his end; if he be not, then he is tormented
with the Apprehensions of what may follow it. So that there is nothing which
conduces more to the greatest Blessing of Life, the Tranquillity of our Minds,
than the Government of our Passions does.

(2) Let us now see, whether our Savior has laid any Unreasonable Restraint
upon our Passions.

There are Three things he particularly requires in order to the Government of
them.

(1) Meekness. (2) Patience. (3) Love of Enemies. And I hope to make it appear,
that there is nothing unreasonable in any of these.

(1) Meekness. Which is such a Gentleness of Temper, as makes a Man not easy
to be provoked. There is a great deal of difference between Meekness and
Stupidity; the one arises from a natural Dullness and Insensibility; the other
from a fixed, calm and composed Temper of Mind; and is founded on two, which
are both wise things, especially when they go together; and those are,
Consideration and Resolution. For, nothing tends to the abating the heat and
violence of Passion so much, as Consideration does, and Resolution makes it
effectual. If it were nothing but the time it gives, that is of great force for
letting out the inward Fermentation, which will spend it self in great Measure,
if Vent be given to it. Whereas, if it be kept in and suffered to work upon it
self, it turns from a hasty Passion to Malice and Revenge. But Consideration is
of greater Use, as it suggests Arguments from Reason to quell and allay the
sudden heat of Passions; as, That, it Exposes the Weakness of our Minds, in not
being able to keep under that which they ought to Govern and have Power to
Command; That, it is a great Folly to disorder our selves, at the Pleasure of
our Enemies; or, at such Accidents, which we can neither prevent, nor remove;
That, the wisest thing we can do, is not to betray our Folly to others, if we
cannot wholly suppress it in our selves; That, we weaken the Reins of the
Government of our Selves, by not holding them with a stricter hand; and make
our Passions more seditious and turbulent by letting them alone; That, the more
we try to command our selves the easier we shall do it; That our most
Rebellious Passions will submit, if they find we are in Earnest; That, it is
the Way to make that a real Injury by being disturbed, which would lose is
Force by being neglected; That, while we are true to our selves, we are out of
the reach of our Enemies, and then we are most under their Power, when we are
least under our own; That, the great Work of Religion lies within us; and that
we are in a very ill Condition if neither Reason nor Religion can keep us in
order. By such Considerations as these, men are brought to a more calm and
composed Temper, which is that Meekness which our Savior requires. And to this
he seems to Appropriate the Happiness of this Life. Blessed are the Meek for
they shall inherit the Earth. Matt. 5. 5.
What does our Blessed Savior mean by Inheriting the Earth? Is there any thing
like Blessedness to be expected in this Troublesome and Sinful World? Not
Absolutely; but Comparatively there may; and if there be any thing like it to
be had here, the Meek may put in for the largest share of it. For they have
more Friends and fewer Enemies than the rest of the World; they enjoy
themselves with more quietness and satisfaction, and are less disturbed at the
Noise and tumultuous Passions of the rest of Mankind. O happy Temper! To be
calm and easy and in good humor, in the midst of Disorders and Provocations;
To enjoy the Peace and Serenity of the Regions above, in the midst of the
Storms and Tempests, here below; To raise the Mind above the Power of
Detraction; and thereby to suffer the Venom of Malicious Tongues to scatter and
disperse it self in the open Air, if it does not return to the Breasts of those
from whom it came. S. James might therefore well call it the Meekness of
Wisdom, Jam. 3. 13.
not only because Wisdom directs it, but that it consists very much in the
Exercise of it.

2. Patience. For let Persons be endued with the Spirit of Meekness, yet the
World is so froward and hard to be pleased, so captious and ill-natured, so
ready to apprehend an Injury and to Revenge it, that there is great need of
Patience, not only in bearing the Troubles of Life, but in forbearing to return
evil for evil. And this is that which our Savior particularly requires of his
Disciples. He strictly forbids all Causeless Anger, all Contumelious and
Reproachful Words; Matt. 5. 22.
and when Injuries are done us, he commands us that we resist not evil; v. 39.
but if one smite us on the right Cheek, to turn to him the other also. v. 40.
And if any man will sue thee at the Law and take away thy coat, let him have
thy cloak also. v. 41.
And whosoever will compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Now here lies
a real Difficulty; for this seems to go beyond the bounds of human Patience: To
pass by Affronts without taking notice of them; not to Resent the Injuries of
those whom no Kindness can oblige, seems to be a great degree of Virtue; and it
is so; but to bind hand and foot when we receive them, to invite them to do
more, and to offer our selves to double the proportion, seems wholly
unaccountable to Reason, and inconsistent with the Wisdom of Christianity.

The true Account of the meaning of these Commands is this; Our Savior takes
it for granted, that all considerable matters of Right and Wrong were
determined by Laws; as the most equal Measures between Parties; and these he
meddled not with; For, says he, to one that desired him to interpose in such a
Matter; Luke 12. 14
Who made me a Judge or a Divider among you? Therefore he does not abridge his
Followers from making use of these Laws and Courts of Judicature, which are
established for matters of common Justice and Equity; But all the Laws in the
World cannot alter the Temper of some men's minds, who are peevish and
quarrelsome, who are provoked on any slight Occasion, and it may be are
provoked if you gave them none. Like the Roman Orator, De Ira, l. 3. c. 8.
Seneca mentions, who was angry with every one that came near him; and when a
Client sought to humor him in every thing, he was at last angry with him,
because he did not provoke him. There are some Tempers so easily provoked, and
yet so hard to be Reconciled, as if their Original Sin did not lie in
Concupiscence but in Ill Nature. And yet, even that is a kind of Concupiscence;
for the Stoics defined Anger by Libido; Tusc. 3. 9.
and said it was a Lust of Revenge; and so far, seemed more unreasonable than
that of Intemperance; because this aims only at Pleasure, in things which are
apt to produce it (however mean and unreasonable) but the other is an
extravagant and unnatural Pleasure, which arises from another Pain; And
differs from the other, as the Pleasures of evil Spirits do from those of
Brutes.

But if we happen to converse among such who take Pleasure in doing us Injuries
upon every slight Occasion, by some Personal Affronts, or litigious Suits, or
unjust Exactions in ordinary Cases; what are we to do? May we not Right our
selves by Retaliating the Injury upon them? Since the Law of Moses did allow of
Retaliation in case of real Injuries, Exodus 21. 24.
an Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth; Levit. 24. 20.
and so by an Equitable Construction of the Law, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
it may extend to Personal Affronts. Thus the Jews indeed understood it; but if
our Savior had allowed their Interpretation, he would never have said, But I
say unto you, that ye resist not evil. There was a Spirit of Revenge in them,
so as they would pass by no kind of Injuries, although they were such, which
the Law had made no Provision for; and this our Savior Condemns. But here
comes a hard Case to be resolved; not so in it self, but the Custom of the
World has made it so; for when a mistaken Notion of Honor and Conscience come
in Competition, it is not an easy thing to forego Honor for Conscience sake.
The Case is, concerning Contumelious Words and Personal Affronts, which are
given to Men of Honor. Is it unlawful for them to Right themselves according
to the received Customs among them, when the Law takes no notice of such
Injuries, and so seems to leave it to them? This is the Case; and I have put it
as fair as the thing will bear. I might say in general that our Savior makes
no distinction of Men's Honor and Quality in his Commands; and that for all
that I can see, such must be saved on the same Terms with others; That Honor
is but an imaginary thing when it stands in Competition with the Rule of
Conscience; and that no Custom is to be observed against Reason and Religion:
But here lies the insuperable Difficulty; how the Exposing one another Lives
for the sake of Reproachful Words or Personal Affronts, can be Reconciled to
this Command of Christ? For my part, I cannot see how it is possible to do it;
since in this Case, there is a studied and premeditated Design of Revenge in
the Case of such Injuries which are here mentioned; and that of the highest
Nature, and beyond any Proportion between the Offense and the Punishment, which
all men out of Passion, think, in common Justice ought to be considered. I know
some Casuists in the Church of Rome, allow it to be lawful to take away the
Lives of any who give them Contumelious Words; but these have been condemned as
very loose Casuists; And they have found out a subtle way of directing the
Intention, whereby to keep from breaking the Laws of Christ; but this is too
subtle to be reconciled with the Plainness of his Laws; and they all deny it to
be lawful by way of Revenge. Others say much better, that although Nature may
seem to give an Injured Person a Right to vindicate himself by the best Means
he can; Gr. de I. B. and P. l. 2. 1. 10.
yet that Right is so restrained and limited by Christ's Commands in this case,
that it is by no means lawful for Christians to use it; and to pretend to do
it for a Reparation of honor, a ratione and pietate valde alienam videtur, is
repugnant both to Reason and Religion; says one, who very well understood the
Rules of both.

But all the pretended Right of Nature is taken away by Laws, and where those
declare it to be Wilful Murder to take away the Life of another on such
Accounts as these, there is no color left for natural Right, which supposes no
determination by Laws.

I confess it requires a more than ordinary Degree of Christian Fortitude as
well as Patience, to be able to despise such a prevailing Custom. But if Men
hope to be saved by Christ, they must observe his Commands; and if they once
declare, that they are Resolved to do so in this particular, (if they do the
same in all others) it will be then thought to be Conscience and not Cowardice
for them to decline a Challenge; and that upon good Grounds they contemn such a
Custom, which no Good man could ever Approve, nor any Wise man Defend.

3. Love of Enemies. This seems to be harder yet. Is it not enough to bear
them; but must we love them too? Yes, Christ has strictly required it.

But I say unto you, Luke 6. 27, 35.
Love your Enemies; and again in this very Chapter, But love your Enemies. If
he had bid Men love their Friends and take heed of their Enemies, there are
some Ages of the World, wherein this had been no impertinent Advice. But how
can those be supposed to love their Enemies, who hardly love any thing but
themselves? Self-Opinion, Self-Will, Self-Interest prevail over the
far-greatest Part of Mankind; I wish I could not say, even among those who call
Christ Lord, Lord. But Self-Love as natural as it is, must be artificially
disguised; for, if it appears too openly, it meets with so much Self-Love in
others, that it will not be easily born. Therefore the most crafty Lovers of
themselves, if they design to have the Love of others, must conceal their
inward Passion. For, he that appears to set up himself, is certain to make the
rest of Mankind his Enemies; for, even those who would do the same, will be the
most displeased with those who do it. Therefore, the most certain way to Honor
and universal Esteem, is to mind the Good of others more than our own; to be
Just and Charitable and Kind to all; and to oblige as many as we can, without
Partiality or Prejudice. And this, I say, is that Love of Enemies which our
Savior requires, which does not suppose the same kind of Affection to them
which we have to our Friends, for that is grounded on mutual Love and Good Will
to each other; which, if we suppose in Enemies, we suppose a Contradiction; for
that is to suppose them not to be Enemies, but Friends. What then is it which
our Savior means? It is certainly an Universal Charity, or a Readiness of Mind
to do Good to all, although they have Personally provoked, or Injured us. And
so Christ himself explains it, Luke 6. 27. 33. 35.
by doing Good to our Enemies, praying for them and relieving them in their
Necessities; and he proposes the best Example in the World for our imitation;
and that of God himself, who makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good,
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. But none can suppose that the
righteous and holy God, can have the same Love or Kindness for the Evil, which
he has for the Good, or for the Unjust, which he has for the Just. So that
this Precept, which being misunderstood, seems to be irreconcilable to human
Nature, contains in it, nothing but what all Mankind approve in others, as
unwilling as they are to practice it themselves.

And now, it is time to make a stand, and to look about us, for, I have gone
through our Savior's Commands with Respect to the things which are apt to
provoke us. And where are those Christians to be found, who do what Christ has
said herein, who do yet every day call him Lord, Lord? If Peevishness and
Frowardness, perpetual Uneasiness and Discontent; If Rancour and Bitterness,
Strife and Envying, Faction and Animosity; If Impatience of apprehended
Injuries, and the making of Enemies, instead of loving them, were the Marks of
good Christians, we should find Number enough; even among those who pretend to
Reformation. We profess to thank God for a late great Deliverance from the
hands of our Enemies, I mean as to our Religion; (and truly there appears more
and more Reason for it, since it is so much more evident that the Design was no
less than a total Subversion of our Religion.)

But what a sad Requital is this, for so great Mercies, to break out into
Factions and Parties, instead of pursuing the common Interest of our Religion?
Instead of laying aside Differences about Religion, to increase them; nay to
make Religion it self not only the Subject of their Quarrels, but of their
Scorn and Contempt? What can be said or hoped for, as to such a froward,
unthankful, Atheistical Generation of Men? Thanks be to God, there are not
wanting some Extraordinary Examples of true Piety and Goodness among us; and of
Meekness, Patience and Universal Charity, and truly there needs a great deal,
to bear up against the daring and insolent Profaneness and Irreligion of
others. When I once see a true Spirit of Reformation prevail among us, not
merely as to Doctrines, but as to Men's Lives and Tempers; when I see them more
zealous for God and Religion, than for the Interest of particular Parties; when
I see them really promoting Peace and Unity, and not making a Pretense of it to
serve private Ends, I may then hope for a lasting Settlement of the true
Religion among us. But till then --

(2) I proceed to the second Head of our Savior's Commands, and that is as to
such things which Tempt us. S* James says, Every man is tempted, Jam. 1. 14.
when he is drawn aside of his own Lust and enticed. Lust is the ungoverned
Desire of Sensual Pleasure. Now, as to this, Christ has laid so strict a
Command, as seems very hard for human Nature to observe. For he not only
forbids the Act of Adultery, but the Tendencies to it; viz. the Impurity of the
inward Desires, and of Looks and Glances, and makes these to be Adultery in the
Heart. Matt. 5. 28.
What is that? For Adultery is an outward, deliberate Act, and has Injustice
as well as Uncleanness in it. But Desires and Looks, are sudden and transient
things, which may leave, no permanent Effect behind them. However, our Savior,
to show how much God abhorrs Impurity, (who sees into the Secret Thoughts and
Intentions of the Heart,) declares that the unmortified Desires and inward
Lusts are very displeasing to God; And therefore that those who hope to see
God, Matt. 5. 8.
must be Pure in heart. Which as it implies a sincere Endeavor to Suppress all
inward Motions which are contrary to it, is both a Reasonable and Necessary
Duty.

But the hardest part of Christ's Commands in this matter, is that which
requires us to pluck out right eyes and to cut off right hands: Matt. 5. 29. 30.
Must the blind and the lame only go to Heaven? But he speaks of such sinful
Inclinations in us, which seem as delightful and useful to us as to the
Pleasures of Life, as a right Eye or a right Hand; yet we must part with them,
if we ever hope to get to Heaven. Not, by any one single Act like the cutting
off a Hand, or plucking out an Eye, but by a serious, constant and sincere
Endeavor to Mortify and Subdue them. And if this be thought hard, the
Consideration of future Happiness and Misery ought to Reconcile us to it; and
surely it is Reasonable, we should part with something which is pleasant to us
here, for the sake of an infinitely greater Pleasure in another World;
especially since this is only a Sensual Pleasure, which cannot be pursued
without Disturbance of the Mind, and can be enjoyed but for a little time; and
the other is no less than Eternal Felicity of Soul and Body together.

(3) As to the things which Concern us, as to our Condition in this World.
There is no Precept of Christ which seems more inconsistent with the Wisdom of
this World, than this does. For, as that lies in taking great Care for the
future; so our Savior on the contrary seems to allow none at all Therefore I
say unto you, Matt. 6. 15.
Take no thought for your Life, Luke 12. 22.
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet, for your Body, what ye
shall put on. What does our Savior mean by this? Would he have all Christians
live like the young Ravens, Luke. 12. 24.
merely upon Providence? Job 38. 41.
Or, Psalm. 147. 9.
as the Lillies of the Field, which grow and flourish and yet neither Toil nor
Spin? But Man is an Intelligent Creature, and apt to forecast and contrive
things for his future advantage, and God seems to have left things very much to
his own Care and Providence; and generally speaking, Men's Condition in this
World is according to it. What then? Does our Savior indulge Men in a
Careless, Easy, Unthinking Life? Or, require that his Disciple's thoughts
ought to be wholly taken up with matters of Religion? 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Not, if S. Paul knew his meaning; for he says, Those who provide not for
their own, have denied the Faith and are worse than Infidels. But this only
seems to make the Difficulty greater. Therefore to clear it, we must attend to
our Savior's Scope and Design; which was, to persuade his Disciples to lay up
their Treasure in Heaven, to seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness in
the first place; and then represents this World and another as two opposite
Interests, so that one cannot serve two Masters; which implies a Contradiction
to each other. So that what follows must be understood in such a Sense, as is
inconsistent with the main Duty, of looking after Heaven as our Happiness; and
therefore ought not to be understood of a Prudent, Necessary Care, but of an
Anxious, Solicitous, Distrustful Care, which implies that we place our
Happiness too much here. And therefore S. Luke subjoyns these Commands to the
Parable of the Rich Man, Luke. 12. 18, 19.
whose heart was in his Barns and Storehouses, and took great Care to lay in
Provision enough for a sensual and voluptuous Life: But to show the unspeakable
Folly of such vain Contrivances, it was said to him, This night shall thy Soul
be required of thee; v. 20.
and then whose shall these things be which thou have provided?

II. I come now to our Savior's Commands with Respect to the Government of our
Speech. And he seems to be very severe as to this, Matt. 12. 36.
when he says, That every Idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof at the Day of Judgment. What a heavy Account then, are those to
make, whose time is so much taken up with idle and impertinent talk; and who
can hardly forbear it, when they should be most serious? Is it unlawful then
to speak any more than is just necessary to express our Minds? May we not
employ our Speech sometimes for our innocent Diversion and Entertainment if we
keep within the bounds of Prudence and Religion? I do not see that our Savior
forbids it. For the idle Words he speaks of there, are profane, false, abusive,
malicious Reproaches of Religion and the means to confirm it; as appears by his
bringing it just after the mention of the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. v.
31.
So that all such Abuses of Speech which entrench on Piety and Good Manners, or
Truth and Sincerity, are certainly forbidden by him. But there is one
particular Vice of Conversation, Matt. 5. 34, 37.
which he has with most force of Argument forbiddden; and yet (which is a
great shame to any that would be called Christians) none more common among some
who would pretend to understand the Methods of Conversation and the best Modes
of Speaking; and that is the profane Custom of Swearing. I take it for granted,
that all are Christians among us, till they disown it themselves; and however
Men may Act, they are not willing to Renounce all hopes of Salvation by Christ.
I beseech them then to consider, what a Contempt of his Authority is implied in
this, too fashionable sort of Profaneness? The other Duties I have mentioned,
have a great Difficulty in them, as to our Tempers and Inclinations; but
nothing of that Nature can be so much as pretended as to this. For no Man could
ever say, that he had a Swearing Constitution, or that it was an Infirmity of
his Nature. There is nothing in it but the Tyranny of a very bad Custom; which
every Prudent Man, as well as Good Christian, will see Cause to break. But what
a Reproach is it, to the very Profession of Christianity among us for so plain,
so easy a Command of Christ to be broken so commonly, so unconcernedly, so
impertinently, as is every day done; and yet they call Christ Lord, Lord? In
all Ages, there were some pretended Christians, who did not sincerely obey the
Commands of our Savior; but their Hypocrisy was of a finer and more
Artificial make; this is gross and rude, without the Common Respect which is
due to the Religion we all profess to be that, or hope to be saved by. Some
say, a Custom in it self is no Sin, because it is no Act; but certainly a
Customary breach of a plain Command is so much greater a Sin, as it implies a
greater Contempt of him that made it; and when Custom has taken away the Sense
of a Fault, it is so much more aggravated by it. It is really a matter to be
wondered at, that among Persons professing a better sort of Breeding, as well
as Christianity; a Vicious Custom, so Untempting in it self, so Unbecoming the
Decency of Conversation, so Affronting to the Divine Majesty, so directly
contrary to the Commands of Christ, should get so deep a rooting in ordinary
Conversation, that it seems almost impossible to be Reformed. But till Men do
think of breaking off such a Practice as this, I despair of ever seeing them
Reform other things which have a deeper Root in their natural Inclinations, and
have greater Advantages as to this World.

III. The Commands of Christ extend to the whole Course of our Actions; so, as
that we lead a sober, righteous and godly Life.

1. As to Sobriety. Take heed to your selves, says Christ, Luke 21. 24
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness.
These are somewhat hard words for that which our Age has learnt to express in
much softer terms of Eating and Drinking well. Luxury seems a thing quite
forgotten to be a Sin* among those who are most guilty of it; and Intemperance
thought so uncertain a thing, as though it were impossible to tell when Persons
are guilty of it. It Is true, that Temperance may vary as to the Degrees and
Limits of it; and we do not pretend to define it by Grains and Scruples. But
still, there ought to be a Governing our Appetites according to Reason, and
that is Temperance. But what is Reason in this Case? Some send us to the Brutes
to find out what Reason is; and they tell us, it lies in a plain simple Diet,
such as the Beasts use, without provoking or raising the Appetite. But I know
not where God has forbidden the Use of Art, as to our Eating and Drinking; and
if this were so, we must practice Temperance only in the Use of Water and
Acorns. If mere Satisfaction of Nature were the exact Rule of Temperance, then
eating or drinking any thing beyond it were a Sin; which would fill the Minds
of those who are afraid to sin, with infinite Scruples; and make all Feasting
unlawful. Yet our Savior was present at one in Cana of Galilee; and did a
Miracle relating to it. But we need not run into Niceties in this matter; For,
Intemperance is either an over-charging of Nature, so as to make it to sink or
totter under the load; or it is a wanton humouring and pleasing the Appetit^,
not, for the Service of Nature, but for the Pleasure of Eating and Drinking;
Or, it is as S. Paul calls it, Phil. 3. 19.
making a God of their belly, by Sacrificing their Time, their Study, their
Estates in order to the filling and pleasing of it. Any of these ways, it is no
Difficulty to understand what Intemperance is; I wish it were as easy to avoid
it.

2. As to Righteousness. Our Savior has given one Admirable Rule; which all
Persons agree to be of excellent Use in all Contracts and Transactions of Men
with one another; v. 31. And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also
to them likewise. Which is an Universal Rule of Justice and Equity, if it be
understood of what we would have others to do to us according to Reason, and
not according to the Partial Affection we are apt to have to our selves. For
this Rule is founded upon the second great Commandment, as our Savior calls
it, Matt. 22. 39.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

3. As to Godliness. He lays the Foundation of that upon the first and great
Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart and with all
thy Soul and with all thy Strength. Matt. 22. 37.
We need not to question, but wherever there is such a Love of God, as is
here required, there will be true Godliness in all the parts of it. And where
this is wanting, all external Shows of Devotion want the true Life and Spirit
of it. For it is the Love of God which makes all our weak and imperfect
Services to be acceptable to him; and without it all our Prayers and our
Fastings, and all other Appearances of Devotion, are empty and insipid
Formalities. Not, but that the Acts themselves are Commendable; but, they are
like a Body without a Soul, dull and heavy; or like the leaves of a Tree in
Autumn, which make a great noise in the Wind, but are dry, sapless and soon
fall to the Ground. But where the Love of God prevails, it keeps up the Life
and Order and Vigor of Devotion; and preserves it from being tainted by
hypocrisy, or choked by the love of this World, or decaying from want of
Constancy and Resolution.

Thus I have set before you some of the most remarkable Duties of Christianity;
not such as depend on the Opinions and Fancies of Men; but such as our Blessed
Savior, the great Lawgiver of his Church, has made the necessary Conditions
of our Salvation by him.

And what now can we say for our Selves? We do call Christ Lord, Lord; or else
we renounce our Baptismal Vow, and all hopes of Salvation by him. But can we
say that we love God, when we love what he hates, viz. Sin? Can we say, we love
him with all our Heart and Soul, when our Hearts are so much divided between
him and the Vanities of this World? Can we say, we love him with all our Might,
when our Love to God is apt to grow cold and remiss upon any apprehension of
Difficulties? Can we say, that we love our Neighbor as our Selves, when we
despise and scorn him, or overreach and defraud him, or oppress and ruin him?
If it go not so far, are we as tender of his Reputation as of our own; as
unwilling to see him injured, as ready to help him in his Necessities, as we
should desire it from others, if we were in the same Circumstances? If strict
Sobriety and Temperance be the Duties of Christians, where are those Virtues to
be generally found? I do not speak of particular Persons; but I am afraid,
there is hardly such a thing left as a Sober Party among us. What profane,
customary Swearing is everywhere to be met with? What Complaints are daily
made of the Abounding of all sorts of Wickedness, even to an open Scorn and
Contempt, not barely of Christianity, but of any kind of Religion? For, many
who have long denied the Power, seem to be grown weary of the very Form of
Godliness; unless it serves some particular End and Design. So that, if we look
abroad in the World, we find little Regard showed to the Precepts of Christ;
and yet those who commit these things call Christ Lord, Lord. What is the
meaning of all this gross Hypocrisy? Nothing would have been thought more
Absurd or Ridiculous, than for one who used no kind of Abstinence, to be
thought a Pythagorean; or one that indulged his Passions a Stoic; or one who
eats Flesh and drinks Wine a Brachman, or Banian. It is really, as much for any
one to break the known and particular Precepts of Christ, and yet desire to be
thought a Christian. For, a loose, profane and debauched Christian, is a
Contradiction in Morality; It is to be a Christian against Christ, to call him
Lord, Lord, and yet to defy his Laws and Authority. A Star without Light, a
Guide without Eyes, a Man without Reason, a Sun with nothing but Spots, are not
more absurd Suppositions, than a Christian without any Grace, or Virtue.

But let us say what we will, there are and will be such, who will own Christ
and call him Lord, Lord, and yet will not part with their sins for him. There
were Multitudes of such formerly who would lay down their Lives for the Ground
he trod on, and yet would not mortify one Sin for his sake. The Reason is
still the same which our Savior mentions, they hope that calling him Lord,
Lord, will make amends for all; and yet it is not possible that fairer warning
should be given to any, than he has given in this Case, that let them pretend
what they will, he will say to them at the great Day, Depart from me all ye
workers of Iniquity. Matt. 7. 25.
O dreadful Sentence! Not, Luke 13. 27.
to be mentioned without Horror, nor to be thought upon without Astonishment.
How miserable, for ever miserable, must their condition be, whom Christ at that
day shall bid to Depart from him! What is this, some will be apt to say, but to
put all Christians into utter Despair? For, who is there that can say, that he
has done all that Christ has said? Truly, we have a sufficient Ground for
deep Humility and serious Repentance, and timely Reformation. But there is a
great difference between the Failing of our Duty and the Works of Iniquity;
between the Infirmities of those who sincerely endeavor to do his Will, and
the Presumptuous Sins of those who despise it; between Sins committed and
heartily repented of; and Sins habitually practiced and continued in, without
any Marks of Amendment. Such must go out of this World in a State of Sin, and
therefore can expect nothing but that dreadful Sentence, which I tremble at
the very thoughts of Repeating. But there are others, who in the sincerity of
their hearts have endeavored to do his Will; and whose Sincerity will be so
far accepted by him, that he will say to them at that Day, Come ye blessed of
my Father, Matt. 25. 34.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World.

To which God of his infinite Mercy bring us through the Mediation of Christ
Jesus our Lord.

FINIS.
Lately Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, Febr. 22. 1688/9. upon 1
Pet. 14. verse 18.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at White Hall, March* the 23d.
1689/90. upon Ecclesistiastes 11. verse 9.

Christian Magnanimity: A Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church at Worcester,
at the Time of the Assizes, September 21. 1690. upon 2 Timothy 1. verse 7. All
three by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Bishop of Worcester's Charge to the Clergy of his Diocese, in his Primary
Visitation, begun at Worcester, September. 11. 1690. Quarto.


