AN ASSERTION FOR True and Christian CHURCH-POLICIE.

Wherein Certain Politic Objections made against the planting of PASTORS and
Elders in every Congregation, are sufficiently ANSWERED.

And Wherein also sundry projects are set down, how the Discipline by Pastors
and Elders may be planted, without any derogation to the Kings Royal
Prerogative, any indignity to the three Estates in Parliament, or any greater
alteration of the laudable Laws, Statutes, or Customs of the Realm, than may
well be made without damage to the people.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed 1642.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in High COURT of
Parliament.
Right HONORABLE, etc.
THe Ensuing Treatise which I am bold to present to Your wisdoms view,
contains principal political reasons grounded upon the Laws of this
Kingdom, for the removing of the present Hierarchy, and planting of a
Government by Pastors and Elders. The appellation of Lay Elders has been
very displeasing to many; whereas the Elder intended to be planted, is not lay,
but in regard of the service (wherein he is to be employed) Ecclesiastical.
The Author was an elaborate Student in the civil Law, and a professor of it.
He was esteemed learned by the best of that profession, as also by Divines and
common Lawyers, learned Sir Edward Cook, late Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, Sir Christopher Yelverton, late Judge of the Common Pleas, Sir Henry
Finch, late the Kings Sergeant at Law, and others have given testimony of him.
The Treatise is an answer to diverse passages in a Book written by D. Whitgift,
late Archb. of Canterbury, entitled An admonition to the Parliament. The
Author (as I doubt not but will appear to your Wisdoms) has written with
the spirit of meekness and humility, submitting all to the judgment of an
High Court of Parliament, he disputes with the Great Bishop in a Scholasticall
way, without one syllable of reviling, or bitter language, which he ever
detested. He discovers the foundation of the Hierarchy to be totally
illegal, and to be abolished by the abolition of the Papal Canon Law, which
appears to be abolished by the statute of 25. of Henry 8. cap. 9. The truth
whereof (being discovered by the Authors means to the said learned Judge Sir
Edward Cook,) he did most ingenuously acknowledge, and did avow he never
understood the statute so well before, yet affirmed he thought he had read the
said statute an hundred times. May it please you in your wisdoms to commend
the Treatise to be viewed by the learned Gent. of the long Robe, whose awful
judgments I shall ever honor. Most true it is (I dare aver) there is little
written in this Kingdom tending to the removal of the Episcopacie, from
Legal and Political arguments, but the Author has the arrows in his quiver,
I say not that others have borrowed light from his Candle. Right Honorable and
Right worthy, I shall humbly take further boldness (humbly presuming upon your
Honorable favors) if this poor model find acceptance in your sight, to
present you with a new impression of an abstract written in time of famous
Queen Elizabeth, (a Book well known to learned King James) by the same
Author, whose memory, I am bound by nature to Honor. Give me leave only now
to make known unto you the Title and several Treatises contained in it. It is
entitled, An abstract of certain Laws, Canons and Constitutions Synodall and
Provincial in force within the Queens dominions, and for the most part
unknown to the subject. It contains these principal Treatises. 1. That a
learned Ministry is commanded by Law. 2. That Pluralities are forbidden by
Law. 3. That it is unlawful to make a Minister without a title. 4. That it is
unlawful for a Clerk to have civil authority. This abstract was seemingly
answered by the railing style of a then Doctor Cozens, but by a further
encounter, and the counterpoyson (yet extant) written by the same Author, he
departed the Field with Honor, such was the opinion of many learned, among
others of the foresaid, Reverend Judge, Sir Henry Yelverton. This treatise was
never questioned nor quarreld, for ought I ever heard: Yet was the Author well
known to many of the Bishops. You may happily in your Wisdoms conceive some
things might have been omitted, as not wholly incident to the time, and some
abbreviated in regard of the shortness of your time, and of the high affairs
now in hand. But may it please you, being about so to do, I found the light
must have bin much Eclipsed, and the truth obscured. I am over bold, most
humbly to commend the defense of what he writes, grounded upon the laws of the
Kingdom, to your most Honorable protection. It shall be enough for me to
attend among the meanest of your servants, having heretofore had the happiness
to have bin a member (though unworthy) of the Honorable House of Commons.

Presenting your honors and your grave wisdoms with my heartiest prayers and
humblest service, In most humble manner, I entreat your pardon of and for

The Contents.
THe defenders of the Hierarchy confess their government is not apostolical.
page 2. The bringing in of the discipline desired, causes no alteration of
temporal laws, nor the officers of a kingdom. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 No fear
that profane men will overthrow the Gospel if the form of Church government
be altered, 10. The description of lukewarm professors, that will be of that
religion the King will be of, 11. The Puritan protestants can never overthrow
the Gospel, 13. Neither can the Papist because he is overthrown by the Gospel,
13 The planting of an Apostolical government will draw no alteration of the
Laws of the Realm, 14. The whole Papal Law is totally abolished by the
statute of the 25 of Henry 8. c. 19. of the submission of the Clergy, as
appears by the body of the statute and the proviso, from the 15. to the 20.
Canon and civil Laws no part of the Laws of the Realm but by sufferance, 15
An imbasement for Civillians to have preferment by the offices of the Canon
Law, that ought not to be used, 17, 18, 19. Whence it follows that the papal
Canon Law being abolished, the papal offices and functions of Archbishops and
Bishops are also abolished, being grounded upon the same Law, 20 Power properly
and improperly called spiritual, 20, 21 Bishops remain ordinary by custom,
provincial Canons and statute Law, though papal laws be abolished, 21 The
King though Supreme governor of the Church cannot give Archbishops and
Bishops spiritual power properly called spiritual: that power must be derived
from the Scripture, 20. The Bishops did use a plenary power, devised and
promulged new Canons without the Queens assent, 23 All the Bishops together
can make no new Law, and yet every Bishop does make many laws, 24 All
temporal officers do draw their power from the King one way or other, 25 The
Charter of England confirms not the power of Archbishops or Bishops, because
their power appears not by the Scripture to be given them by God, and
therefore the King and Parliament, may be pleased to abolish both them and
their power, as King Hen. 8. did abolish Monks and Friars. 26. 40. and 28 The
challeng for Lordly primacy out of the great charter answered, 28 The study of
the civil Law and the professors of it may flourish more than now they do, 28
Fees for probate of testaments let to farm, 29 Fees dew for execution of
functions of the Canon Law disproportionable for a D^ctor of the Civil Law, 30
An Act of Parliament for the advancement of the Civil Law is set down, and a
form laid for all proceedings in the Courts in which the Civil Lawyers should
be Judges, 32, 33 It will advance the honor of the King, and the good of his
subjects to have matters of tithes and testaments, and matrimony reduced by act
of Parliament to be tried by the Judges of the Common Law, 37 Matters of
tithes and other causes of light nature pertain to civil justice, 37 The
temporal law may easily be applied to causes now reputed Ecclesiastical, 39
How legacies may be recovered at the Common Law, 42 Matters of marriages more
fit to be decided by the Kings officers than by the Bishops, 43 Much ad^e in
the Bishops Courts about Accipio and Accipiam, 44 The common Law preferred by
the Bishops above the Law of God and the civil Law, 45 Causes of Adulteries,
Slander, Heresy which by sufferance only have bin exempted from the Cognizance
of the King may be arbitrated by the Judges of the common Law, 47 Hierarchy may
be judged felony if it please the King, 49 The cognizance of all crimes as well
as of some by the Law of God belong to the King, 50 No impeachment and
impropriations in lay men's hands, the stat. of 15. Rich. 2. and the 4. Hen. 4.
being observed for a Vicar endowes, yet if it please the King and Parliament, a
law may be made for reducing of impropriations, which may be done. First, by
restitution. Secondly, by commutation. Thirdly, by redemption. Fourthly, by
contribution, 52 Parochial Churches to what use they were founded, 56 First,
restitution of many may and ought to be, which are now accounted the temporal
revenues of Archbishops and Bishops which were given to several Churches, are
now spoiled of them by Archbishops and Bishops, 55, 56, 57, 58. Secondly,
commutations may be made of many of the Bishops lands given to superstitious
uses, for many impropriations in the Kings hand and the hands of many of the
Nobility, 56, 58, 59 Thirdly, there may be a redemption made of the same land,
or buying in of many impropriations by a common purse or treasury which will
increase. 1. When the people shall be discharged of the burden of
Ecclesiastical Courts. 2. The treasure will increase by the dissolution of
Chapels of ease, and uniting two Parishes into one, and especially in great
Cities and Towns where often are but small Livings. 61 Dissolution of Chapels
no new thing, Ibid. Chapels the Seminaries of hirelings, 62 3. By sequestration
of the Livings of non residents. 4. By the forfeiture of penal Laws due to
the King, 60, 61, 62, 63
Sequestration of the Churches of pluralists may further the treasure for
redemption of impropriations, 63 By what contributions Impropriations may be
brought to the use of the ministry, 63 Fourthly, the fourth means, viz, by
contribution whereby Impropriations may be reduced to the ministry, 63, 64, 65
How and by what means impropriations may be reduced into the ministry, 65, 66
None of the three estates in Parliament is lost by removal of the Hierarchy,
as appears by several statutes, viz. 25. E. 3. c. 24. 31. Ed. 3. Stat. of
Herrings 3. R. 2. c. 3. 7. R. 2. c. 12. 1. E. c. 2. 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 The
state of Prelacy founded by the Grandfather of K. E. 3. 69 The K. having the
assent of the Nobles and Commons may repeal statutes without the assent of the
Prelates, 70 The argument answered, in which it is said that it has been
always dangerous to pick quarrels against laws settled, 74, 75 Less danger to
reform the Church by new laws, than to continue corruption by old laws, 74
That argument answered, in which it is said that there must of necessity be in
every Parish one Pastor, a company of Seniors, and Deacon or two at the least,
and all those to be found of the Parish, 75, 76, 77, 78 What kind of men ought
to be chosen Seniors, and Deacons, 76 The judgment of the Commissioners of Ed.
6. touching Elders and Deacons, 77 The election of Pastors by the people stands
upon the ground of reason and nature, rules of Christian equity and the law of
God, therefore by no Law or custom can justly be taken away though actually it
was by the Pope, 79, to 87 Dangerous to innovate unless there be evident
utility in innovation, 80 The common manner of election in the old Churches was
by the people, 81 The King without the people has power to nominate the Kingly
Bishop, 82 M. Bilson confirms the peoples election of their Pastor, 83 A great
difference betwixt the choice of Bishops in England and Pastors, 86 No Schism
happened by choice of Pastors by the people: ancient schimes were ever from the
election of Bishops, 87, 88 therefore a Stat. is desired for the giving of
election of their Pastors, 86 Election of public officers in Cities and
Boroughs is by the principal men of these places, 90, 91. therefore Ministers
may be elected: the officers of Cities and Towns Corporate chosen without
contention, therefore Pastors may be also chosen, 90 The people would be more
careful of their Election than Bishops have been, the people could make no
choice of insufficient Ministers unles the Bishops did make insufficient
Ministers, 93, 94 The common people accused of backwardness in Religion, the
reason of that must needs be from their ill guides, 95 Men of excellent gifts
and men of no gifts are unequally matched in the ministry of the Gospel, 96
The people may know a man to be a fit Minister though he be not brought up
among them, 98 What knowledge of a Minister is required in the people before
they choose him. No partial suits can follow the election of Ministers by the
people, 100 The means to take away all symony for places in the Ministry, 100
The inconveniences of Bishops ordination set down, 102 As many suits between
the Bish, and the Clerk, 2. suits between the Clerk and the Archdeacon, 3.
suits between the B. and the Archdeacon, 4. Riots and breaches of the Kings
peace, 5. unlawful Fees for Letters of institution, 6. unlawful Fees for
letters of sequestration, 105. 7. Perjury by the Clerk and robbery by the
Patron, 8. Chopping of benefices and dispensations, 106. A supplication to the
Parliament to consider these inconveniences, and likewise a brief way is set
down of the redress of them, 107, Diverse things set down concerning
ordination of Ministers, 108 How a Minister ought to be called to a place, of
his examination, and approbation by Ministers and the Parish, and of his
ordination and actual calling to a place, 108 This way laid down before is no
such innovation as is pretended, it being agreeable to the ancient Laws of the
Land, 100 The spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets how to be, 112
What is to be done if suit fall out betwixt two Patrons, 113 Patrons not so
strictly curbed is pretended, 114 Prophets to be taken from the Schools of the
Prophets upon difference in judgment of the abilities of men what then to be
done, 114 Concerning refusal upon non ability, 116 The benefits ensuing the
platform of ordination and required, 117, 118 What perfection is required in a
Minister, 120 Prelacy and a learned Ministry cannot stand together, 120 That
objection answered, that the reward of learning being taken away learning it
self must needs fall to the ground, 121 Prelacy the bane of learned Ministers,
122 That argument answered concerning the drawing of Scholars out of the
Universities before they are fit, 123, 124 The argument concerning
excommunication answered: by whom excommunication ought to be performed, 125,
126, 127, what it is, 128 The inconvenience of the Bishops excommunication, 129
It has many deformities, 130 By the Bishops excommunication one may be a
communite, 130 Excommunication touches them only who profess themselves
members of the Church, 133 The different manner of discipline exercised by
Ecclesiastical Commissioners: several instances in diverse persons set down,
134, 135, 136 The Articles objected by her Majesty's High Commissioners for
causes Ecclesiastical against G. B. of B. and F. B. of B. in the County of L.
with observations on the Bishops proceedings, 1637. 138, 139, 140, 141. with a
Copy of the Archbishops Letter and answer from the Bishop to that Letter. The
Argument concerning the bringing in of Aristocracy into the Church answered,
143 Prelacy either oligarchie or tyranni^e, 144 It is to be feared, lest by the
examples of the Prelates Oligarchie be brought into the Commonwealth, and
therefore a caution is put in against it, 145 The government of the Church by
Prelates is not Monarchical, 145 If it be so, then the government by Pastors
may be so too, 145 No cause for the Monarch to fear Aristocracy in Church
government, 147 Pastors disclaim to meddle in civil matters, 147 The people
of England are rather possessed with the sense of Democracy and Aristocracy,
148 The manner of Policy by Pastors and Elders in the Church is agreeable to
the government in the Commonwealth, but the government by Prelacy is
disagreeable, 149 The answer of an Italian Bishop being asked, vis ne
Episcopari? And the answer of an English Bishop having obtained his
Congedelier, 149, 150 The manner of administration of justice spiritual in the
Church by Prelacy, 150 The administration of Justice spiritual by Pastors and
Elders agreeable to the execution of civil justice in the Commonweal 151 No
matters of justice civil administered by one alone in the Commonwealth, 150,
152. Several ordinances set down in several Courts how they proceed, 152,
153, 154. The Government of the Church ought not to be by one alone, 155, 156.
Several ordinances thereof, in the same pages. No exception to be taken
against Lay Elders to be authorized by the King in every Parish, since the King
authorizeth Lay Elders in Ecclesiastical commission, 157 Discipline of
excommunication exercised by one Lay Elder, and one Ecclesiastical Elder, an
instance of this discipline set down, 157, 158 The King has as good right to
command excommunication to be exercised by a Pastor and Elders, as the Bishops
have to commit the same to a Curate, and one Lay Elder, 159 Lay men appointed
by the Queens injunctions to execute some part of discipline, 160 Every
Minister ought to minister the discipline of Christ in his own cure by consent
of Parliament, 161 The Minister by promise binds himself to minister the
discipline of Christ, 162 The not disposing in particularity, all rites and
ceremonies of discipline does not hinder the exercise of discipline by the
Minister 163 To what persons the discipline of Christ by Scripture is
committed, and whether the persons be arbitrable or no, 164, 165 A Bishop,
Pastor, and Elder, and our L. Bishop differ, 165. and what a L. Bishop is. No
Lord Bishop called L. Pastor, Pastoral authority of a L. Bishop and of other
Pastors is equal, 166 Whether a L. Bishop minister the doctrine, Sacraments,
and Discipline of Christ by virtue of his Lordly Episcopal or Pastoral
office, 166 Lordly Episcopality authorized only by the Realm, 167 If the L.
Bishop have power to minister Discipline by divine right, then no more can he
commit that his power to an other, than he can commit the power which he has
of preaching to another, 168 Whether L. Bishops, by Pastoral Authority may
excommunicate a Pastor, 169. Pastors over small Flocks are as truly Pastors as
Pastors over great Flocks, 169. As great parity between Pastors and Pastors, as
between Apostles and Apostles, 169 Not only Kings of great kingdoms, but also
Kings of small kingdoms be true Kings, 170. Rural Deanes in Cheshire, etc.
use some part of Episcopal power, 171 Episcopal power to excommunicate
granted by papal privileges, or prescribed Use, 171. Power to excommunicate,
if it be of divine right, may not be prescribed, 171. No more pre-eminence
given to a Bishop than to a Minister, or to a Layman, in some places, for the
use of Excommunication, 172
AN ASSERTION FOR True and Christian Church-Policie: Wherein certain politic
Objections made against the planting of Pastors and Elders in every
Congregation, are sufficiently answered. And wherein also sundry projects are
set down, how the Discipline by Pastors and Elders may be planted, without
any derogation to the KINGS Royal Prerogative, etc.
ADMONITION.
THE reason that moves us, not to like of this Page 79.
platform of Government, is, that when we, on the one part, consider the things
that are required to be redressed; and on the other, the state of our Country,
People, and Common weal, we see evidently that to plant those things in this
Church, will draw with it so many and so great alterations, of the state of
Government, and of the Laws, as the attempting thereof, might bring rather the
overthrow of the Gospel among us, than the end that is desired,

ASSERTION.
THe benefit of all exceptions, and advantages, to the invaliditie,
uncertaintie, imperfections, and insufficiency, of this admonitory bill, and
matters therein contained, always saved; for answer to so much as concerns
this clause, and every other clause, and article, of the bill hereafter
following, and without that, that there is any matter, or thing, in the same
bill of admonition material, to be answered unto, and not herein, or hereby
sufficiently answered, confessed, and avoided, traversed and deemed is true, in
such manner and form, as in the same is set forth, and declared; the defendant
is ready to aver, maintain, and prove his answer, as shall please the King, to
award, and to command. And therefore he most humbly beseeches the King, if it
please the King, and that he have found favor in his sight, that his
exceptions may be admitted, and read, and that his counsel, learned in the
law, may be heard, and suffered to speak.

This platform of government, intended by the admonitor, not to be liked of in
this place, is that platform of Church government, Book of Com. Pray. tit.
Commination. Homil. 2. part. of the right use of the Church. Admo. page
Whitgift p. 654. M. Nowell in his Cate. M. Calvin. M. Iunius. Look Peti. to
her excellent Majesty, p. 11.
by Pastors and Elders which the Book of Common Prayer, the Doctrine of the
Church of England do highly command, and which he himself Master D. Whitgift,
now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and very many other (c) reverend Divines of
our age, do publicly confess in their writings, to have been practiced by
the Apostles, and Primitive Church. From whence it follows that the
government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes, Archdeacons,
Deacons, Chancellours, Commissaries and Officialls, now already planted and
liked of, was not practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Church. And therefore
for my part, I cannot, but marvel, that a disciple of the Apostles Doctrine,
and a successor in the Apostles Chair, should be drawn to humane reasons, not
to like of the Apostles government, nor to tread in the steps of the Primitive
Church. For seeing the same is acknowledged by himself to be the first ways to
be the old and ancient way, as being the Apostles way, why Ier. 6. 16.
should we not walk therein, as in the only good and perfect way? The reverend
Bishops will not deny, that the Apostles, and Primitive Church for their manner
of government, had the mind of Christ, and that we should follow the Apostles,
as having them for examples, because they were the followers of Christ. Again
they cannot but grant, that the manner of government, practiced by the
Apostles and Primitive Church, is written within the book of the covenants of
grace. All which notwithstanding we see in this place, that from the new
Testament, from the Articles of grace, from the law, from the testimony, from
the example of the Apostles, and from the mind of Christ, we are addressed and
turned over to our state of government, to our country, to our people, to our
Common weal, and to our Laws. But this turning of devises shall it not be
esteemed, as the Potters clay? Isa. 29. 16.


But (says he) to plant those things in this Church, which are required to be
redressed, might bring rather the overthrow of the Gospel, than the end, that
is desired. Indeed (say I) if this might be as soon proved, as it was soon
said, the case might have gone well with him. But this parable is so dark,
that (unless it be opened) there is no light at all to be seen in it. For he
well knew, that in stead of the government practiced by the Apostles and
Primitive Church, the jurisdiction of Archbishops, Bishops, Suffragans,
Deacons, Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials, is already
planted in this Church; And he was not ignorant also that the same jurisdiction
only, and none other, is required to be redressed. Now then if request be made,
that this manner of government be redressed, how can it evidently be seen
that to plant that manner of government, might bring rather the overthrow of
the Gospel than the end that is desired? But it may be that he meant more
lightsomely than he spoke. Yea let it be, that he intended thus: viz. to
unplant that, which is now planted, and to plant those things, which are yet
unplanted (by reason of many and great alterations) might bring rather an
overthrow of the Gospel, than the end that is desired; well (I say) be it so,
that he thus meant. How is this thing evidently seen, or how can it evidently
be proved? The best sight, that the servant of Christ can have, is faith. For
Faith is an evidence of things which are not seen. This overthrow Heb. 11.
then of the Gospel, not being seen with his bodily eyes, must needs be
intended to have been seen with the eyes of his faith, But where is the word
of Christ, whereupon the eyes of his faith were fixed? If then he hold no word
of faith, then of necessity was his evident sight, but an evident fancy. And
in deed what else could it be? For what other thing is there desired, to be
planted in this Church, but only the Apostolical government of Christ? And
what other Gospel could he evidently see, that might be overthrown by
holding forth this scepter, but only the Apostolical doctrine of Christ? A
mavelous strange and unkind sight, (I trow) to be seen, that the
Apostolical Government could no sooner be planted, but that the Apostolical
doctrine must needs be rooted up. That Christ by his own scepter, were not
able to maintain his own grace, by his own order, should weaken his own
oath, or by his own sword, should cut from the people of God, his own Word.
But seeing it was his purpose to persuade the people unto a dislike of the
Apostolical government, by arguments and reasons drawn from humane policy,
rather than to confirm them in a good opinion of the Prelaticall Government,
by proofs taken from the authority of holy Scripture, we will follow him in
this his vein. Yea, and by the help of God, we will try of what efficacy, such
his politic and humane reasons may be, as wherewith he did assay, to dissuade
the people from consenting unto any other manner of Church Government, than is
already settled among us. The general effect of all which, both here and else
where spoken of, by him briefly gathered, is this:

Such things may not be plan^ed in the Church of England, as by attempting, the
planting whereof, there is an evident sight, that the Gospel among us, may be
overthrown.

But there is an evident sight, that the Gospel among us, may be overthrown,
by attempting, to plant that Government in the Church of England, which was
practiced by the Apostles and the Primitive Church, Therefore that manner of
Government may not be planted.

The assumption of which sillogisme, he endeavors to confirm thus,
whatsoever will draw with it, many, and great alterations of the state of
Government, and of the laws, the same may bring rather the overthrow of the
Gospel, than the end that is desired: but the planting of the Government
practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Church, will draw with it, many and
great alterations, of the state of Government, and of the laws.

Therefore the planting of this manner of government may rather bring an
overthrow of the Gospel, etc.

If any shall object that by thus gathering his argument, I had in this place
falsified his argument, by adding more, than is here expressly uttered by him:
let such one understand, that this charge is but a mere and needless cavil.
For sithence both here, and throughout his book, his intent was to dispute for
the government already received, against the government, which is required,
to be planted, in the Church: And for so much also, as none other government,
is required to be planted, but that only Government, which was practiced, by
the Apostles and Primitive Church, it must necessarily follow, that the arrows
which he shot against the government required to be planted, were shot only
against the government which was practiced by the Apostles, and the Primitive
Church. And therefore there can be no just charge of any falsification; used in
the gathering of his arguments. Against which I argue as ^olloweth:

Whatsoever will draw with i^ no alterations of the state of Government, and
but few, or small alterations of the laws, the same may rather bring the end,
that is desired, viz. a godly peace, and Christian unity both in Church and
Common weal, than the overthrow of the Gospel among us.

But the planting of the government practiced by the Apostles and Primitive
Church, will draw with it no alteration, of the state of government, and but
few or small alterations of the laws.

Therefore the planting of the Government practiced by the Apostles, and
Primitive Church, may rather bring the end that is desired, viz, a godly peace
and Christian unity, both in Church and Common weal, than the overthrow of
the Gospel among us,

The truth of which argument will then appear, when the Admonitors argument
shall be convinced of error: for the disproofe of the one, is the proof of
the other, and if his fall, then cannot this but follow. And touching the
invaliditie of the first proposition, of his second Sillogisme, we affirm,
that the alterations, of the state of government, and of the Laws (be they
never so many and never so great) can never bring any overthrow of the Gospel,
if the same alterations, be made, for the planting of the Gospel. For the
laws once altered, can overthrow naught, because they are then no more laws.
And to say, that the Gospel once planted by authority of new laws, can be
overthrown by the same laws, is more absurd. For the new laws give life to
the entertaining of the Gospel, by means whereof, the Gospel, can not
discontinue, so long as those laws continue. And hereupon also it follows,
that no alteration of laws, for sweeping, and cleansing of the Church, for
casting, and whipping buyers and sellers, and choppers of Churches, out of the
Church, can overthrow the Gospel. For if all dross, filth, and corruption, be
cast out; if all lets, and impediments, be done away, it cannot be but that the
Gospel, must needs have a freer, and larger passage, as whereunto a wider
door can not be, but opened, for the bringing in of a more plentiful
harvest. And if the Church be beautiful as Tyrsa, and Sol. song. 6. 3, 4
comely as Jerusalem, if she look as the morning, If she be fair as the
Moon, pure as the Sun, and terrible as an army, then is she set as a seal
on the Lords heart, and as a signet upon his arm, and then shall the coals of
his jealousy be as fiery coals, and as a vehement slame, that much water
shall never quench it, nor any floods ever drown it. But if he should rather
mean, that the alterations of the state of government, should be so many and
so great, as that thereupon he did strongly imagine, evidently to see the
overthrow of the Gospel, then we say that no state of government, can ever
undergo, either many, or few, either small, or great alterations, unless by
alteration of laws made by the same state of Government, the same state of
government be altered. Now then if our politic state of government, (whereof
he must needs speak, for otherwise his speech were to no purpose) to amend
and reform abuses in it self, may justly put it self under the yoke of a new
law, (as it has done, and daily does unto many new laws) and so in this
respect, after a sort, in some part alter it self (for every reformation is a
kind of alteration) without any damage, hazard, or prejudice to it self, if
(I say) this may well be so, what a silly skare-crow, is there here, brought
into the field, to fray our politic state of government, for attempting a
reformation in the Church? Belike he knew some to feign, that our state of
government, must necessarily fancy whatsoever they fancy. And namely, that a
reformation of the Church, cannot but infer a desolation of the State: or
that the State cannot be well ordered except it suffer the Church to be
disordered: or that the Church could not be fair, well favored, and in good
plight, but the state of our Country, people and common weal, must be foul,
ill favored and out of heart; or lastly that the State cannot lance, bind,
draw, and heal up the sores, wounds, and contagions of the Church, but it must
withal fester, infect and poison it self. All which, how unsavorie and void
of all sense it is, I leave to the judgment, both of the state, and of the
Church. For who sees not, but that the state of politic government, may
wholly alter the state of Church government, and not so much as alter one least
jot of the politic state of government it self? Besides, since our state of
politic government, has in our days and before our eyes, repealed very many
old laws, and disavowed sundry ancient customs, to entertain, and harbor
the Gospel, must our state of politic government, no sooner now attempt to
repair certain breaches, made into the vineyard, but it must straight ways,
root up, that which it has planted, and pull down that, which it has
builded? He that diggeth about, and dungeth, he that spreads and pruneth
the roots and branches of a Tree, does he not rather quicken, than kill the
root? And does he not rather cause the boughs to sprought, than the body to
wither? Can seven times trying, and fining of Gold, breed a canker in Gold: or
may a River be dreined dry, by one who shuts not, but opens the Springs?
The body of a corpulent, and diseased man, the more it is purged, the more
full of health it is, and of better constitution. And how then can it be
concluded, that the Gospel, the life and soul of the Church, can languish,
and give up the ghost, when the Church for the better preservation of her
health, shall receive by some new and wholesome law, some new and wholesome
purgative receite? Moreover, for so much as here is mention made, how the
publishers of this Book, did consider on the one part, of things that were
required to be redressed, and on the other side, of things required to be
planted, together with the state of our Country, People, and Common weal, it
is plain, that their resolution was rather still to continue things amiss, in
the Church unredressed, than to plant the things required, to be planted. And
alas, what a resolution was that among pillars and Fathers (for so they will
be counted) of the Church? Especially, when as the things required to be
redressed, were required to be redressed at the hands of the whole state of
government, that is, at the hands of the Queen, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in open Parliament assembled. And could any damage (I
pray you) have ensued to the state of Government, to the state of the Queen,
to the state of our Country, People, Common weal, and Laws, or to the state
of the Gospel, if things amiss in the Church, had been redressed, and things
wanting in the Church, had been planted by so high, and supreme a power? I
trow not. Nay seeing our Country, People, and Commmon weal, not only once,
and twice, and thrice, but many times, have humbly and earnestly prayed, and
solicited in open Parliament, a redress of things amiss in the Church, is it
not most evident, that things were not considered aright but amiss by these
Fathers of the Church? And that the considerers by keeping things unplanted,
rather aimed at their own profit, honor, and dignity, than that our
Country, People, and Common weal, should fare the better, by having things
amiss, to be redressed* The considerers then being them selves parties, yea
and such parties as by whom things were carried amiss, in the Church, and
whose defects only were required to be redressed: no marvel (I say) if they
used all kind of artificial advisement and consideration, to keep things
still unplanted, by the planting whereof their own unfatherly miscariages,
must have been reformed.

On the other side, if things required to be planted, might indeed be once
planted, howsoever happily our former Church officers, might be somewhat
male-contented, and discouraged, to have their superfluities pared, and the
edge of their swords abated, yet is there no least cause at all, for our
Country, people, and Common weal to fear any trouble, or hurly burly among
us. For if the hand of God be in Judah, so that he give the people one heart,
to do the commandment 2 Chronicles. 30 12.
of the King, and of the Rulers, according to the word of the Lord, and if the
King, the Nobles and Commons shall condescend and agree in one, and if their
voices shall be all, but as the voice of one man, to allow and approve that,
which does touch and concern them all, then shall neither the Nobles have any
occasion to disdain the Commons, nor the Commons any reason to envy the
Nobles. Much less can the Nobles be at variance with the Nobles, nor the
Commons be at defiance with the Commons. For they be all of them so prudent,
and so provident, as that they will not bite one another, lest they should be
devoured one of the other. And in deed, why should any of our Clergie-Masters
be so void of judgment, as to deny the Nobles and Commons, after four and
forty years experience, of a most prosperous peace, waiting upon the Gospel,
to be now grown so uncircumspect and simple witted, as that a reformation of
disorders to be made by their consents in others, should bring forth a
confusion in themselves? What? will they bicker one with the other, will they
beat, and buffet one another, when there is no cause of disagreement, or
variance between them? For they shall be sure to lose neither liberty, nor
dignity; they shall endanger neither honor, nor profit. Our Nobles shall be
tres-noble still, they shall be Princes and Captains over our people: They
shall be Deputies and Presidents in our public Weal: They shall be Peers,
and Ancients of the Kingdom: their Privileges, Prerogatives, Preeminences,
styles, ensigns, and titles of prowesle, and honor, shall not be raced,
defaced, or diminished. But they shall (as they may and ought) remain and
continue whole, and inviolable, both to them, and their posterities, throughout
their generations. Our Judges, Justices, and Lawyers, shall have and enjoy
their authorities, credits, and reputations, as in ancient times. They shall be
recorders of our Cities, Towns, and Boroughs: They shall be Stewards of Kings
Leets and Lawdayes. Our Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, shall still be
Burgesses in Parliaments, and Conservators of the Kings peace: they shall be
Assistants to examine and repress thefts, rapines, murders, robberies, riots,
routs, and such like insolences. yea they shall be our Spokes-men, and our
Dayes-men, to arbitrate and compose, striffes and debates between neighbor
and neighbor. Our common people, they without disturbance, shall quietly and
peacably, retain and enjoy (as in former ages) their immunities, franchises
and liberties, as well abroad as at home, as well in their houses, as in their
fields. They shall possess their tenancies without ejection, they shall be
inheritors without expulsion, as well to the laws, liberties, and customs, as
to the lands and possessions of their Ancestors. They shall not be compelled
to go to warfare upon their own costs, they shall not be tried, arraigned, or
condemned, by foreign power, or by foreign Laws. There shall no husbandry,
no clothing, no handicraft, no mariner, no merchandise, no laws of the Land,
no manner of good learning whatsoever in School, College, or University, be
decreased or laid aside. Wherefore the Admonitor toying neversomuch; howsoever
he has made his flourish, and cast about with his May bees, his, I fear, his
pray God, his yfes, and his andes, howsoever (I say) it pleased him to trifle
with these gew gawes; yet shall none ever be able, to prove by any proofs
drawn from the holy Scripture, or humane reason, that any hinderance,
indignity, or encumbrance can ever betide our Nobles, our Commons, the state
of our Country, People, Laws, or Commonweal, if the state of
Church-governement, were translated from Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Chancellours, Commissaries, and Officials, (which are officers in the house of
God, only according to the commandments and traditions of men) unto the
government practiced by the Apostles and primitive Church, which they cannot
deny, but must confess to have been according to the holy pleasure of God. Nay
our Nobles, and our Commons, are most assured to be so far from being
endammaged, or dosing ought hereby, as hereby they shall purchase that unto
themselves, which never yet any oppugner of so good and holy a cause, could
attain unto. Namely, they shall seal up unto their own souls, infallible
testimones of good and sincere consciences: testimonies (I say) of their
fidelities unto God, testimonies of their allegiance unto him, by whom they
have been redeemed, and testimonies of love, and compassion unto the whole
Church of God. Nay further, our Commons shall be so far from bringing
a-dammage upon themselves, as they shall marvellously benefit the mselves.
First by purchasing unto themselves, a large immunitie from many foul and
great grievances, and exactions of money imposed and levied upon them, by
Officers and Deputies of Arehbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, etc. Secondly, by
having the Lord Christ, whose cause they undertake, and whose glory they
advance, to be a friend unto their friends, and an enemy unto their enemies.
And if our Nobles, and our Commons, be all hushed, if they be all at sleep,
at peace and at rest, we may cast away all fear, and be past all doubt, that
the King can not, but holily recreate and solace himsel^e, and that his gray
hairs, whenever they shall come, shall never be brought to the grave, in
sorrow, but in a good and perfect age, and peace

But happily it may be replied, that some of our Nobles, and most of our
``Commons, be so backwardly affected of the truth of Religion, Page 79.
as that rather they would turn head upon the Gospel, than Page 79.
brook an alteration of Archiepiscopall, Episcopal, and Archidiaconall Church
government. In deed if a reformation of the state of the Clergy were
attempted by any other means, than by public tractation and consent of
Parliament, I could not but lean unto this opinion, that the attempting
thereof might bring an overthrow to the attempters. Because the same attempt,
should be dishonorable to the name of God, as being contrary to the form of
doctrine received. But since things amiss are required to be redressed by the
King and Parliament alone, this objection is altogether vain and frivelous,
and is already sufficiently convinced, by that peaceable agreement between
Nobles and Commons, before remembered. But let us wade a little deeper, and
search a little more narrowly into every vein, creek, and corner of this
supposition. And let us see, by what manner of persons this pretensed overthrow
of the Gospel might be wrought.

All carnal, sensual, and earthly men, either whose belly is their No fear
that profane men will overthrow the Gospel.
god, or whose God is this world, all such men (I say) as in every age, be of
Domingoes religion, namely, just and jump, of that religion, which the King and
State profess, they are so far from attempting ought, to overthrow the
Gospel, as under the shadow of the name thereof, they will evermore crowd, and
cover their carnalitie and prophannesse. For they being evermore of every
religion, and so indeed of no religion, and passing not whether our Savior
Christ, or Beliall be their God, sing as the Poet sings; Ais? Aio: Negas?
Nego: beck and bow, cap and knee, to whatsoever the State and Law commands. If
the King be a Gospeller, the Gospel, the Gospel, and naught else, but the
Gospel shall be found to roll in their mouths. But let the Crown once turn,
by and by, they have turned their Coats, and as weaher-cocks, with every puff
of wind, are huffed about. Whatsoever order or manner of government be
planted or displanted in the Church, the same shall be no corosive to them. It
shall never stick in these men's stomachs, neither will they lay it to their
hearts. The King and the Counsel is wise enough, and know what they have to
do well enough. They will not be more forward, nor wiser than the Prince,
they will not check and control the whole Realm. They cannot brook these
busy bodies, and medlers in matters above their reach. They will be none of
these new fangled and precise fools; they will not be backward, and come
behind the law, as the Papists do; neither will they be too forward, and
run before the law, as the Puritans do. But they will behave themselves in
all things, and at all seasons, as discreet and politic Protestants ought to
do, conforming and submitting themselves always to all order and authority
of the Queens book, and laws settled. Yea and though they be not book
learned, nor any pen Clerks, yet they believe well. And therefore they will go
to the Church, and say a few prayers, yea, and they will receive the Sacrament
at Easter, as devoutly as the best precisian of them all. All these Atheists
and godless men, being neither hot nor cold, neither fish nor flesh, nor good
red herring, plant what plants you will, and sow what seeds you list, yea make
what ditch, hedge, pale, wall, or sense you please, they set cock upon hoope,
and pass not a button for it; every season, be it wet, or be it dry; every
kind of land, be it clay, or be it sand; every surrow, be it broad, or be it
narrow, be it deep or be it shallow, pleases these medley coats alike. They
are like unto Jacobs Ewes, which having straked and party colored rods laid
before them in the gutters, at a ramming time, brought forth none other but
party colored Lambs. And therefore they will never stir hand nor foot, nor
once step over a straw to work any Admonitory protestants by their own
doctrine, ought not to bind the Church, to a perpetual government of prelacie.
least annoyance to the Gospel. It is good sleeping always, for these men in
a whole skin: And not much unlike to these party colored sleepers, are the
admonitorie protestants. For they, as the duty of faithful subjects do bind
them, living in a state of the Church reformed, and having liberty in
external government, and other outward orders to choose such as they think,
in wisdom and godliness, to be most convenient for the state of their
country, and disposition of the people, and having the consent of their godly
Magistrates, to that outward form of jurisdiction, and deciding of
Ecclesiastical causes, these kind of protestants, (I say) always blowing out
the trumpet of obedience, and crying an alarm of loyalty to every ordinance
of man, and gravely, wisely, and stoutly demeaning themselves against all the
giddie heads, and fanaticall schismatikes, and wrangling spirits of our age,
dare not (I trow) slip the collar nor cast off the yoke, dare not push with the
horn, nor wince with the heel against the Gospel; If so be by the
authority of our Christian King, with the consent of his Parliament; the
platform of govern-(as he says) devised by some of our neighbor Churches,
but (as we and they themselves confess) practiced by the Apostles and
Primitive Church, might be received and established, to be the best and
fittest order of government, for the Church of England, as well as it has
been a long time, and yet is of Scotland, and of most of all other Christian
Churches. For if it be too great a bridle of Christian liberty (as they say)
in things external, to cast upon the Church of Christ, a perpetual
commandment, and if the Church have free liberty to make choice of what
government soever, she thinks convenient, then is she neither restrained at
her pleasure, to forsake that which by long experience she has found to be
inconvenient, neither is she tied still to retain Archiepiscopall, Episcopal,
and Archidiaconall government, though for a long season the same have been
used. For that indeed might well and justly be said, be too to great a bridle
of Christian liberty, when by necessity there is cast upon the Church, such a
perpetual regiment of prelacy, as may not be removed. Wherefore if our
continued Prelaticall discipline, whereby the liberty of the Church is taken
away, by public authority of the King and States might be discontinued, and
liberty granted to the Church, to use the Apostolical discipline, either our
Admonitorie Protestants must yield, stoop, and obey, or else be found to be a
way ward, a contentious and a ^romple generation.

And if these two former kinds of our people (which the land being divided into
five parts make three at the least) shall every way be supporters of unity,
and conformity, to the Gospel, and no way disturbers of the peace, liberty
and tranquillity of the Church, what overthrow, or what damage may the
Gospel sustain by the other parts? Yea though they should unite, link and
confederate themselves in one. For are they not weaker in power, poorer in
purse, and of far less reputation than the former? And yet nevertheless,
these parts are at such deadly feud one against the other, and at such an
irreconcilable enmity between themselves, that the case stands now
between them, as sometimes it stood with Caesar and Pompey, not whether of
them, should reign, but whether of them should live. And how then can these
parts thus divided, possibly agree together, against the other parts, so surely
combined?

Besides, the first sort of these two sorts, whom it pleases our Protestants,
Puritan protestants, can never overthrow the Gospel.
the Admonishers, for difference sake to dubb with the Knights Hood of
Precisians, or precise and puritan Protestants. Why? They are the only and
principal spokes-men and petitioners for the Apostolical Discipline, required
to be planted. Nay these men, out of the holy Scriptures, so resolutely are
persuaded, of the truth of God, contained therein, as without which, they know
perfectly that the doctrine of the Gospel can never powerfully flourish, or be
entertained with so high a Majesty in the hearts of men, as it ought to be.
The Gospel has overthrown the papist, therefore he can never overthrow the
Gospel.
And as for the other sort, (the Papists I mean) alas that poor ratt, what
overthrow can he work to the Gospel, whose bane the Gospel has wrought so
long since? Alas this faint ghost is so far spent; his disease grown so
desperate, and his sickness, now at such an haynow-hay, as all the physic of
all the Physicians in the world, can not recover his health, or once take away
his headache. This silly snake, then having hissed out all his sting, spit out
all his venom, and ungorged himself of all his poison, how can his skin, or
how should his tail anoy the Gospel? If therefore it might please the
Admonishers, upon a revew of our State, our country, and our people, to cast
such men, as be open enemies to the Gospel, into squadrons, causing them to
march rank by rank, and troop by troop and delivering unto the King, a muster
roll, of all the names, qualities and conditions of the principal popish
recusants within the Realm (for none but such only can be suspected openly to
band themselves against the Gospel) it is not to be doubted, but the least
part of all the other four parts would be as great in number, as these. And
what then should the King and State fear the multitudes of Recusants, when one
standing on the Kings side, should be able to withstand ten; and ten an
hundred; and hundred a thousand; and a thousand ten thousand papists. King Asa
2 Chronicles. 14.
crying unto the Lord his God, that it was nothing with him, to help with many
or with no power, and resting upon the Lord, overcame ten hundred thousand, and
three hundred chariots, of the Ethiopians, and Labimes. For the eyes of the
Lord behold all the earth, to show himself strong with them, that are of a
perfect heart toward him: And when King Joash remembered not the kindness
which 2 Chronicles. ^4
Iehoiada the Priest had done unto him, but slew Zechariah his son, the Lord
delivered the King, and a very great Army into the hands of a small company of
the host of the King of Aram, who gave sentence against the King, slew all the
Princes of Judah from among the people, and carried the spoil of them unto
Damascus. And thus much concerning the Admonitors proposition, viz. Whatsoever
will draw with it many and great alterations of the state of Government, and of
the laws, the same may bring rather the overthrow of the Gospel, than the end
that is desired; All which speech of his I affirm to be but a vain and
trifling riddle, as the whole strength whereof rests only upon a may be.
Whereunto if I should only have spoken thus, and no more, viz. that many and
great alterations, etc. might rather not bring an overthow of the Gospel, etc.
I suppose, and that upon good ground, that such (may, might not be) might
every way be as forcible, to disprove the one, as his (may be) can any way be
pregnant to prove the other.

And touching his assumption, viz. but the planting of the government,
practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Church, will draw with it many and
great alterations, of the state of government and of the Laws: If in this
place he understood, the state of Church government, and of the Laws
Ecclesiastical now in use, then is the proposition true. And yet
notwithstanding we avow, the Gospel to be so far from incurring any
overthrow by such an alteration, as thereby it is certain, that the same shall
more and more flourish, and be perpetually established: by reason that this
alteration should be made from that which by long experience, is known to be
corrupt, unto that which is known by the holy Scriptures, to be pure and
sincere. From a government (I say) and Laws authorized, by tradition, and
commandments of man alone, to a policy and laws founded and descended, by
and from God himself.

But if the Admonitor, by the assumption meant to inform us, that the planting
of the Apostolical government will draw with it many and great alterations, of
the temporal state of government, and of the temporal laws, statutes, or
customs of the Kingdom: then as before The planting of the Apostolical
government will draw no alteration of the Laws of the realm with it.
to his first, so now also to his second, I answer negatively: and affirm,
that the planting of the said Apostolical government, will not draw with it
any the least alteration, of any part, of that temporal state of government,
nor almost of any one common statute, or customary law of the Land, which may
not rather be altered, than retained. For this platform of government, we are
able by the help of God, to defend the same generally, and for the most part,
to be most agreeable, and correspondent, to the nature, quality, disposition,
and estate of our Country, People, Common weal, and Laws, as in our
particular answers, to his particular reasons shall more at large appear. In
all new, and extraordinary alterations, it is not only requisite to abolish all
bad opinions out of the minds of those that know not the drift of the
enterprisers, but it is also necessary, that the defense of such alterations,
be made forcible against the opposition of all gainesayers: we will descend to
the particulars, and join issue with the Admonitor. And upon all allegations,
exceptions, witnesses, and records to be made, sworn, examined, and produced
out of the holy Scriptures, and Laws of the Land already settled, on the
behalf of our cause, before our Sovereign Lord the King, his Nobles, and
Commons in Parliament, we shall submit our selves and our cause to the Kings
Royal, and most Christian judgment. In the mean time, we aver that not
only the former clause of this admonitory bill, but that all other clauses
following in the same bill, for the invaliditie, insufficiency, indignity, and
nullitie of them, are to be thrown out and dismissed from the Kings Court,
especially for that the particulars opened by the Admonitor, can not serve for
any reasonable warning, to induce the common people, to rely themselves upon
his, I am of opinion, to the which we plead at bar as follows.

ADMONITION.
First (says he) the whole State of the Laws of the Realm will be Page 77
altered. For the Canon Law must b^ utterly taken away, with all Offices to the
same belonging; which to supply with other Laws and functions, without many
inconveniences, would be very hard: the use and study of the civil Law, will
be utterly overthrown.

ASSERTION.
When by a common acceptance and use of speech, these words (whole State of the
Laws of the Realm) are understood of the Common and statute laws of the
Realm, that is to say of the Kings temporal Canon and civil Laws no part of
the Laws of the Realm, but only by sufferance.
laws, and not of Canon or Civil laws, it cannot follow, that the whole
state of the Laws of the Realm should be altered, though the Canon and Civil
Laws, with all offices to the same belonging, should be utterly taken away and
be wholly overthrown. For no more could the Admonitor prove, the Canon or
Civil Law, at any time heretofore, to have been any part of the Laws of this
Realm, otherwise than only by a 25. H. 8. C. 21. in the preamble.
sufferance of our Kings, acceptance, long use and custom of our people) than
can any man prove a parsley-bed, a rosemary-twigge, or an ivie-branch, to be
any part of the site of the Castle of Farnham: And therefore he might as well
have concluded thus, the whole site of the Castle of Farnham will be
transposed: for the Boxetrees, the Heythorne Arbours, and the Quick-set hedges
planted within the Castle-garden must be removed and cast away: which were but
a proof provelesse, and a reason reasonlesse. If then by the abrogation of the
Canon or Civil Law, scarce any one part of the laws of this Realm should be
changed, what reason have we to think that the whole state of the laws of the
Realm must be altered? Besides, to conclude the whole, by an argument drawn
ab enumeratione partium, and yet not to number the tenth part, (of such parts
as were to be numbered) is, I am sure, neither good logic nor good law.
Moreover if all the Canon Law, (I mean all the Papal and foreign Canon Law,
devised and ordained at Rome, or elsewhere without the Realm, and consequently
all the Offices and functions to the same belonging) be already utterly taken
away, what hope of reward can Civilians expect from the use of such things, as
are within the compass of that law? or of what efficacy is this argument, to
prove an alteration, of any part of the laws of this Realm, or that the
study of the Civil Law should be utterly overthrown? For the whole state of
the Laws, properly called the Laws of the Realm* has stood and continued
many years since the same Papal and Canon Law was abolished. An imbasement for
civilians to have preferment by offices of the Canon law. The Canon law be
abolished out of the realm and ought not to be used.
And as touching the Civilians, for them to seek after preferments, by Offices
and functions of the Canon Law, is an embasement of their honorable
profession, especially since far greater rewards might very easily be
provided for them if once they would put to their helping hands, for the only
establishment and practice of the Civil Law, in the principal causes now
handled by them in the Courts called Ecclesiastical.

But how may it be proved, that the Papal and foreign Canon law, is already
taken away, and ought not to be used in England? For my part, I heartily wish,
that some learned men in the Common Law, would vouchsafe to show unto the King
and Parliament, their clear knowledge in this point. In the mean season, I
shall not be negligent, to gather and set down, what (in mine understanding)
the Statute Law has determined thereof. By the statute of submission, 25. Hen.
8. revived 1 Eliz. (as the very words and letter of the petition and submission
of the Clergy, of the body of the law, and of the provisoes do import) the
very true meaning and intent of the King and Parliament, is evident and
apparent to be thus as follows, and none other, viz. That such Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Synodall, or Provincial, which before that time
were devised and ordained, or which from thence orth should be devised or
ordained by the Clergy of the Realm, being not contrariant or repugnant, etc.
should only, and alonely be authorized, and to be put in ure, and execution.
And consequently, that all Canons, Constitutions, and Ordinances Papal, and
made by foreign power without the Realm, should wholly and utterly be
abrogated, adnulled, abolished and made of no value. The words touching the
petition, and submission, mentioned in that Statute, in substance, are these:
Where the Kings humble and obedient subjects the Clergy, etc. have submitted
themselves, and promised in verbo Sacerdotii, that they will never from
henceforth presume No Canons provincial or other to be put in ure, therefore
no papal canons in force.
to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, any Canons, Constitutions,
Ordinances, provincial or other, or enact, promulge, or execute any new Canons
etc. And where also diverse Constitutions, Ordinances, and Canons Provincial,
or Synodall, which heretofore have been enacted, and be thought not only to
be much prejudicial to the Kings prerogative Royal, etc. the Clergy has
most humbly besought Canons provincial, heretofore enacted, being
prejudicial, are to be abrogated.
the Kings Highness, that the said Constitutions, and Canons, may be committed
to the examination and judgment of his Highness, and of two and thirty
persons of his subjects, etc. and that such of the said Canons, and
Constitutions, as shall be thought and determined by the said 32. persons, or
the more part of them, worthy to be abrogated, and No Constitutions, or
Ordinances provincial or other canons to be alleged, therefore once they
were all abolished.
adnulled, shall be abolite, and of no value: and such other of the same
Constitutions, and Canons, as by the said 32. persons, etc. shall be approved
to stand with the Laws of God, and consonant to the Laws of this Realm,
shall stand in their full strength and power, etc.

These are the words of the petition and submission, etc. the letter of the
body of the Statute in effect is this: Be it therefore enacted, etc. That they,
nor any of them, from henceforth shall presume to attempt, allege, claim, or
put in ure, any Constitutions, or Ordinances The King and thirty two persons
have no power to examine papal canons; therefore papal canons intended to be
wholly abolished.
Provincial, or Synodall, or any other Canons. And forasmuch as such Canons,
Constitutions, etc. as heretofore have been made by the Clergy or this
Realm, can not, etc, by reason of the shortness, etc. be it therefore
enacted, etc. that the Kings Highness, etc. shall have power, etc. and that
the said 32. persons, etc. shall have power and authority to uiew, search, and
examine the said canons, constitutions, etc. Provincial and Synodal heretofore
made, and such of them as the Kings Highness, etc. shall deem and adjudg worthy
to be continued and kept shall be from henceforth kept, etc. and the residue of
the said Canons, constitutions, and ordinances provincial, which the K.
Highness, etc. shall never be put in execution within this Realm. These are the
words of the body of the Law: the words of the Proviso are these: Provided
Canons provincial already made only on authorized by the proviso, therefore no
papal Canons in force.
that such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial, being
already made, which be not contrariant, etc. shall now still be used and
executed, as they were before the making of this Act, till such time as they be
viewed, searched, etc. by which words of the petition, body of the statute, and
proviso, three things seem principally to be meant and intended. First an
utter and absolute abolition of all Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and
Synodals, before that time made by the Clergy within the Realm, or by any
foreign power within the Realm whatsoever: Secondly a view, search, and
examination of all Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial or Synodall
before that time made by the Clergy within the Realm: And lastly, because the
Church should not utterly be destitute of all Canons, etc. (Provincial or
Synodall) a reestablishment, or reauthorisement of all such of the said Canons
Provincial or Synodall, as were not onerous to the people, contrariant or
repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, or customs of the Realm, nor prejudicial
to the Kings prerogative Royal, was agreed upon, till the said Provincial
Canons, etc. were viewed, searched, and examined.

All Papal and foreign Canon Law then, before that time made without the
Realm, being once inhibited, to be attempted, alleged, claymed, or put in
ure, and by consequence adnihilated, abolished and made void: unless the same
be again revived and reestablished, remain frustrate and adnulled still, and
therefore ought not to be attempted, alleged, claimed, or put in ure. Besides,
it is plain, that foreign and Papal Canon Law was never intended to be
reauthorised, because the same Law was never committed to the view, search and
examination of the King and 32. persons. The King therefore and 32 persons, by
virtue of this act, not having any authority to view, search and examine any
foreign Canon Law, though he and they, had deemed and adjudged any part of the
same Law, worthy to have been continued, kept and obeyed, yet nevertheless
had not the same been of any force or validity. For only such Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Provincial or Synodall (being not contrariant,
onerous or prejudicial to the King, to the Laws, or to the people) were
reestablished, as were committed. Besides, whereas about twenty years passed,
diverse Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, as well Papal as Provincial,
were alleged by him that collected an Abstract, against an unlearned
ministry, against Dispensations for many benefices, against excommunication,
and against Civil jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical persons: the answerer, in
the behalf and maintenance of those abuses, challenged the author for not
having proved his intent by law in force: affirming that Tit. page 1. and 2.
The answerer unto the Abstract. proves by his reasons the Papal Canon law now
used to be abolished.
the Canons and Laws by him alleged, were but pretended necessary and disused
laws; that they were not inspired with the life of laws; that such were
fathered for laws, as be not Laws; and that it remained by him to be
discussed how many of them were to be called in truth, her Majesty's laws. The
reason of all which his exceptions, he yields to be this: namely, that the
Author ought to have proved them, not to have been repugnant to the customs
of the Realm, but to have been in use and practice before the making of the
act of submission. For he must prove (says the Answerer) that they are not
repugnant to the customs of this Realm, and show us how they have been used
and executed here, before the making of the statute: yea he can say, that they
are by law established among us. Which points says he, because we learn by
law, quod facta non praesumantur, matters in fact, are not intended to be done,
until they be proved so: we must still put him to his proofs, and in the
mean time say, that he has gaped wide to say nothing to the purpose, and that
in his whole book, he has talked but not reasoned. All which asseveration of
this Answerer, if the same be true, and, if this plea be a good averment to
bar the Author from having proved a learned ministry to be commanded by the
law; dispensations for many benefices to be unlawful, excommunication by one
alone to be forbidden; and civil government to be unlawful in
Ecclesiastical persons, then much more forcibly may this argument be retorted,
upon all such as claim, allege and put in ure any portion of the foreign
Canon Law. For sithence it has never yet been proved, that the foreign Canon
Law, used and executed at this day, was accustomed and used 25. H. 8. then
because we learn by law (as he says) quod facta non prae sumantur, we must
still put him, and his clients to their proof, and in the mean while tell
them, that their Advocate has twisted for them but a bad thread, when by his
reason he has untwined all their laws, and broken a sunder the bands of their
government. Moreover because it is not yet proved, that the foreign and
Papal Canon Law is not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, statutes or
customs of the Realm, nor derogatorie to the prerogatives of the regal
Crown; nay because the contradictorie hereof is affirmed, and this denied: and
because we learn by law (as he says) that matters in fact, are not intended to
be done till they be proved so, we must still put the upholders and
executioners of this law, to their proof, and in the mean while tell them
that the foreign and Papal Law, is but a pretended necessary and disused
law, that it is not inspired with the life of Law, and that it is fathered by
them to be such a Law, as is an headless, a fetherlesse and a nocklesse arrow
which is not fit to be drawn, or shot against any subject of the King. And
from this voidance, abolition and nullitie of foreign and papal Canon Law
(because sublato principali, tolluntur accessoria) it follows that all
offices and functions of papal Archbishops, papal Bishops, papal
Suffraganes, papal Archdeacons, papal Deanes and Chapters, papal Priests,
papal Deacons, papal Subdeacons, papal Chancellors, papal Vicars general,
papal Commissaries, and papal Officials, merely depending upon the
authority, and drawn from the rules and grounds of that Law, are likewise
adnihilated, and of no value. Howbeit for so much as by the opinion of some
learned Civilians, By the opinion of the Civilians, the papal Canon law
seems to be in force.
there seems unto them, a necessary continuance of the same foreign and
papal Law, by reason that Archbishops, and Bishops do now lawfully (as they
say) use ordinary Archiepiscopall and Episcopal jurisdiction, which they
could not (as they think) do, if the same common law were utterly abolished:
and for so much also, as some learned in the Canon laws, do maintain, that
since the statute Apology of certain proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical.
of 1 Eliz. c. 1. the Archbishop and Bishop cannot lawfully claim any ordinary
spiritual jurisdiction at all, but that the spiritual jurisdiction, to be
exercised by them, ought to be delegated unto them from the King, by a
Commission under the great Seal: Forasmuch (I say) as there are these
differences of opinions, it seems expedient to be considered, by what law,
and by what authority, Archbishops and Bishops exercise Archiepiscopall and
Episcopal power in the Church: And to the end this question may fully be
known, and no scruple nor ambiguitie be left, what power spiritual may be
intended Power properly, and improperly called spiritual. Queens Injunct. and
execut. of justice.
to be exercised by them: We distinguish spiritual power, into a power
properly called spiritual; and into a power improperly or abusively called
spiritual, There power properly called spiritual, is that spiritual power,
which consists, and is conversant in preaching the Word; administering the
Sacraments; ordaining and deposing Ministers, excommunicating or absolving; and
if there be any other spiritual power of the like property and nature. Now
that this power properly called Power properly called spiritual, was never in
the Queens person.
spiritual, could have been drawn from the person of our late Sovereign
Lady the Queen unto Archbishops and Bishops, we deny. For the Queens Royal
person, being never capable of any part of this spiritual power, how could the
same be derived from her person unto them? Nemo potest plus juris in alium
transfer, quam ipse habet. Archiepiscopall and Episcopal power therefore,
exercised in, and about these mysteries of our holy Religion, ordinarily and
necessarily must belong unto the Archbishop and Bishop by the canon of the holy
Scriptures; otherwise they have no power (properly called Power improperly
called spiritual, is indeed but a temporal power.
spiritual) touching these things at all. The power which improperly is called
spiritual, is such a power, as respects not the exercise of any pastoral or
ministerial Church, to the internal begetting of faith, or reforming of
manners in the soul of man; but is such a power, as whereby public peace,
equity, and justice is preserved, and maintained in external things,
peculiarly appropried, and appertaining unto the persons, or affairs of the
Church; which power indeed is properly a temporal or civil power, and is to
be exercised only by the authority of Temporal and Civil Magistrates. Now
then to return to the state of the point in Question touching this later
power, improperly called spiritual, by what law, or by what authority the
Archbishops and Bishops do exercise this kind of power in the Church: I
answer that they cannot have the same, from any foreign Canon Law, because
the same Law, with all the powers and dependences thereof is adnulled: And
therefore that this their power, must and ought to be derived unto them from
Bb. where, From whence then is their power derived? Hereunto we answer, that
(before the making of that act) spiritual jurisdiction did appertain unto
Bishops, and that Bishops were ordinaries, as well by custom of the Realm,
canons, constitutions, and ordinances provincial and synodall, as by foreign
canon law. And that therefore these canons, constitutions and ordinances
provincial or synodall, according to Bishops remain ordinaries by custom,
provincial Canons, and statute law, though papal Canon law be abolished. 25.
h. 8. c, 20. 25. h 8. c ^6.
the true intent of that act, could not still have been used and executed as
they were before, if the Bishops had not still remained ordinaries. Moreover it
is clear by two statutes, that the Archbishops and Bishops ought to be obeyed
in all manner of things, according to the name, title, degree, and dignity,
that they shall be chosen, or presented unto, and that they may do and
execute, minister, use, and exercise all and every thing and things, touching
or pertaining to the office or order of an Archbishop or Bishop, with all
ensigns, tokens and ceremonies thereunto lawfully belonging, as any Archbishop
or Bishop might at any time heretofore do, without offending of the prerogative
royal of the Crown, and the laws and customs of this Realm. Let it be then
that by custom, canons provincial and statute law, Bishops be and do remain
ordinaries; yet as well upon those words of the statute 25. H 8. without
offending of the prerogative Royal, as upon the statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1
there remains a scruple and ambiguitie, whether it be not hurtful, or
derogatorie unto the Kings Prerogative Royal; that Ordinaries should use and
exercise their ordinary power (improperly called spiritual) without a
commission under the great Seal, or that such their power should be as
immoderate, and excessive now, as in times past it was by the Papal Canon law?
Concerning the first, by the Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 1. and by the Statute of 8
Eliz. c. 1. the Queen was recognized to be in effect the Ordinary of
Ordinaries, The Queen was supreme ordinary of ordination.
that is the chief supreme and sovereign Ordinary over all persons, in all
causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. Where it seems to follow, that
all the branches, and streams, as well of that power which improperly is called
spiritual, as of that power which properly is called temporal, should have
been derived originally unto the Bishop from her Highness person, as from the
only head and fountain of all the same spiritual power within her Kingdoms,
in such manner and form, and by such commission under the great Seal, as her H.
temporal Officers, Justicers and Judges, had their authorities committed unto
them. And to this opinion Master D. Bilson seems to accord. For all power
Page 348.
(says he) is not only committed to the sword, which God has authorized, but
is wholly closed in the sword. Against the head, that it shall not be head, to
rule and guide the feet, can be no prescription; by reason Gods Ordinance, for
the head to govern the body, is a perpetual and eternal law: and the
usurpation of the members against it, is no prescription but a confusion, and
the subversion of that order, which the Page 114. and 130.
God of heaven has immutably decreed and settled. Besides there rests (says
the Remonstrance) unto the Bishops of this Realm, none other but subordinate,
and delegate authority: and that the matter and heads wherein this
jurisdiction is occupied, are by, and from the Christian Magistrates
authority: In whom, as supreme Governor, all jurisdiction, within her
Dominions, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, by Gods and man's law is invested,
and their authority Ecclesiastical is but subordinate under God and the
Prince, derived for the most part from the Prince. From which two Statutes and
judgments of the gorernours of the Church contained in these two books (for
these two 1 Eliz. c. 1 and 8 Eliz. c. 1.
books were seen and allowed by the Governors of the Church) I leave it to be
considered, if the Bishop did exercise the same improper and abusive spiritual
power and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical only and alonely, in their own names,
styles and dignities, and under their own seals of office, and that also by
authority of foreign and Papal laws; if (I say) the Bishop did these things,
after this and this manner, I leave it then to be considered, whether their
exercise of such power were derogatory and prejudicial in a very high degree,
to the prerogatives of the Royal Crown or not. For my part because I find by
the foreign Canon Law, that Papal Bishops be the Popes sons, and are
privileged to carry the print and image of the Pope their father, namely, that
they have plenitudinem potestatis within their Diocesses, as the Pope
pretends Ex. de Major. and obe.
to have power over the whole world: For quilibet ordinarius says the same law
in sua Dioecesi est major quolibet principe, and because also (notwithstanding
whatsoever the B b. have written, that M. Bilson page 330.
they were the Queens B b and had their authority derived unto them from the
Queen) they did in her life time, put the same Papal Law in execution, and by
the same law did take upon them, plenitudinem potestatis, within their
Diocesses: I for my part (I say) can not as yet otherwise conceive, but that
exceedingly ^hey did intrude themselves into the Royal preeminences,
privileges, and prerogatives of the Queen. For by what other authority, than
by a certain The Bb. by a plenary* power devised and promulged new Canons,
without the Queens assent.
plenarie power, did they in their own names, for the government of their
several Churches within their several Diocesses, from time to time, make,
promulge, and by virtue of men's corporal oaths put in execution, what new
Canons, Injunctions, and Articles soever seemed good unto them, without any
license or confirmation from the Queen, first had and obtained thereunto? By
which pretensed plenarie power, it seems that the statute made to bring the
Clergy in submission to the King, was covertly deluded, and our late
Sovereign Lady the Queen, cunningly bereaved of that regal authority, over
every particular Diocesan, or Ordinary, which notwithstanding, by the
Parliament was given unto her Highness, over the whole body and state of the
Clergy. For if once there be no necessity of the Kings license, assent, or
confirmation to such Articles, Canons, or Injunctions, as every Ordinary shall
make within his jurisdiction, then must it be intended, that the Statute of
submission has covertly permitted, several members, severally to do, and to
execute those things which apparently, and in express terms, the whole
convocation was commanded, and with the same, in verbo sacerdotii, had
promised, not to do: then the which what can seem more unreasonable and
absurd? For then might all the Ordinaries join hand in hand, and agree all
together in one, never in any of their convocations, assembled, by the Kings
Writ, to devise, make, or promulge any Canons Ecclesiastical at all. And what
assent, license, or confirmation from the King, could then be needful? Or how
then was the Clergy, brought in submission to the King? For then, should it
not be with them, as it is in the proverb; A threefold cord is not easily
broken: but then should it be with them, contrary to the proverb; for they
being all fast knit and bound together unto the Kings authority, by a cord of
twenty four threads, might easily be broken; but being severed and plucked
assunder, into twenty four parts, one from the other, the 24 Bishops, can make
no law with out leave, And ye^ every B. does make many laws
King with all his regal power, might not be able so much as to break one of
the least threads, wherewithal one of their cords was twisted. If the Lord
Major, the Sheriffs, Aldermen, and whole communaltie of the City of London,
should promise unto the King upon their fidelities, not to set any price upon
Wines or other victuals, by their common Council, within the said City,
unless the King under his privy signet, should first authorize them so to
do, were it not a mere collusion of the Kings meaning, if every particular
Alderman, should set prices of such things in every particular ward? But
against the collection made from the Statutes, 1 and 8 Eliz. and the judgment
of the divines aforesaid, A collection made against the former reason by an
Apology for sundry proceed. by jurisdi. ^^. page 5.
the author of an Apology, to his understanding, reckons the same collection
to be a very simple collection, and against the same, he answers and
reasons in effect thus.

If (as is collected) all power spiritual, by a commission under the great
Seal must be derived from the Queen, to warrant the execution of it unto
him, that is, to exercise it; then must the like warrant be procured, for
every temporal office, to execute his temporal office.

But every temporal officer, must not procure like warrant to execute his
temporal office.

Therefore a Commission under the great Seal, must not be procured to warrant
the execution, of the said spiritual power.

The consequence of his major proposition being false, he labors
notwithstanding to make the same good, and in effect for the same argues thus:

All temporal authority, as absolutely and as really, is revested in the
person of the Queen, as is the said spiritual authority.

Therefore as all spiritual Officers, for the execution of the said spiritual
power; must have their authority, derived unto them from the person of the
Queen under the great Seal, so likewise must all temporal officers, for the
execution of their temporal offices, have the like commission.

The consequence of which enthimeme follows not, though the antecedent be
true. For although as well all temporal, as all the said spiritual authority
improperly so called, was really and absolutely in the person of the Queen;
yet hereupon it follows not, that by one and the self same means alone, and
namely, by a commission under the great Seal, all temporal and the said
spiritual power, in every part and branch thereof, should be drawn alike,
from the Queens person. For there be diverse and sundry means, to derive
temporal authority, whereas there seems to be but one only means to derive
the said spiritual authority, and then mark the substance of the authors
argument.

Some temporal Officers, as Stewards of Leets, Constables, and sundry other
Officers, must not draw their temporal authority from the Queen by a
Commission under the great Seal.

Therefore no spiritual Officers, as Archbishops, Bishops, Archd^acons, and
sede vacant, Deanes and Chapters must draw any of their spiritual authority
from the Queen by a Commission, etc.

Which argument drawn from a particular affirmative, unto a general negative,
what weakness it has, every young Logician can discern. And as for Stewards
of Leets, though they have no Commission Though all temporal officers draw not
their power from the King by the great seal yet by one means or other
withdraw it from the King.
under the great Seal, yet for the execution of their Stewardships they have a
Commission under the Seal of the Exchequer, Constables, Decennary or
Tythingmen, and Thirdboroughs, have their authorities derived unto them from
the Kings person, by the very original and institution of their offices,
Sheriffs of Countries, Coroners, Escheators, and Uerderors, have their offices
and their authorities warranted unto them, by the Kings writs out of the
Chancerie. But it was not the mind of the Lawmakers (says the Author) that
the Ordinaries, by a commission under the great Seal, should draw their said
spiritual power from the Queen. What the minds of the Lawmakers were,
touching this point, it mattereth little or nothing at all. Neither is it to
purpose, whether a commission under the great seal, be necessarily required,
or not required by virtue of that statute, 1 Eliz. c. 1. to warrant the said
spiritual power unto Ordinaries. Only it suffices, that the Queen having all
power, improperly called spiritual, invested in her Royal person, and being
really and actually seized of all the said supreme spiritual authority, could
not have any part of the same spiritual power drawn from her, but by some one
lawful and ordinary means or other. For if this rule be true in every common
person, quod meum est, sine mea voluntate a me auferri non potest; how much
more does the same rule hold, in the Royal prerogatives, rights, privileges,
dignities, and supremities of a King? wherefore to say that all supreme and
ordinary power (improperly called) spiritual, was really and actually
inherent in the Royal person of the Queen, and to say also, that some of the
same inferior, and ordinary power, not derived from the Queen, was
nevertheless in the persons of inferior ordinaries, is as much to say, that
some branches of a tree, may receive nourishment from elsewhere than from the
root; that some members of the body, are not guided by the head; and that some
streams, flow not from their fountains. And now to conclude this part,
against the Canon Law, and their Offices and functions thereof, I dispute thus:

The foreign and papal canon law, with all the accessories, dependances
offices, and functions thereof, is utterly abolished out of the Realm:

Therefore the same law is no part of the laws of the Realm; and therefore
also it is evident, that there will not follow any alteration of the Laws of
the Realm, by the taking of it away.

Which Canon Law also, with other laws and functions, how easily the same
without any inconveniences, may be supplied, shall (God willing) be presently
made apparent, if first we shall answer to that challenge, which the state of
Prelacie may seem to make for the continuance of their Lordly primacie, out of
the words of the great Challenge for Lordly primacy, out of the great Charter,
answered.
Charter. Concerning which challenge, namely, that by the great Charter, Lordly
Archiepiscopall, and Episcopal primacie or jurisdiction belonging to the state
of Prelacie, is belonging unto them: I demand unto what Church this great
Charter was granted? And whether it were not granted unto the Church of God in
England? The words of the Charter are these: Concessimus Deo, and h^c praesenti
Mag. Charta. c. 1.
Charta nostra confirmavimus, pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, in perpetuum,
quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat omnia jura sua integra, and
libertates suas illaesas. We have granted unto God, and by this our present
writing have confirmed for us, and for our heirs for ever, that the Church of
England be free, and that she have all her rights, and liberties whole and
unhurt. Now by this Charter, if the same be construed aright, there is
provision made; first, that such honor and worship be yielded by the King and
his subjects, his and their successors and posterity unto God, as truly, and
indeed belongs unto him: Secondly, that not only such rights and liberties,
as the King and his progenitors, but also that such as God had endowed the
Church of England with should inviolably be preserved. And in very deed, to
speak truly and properly such rights and liberties only, are to be called, the
rights and liberties of the Church of England, which God himself has given by
his Law unto his universal Church, and not which the Kings of England, by
their Charter, have bequeathed to the particular Church of England. When
therefore question is made that by the great Charter, the Kings of England are
bound to maintain the rights and liberties of the Church of England, we are
to enquire and search what rights and liberties, God in his holy word, has
granted unto his universal Church; and so by consequence unto the Church of
England, one part of the Catholic Church. And this questionless was the
cause, that moved the victorious Prince Henry the eight, so effectually and
powerfully to bend himself against the Popes supremacy, usurped that time
over the Church of England. For (says the King) we will with hazard of our
life, and loss of our Crown, uphold and defend in our Realms whatsoever we
shall know to be the will of God. The Church of God then in England, not being
free, nay having her rights and liberties according to the great Charter, whole
and unhurt, but being in bondage and servitude to the Sea of Rome, contrary to
the Law of God; the King judged it to stand highly with his honor, and with
his oath (according to the measure of knowledge, which then was given unto him)
to reform, redress, and amend the abuses of the same Sea. If then it might
please our gracious Sovereign Lord King James, that now is (treading in the
Godly steps of his renowned great Uncle) to vouchsafe an abolishment of all
lordly primacie, executed by Archiepiscopall, and Episcopal authority, over
the Ministers of Christ; His Highness in so doing, could no more rightly be
charged with the violation of the great Charter, than might King Henry the
eight with the banishment of the Popes supremacy; or than our late Sovereign
Lady the Queen could be justly burdened with the breach of her oath, by the
establishment of the Gospel. Nay if the Kings of England, by reason of their
oath, had been so straightly tied to the words of the great Charter, that they
might not in any sort, have disannulled any supposed rights, and liberties of
the Church then used and confirmed by the great Charter, unto the Church that
then was supposed, to be the Church of God in England; then belike King Henry
the eighth, might be attainted to have gone against the great Charter, and
against his oath, when by the overthrow of Abbeys and Monasteries, he took
away the rights and liberties of the Abbots and Priors. For by express words
of the great Charter, Abbots and Priors, had as ample and as large a Patent,
for their rights and liberties, as our Archbb. and Bishops can at this day
challenge for their primacies. If then the rights and liberties of the one, as
being against the law of God, be duly and lawfully taken away, notwithstanding
any matter, clause or sentence, contained in the great Charter; the other have
but little reason by color of the great Charter, to stand upon their
pantofles, and to contend for their painted sheathes. For this is a rule and
maxim in all good laws, that in omni juramento, semper excipitur authoritas
majoris: unless then they be able to justify by the holy Scriptures that
such rights and liberties, as they pretend for their spiritual primacie over
the Ministers of Christ, to be granted unto them by the great Cha^ter, be in
deed and truth likewise confirmed unto them by the holy Law of God: I suppose
the Kings Highness, as a successor to K. Henry the third, and as a most just
inheritour to the Crown of England, by the words of the great Charter, and by
his oath (if once the same were taken) to be bound utterly to abolish all Lordly
primacie, as hitherto upheld and defended, partly by ignorance, and partly by
an unreasonable and evil custom.

ADMONITION.
The use and stud^e of the Civil Law will be utterly overthrown; for the
Civilians in this Realm, live not by the use of the Civil law, but by the
Offices of the Canon Law, and such things as are within the compass thereof.
And if you take those offices, and functions away, and those matters, wherein
they deal in the Canon Law, you must needs take away the hope of reward, and
by that means their whole study,

ASSERTION.
This collection depends upon his former Reason, and is borrowed to prove a
necessary continuance of Canon Law, and concludes in effect thus:

The taking away of the reward and maintenance of Civilians, will be the
overthrow of the use and study of the civil law:

But the taking away of the Canon Law, the offices and functions thereof, and
such things as are within the compass of the same, will be the taking away of
the reward and maintenance of Civilians.

Therefore the taking away of the Canon Law, will be the overthrow of the use
and study of the Civil Law.

But we deny the assumption, and affirm that Civilians might have The
maintenance of Civilians, depends not upon the functions of the Canon law.
far better reward and maintenance than now they have, if the offices and
functions of the Canon Law, and such things as are contained within the same,
were simply and absolutely taken away. And further we say, if there were none
other use, nor end of the study of the Civil Law, than hope of reward, and
maintenance by some office and function of the Canon Law, that then Civilians
should in vain seek for knowledge in the Civil Law, because without the
knowledge thereof, and by the only knowledge of such things, as are within the
Compass of the Canon Law, they might reap that reward and maintenance. Nay
sithence by experience we have known that some, who never unclasped the
institutions of Justinian, out of the same to learn the definition of Civil
Justice, have been and yet are authorized, to exercise the offices and
functions of the Canon Law; how should the study of the civil law, be
furthered by these offices and functions, when as without any knowledge of the
civil law, these offices and functions have been and yet are daily
undertaken, and executed to the full? And what man then (if there were none
other reward for Civilians) would ten or twelve years together, beat his
brain, and trouble his wits, in the study of the Civil Law, when every silly
Canonist might be able and learned enough, to sit in the Bishops throne, and
to be judge in his Consistory? Besides, if the Admonitor speak sooth, viz.
that Civilians in this Realm, live not by the use of the civil Law, to what
end then should he fear an overthrow of the study thereof? For if there be no
use of it in this Realm, for the maintenance of this life, to what use then
should men study the same in this Realm? As for the use of it among
strangers, and foreign nations without the Realm; the same (as I suppose) is
no greater than such as 3. or 4. Civilians may be able well enough, fully to
deliver the law, touching all matters of controversy, that may grow to
question during the whole space of a Kings reign. If no man lived in this
Realm, by the trade of brewing Beer, but that all Brewers did live by the
trade of Brewing Ale, what should we need to fear the decay of ^eere-brewers,
or what use were there of them? in like sort, if men live only by the use,
offices and functions of the Canon Law, and that men live not (as he says) by
the use of the Civil law within the Realm, what folly were it to study the
one, whereas without the knowledge thereof, he might live by the other? And
therefore it seems that the Admonitor by his own weapon, as much as in him
lay, has given the whole study of the Civil Law, a most desperate and deadly
wound. And to the end we may understand what reward and maintenance, Civilians
by the Offices and functions of the Canon, do receive yearly for their service
and attendance, in the Bishops and Archdeacons their Courts; We will examine
what fees Doctors of the civil law, being Chancellors, Commissaries or
Officials, have usually, and ordinarily allowed unto them, by their Lords and
Masters. Fees for probat of Testaments, granting Fees for probat of testaments
let to farm.
of administrations, with their appendances, of late years in some places
(whether in all or how many I know not) have been demised unto farm for an
annual rent; out of which, either a small or no portion at all, have been
allowed unto the Chancellor or Official, for his service in this behalf.
Whereupon (as I conjecture) it has fallen out, rather than that those Officers
would work, keep Courts, and travail for little or naught, there have been
exacted greater fees, for the dispatch of these things, than by law ought to
have bin paid. Perquisits of courts arising upon suites, commenced between
party and party, it must be a plentiful harvest, and there must be multi
amici curiae, in a Bishops consistory, if ordinarily (communibus annis) they
amount in the whole to twenty pounds by the year: and yet these perquisits,
belong not wholly to the Chancellor, but are to be divided between him and the
Register. And touching fees for excommunication, and absolution, fees for
institution and induction, licenses to preach, licenses for Curats and Readers.
For testimonial of subscription, or licenses to marry without banes; fees for
commutation of penance, and fees for relaxation of sequestrations: touching
these manner of Fees, if the same be fees no Fees due for the execution of the
functions of the canon law, dishonorable for a Doctor of the civil Law.
way warrantable, how are not then such fees every way dishonorable for a
Doctor of the Civil law, to take, either of Ministers or people? There must be
therefore some other hope of better reward and maintenance, to incite and
encourage scholars, to the study of the civil law, than are these beggarly
and unlawful fees, depending upon the functions, and exacted by the Officers
of the Canon law: or else the use of the civil law (as the Admonitor says)
must necessarily in short time be overthrown. For if Fees for probat of
Testaments, and granting of administrations with their appendices, shall still
be let to farm; and if also, many unlawful fees were quite inhibited, there
would remain (I trow) but a very poor pittance for Civilians out of the
functions of the Canon law, to maintain their Doctoralities withal. But what
better reward can there be for Civilians, than has already been mentioned?
If the Admonitor had not willingly put a hood Civilians in England live not
only by the functions of Canon law.
wincke before his eyes, he might have seen that the Civilians live not wholly
and altogether by the practice of the Canon Law; but partly also, and that most
honorably by the use of the Civil law. If a Doctor of the Civil Law, be
judge or Advocate, in the Court of Admiraltie; if he be Judge or Advocate in
the Prerogative Court, so far as the same Court handles only matters of
Legacies, Testaments and Codicills, to what use can the Canon Law serve him, or
what advantage can the same Law bring him in? Beside to what use serves the
Canon Law unto a Doctor of the Civil Law, if he shall find favor in the
Kings sight, and if it please the King to make him one of the Masters of his
Requests, or one of the twelve Masters of his high Court of Chancery, or to be
the Master of his Rolls; or to be his Highness Ambassador unto foreign
Nations, or to be one of his Highness most honorable privy Council, or to be
one of his principal Secretaries. It follows not therefore (as the Admonitor
pretends) that either the Civilians in this Realm, live not by the use of
the civil law but by the offices, and functions of the Canon law, and such
things as, are within the compass thereof; or that the hope of reward, and by
that means, the whole study of the Civil Law must be taken away, if once the
Canon Law should be abolished. Neither would it be any hard matter for the
King (if the Civilians might find grace in his sight) to appoint Courts,
Offices, and all manner of process and proceedings in judgment for Doctors of
the Civil Law, to hear and determine in the Kings name, all causes being now
within the compass of any Civil or Ecclesiastical Law within this Realm.
And although a little candle can give but a little light, and a small Spring
can send forth but a small stream, yet because great fires are kindled
sometimes by little sparkles, and small streams meeting together, may in time
grow into great rive^s; I shall desire the great Civilians with their floods
and lamps of learning, to help forward such a law, as whereby the study of the
Civil Law, may be upholden, the reward and maintenance of Civilians, without
any function from the Canon Law, may be enlarged, many controversies, and
disorders in the Church, may be pacified, and the Kings Prerogative Royal be
duly advanced. Which things if it might please them rightly to consider, then
let them humbly and seriously beseech our Sovereign Lord the King, and States
in Parliament, to give their consents to such a Law, as the project ensuing,
may warrant them, the same not to be dangerous to the overthrow of their
civil studies.

The Project of an Act for the explanation and amplyfying of one branch of a
Statute, made in the first year of the reign of Queen ELIZABETH, entitled, An
Act restoring to the Crown, the ancient jurisdiction over the state
Ecclesiastical, and also for the declaring, and reviving of a Statute made in
the first year of King EDWARD the sixth, entiled, An Act, what seals and
styles Bishops and other spiritual persons exercising jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, shall use.
FOrasmuch as by one branch of an Act made in the first year of our late
Sovereign Lady of blessed memory, Queen Elizabeth (entitled an Act,
restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power repugnant to the same) it was
established and enacted, That such jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities,
and preeminences Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical power, or authority, has heretofore been, or may lawfully be
exercised, or used, for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical state and
persons, and for reformation, order and correction of the same, and of all
manner errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities,
should for ever, by authority of that present Parliament, be united and
annexed, to the imperial Crown of this Realm, by means whereof, it may now be
made a question, whether any Archbishops or other Ecclesiastical persons,
having since that time used or exercised any such spiritual or Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in their own right, or names, might lawfully have done, or
hereafter may lawfully do the same, without special warrant, and authority
derived immediately from your highness, by and under your Highness letters
patents: And whereas also by a statute made in the first year of King Edward
the sixth, entitled, an Act what seals and style, Bishops, or other
spiritual persons shall use, it was ordained, that all and singular
Archbishops and Bishops, and others exercising Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
should in their process use the Kings name and style, and not their own: and
also that their Seals should be graved with the Kings arms: And forasmuch
also, as it must be highly derogatorie to the imperial Crown of this your
Highness Realm, that any cause whatsoever Ecclesiastical or temporal,
within these your Highness Dominions, should be heard or adjudged, without
warrant or commission from your Highness, your heirs and successors, or not
in the name, style, and dignity of your Highness, your heirs and successors;
or that any seals should be annexed to any promise, but only your Kingly seal
and arms: May it therefore please the King at the humble supplication of his
Commons, to have it enacted, That the foresaid branch of the foresaid Act made
in the first year of Queen Elizabeth her reign, and every part thereof may
still remain, and for ever be in force.

And to theend, the true intent and meaning of the said statute, made in the
first year of K. Edw. the sixth, may be declared and revived, that likewise by
the authority aforesaid, it may be ordained, and enacted, that all and
singular Ecclesiastical Courts, and Consistories, belonging to any
Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes, College, Deane and Chapter, Prebendarie, or
to any Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever, and which have heretofore
been commonly called, reputed, taken or known to be Courts or Consistories,
for causes of instance, or wherein any suite, complaint or action, between
party and party, for any matter or cause wherein judgment of law civil or
Canon, has been or is required, shall and may for ever hereafter be reputed,
taken, and adjudged to be Courts, and judgment seats merely Civil, secular
and temporal, and not henceforth Ecclesiastical or Spiritual; and as of
right belonging and appertaining to the Royal Crown and dignity of our
Sovereign Lord King James that now is, his heirs and successors for ever. And
that all causes of instance and controversies, between party and party, at
this day determinable in any of the said Courts, heretofore taken and reputed
Ecclesiastical, shall for ever hereafter be taken, reputed, and adjudged to
be causes merely Civil, secular, and temporal, as in truth they ought to be,
and of right are belonging and appertaining to the jurisdiction of the
Imperial crown of this Realm.

And further, that your Highness Liege people, may be the better kept in awe,
by some authorized to be your Highness Officers and Ministers to execute
justice in your Highness name, and under your Highness style and title of King
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. in the
said Courts and Consistories, and in the said causes and controversies: Be it
therefore enacted by the authorities aforesaid, That all the right, title, and
interest, of, in, and to the said Courts and Consistories, and in and to the
causes and controversies aforesaid, by any power, jurisdiction, or authority
heretofore reputed Ecclesiastical (but by this Act adjudged civil, secular
and temporal) shall for ever hereafter, actually and really, be invested and
appropried in and to the Royal person of our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is, his heirs and successors, Kings and Queens of this Realm. And that it
shall and may be lawful to, and for our said Sovereign Lord and King, his
heirs and successors, in all and every Shire and Shires, Diocese and
Diocesses, within his Highness Dominions and Countries, by his and their
letters patents under the great Seal of England, from time to time, and at all
times to nominate and appoint, one, or more able and sufficient, Doctor or
Doctors learned in the Civil Law, to be his and their civil, secular, and
temporal Officer, and Officers, Minister, and Ministers, of justice in the
same civil, secular, and temporal Courts and Consistories, which in and over
his, and their royal name, style, and dignity, shall, as Judge, and Judges,
do perform, and execute all and every such act, and acts, thing and things
whatsoever, in and about the execution of justice and equity in those Courts,
according to the course and order of the civil Law, or the Ecclesiastical
canons, and constitutions of the Realm, as heretofore has been used and
accustomed to be done, by, for, or in the name of any Archbishops, Bishops,
College, Cathedral Church, Deane, Archdeacon, Prebendary, or any other
Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever: And that all, and every such
civil, secular and temporal Officer, and Officers, Minister, and Ministers,
Judge, and Judges, in his and their process shall use one manner of Seal only
and none other, having graved decently therein your Kingly arms, with certain
characters for the knowledge of the Diocese or Shire; And further be it
enacted, etc. That it shall and may be lawful, by the authority aforesaid,
for our said Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors, from time to
time, and at all times, to nominate and appoint, by his and their Highness
Letters Patents, under the great Seal of England, for every Shire and Shires,
Diocese and Diocesses within his or their highness Dominions, one or more
able and sufficient persons, learned in the Civil Law, to be his and their
Notarie and Notaries, Register and Registers, by him and themselves, or by his
or their lawful Deputy or Deputies, to do, perform, and execute all and
every such act and acts, thing and things, as heretofore ^^ the Courts and
Consistories Ecclesiastical aforesaid, has been, and ^ow are incident and
appertaining, to the office of any Register or Notarie. And further at the
humble suit of the Commons, etc. it may please the King, to have it enacted,
that all and singular matters of Wills and Testaments, with all and every their
appendices, that all and singular matters of Spousals and Marriages, with their
accessories, that all and singular matters of defamation heretofore
determinable in the Ecclesiastical Courts (and if there be any other causes
of the like mere civil nature) shall be heard, examined, and determined by
the said civil and secular Officers and Judges in the said civil and secular
Courts, according to the due course of the civil Law, or statutes of the
Realm in that behalf provided. And that all matters of Tithes, Dilapidations,
repair of Churches, and if there be any other of like nature, with their
accessories, and appendices, shall be heard, examined, and determined, by the
said civil and secular Officers and Judges, in the said Civil and Secular
Courts, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, Statutes, and customs of
the Realm, in that behalf heretofore used, or hereafter by the King and
Parliament, to be established.

And at the humble suite of the Commons, may it please the King to have it
further enacted, That all manner of fees heretofore lawful, or hereafter by
the King and Parliament to be made lawful, for or, concerning the probat of
Wills; administration of the goods of the intestat; letters of tuition;
receiving or making of accounts, inductions to Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics,
Deanries, Parochiall-Churches, or other spiritual promotions, and all other
fees whatsoever heretofore lawful, or hereafter to be made lawful, for any
travail or pain to be taken in or about the expedition or execution of any
of these causes, shall for ever hereafter be fees, and allowances appropriated
to the Judges, and principal Registers of the said Courts, equally to be
divided between them, as heretofore has been accustomed; and that the said
Judges and Ministers, within their several charges, shall be Collectors of the
Kings tenths and subsidies, granted and due by the Clergy, taking for their
travail and pain, in and about the same collection, such fees as heretofore
have been accustomed. Provided always, that none of the said civil and
temporal Officers and Ministers, nor any of them, for any offense, contempt or
abuse, to be committed by any person, or persons, in any wise incident to any
of the said Courts and Consistories, suspend, excommunicate, or interdict any
person or persons, but shall and lawfully may by authority of this present Act,
proceed against every offender, and offenders by such ordinary process, out
of the said Register or Notaries office, as is used upon a sub-paena out of the
high Court of Chancerie, and there upon default, or contempt, to proceed to
attachment, proclamation of rebellion, and imprisonment of the party
offending, as in the said high Court of Chancery is used. Provided also, that
all appeals, hereafter to be made, from all and every Court, and Courts in
the Shires and Diocesses of the Country, shall be made to the higher Courts,
as heretofore has been accustomed, only with an alteration, and addition of
the names, styles and dignities of Archbishops, Bishops and other Ordinaries,
unto the name, style and dignity of our Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs
and successors. And that upon the appeals, so to be made, it shall and may be
lawful, for the Judges and Ministers of Justice, of and in the said higher
Courts, to make out all manner of process, and processes, and to do and
execute all and every act and acts, thing and things, for the furtherance of
Justice, in the causes aforesaid, as to them shalby the law seem equal, right,
meet, and convenient; any law statute, privilege, dispensation, prescription,
use or custom, heretofore to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
Provided also that all and every such Judge and Minister, that shall execute
any thing by virtue of this act, shall from time to time obey the Kings writ,
and writs of prohibition, of attachment upon prohibition and indicavit, and not
to proceed contrary to the tenor of such writ or writs, in such and the same
manner and form, and condition, as they have or ought to have done be ore the
making of this act, any thing in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.
Provided also that this act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend or
be interpreted to give any authority to the said Judges and Officers, or any
of them, to put in execution any civil or Ecclesiastical law, repugnant or
contrariant to the laws, statutes, or customs of the Realm, or hurtful to
the Kings Prerogative Royal.

And thus it may seem to be but a small labor, a little cost, and an easy
matter, for the King, his Nobles and Wisemen of the Realm, to devise forms of
judgment, and manner of process, and proceedings, without any offices or
functions of the Canon law, whereby the use and study of the Civil Law, and
the reward and maintenance for Civilians, might be furthered and increased, and
not utterly overthrown and taken away; as the Admonitor uncivily bears us in
hand. As for the alteration of the censure of excommunication for contumacy
mentioned in this project, we have the consent of the reverend Bishops in this
admonition, that the same may be altered. For the Admonitor their Prolocutor
speaks on this wise, viz. As for the excommunication Page 138.
Excommunication for contumacie by the Admonitors judgment, may be taken away
without offense, and with the good liking of the Bishops.
practiced in our Ecclesiastical Courts for contumacie, in not appearing, or
not satisfying the judgment of the Court, if it had pleased the Prince, etc.
to have altered the same at the beginning, and set some other order of process
in place thereof; I am persuaded (says he) that the Bishops and Clergy of the
Realm would have been very well contented therewith. And speaking of a
certain manner of civil discomoning used in the Church of Tigure, he further
adds, viz. Which, or the like good order devised by some godly persons, if it
might be by authority placed in this Church, etc. I think it would be gladly
received, to shun the offense, that is taken at the other.

ADMONITION.
And matters of Tithes, Testaments, and Matrimony; matters also of adultery,
slander, etc. are in these men's judgments, mere temporal, etc. therefore to
be dealt in by the temporal Magistrate only, which as yet have either none at
all, or very few laws touching those things, therefore the common law of the
Realm, must by that occasion, receive also a very great alteration. For it
will be no small matter, to apply these things, to the temporal law, and to
appoint Courts, Officers and manner of process and proceedings in judgment
for the same.

ASSERTION.
Indeed we hold, that all these matters whereof mention is here made, Matters of
tithes and other causes of like nature pertain to civil justice.
and all others of the like nature, are merely civil and temporal, and by the
temporal Magistrate alone, to be dealt in, and to be discussed, if we
consider the administration of external and civil justice. And this we think
will be granted of all, and not to be denied of any unless they be too too
popishly addicted. In regard whereof we have drawn (as before is mentioned) a
project, how Courts and manner of process and proceedings in judgment, by
Doctors of the Civil Law may be appointed by the King, and his high Court of
Parliament, without that, that the common Law of the Realm, by the occasion of
any such courts, offices, or manner of process and proceedings, must receive
any alteration at all, much less a very great alteration. Howbeit if it should
not please the King, and that the Civilians could not find favor in his
sight, by courts, offices, and manner of process and proceedings in judgment
before specified, or by the like to have the study of the civil Law advanced;
yet we think it convenient once again How matters of tyths etc. may be dealt
in by ^he Kings Judges.
to be examined how these matters may be dealt in, according to the rules and
grounds of the Common Law, before the Kings Judges, and Justices of the Kings
bench, and Common pleas.

By a Statute of 32. H. 8. c, 7. it is clear, that all tyths, oblations, etc.
and other Ecclesiastical or Spiritual profits, by the laws and statutes of
the Realm, may be made temporal, as being admitted to be, abide and go to,
and in temporal hands, lay-uses and profits. From the reason of which statute
it is clear, that those laws likewise, may be reckoned amongst us for
temporal laws, which by the laws and statutes of the Realm, may be executed
by temporal and lay persons, and which are conversant about temporal and lay
causes. If then the execution of the Laws, touching these matters may lawfully
remain, and abide in the hands of Doctors of the Civil Law, being temporal
and lay persons (as already under the Bishops they do;) it cannot be denied
but that the Kings Judges, and Justices, of both benches, may be as competible
Judges, to put in execution the laws concerning these matters, as Doctors of
the Civil Law, or other lay men be. But the causes are not reputed and called
temporal, and lay causes amongst us. What for that? if in their own nature
simply considered, these causes be merely lay and temporal causes, such causes
(I mean) as whereof the King a lay, civil and temporal Magistrate, by his
lay civil and temporal Magistracy derived unto him immediately from the holy
law of God, may and ought to take cognizance, and thereupon, either in his own
Royal person, or by the person of any of his inferior Officers, may give
absolute and peremptory judgment: If (I say) these things be so, what booteth
it, or what wisdom is it to contend, that these causes and matters, have
been, and are still adjudged to be therefore Ecclesiastical, and no temporal
causes, because through an abusive speech, or through a vain and evil
custom, they have been so led and accounted in times past? And what if it
has pleased the Kings Progenitors, by sufferance to tolerate the executions of
such Laws, as concern these things, to be in the hands and power of
Ecclesiastical persons; yet hereupon it follows not that in very deed and
truth, the Magistracy of the said Ecclesiastical persons, was an
Ecclesiastical Magistracy, or that they were Ecclesiastical Magistrates; but
their Magistracy was, and remained still a temporal magistracy, and they
were and abode temporal Magistrates. For not more can the quality of the
person, alter the nature of the cause, than can the quality of the cause,
alter the nature of the person. And if it be true, that matters determinable
(in times past) by a Magistracy abusively called Ecclesiastical, be
notwithstanding properly temporal matters, and that the same Magistracy also,
be a temporal and no spiritual Magistracy, what a childish and poor conceit
is it, to challenge and threp upon the temporal Magistrate, that he has none,
or very few temporal laws, touching those matters, and that therefore the
people should not solicit an alteration of abuses in Church government, left
for want of temporal laws, the people should be without Ecclesiastical
discipline? It will be no small matter (says he) to apply these things to the
temporal law; yea, and so say I to. But what of that? The question is not how
hardly these things may be applied to the temporal law, but how small a matter
it were to apply the temporal law unto these things. For it is not said in any
law, that, casus ex juribus, but it is said in all laws, that ex casibus jura
nascuntur. The temporal law may easily be applied to causes now reputed
Ecclesiastical.
And indeed the Physician applies not the disease to his Physic, but he
prepares his phificke for the disease. The husbandman he measures not his
ground by the seed, but his seed by the ground. The Draper, he meateth not his
yard by the cloth, but his cloth by the yard. If in like manner the temporal
laws, and the grounds and rules thereof, were applied to these matters of
tithes, marriages, etc. whereof he speaks, what more alteration could there
be of the temporal law by such an application, then there is an alteration of
the plummet, by laying it to the stone, or than there is an alteration of the
rule or yard, by laying them to the timber and cloth? Besides, he that rightly
and after an exact, and equal proportion, can apply one rule or maxim of the
temporal law, to many more cases, than whereupon it has been usually in
former times applied, he may rather be reputed an additioner, than an alterer
of the Law. But how may the temporal Law be applied to those matters? how?
even so, and so, as follows. By the statute of 32. H. 8. c. 7. it is
declared, that tithes, oblations, how tithes may be recovered in the Kings
temporal Courts.
etc. and other Ecclesiastical or spiritual profits, etc. being lay men's
hands to lay uses, be no more Ecclesiastical, but temporal goods, and
profits; and that if any person were diseased, deforced, wronged, or otherwise
kept, or put from his lawful inheritance, estate, seisin, etc. of, in, or to
the same, by any person, claiming, or pretending to have interest, or title,
in, or to the same, that then, in all and every such case, the person so
disseised, deforced, or wrongfully kept from his right or possession, shall and
may have his remedy in the Kings tempo^al Courts, as the case shall require,
for the recoverie of such inheritance by writ original, etc. to be devised and
granted out of the Kings Court of Chancery, in like manner, etc. It is there
likewise provided, that that Act shall not extend, nor be expounded, to give
any remedy, cause of action or suite, in the Courts temporal, against any
person, which shall refuse to set out his tithes, or which shall detain, etc.
his tithes and offerings. But that in all such cases, the party, etc. having
cause to demand, or have the same tithes, shall have his action for the same,
in the Ecclesiastical Courts, according to the ordinance, in the first part of
that act mentioned, and none otherwise.

Now then sithence every person, whether he be lay or Ecclesiastical, having
right to demand tithes and offerings, has the party from whom those tithes be
due, bound and obliged unto him: and sithence also the party not dividing,
yielding or paying his tithes, does actually and really detain the same, and
thereby does unjustly wrong the party to whom they be due: contrary to justice
and the Kings laws; sithence (I say) these things be so, what alteration or
disadvantage could befall or ensue to the Common Law, or the Professors
thereof; if so be it might please the King, with his Parliament, to have the
last part of this Act so to be explained, extended, and enlarged, as that the
same might give remedy in the Kings temporal Courts, by writ original, to be
devised and granted out of the Chancerie, against any person detaining his
tithes and offerings? the Hospital of S. Leonards in York, of the Kings
foundation and Patronage, endowed of a thrave ^ospital of S. Leonard 1, 2. h.
6. c, 2
of Corn, to be taken yearly, of every plough earing, within the Counties of
York, Comberland, Westmerland and Lancaster, having no sufficient or
convenable remedy at the Common Law, against such as withheld the same
thraves, it was ordained by the King in Parliament, that the Master of the said
Hospital, and his successors, might have action by writ, or plaints of debt, or
detain at their pleasure, against all and every of them that detained the same
thraves, for to recover the same thraves with their damages. And by the
Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 4. it is enacted, That the Parsons and Curates of five
Parish Churches, whereinto the Town of Royson did extend it self, and every of
them, and the successors of every of them, shall have their remedy, by
authority of that act, to sue, demand ask, and recover in the kings Court of
Chancerie, the tithes of corn, hay, wool, lamb, and calfe, subtracted or
denied to be paid by any person or persons. Again, Vicars, Parsons, or
improprietaries, do impleade any man, in the Ecclesiastical Court, for tithes
of wood, being of the age of twenty years or above, for tyth-hay out of a
meadow, for the which time out of mind and memory of man, there has only some
Meade-silver been paid: or if a debate hang in a spiritual Court for the
right of tithes, having his original, from the right of Patronage, and the
quantity of the same tithes, do pass the fourth part of the value of the
benefice, a prohibition in all these, and sundry other cases does lie, and the
matters are to be tried, and examined in the Kings Courts, according to the
course of the Common Law, unless upon just cause there be granted a
consultation. And if in these cases, in maintenance of the Common Law, the
defendants have relief in the Kings Courts; I think it more meet to leave it
to the consideration rather of common, than to the judgment of Canon Lawyers,
to determine what alteration the Common Law could sustain, in case if
plaintiffes, as well as some defendants might pray the Kings aid, for the
recoverie of tithes, especially seeing at this day, the manner of paying tithes
in England, for the most part, is now limited by the common and statute laws
of the Realm, and not by any foreign canon law. But there is some fact What
facts touching the upholding of tyths are examinable in the Ecclesiastical
courts.
see of what nature that inextricable fact may be. I have perused many libels;
made and exhibited, before the Ecclesiastical Judges, yea and I have read them
over and over, and yet for ground of complaint, did I never perceive any other
material and principal kind of fact, examinable in those Courts, but only
such as follow.

First, that the party agent, is either Rector, Vicar, Proprietarie, or
Possessor, of such a Parish Church, and of the Rectorie, Vicaridge, farm,
possession, or dominion of the same, and by virtue thereof has right unto all
tithes, oblations, etc. apertaining to the same Church, and growing within the
same parish, bounds, limits, or places tythable of the same.

Secondly, that his predecessors, Rectors, Vicars, etc. time out of mind and
memory of man, have quietly and peaceably, received, and had, all and singular
tithes, oblations, etc. increasing, growing, and renewing within the Parish,
etc, and that they and he have been, and are in peaceable possession, of
having, and receiving tithes, oblations, etc.

Thirdly, that the party defendant, has had and received in such a year, etc.
of so many sheep, feeding and couching within the said Parish, etc. so many
fleeces of wool; and of so many Ewes, so many Lambs, etc.

Fourthly, that the defendant has not set out, yielded or paid, the tyth of
the wool, and lamb; and that every Tyth fleece of the said wool, by comm^n
estimation, is worth so much, and that every tyth Lamb, by common estimation,
is likewise worth so much, etc.

Fifthly, that the defendant, is subject to the jurisdiction of that Court,
whereunto he is summoned.

Lastly, that the defendant does hitherto deny, or delay to pay his tyths,
notwithstanding he has been requested thereunto.

These and such like are the chief matters of fact, whereupon in the The Kings
Justices are as able to judge of exceptions against tyths as the
Ecclesiastical Judges.
Ecclesiastical Courts, proofs by witnesses, or records rest to be made for
the recoverie of tithes. And who knows not, but that these facts, upon
proofs made, before the Kings Justices, may as well be decided by them, as by
any of the Reverend Bishops or venerable Archdeacons, their Chancellors or
Officials. If there be any exception alleged by the defendant, as of
composition, prescription, or privilege, the Kings Justices are as able to
judge of the validity, of these, as they are now able eo determine customs de
modo decimandi, or of the use of high ways, of making and repairing of
Bridges, of Commons of pasture, pawnage, ^estovers, or such like. Truth it is
that of Legacies and bequests of goods, the reverend Bishops by sufferance
Legacies how they may be recovered at the common law.
of our Kings and consent of our people, have accustomably used, to take
cognizance, and to hold plea, in their spiritual Courts. Notwithstanding if
the Legacy be of lands, where lands be divisible by Testament, the judgment
thereof has been always used, and holden by the Kings writ, and never in any
Ecclesiastical Court. Wherefore if it shall please the King, to enlarge the
authority of his Courts temporal, by commanding matters of legacies and
bequests of goods, as well as of lands, to be heard, and determined in the same,
it were not much to be feared, but that the kings Justices, the kings learned
Counsel, and others learned in the Law of the Realm, without any alteration of
the same law, would speedily find means, to apply the grounds thereof, as well
to all cases of Legacies, and bequests of goods, as of lands. For if there be
no goods divisible by will, but the same are grantable, and confirmable, by
deed of gift, could not the kings Justices, as well judge of the gift, and of
the thing given by will, as of the grant, and of the thing granted by deed of
gift? or can they not determine of a Legacy of goods, as well as of a bequest
of lands? If it should come in debate before them, whether the Testator, at
that time of making his will, were of good and perfect memory, upon proofs and
other circumstances to be opened, and made of the Testators memory by lively
testimonies, either the Admonitor must condemn the kings learned and discreet
Justices to be malae mentis and insanae memoriae, or else it must be confessed,
that they be as well able to judge of the distraction of wits and unsoundnesse
of memory, in a person deceased, as they be to determine the question of
Lunacie, madness, or idiocie, in a man living.

If any question should arise upon the revocation of a former will, of the
ademption of a legacy, or of a legacy given upon condition, or in diem, it
would be no hard matter, for the learned Judges, upon sight of the will, and
proofs to be made, to define which is the first, and which is the last will;
whether the legacy remain, or whether it be revoked, whether it be legatum
per rerum or in diem, whether conditional or without condition: And if it be
conditional, whether the same be possible or impossible; honest, or dishonest;
and if it be in diem, whether the day be past, or to come. But there lies no
action at the common law, for a legatorie against the executor to recover his
legacy. I grant. But a creditor to recover his debt, due by the testator upon
specialtie, may bring an action at the common law, against the executor. And
then what is the cause, that a creditor way recover his debt, and that a
legator cannot recover his legacy, in the kings Court, but only, for that
remedy could not be given unto legatories complaynants, by any writ out of
the Chancery. And therefore that 21 Ed. 1. statute upon the writ of
consultation.
such plaintiffes, might not be deferred of their right, and remedy in such
cases, to their great damage, it has pleased the kings, by sufferance, to
tolerate the Church Officers to determine these cases. Wherefore if it might
please the king, to cause writs to be made out of his Court of Chancerie, for
the recovery of Legacies, it were clear by the Common Law of the Realm (as
from the statute may be gathered) that the cognizance of these Cases, did not
appertain any more to the Spiritual Court. For then might the legatorie, by
that writ, bring an action against the Executor, to obtain his Legacy. But
how should that action be tried? How? even as other actions of debt, detinue,
or trover be tried, namely (as the case should require) either by the
country, or by the Judges upon a moratur in lege.

As Testaments with their adherences, so likewise matters of Spousals,
Marriages, divorces, etc. together with their accessories, by common Matters of
marriages, more meet to be decided by the Kings, than by the Bishops officers.
right, of the Imperial Crown, did in ancient times properly appertain to
the examinations, and sentences of the Emperors themselves, and to their
Provostes, Deputies, and Presidents, of Cities and Provinces, as by their
several titles, de Testamentis, Legatis, Fidei commissis, Nuptiis, repudiis,
divortio, dote, etc. in the books of the civil law appears. By the Law of
England also, the king has the marriage of an heir being within age, and in
his ward. Widows also that hold of the King in chief, must not marie
themselves without the Kings license. And by an Act made 4. and 5. Phil. and
Mary. there is a straight punishment provided against all such, as shall take
away Maidens, that be inheritors, being within the age of sixteen years, or
marry them without consent of their parents, and what reason lets them, that
the King might not as well have the care and cognizance of all the contracts of
marriage, especially of the marriage of all children and widows, in his
temporal Courts, as he has of some parties, to be contracted of the Dower, of
the jointure, of the disparagment, of the age, of the taking away, of the
deflouring, and of marriage without parents consent in some cases? or what a
very great alteration of the common law, could ensue, in case the Kings
temporal Justices, did examine and determine whether the contract were a
perfect and simple, or conditional contract yea, or no? For if upon the
statute made by Philip and Mary, that maidens and women, children of Noble men,
and Gentlemen, etc. being heirs apparent etc. and being left within age of
sixteen years, should not marry against the will or unknowing, of, or to the
father, or against, etc. If I say upon the publishing of this act, there has
no alteration of the common law hitherto followed, it is but a mere
superstitious error, to feign, that a change of the Common law must follow,
if so be this statute were extended, to all children, both Sons and
Daughters, of what parentage, sex, estate, or age soever. For if the King in
his temporal Courts, had the definition of all, as well as of some contracts,
made by children, without consent of parents, then should a multitude of lewd
and ungodly contracts, made by flattery, trifling gifts, fair and goodly
promises, of many unthrifty, and light personages thereunto won, by entreaty
of persons of lewd demeanor, be pronounced void, and of no efficacy, yea,
and on the other side, a number of honest, lawful, and godly contracts, should
be confirmed, and Much a do in the Ecclesiastical Courts, about accipio, and
accipi^m.
remain in their full strength, and force; which now upon certain frivolous
and trifling quiddities, and nicities of words and sillables are pronounced in
the Ecclesiastical Courts, to be no contracts. And in good earnest, is there
now a days, any soundness of reason at all, to be heard amongst the Doctors
and Proctors of those Courts, where they inform out of the Canon law in these
cases? For does not their whole dispute and information rest principally,
whether the contract be made by words of the present, or of the future tence?
whether it be made with an oath, or without an oath? yea, and do they not
exceedingly besweat, and besmyre themselves, by turning and returning, by
folding, and unfolding, their great and hydeous volumes, for proof, and
reproof, of accipio, and accipiam? yea and sometimes of letters and accents? If
the young man and maid, having both of them their parents consent, shall
answer only in the future tence; I will have thee, or I will take thee; or I am
content to take thee, or I will have none other but thee, or if ever I marry I
will marry thee; and do not answer directly, I do take thee to mine husband, or
I do take thee to my wife: oh! it is a world to see, and a wonderment to
behold, what canvasing, heaving and shoving, what a stir, quoyle, and
garboile, the Canonists make, about the lifting and removing of these feathers.
And whatsoever the holy Scriptures have determined of the necessity of parents
consent, or of what necessity likewise soever the Institu. de nup. S. 1.
civil law, hold the consent of parents to be, yet in the Ecclesiastical
courts, the papal canon law must needs take place, because by the same law,
consent of Parents, is not de necessitate, but The canon law preferred by the
reverend Bishops before the law of God and the civil law.
de honestate tantum, and because also matrimonia debent esse libera, and non
pendere ex alieno arbitrio, Wherein the reverend Bishops, under their
favorable patience) can not clearly excuse themselves, of much oversight, in
so slender managing of a matter, of so great and high a consequence. The holy
law of God, by public authority, has been commanded within this Realm, to
be sincerely and purely taught, received and embraced. The civil law, has
not had her free course, in this case hindered, by any law of the Realm. And
how then comes it to pass, that the canon law, being in this point repugnant
to both these Laws, should notwithstanding be preferred, bear sway, and take
place, in this Realm, before and above both these Laws, especially Certain
special points to be provided about marriages.
the same in this point, as being against the law of God, being utterly taken
away. The abuses past, and marriages past, under color and pretext of this law,
may and ought to be bewailed, and repented of: yea and that no such marriages in
time to come, may be made, I leave it to be considered, whether it might not
tend to the advancement of the Law of God, be honorable for the King, and
commodious for the Common Weal, providently to provide, these things
following: viz.

First, that no matrimony secretly contracted, against the will, or unknowning
of, or to the father, or him, or her, that has the keeping, education, or
government of the party to be married, before he or she come to a certain age,
should in any sort, be good or available to make the posterity of those, who
shall be so married, legitimate, or inheritable.

Secondly, that every contract of marriage concluded, with consent of parents,
Tutor, Governor, or Guardian, should be forcible and effectual, to bind both
parties irrevocably: whether the same contract with an intent to conclude a
marriage) be made by words of the present, or future tence, it skilleth not.

Thirdly, that every man stealing away, contracting, and marrying a maid,
under the age of certain years, without consent of father, tutor, governor,
or guardian, should be a felon, and for such his felonious act, suffer the
pains of death. And lastly, that all licenses to marry without banes asking,
according to the intendment of the book of Common prayer, be forbidden, and
unlawful for ever. Which things if they might be observed, it is very likely,
that men's inheritances (as now many times they do) should not hang in
suspense, upon question of legitimation or illegitimation of their children to
be allowed or disallowed by the commonlaw. There should not any such long and
tedious suites and variances hereafter fall out, between the posterities and
children of one man, for the right and interest of their Ancestors lands.
Neither should Sir Thomas Lucie, nor Sir Edmond Complaint heretofore made upon
stealing away and marying men's daughters, how they may cease.
Ludlow, nor the Lady Norton, nor Master Cook the Kings Attorney general, nor
many more Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, complain and bewail, the stealing
away, and marriages of any their daughters, Neeces, near Kinswomen, or Wards.
Neither could it be possible, that one woman might procure four or five
several licenses for the marriage of four or five several husbands, all of
them being alive together, and not one of them dead. Neither should there any
license of marriage be granted out of any Ecclesiastical Court, to any man or
woman with a blanck, whereby the party licensed was enabled to have married
another man's wife, or his own or his wives sister. Neither should any couples
married, and living together four, six, or more years, as man and wife, upon a
new and sudden dislike or coffeehouse, and upon a surmised precontract, to
be pretensedly proved by two suborned witnesses, be adjudged (by virtue of the
canon law) to be no husband, and to be no wife. Neither should any man (being
solemnly married to a wife, and afterward by reason of a precontract, solemnly
divorced from the same his wife, and by censures of the Church compelled to
marry her for whom sentence of precontract was adjudged) be reauthorised by the
same Consistory, about ten or twelve years after the divorce, to resummon,
recall, and rechallenge his first wife: especially she having a testimonial
out of the same Consistory, of her lawful divorce, and being again solemnly
married to an other husband. Wherefore to conclude these matters of tithes,
testaments, and Marriages (if the King should not be pleased, to have the study
of the civil law advanced by some such law, as whereof the former project
makes mention) I dispute for the enlarging of the common law, thus:

If it stand with reason, with the grounds and rules of the common law, and
with the Kings Royal prerogative, that in cases of Tithes, Testaments, and
Marriages, the King, (if it may please him so to provide by Parliament) may give
remedy unto complaynants, by writs out of the Charcorie, and that complaints
in such cases, may effectually be redressed upon such writs, in the Kings
Courts: And if also sundry matters of Tithes, Testaments, and Marriages, be
already handled, in the Kings Courts: if these things (I say) be so and so may
be; then with little reason, did the Admonitor warn us, that a very great
alteration of the common law must follow, and that it will be no small matter,
to apply these things to the temporal law.

But the antecedent is true, as has been already showed.

Therefore the consequent is true.

ADMONITION.
Indgements also of adultery, slander, etc. are in these men's judgments mere
temporal, and therefore to be dealt in by the temporal Page ^^.
Magistrate only.

ASSERTION.
We are indeed of this judgment, that in regard of the Kings Royal Office,
these judgments of adultery and other criminal Causes comprised within this
clause, etc. ought no more to be exempted, from the Kings temporal Courts,
than matters of theft, murder, treason, and such like ought to be. And for the
maintenance of our judgments, we affirm, that there is no crime, or offense
of what nature or quality soever, respecting any commandment contained within
either of the two tables, of the holy law of God, if the same be now corrigible
by spiritual power, but that some fault and contempt, one, or other, of the
like nature and quality, as comprised under the same commandment, has been
evermore, and is now punishable by the Kings Regal, and temporal jurisdiction.

For, adultery, as the same is to be censured by penance in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, so is ravishment also, buggerie and sodomie, to be
punished in the Kings Court, by pain of death. And, as has been accustomed,
that Ordinaries by censures of the Church, may correct fornicators, so
fornication also, (as in some books written of the common law, is reported)
has been in times passed, presented, and punished in leets, and law-dayes, in
diverse parts of the Realm, by the name of Letherwhyte, which is, as the book
says, an ancient Saxon term. And the Lord of the Leet (where it has been
presented) has ever had a fine, for the same offense. By the statute of those,
that be borne beyond the seas, it appears, that the King has cognizance, 25.
Ed 3.
of some bastardy. And now in most cases of bastardie, if not in all, by the
statute of Eliz. the reputed father, of a bastard borne, is liable to be
punished at the discretion of the justices of peace.

Touching perjurie, if a man lose his action, by a false verdict, in plea
Perjurie if punishable, temporally in some cases, why not in all.
of land, he shall have an attaint, in the Kings Court, to punish the perjurie,
and to reform the falsitie. And by diverse statutes it appears, that the
Kings temporal Officers, may punish perjurie committed in the Kings temporal
Courts. And though it be true, that such perjury as has risen upon causes,
reputed spiritual, have been in times past, punished only by Ecclesiastical
power and censures of the Church, yet hereupon it follows not, that the
perjurie it self, is a mere spiritual, and not a temporal crime or matter,
or that the same might not to be civily punished.

By a statute of Westminster, 25. Edw. 3. it was accorded, that the Usury.
King, and his heirs shall have the cognizance of the usurers dead; and that
the Ordinaries have cognizance of usurers on life, to make compulsion, by
censures of the Church for sin, and to make restitution of the usuries taken,
against the laws of holy Church. And by another statute, it is provided* that
usuries shall not turn against any being ^0. h. 3. ^. 5.
within age, after the time of the death of his Ancestor, until his full age.
But the usurie with the principal debt, which was before the death of his
ancestor, did remain, and turn against the heir. And because all usurie
being forbidden by the law of God, is sin, and detestable, it was enacted,
that all usurie, lone, and forbearing of money, etc. giving days, etc. shall
be punished, according to the form of that Act. And that every such offender
shall also be punished, and corrected, according to the Ecclesiastical laws,
before that time made against usurie. By all which statutes, it seems that
the cognizance, and reformation of usurie, by the laws of the Realm,
pertains only to the King, unless the King by his Law, permit the Church,
to correct the same, by the censures of the Church, as a sin committed against
the holy law of God.

Touching heresies and schisms, albeit the Bishops, by their Episcopal, and
ordinary spiritual power, grounded upon Canon law, or an evil custom, have
used by definitive sentence pronounced in their Consistories, to condemn men
for heretics and schismatikes, and heresies and schisms are punishable by the
kings laws.
afterward being condemned, to deliver them to the secular power, to suffer the
pains of death, as though the king being custos utriusque tabulae, had not
power by his kingly office, to inquire of heresy, to condemn an heretic, and
to put him to death, unless he were first condemned, and delivered into his
hands, by their spiritual power: although this has been (I say) the use in
England: yet by the statutes of Richard the second, and Henry the fifth, it was
lawful for the Kings Judges and Justices, to enquire of heresies and Lollards,
in Leets, Sheriffs 25. h. 5. c. 14.
turns, and in Law days, and also in Sessions of the peace. Yea the King, by
the common law of the Realm, revived by an act of Parliament, which before the
Statute of Henry the fourth, was altered, may pardon a man condemned for
heresy, yea and if it should come to pass, that any heresies, or schisms
should arise in the Church of England, the king by the Laws of the Realm, and
by his Supreme and 1 Eliz c. 1.
Sovereign power, with his parliament, may correct, redress and reform, all
such defaults and enormities. Yea further, the king and his 1 Eliz. c. 1.
parliament, with consent of the Clergy, in their Convocation, has power to
determine what is heresy, and what is not heresy. If then it might please the
king, to have it enacted by parliament, that they which opiniatively, and
obstinately, hold, defend, and publish, any opinions, which according to an Act
of Parliament already made, have been, or may be ordered, or adjudged to be
heresies, should be heretics If it please the King, heretics may be adjudged
felons, and heresies felonies.
and felons, and their heresies to be felonies, and that the same heretics and
felons, for the same their heresies and felonies, being arraigned, convicted,
and adjudged by the course of the common law, as other felons are, should for
the same their heresies and felonies, suffer the pains of death: there is no
doubt, but the King, by virtue of his Sovereign, and Regal Laws, might
powerfully enough, reform heresies, without any such ceremonial form, papal
observance, or superstitious solemnity, as by the order of the Canon Law,
pretended to be still in force, have been accustomed.

And as these offenses before mentioned, be punishable partly by temporal and
partly by Ecclesiastical authority, so drunkenness, absence from divine
service and prayer, fighting, quarrelling, and brawling in Church and
Churchyard; defamatorie words and libels; violent laying on o^ hands upon a
Clarke, etc. may not only be handled and punished in a court ecclesiastical,
but they may also be handled and punished by the King, in his temporal courts.
By all which it is evident that the Clergy has had the correction of these
crimes, rather by a The cognizance of all crimes as well as of some crimes ^^
the law of God, belong to the King.
custom, and by sufferance of Princes, than for that they be mere spiritual,
or that they had authority, by the immediate law of God. And if all these, as
well as some of these crimes, by sufferance of Princes, and by a custom may be
handled and punished spiritually, then also if it please the King, may all
these, as well as some of these crimes, without a custom be handled, and
punished temporally.

For by custom, and sufferance only, some of these crimes be exempted from the
cognizance of the King, and therefore by the immediate law of God, the
cognizance as well of all, as of some o^ these crimes, properly appertains
unto the King. And then the judgment, of those men, who defend judgments of
adultery, slander, etc. to be more temporal, and by the temporal Magistrate,
only to be dealt in, seems every way to be a sincere, and sound judgment.
Howbeit, they do not hereby intend, that the party offending, in any of these
things, and by the Kings law punishable, should therefore wholly be exempted
and freed from all censures of the Church. Nay we judge it most requisite, and
necessary for the bringing the No offender freed from the censures of the
Church
party which offends, to repentance and amendment of life (if presently upon
sentence of death, he be not executed) that besides his temporal punishment,
the censures of the Church according to the quality of the offense, may be
used, and executed against him: yea and we think, that the King, by the holy
law of God, is bound by his regal power, to command the Church, duly and
rightly to use the same censures, not only against every adulterer, defamer,
usurer, etc. but also against every thief, every manslayer, every traitor, and
every other offender: For not only sins, reputed with us Ecclesiastical, but
all sins, of what kind soever, ought to be repented of, and consequently
against all sins, the Ecclesiastical censures ought to be used. And by whom
should the same be exercised, but by the Church? Why then belike, where an
offender is punished in the Kings Court, he shall again be punished in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and so for one offense, be twice punished, which were
unreasonable.

To this we answer, that it is not against reason, that one man, for one fault
should be punished both temporally and spiritually. First he consists For a
man to be punished ^wi^e for one ^ault ^n two re^^ect, is (...).
of two parts: viz. of a body, and of a soul, in both which parts he has
offended. Secondly, he has offended, against two laws, the law of God, and
the law of the King. For the execution of which two laws, there be two kinds
of officers, of two several natures, the king for the one law, and the
officers of the Church for the other law; and both these kinds of officers,
have power given them, immediately from God, to execute; the one, Kingly and
temporal; the other pastoral and spiritual power. And therefore we say, it
stands with great reason, that the soul causing the body to sin, should no
more escape that punishment which is appointed for the soul, by the law of
God, than the body should escape that punishment which is appointed for the
body, by the law of the King: why then the officers of the Church, may meddle
with matters appertaining to the Kings law, and what an indignity to the King
were that? To this we answer, that the officers of the Church in a several
respect, and to a several end, dealing in one and the self same matter,
wherein the king deals, may no more be charged with dealing in matters
appertaining to the Crown, by the exercise of their spiritual sword, than can
the King be charged, with meddling in the same matters, to meddle with matters
pertaining to the soul, by the exercise of his temporal sword. So that the
spiritual power of the officers of our Savior Christ, (which consists only
in binding and loosing of the souls of men) can not possibly, by any reason or
good intendment, be construed, now to be any more prejudicial, to the Kings
prerogative, or contrariant to the laws of the Realm, than it has been
heretofore: Because usurie, incontinency, and diverse other crimes
Ecclesiastical have not been punished only by Ecclesiastical correction, but
also by corporal pain. And therefore to take away this frivolous objection, we
instantly pray, that the laws of the Realm may still keep their due and
ordinary course, and that the Kings Scepter may retain, that ancient and
Royal estimation, which belongs unto it: and that it may be ordered, by an
irrecoverable law as follows.

Potestas and jurisdictio actionum quarumcunque civilium; punitio, and
castigatio externa, omnium maleficiorum qu^rumcunque famam, facultates, seu
personas tangentium, non penes Pastores, and Seniores Ecclesiae; sed penes unum
solumque Principem, and civilem Magistratum sunto, and quicunque iis non
acquieverunt, cap^tali poena puniunto.

Whereupon falls to the ground, that cavillous and odious slander following
in the Admonition: viz. that the laws maintaining the Queens Supremacy, in
governing of the Church, and her prerogative in matters Ecclesiastical, as
well Elections as others, must be also abrogated. The contrary whereof being
avouched throughout this whole assertion, it shall be needless to spend any
time in the refutation of so gross an untruth.

ADMONITION.
Those laws likew^se, must be taken away, whereby impropriations and patronages
stand, as men's lawful possession and heritage.

ASSERTION.
By a statute 15. R. 2. c. 6. because diverse damages and diseases oftentimes
had happened, and daily did happen to the parochians of diverse places, by the
appropriation of benefices, of the same places, it was agreed and assented,
that in every license, from thenceforth to be made in the Chancerie of
appropriation of any parish Church, it should be expressly contained and
comprised, that the Diocesan of the place, upon the appropriation of such
Churches, should ordain according to the value of such Churches, a convenient
sum of money, to be paid and distributed yearly of the fruits, and profits
of the same Churches, by those that shall have the same Churches in proper use
and by their successors, to the poor parochians of the same Churches, in aid
of their living and sustentation for ever; and also that the Vicar be well and
sufficiently endowed. By which statute it appears, that every impropriation
ought to be made by license out of the Chancerie, that it ought to be made to
the use of Ecclesiastical persons only, and not to the use of temporal
persons or patrons. Now then all such parish Churches, as without license of
the king in his Chancery, have been appropried to any Ecclesiastical person;
and again all such parish Churches, as by license of the King in his
Chancerie, have been appropried, to the use of lay persons, they are not to be
accounted men's lawful possessions and heritages. Besides this, as many
impropriations, as whereupon the Diocesan of the place, has not ordained,
according to the value of such Churches, a convenient sum of money to be
paid, and distributed yearly of the fruits of the same Churches, etc. to the
poor Parochians of the same Churches, in aid of their living and sustentation
for ever; yea and every Church also appropried, as whereunto a perpetual Vicar
is not ordained, canonically to be instituted and inducted in the same, and
which is not convenably endowed, to do divine service, and to inform the
people, and to keep hospitality there, all and every such Church and Churches
(I say) otherwise than thus appropried, by the law of the Realm (as it
seems) are not men's lawful possessions and inheritances: For by a Statute of
king Henry the fourth, every Church after the fifteen year of king Richard
the second, appropried by license of the king against the form of the said
Statute of Rich. 2. if the same were not duly reformed, after the effect of
the same statute, within a certain time appointed, then the same appropriation
and license thereof made, presently (the parish Church of Hadenham, only
excepted) was adjudged to be void, and utterly repealed and adnulled for ever.
And therefore I leave it to the inquisition of our Sovereign Lord the King,
whether the impropriation of the parish Church of Belgrave in the County of
Leic^ster, whereunto two Chapels are annexed, and other Churches appropried to
the Bishop of Liecester, since the statutes of Richard the second, and Henry
the fourth, be the lawful or unlawful possession and heritage of the same
Bishop, yea or no And if it be lawfully appropried and so a lawful possession
and heritage, then I leave it again to the inquisition of the King, what sum
of money out of the fruits of the same Church ought yearly to be distributed
to the poor parochians, what the endowment of a Uicar canonically to be
instituted, and inducted, in the same Church should be, what house is
appointed for the same Vicar to keep his hospitality in, and whether any
Vicar for the space of these many years passed, has been canonically
instituted and inducted in the same Church, to possess that endowment, to
inhabit that same house, and to inform that people. For if by the appropriation
it self, or by the abuse thereof, the poor parochians have been defrauded of
their yearly distribution, or if no Vicars have been Canonically instituted
and inducted in the same, or if being inducted they have their endowments so
small, or so covetously kept back from them, as that they cannot sufficiently
maintain themselves, much less keep hospitality: then (as the Admonitor
confesses) there must needs be a lamentable abuse of impropriations; and that
therefore it is greatly to be wished, that by some good statute, it might be
remedied.

And as those Churches which are unlawfully appropried, are not the lawful
possession and heritage, of the proprietaries, so on the other side we affirm,
that those impropriations, which were made and reformed, according to the
statutes of Ric. 2. and Hen. 4. may well stand as men's lawful possessions and
heritages, even with those things which are required to be planted and brought
into the Church, whatsoever the Admonitor has written to the contrary. For we
do not hold that maintenance, must only and necessarily be provided for every
Minister, by the payment of tyths, oblations and other ecclesiastical profits,
belonging to Churches appropried or disappropried. For there being no direct
proof to be made out of the law of God, that Ministers of the Gospel, must
only live upon tithes; the King and parliament, may well and competently
enough, appoint convenable endowments for every Minister, without
disapproprying of any Church appropried. And therefore little cause had the
Admonitor, to insinuate the ruin of impropriations, upon the bringing in the
discipline of our Savior Christ, because the same may be well planted, and yet
to other not unplanted. But what need we to argue against his insinuation,
consider^ng he himself, before he came to the end of this page, by his own
idisclaime, contradicted his insinuation, For if the form of finding Ministers
by tithes, must with the canon law (as he says) be abolished, and if there
must be some other order for this devised, because this may seem papisticall
and antichristian: what should any man fear the taking away of those laws,
whereby impropriations do stand? For if such as heretofore have spoken or
written against them, because (as he insinuates) the form of finding
Ministers by tithes, seemed to be unlawfully taken away, and as he would also
insinuate by their judgment, ought again to be restored, and not to stand
any longer as men's lawful possessions, and heritages. How (I say) does it
follow that they which desire impropriations, to be restored to their
pristinate state, should withal enquire, to have the finding of Ministers by
Tithes, to be abolished? It seems therefore, that the Admonitor, so he
might be talking, passed but a little what he talked. For what a double talk
is here? or to what purpose was this talk? Was it because some men do think,
that the Ministers, ought not to receive tithes, for their relief and pains
in the Ministry? Why then, let all men know, that we disclaim such some men's
opinions. For we account all things, pertaining to this life, directly, or by
consequence, not commanded, nor prohibited, by the holy and sacred Scriptures,
to be things indifferent, and that therefore we may use them or not use them,
as the commodity or incommoditie of the Church shall require. And therefore as
we do not affirm, that the maintenance of the Ministers, must only and
necessarily be levied out of tithes, oblations, and such like, so also we do
not deny, but that the tenth part of the increase of all our goods, by the
authority of the King, and his laws, may be alloted for their possession and
heritage: especially in our country, the same manner of payment being so
ancient, and so agreeable to the manners, usages and disposition of our state
and people. Nay since the payment of tithes, for service accomplished in the
spiritual Sanctuary, is correspendent in the nature thereof, to the equity
of the Law of Moses, for the Levites attendance about the earthly Tabernacle;
and since also we be bound by the commandment of the Apostle, to make him
that teaches us in the word, to be partaker of all our goods, I see not (so
Jewish and popish ceremony, and superstition be avoided) but that this duty,
may as Christianly be performed, by the payment of the tenth part of the
increase of our corn, hay, wool, lamb, etc. as by the eight, twelfth,
twentieth, or any other part of our money and coin. By payment also of which
tithes, the Ministers at every season, with every kind of necessary provision
toward hospitality, might thoroughly be furnished, which many times they shall
want, by reason of men's backwardness, when collections of money are to be
made. But to speak no more of this matter of tithes, we will return to the
objection made against the Apostolical government, drawn from taking away
impropriations, And herein we will not handle, whether the laws whereby
impropriations do stand, as men's lawful possession and heritage must (as he
says) be taken away: but whether impropriations, now divided from the
Ministry, and dispersed into many several men's hands, and employed to many
uses in the Common weal, may not in tract of time by some wholesome law, be
reduced, either wholly, or in part, to be the only lawful possessions and
inheritances for the Ministers of the Gospel, yea and that without any
prejudice or damage unto Prince, or people.

It is evident in the eyes of all, that the Churches now appropried, do stand
and remain as the lawful possessions and inheritances, either of the King, or
of the Nobles, or of the Knights, Equires, Gentlemen, and other temporal
persons: or of Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, Prebendaries, and
other Ecclesiastical persons, or of the Universities, of the Colleges in the
Universities, of Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, of Schools, Hospitals,
Fraternities, and other bodies Politic, and Corporate. Wherefore to the end
our meaning may the better be understood, and that we may proceed orderly, we
think it good, to examine first, by how many several ways, some o^ these
impropriations may be wholly and thoroughly reduced: secondly, by how many
several means, other some in part, may be brought to the use of the
Ministry. To reduce some of them wholly may be done by restitution.
commutation, redemption, and contribution. And first Impropriations may be
reduced to the ministry by 4 means.
that I prejudice not the Lords spiritual, and Churchmen of their ancient
privileges, from being placed in the first rank, reason is, that, (they
teaching the people not to possess other men's goods wrongfully) we speak
first o^ restitution to be made by them. In declaration whereof, we think it
not fit, in this place to show, to what end the state of the Clergy was first
founded into a state of prelacie, by the King, Earls, Barons and other great
men (because the same comes afterward to be handled more at large) but it
shall suffice at this ^arochiall Churches to what use they were founded.
present, for the purpose whereof we now entreat, to let the reverend Bishops
understand, that the small Parochial Churches, were founded, and endowed with
glebe lands, tithes, and other fruits by the Lords of Manors, to the end that
the Lords Tenants within the same Manors, should be informed of the Law of God,
and that hospitalities might be kept, and the poor of the same parishes be
relieved. And besides, the reverend Bishops, we hope, will grant, that the
great Cathedral, This may be proved by 15. R. 2. and 4. h. 4. c. 2. and is
confessed by M, Bilson in his perpet government, page 365. 366.
and Collegiate Churches, were not founded by the Kings progenitors, Nobles,
and great men of the Realm, to the end, that those great Churches, (as great
Hawks prey upon little fowls) with their great steeples, should eat and
devour the little steeples, or that with their great Quiers, they should
overthrow and justle down the small pulpits. And therefore we most humbly pray
aid from the king, for the casting of new claps to be erected in the little
pulpits, that he would be pleased, to grant restitutiones in integrum, to all
the little Churches, and that all impropriations, of all Parochial Churches
and benefices, now by spoliation, parcel of the revenues, of Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, and other Ecclesiastical persons,
restants within those great Churches, may be wholly restored to their ancient
and original use, according to the minds and intents of the first Donors, and
Patrons of the same parochial and little Churches. For if (as Master Bilson
says) it be true, that the Lords of Villages, having erected Churches, and
allotted out portions for divine service, either by Gods or man's law, by their
later grants could not have the former rights, unto their patronages
overthrown; and if the allowance given at the first, to the Minister of each
Parish, by the Lord of the soil, were matter enough in the judgment of
Christ's Church, to establish the rights of patrons, that they alone should
present Clerks, because they alone provided for them, if (I say) this be true,
then have the Ministers of those Villages, and of that soil, just cause to
require, at the Diocesans hands, a restitution of such allowances, as were
first given and provided for them by the patrons: Especially the Diocesans by
their own act now enjoying, and converting the same allowances, to their own
use. If it be answered, that this can not well and conveniently be brought to
pass, because the same impropriations, by the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, for diverse sums of money, are now lawfully demised
to farm, for many years yet to come: hereunto we answer, that these leases
should hinder nothing at all, the restitution of the right and interest in
reversion, or remainder of those impropriations. Only if the impropriations
have been made according to the laws of the Realm, and the leases duly
granted) these leases for a time, may hinder the incumbent Ministers, from the
present possession of the Tithes, Fruits, and glebe Land, belonging to the said
impropriations. And yet may not the incumbent Ministers, be hindered in the
mean while, from receiving the rents reserved upon such Leases, and which by
the same Leases, are now payable to the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons. Neither after the determination of the same leases,
should the incumbent Ministers, be any more let, to enjoy and receive, the
whole profits in right of their Churches, than other Ministers be now let to
enjoy theirs. If any shall say, that many of these impropriations, are annexed
and appropried, as Prebends for the provision of some of the Prebendaries of
the same great Churches, and that the same Prebendaries, in the right of their
Prebends, be the lawful Rectors of the Churches appropried, and have curam
animarum in the same Parishes; then we must instantly again pray the King,
that those Prebendaries, by some wholesome law may be constrained to reside,
and to incumb upon their said Prebends, and Parochial Churches, and that by
continual preaching of wholesome doctrine, they may endeavor to cure the
souls of the people, over whom, by the order of those great Churches, they be
set, and over whom they have taken charge. And withal that they may no more be
suffered, to ly and to live idely in their Cloisters, in their caves, and in
their dens, sometimes at Worcester, sometimes at Hereford, sometimes a
Gloucester, sometimes at Salisburie, sometimes at Westminster, sometimes at
Southwell, sometimes at Windsore, sometimes at Paul's, sometimes at Oxford, and
sometimes at Cambridge. When in the mean while both seldom, and very
slenderly, they feed other sheep, whose fleeces they take in, and about London,
Winchester, Tukesbury, Reading, and other places of the Country. Besides we
pray that these prebends, after the determination of Leases now in being, may
never any more be let to farm, so that the fruits thereof may serve for those
Prebendaries, or other succeeding Ministers, to make Hospitalities, Alms, and
other works of Charity. If it be alleged that the king now having first
fruits, Tenths, and Subsidies, out of the impropriations of those great
Churches, as being all comprised, under a gross sum of the Tenths payable
for the whole revenues of the same Churches, should lose the first fruits,
Tenths, and Subsidies, of the same impropriations, if hereafter they become
either donative, or presentative; to this the answer is readily made, viz, that
Tenths, first fruits, and subsidies, might as well be paid then as now. And
that the King might then as well have right to the donation of the benefice
disappropried, as the Bishop now has the gift of the prebend appropried.

In the next rank comes commutation to be spoken of. Wherein, because the
impropriations of Parochial Churches appertaining now to the King, Nobles,
Commons, Colleges, Schools, Bodies politic, etc. were at the first
appropried only by the discretion of the Diocesans, Predecessors to the
reverend Bishops that now are, unto Abbots, Priors, Nuns, Friars, etc. and
because the successors of those Diocesans be bound in the same band of
iniquity with their predecessors, unless by all good means they labor that
things may be brought to their first, and pristinate state, it seems equal
and just, that this commutation should likewise proceed and be drawn from the
Diocesans, and great Churches before specified.

The reasons whereof may be such as follow.

The Lands and possessions given by the Kings progenitors, the Earls, Barons
and other great men of the Realm, to Bishoprics, were not given (as Master
Bilson affirms) to unburden the people Perpetual power, page 367. 25 Ed. 3.
statutes for provisours. Bishoprics founded to some sumptuous uses.
of the support and charges of their Bishops, but they were given (as the Law
of our Land teaches us) first, to inform the people in the Law of God in
those Churches; Secondly, to keep Hospitalities, alms, and other works of
charity; And thirdly, for the souls of the founders, their heirs, and of all
Christians. Now then, if some of these conditions be such as for the impiety
thereof ought not to be performed, and if other some also, being good and
godly, be not performed, and so the things are to return to their first
nature, as in the same statute is alleged; then is it reason, that the King
and Nobles, who are the just inheritours and successors, to those who were
first Donours, and founders of those Churches, should have as free a
disposition, and donation of those lands and possessions now, as his, and their
progenitors and ancesters ever had. And seeing it is mani^est, that the lands
and possessions of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, do not for the
most part, now a days serve for those good uses, for the which they were first
granted, namely, to inform the people in the Law of God, to keep
hospitalities, alms, and other works of charity, but partly for the use of
chaunting, and singing in the quires; and partly to vain, idle, superfluous,
and pompous uses, the king can not do a better and more charitable deed, than
to convert a parcel of the same lands and possessions (thus by defect of the
conditions not performed, returning to their first nature) to and for the
necessary and perpetual provision of learned, able, and preaching Ministers,
to be planted in parochial Churches, now destitute of sufficient pastors, for
want of sufficient maintenance, nay sithence Archbishoprickes, Bishoprikes, and
other prelacies, by the very express letter of the statute; are said to be
founded to superstitious uses: viz. for the souls of the founders, their
heirs, and of all ^hristian, the same reason led King Henry the eight, his
Nobles and Parliaments, to dissolve Abbeys and Monasteries, and the same reason
also, which moved King Edward the sixth, with his Nobles, and Parliament, to
dissolve Colleges, free Chapels, and Chauntries, the same reason, may be a
sufficient reason, to persuade our Sovereign Lord King JAMES that now is, with
his Nobles and Parliament, to dissolve Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics,
Deanries, etc. First, to the end these Prelacies and Dignities, may never in
any succeeding ages, serve to any such superstitious uses, as whereunto they
were first erected. Secondly, that the King having them all in his own hands,
and free disposition, may be the only founder and donor of so many new
Bishoprics as might please him to erect, and endow with such liberal, and
convenable endowments, as might serve for learned Evangelicall Bishops to
inform the people in the holy Evangell of Christ, to keep hospitalities,
alms, and to do other works of charity, rather than to be expended, as now
for a great part they are, upon the keeping of great horses, caroches, and
troops of serving idlers. The commutation then whereof we speak, and which
we most humbly commend, to the consideration of the King, is, viz. That
parcel of the temporal Lands and possessions of Archbishops and Bishops,
together with all the lands and possessions, serving to the maintenance of idle
Ministers, and idle Songsters, in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches (the
Collegiate Churches of Eaton and Winchester, and the Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches in Oxford and Cambridge excepted) by an equal and reasonable
proportion, may be made, with such impropriations, as belong to the King, the
Nobles, Commons, Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, etc. Provided as before has
been said, that there may be a liberal and convenable endowment, for the
learned Bishops or Pastors, to be continued and placed in all the chief and
principal towns and cities of the Realm. And that the impropriations of
Parochial Churches may for ever, be livings for the Ministers of the same
Churches. And therefore in the just defense of the innocence of all such as
require a godly and religious re^ormation, we say, that they ought not, to have
been traduced before the king, as robbers and ransackers of the Church. And
that some of the plotters for the Prelacie, more honestly might have employed
both their Latin and their labor, than lately they did. When by drawing
Letters (as they pretended) congratulatorie to the King, only in the name of
Preaching Ministers, they procured notwithstanding ignorant, and unpreaching
Ministers to join in the action, and to affixe their hands and names. That
such letters have been made and signed, is sufficiently to be proved, but
whether they have been presented to the Kings hands, is not yet known. Only
if they shall hereafter come, then may they be known by these words: Nos
Concionatores, etc, ab omni domestica capacitate eorum, qui praetextu
religionis, ecclesiae insidiantur. My Lord the King is wise, 2 Samuel 14. 24.
according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to understand all things
whereof he is informed.

The third means to reduce impropriations, unto the possession of Public
redemption of impropriations.
the Ministry is by way of public redemption or purchase. For the
accomplishment whereof it is necessary, that not only a common treasure be
provided, but also that the price of improptiations, by a public consent be
valued, at a reasonable rate to make, which rate will be a matter of small
weight, whether they be valued to be bought and sold, at their old and
ancient, or at their new and improved rents. To provide a common treasure,
though to some it may seem a matter intricate, and troublesome, yet seeing the
same possibly and conveniently may be done, there is no cause, that men should
faint, before thy fight, or be at an end, before they begin. It is written that
the cause when king Solomon raised the tribute, to wit, was to build the house
of the Lord, his own house and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem. After 1 Kin.
9. 15
that wicked Athaliah and her children, had broken up the house of God, and had
bestowed all the things, that were dedicate for the house 2 Chr. 24.
of the Lord, upon Balaam, King Ioash commanded the Priests and Levites, to go
unto the Cities of Judah, to gather of all Jsrael money to repair the house of
God, from year to year, and they made a chest, and made Proclamation to bring
the tax of Moses, and the Princes rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the
chest. And when there was much silver, they emptied the chest, and carried it,
to his place again, and thus day by day they gather silver in abundance. If
then toward the building of an earthly house, the Princes and people of Judah
and Israel, willingly with joy of their hearts, from year to year, and from
day to day, threw silver in abundance into the chest, how much more were it
praise worthy, if Christian people, did encourage themselves, to pay a small
tribute toward the provision of a competent maintenance, for their spiritual
pastors, by whose labors, as lively stones, they might be builded up into a
spiritual temple in the Lord? That many and great taxes and tributes of late
years have been made for many uses, and to many purposes, there is no man
ignorant thereof. And therefore though there be little reason, that the people
standing already burdned, with great charge, should be again recharged,
especially when without any extraordinary burden, there is an ordinary
means, (if the same were accordingly bestowed) by the people yielded, to
relieve the Ministers in all places, with a decent and comely portion; yet
notwithstanding to be eased, from those public payments, and annual
grievances, imposed by the Ecclesiastical Courts, upon the people is not to be
doubted, but the parishioners in all places would willingly pay any reasonable
tax or tribute, to be demanded of them for this purpose.

An other means to raise this public treasure, may be a dissolution The
dissolution of Chapels may be a good mean to raise a tribute.
of all free Chapels, and Chapels of ease in the Country, together with an
union of two or more Churches into one, especially in Cities and great towns.
For as in these Cities and Towns, the poorest, and meanest livings be
provided, so generally for the most part, are they fitted, with the poorest,
and meanest Curates, as by most lamentable experience is to be seen, in all
the Episcopal Cities of the Realm, excepting London. Nay the chief and
Metropolitan City of Canterbury is not to be excepted. For in that City
there being about 12, or 13, Parish Churches, there has not been ordinarily
of late years above 3. or 4. able Preachers, placed in the same Churches.

The Chapels to be dissolved, and the Churches to be consolidated by two, and
two into one, and one can be no fewer in number than one thousand at the least.
All which if they might be sold, the money to be raised upon their sale, could
be no less than twenty thousand pounds, if they were sold only for twenty
pounds a piece. But if they be well worth double or treble so much, then would
the treasure also be double or treble. This dissolution of Chapels, and union
of Churches, is no new device, nor strange innovation: but has been
heretofore thought upon, and in some part confirmed already by our Kings in
their Parliaments. Touching the dissolution of Dissolution of Chapels no new
device.
Chapels, the most reverend Father Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury,
with the residue of the Kings Commissioners, appointed for the reformation of
Ecclesiastical laws allows of the same. And Titu. de eccles. guard. fol. 54.
for the union of Churches, there was an act made 27. H. 8. so they exceeded
not the value o six pounds. And by a statute 1 Ed. 6. it was lawful for the
Mayor and Recorder of the City of York, and the Ordinary or his Deputy, and
six Justices of the peace in the same City, to unite and knit together, so
many of the poor parishes of the same Cities and suburbs of the same, as to
them should be thought convenient, to be a living for one honest incumbent. And
it was lawful for the Lawful for the Major of York, etc. to unite Churches
in the City of York.
said Major, Recorder, and Aldermen, to pull down the Churches, which they
should think superfluous in the said city, and suburbs of the same, and to
bestow the same, toward the reparation and enlargment of other Churches, of
the Bridges in the City, and to the relief of the poor people. The
considerations which moved the King and Parliament to ordain this act, were
these, viz. The former incompetency of honest livings, the former necessity of
taking very unlearned and ignorant Curates not able to do any part of their
duties; the former replenishing of the City, with blind guides and Pastors;
the former What reasons moved K Ed. 6. to unite Churches in York may move king
James to unite Churches in Canterbury etc.
keeping of the people, as well in ignorance of their duties to God, as also
toward the King and Common weal; and lastly the former danger of the souls of
the Citizens. If then in these days it might please the King to apply like
plasters, to the like sores, to provide remedies for the like mischiefs, and
for the like diseases, to minister like medicines, it would come to pass no
doubt, in few years, that the lame and the blind and the broken, with a number
o^ unhallowed and unclean beasts, should be swept, and cast forth of all the
Parochial Churches, within Canterbury, Winchester, Chichester, Lichfield,
Oxford, and other great Cities of the Realm. For these Chapels, and smaller
Churches, being the very Seminaries, of all hirelings, and idle Shepherds, a
Benefice can no sooner become void, but the poor and hungry Chaplains, w^arie
Chappe^s, the se^inaries of hirel^ngs.
of their thin diet, and long leaping after a bean, presently trudge to the
Patron, offering, or accepting any conditions to be presented by him. And not
only should the Church by this means, be rid of these vermin, but also the
learned and Preaching Minister, without further aid or contribution, in those
places, might have more liberal maintenance, than erst they have had. For then
should they be no more constrained, to deduct out of their livings, by reason o
Chapels yet standing, and as it were annexed to their parish Churches, some 10
pound, some 20. pound, some 30. pound by the year, for the wages o these
hirelings, besides this a singular and apparent benefit, could not but redound
to the Common weal, by the dissolution By the dissolution of Chapels many
suits in law should be avoided.
of these Chapels, when as many, long, tedious, and changeable and
uncharitable suites, heretofore had and commenced, should hereafter be
extinguished, between the parochians of the mother Churches and the
inhabitants of Hamblets, for and concerning the repair, and reedifying of the
said Churches, and Chapels, and for other rights, and duties challenged to
belong from one unto the other.

A third means to leavie a treasure, for the redemption of impropriations, may
be a sequestration of the fruits of the Churches of non Sequest ration of the
fruits of the Churches of pluralists may further the treasure for the
redemption of impropriations.
Residents, and commendames, with the fruits of the Churches of the pluralists,
and perinde valeres, from the which same the plurisied persons are to depart,
the said sequestration no longer to endure, than some able Ministers may be
provided and placed in the same Churches.

A fourth mean to raise this treasure, if it please the king, and that the
Church have found favor in his sight, may be the money due unto the King upon
such penal Laws, as for the benefit of the Common weal, are necessarily to
be put in execution, and especially upon the law of provision and praemunire,
not pardoned by the Queen. And albeit happily the King, upon a most worthy and
Christian zeal, be well pleased hereafter not to urge upon the popish
recusants, the payment of their forfeitures, for absence from divine service,
yet because they be able and do daily contribute to seminaries abroad, and be
favorers and abetters of popish Priests and Jesuits, lurking at home, the
most treasonable and dangerous enemies, that can be to the Kings Person and
State, in consideration hereof (I say) if it may please the King, it seems
not unreasonable (the law standing still in force, and unrepealed) that the
popish recusants be urged to the payment of such sums of money, as are
already forfeited; the same by the commandment, and free gift of the King to
be employed upon the redemption of such impropriations, as are within the
parishes of their abodes. To the end that learned, and preaching Ministers,
being placed in the same, they; their wives, children, servants, tenants, and
dependants, by the powerful preaching of the word, might be converted unto the
Gospel.

It follows now in order, that we speak of contribution, the By what
contribution impropriations may be brought to the use of the ^in^stery.
fourth means whereby some impropriations may be reduced wholly to the use of
the Ministry. Wherein there can not any certain rule, or direction be
prescribed: because it must proceed only from those, whose hearts God shall
touch, stir up, and encourage, willingly to bring a free offering, unto the
Lord, for the building up of his spiritual house. For of every one (says the
Lord) whose heart offers it freely, ye shall take an offering for me. And
every one whose heart encouraged Exodus, 25. 2.
him, and whose Spirit made him willing, and men, and women, as many as were
free-hearted, came and brought, taches, and Exodus 35.
earings, and rings, and bracelets, all were jewels of gold, and blew silk,
and purple, and s^arlet, and fine linen, and Goats hair, and Rams skins,
and Badgers skins, and silver, and brass, and Shittim wood, and Onix stones,
and Spice, and Oil: Every man, and woman, (I say) whose hearts moved them
willingly to bring for all the work, Exodus 36. 5.
which the Lord had commanded, brought a free offering, yea and the people
brought too much, and more than enough, for the use of 2 King. 8.
the work of the Lord. King Sa^omon having all the Elders, the heads, the
chief Fathers, and all the men of Israel, and the Priests and Levites, to
bring up the Arc and Tabernacle of the Lord, offering Beeves, and Sheep which
could not be numbered for multitude. Yea and after these offerings were made,
and after the King had prayed, that their heart might be perfect with the Lord
their God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at that
day; the king again offered a sacrifice of two and twenty thousand beeves, one
hundred and twenty thousand sheep, and so was the house dedicated. After the
return of the people out of captivity, certain of the chief Fathers, when
they came to the house of the Lord, which was in ^erus^lem, they gave after
their ability, unto the treasure of the work, evenone, and three score
thousand drammes of gold, and five thousand pieces of silver, and an hundred
priests garments: they gave (...). 2. 68. etc.
money also to the Masons, and to the workmen, and meat, and drink, and
oil. Yea at the exhortation of Nehemiah, the Priests, the great men, the
people, and the women, that they might be no ^^he 2 etc.
more a reproach, set their minds to the building of the walls, and at their
own charges, builded some one gate, some another; some one door, some
another; some one tower, some another: some one portion o^ the Wall, some
another. Wherefore, seeing we have not an Ester to succeed our Deborah, but a
Solomon rather to succeed a David; yea such a Solomon, as whose heart the Lord
has filled with an excellent spirit of wisdom, of understanding and of
knowledge, to find out, and to dissolve hard and curious parables, and has put
in his heart to teach and to guide others; we rest persuaded in our hearts,
that the King for his part, treading in the steps of the godly Kings, Princes,
and Governors of Judah, will go in, and out, before his people, as they did
before theirs. And that he will rather not eat of the Nehe 5.
bread, nor drink of the wine, of the governors that were before him, than
that he will not remit the provisions, the seasements, the fynes, the
impositions, and the amerciaments, that have been exacted. Yea also that he
will feed from his own table, an hundred and fifty Prophets, and prepare for
them oxen, and sheep, and birds, and wine in 2 Chro. 11.
all abundance, because they are come unto him, from among the prelatists that
were about them, because their bondage has been grievous unto them Yea further
also, we are persuaded, that he will make out of his Lap every servant of his,
that shall bear rule over his people. And thus much of the means whereby some
impropriations, may wholly be reduced to the use of the Ministry. It
follows to show by what means other impropriations, may be converted in
part, to the maintenance of Ministers to be planted in parochial Churches,
now destitute of able Pastors, in case the same impropriations by none of the
former means, can be reduced wholly to their first and ancient institution.
Wherein these two things come principally to be considered.

First, whether it were not convenient, by some wholesome law; to how
impropriation^ may be in part, reduced to the Ministry*
have it ordained, that the Heads, Governors, Rulers, and Masters of the
Universities, Colleges, Cities, Towns, Hospitals, free Schools, and other
bodies politic and corporate, should not from henceforth demise or set to
farm their, or any of their impropriations, or any of their glebe Land,
Tithes, or other fruits belonging to the same, until such time as all leases
heretofore made, be fully ended, or otherwise determined.

Secondly, whether it were not convenient to have it enacted, by the same law,
that all and every impropried Church and Churches, with their glebes, tithes
and other fruits, after the determination of the leases now in being, should
be demised and set to farm, only to the incumbent Ministers of the same
Churches, for term of their natural lives, if so long they did continue
resiant, and faithfully preach in the same Churches, the doctrine of the
Gospel, according to the articles of Religion, concerning Faith and
Sacraments; by public authority, now established in the Church of England.
And because by likelihood the Vicars will not be able to pay fynes or incomes
unto the Colleges, Hospitals, and other places, and because also it seems
reasonable, that the Colleges, Hospitalls, and other places, by some other
means, should be recompensed, we leave it again to be considered, whether it
were not convenient that the Vicars, in consideration of non payment of fynes,
should yield in money, corn, or other provision, to the double or treble value,
of the ancient and unimproved rents. For men experienced in these affairs of
this life, know that the profits arising out of Churches appropried unto the
farmours thereof, are commonly six, eight, or ten times more worth by just
estimation, than are the old rents, payable unto Colleges, Hospitalls, and
other like places. And thus we see how together with the bringing in of these
things, which are required to be planted in the Church, impropriations may
stand, as men's lawful possessions, and heritages, or otherwise how without
damage or hurt to the King or Realm, they may be converted to the use and
provision of the Ministers, whatsoever has been insinuated by the Admonitor
to the contrary. And yet do I not in any of these things, or of any other
thing, first or last, spoken, or to be spoken, desire mine own advice and
judgment so to be respected, as though I should arrogate unto my self more
knowledge than all others, which labor in the cause of reformation: but only
I submit these my private meditations with their reasons, to the censures of
all wise, godly, and learned men. Humbly praying them so to bestirre their own
wits, and so to bestow their own cunning, and learning, that a better and more
easier way, by their ingenuousnesse, may be found out, and procured to take
place. And in the mean season, that these motions tendered to their views, may
not altogether be neglected, but duly weyed, and considered. Especially for
that I have not tendered any other thing to be performed, by any of these
means, unto any other, than such as whereunto I my self to my power, yea and
beyond my power as far as in me lies, shall be ready to yield.

And howsoever the Bishops and other great Clergy Masters, with their stately
favorites, may pretend some part of this device, to be an hinderance of
learning, and other some part not to be for the Kings profit; yet to the first
we answer briefly, that learning is not so much furthered by a few great
rewards, provided for a few great learned men, as it is by many good rewards,
appointed for many good learned men, as hereafter more at large, in a more
convenient place is declared. Touching the Kings profit, we affirm, that it is
not only most profitable, but also most honorable for the King, to have a
multitude of loyal, virtuous, and godly subjects. And that such manner of
subjects, can by no means better be procured, than by a continual preaching
Ministry of the Word, to be planted in every parish, of the Kings Realms.
And because no man better knows the recyprocall duties, between a Christian
King, and Christian Councellers, we leave the discerning of the spirits of
these profit preachers to the trial and judgment of the most Christian King;
whom if he shall find, either by flattery, to fawn upon the Kings profit,
or by laboring to keep the King in a good opinion of things amiss, we most
humbly beseech the King to accept them, and reward them for such, as could wish
in their hearts, the king should rather be impoverished by having many bad,
and unprofitable subjects, than that themselves would not be enriched, by
enjoying many good and profitable impropriations. As for the Laws whereby
patronages do stand, as men's lawful possessions, and inheritances, which (as
the Admonitor says) must also be taken away, how the same laws may still
endure, or by consent of patrons, be altered without their damage (if God
permit) when we come to speak, of the clections of Ministers, wherein the
reformers are charged with the burling, and thrusting out of Patrons, shall be
declared.

ADMONITION.
The Laws of England to this day have stood by the authority of the three
estates, which to alter now by leaving out the one, may happily seem a matter
of more weight, than all men do judge it.

ASSERTION.
Not to stand upon terms with the Admonitor, that the laws usually called the
common laws of the land, being mere customarie laws, did never yet stand by
the authority of the three estates. I will The bringing in of the discipline
by pastors and elders is not the leaving out of parliament any one of the
three estates
take his meaning to be, that the statute laws of England, to this day have
stood by authority of the three estates, which to alter now by leaving out the
one, etc. and then hereunto, I answer, that not any one of the three estates
should be left out, or barred, from having authority in making and promulging
statute laws, though the government of the Church, by Pastors and Elders were
brought in. For we which so much cry (as he says) for this manner of
government, to be planted, are so far from exempting, or excluding any one of
the three estates, from their ancient power, privilege, and preeminence, in
the making of statute laws, as that we pronounce him to be guilty of high
treason, to the King and to the Realm, that avoweth the contrary. And we
affirm directly, and confess plainly, that it belongs only, wholly and
altogether, to the three estates, as well to root out, and to pull up,
whatsoever government, is not justifiable, by the holy law of God: as also to
plant and to settle, whatsoever discipline is warrantable by the same law. And
to speak as the thing is, how were it possible to have the discipline by
Pastors and Elders planted by authority of the three estates, if one of the
three estates should be left out? or can it be imagined, that any one of the
three estates, would ever consent, to the bringing in of such a government of
the Church, as whereby (the same government being once brought in) the same
estate, should ever after wards cease, to be any more an estate? Besides we
acknowledge that all powers are of God, and therefore every one of the three
estetes, being a power; we grant that the same has his stateship, by the
authority of God. And if all the three estates be lawful by the holy law of
God; how can it be verified against us, that we, which urge the same holy law,
for the bringing in of the discipline by pastors and elders, should
notwithstanding contrary to the same law, intend the leaving out, or altering
any one of the three estates? But which of the three estates was it that he
meant, should be left out? I trow there is none of the state of prelacie, so
ill advised, as to take upon him the proof of this position: viz. That the
Lords spiritual The state of the prelacie is not one of the three estates in
parliament.
by themselves alone, do make one of the three estates, or that the statutes
of England, to this day have stood by their authorities, as by the authority
of those, who alone by themselves are to be accounted, one of the three estates.
For if that were so, how much more then, might the great Peers, Nobles, and
temporal Lords, challenge to make by themselves an other estate? And without
contradiction, to this day the commons summoned by the kings writ, have ever
been reckoned a third estate. Now then if statutes have hitherto stood, by
authority of the Lords spiritual, as of the first estate, by the authority
of the Lords temporal, as of the second estate, and by authority of the
commons, as of the third estate, I would gladly be resolved, what account the
Admonitor made of the Kings estate. It had not been liegnes, nor loyalty (I
am sure) howsoever he spoke much of the Lords spiritualls duty and fidelity
in the execution of our late Queens laws, to have set her Royal person,
authority and state, behind the lobbie, at the Parliament door, Either the
kings Royal person then, as not comprised within the compass, and
circumcription of the three estates, by his meaning (which had been but a very
bad meaning) must be thought to have been hitherto secluded, from authorizing
the statute laws, made in Parliament. Or else it is a most clear case, that
the Lords spiritual themselves alone, do not make any one of the three
estates. And what matter then of more weight, may it happily seem to be, to
alter the authority of the Lords spiritual, and to leave them out of the
Parliament, when as notwithstanding, they being left out, the statutes of
England, may remain and continue, by authority of the three estates? And it
were not amiss for the Lords spiritual, to consider, that the body and state
of the weal public, both now is and ever has been, a perfect, entire and
complete body, and State, without the body and state of Prelacie: and that
the King, and Nobles, and Commons of the Realm, without Prelates, Bishops or
Clerks, do make up all the members and parts of the body, and of the state;
and may therefore ordain, promulg and execute, all manner of laws, without
any consent, Anno 36. h. 8. fo. 51. h and Anno m. j. fo. 93. ^.
approbation or authority yielded unto the same, by the Bishops spiritual, or
any of the Clergy. And thus much our Divines, Histories, and Laws do
justify. Sir James Dier, Lord chief Justice of the Common pleas in his
reports, tells us that the state and body of a Parliament in England,
consists first of the King, as of the head and chief part of the body;
secondly of the Lords, as principal members; and lastly of the Commons as
inferior members of that body.

By a statute of provisoes, it appears, That the holy Church of 25. Ed. 3.
holy church founded in the state of prelacie by the King.
England, was founded into the state of prelacie within the Realm of England,
by the grand father of King Edward the third, and his progenitors, and the
Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of the Realm, and their Ancestors, for them
to inform the people of the law of God, and to make hospitalities, and alms,
and other works of charity, in These uses are changed to the keeping of great
horses, great troops of idlers wi^h long hair, and great chains of gold. 6
Eliz. c. 1. The King bound to do laws made without assent of prelates to be
kept as laws of the realms.
the places where the Churches were founded. From whence it follows: First
that the Archbishops and Bishops only and alone, do not make of themselves any
state of prelacie, but that the whole holy Church of England, was founded into
a state of Prelacie: Secondly it is plain, that the Kings of England, before
they and the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and great men had founded the
holy Church of England, into a state of Prelacie, ought and were bounden, by
the accord of their people, in their Parliaments, to reform and correct
whatsoever was offencive, to the laws, and rights of the crown, and to make
remedy, and law in avoiding the mischiefs, damages, oppressions and
grievances of their people, yea and that the Kings were bound by their oaths,
to do the same laws so made, to be kept as laws of the Realm, though that
thorough sufferance, and negligence, any thing should at any time be attempted
to the contrary. For whereas before the statute of Caerlile, the Bishop of
Rome, had usurped the Seignories, of such possessions and benefices, as whereof
the Kings of the Realm, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, as Lords and Avowes
ought to have the custody, presentiments and collations. King Edward the first,
by assent of the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and of all the communaltie,
at their instances and requests, und without mention of any assent of the state
of prelacie, in the said Parliament holden at Caerlile, ordained that the
oppressions, grievances, and damage sustained by the Bishop of Romes
usurpation, should not from thenceforth, be suffered in any manner. And
forasmuch as the grievances and mischiefs mentioned in the said Act of
Caerlile, did afterward in the time of King Edward the third, daily abound to
greater damage and destruction of the Realm, more than ever before, and that
by procurement of Clerks, and purchasers of grace from Rome 31 Ed. 5 sta. of
^^ering.
the said King Edward the third, by assent, and accord, of all the great men,
and commons of this Realm, and without mention of any assent of Prelates, or
Lords spiritual, having regard of the said Act of Caerlile, and to the causes
contained in the same to the honor of God and profit of the Church of England,
and of all this Realm, ordained and established, that the free elections of
Archbishops, Bishops, and all other dignities, and benefices, elective in
England, should hold from thenceforth, in the manner as they were granted by
the Kings progenitors, and founded by the ancestors of other Lords. And in
diverse other statutes made by King Edward the third, it is said, that our
sovereign Lord the King by the assent of the great men, and all the Commons
has ordained remedy etc. That it was accorded by our Sovereign Lord the
King, the great men, and all the commons, 36 Ed. 3. c. 6 8 Ed. 3. 3. statute of
provisours.
that the King chiefly desiring to sustain the people in tranquillity and
peace, and to govern according to the laws, usages, and franchises of his
land, by the assent and express will and accord of the Dukes, Earls, Barons,
and the Commons of his Realm, and of all other whom these things touched,
ordained that all they, etc. By which desire of the King, and words of the Act,
we learn, that our sovereign Lord King James, may sustain his people, The
king with the assent of the nobles and commous, may repeal statutes without
consent of prelates. 25 Ed 3.
in tranquillity and peace, and govern according to the laws, usages, and
franchises of his kingdom, though the assent, and accord of Prelates be never
required to the enacting of any statute in Parliament. Nay such has been and
yet is the power of the King, that with the assent and accord of the Nobles,
and Commons, he has authority to adnull, and make void, even those Acts
which in favor of Prelacie, and assent of Prelates, have been enacted in
Parliament. As by an Act made in the time of King Edward the third, is plainly
to be seen. For whereas the King by assent of the Prelates, Earls, etc had
willed and granted for him, and for his heirs, certain articles firmly to be
kept, and holden for ever, namely that the Ministers of holy Church for money
taken for redemption of corporal penance, nor for proof, and account of
Testaments, nor for solemnity of Marriage, etc. should not be impeached, etc.
before the Kings Justices; nevertheless the same king, in the same year, with
assent of the Earls, Barons, and other wise men of the Realm, and without
assent of Prelates, revoked and adnulied the same articles again.

Again king Richard the second hearing the complaints of his faithful liege
people, and by their clamor in diverse parliaments of diverse abuses crept in
against the solemn, and devout ordinations of Churches, etc at the request,
and complaint of the commons, by the advice 3 R. 2 c. 3. 7 R. 2 c. 12.
and commonassent of the Lords temporal (without mention of any Lords
spiritual) is said to have ordained, That none of the kings liege people, etc.
should take or receive within the Realm of England, any procuracie, etc. And in
the eleventh year of the same kings reign, it is especially provided, that the
appeals, pursuits, etc. made and given in the same parliament, be approved,
affirmed, and established, as a thing Act. and Mo. R. 2.
duly made, for the weal and profit of the king, and of all the realm,
notwithstanding that the Lords spiritual, and their procurators, did by
protestation, absent them out of the Parliament, at the time of the said
judgment given. And the like protestation being made by the Prelates and
Clergy, at a Parliament, holden the third year of the same king, it was
replied for the king, that neither for their said protesttation, The king bound
by his oath, to do his laws to be made though prelates protest against him.
or other words in that behalf, the king would not stay to grant to his
Justices in that case, and all other cases, as was used to be done in times
past, and as he was bound, by virtue of his oath at his coronation. By all
which premises it is as clear, as the Sun shining at noon day, that the Lords
spiritual be so far from making any one of the three Estates, as that (if it
please the king) they may not be so much as any member, or part of any of the
three Estates at all. If in the time of king Henry the eight the Lords
spiritual (being then more in number than the Lords temporal) had been but
such principal members of the high estate of Parliament, as without whom,
neither law could The Lords spiritual no principal members of the parlia^ent
otherwise than as the King pleases.
have been made, Monastery nor Priorie might have been dissolved; what could
the king have done as head, and the Commons have done as feet, and the Nobles
have done as the heart, the Liver and the Longs, to the dislording and
discloystering of the Abbots, and Priors, the Monks and the Friars of those
days. In case the Prelates with their arms, and with their shoulders, with
their hands, and with their horns, had heaved, and shoved, and pushed, and
thrusted to the contrary. But to come nearer unto our own times, and
remembrances, if it cannot be proved, that above one Lord spiritual was
present in parliament, and gave any assent to the enacting of statutes, made in
the first year of the Queens Majesty's reign deceased, but that it be a No
Lords spiritual present in parliament 1 E^.
clear case, that the ancient jurisdiction, preeminences, rights, and
privileges of the kings Crown, were restored, that popery and superstition
was banished, and the doctrine of the holy Gospel harbored only by the
Queen, the Lords temporal and commons, what more plain evidence or better
proo^e can there be, that the Lords spiritual by any necessity be neither
principalls nor accessaries, neither branches nor buds, nor any essential
member of the house of Parliament. And of this opinion are the soundest
Historians, and sincerest Divines of our age.

In the fifteenth year of King Edward the third (says Master Fox) diverse
petitions being put up in Parliament against provisions coming Act. and M^.
fol. 320.
from Rome, the Kings answer and agreement was made in form following: viz. It
is agreed by the Kings, Earls, Barons, Justices, and other wise men of the
Realm, That the petitions aforesaid, be made in sufficient form of law.
Where it is to be noted (says he) that at the grant hereof, the consent of
the Bishops is neither named nor expressed, with the Lords of Parliament, and
yet the Parliament stands in his full force notwithstanding. At an other
Parliament Act. and Mo. 525.
(says he) William Wicham, Bishop of Winchester, for a slanderous report
savouring of a contumelious lie, and proceeding of a subtle zeal, meaning
falsehood, was so by the Duke of Lancaster pursued, that by act of Parliament he
was condemned, and deprived of all his temporal goods. And this seems to
have been done (says Master Fox) without assent, and against the wills of the
Lords spiritual; for afterward at an other Parliament, great suite was made by
the Clergy, for deliverance of the said Bishop: and being asked a subsidy in
the Kings behalf, with great lamentation they complained, for lack of their
fellow and brother of Winchester, and denied to join themselves in any
tractation of any such matter. And in another Parliament holden at York, in
the sixth year of King Edward the third, all such Act. and Mo. 519.
laws, as then passed, and were concluded by the King, Barons, and Commons,
were good, notwithstanding the absence, or malice of the Lords Spiritual. For
it is recorded (says he) that only the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of
Lincoln, and the Abbots of York and Silby were there present.

In a book entitled the burning of Paul's Church in London, 1561. and in the
fifth question moved by a papist, it is said, that this manner of ministration
of Sacraments, set forth in the book of Common prayers, was never allowed, nor
agreed upon, etc. no not by the Clergy of England, at the last Parliament, but
only it was agreed upon, by the Laity which had nothing a do with spiritual
matters, or causes of religion. Whereunto the reverend Father Master Pilkington
Bishop of M. Pilkington Bishop of Durisme.
Duresme answering: was there not (says he) a disputation for Religion,
appointed by the Queens Majesty, wherein your Clergy was afraid to utter
their foolishness, in defending their superstition, lest they had taken more
shame in answering, than they did in holding their peace? I think the
Universities with so many places of this Realm, receiving religion, and these
other disputing for it, may be counted to be some part of the clergy of the
Realm. And so it was not received without consent of the Clergy: But these
were not of the Parliament, What then? But as Ioash, Josaphat, Ezechias, and
Josias, did not make a new Religion, but restored that which was defaced and
had long lain buried, so our Parliament, did not set forth a new religion, but
restore that, which was godly begun before the good K. Edward, confirmed by the
Parliament, and Clergy then, etc. But nothing can be concluded, as a law by
Parliament, (say they) without consent of the Clergy there present. But this
having not their consent, cannot be counted a law, as they think. I had rather
(says M. Pilkington) leave this to be answered by the Lawyers, than otherwise.
Yet that the world may see, that something may be said in it, we grant him not
this to be true, that no law at all can be made without consent of Bishops.
Look your old statutes of Parliament, when Bishops were highest, before Edward
the third, and ye shall read, that they passed by consent of the Lords
temporal, and commons, without any mention of the Lords spiritual, which
statutes, many of them stand in strength at this day. Then it may well be
gathered, that the consent of the Clergy, was not always so necessary as
they think it. The Lawyers, Judges, and Justicers put in practice and execute
these laws, therefore their doings, may be a sufficient reason, to lead the
unlearned, what opinion they have of this statutes. For Religion (except
Justice Rastall) first executing that, and afterward running away, may condemn
the rest, which I trust he may not; I think they would not execute them,
except they had the strength and nature of laws. If they do contrary to their
knowledge and opinion, they cannot be able to answer their doings, but I think
no wise men are of this opinion. Only these corner creepers, that dare not show
their face, and would deceive the people, go about to deface all good and godly
order, that displeases them. In the days of K. Edward, they had the like fond
opinion, that the king could not make laws in his minority, until he came
unto full age, and to make the people to disobey their Prince. Hitherto M.
Pilkington L. Bishop of Durisme; with whom the most worthy and learned M.
Jewel, late Bishop of M. Jewel B. of Salisburie.
Salisburie agrees in every point.

The wise and learned (faith he) could have told you, that in the Parliaments
of England, matters have evermore used to pass, not of necessity by the
special consent of the Archbishops and Bishops, as if without them no statute
might lawfully be enacted, but only by the more part of voices, yea although
the Archbishops and Bishops were never so earnestly bent against it. And
statutes so passing in Parliaments, only by the voices of the Lords temporal,
without the consent and agreement of the Lords spiritual, have nevertheless
been always confirmed, and ratified by the Royal assent of the Prince, and
have been enacted and published, under the names of the Lords spiritual and
temporal. Read (says he) the statutes of King Edward the first, there shall
ye find, that in a Parliament holden at S. Edmundsbury, the Archb. and Bishops
were quite shut forth, and yet the Parliament held on and good, and profitable
laws were there enacted, the departing, or absence, or malice of the Bishops
spiritual notwithstanding. In the Records thereof it is written thus: Habito
Rex cum suis Baronibus Parliamento, and Clero excluso statutum est: The King
keeping a Parliament, with his Barons, the Clergy, that is to say, the
Archbishops and Bishops being shut forth, it was enacted, etc. In provisione de
matrona in the time of K. Edward the third, whereas matter was moved of
bastardie, touching the legitimation of bastards, borne before marriage, the
statute passed wholly, with the Lords temporal, whether the Lords spiritual
would or no. and that contrary to the express decrees and canons of the Church
of Rome. And thus much the most reverend and godly Father M. Jewel Bishop of
Salisbury. Wherefore to conlude this point against the Admonitors position, I
dispute thus:

All those persons, who by any necessity, are none of the three estates, and
by whose authorities, the statutes of England, to this day, have not stood, to
leave out the same persons, may happily seem a matter of less weight, than all
men do judge it:

But the Archbishops and Bishops, are such persons, as by n^cessitie are none
of the three estates, and by whose consents, the statutes of England to this
day, have not stood,

Therefore to leave out the Archbishops and Bishops may happily seem a matter
of less weight than all men do judge it.

If our Evangelicall Bishops be of that opinion, of which the Popish Bishops
were, viz. that the house of Parliament is an unfit, and an unmeet place, to
have the holy cause of the religion of God debated and concluded upon, and that
the Laity without the clergy ought not to conclude any thing in Religion, and
that in respect hereof, their presences, their voices, and their assents are
necessary in the ^arliament: If our Evangelicall Prelates (I say) make this
objection: then besides that hereby they unseemely, unmannerly, and
unchristianly, accuse the whole land of ignorance and blindness in religion,
supposing neither King, nor Nobles, nor Commons, to be able to discern between
night and day, besides this (I say) so shameful an abuse, of a whole Christian
nation, I would pray them to remember what the most reverend Fathers, Master
Pilkington and Master Jewel have answered, to such cavillous slanders. For
what else intended they by many examples, and proofs brought for the
Parliaments of England, consisting of the King, the Nobles, and the Commons, to
be lawful Parliaments, and to have right to establish religion, but to
justify against Popish scoffers, that religion might be conceived, and
established in Parliament, notwithstanding the absence or exclusion of the
Clergy? Besides, since our laws do uphold the state and authority of the
Convocation house, for the examination of all causes Matters of religion not
concluded in parliament, before the same be consulted of in convocation.
of Religion, surely it cannot be truly averred, that it is necessary for
Evangelicall Bishops, to be members of the Parliamenthouse, lest controversy
of Religion should be handled, and discussed without them. For how should any
matter of religion be concluded without them in Parliament, when first of all,
the same is to be argued among themselves in convocation? Or let them hardly
(if they can) show any one instance of any change, or alteration, either from
religion to superstition, or from superstition to religion, to have been made
in Parliament, unless the same freely and at large, have been first agreed
upon in their Synodes and Convocations? And what booteth it, then, to have a
double or treble consultation, and consent of Archbishops and Bishops in
parliament? Is the holy cause of God, any whit bettered, by their Bishops
riding from Paul's to Westminster? Or can it receive any more strength, by their
walking from Westminster Church, to Westminster palace? Nay it has been often
times so far from being promoted by their bishops, as not only in their
convocations, but also in the Queens parliaments, the same thing has been
shamefully entreated, and taken the foil, as may witnesle the bill for the
better observation of the Sabbath, 27. Eliz. which being passed by both houses
of parliament, was notwithstanding gainesaid and withstood, by none so much as
by certain Evangelicall bishops, and which (as there all men generally
conceived) was only stayed from being made a law, by the Queen, upon their
counsel, and persuasion.

ADMONITION. Page ^8.

It has been always daugerous to pick quarrels against laws settled.

ASSERTION.
And is it not morbus haereditarius in Prelates to pick quarrels against
reformation of errors? For even this did Stephen Gardener Stephen Gardeners
argument, and the ad^onitors argument in effect one.
reason against the Lord Protector,

That in no case (says Stephen Gardener) is to be attempted, of the Lord
Protector, which may bring both danger to him, and trouble to the whole Realm:

But innovation of Religion, from that state wherein K. Henry left it, may be
and is like to be dangerous, to the Lord Protector, and to baeed troubles to
the whole Realm:

Therefore innovation of Religion from the state that K. Henry left it, is in
no wise to be attempted.

And even of this stamp, and of this streyne is the argument of pickking
quarrels against laws settled, for thus in effect he argues:

That Discipline in no case is to be brought into the Church by the King and
Parliament, which may be dangerous to laws settled:

But to bring into the Church the Apostolical discipline, may be dangerous to
laws settled.

Therefore the Apostolical Discipline, in no case is to be brought into the
Church by the King and Parliament.

But forasmuch as that noble and religious Lord Protector (notwithstanding
Stephen Gardeners sophistry) continued constant, and courageous in the
abolishment of popery and superstition which king Henry left, and did without
dangerous alteration of laws then settled, innovate religion: How much more now
may the Kings Majesty, the Lords and Commons in Parliament, attempt with
effect, an innovation of that state of Ecclesiastical government, wherein the
Queen left the Church? And if it cannot be denied, but it had been far more
dangerous for the Realm, and for the Lord Protector, not to have settled the
holy doctrine, of the everlasting Gospel, by Less danger to reform the
Church ^y n^w laws, than to c^ntinue corruption by old laws
new laws, than to have maintained, and continued antichristianitie by old
laws: how should it be less danger, for the king in these days to continue
corruptions in the Church, by toleration of old laws, than to have the same
corruptions reformed by establishment of new laws? But unto whom, or unto
what, has it been dangerous, to pick quarrels against laws settled? Wha,
has it been dangerous to laws settled? No. For how should laws settled be
endangered by quarrelers! sithence quarrellers are evermore in danger of laws
settled. Or has it been always dangerous for a king, for a State, for a
people, or for a Country, to pick quarrels against laws settled? No. For what
man is he, or what face carries he, that dare upbraid a country, a people, a
State or a King, minding to unsettle evil laws, and evil customs, to be
quarrellers against laws settled? Let it then only be dangerous for private
persons, upon private male-contentment, to pick quarrels against good laws,
well, and rightly settled; and let it not be hurtful or dangerous for supreme
Kings, powers, and principalities, by public edicts, to alter evil laws,
evilly settled. For to what other end should evil laws evilly settled, be
continued, but to continue evil? And what a thing were that? This argument
then for laws settled, being the sophisme of that Fox Stephen Gardener, is but
a quarrelsome, and wrangling argument.

ADMONITION.
If this government whereof they speak, be (as they say) necessary Page 78.
in all places, then must they have of necessity, in every particular parish,
one Pastor, a company of Seniors, and a Deacon, or two, at the least, and all
those to be found of the parish, because they must leave their occupations to
attend upon the matters of the Church. But there are a number of Parishes in
England, not able to find one tolerable Minister, much less to find such a
company.

ASSERTION.
This argument seems to be drawn from kitchen profit, and is but a bugbegger
to scarre covetous men from submitting their necks unto the yoke of that holy
discipline, which our Savior Christ has prescribed, and which the Admonitor
himself confesses, to have been practiced by the Apostles, and primitive
Church. And yet because this argument seems to lay a very heavy burden on
men's shoulders, such as is impossible to be borne, it is an argument worthy
That seniours and Deacons should be found at the charge of the Parish is
absurd.
to be examined, though in it self, the same be very untrue and absurd. For who
did ever fancy that a Pastor, a company of Seniours, and a Deacon or two at the
least, should be men of occupations, or that they should be all found of the
parish, because they must leave their occupations, to attend upon the matters
of the Church? Why? there be many hundreds of parishes in England, wherein
there dwells not one man of an occupation. And what reason then, or what
likelihood of reason was there, to father such an absurd necessity upon the
Church? As for the necessity of having one Pastor in every partilar parish,
and of his finding by the parish, because it is his duty, to attend upon
reading, exhortation, and doctrine, although he be no man of occupation, this
(I say) is agreeable and consonant, to the government of the Church practiced
by the bishops. And therefore in the finding, and having of one pastor in
every parish, they, and we differ not. But that men of occupations only should
be chosen Seniors and Deacons in every parish; or if Seniours and Deacons, were
men of occupations in any parish, that they should be all found of the parish,
we utterly disclaim as an absurdity of absurdities. And yet we deny not, but
in Cities and great towns wherein for the most part, men of trade, do
inhabit, that Seniours and Deacons must of necessity be men of occupations.
Unless then an occupation must of necessity hinder men, from being faithful,
religious, and godly men, there is no reason to enforce, that men of
occupations in cities and What kind of men ought to be chosen seniours and
Deacons.
great towns, should not be chosen Seniours and Deacons. And as for Country
parishes, wherein very few, or no men of occupations do reside, this objection
is altogether idle. In which parishes also we affirm, that men of greatest
gravitie, integrity, wisdom, faith and godliness, ought to be chosen
Seniours, and Deacons. And we doubt not, but all such men as whom we intend,
ought to be chosen Seniours and Deacons, whether dwelling in Cities and
Towns, or in the Country, would be as ready, as willing, and as watchful,
prudently to employ themselves hereafter, in matters of the Church, as now
either themselves, or their equals, are busied in matters of their
corporations, or common weal, without any manner of contribution, to be yielded
toward their finding.

When the people of Israel were commanded to pay their tithes, first fruits,
and other oblations unto the Priests, and Levites, for their attendance and
service in the Sanctuary, we do not read in the whole book of God, that they
were enjoined to be helpers and contributers to the relief and sustentation of
the Captains over thousands, of the Captains over hundreds, nor of the Elders
and governors, placed city by city, for the affairs of the King. And
therefore sithence we have neither precept nor president, that all the
officers of the Church should be found at the costs of the Church; and sithence
also as well in Country parishes, as in Cities, and towns, (to the praise and
glory of God be it spoken) we have many able, wealthy, and substantial
persons, who have given their names unto Christ, what necessity is there that
any such Seniours and Deacons should be elected, as have need to be relieved,
and supported by a common purse? And Churchwardens and sidemen are not found at
the charges of the parishes
had the Admonitor well and advisedly pondered, that our Churchwardens, and
Sidemen (who carry a semblance of governing Seniours) that our Collectors also
for the poor (who justle out the Deacons) being all of them men of
occupations, poor husbandmen, or day laborers, and being not ^ound of the
parish, are notwithstanding of^entimes in the year, troubled and turmoyled,
from one end of the Diocese unto the other, and that which is more, from
attendance upon their day labor, husbandry and occupations, to wait, and to
attend, not upon matters of the Church, but upon money matters, pertaining to
the officers of the Bishops consistory, Had he (I say) wisely and sincerely
considered these things, he would certainly not once have mentioned this so
silly and simple a suggestion. But quite and clean to cut off at one blow all
the skirts of the coat of this silly bulbegger, that the very buttocks of it
may be bare, and that the Church may see, there is no such burdensome Charge,
to be laid upon her, as is fained; the grave and godly judgment, and policy
of King Edward The judgment of K. Ed. 6. commissioners touching Elders and
Deacons.
the sixth his Commissioners, authorized to compile a book, for the
reformation of laws Ecclesiastical, according to an act of Parliament, in
that behalf provided, shall rise up for us and plead the truth and equity of
this our sayings, The commissioners names were these: viz. The most reverend
Father Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. Thomas, Bishop of Ely. Richard
Cox, the Kings Almoner: Peter Martyr, professor of Divinity. William May,
Rowland Tailor, Doctor of the Law, Sir John Cheek, John Lucas, Richard
Godericke, M. Hadon, and others. All which reverend, learned, Titul de divinis
officiis c. 10. f. 45.
and religious men, as with one voice and accord speak one thing: so thus and
thus they speak: Evening prayer being finished, whereunto all shall be
attendant, after sermon in their own Chu^ches, the chief Minister whom they
call parochies, and the Deacon, if happily they shall be present, or they being
absent, let the Ministers, Vicars and Elders, (so the Archbishop of Canterbury,
afterward a godly Martyr, and Bishops can skill of the name of Deacon and
Elders) with the people confer about the money put apart to godly uses, how the
same may be best employed; And let the D^scipline (lo these sage Counselors
were all Disciplinarians) be reserved until that time. For they whose
frowardnes has been public, and tending to the common offense of the Church,
let such be recalled to the acknowledgement of their faults, and let them
publicly for the same be censured, that the Church by their wholesome
coertion, may be brought in good frame. Afterward let the Minister going a
part, with some of the Elders, take counsel, how the others (whose manners are
said to be lewd, and whose life is said to be full of mischiese) may first
according to the commandment of Christ in the Gospel, come together, and be
communed with, by sober and discreet men, and with a certain kind of
brotherly love. By whose admonition if they shall reform themselves, thanks
are diligently to be given unto God. But if they shall proceed forth in their
wickedness, they are to be bound with that sharp pain, which by the Gospel
we know to be prepared for contumacie. And when the force and vehemence of
excommunication shall be shaken, first let the Bishop be sought unto, who if
he shall consent, and oppose his authority, let the form of excommunication
be dispatched, before the whole Church, that we may bring in as much as may be
the ancient Discipline.

Thus much have these most Christian Disciplinarians, and renewers of the
ancient Discipline, by Pastors, Elders, and Deacons both written and spoken.
And yet have they founded never a word, to the finding of Elders and Deacons by
the Parish, nor by having men of occupations to leave their business, to
attend upon matters of the Church. For men thus meeting together once only in
the week, and that upon the Lords day, and that only within their own parishes,
and without payment of any fees, may very well notwithstanding these
attendances, give themselves wholly all the week following, to their ordinary
vocations. And therefore against his not able to find one tolerable Minister,
much less to find a Company, etc. I conclude thus:

No Parish in England shall be burdened to find so much as one Seniour or
Deacon:

Therefore much less shall every Parish be burdened to find a company of
Seniours, etc,

Where the Admonitor complains, that many parishes are not Tolerable and
intolerable Ministers.
able to find one tolerable Minister, we would gladly learn, by what brand
tolerable Ministers, are known from intolerable Ministers, according as the
Lords spiritual judge, or judge not, of tolerable, and untolerable Ministers.
For if all reading Ministers (as needs with them they must be) or else why
do they tolerate them, be tolerable Ministers, what a vain and idle
distinction, has he coined touching the scarcity of maintenance, for
tolerable Ministers? Considering all Ministers by intendment of law, be able
to read: and considering also a very small maintenance, is esteemed to be a
tolerable maintenance, for reading Ministers. For else why do the great
Bishops, in their great Churches of Commendams, and the rich Doctors in their
rich Churches of non residencies, make so small allowances to their reading and
stipendarie Curates? And where then is that parish in England, that is not able
to maintain a tolerable Minister?

ADMONITION.
The next Argument, that the people might not choose their Pastors, Page 78.
Elders and Deacons, as is required, is drawn partly from a fear, that the
same will be a matter of schism, discord, and d^ssen^ion in many places:
partly from affection and want of right judgment of the people, partly from
the unrulinesse of the Parishes, and partly from the broyle and trouble which
may follow.

ASSERTION.
Unto this objection if I should answer nothing at all, but only should The
objection of fear etc. answered.
deny, that any fear, or any other inconvenience at all, pretended in this
place, is to be feared to ensue, my simple negation were more to be tolerated
than his simple affirmation, for by the canon Law, non inficienti, sed ponenti,
incumbit onus probandi. And yet because Doct. in ^si cui de preb^^^.
the Lord has spoken unto Joshua, and in him unto us all, that we should not
fear, nor be discouraged to observe, and to do all, that is written in the
law, for then (s^ith the Lord) shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then
shall thou have good success, therefore in the word of the Lord (I say) that
none of all this fear, broyle, trouble, or turmoyle, is to be feared at all.
Nay that it is most assuredly, and without all doubt, to be hoped and looked
for, that he would so bless the attempt of putting this order in execution, as
that the peoples approbation, and allowance of their Ministers, should be a
matter of all peace, quietness, unity, concord, good success and prosperity
to the whole Church of God in England.

For what an heathenish incredulity, were it for us to reply upon the
erroneous conceit of a timorous, and suspicious fancy, that fear, and I wot
not what unrulinesse, and unquietness shall follow, when we (receiving the
laws of peace from the Prince of peace) have his most stable truth, that his
peace shall rest upon us, and that all fear and evil success shall cease and
vanish away. No busy headed body therefore, shall be able to lead any man
away, to disquiet either Church or common wealth, (otherwise than as the Church
in all ages by the malice of Satan and his instruments, has evermore been
disquieted) if once the holy law of the Gospel touching this point were
observed and put in ure. And if it be feared, that the choice to be made by the
people of God, and which is allowed unto them by the holy laws of God would
prove to be a matter of schism, discord, and dissension, how much more reason
have we to fear, that the fi^e of schism, discord, and dissension, being
blown already, should not break out and fame among us, if still one man
alone, be suffered to thrust upon the people of God, not tolerable Ministers,
according to Gods heart, but intolerable Ministers, according to man's
tradition. The Admonitor has insinuated unto us often in his Admonition, that
it is dangerous to innovate. And so I say too, unless there be evident ^^de
constitu. prim. L. 2.
utilitie of innovation. For (says the Emperor) in rebus novis constituendis
evidens esse utilitas debet, ut ab eo jure recedatur, quod diu aequum visum
est. But is it not as perilous, yea sometimes much more perilous not to
innovate? for proof whereof, it shall suffice, to take witness of our own
times, and of our own experiences. It seemed equal a long time, and for many
years, that the Sacrifice of the Mass, with all the pelf and trumperie
thereof, should not once be Dangerous to innovate unless there be evident
utiliti^ of innovation.
spoken against. But we all know, that the abandoning thereof, has not yet
brought any perilous subversion, upon any nation, that purely and soundly in
place thereof, has embraced the holy sacrament of the Lords Supper. It seems
also to be equal for many ages past that the Bishop of Rome might have supreme
and absolute power over all persons, states, and causes, not only in Rome,
Italy, Spain, Germany, and other foreign kingdoms, but also in England and
Scotland. But as yet to the view of all the world, it has not proved perilous
for the King and Queen of England and Scotland, to establish new laws, for the
alteration of that ancient abuse. And why has it not been dangerous so to do?
Why? forsooth because there was evident utility in doing of it. But how could
an evident utilitie appear before it was done? How? Forsooth because the holy
law of God had warranted an alteration. For faith having eyes to see the
wisdom, the power, and the truth of God in his word, discerned a far off that
the institution of the Lords Supper, was long before the sacrifice of the
mass. And therefore our Kings by abandoning popery out of the Realm, did not
institute any new religion, but only they restored the old. Now then if a same
holy law of God, do condemn the choice, and thrusting of the pastor upon the
people by one man alone; and again it the same Law, do impugn the primacie of
one pastor over all Pastors, as well in a Diocese, or Province, as in the
whole West part of Christendom, what danger can it be, not to disfranchise the
one, sithence without any manner of danger, we have abolished the other? or
what peril can it be, not to countenance the sons, sithence without peril
we have discountenanced the father? Especially seeing in this place of the
admonition we have a plain confession, that the common manner of election of
Pastors, Elders, and Deacons in the old Churches was made by the people. For if
the examples of schism, discord and contention, did commonly appear in the old
Churches, while that manner of election did continue, then by his own mouth
Common manner of elections in the old churches was by the people.
that manner of election was common, and did continue in the old Churches.
Besides, this inconvenience (says he) caused Princes and Bishops so much to
intermeddle in this matter. Frow whence it necessarily again follows, that
by the holy Scriptures, and law of God, Princes and Bishops, did not
entermeddle with that matter atal. For had it been simply lawful for them, to
have dealt in those causes by the word of God, then as well before schism,
discord, and dissension, as afterward, yea rather much more before than
afterward. For then by their own right, might Princes and Bishops have
prevented Bishops n^eddle not with election of Pastors by the holy Scriptures.
all occasion of schism and contention, and have so preserved the Church, that
no tumult, or disorder, should once have been raised or begun therein. Again
if by the law of God, Princes and Bishops, had meddled in these matters, and had
not intermedled by humane device, then lawfully by their authority alone,
might they have chosen Pastors, Elders and Deacons in the old Churches: which
thing in this place by necessary inference he denies. For schism (says he)
caused them to intermeddle. So as by his confession, they were but
intermedlers, and entercommoners, by reason of schism, and not commoners, and
medlers by virtue of Gods word. And yet now a days our reverend Bishops in
this case, are no more intercommoners, with Princes and with the people, they
ate no more entermedlers as in old times they were; but they have now so far
incroached upon the prerogatives of the prince, and privileges of the people,
that neither prince nor people have any commons in the election of Pastors,
Elders and Deacons with them at all. Besides if schism, and contention among
the people Bishops ^n croach upon the ^igh^ o^ p^^^ce and people.
were the reason, why Bishops first entermedled in the choice of Pastors; we
now having no schism nor contention about the choice of Pastors, by the
people, and so the cause of ceasing, why should not the effect likewise cease?
But this effect, is therefore still to be continued, because otherwise the
cause would a new sprout out, and spring up again. Nay rather inasmuch, as for
these many years, we have had schism, discord and dissension, because the
bishops wholly and altogether have meddled in the choice of pastors, and have
thrust upon the people, whatsoever pastors please not the people, but pleased
themselves, and have not suffered the people to meddle, no not so much as once
to intermeddle in these matters; in as much (I say) as these things be so: it
seems most expedient, requisite, and necessary, for the appeasing, and
pacifying of this discord, and the taking away of this schism, to have the
manner of election, which was in the old Churches, restored to the people; and
this wherein the bishops have intermedled, without authority from the word, to
be abolished: that so again the cause of scbism and strife, which is now among
us ceasing, the effect might likewise cease.

After I had ended this tract, in this manner, touching this point, there came
into mine hands a book entitled, The perpetual government of Christ's Church,
written by Thomas Bilson, Warden of Winchester College: in the fifteenth
chapter of which book is handled this question, viz. to whom the election of
Bishops and Presbyters does rightly belong, and whetherby Gods law the people
must elect their pastors or no. In which chapter also the matter of schism,
strife and contention is handled. The final scope and conclusion whereof, is
as the proposition imports, twofold: First, concerning Bishops, then
concerning Pastors. The quarrel taken against Bishops does not so much touch
(says he) the office and functions of Bishops, as it does the Princes
prerogative. When you rather think the Prince may not name her Bishops,
without the consent and election of the people, you impugn not us, but
directly call the Princes fact, and her laws in question. As touching this
point of the proposition, because the people by any law, or custom, never
challenged any right, or interest, in the choice of the Kings bishops, we have
nothing The King only has power without the people to nominate his Kingly Bb.
to meddle or to make about the choice; of any of the Kings Bishops. Nay we
confess, as his highness progenitors Kings of England have been the
Sovereign Donours, Founders, Lords and Avowes of all the Bishoprics in
England without aid of the people; that so likewise it is a right, and interest
invested into his Imperial crown, that he only, his heirs and successors,
without consent of the people, ought to have the free nomination, appointment,
collation, investiture, confirmation of all the Bishops from time to time, to
be planted in any of those Bishoprics; yea, and we say further, that the
King alone, has not power only to nominate, collate and confirm, but also to
translate, yea and if it please him to depose all his Kingly Bishops without
any consent of his people at all. For (say we) ejus est destruere, cujus est
construere, ejus est tollere, cujus est condere: Neither will we dislike, but
rather content our selves, that our late Queens Bishops (if they shall find
favor in the Kings eyes) should be also the Kings Bishops, conditionally they
submit themselves to the laws, and prerogatives of the Kings Crown, content
themselves with the only name of Kingly and Princely Bishops, and not challenge
any more unto themselves the sole titles of Godly and Christian Bishops, as
though without injury to the law of ^od, and Gospel of our Savior Christ,
they could not be dispossessed of their Lordly Bishoprics. And therefore our
most humble prayer to the King is, that his Majesty would be pleased, that
such his Kingly Bishops may not henceforth over crow, and justle out Gods
Bishops: nor have any primacie over Gods Bishops. And withal, that the King
himself would vouchsafe, to hearken to the doctrine of such as are indeed Gods
Bishops, rather than to the Counsel of those who lately were the Queens
bishops.

As touching the second part, viz. whether the people by Gods M. Bilson
confirms the peoples election of their pastor p. 339.
law, must elect their Pastors, or no; Master Bilson by reasons, and proofs
brought for the first use of it, rather confirms than impugneth the same. For
(says he) Well may the peoples interest stand upon the grounds of reason and
nature, and be derived from the rules of Christian equity and society: That
each Church and people stand free by Gods law, to admit, maintain, or obey no
man, as their Pastor without their liking, unless by law, custom, or
consent, they have restrained themselves: Then the people had as much right to
choose their 360,
Pastor, as the Clergy that had more skill to judge: that the Apostles left
elections indifferent to the people and Clergy at Jerusalem, That the Apostles
in the Acts, when they willed the Church at Jerusalem to choose the seven, did
not make any remembrance or distinction of the seaventie Disciples from the
rest: And lastly, against the cursing, and fighting of the late Bishops of
Rome, till excluding both 359.
Prince and people, from yielding his consent, or making their request they had
reduced the election wholly to the clergy, he tells them by 339.
their leave, it was not so from the beginning. From all which sayings of
Master Bilson I conclude thus:

Whatsoever is right, lawful, and free by the law of God: whatsoever stands
upon the grounds of reason and nature: whatsoever is derived from christian
equity and society: whatsoever is from the beginning, and was left by the
Apostles to the church at Jerusalem, ^he same ought still to remain, and must
be kept inviolable in the church.

But the peoples interest to choose their Pastor, is right; is lawful; is free
by the law of God; stands upon the grounds of reason and nature; is derived
from Christian equity and society, is from the beginning, and was left by the
Apostles to the Church at Jerusalem: Therefore the pe oples interest to choose
their Pastor ought still to remain, and must be kept inviolable in the
Church.

The whole proposition and every part thereof, together with the assumpt, and
every part thereof, is drawn from M. Bilsons own confession. Only to the
proposition he has annexed certain conditions or exceptions, viz. Unless by
law, custom, or consent, the people have restrained themselves, or transferred
or altered their right, or else by their default or abuse, the canons,
councels, superior powers, princely, or public laws, have abridged, altered,
or abrogated the same. Now then it remains to know, whether any consent,
default, abuse, custom, canons, councels, superior powers, public or
princely edicts, may be a good and sure warrant, to abridge, transfer or
abrogate, the peoples interest, from having to do, in the choice of their
Pastors.

Our Savior Christ, when he came in the flesh, he came to reform the abuse
crept in of the Law, and to improve the corruptions of doctrine taught by the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law, but he took not away any least
tittle of the Law, ne abolish any jot of true and sound doctrine in the Church.
The Gospel teaches us to order our judgments aright, to bridle the
unrulinesse of our affections and to moderate our inordinate appetities. But
yet, does not the same command us, to empty our souls of all judgment, to
bury our affections in our bellies, and to become as dead as stones, without
all Canons and Councels, etc may bridle diso^dered elections, but not disannul
elections of the people altogether-
sense, or appetite. In like sort we grant, that custom, consent, Canons,
Councels, Superior powers, public, and princely laws, may re^orme, reprove,
restrain, direct, moderate, and bridle the disordered unrulinesse, and
contentious brawlings of the people, in, and about their elections; yea and we
grant further, that they may alter, abridge, or enlarge the form and manner of
elections. All this we grant: but that Christian Kings or any superior powers,
may take this right into their own hands (as he says) from the people; or
that the people by any law, custom, consent, canon, or council, may
transfer or abolite their right, f^eedome, and interest given and deduced
unto them, ^y these rules and by these grounds, I do not yet perceive any good
ground o^ reason for the same. For in so doing, how should the holy wisdom
and providence of God, who has imprinted in our nature, these rules and these
grounds, this equity and this freedom, be so holily regarded, and so highly
reverenced, as it ought to be. For has he made us freemen, and can we without
contempt of this grace become bondmen? And albeit in some cases, that may be
well said, quod volenti non fit injuria, and that quilibet potest recedere a
suo jure; yet the cases must be such, as a man's willingness, and re^dinesse to
forgo his right, be not tied to him with so strong a band, as is the band of
the grounds of reason and nature, of the rules of Christian equity, and of the
freedom of the law of God. It is free, I grant, for a man to eat or not to
eat, to drink or not to drink, but for a man not to eat at all, or not to
drink at all, and so with hunger and thurst to sterve himself is not free:
and in this case volenti fi^ injuria. Every man that has a wife, that has
sons and daughters, that has menservants, and maid servants; as by the very
instinct of nature, and by the equity of the Law of Christ he has freedom to
provide for them, so must he carefully use this his freedom. And therefore he
may not wholly and altogether put from himself, and expose at hap hazard, the
provision, education, instruction, dieting, apparelling, and lodging of his
wife, his sons, his daughters and his servants unto strangers: neither may
husbands, fathers, nor masters give their consent, to the making of any law, or
the bringing in of any custom, whereby their freedoms should be restrained,
adnihiled, or made void in this behalf. For by thus violating the rules, and
grounds, and by thus treading, as it were, under foot, the equity of Christ,
and the freedom they have by the law of God: should they not most profainely,
and impiously despite God, and, as it were, overturne the whole order he has
set in nature? And if the people may not cast off these rules, and these
grounds, this equity, and this freedom in things appertaining to the frail,
bodily, transitory, and earthly life: how much less may they cast them off,
or set little by them, in things appertaining to the salvation of their souls,
and to a durable, spiritual, everlasting and heavenly life?

But the peoples right to choose their Bishops, did never depend Objection,
that the peoples right did never depend upon the express commandment of God.
upon the express commandment of God: neither can the people challenge by
Gods law, the right to choose their Bishops: I mean (says he) no such thing
is expressed, and contained in the Scriptures. What then? if it do depend, or
be contained under the general grounds and rules of reason, nature, christian
equity, christian society principles of humane fellowships, the law of God,
the practice of the Apostles, and that which was from the beginning: Is it not
sufficient? Though it be not expressed in these terms, viz. That the people
must choose, or that the people have right to choose their bishops? it is not
expressed and contained in the Scriptures, that every man must choose his own
wife; or that every woman must choose her own husband. And yet by the doctrine
expressed, or contained in the Scriptures, is it true that no man has right
either to choose an other man's wife, or to choose an other woman's husband. And
that every man has right to choose his own wife, and every woman right to
choose her own husband. Again, it is not expressed and contained in the
Scriptures, that infants must be baptized: neither is it expressed and
contained in the Scriptures, that the bishop of Lichfield must have but one
wife. Yet because it is contained in the Scriptures, that God in the beginning,
brought but one woman unto one man, and gave to one woman but one husband, I
assure my self it will not be denied, but that the bishop must and does
content himself with one wife, and that every Christian ought to bring their
children to be baptized. Besides if Master Bilson distinguishes bishops in
England from pastors in England, and Archbishops in England, and Pastors in
England, two several orders and degrees of Ministers in the Church of England,
then I grant that it is neither expressed nor contained in the Scriptures that
the people must choose their bishops in England. And why? but because the
Scriptures (having put no difference between bishops and pastors) know no
such bishops as we have in England. And therefore bishops Bishops in England
are only Bb. by the Kings grace and not by divine institution.
in England, being bishops only by the Kings grace, and not by divine
institution and ordination, as pastors in England be, hence is it, that the
Kings of England, by their prerogative Royal, and not the people, by the rule
of Scriptures, have chosen their bishops in England. And for this cause also
was it, that K. Hen. 8. with advice of the Parliament, did resume the
nomination, appointment, investiture, and confirmation, of his Kingly bishops
from the pope. As for the nomination of pastors, having cure of souls in
parishes (otherwise than all patrons by right of patronage, do give
presentiments) their choice, institution, translation, o^ deprivation, the Kings
of England by their Pastors in parochial Churches were never placed by the
King, as Bb. are in their Bishoprics.
regal power never yet hitherto took the same upon them* And if the Kings of
England by any fact, or by any law, did never take away the right, interest,
and freedom from the people, in choosing their pastors; what right, other,
than by usurpation, can the bishops have, to impose, or thrust upon the people
pastors without their liking? But by custom and consent the people have
restrained themselves. Hereunto (if it were not already sufficiently answered,
that the people could not lawfully restrain themselves) yet Master Bilson
himself answers, That the late bishops of Rome never left cursing The people
lost their consent by cursing and fighting of the Popes.
and fighting, till they had excluded both prince and people, and reduced the
election wholly to the Clergy. By cursing, and fighting then have the people
been overruled, and excluded, and not by custom or consent, have they
restrained themselves. Yea and by virtue of this cursed fight only, do the
Bishops of England at this day, exclude both Prince and people, from meddling in
the choice of pastors. For by authority of the canon law, made by those late
cursing and fighting Bishops of Rome, the bishops of England have the sole
ordination, and placing of pastors over the people. And from hence also it is
plain, that the peoples right, was not by their default or abuse, relinquished
and forfeited. For then the late Bishops of Rome needed not to have cursed, and
fought for it. And now whether it be not meet, that the Lord Bishops professing
themselves to be Christian bishops, should still retain in their hands, and
not restore unto Christian people, the possession of their Christian equity,
and freedom* exto^ted from them, by the cursings and fightings of
antichristian Bishops, I leave it to the consideration of the reverend bishops
themselves.

Touching the mischiefs and inconveniences of schisms, troubles, strifes, and
contentions so often inculcated, and so much urged, and excepted against the
election of the people, there is no man able (as I think) to produce any one
pregnant proof, out of any ancient, or late history, that any king or
Sovereign power, has interposed any supreme authority, to appease any
discord or dissension, ensuing or raised upon the bare choice, made of any
mere parochial pastor, by any faithful and christian people. The schisms,
strifes, and factions, that were raised in the old churches, sprang out, and
slowed only Schisms and contentions spring from schismatic and proud
clergy masters.
from the heads, and fountains of those schisms, strifes and factions: and
namely from proud, ambitious, and heretical bishops, and great clergy
masters. For they being infected, and poisoned with the contagion of schism,
and heresy, and having sowred the minds of their Disciples,, with the leaven
of their heretical doctrines, no marvel if the people became followers of
the evil manners of their teachers, and no marvel if they verified the
proverb, Like master like man, like Priest like people. Eustatius Bishop of
Antioch, being a Sabellian heretic, was deposed by the Council of Antioch,
after whose deposition, a fiery flame of sedition was kindled in Antioch:
Socr. 1. c. ^^
because one sort of the common people sought to translate Eusebius Pamphilus
from Caesarea to Antioch; some other would bring again Eustatius. Eusebius
bishop of Nicomedia and Theognis bishop of Nice, being both Arians, with their
confederates, raised skirmishes and tumults against Athanasius, after the death
of Alexander bishop Socr. l. 2. c. 2
of Constantinople about the election of a bishop, there was greater stir
than ever before time, and the Church was more grievously turmoyled: The people
were divided into two parts, the one egerly set with the heresy of Arius,
clave to Macedonius; the other cleaved very constantly to the decrees of the
Nieene Council, and choose Socr. l. 2. c. 4
Paulus to be their Bishop. The cause of division among the Citizens of Emisa,,
about the election of Eusebius Emisenus, was, for that he was charged with the
study of the Mathematickes, and accused of Socr. l. 2. c. 6
the heresy of Sabellius. After the death of Eusebius, when the people of
Constantinople, had brought again Paulus, to be their bishop, the Arians chose
Macedonius. The authors and chief doers in that stir, were certain Arian
bishops, who before aided Eusebius, that turned up side down the whole state
of the Church. These Socr. l. c. 9
and sundry such like sturres, discords, factions, and dissentions, are found
to have been raised, and pursued by schismatic, and heretical bishops,
their favorites and followers in the old Churches; but that these or the like
mischieves, and inconveniences, can be proved to have fallen out, by the
election of Parochial pastors in the old Churches, we deny. And why then
should not the interest, and freedom of faithful, and Christian people,
wrested from them by cursings and fightings, of faithless, and antichristian
Popes, be restored to them again? And the cause ceasing, why should not the
effect likewise cease? And therefore we humbly entreat the Lords bishops, that
against the grounds of reason and nature; against Christian equity A ^equest
to the ^everend bishops.
and society; against the right and freedom of the law of God; against the
principles of humane fellowships; against that which was in the beginning; and
against that which the Apostles left in the Churches, by color of laws
brought into the Church, by the cursings and fightings of the late Roman
Bishops, they would not henceforth bar and seclude the Kings Christian and
faithful people, from giving their consents unto their pastors. Yea and we
further beseech their Lordships, that are scholars unto the Apostles, and as
servants unto the old way of reason, of nature, of the law of God, of the
equity of Christ, and of humane society, they would hereafter embrace that
way, which was from the beginning, which is the old way, and the best way, and
not any longer persist, in a cursed and quarrelling way, which is the new way,
and the worst way. But if the Lords spiritual of their own accord, shall not
readily vouclsafe to yield unto us this our right at our entreaty: then for my
part, I will briefly show mine opinion, what were expedient, for the A
supplieation to the king by the Lords and commons for the restitution of their
right in the choice of their pastors.
Lords and commons in open parliament dutifully to pray, and to supplicate at
the Kings Majesty's hand. Namely,

At the humble petitions, and supplications, of all his Lords temporal, and
commons in Parliament assembled, his majesty would be well pleased, to give
his Royal assent to an act, to be entitled, An act, for the restitution of
the ancient right, and freedom which the people of God in the old Churches
had, and which the people of England ought to have, in, to, or about the
election of their Pastors, and abolishing all papal power repugnant to the
same. For if as it is plainly confessed) the people of all Churches, have
right, and freedom by the law of God, by the equity of Christ, by the grounds
of reason and nature, by the principles of humane fellowships, and by that
which was from the beginning, to elect their pastors: and if also the same
right, and freedom being left to the old Churches, and especially to the
Church at Jerusalem by the Apostles; have been taken away by the cursings, and
fightings of the late Bishops of Rome, then cannot the people without violation
of those laws, rules, and grounds, by any Episcopal power, be any more
excluded from their said right, and freedom: than could, or might the ancient
jurisdiction of the Crown of England, have been still usurped by the pope
from the Kings of England.

ADMONITION.
But alas the common people of England, thorough affection and want of right
judgment, are more easily wrought by ambitious persons, to give their cons^nt
to unworthy men, as may appear in all those offic^s of gain or dignity, that
at this day remain in the choice of the multitude.

ASSERTION.
The Admonitor in one place of his admonition, tells us, that he must not put
all that he thinks in writing, and yet he writes in this place that thing,
which might far better have been utterly unthought than once written: for could
he think, to win the common people of England, to a continual good liking, of
high and stately prelacie, by upbraiding and charging them to their faces, in a
book dedicated unto them, with affection, and wanting of right judgment? Was
this the way to procure grace, favor, and benevolence at their hands? And
albeit this slander deserved rather to have been censured by the Commons in
Parliament, than by confutation to have been answered, yet for the better
clearing of the right judgment, of the common people, giving their consents,
to most worthy men, in all offices of gain, or dignity, remaining in their
hands, I think it necessary to show the indignity of this contumely.

There be (I confess) in London, York, Lincoln, Bristow, Exceter, Norwich,
Coventry, and other principal Cities, and towns corporate, Majors, Sheriffs,
Stewards, Recorders, Bailiffes, Chamberlains, Bridge-masters, Clerks,
Swordbearers, Knights, Burgesses, and such like offices, some of dignity, some
of gain, but that the officers of these, or any other places, whether of
dignity, or gain, be chosen by the multitude of those places, is utterly
untrue: for only according to their ancient customs, privileges, and
Charters, by the chief Citizens, Townsmen, and Borough-masters, are those
officers chosen. The number also of which Electors in all places is not alike.
In London the Aldermen, choose the Lord Major.

In other Cities and Towns, sometimes eight and forty, sometimes fourteen,
sometimes twelve, sometimes only such as have borne office, as Majors,
Sheriffs, and Bailiffs in the same places, nominate and elect their new Major,
Sheriffs, and Bailiffes. But that the Aldermen, principal Townsmen,
Borough-masters, and men having born chief offices in those cities, towns, and
boroughs, have easily been wrought by ambitious persons, to give their consents
unto unworthy men, though it have pleased the Ll. Bb. (with seen and allowed)
to have spread and published this saying, yet that the same saying, is wholly
unworthy, of any credit to be given unto it, or to be regarded of any wise
and indifferent man, let the sober and peaceable elections made of the worthies
of the land hereafter mentioned, be witnesses. The officers in Cities and
towns corporate chosen with out contention and ambitious working of unworthy
men.
And to leave to speak of the election of the Lord Major of the City of
London, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Wardens of companies, Chamberlains, bridge-masters,
and other annual officers, of honor and dignity, let us consider whether the
Citizens of London have been wrought by ambitious persons to choose M.
Wilbraham, M. Onslie, M. Bromley, to be their Recorders, ^ll three afterward
the Queens solicitors, and M. Bromly Lord Chancellor of England: and let us
consider whether the same Citizens, as men of affection, and want of right
judgment, did elect to be Recorders of the same City, M. Sergeant Fleetwood,
Master Sergeant Flemming, Master Sergeant Drue, and how Master Crook, a man
wise, learned and religious, and a Counselor and justicer within the
princip^litie of Wales. The Recorder of the town of Bedford, is the right
honorable, the Lord S. John's of Bletsoe. The Recorder of Bristoll, was a long
time Master Poppam, now Lord chief Justice of England. The Recorder of
Northampton, before he came to be Judge in the Kings bench, was Master Sergeant
Yelverton, a favouter of the truth, and an upright Justicer: The Recorder of
Warnick was Master Sergeant Puckering, afterward Lord keeper of the great
seal: And of the same town the Recorder now is, a worthy Knight, descended
from a noble house, Sir Foulke Grevile: The Recorder of Coventrie, is Sir John
Harrington Knight, a man zealous for the true fear of God: The Recorder of
Chichester, was M. Sergeant Lewkner now chief Justice in the principalit^e of
Wales. The Recorder of Norwich was Master Cook, the Kings Attorney general.
And whosoever shall enquire, after the names, and after the manner of election
of all the Recorders, in all other Cities and Boroughs of the land, I doubt not
but he shall find them all, to have been far from any least show, of
ambitious working, the Citizens, and townsmen to nominate, and elect them.
Moreover, as these noble Persons, these sage, grave, learned, and christian
Gentlemen, quietly, and in all peacable manner, with upright, and good affection
and judgment, and without ambition, have been chosen by the Citizens,
Townes-men, and Boroughmasters, to the office (...) ^ecorderships. So likewise
many and sundry honorable Counsellor^, have been, and as occasion is
Honorable Counselors chosen high stewards, without ambitious working.
ministered, are daily elected by Citizens, and Townsmen to be their high
Stewards, Sir Francis Knolles, an honorable counselor, and one, whose faith
was famous among the Churches as well abroad, as at home, by the election of
the citizens of Oxford, remained until he died, high Steward of the City of
Oxford. The right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, by the common counsel of
Ipswich, was made high Steward of the same town: after whose decease, the same
common counsel, by their election, surrogated into the same place, the right
honorable the L. Hunsdon, late L. Chamberlain. The right honorable S.
Christopher Hatton, L. Chancellor of England, by the townsmen of Cambridge, was
chosen to be high steward for the town of Camb. The right Ho. the old F. of
Arundel; and after him the right Ho. E. of Lincoln, and after his death, the
right honorable, the L. high Admiral of England, now E. of Notingham, by the
bo^oughmasters of the town of Gildford, was elected to be high steward of the
town of Gildford. Of all which honorable persons, and of all other their
Peers, chosen in other places of the Kingdom, by the same means, to the like
offices, there is great reason, and just cause for the reverend Bishops to
carry a more reverend estimation toward them, than to burden them as ambitious
persons, to have sought their places, at the hands of men affected, and wanting
right judgment. As for any other offices of credit, dignity, charge, and
government in the common weal, now remaining in the choice of the commons: it
may easily be proved, that the common people in sundry places, have bent, and
opposed themselves, against ambitious persons, who by sinister, and indirect
means, have hunted for preferment at their hands.

And what if it cannot be gainsaid, but that some public officers chosen by
public applause of the people, have corruptly behaved themselves, in their
charges, and have not so equally, and indifferently distributed justice to all
degrees, as it became them: yet this their misdemeanour can no more justly be
laid as a fault, nor any more disgrace, or discountenance the ancient and
commendable form, and manner of election, than the hypocrisy, or counterfeit
zeal, of an evil man ordained by the bishop to be a Minister, can be imputed
unto his letters of orders or manner of ordination. Besides if none be able
Knights of the shires ^^ other officers chosen by the people without trouble to
the state.
to prove, that the choice of the Knights of our Shires, Coroners of the
Counties, Verderers of the kings forests, resting in the free voices, and
consents of the freeholders; that the nomination of the high Constables being
in the disposition of the Justices of peace, at their quarter sessions; that
the choice of our peti-Constables, third Boroughs, Tythingmen, Churchwardens,
wardens for the highwayes, overseers for the poor, side men and such like,
remaining altogether in the free elections of the suitors to courts, Leets, and
lawdayes, and of the inhabitants, and Parishioners of every Village, Hamlet, or
Tything, have been troublesome to the Lievtenants of the Shires, to the
Stewards of our Courts, to the Lords of our liberties, nor to the ordinaries of
the Diocesses: If (I say) there be not any one man able to bring forth some few
persons, for many years passed, by whom the Officers and Magistrates of the
Queens peace, have been sued unto, and importuned, for the pacification of any
strife contention, or debate of any busy head, or ambitious person, raised
among the people, about the choice of any one of these Oficers; then (I say),
it is meet and it imports the Lords Bishops very deeply, that for ever
hereafter they be silent, and never any more utter so Page 8.
vile a slander, against so noble a people, as are the people of England: viz.
that upon affection and want of right judgment, they will easily be led by
ambitious persons to prefer unworthy persons un^o all Offices of gain or
dignity. Or that this Nation of England, upon light causes, is more inclined
to broyle, and trouble than any other.

And to speak the truth (as daily experience teaches us) what No fear of
trouble about the choice of an ecclesiastical Officer.
sear of trouble is there likely any way to ensue by reason of dissension, and
ambition among the people in the choice of an ecclesiastical Officer, when
most of the people shall rather shun and eschew, than long or desire to bear
any ecclesiastical office? The common people among whom I dwell use oftentimes
many delays, yea they procure what favor and friendship they can, not to be
appointed, to any the inferior Offices before specified: And why do they so,
but because those offices be full of bodily care and trouble? And is there then
any Christian, knowing, how the whole soul, mind, and spirit of a man is
altogether to be employed in the discharge of a spiritual function, that will
dissentiously and ambitiously seek to be chosen an Elder?

The admonitor tells us, that men by experience know that many parishes upon
some private respect, do send their letters of earnest page 79
commendation for very unfit, and unable persons, insinuating thereby what an
inconvenience might follow, if Parishes had the whole direction, and order to
sound out, who were fit and able persons. But as this fancy was never yet by
any of sound judgment on our behalf so much as once thought, much less
insisted upon: so may it please the reverend Bishops to be advertised, that the
meanest and simpliest parishioner, among a thousand, can quickly retort this
reason against their Lo. viz. that no parishes by letters of commendation, can
commend unso any bishop, any person, as an able and fit man, unto any
particular parish or special charge, unless the same, or some other bishop
have formerly ordained him, and approved him to be a fit and able person for
every place. And how then were it possible if the choice of having one, to be
their pastor were wholly in the hands of a parish, that the same parish could
choose any worse men, any more ignorant, and unlearned men, than their Lords
have commended unto us. For have they not chosen, sent, and commended such unto
us as know not a be from a batle door, as uneth know to Ministers sent unto
the people, which know not a be from a battle doors.
read English, and as know not the Lords prayer from the articles of faith: Of
which sort of Ministers, the Parson of Haskam now living a Chaplain in
Winton-diocesse may be produced for a witness omni exceptione major. For thus
much is to be proved from the report of a good and religious Knight, dwelling
within that diocese, that upon a time in the presence, and at the instant
request of the said Knight, when a Protestant bishop of the same diocese
deceased, had demanded of the new Parson of Haskam, which was the first
Petition of the Lords prayer, the said Parson, after he had a pretty space
paused The parson of Haskams answer to the Bishop of Winchester.
and gased toward heaven at length made this answer, viz. I believe in God the
Father Almighty: at which answer the Knight merrily smileing, I told you my
Lord, quoth the Knight, what a profound Clerk your Lordship should find this
fellow. Well how unclerkely, and how unprofoundly soever, this Clerk then
answered, and albeit at that present, he could not obtain the institution,
which he came for, to that benefice (for the good Bishop hated such gross
ignorance) yet this Clerk afterward, by the corruption of the some Bishops
Chancellor, was instituted into the same benefice, and to this day possesses
it quietly, though he can hardly read English to the understanding of his
people. I could have informed him also of many other such Clerks resiant and
beneficed in that Diocese: and namely of the Vicar of W. who upon an holy day,
instead of preaching the word which he could not, or in reading of Homilies
Fables read in the Church.
which he would not, (to terrify his Parishioners with the judgments of God,
and to move them unto repentance) solemnly read and published a counterfeit
fable out of a little Pamphlet, intitul^d, Strange news out of Calabria,
pretended to be prognosticated by M. John Doleta. Of these and of a number of
such able and skillful Clerks and Chaplains; my Lords of the Clergy may be
informed. ^f the people had choice of their pastors they would provide better
than the bishops send them.
And therefore on the behoof, and in the defense of the common people of
England, I am to testify and to protest unto their Lordships, that by the
mercifulness and goodness of our God, we are not yet become so ignorant,
rude, and barbarous, as that we would admit such manner of Clerks and
Chaplains, to have the cure of our souls, in case, it laid in our power to
choose, and refuse our own Pastors. No, no, our souls, and the souls of our
wives, children and families should be more dear, and more precious in our
eyes, than that carelessly we would hazard, all our birthrights, upon the skill
and ability of such a mess of hirelings, and idol shepherds. And surely me
thinks it stands greatly with the charity of our Lord Bishops to conceive
Though the common people be not able to discern of pastors, yet the Nobles
are able.
the Commons, to have so much natural understanding, as not to choose a
cobbler, when they want a carpenter; nor to retain a loyterer in lieu of a
labourer, nor to hire a sleeper, in stead of a watchman. But (alas) be it, that
the poor Commons of England, were thus wretched and thus bewitched; yea be it,
that they were thus desperate and besides themselves: should therefore the
Nobles and Peers of the Realm; be as profane, as impious, and as heathenish
as they? Are the great men also unworthy, unable, and unfit to discern between
night and day, between light and darkness? Can they also put no difference
between good and evil, between a blind guide, and him that has his
eyesight? or have they no better stomach, than to cast up Mithridate, and to
digest hemlocke? will they also choose them Captains from among Corvisers? and
will they call shepherds from among swineheards? or will they take them
pastors from among pedlers? or will my Lords of the clergy charge them to be
those ambitious persons, to work the Commons, (for their private respect) to
the choice of unworthy men? or will they, being themselves under his Majesty,
the worthies of the land) and chief guides and leaders of men in peace and in
war upon earth, choose the scumm, the refuse, and the baggage of the land, to
guide their own souls to hell? For to heaven by the labor and industry of
such idol ministers (as whose lips preserve no knowledge) they can never be
brought. A great part of the common people (says he) are backwardly affected
toward the truth of Religion: from which backwardness The common people
accused to be backwardly affected to religion.
he draws an argument against the allowance of the pastors by the people. But
(alas) is there any marvail, that the common people (for the most part) be
backwardly affected? For how is it possible, that they should step one foot
forward, when either their guides stand still, or go not at all, or at least
run fromward? or can The backwardness of the people proceeds from the
backwardness of their guides.
the common people become good scholars in the school of Christ, and learn
to know the truth of his religion, when their Masters and Tutors (whom my Lords
of the Clergy have begotten, provided, and thrust upon them) be unlearned and
irreligious dullards What? Can truth spring from error? or can light arise out
of darkness? Do men pluck, or pull corn from a dead stalk, or a full ear
from a dead root? Can a Vintener draw wine out of an empty Casque? or does a
Baker pour meal out of a bottomless bag? If then the common people be
foolish and ignorant, if they do err, and be irreligious, they may justly
challenge the Lords spiritual of unkindnesse, and want of love, not because
they have sent Ambassadors unto them, as the Gibeonites sent unto Joshua, with
old sackes, and old bottels, with old shoes, and old raiment; with provision
of bread dried, and mouled: but because they have sent them such ambassadors,
as have had no sackes, no bottels, no shoes, no raiment, yea and no manner of
bread at all. All which notwithstanding, the Admonitor (by the backwardness of
the people) labors mightily to acquit the Lord Bishops, laying to the
peoples charge, that this fault has not happened for want of teaching by the
Ministers, but for want or profiting by the people The Scripture (says he) in
no place teaches us, that the offenses and faults of the Ministers, are
always the only cause, why the word of God does not take place in men's hearts.
It is commonly, and almost always imputed to the way wardnesse,
unthankfulness, and obstinacy of the people that hear it. But (alas) who
ever fancied that the faults of the Ministers of God, were the only cause, why
the word of God preached by them, did not enter into the hearts of men? Where
the Minister sincerely preaches the word of God, if there the people do not
worthily embrace the same, the people are only in blame and not the Minister,
no, though he may have many faults: for when they teach the truth, the people
are bound to do as they Mat. 2^. 2, 3
say, and not to do as they do, because they say and do not. But the
complaint that has been, and is still made is this: namely, that the people
generally in most places of the land, and for the most part have no seed at all
sown, for want of husbandmen; that the people cannot be harvested, for lack
of laborers, that the people could bring forth no fruit, because they were not
ered and plowed; and that the people could not hear. What? for want of their
own ears? no, but for want of the Priests lips, which should have preserved
and taught knowledge, and therefore this general backwardnes and
unfruitfulnesse of the people in religion, must still light upon such as have
been the occasion that there have been so few drivers to haite them on, and
to whistle them forward. No? why this Realm of England (as says the
Admonitor) never had so many learned men, nor of so excellent gifts, in
delivering the word of God; it Page 140.
is the greatest ornament that ever this Church had; for my part (says he)
surely I do reverence, and marvel at the singular gifts of God, that I see
in many. And do my Lords of the clergy marvel in deed of so great a number
of excellent men, and of so singular gifts in them? And should not then also
the people marvel beyond marraile, Men of excellent gi^ts and men of no
gifts, are unequally matched in the ministry of the Gospel.
that some of the Lords spiritual, for small matters, and of so little
importance, should put to silence, many of the chiefest of many excellent and
learned men? Nay may not the people be astonished at the little love of some of
the Bishops, when as upon displeasure conceived against many excellent and
learned men, their Lordships suffer, the people to starve, and famish for want
of food, rather than those learned and excellent men should break unto them,
the bread of life? But be it granted that many excellent men's mouths be not
yet stopped, or if they have been stopped, they are now opened again, what is
this to that, that they have no more learned men, or that, they have any
hirelings at all? For to what use serves an hireling, but first to rob, to
spoil, and to kill, and afterward to trust to his heels to trudge, and to
run away? As for that, that many learned The use of an hireling The number of
excellent Ministers in the ministry, is small, in comparison of unlearned
Ministers.
and excellent men, in many places of the land do still feed the people, they
may be said (in respect of the people unfed) to be an handful, to an
house-full, or as an inch to an ell. Besides how are the people fed in many
places by some of these many learned men? is not one of them allotted (by a
license in a box) to break bread unto twenty or forty thousand people? What?
by them selves in one place sitting round and close together? Nay but in a
thousand and more Parishes distant far and wide asunder, and that at sundry
times, one time long after another: and what a strange and new kind of feeding
call you that? Is it not as if a victualler, should provide one meals meat
for a company at London, and an other meals meat for a company at Lincoln, and
an other meals meat for a company at Exceter, and an other meals meat for a
company at Bristoll, to feed his The manner of diet set before the people, by
such Ministers as wander from place to place.
guests, until he had ridden from coast to coast to provide new viand? And yet
this is the common manner of Diet, and the common manner of food prepared and
set before the souls of the people. For many of these learned Preachers,
gallop from place to place, and trot from parish to parish, and give unto the
people at one time, bread, half baked, at another time, beer half brewed;
sometimes either meat twice sodden, or half raw, and many times drink, both
dead, sower, and wallowish. And how then is it possible, that the souls of the
people should prosper, wax strong and be pliable in going forward in the truth
of religion, they being so thinly dicted, and entertained with so small cost.
But let these gallopers pass, we will conclude this point: and thus we say,
that the backwardness of the people in the truth of religion (how backward
soever they be, and howsoever the same backwardness may happen) can be no
good plea in bar to take from the people of God, their right, interest and
freedom, from the allowance and approbation of their pastor. As for that vain
and ridiculous gibe, whether all (hand over head) men and boys, women and
girls, young and old, etc. should give their consents, to this fond gibe, I
answer, that there is no such vanity of vanities intended. Answer to the
abstract
For when we say, that the people of every parish, ought to choose and elect
their pastor, we mean, not that the election should solely be committed to
the multitude, but we intend only that the chief Fathers, Ancients, and
Governors of the parish in the name of the whole should approve the choice
made by the holy Ministry: wherein we follow the example of the ancient
people of God, whose affairs were committed to the chief Fathers sitting in
the gate.

Where the Admonitor has pretended that it is impossible to be Page 80.
brought to pass, which (as he says) is most of ali pretended for the The
people may know a man to be a fit Minister though he be not brought up among
them.
common manner of election, that the people may know their Minister, and
thereby have the better liking of him, unless every parish shall have within
it self, a School or College, where those should be brought up that shall be
preferred to the Ministry amongst them: this (I say) is another vanity of
vanities, and a vexation of spirit without all mean or measure, yea it is an
asseveration void of all sense and soberness. For is it not possible for a
Lord Bishop, to know the equities, condition, and behavior of a man fit to be
retained for his Secretary or Gentleman Usher, unless the same party be
brought up, in some School or College within his own house? Or is it
impossible for his Lordship to know the education, life, learning, gifts of
utterance and aptness to teach, of a man, and so to have the better liking of
him, to make him a Minister, unless within his Parish, there be a School or
College, wherein such as are to be preferred, to the Ministry be brought up?
If then without having any school or college, within his own house, or within
his own parish, for the bringing up of such as are received by a L. Bishop
either to his private service, or to the public ministry; his Lordship may
know, and so have the better liking of them, whom he would prefer. How then
follows it to be impossible, that the people should know their Minister, and
so have the better liking of him, unless every parish had in it self a School
or College, where those should be brought up that should be preferred to the
Ministry amongst them? What? is one tongue, of one man alone able to enquire
and learn the manners of many men to be ordained and placed Ministers in many
places, and are many tongues of many men not able to enquire and learn the
conversation of one man to be placed in one place? or have the eyes and ears
of one man, sight quick enough, and hearing good enough, to hear and to see
into the education and life of all the Ministers, within all the parishes of
one whole diocese? and are all the ears and eyes of many men, deaf and dimm
to hear and to see into the life and education of one Minister, in one parish?
If the parish of Mary's in Cambridge, or the parish of All-hallowes in Oxford,
were destitute of an able, and preaching Minister, might not the people of the
first know M. Doctor Overall, and have the better liking of him; and might not
the people of the second, know M. Doctor Reynolds, and have the better liking
of him to be their pastor, unless Corpus Christi College in Oxford, stood
in Al-hallowes Parish, or Kat. Herle in Cambridge stand in Mary's parish? or
did the Deane and Chapter, the Clerks and people of Lincoln, and Winchester,
therefore know H. C. and thereby had they the better liking of him to choose
him first Bishop of Lincoln, and secondly Bishop of Winchester, because he was
brought up in some School or College in any of the parishes of Lincoln and
Winchester? I trow himself, if he were now living, would not so affirm: and
what then should eale the Gentlemen o^ the Temple, or the people of the Parish
of Bow in London, that they may not know, and thereby have the better liking of
M. Travers, and M. Barber to be their Ministers, albeit neither of the twain,
were brought up in any School or College, in, or about the Temple, or the
Parish of Bow? For who knows not, that there be means enough, and enough to
know a man within and without, and to have a good opinion and liking of him,
though the same man be not brought up in any School or College, amongst them?
Wherefore his argument of (cannot possibly be brought to pass) may pass, and
repasse, as the only stream of an The people would not do as the ordinaries
use to do, first choose Ministers and then set them to school:
humerous passion. Neither may the people in this case do as the Ordinaries
use to do. For the Ordinaries first ordain Ministers; secondly, they set them
to school and give them their taskes, that by their Archdeacons they may know,
how they profit; and lastly they have the better liking of them because they
be branded with their own stamp. But the people (I say) may not, ne yet
would they, thus ungainely set the cart before the horse. But they would use
all good and circumspect care and diligence, first to know them, secondly upon
just and equal cause, to like them, and lastly, upon their liking, to allow
and approve them. For how should a m^n allow any thing, before he like it, or
how should he like it before he know it? or how should he know it, before he
had seen, heard, or enquired after it? And hereupon also his two asseverations
next ensuing, fall to the ground. For albeit he affirm, that if this manner of
election were admitted, the Page 80. If the people were admitted, to the
election of their Minister they should be better acquainted with him, than now
they be.
people (nevertheless.) should have as little acquaintance with their
ministers as now they have: albeit (I say) he thus thought, yet nevertheless
his (ipse opinatus sum) I am of opinion, is no (ipse dixit) unto me. No, I
aver and hold the contrary to be true, and therefore his opinion in this
case) to be erroneous. For this cannot be denied, that there is not any one
man, or woman amongst forty, in any one parish amongst forty, that can tell,
that ever he, or she, did see, or hear, of the Minister appointed, and sent by
the Ordinary, to be Parson or Vicar of the ^arish Church vacant, before such
time, as he did hear, or see, the Parish Clerk to trudge with the Church door
keys, to let in the Sextin, to ring the bell, for the said Parson, or Vicars
induction, and real possession.

And if the people of every parish had their consents in the choice and
approbation of their minister, were it possible to have less acquaintance with
him than this? For we avow that the people ought not to give their consents
unto any pastor, before they have seen him, before they have heard him divide
the word, before they have procured a good testimony of his gifts, from those
who by the word have interest to approve him; and lastly before they have
gotten sufficient notice of his condition, estate, conversation, birth,
education, and life. Wherefore these things being carefully and diligently
searched into, not by one, but by many, not for a fee, but of duty, not for
reward, but for conscience; not for one day, but for many days, I trust it
will not still be holden for an oracle, that the people should have as little
acquaintance with their Ministers, as now they have.

As for the second poinr, that far greater occasions of partial suits should
follow this manner of common election, whereof we speak, No partial ^uits
can follow the election of Ministers by the people.
than now there is: this is also (I say) not true; nay that far less
occasion of partial suites, should follow than now there is, this (I say) is
true. For by this means all partial suites now happening, may either be
extinguished, or with less charges pursued, than now they be. For there can be
no suites, much less can there be any partial suites, when neither
plaintiff, nor defendant may be found, and where also there can lie no writ,
nor any action be commenced. For who be the parties between whom these
partial suites should arise? Be there many ministers, who for one place, and
at one time, are found meet for the same? And do they sue and contend one
against anoother, which of them should possess the place? or should these so
many partial suites, consist between the inhabitants of one parish; one part
leaning to one side, and an other part cleaving to the other side? Touching the
Ministers, we affirm that none may or ought to sue or solicit any man's voice,
directly or indirectly, much less to labor for a place of Ministry. And
therefore, we desire by an irrevocable law (according to the manner of the
Medes and Persians) to have it enacted, That as well every procurer, and
labourer for a voice, as also No occasion of partial suits about election,
between parishioners
every suitor and solicitor for a place of Ministry, be adjudged ipso facto,
incapable for ever of the same place. For the second, touching partial suits
to arise between the Parishioners, about the election of their Pastor, these
suits for ought I yet conceive (wherein I grant I may err and conceive too
little) may easilier be dispatched, than be once begun. Parishioners ordinarily
in the Country, sue not, ne molest one the other for pleasure, but for profit;
they are not so lavish of their purses, nor so careless of their thrifts, as to
jangle in vain, when before hand, they know there is no hope of gain. And
indeed what advantage, or what pleasure should Ancients divided against
Ancients, and chief men distracted against chief men in a parish, about the
election of a Minister, reap by such ^ division, and distraction? Besides by
our daily experience, we have learned, that very rarely, or not at all about
elections, made by the people of any Officers, either in the Country or in
Cities and Towns, any variance or partial suites have been stirred, between
the electors. For though some times perhaps they vary in their judgments one
from another, yet rest they more wise and provident, than to impair their own
estate, to advance an other man's reputation. And if in former times there have
no occasion of partial suites (touching public officers in the common weal)
fallen out between the people, when out of a multitude they have chosen one:
much less can there be any occasion of No partial suites can be among
parishioners, when one only is propounded to be chosen by them.
partial suites, if only there remain but one, to be chosen to be a Church
officer. For if all the ancients agree to choose that one, then is all the suit
(about him) ended: and if the greater part disagree, yet this their
disagreement can be no occasion to breed and nourish suit and contention. And
why? first because no other cause by the greater part ought to be alleged, to
withdraw their consent, but only such a cause as the law should precisely
allow, in the same case, to be a just cause: Secondly, because this just cause
before the day of election, ought to be made known unto the Magistrate, and by
him to be approved; so that if the greater part upon the day of election shall
dissent, not having before hand alleged, and provided a just cause of their
dislike, the voices of the lesser part (as being supposed the better part)
shall prevail, confirm, and make good the election. Oh! here is much (said my
Lords) spoken of a choice, and election to be made by the Ministers and people,
by proofs to be made before the Magistrate, but here is not any one word
spoken, or any mention made of the Patron, of the Bishop, or of the Archdeacon,
of presentation, institution, or induction. And what an alteration, and
innovation would that be, and what a dangerous attempt were it, to alter laws
settled; and that Patrons should be curbed, and that Bishops and Archdeacons
should not meddle in these ^usinesses any more? Well then to wipe away as much
as in me lies, this cavillous reproach, and obloquie from the servants of God,
who are challenged to be new fangled, giddie headed, and fanaticall spirits,
strange innovators, and desirers of perilous alterations, to wipe away (I say)
this slander, If it may please the King with his Princely wisdom to confirm
the form of policy now in use and practice, touching ordinations,
presentations, The form of Church policy now in practice by the Bishops, and
the platform of Church policy, desired to be planted by pastors, compared
together.
institutions, and inductions, by Bishops, Patrons, and Archdeacons, with the
manner of that platform of Discipline (concerning the substance of these
things) which is propounded. And if the propounders prefer but the
commandment of God, before the traditions of men; but the Kings Crown, before
the Bishops Myters, but a feast of fat things, yea of fat things full of
marrow, before lean spits and empty platters; but a feast of wines, yea of
wines fined and purified, before sower and untoothsome whey: I hope his
Majesty will graciously vouchsafe so to protect the propounders (being his
faithful, loving and obedient subjects) as that hereafter they shall not be
charged with any more so unjust and scandalous imputations.

The practice and policy then now in use, is after this and this manner. The
Bishop oftentimes at his pleasure, (beside the law, nay rather Inconveniences
of bishoply ordination are these, pestering of the churches with unlearned
ministers. Vnlawfu^l gain for ^etters or orders the breach of many good laws.
against the express letter of the Law, and public Canons of the Church) not
only ordains Ministers alone, without assistants of such number of Ministers,
as is required; but he also ordains them, (for the most part.) when there is
no place of Ministration void. Now the buds which, (to the grief of many godly
men, and to the obloquie of the Professors of the Gospel) have sprung from
this manner of ordination, have been these, viz. The public breach of many
good laws; the pestering of the Church with multitude of unable Ministers,
together with much unlawful gain (by immeasurable exaction of money) for
letters of orders. For it cannot be denied, but the Bishops Secretary,
Gentleman Usher, grome of his chamber, Butler, Pantler, Porter, and other the
Bishops menials, (besides his own and his Registers fees, and his Clerk for
expedition) do usually (all, or most of them) challenge and receive fees,
(some more, some less) before the poor Minister with his box of orders can
be suffered to pass by the porters lodge: these are the fruits of the
Bishops Suits between the patron and the ^ishop.
sole ordination. The suites which have grown and daily do grow, by the
Patrons presentation to the Bishops have been and are these, Sometime
contention and suite in law, between the Patron and Bishop, for disallowing
the Patrons Clerk, for non-abilitie, or as being criminous. Sometimes, if two
Patrons pretend right of patronage, Suits between Clerk and Clerk.
if one of their Clerks be instituted, and the other rejected (as necessarily
it must come to pass, for one wife can have but one husband) then follows
suit at law, between the Clerk refused, and the Clerk admitted, wherein also
the Bishop is made a party by a writ of quare impedit, sometime suit falls
out between the Clerk presented, and the Bishops, when the Clerk calls the
Bishops Suites between the Bishop and the Clerk,
(by a double quarrel) before the Archbishop, for not granting institution:
and sometime also likewise debate is moved, and law attempted, between the
Clerk instituted, and the Archdeacon, who Suites between the Clerk and
archdeacon:
(knowing the Church not to be vacant) refuses to execute the Bishops
inductorie mandat. For many times, upon pretense that the Church stands void
(being indeed full) the Patron, upon suggestion grants a presentation, and
the Bishops also institution; which if the Archdeacon refuse to execute, then
(besides the discord between the Bishops and the Archdeacon, for contempt of
the Suites between the Bishop and the Archdeacon.
Bishops mandat) he, who pretends title by vacancie, thinking to have right,
though a real incumbent be in possession, brings their two titles to be
tried in the Ecclesiastical Court; but before the matter can be finally
sentenced by that Court; many foul riots, ^^ots and breaches of the Kings
Peace.
breaches of the Kings peace, and unlawful assemblies, upon entries and
keeping possessions, do ensue: as was well enough lately known in the case
between Rogers, and Baker, for the title to the Pa^sonage of Barby, in the
County of Northampton.

Howbeit, let it be supposed that none of these variances in law f^ll out
between the Bishops and the Patron, between the Bishops and the Clerk, between
the Bishop and the Archdeacon, between the Clerk and the Archdeacon, and
between Clerk and Clerk: the exa^tion (notwithstanding) of unlawful gain,
for fees of letters of institution, and fees usually payable to the Bishop his
Officers, as aforesaid; for fees of the Archdeacons induction; his Rester; his
Clerk, and his Apparrators fees: the unconscionable exaction Unlawful fe^s
for letters of institution, etc.
(I say) of these unreasonable fees, may seem to be a conscionable motive, to
cause better things than these, without danger to be attempted, and innovated.
And yet these are not all the bad events that happen, and fall out upon the
presentation, institution, and induction now used. But by the interest whereby
the Bishop challenges to be custos Ecclesiarum, there happen as bad, if not
worse than these. For there is no sooner a Church void, but a post is sent in
all haste, with letters of sequestration, to sequester the Unlawful fees for
letters of sequestation.
fruits, to the use of the next incumbent. Which next incumbent, for the great
care taken to preserve the fruits to his use (before he can obtain to be put in
real possession) must pay Ten Shillings, or a mark, or more, for those
letters of sequestration, which as much more also for letters (so called) of
relaxation; besides Two pence, Three pence, or Four pence a mile, for portage
to the Somner. And from hence is the Patron (as I take it) very much injuried.
For he being (as it appears) by the Statute of 25. of King Ed. 3. Lord and
Avower of the benefice, ought to have the custody and possession thereof
during the vacancie. Besides many times wilful Perjurie by the Clerk, and
robbery by the patron.
perjuries are committed by the Clerk, and many times sacrilegious robberies
are perpetrated by the Patron. The Clerk (when he swears that neither
directly, nor indirectly, any compact, promise, band or agreement has been
made or passed by him, for him, or in his name to the Patron;) many times
forsweareth himself. And if the Clerk be presented to a Vicarage, then the
Bishop Every Vicar swears or ought to swear to be resident.
(if he be faithful to the law) swears him to be resident upon the same
Church: Which oath (notwithstanding) is afterward broken; when as the same
Vicar, accepting another benefice (and retaining withal the former, by
purchase of a dispensation) betaketh himself to be resident upon his second
Benefice, and so by non-residence from his first Vicarage, commits perjurie.
Touching the Patrons robbery, thus it is, and thus many times has it fallen
Patrones robbery.
out. The Patron, when (at the hands of two, three, or more such perjured
Clerks) he has (time out of mind) possessed, the mansion house, or
gleebe-land of the Parsonage; finally (in time) spoiled the Church both of the
house, and gleebe-land: the gleebe-land being often intermingled with his own
enclosed grounds, he possesses them as his own inheritance; and in steed of
the Parsonage house, either he builds another new, or else hireth some
cottage or farm house for the Parson and his successors to inhabit in. These
abuses (we see) are many, and yet, besides these continuing at this day in the
government established, there remains others, as foul, and as gross as any
of the rest: which is the too too inordinate, and licentious chopping and
changing of Churches from Minister to Chopping of benefices despensations, etc.
Minister; for dispensations, commendames, perinde valeas, res, pluralities,
and Non-residencies: wherein not the people to be taught, but their own backs
and bellies to be clothed and fedd, is wholly respected. Now then that this
manner of government, wherein the before specified, and the like disco^modities
daily fall out, under color of not diminishing the Kings Prerogative, of not
altering laws settled, of not attempting dangerous innovations, and of the
preserving of the right of Patrones, Bishops, and Archdeacons, should still be
continued without any mention or Remembrance to be once had, of their
discontinuance, especially in the time of Peace, and under a Christian
Magistrate, and in a state (as he says) reformed; we humbly leave to the wise,
and mature deliberation of our most Christian King, and State in Parliament.
And we most humbly beseech the King and State, that indifferently, freely, and
largely, it may be argued, heard and examined; whether it be possible,
Supplication to the King and State in parliam.
that the tenth part of these, or any other the like disorders, corruptions,
and grievances, can possibly fall out in the Church, by that platform of
Discipline, which is required to be planted. And to the end that the Kings
Majesty, and the State, might rightly and perfectly be informed and resolved
of those points, whereof we now speak, viz. of the petition, ordination,
election, prefentation and admittance of every Parochial Pastor, to any
Church, with cure of souls; how the same may stand, and not be disagreeable to
Petition, ordination, etc. of Misters or Pastors, how the same may be made
without Bishops or Archdeacons, not disagreeable to diverse laws already settled.
diverse laws already settled, and in force; it is requisite that the substance
of these things, in this place be entreated of; wherein against the base
office, and mean person of the Archdeacon, we oppose the Royal office, and
most excellent person of the King: against the immoderate office, and stately
person of one Lordly Bishop; we oppose the meek and temperate carriage of a
Senate, or Presbytery, of many wise, learned, and grave Ministers, together
with a Reverend assembly of the Ancients, and chief Fathers of every Church
destitute of a Pastor. As for the Patrons right, we are so far from
diminishing any jott of the true right which by laws settled he ought to have,
as that he shall quietly possess his interest, and that with less trouble and
expense, yea and with greater privilege than he did before. Thus therefore
touching the office and person of the King, the duty of the Presbytery and
people, the right of the Patron, and the person of the Minister to be ordained,
thus and thus we say, and thus and thus (as we think) may our sayings well
stand with laws settled.

By an act primo Eliz. c. 1. the King has full power and authority, by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, when, and as often as need
shall require, as he shall think meet and convenient, and for such, and so
long time as shall please his Highness to assign, name, and authorize, such
person, or persons, being natural borne subjects, as his Majesty shall think
meet, to exercise, use, occupy, and execute, under his Highness, all manner
of jurisdictions, privileges, and preheminences, in any wise touching or
concerning any Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, within this Realm
of England. Again, by the book of ordeyning Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, it
is prescribed, that the Bishops, with their The Bb. and Priests must lay on
their hands.
Priests, shall lay their hands severally upon the heads of every one that
receives Orders; that every one to be made a Minister, must be of virtuous
conversation, and without crime, sufficiently instructed in the holy
Scriptures; a man meet to exercise his ministry duly; that he must be
called, tried and examined; that he must be presented by the Archdeacon, and be
made openly, in the face of the Church, with prayer to God, and exhortation to
the people. And in a statute made 21. of King Hen. 8. it is affirmed, That a
Bishop The Bishops must use six Chapleins at giving of orders.
must have six Chaplains, at giving of orders. Besides, by an ancient and
lowable custom, the Parishes, and Parish Churches within every Archdeaconrie,
remain unto this day, distributed into certain Deanries, the Parson or Vicar
of the auncientest Church, commonly called the Mother Church of the Deanrie
(unless by Every Archdeacon divided into Deanries.
consent, some other be chosen by the Ministers themselves) has the first
place, and is the chief director, and moderator of whatsoever things are
propounded in their Synodall meeting; which Minister also is called
Archipresbyter or Decanus curalis, according to the appellation of the chief
Minister, of the mother, or chief Church of that Diocese, who is called
Archipresbiter or Decanus cathedralis: so that unto this day these Ministers
meeting at the Archdeacons visitations once in a year at the least, there
remains in the in the Church of England, a certain image or shadow of the
true, ancient, and Apostolical conference, and meetings. Wherefore from these
laws, and from this ancient manner of the meetings of Ministers, and of having
one principal and chief Moderator amongst them; according to the Apostolical
practice, and usage of the primitive Church, thus already settled in the Church
of England, we humbly leave it to be considered by the Kings Majesty.

First, whether it were not meet and convenient for his Highness by his letters
patentes under the great Seal of England, to assign, A Minister to be
ordained by the Bishops, and a ^ompany of Ministe^s at the Kings commandment.
name and authorize, the Bishops and six or more Ministers within every Deanerie
continually resiant upon their benefices, and diligently teaching in their
charge, to use and execute all manner of jurisdiction, privilege, and
pre-eminence, concerning any spiritual ordination, election, or institution of
Ministers to be placed in the Parochial Churches, or other places, with cure
of souls, within.

Secondly, when any Parish Church, or other place, with cure of souls, shall
be void, whether it were not meet and convenient, that the ancients and
chief Fathers of that place, within a time to be limited for that purpose,
should intimate the same vacancie unto Vacancie of a benefice to be intimated
t^ the King^ office.
the office of the Kings civil Officer, appointed for that Shire or Diocese:
to the end the same Officer, by authority from the King, might command in the
Kings name, the Bishop and other Ministers, to elect, and ordain, and the
people of the same place to approve and allow of some able and godly person, to
succeed in the Church.

Thirdly, the Patron (if the same be a common and lay person, A Lay patron,
instead of varying his Clerk may present two Clerks at one time.
having now liberty to vary his Clerk, if he be ^ound unable) whether it were
not meet and convenient (to avoid all manner of varying) that, within the time
per^^xed, he should nominate at one time two Clerks, to be taken out of the
Uni^ersities, or other Schools, and Nurseries, of the Prophets, and that the
same nomination be made unto the Bishop, and the said six Ministers, to the
end that both the Clerks, being tried and examined by them, the abler of the
two might be preferred to that charge. And of this manner of presenting two
Clerks by the Patron, we have a president not much unlike, in the statute for
nomination of Suffraganes. By which act, every Archbishop and Bishop, desiring
to have a Suffragane, has liberty to name, and present unto the King two
honest and discreet Spiritual Persons, etc. that the King may give to one such
of the said two Spiritual Persons, as shall please his Majesty, the title,
name, style and dignity of a Suffragane.

Fourthly, the Bishops and Presbyters having thus, upon trial and A Minister
found able for gif^s, is to be sent to the parish, that his life may be
examined, and to have the consent of the people.
examination found one of the Patrones Clerks, to be a fit and able man, to
take upon him the execution of the Ministry in that Church; whether it were
not then meet and convenient, that by them he should forthwith be sent to the
same Church, as well to acquaint the people with their judgment and
approbation, of his gifts and ability to teach, as also that, for a time, he
should converse, and abide amongst them, to the end his life, manners, and
behavior, might be seen into, and enquired after, by their careful endeavors?

Fifthly (the people within a time to be perfixed, not making and proving before
the Magistrate, any just exception against his life, A man allowed for gifts
and Conversation, is to be ordained with prayer, fasting, and laying on of
hands. A Minister to be inducted into the Church, b^ the Kin^^ Writ.
manners and conversations) whether it were not then meet, and convenient,
that the Bishop with six ^ther Ministers or more of the same Deanrie,
authorized by the King, as aforesaid, under some pain, and within a certain
time, should be bound (in the presence of the Elders and people, and in the
same Church, with fasting, prayer, and laying on of hands) to ordain and
dedicate him to the Ministry, and Pastoral charge of that Church.

Lastly, these things being thus finished, whether it were not then meet and
convenient that the Bishops with the other Ministers, and some of the chief of
the people, should give the party ordained, a testimonial under their hands,
or under some authentical seal, to certify the Kings Officer of the
execution of his writ; and that the Patron also should present the same person
to the Kings officer, humbly praying the same officer, by authority to be
derived from the King, to cause him by some other writ, to be confirmed, and
really inducted, into the possession of the same Church, and into the
Mansion House, glebe-land, and other profits Ecclesiastical to the same
appertaining.

Oh! but this were a strange kind of innovation, and a dangerous To execute
the premises no dangerous at^e^pt.
attempt to alter laws settled, especially in a settled estate of the Church.
Well, well let my Lords of the Clergy sing this song, and pipe this melody at
their pleasure. How be it, forasmuch as this platform, in some part thereof,
has already been agreed upon by diverse Co^mittees in Parliament; in other some
part thereof, by laws already settled, ought to have been practiced; and that in
other some part thereof is an advanceme^t of the Kings authority, which last
part also is lively pourtracted out unto us, by presidents from the Archb. and
B. themselves, we shall through the grace of God, and favor of the King, be
able well enough, quite and clean to wipe away all the spots of this
calumniation. And first, touching the intimation, and supplication to be made
unto the King, that his Highness would Petition and intimatio^ ^o the King,
agreeable to laws settled.
be pleased to command every Minister to be presented by the Patron, ordained
by the Bishop and Ministers, and elected by the people; and that the King,
being certified by them of the execution of his writ, should upon their
Testimonial, by another public writ, cause the Clerk ordained, to be
confirmed, admitted, and inducted to the real possession of the temporalities
of the benifice; This manner (I say) of intimation, petition, testimonial and
admittance, in substance and effect, differs but little from the form of the
petition, ^^. H. 8. c.
nomination, election, investiture, confirmation, and consecration of the
Archbishops, and Bishops of this Realm. For whenever the Church of
Canterbury, Winton, or other Bishops Sea becomes destitute of a Pastor, does
not the Deane and Chapter of the same Sea, intimate unto the King their want
of a Bishop? and does not the same Deane and Chapter, humbly supplicate his
Majesty's favor and license to elect another? and does not the King, upon
their supplication, by Letters Patents under his great Seal, favorably grant
their petition; willing them, ut talem eligant in Episcopum and Pastorem, qui
Deo devotus, and Ecclesia suae necessarius, nobisque and regno nostro utilis
and fidelis existat? And with the same Letters Patents, does not the King send
a letter missive, containing the name and commendation of the person to be
elected? After the election finished, does not the Deane and Chapter intimate
the same also unto the King, and humbly again pray the King, to yield his
Royal assent to the Lord elected? Whereupon does not the King again direct
his Letters Patents of warrant to the Archbishop, or some other, whom the King
shall appoint, to perform all things which accustomably are to be done,
appertaining to his confirmation, and consecration, according to the laws and
statutes of his Realm of England? Lastly, the consecration and confirmation
being finished, and the Bishop having done his homage, and sworn fealty, is
not the Kings writ out of the Chancery directed to the Escheator, to restore
unto him, the temporalities of the same Bishopric? Yea and may not the Bishop
also, if it please him, procure another writ out of the Chancery, directed to
his Tenants, commanding them to atturne, and to take him for their Lord?

Now then, in this platform, whereof mention has been made touching the
placing of a Parochial Pastor (any Parochial Church with cure of souls being
void) when it is craved that the people of the same parish, might intimate
their want unto the Kings officer, and that the same officer might command the
Patron to present, the Ministers to ordain, and the people, according to the
Kings laws, to assent unto, and approve the Clerk; what other intent or
meaning have we then, that the King has as ample, and as lawful a power The
King has as large a power to command a Minister to be elected and ordained, as
a Bishop, to be chosen and consecrated.
to command a Minister to be presented, ordained, and elected to be a Pastor in
a parochial Church, as he has to command a Bishop to be elected, confirmed,
and consecrated to an Episcopal sea? And are we not then merveilously
giddy-headed, new fangled, and strange innovators? Again, when we desire,
that the King at the humble suite of the Ministers, the Patron and the people
would be pleased, to confirm and admit the Patrones Clerk, in, and to the
temporalities of a Benefice, what other thing is required, but that the
possession of no Church should be delivered unto any Minister, without the
Kings public writ. And would not this breed a perilous stir, garboyle,
discord, and contention, when the Archdeacons pretty signet, as Dagon falling
down before the Arc, should give place, bow down, and do reverence unto the
Kings of England seal at arms? The Prophets ought to be tried by the prophets.


Oh! but in this platform, there be other dangerous innovations and
alterations, not to be attempted: Yea? And what then be they? The Admonitor
himself, in his admonition holds: Yea Master Bilson, and all other
supporters of the Hierarchy defended, That the Clergy ought to judge of the
Clergy, and that the Prophets ought to be tried, examined, and ordained, only
by the Prophets, and that the ^pi^its of the Prophets are subject to the
spirits of the Prophets. Wherein the consists the disagreeme^t and variance
between us and them, touching the ordination of a Prophet, by Prophets, or a
Minister, by Ministers? certes to my understa^ding, there is no other matter of
dissonancie in this case, but even alonely this: viz. That he by these words
(the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets) intends Corinth.
that the Spirits of many Prophets, touching their trial, examination, and
ordination, are subject to the spirit of one Prophet, and that therefore one
Prophet by his own spirit may try, examine, and ordain many Prophets:
Whereas on the other side, we affirm, that one Prophet, according to this rule
of our holy faith, Whether the spirits of many Prophets subject to one, or of
one ^o many.
is to speak, and the other Prophets are to judge, and that no one Prophet may
t^ie, examine, or ordain many Prophets: Because from this place, we gather,
that the spirits of many Prophets in the ordinary course of the ministry of
the Word, were never subjected in this case to the spirit of one Prophet. But
in this platform there is no mention made of the King, if he be patron,
neither is there any institution spoken of; and then how can any action of
quare impedit, be brought, to try the right, if two Patrons pretend title to
the Patronage: besides the Patron by this platform must fetch his Clerks only
from the Universities, Schools of learning, and Nurseries of the Ministry,
whereas now he has liberty, to present any Clerk wheresoever or howsoever
ordained: Again, strife and contention may arise in the Presbyter, between the
Bishops and the Ministers themselves, appointed to be examiners, and ordainers,
which of the two Clerks nominated by the Patron is most worthy to be preferred.
If both the Patrons Clerks for non-abilities, or criminousnes, be refused, who
shall then nominate, and to whom shall the election devolve? And lastly, what if
the B. and Presbyter shall disallow one for unabilite, Which indeed is
notwithstanding, of ability to teach? to all these difficulties, thus we
answer.

If the Kings Majesty be Patron, to any benefice with cure of souls, because
we judge and confess him, to be a King, endowed Touching the Kings patronage.
with a rare and singular spirit of zeal, for the glory of our God, with an
excellent spirit of love, for the salvation o^ the souls of his subjects, and
to be the Nehemiah of our age, sent unto us from above, for the building of the
walls, and reedifying of the ports of the House of God, which were broken down
and devoured: we for our parts doubt nothing at all, nay rather we most
certainly persuade our selves, his Highness having once been please^, to
prescribe all wholesome and commendable Laws, unto his people, will also
vouchs^f^, much more to prescribe laws, yea and to be a Law unto himself. And
that his Majesty will set this business of the Lords house, so near unto his
Kingly and Christian heart, by the planting of able Ministers in H. de ley and
fidei. 3 l. ex imperfecto.
all the Churches, of his Highness Patronage, a that all other Patrons, by his
godly example, will be excited rea^^ily to walk in the Kings path, to wear
the Kings colors, and to become the Ki^gs chief favorers in this so holy a
work. And therefore touching the Kings Patronages, cum Magistas imperatoria,
l^gibu esses^luta videatur, we commend them wholly to the Kings most Christian
care, providence, and fi^elitie.

The Bishops institution, and writ of Quare impedit, we grant The Bb.
institution may cease.
must cease: but in place of institution, the election and ordination by the
Presbiterie succeeds: and the Clerk nominated by the Patron, elected and
ordained by the Presbytery; shall have idem jus, ad Ecclesiam, and in
Ecclesia, which in former times, the Clerk presented by the Patron, and
instituted by the bishop, was wont to have.

If any suit in law, happen for the right of Patronage, between two or more
Patrons, pretending title to the gift of one benefice: It seems If suit fall
out between two patrons what then may be done.
that this gift might have far easier, and more speedy way of trial, by some
other writ, than ^y the writ of quare impedit; for upon this writ many times by
negligence, or unskilfulnesse of the Atturnies it falls out, that one of the
parties is driven sometimes to sit down by great loss, and not to have his
title tried at all, only for wan^ of some ceremonial form, no^ observed in the
pleadings of the cause: And therefore both Patrons, within the time to be
limited by the kings writ, having nominated their Clerks, to the Presbytere, as
hertofore they presented to the B. we leave it to be considered, whether it
were not meet, and convenient, that the Presbytery should wholly defend ^he
election, and ordination, of either their Clerks, until the right of patronage
were finally adju^ge^ before the K. Justices at the common Law: upon which
judgment passed, they might then without scruple, or impediment, proceed to
the full election, and ordination, of that patrons Clerk, for whom the judgment
was given. By which manner of trial, if the action might be brought in the
name of patron against patron, the Clerks should not only be freed from much
obloquie, whereunto they are now subject, by prosecution of suits at law, one
Clerk against another, but also they should be exempted, from all expense,
labor and turmoile, with which heretofore they have encumbered themselves, to
the hinderance of their studies, and decay of their estates, by pursuing the
Patrons title, at their own charge. Neither might the occasion of suit about
the right of patronage, be any let or hinderance that the Church in the mean
time should be left as a Widow destitute of an husband. For any one of the
Clerks nominated by either of the patrons, might be appointed by the
presbytery, to preach the Word, and publicly to pray, until the controversy
were ended. And out of the fruits also of the same Church, remaining in the
custody of one of the patrons, or sequestered by the king to the use of the
next incumbent, he might have such allowance, as were requisite for the time of
his continuance in that place. And for the Sacraments, if any were of
necessity to be administered, some other Minister near adjoining, might be
provided to administer the same, as in many places, it has been, and is now
daily used, in like cases of vacancie.

That the Patron should be curbed with too hard a bridle, as being barred to
fetch his Clerks from any other place, than from the The curbing of a patron
with too hard a bridle answered.
Universities or other Schools and nurceries of learning, is a matter, if it be
well weighed, of less importance, than the Admonitor would insinuate the same
to be. First it is not of necessity required, that all patrons should at all
times fetch all their Clerks, from those places and not from elsewhere. For
many times it may happen upon just cause, (for the benefit of the Church) that
a Clerk already ordained, and placed in one Church, may be removed from the
same, to another. But only the meaning is according to the Laws and canons
already settled, that the greatest part, of the patrons Clerks, must of
necessity be called thence, because they can not elsewhere be had.

Now then whereas the law intends every Church to be a wife and to have an
husband; to be a body, and to have an head; the law as a parent unto the
Church has provided, until she be widow indeed, that no husband be provided
for her. And therefore by sundry ^^. de prebend. c. tuis l. 6. de prebend. fi
Episcopus.
as well ancient Decrees, as by Canons of Discipline, made and published by the
Bishops 1571. it is decreed and confirmed, That the Bishop shall lay his hands
on none, or at any other time, but when it shall chance some place of
ministration is void in the same Dioces. As for stipendarie Curats it is
expressly against the policy of our Church, that any should be ordained a
Minister, to serve only as an hireling. From which Decrees and Canons, already
settled (as I said before) it follows for the most part, that the patrons
Clerks to be ordained, of necessity must be called from the Universities; or
other places of learning. For if every place of ministration, be full, and none
must be made a Minister until some place be void, then albeit some patrons,
upon good causes to be allowed by public discipline, might be permitted to
nominate some Clerks already placed in administrations: Yet in the end, as
well the patrons of those Churches, from whence these are to beremoved, as
other patrons also (many benefices at one time being void) must of necessity,
seek out men, to be ordained, which never were ordained to the ministry
before. And where are these to be sought, if not only at the Universities, or
other Schools and nurseries of learning? For that prophets in the ordinary
time of prophesying, should be taken from the feet of the Apothecaries,
Tailors, Drapers, Milners, Mercers, or Prophets in the ordinary time of
prophesying to be taken out of the schools of prophets.
from the butry, pantry, kitchen, celler, or stable, of any Bishop, Peer,
Knight or Gentleman, and not from the feet of the prophets, is a thing
abominable, and odious unto God, and man. Wherein then, does this platform, in
this point of fetching Ministers, only from the Universities, or other places
of learning, differ from the intendment of laws settled? Or wherein can the
patrons receive any detriment by such a practice? Nay they are so far from
receiving any prejudice hereby, as indeed both they and their Clerks shall
reap great commodity by it. Wherein I grant some discrepance, to consist
between the Bb. practice, and this platform. For the Bb. at The difference
between the platform and the bishops practice.
one time, allow a Clerk for ability, and at another time, disallow the same
Clerk for nonabilitie. And him whom they have ordained, and adjudged, to day,
worthy of an office, they many times disordaine him tomorrow, and refuse him as
a person unworthy, to possess a benefice: Whereas on the contrary part, we
think it very absurd, and unreasonable to bar any man from a benefice, whom
the Governors of the Church shall judge worthy to bear an office. So that the
patron by this platform, shall be sure, if at any time he nominate a Clerk
already ordained, that the same Clerk (unless it were for Crime, or some
defect after happening) should never be refused. And if such be the laws and
liberties of the Ordinaries, what alteration of the law, or prejudice to the
patron, could it be, if by a new law, the King provided new means, to put his
old law, in due execution?

It upon difference of judgment, any variance should arise, between Upon
difference of judgment about the ability of a Clerk what may be done.
the Ministers appointed to elect, and ordain, which of the patrons Clerks
were most worthy, the same diversity we assure our selves, can breed no
greater inconvenience, nor further danger, than does now daily fall out in the
election of Scholars, fellows, and heads of houses in the Vniversiti^s, or of
other Officers in Colleges, Cathedral Churches, and bodies politic or
corporate. As those controversies therefore have been, and are appeased by the
good orders and laws of those places, even so might these also. And therefore
some good law might be made to this effect, viz. If any four of the seven did
agree together, upon any one ^lerke nominated by the patron, that the same
four should strike the stroke, and make the election good, against the other
three. Neither do we think it to stand with reason, that the Archipresbyter,
or any other Minister among the seven, should necessarily be of the qu^rum. For
if any one of the seven, should necessarily be of the quorum, then (having, as
it were, a negative voice against all the rest) if he should be wayward, and
apt A Clerk refused for nonabilitie to whom the nomination may devolve.
to contention, he might then always frustrate the election, either by
opposing himself to all the rest, or by inclining to the lesser, and worser
part, as lately came to pass about the election of a Scholar, among great
Doctors. If both the Patrons Clerks, should be disabled by those, unto whom
the judgment of their nonabilitie did appertain, we leave it to be conside^ed,
whether the right to n^minate, elect, and ordain, for that time only, might not
hereafter devolve unto the presbytery, as in like case it has done heretofore
unto the Bishops. And from that Presbytery, if the same should make default,
that the be^efice, should be then in lapse unto the king.

Lastly, touching the nonabilitie of a Clerk: i^ the Clerk whom A Clerk
wronged by a refusal for nonabilitie how he may be relieved.
the presbytery should refuse, come from one of the Universities, then as a
Clerk before time refused for nonabilitie, by the Bishops was to be tried by
the Archbishop, and by him to be allow^d, or disallowed, so in this case we
leave it to be conside^ed, whether it were not meet that this Clerk so
refused, and complaining himself unto the Magistrate, to be wronged, should
have his ability to be again tried, by that next Synod of Ministers to be
congregated within that Deanery. And if upon trial made, and bringing a
testimonial under some authentike seal, from the Synod, of his ability:
whether the Presbytery, upon a good pain within a time to be prefixed, should
A Clerk refused for crime to whom the nomination may devolv^
not be constrained, to ordain and dedicate the same Clerk, to the Ministry
of the same Church. And as for the refusal of a Clerk by the Presbytery,
upon objection of crime, if the crime be so heinous as for which by the Canons
of the Church, he might not be promoted, to the Ministry, then is it to be
considered, whether the p^esbyterie in this case also, as in the former of
nonabilitie, might not nominate, elect, and ordain, the Clerk to that place,
for that time only? and upon the presbyters default, the lease also to be unto
the king.

And thus have we compared, the manner of Church government, The benefits
ensuing the platform of ordination etc. required.
now in use, touching these points, with th^^ ^orme of Discipline, which is
desired to be planted. By which comparison the Kings Highness, may very
easily discer^e, the differences between them, to be such, as whereby the
Kings dignity and prerogative, shall highly be advanced, the Kings poor
subjects, both Ministers and people, diverse ways eased, and unburdened, and
the Laws better observed, to the unspeakeable peace, and tranquillity, both of
Church and Commonweal. The Prophets trial of the Prophets; the peoples
approbation of their Pastors; the Ministers entrance into their Ministry,
according to the Apostolical practice of the Primitive Church, would be a
means utterly to extinguish, that schism, that remains yet among us; that
we have no Christian Ministers; no Christian Sacraments; no Christian Church in
England. Besides, the Ministers, for Letters of Orders; Letters of Institution;
Letters of Inductions; for Licenses to serve within the Diocese; for Licenses
to serve in such a cure; for Licenses to serve two cures in one day; for
Licenses to preach; for Licenses of resignation; for testimonials of
subscription; for Letters of sequestration; for Letters of relaxat^on; for the
Chancellours, Registers, and Somners dinners; for Archidiaconall annual, and
for Episcopal trienniall procurations, the Ministers (I say) to be nominated,
elected, ordained, approved, confirmed, and admitted, by the Patron, by the
Presbytery, by the People, and by the King, should be disburdened, from all
fees, for these things, and from all these, and such, and such like grievances.
Only for the Kings writts, and for the traveile and pains of His Highness
Officers, taken in, and about the execution of the same wr^tts, some reasonable
fees, (as it shall please the King,) may be taxed, and set down. The people
also in souls, in bodies, and in their goods could not be much comforted,
relieved, and benefited. They should not henceforth to the peril of their
souls, have unlearned, unable, and undiscreete Ministers thrust upon them, and
set over them: Neither should they be compelled, upon light occasions, to take
many frivolous oaths in vain. They should not be summoned, from one end of
the Diocese, unto the other: nor be posted from Court, to Court, and from
visitation, to visitation. The Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish,
should not upon pain of excommunication, be constrained, once, or twice in the
year, to pay six or eight pence, for a sheet of threehalfepeny articles. They
shall not any longer, out of the common treasury, reserved for the poor, bear
the charge of their Parishes for making bills, visitation and diverse other
expenses. There should be no more suits at Law, between Clerk and Clerk,
about the Patrons Title; no more suites of double quarrel, between the Clerk
and the Bishop; no more debate between the Bishop and the Archdeacon; and
lastly there should be no occasion of any riots, and unlawful assemblies to
be made upon entries and possessions, by virtue and color of two
presentations, two institutions, and two inductions, into one benefice, at one
time. The Patrons as being Lords and avowers of the Churches, might have the
custody of the Churches, during their vacancies, and their ancient right, in
this behalf, restored. All swearing of Canonical obedience, unto the Bishops
by the Ministers: all 31. Eliz. c. 6.
swearing, and forswearing of Clerks, for any symoniacall bands, promises, or
agreements, between them and their Patrons, and all robberies and spoiling of
the Churches, by the Patrons, should determine and cease. Especially if it
might please the King and Parliament, to have one clause of a Statute, against
abuses, in election of Scholars, and presentation, to benefices enlarged. For
although every corrupt cause, and consideration, by reward, gift, profit, or
benefit to present, be inhibited by that act; yet notwithstanding by experience
in many places we find, that the Patrons for small rents, and for many years,
are in possession, some of the mansion houses, some of the glebe lands, and
some of the tithes, of such benefices as since the publishing of that act, have
been bestowed upon Clerks: which breeds great suspicion and jealousy in
the minds of men, that the Clerk and Patron at the beginning directly or
indirectly, did conspire to frustrate and delude, the intendement of the
statute: And therefore we leave it to be considered by the Kings Majesty and
Parliament. If any Clerk after confirmation A means to restrain patrons from
corruption.
and possession to any benefice, hereafter to be made and given unto him,
shall willingly and wittingly, suffer the Patron of the same benefice, or any
other person, in his name or to his use, directly or indirectly, mediatly or
immediately, to use, occupy, or enjoy, the mansion house, glebe land, or other
ecclesiastical commodities, or any part thereof, belonging to the same
Benefice: In this case (I say) we leave it to be considered, whether it were
not meet and convenient, that every such willing and witting sufferance by the
Clerk, and every such willing, and witting possession, use, or occupation, by
the Patron, should not be adjudged, to be a just cause, to determine the
presentation, to have been first made upon corrupt respect, and consideration.
And that therefore the Clerk, ipso facto, to ^ose the benefice, and the
Patron, ipso facto, to forfeite his right of Patronage to the King, for the two
next turns following. And these being the principal reasons, and grounds of
our desires, we are humbly to pray the Lords spiritual, either to convince
them of indignity, insufficiency, and incongruitie, or else to join with us
unto the Kings Majesty, for the restitution of that manner of Government,
which they themselves confess to have been practiced, at the beginning by the
Apostles and Primitive Church: but the Admonitor has yet more reasons
unanswered against this platform.

ADMONITION.
That every Parish in ENGLAND may have a Learned and discreet Minister,
howsoever they dream of perfection, no man is able in these days, to devise
how to bring it to pass, and especially when by this change of the Clergy,
the great rewards of Learning, shall be taken away, and men thereby
discouraged, to bring up their Children in the study of good Letters.

ASSERTION.
In some part to justify this opinion, I grant, that no man is able in these
days, to devise, to bring it to pass, that every Parish should have a Learned
and discreet Minister. And why? because in these days not any one Bishop has
afforded, to ordain one Learned and discreet Minister, for five Parishes:
secondly, because where some of the Reverend Fathers, have ordained and placed
in many Parishes, many Learned and discreet Ministers, some others of the same
Fathers, have again disregarded, and displaced those learned and discreet
Ministers, and in their rooms have placed many unlearned and undiscreet
Ministers. Now then if these days wherein so few learned and discreet
Ministers, and so many unlearned and undiscreet Ministers be ordained, and
wherein also, so many learned, and d^screet Ministers are disgraced, and so
many undiscreet and unlearned Ministers graced: If these days (I say) were
ended, then albeit no perfection, whereof never any one of us dreamed, could be
attained unto, and albeit no one man were able to devise, how to bring it to
pass, that every Parish should have a learned Minister: Yet nevertheless, all
good and holy means being used, to aim and to shoot after perfection, and all
good and holy men laying to their heads, and applying their hearts to further
this enterprise, and service unto God, we know that the Lord might call, and
make, and fill with the Spirit of God in wisdom, and in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in spiritual worke-manship, many Bezaliels, and many Aholiabs,
spiritually to carve, grave, and imbroyder the Lords spiritual Temple. The
perfection therefore after which we long, and the change of the Clergy,
whereof we entreat, is but such a perfection, and such a change, as (good
means for the restitution of impropriations being used) may easily be
attained, and well made. For the perfection required by us, to be in a
Minister, What perfection of a Minister is required by this platform.
is none other than such as the holy Law of God, and the Laws, Canons and
Injunctions already settled, do require, viz. that every Minister, to whom cure
of souls is committed, with some competent knowledge, according to the measure
of the grace, of the gift of Christ, be able to teach, to exhor^, and reprove
the people, yea and to convince the gainesayers, if any should arise among
them. From whence also springs the change intended by us: viz. that in the
Churches of all Ministers, unable to teach, etc. There might be a change of
Ministers able to teach, etc. Wherefore if the Admonitor meant otherwise then
we intend, and if upon placing a learned and discreet Minister in every
Parish, he should not intend, the change of the High and Papal state of
Prelacy: then either is not his answer pertinent to the question, or else it
must necessarily follow, from his intendment, that the high and Papal state of
Prelacy, and Prelacy and a learned Ministry cannot stand together.
the placing of a learned and discreet Minister in every Parish, are like unto
Coleworts planted among Vines, or unto Parsley sowed among Bishops Weed, which
will never spring, grow, and prosper together. Because the rising of such a
Learned Ministry must be the fall, ruin, and breake-necke of Prelacy. And
this follows inevitable upon his own reason, drawn from the taking away of
the great rewards of learning, by the change of the Clergy.

For the great rewards of learning, whereof he speaks, must of necessity be
the Prelacies, viz. Arbishoprickes, Bishoprics, Deanries, Archdeaconries,
Prebendaries, Canonries, Chanterships, Commendames, non Residencies, and
Pluralities. And then let us observe, whether in effect he has not reasoned
thus: If prelacies (being the great reward of learning) should nor stand, and
not be changed, there is no man able to devise, how a learned and discreet
Minister may be placed in every parish: but if prelacies (the great rewards of
learning) may once be changed and not stand, then were it possible to have it
devised, that a learned and discreet Minister, might be placed in every parish.
And then has he not profoundly, and learnedly disputed, when he has preferred
the Damsel before her Dame, and the maid before her Mistress? When he has
advanced a great deal o^ learning in one before a great deal of learning in
many, and learning in some places, before learning in all places; lastly, when
by continuance and furtherance of the great rewards of learning, he ^ath
greatly hindered and discontinued learnednesse, and greatly furthered and
continued u^ learne^nesse? For if Prelacies were no hi^derance^, but only
furtherances of discreet and learned Ministers; and again if prelacies were no
furtherances, but only hindrances ^f unlearned and undiscreet Ministers, to be
had in every parish, th^n might the rewards of learning still remain, that men
should not be di^couraged, to send their sons to the study of good learning.
For generally men be not so much encouraged, to set their sons to learning,
where a few great rewards Men are more encouraged to learning, where many good
rewards than where few great rewards are provided.
of learning are provided for a few men greatly learned, as where many good
rewards of learning, are provided for many good learned m^n. And to speak as
experience teaches us, and as the truth is, what one father among twenty, will
dedicate his son, to learning, if men (as the case now stands under
prelacie) not brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, but at the feet of some
swash-buck^er; not taught from any Doctors chair, but schooled upon some
crafts man stoo^e, when men who can but read, and cannot preach, may be
Ministers and capable of the fattest benefice; within a whole County? In the
Commonweal, if there be many places of honor, profit, and dignity, for
such only as have valiantly served the King in his wars, or carefully attended
upon him in the Court, then will many fathers incite and encourage their sons
to prepare and furnish themselves to the wars, and to the Court. But if all
men's sons in the Camp, and in the Court be capable of entertainments alike; if
as well a laborers son following the Cart, as a noble man's son a waiter in
Court, may be the Kings Lord Chamberlain, in time of peace; and if as well a
Carpet Knight, as a valiant warrior, may be Lord general in time of war,
would any father for many years together, costly, and gorgeously brave his
son at Court; or would any father adventurously, and dangerously hazard his
son in the field? Again, fathers do not therefore send their sons to be
students, at the Innes of Court, or to be apprentises in the City of London,
only in regard, that they may be all great Citizens, and all great rich men,
and all great Lawyers, and all Judges of the Land. It suffices all parents,
and the purpose and intent of all parents is, that their sons being such
Lawyers, and such Citizens as by their law, and by their trades, they may
thrive, and live Barrester-like, and Lawyer-like; Marchant-like, and
Citizen-like, though they be not able to live Serjeant-like, or Judge-like,
Alderman-like, or Lord-like. In like sort questionless, would it be an
excellent encouragement, to many fathers, to send many sons unto many Schools
and Universities of learning, if so be there were many and good rewards, rather
than few and great rewards provided for many, rather than for few learned men
in the Church. For if there be but few rewards, albeit the same be great, then
but a few fathers among many, will adventure the spending of their substance,
upon a vain hope, that their sons shall obtain great rewards of learning. For
what father knows the capacity, and diligence of his so? Or who can divine
that his son, shall be one among the number of a few men greatly learned,
worthy of a great reward, and to live Deane-like, Archdeacon-like, Bishop-like,
or Archbishop-like? Wherefore if such a change of the Clergy, as whereof we
speak, were made, that is to say, if ^n unlearned, and undiscreet Ministry,
were changed into a discreet and learned ministry: it is not to be doubted,
but a far greater number of sons, would be sent by their fathers, to the
study of good learning, than now there be.

From whence also it follows, that either Papal Prelacie is the Prelacy the
bane of a learned ministry.
only bane of a learned Ministry, or else that an unlearned Ministry, is
the untimely fruit of the womb of Papal Prelacie. Both which twain, rather
than one of which twain, being true, we leave it to be considered, whether the
mother conceiving too soon, or the daughter borne out of time, or both as an
afterbirth, and superfluous members should be cast away, and cut off from the
body of the Church? The admonitors next argument, is drawn from the small
continuance in the Universities.

ADMONITION.
Furthermore who sees not, how small continuance there shall be in the
Universities to make men of any profound knowledge, when the very neces^itie of
places, shall draw men away, before they come to any ripeness or profound
knowledge, etc.

ASSERTION.
This argument is as an headless arrow shot against a corslet of steel, out
of a bow unbent, for what can this argument pierce, when in effect the
conclusion is thus:

If every parish should have a learned and discreet Minister, then men should
have but small continuance in the University, to make them men of ripeness,
or of any profound knowledge,

But that men should be of small continuance in the University, and should be
drawn away, before they come to ripeness or profound knowledge, is not meet.

Therefore it is not meet that every parish should have a learned and discreet
Minister.

The reason of which consequence is thus: viz. The very necessity of places
(says he) shall draw men away before they come to Page 80.
any ripeness: The learnednesse then, and discretion, of a Minister, by his
reason, depends upon his long continuance in the University. And what shall
we then say of the learnednesse and discretion, of such Ministers of the
Bishops making, as did never continue in the Universities, one day in all their
whole life; but hereunto they answer, that the very necessity of the one, is
so great, as that the people must have prayer said, and the Sacraments
administered, lest the people in the country should grow to an heathenish
barbaritie: unto which answer, again I reply and reason thus: if a man of
unlearnednesse and without knowledge and ripeness, may be a Minister, then a
man of small learnednesse, of small knowledge, and of small ripeness, may be a
Minister much more; and again:

If necessity of places may draw men of no continuance in the University, of
no knowledge, and of no ripeness, into the Ministry: then may the necessity
of places draw men of small continuance, knowledge, and ripe^esse,

But the necessity of places may draw men of no continuance, knowledge or
ripeness into the Ministry:

Therefore the necessity of places may draw men of small continuance,
knowledge, and ripeness, into the Ministry.

The second proposition of which syllogism, is confirmed by practice, and
precept, by word, and by deed, of most of our reverend Bishops. And then from
their own practice, I argue thus: if the necessity of saying prayers, of
reading service, and of deliverie of the elements, be of necessity, and of
necessity require unlearned Ministers: rather than no Ministers: then much
more the necessity of having faith, the necessity of the salvation of our
souls; and the necessity of God his glory, is of necessity; and being of
necessity requires Ministers of small learning, of small continuance, of
small knowledge, and of small ripeness: rather than Ministers of no learning,
no continuance, no knowledge, and of no ripeness. And if faith, salvation of
men, and the glory of God, as soundly, and Faith mo^e necessary to be preached
than the sacraments be ^^ministred
as sincerely may be preached and promoted, by young and rude Timothy, as by
aged, learned, and eloquent Apollo, what necessity is there of continuance in
the University, to obtain more profound knowledge, or any other riper
understanding, than is that knowledge, and that understanding, whereby faith to
the salvation of men, and to the glory of God, is of necessity to be preached?
Again, if by continuance in the University, profound knowledge, and ripeness,
be so necessary, that (as is pretended) in respect thereof, a change of the
Clergy may not be made, and that unlearned, and undiscreet Ministers, as it
were by necessity, should still be placed; then seems it reasonable, to
move the L. Bb. that it would please them to effect an abolishment of some of
the statutes, of all the Colleges in Oxford and Cambridge: whereby all Masters
of Art, of what youth, ignorance, or rudeness soever they be (excepting some
small number, which by order of their foundation, he put apart to the study of
Law or Physic) some after two, some after three, and some after four years of
their commencement, are compelled either to enter into the Ministry, or to
leave their fellowships: Nay in some Colleges, if Bachelors of arts be chosen
fellows, and be not Ministers after one year, by statute they lose their
places. The principle reason of the founders of all which statutes (to my best
remembrance) is this: namely that the harvest being great, and the laborers
but few, many laborers, shall be sent from those Colleges, into the harvest.
Neither can it be intended, that many laborers of long continuance, many
laborers of profound knowledge, or many laborers of ripeness should be sent.
But it is simply provided, that many laborers, and not loiterers should be
sent, and yet now the Admonitor rather than that some loiterers should not be
sent, contendeth to seclude some laborers from the work. Besides, how can
they be of any long continuance, of any ripeness, or of any profound
knowledge, in the mysteries of faith and godliness, when not having
accomplished the age of 24. years, 26. or 28. years at the most, and not having
given themselves above 2. 3. or 4. years at the most, to the study of
divinity, nay which after the study of 3. or 4. years of Philosophy or arts,
and no study of Divinity, must notwithstanding enter into the ministry?
wherefore from the statutes of the Colleges in the Universities I thus dispute:
If the necessity of the College statutes, do compel:

All Masters of Arts before mentioned, and some Bachelors of arts not having
any profound knowledge, or being but of small continuance, or not of any
ripeness, either to leave their Colleges, or to enter into the Min^sterie,
then much more the nec^ssitie of preaching faith, the necessity of being
saved, and the necessity of God his glory may compel men of small learning,
of small knowledge, of small ripeness, and of small continuance, to execute
their ministry, rather than that any parish should be necessarily clogged
with a Minister of no learning, of no discretion, of no knowledge, of no
ripeness, and of no continuance.

But the necessity of the College statutes do compel the one, Therefore the
necessity of Faith, etc. may compel the other.

ADMONITION.
Against the inconvenience of discipline, by excommunication only (which he
says we so much cry for) he tells us Page 81.
that some learned men of this age have at large declared in their works set
forth to the world, that the same will be of most men contemned, and that it
will be of small force to bring to effect any good amendment of life.

ASSERTION.
But who taught him to father, or to fasten this untruth upon us? only then
this might suffice for answer, that he did never yet hear, any one of our
part, so much as call, much less to cry for discipline No discipline by
excommunication only called for. Discipline by excommunication only, no more
to be suffered.
by excommunication only. For we say clean otherwise, viz, that the
Discipline of the Church ought not to be executed (as now for the most part it
is) by excommunication only. This manner of discipline therefore, by
excommunication only, is one of the disorders in the Church, used by the
reverend Bishops, and which we so much desire, to be reformed. And for this
cause we entreat their Lordships, to forbear the practice of that, which (as
it seems) they would so feign have others to mislike.

But happily this was not the mark whereat the Admonitor shot; for Bishoply
and Archdeaconly excommunication, being daily used, it is like that he bent his
bow, and aimed at that excommunication only, which is pastoral and Elderly.
Against which form and manner of excommunication, let be so, that some learned
men of this age, have at large declared in their works, set forth to the
world, that the same will be of most men contemned, and that it will be of
small force to bring to effect, any good amendment of The writings of some
learned men not sufficient to condem^e^ excommunication by pastors and Elders.
life, let this (I say) be granted, what of all this? must the Church of
England therefore, dislike and reject the same? God forbid. The whole doctrine
of Faith and Sacraments, we know to be of most men contemned, and to be of
small force to bring most men from superstitious and popish idolatry. And how
then is it possible, but that the sword of this doctrine, should have as little
entertainment amongst most men as the doctrine? He that casts away the
kernel, will much more despise the shale: And he that sets light by the
sword, will set less by the scabberd. It suffices then that the children of
the Church in England, striving to enter in at the narrow gate, and embracing
the doctrine of the Gospel, it is sufficient (I say) that they submit and
subject their necks unto the yoke of the Gospel, for what have we to do with
them that are without? Does the law of England endight, condemn and judge a
Spaniard resiant in Spain?

The Admonitor himself affirms (at the time when our Savior Christ said,
dic Ecclesiae) that there were many presidents as it page 134
were, and governors of the Church together with the chief Ministers page
135* The Bb. confesses that the Minister and Elders, did govern in the
primitive Church.
of every congregation; nay further he says tha^ he will not deny that the
Apostles afterward, and the primitive Church, did practice the same.

These some learned men then, e^ther must show, and prove (unto us the children
of God in England,) that this form of governing the Church, and
excommunicating by many presidents and go vernours, together with the chief
Minister of every congregation, was given to the Churches in the time of Christ
and his Apostles, but only for that time, and that therefore that form is now
at an end, and ceased, or else it must be confirmed unto us, that God has in
these days altered and changed his mind touching England, and that he has by
some new vision, or revelation, commanded the Reverend Bishops in these days,
to teach the Church of England, that he will not have the same manner of
Government used in the Church of England, because it would be of most of his
Children in England The opinion of some Learned men not sufficient for the
Church of England to depart from the word.
contemned, and of small force to bring to effect any good amendment of life in
them: for albeit all the Learned men in the world, had declared as much in
their works set forth to the world, as is here spoken of, what were that to
the children of God in England, unless the same Learned men, had taught unto
us true learning from the mouth of God? How much less are we bound to regard,
what only some Learned men of this age have declared unto us, the same some
Learned men having no warrant out of the holy Book of God for such their
Learning? For if the declaration of some Learned men of this age, in their
works set forth to the world, may be a sufficient warrant to draw men from the
way of truth: then hardly let the declaration of Doctor Harding against the
true use of the Lords Supper, and then let the declaration of Osorius against
justification by faith, and the declarations of Bellarmine, against diverse
Articles of our Religion, and the declaration of Doctor Allen, against the
execution of Justice in England, and the declaration of Doctor Saunders, a
rebellious fugitive, in the defense of the Popes Bull, and the declaration of
G. T. for the pretended Catholics; and lastly, let the declaration of the
Pope, and his whole Clergy, excommunicating our late Sovereign Lady the Queen
deceased, be received, and listened unto. For who can deny but that these men
were some men, and that these some men were also some learned men, and who then
sees not the looseness, the vanity, the trifling, and the toying of this
argument.

The Argument following which the Admonitor would seem Page 81.
to let pass, drawn from experience, is of like quality. For though
experience (as he says) teach that men of stubbornness, will not By
excommunication of Pastors* and Elders, more can not be out of communion than
in communion
shun the company of such as be excommunicated, and though such men of
stubbornness, must be also (as he says) excommunicated, for keeping of
company with them, yet to affirm, that by means of Pastourly, and Elderly
excommunication, more will be excommunicated, as being men of stubbornness,
than in communion, is a very gross, and palpable error. For we hold (as the
truth is) that the greater part of the Church cannot be excommunicated by the
lesser; nor that many should be excommunicated, by a few; nor that a few should
be excommunicated by one of the Church. And if the common union must
necessarily consist of all, or of the most part of the faithful, then is the
lesser part always out of this common union. For what else is excommunication,
but extra communionem ejectio, a casting forth of one, or of more persons from
the common fellowship, society, and company of the faithful? The greatest part
whereof, and not the least, are accounted to be the Church, and to be in
communion; unless then the whole Church, or the greater part of the Church,
having once cast out from among them, one or more adulterers, blasphemers,
extortioners, or such like, and having also excommunicated men of
stubbornness, for keeping company with such, shall themselves all, or the
greatest part, become children of disobedience, and men of stubbornness: it
can not be, but there must be still more of the Church, in communion, than out
of communion. But if the whole Church shall have cast away the yoke of
Discipline, and become such themselves, as were those whom before they had
excommunicated, then is it a clear case, that there is not any more, any
communion among them. For how should any common union be there, where is no
union at all? And if all be departed from obedience, where then can the Church
be? Nay further, if the greatest part of the Church should revolt, and forsake
the faith, yet hereupon it would not follow, that more of the faithful, be out
of communion, than in communion. For then such only as remain in the unity
of faith, and have not separated themselves from Christ, remain now only to
be in communion with Christ: out of which number also, if any should be
excommunicated, by the residue of their brethren, yet even among this small
number, there would be still more in communion, than out of communion. For to be
out of communion can not be understood, to be of any but only of such as
remaining in the profession of faith, and godliness, are yet notwithstanding
found guilty of some transgression, and for the same by the Church, for a time
cut off from the Church by sentence of excommunication.

These deformities, and inconveniences therefore, can in no wise follow, that
Discipline of excommunication, by Pastors, and Elders, which so much is called
for. But certes, it fared (I fear me) with the Admonitor, and sundry of his
colleagues in this case none otherwise, than it fares with incontinent women,
once (say they) incontinent and ever incontinent, we know it by our selves. Our
Ecclesiastical Judges and Officers, in like manner, seeing by experience,
those whom they account to be men of stubbornness, not to shun the company of
such as they daily excommunicate; yea and By the bishops excommunication more
are out of communion, than in communion, it is therefore by his own reason, a
deformed discipline.
they perceiving also, that it may fall out, that more, under their
Jurisdiction, may be out of their communion than in communion with them,
because one man alone (as he plainly insinuates) may excommunicate the
greatest part of the Church under his censure (for otherwise he could never
have supposed, that more would be out of communion than in communion) because
(I say) these deformities, and these inconveniences, by their own experience,
have been found to have followed upon that discipline of excommunication,
which hitherto has been practiced; it falls out, that they cannot otherwise
judge, but that all other manner of discipline, by excommunication, must be of
the same nature and condition, that is, as deformed and inconvenient, as their
own is. And yet in this place it is worthy to be marked, what a rod the
Admonitor has By S. Augustines reason bishoply excommunication has many
deformities.
gotten out of S. Augustine, to whip his own discipline, by excommunication
only out of the Church, and thus it may be framed.

That discipline whereby more will be, or more may be excommunicated than in
communion, has in it many deformities, and inconveniences:

But by the Discipline of excommunication which the reverend Bishops, their
Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials practice, more will be,
or more may be excommunicated, than in communion.

Therefore that Discipline by excommunication, which the reverend Bishops,
their Archdeacons, etc. practice, has in it many deformities, and
inconveniences.

The Major proposition (if he speak truly) is S. Augustines, but whether it be
or be not, it is no great matter, because it needs not the authority of any
man to confirm it, the same being sound and true in it own nature. The Minor
is drawn from his own reason thus:

Where there be more men of stubbornness in the Church, than of obedience, and
where there be more men that shun not, than that shun the company of those that
be excommunicated, there more will be, or may be excommunicated, than in
communion.

But there be more men of stubbornness, than of obedience, and more that shun
not, than that do shun the company of those that be excommunicated, by the
Reverend Bishops, their Archdeacons, Chancellours, and Officials.

Therefore there may be, or will be more excommunicated, by their Lordships,
their Archdeacons, Chancellours, etc. than in communion.

The assumption, though I cannot warrant the same to be simply true, yet I may
safely warrant it, to be drawn from the Admonitors own experience. For I let
pass (says he) that experience teaches that men of stubbornness, will not
shun the company of them that be excommunicated, etc. and that they must be
excommunicated Bishoply excommunication has many deformities
for keeping of company with them. And so it will fall out, that more will be
excommunicated, than in communion; but this last consequence (say I) cannot
follow, unless he first presuppose both his Antecedents to be true: And
therefore because he must needs be intended to have spoken of that kind of
excommunication, whereof he has had experience, it follows that these
deformities, and inconveniences whereof he speaks, must needs be found in
that excommunication, which he and his use. For of the other kind of
excommunication, he never yet had any experience: And then by experience he
could not speak. If he spoke not of his own experience, but of the experience
of some other men, then have we but little cause to believe him, because we
know not what manner of persons those were, from whom he drew his argument of
experience, and whether they reported deceitfully, or truly of their own
experience, or no.

And if this argument drawn from the experience of his own manner of
Discipline, be of sufficient validity to impugn (as he weaneth) that
Discipline by excommunication; which so much (as he says) is cried for, and
whereof as yet he never had experience, By discipline of Bishoply
excommunication one may be a community
how much more effectual then is this argument to overthrow that his own
manner of Discipline, which he so long time to so small profit, and with so
great inconveniences, and deformities, has so unprofitably practiced? For can
there be any greater deformity, than that one member should be supposed to be
the whole body, or that one man should make a community? And yet this
deformity, by his experience, may fall out to be seen even under that
discipline, which every Ordinary exercises. For if by process, Ex mero
officio, an Ordinary should excommunicate any one of his jurisdiction, for not
communicating with an idol Minister, or for holding that Christ in his soul
did not descend into hell, or for denying reading to be preaching, and withal
should pronounce all them to be men of stubbornness, which would shun the
company of him so excommunicated. And for that cause also should excommunicate
them, as is here supposed lawful to be done, were it not a clear case that
the body of that Church must now be taken to consist only in the person of the
Ordinary, and one member to become the whole body? For if all under his
jurisdiction were once excommunicated, how could then any be in communion with
him: And if they all were once excommunicated, must not the Ordinary then
alone be the common union, and so make a community? And what a deformed kind
of excommunication, then is that kind of excommunication, whereby it may fall
out, that to be one, is to be many, and that to be a Church, a company, a
society, and a fellowship, is to be one? of which nature, and of which kind
that manner of excommunication, which by Pastors and Elders is to be
executed, cannot be as has already been proved. If then excommunication now
used be a deformed kind of discipline, and therefore, as we say, to be no more
tolerated, and if excommunication by Pastors and Elders, be a kind of
discipline for the inconvenience thereof, (as he says) not to be planted: what
manner of discipline by excommunication The Admonitor would have no
excommunication at all
would he have in these days, trow we? would he have none at all? verily I
suppose none at all. For so do his words plainly insinuate, by two reasons
following: First (says he) the looseness of these days, require discipline
of sharper laws by punishment of body, and danger of goods, which they do,
and will more fear, than they will excommunication: Secondly, we have (says
he) a good manner of discipline, by the Ecclesiastical commission which does
much good, and would do more, if it were more common. But why did he not speak
plainly, and why did he not affirm devoutly, that discipline by
excommunication, was good where the Church was in persecution, and that it is
not necessary, nor so convenient under a Christian Magistrate as it may be
otherwise? For if Pastors and Elders were appointed joint officers, only for
times of persecution, and not to be under Christian Princes, it follows
(these joint officers ceasing) that all accessories, appendices, and
consequences, of their joint offices must also cease, unless it can be proved
out of the holy Scriptures, that the offices of Pastors ought still to
continue, and that the Offices of Elders ought not to continue; because the
offices of Elders, with all their appendices, have been translated by our
Savior Christ unto Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, their Chancellours,
Commissaries, and Officials. For unless these Officers be Christ's Officers,
the discipline which they use cannot bind the consciences of the people of God.
And for this cause is it very probable, that he so commends discipline of
sharper laws, and discipline by the Ecclesiastical commission. For if these
officers, by their discipline have not to do with the consciences of men, then
is it no marvel that men fear not their discipline. And therefore if they
will be still officers, it is requisite, that they call for such a discipline,
as might cause men to stand in awe of their authority. But were they indeed
the officers of God, and had they indeed the authority from God, to execute
discipline by excommunication, as Pastors and Elders did in the Primitive
Church; then were the looseness of this age never so great, yet that the
children of God in England would more fear the loss of goods, lands, bodies,
or lives, than the censure of Gods officers is one of the Admonitors paradoxes.
And here I appeal the consciences of all the reverend Bishops and Prelates in
the land, and let them answer me hardly, if they judge themselves to be the
children of God, and had seven times seven thousand lives, whether they had not
rather seven thousand times be committed to the Jailer of Winchester, than once
be delivered over, to the Jailer of Hell. And are not all the children of God
in England their brethren? And are they not all led by one and the self same
spirit? And how then can they less fear excommunication (which is a deliverie
of the soul to Satan) than the punishment of body and danger of goods? And
yet touching this point of Excommunication, he seems to be against himself,
for in the 137. page, he tells us that happily it may be a fault, yea and a
great fault that is found with the bishops in these days, that they do not
excommunicate the Prince and Rulers, and so constrain them to do that, which
by persuasion they will not do. If then excommunication be so terrible to
Princes and Rulers, how should it be of so light account with subjects? And if
it be so powerful as it can constrain Princes and Rulers to do their duties,
how much more fearful would it be, to compel inferiors, and men of low
estate, to live soberly in their vocations? I will not here debate the matter
touching the excommunication of Princes and Rulers; much less touching the
excommunication of the Prince and Rulers of our land. But I would gladly be
informed, what they were, or who they be, that found great fault with the
Bishops in these days, for not endeavoring to excommunicate the Prince and
Governors?

The Papists, they think it sufficient, that the Prince and Governors, be
excommunicated by the Pope, and his Clergy. The Ministers, and people
professing the Gospel, and seeking for reformation of excommunication, deny
the Bishops to have any divine power granted by the Word of God, to
excommunicate a private man, much less do they think it lawful for them to
excommunicate the Prince and Rulers: Who then (I say) find fault with the
Bishop^, that they do not excommunicate the Prince and Governors, and so
constrain them to do that which by persuasion they will not do? For my part I
cannot guess, whom he should mean, unless he meant to give us to understand,
that some Prelatists have consulted about the excommunicating, both Prince and
Governors, for not making sharper Laws, against such, as whom the Prelates,
and their favorites, have falsely slandered, to be pestilent fellows, movers
of sedition, enemies to Caesar, troublers and subverters of the state; Act. 24.
5. Act. 1. 16. 20. 17. 6.
Puritans, and I wot not what chief maintainers of the sect of the
disciplinarians; unless (I say) he should mind some such Prelatists, I can not
guess any subjects within the land, to be so undutifull, as to find fault
with the Bishops, for not attempting to bring our Late Sovereign Lady the
Queen deceased, to their excommunication. And therefore to inform the people
of an Author, and not to bring him forth, it argues and breadeth great
suspicion that Excommunication touches them only which make profession to be
of the Church.
the enformer was the Author himself. Touching the looseness of some or of
all in these days, that are without the Church, if he intend that they
require Discipline of sharper Laws, by punishment of body, and loss of goods,
than excommunication, and that they will more fear that manner of punishment,
I hold, and affirm therein as he holds, and affirms, and yet (I say) that
to the matter in question, he has fitted no other answer, than as if he had
answered, a poke full of plummes, or a Buchet full of Pears, (for the
controversy is not concerning those that are without, but concerning those
that are within: not touching those, that are not of the household, but
touching them that are of the household of faith and of God.) As for the first
sort of which people, the Reverend Bishops with good leave, may procure what
sharp punishment, they can devise, for by the Church excommunicated they should
never be.

For how should any be thrust from the communion of the Church, who never were
in the communion with the Church? But it is to be feared, that this sharpness
of punishment, is not urged so much to be inflicted upon them, that are
without, as upon them, that are within the bosom of the Church. For though
such, as be without, did a long time scorn, and set naught by the sword of
excommunication, which was not only drawn out, by the Chancelours,
Commissaries, and Officials: for every crust of bread, and for every piece of
Bacon, but also, which was again put up, for every cracked grote, and for
every IRISH harper; the Reverend Bishops whose freehold by such contempt, was
not touched, were pacified, and contented themselves well enough by inflcting,
and releasing that manner of punishment, but now for so much as they perceive
the Children within the Church, to begin seriously, and religiously to stand
against the use of Lordly and humane censures for the Crown and Scepter of our
Savior Christ, and that the stateliness of Prelacy, must be taken one hole
lower, if the simplicity of the holy ministry be exalted a degree higher,
they pretend Discipline by excommunication, which is the sword of the Son, and
heir of God, to be too bluntly pointed, and too badly edged, to foyne, or to
strike withal.

Touching that very good manner of Discipline by the Ecclesiastical
commission, which he says has done and does daily much good, and would do
more, if it were more common, the people whom he admonishes, have just cause
of being desirous to understand what manner of Discipline it is, which is so
highly commended. Not one manner of Discipline used by the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners.
For all men know, that the Ecclesiastical Commissioners use not in all
places, and at all times one and the self same manner of Discipline. For the
same Commissioners, for the same kind of offenses, sometimes suspend, sometimes
deprive, sometimes degrade, sometimes excommunicate, sometimes fine, sometimes
impr^son, sometimes command this penance, and sometimes that. Nay sometimes
having convented before them, grave, Learned, and godly Ministers, for crimes
supposed to be Ecclesiastical, and for the same pretensed Ecclesiastical
offenses, having detained them some years in durance, This Discipline was
practiced against Master Cart-Wright, Fenner, Whight, L. Snape, and others.
for refusal of the oath ex officio: in the end not having any other supposed
just cause of inflicting any punishment upon them, by Ecclesiastical
authority, have been forced, for a show, to maintain their own credits, to
cause accusations to be framed against them, by the Queens Attorney in the
High Court of Star Chamber, as against violators of the dignities of the Royal
Crown, whose innocencies by the very witnesses produced by their means on the
behalf of the Queen, have notwithstanding been fully cleared from the faults
objected, and the Ministers discharged, without any ordinary Ecclesiastical
Discipline used by the high Commissioners against M. Vdall.
punishment usually inflicted by that Court upon malefactors. Nay further, when
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners had committed Master Vdall to prison, where
he remained half a year, for refusal of the oath ex officio, touching his
knowledge of the Author of a Book, entitled The Demonstration; in the end he
was delivered over as a fell on for making of the same book, and for the which
he was arraigned, and convicted, and so died in prison: notwithstanding our
Sovereign Lord, King James, then King of Scotland, had Graciously written for
his deliverance. And how then would the Admonitor have the people contented
with such a moderation of Ecclesiastical discipline, as the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners ma^y times use? For did he think that every manner of discipline
used by the High Commissioners can not be, but a very good An oath tendered by
the Ecclesiastical Commission unto M. V. dall in case of Felony.
moderat^on? Why then let some of the Commissioners, tell the people whether
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners used a very good moderation, and manner of
Discipline Ecclesiastical against the same Master Vdall, when they tendered
unto him a corporal oath, to have appeached himself upon a matter which was
adjudged to be Felony? or let them declare, what a very good manner of
discipline Ecclesiastical, certain Ecclesiastical Commissioners used, when
having a Gentleman before them, wearing long hair, they constrained the same
Gentleman, by force, and strong hand, to have his head notted in their
presence? The wearing of long hair, by our Laws being not reputed an
Ecclesiastical crime, no although the same be worn by attendants upon the
Reverend Bishops, waiting on their Trenchers. Or let them signify unto us,
what a good manner of discipline, and moderation it was for a Bishop and his
associates, to make an act, in the High Commission Court, repugnant to the
Institution of our Savior Christ, and contrary to the order The Minister
authorized, to put sacramental bread into the mouth of a Communicant.
appointed by the Book of Common Prayer, that the Minister should put the
Sacramental bread inro the mouth of a superstitious communicant, and not
deliver it into his hands? After our hearty commendations (says the Bishop and
his associates) whereas I. V. one of your charge, has been often convented
before us Her Majesty's Commissioners, in causes Ecclesiastical, for not
receiving the holy Communion, it seems unto us, that he has not of any
contemptuous mind, refrained from the same, but is willing to receive it, and
so has bound himself, saving that he has a scruple in his mind by reason
of a fond vow, or promise he made long ago (whereof he is sorry) never to
receive the Sacrament into his hand, but to put it into his mouth by the
Minister? And therefore we pray you to bear a time, with his weakness, and
permit him to receive it in that sort, until by your good counsel, and
persuasion, he may be reduced from that fond scruple. And so we bid you
heartily farewell.

Your loving friends, etc.

And seeing the Admonitor has opposed a very good manner of Discipline, by the
Ecclesiastical commission against excommunication, it seems that
excommunication in his judgment, is no Master Excommunicated by the High
Commissioners, most whereof were lay men.
good or moderate discipline, to be used by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners.
And then were it fit, that the people were resolved, what a very good manner of
Discipline Master D. W. and other Ecclesiastical Commissioners used against
Master E. whom by virtue of the Ecclesiastical commission they excommunicated?
The tenor of which excommunication, taken out of the Register at L. follows.
In Dei nomine, Amen. Nos I. W. Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, etc. Cancellarius
ecclesiae, etc. M. A. M. Armigeri, and M. H. civis civitatis, etc. Commissarij
rite, and legitime procedentes, I. E. de B. L. Dioceses ad hos diem and locum
legitime, and peremptory citatum, and praecognizatum, diuque expectatum, and
nullo modo comparentem, pronunciavimus contumacem, and in poenam contumaciae
suae hujusmodi cum excommunicavimus in hijs scriptis.

Concordat cum Regio. T

Moreover it seems not an unmeet thing, that some Ecclesiastical Authority
committed to Pursevants by the Ecclesiastical commissioners. If the Queen had
specially commanded this search, it is credible, that her privy Counssellors
should have set to their hands rather than the High Commissioners.
Commissioners, did make known unto the people, whether banishment be an
Ecclesiastical Discipline; and what moderate discipline Ecclesiastical the
Commissioners used when they banished religious Master Fullerton the Scot, from
dwelling at Warwick, or within certain Miles thereof, Or let them i^fo^me the
Realm, what a very good moderation was used, when by the Ecclesiastical
Commission, for suppressing of Martines Books, and other books of argument,
against the Hierarchy, they authorized drunken and swearing Pursevants, to
search men's houses, and to break up their chests, etc. the Copy of which their
Letters is this, viz. Whereas the bearer is (say they) by the Queens Majesty
especially appointed, to make search, and to apprehend, certain suspected
persons, according to such particular directions, as he has in that behalf
received, these shall be to will, and require, and in her Majesty's Name
strairly to charge and command you, and every of you, to whom these shall
appertain, to be by all good and possible means, ayding, and assisting to the
bearer in the execution of this service, by entering into all such houses, as he
shall think meet, and hold suspected, as well within liberty as without, and
that in them, and every of them, to make due, and diligent search. And to
search all manner of writings, letters, papers, books, and all other things
carrying note of suspicion, sparing no studies, chests, cubbares, locks, or
walls, as also to apprehend, examine, and bring before us, such persons, as by
Her Majesty's said direction, therein appointed, and wherein if he shall any
way require your further assistance, you may not fail, to yield him the same,
with all diligence, and dexterity, according to the trust reposed in you, as
you will answer for your default, for the contrary at your uttermost peril.
Directed unto all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and quorum, Baylifes,
Constables, Hedboroughes, Tything-men, and to all other Her Majesty's Officers,
and Subjects, etc. But be it that all these manners of Disciplines, were
moderate, and good Ecclesiastical Disciplines, and more to be used, yet there
may a scruple remain, which were fit to be discussed, what a very good
moderation, and manner of Discipline, within our remembrances, was used,
between an Archbishop, and a Bishop, both high Commissioners, against certain
Gentlemen, and one of their Wives, about these Articles following.

Articles objected by her Majesty's High Commissioners, for causes
Ecclesiastical against G. B. of B. and F. B. of B in the County of L.
IN primis, We object unto you G. B. and L. your wife, that you have within
these seven years, and so at this present, do keep company, and use
conference with diverse persons, disobedient to her Majesty's laws, and such
as be suspected to resort and frequent, unlawful Conventicles.

Item, we object unto you, to the end you might the better insinuate your
selves into their companies, you Quere, whether this convention were lawful,
for this cause. Quere, against what law this entertainment was, and whether the
Bishop of L. conversing with Popish Priests and traitors, did not more offend.
have tabled and boorded with the same parties, and that you or one of you,
have been heretofore convented for the causes aforesaid, before the now Lord
Archbishop his grace, for entertaining into your house a person which stood
then, and yet standed suspended, and deprived, for disliking the Book of
Common Prayer, and other godly orders established by Her Majesty's authority in
this Realm.

Item, We object unto you the said G. B. and L. your Wife, that you have not
frequented divine service, celebrated within your Parish Church of Bothese vi.
5. 4. 3. 2. or one years last, nor do not at this present; at least every
Sunday, nor have received the holy Communion within your said Parish Church
during the said years.

Item, that you the said G. B. and L. your Wife within the time aforesaid,
have not Christened, nor baptized Quere, whether the Bishop did not more offend
the law of God by preferring these artioles, than the Gentleman did by
procuring his children to be Baptized by a preaching Minister having none at
home.
your Children within your Parish Church, but contrary to the form, and order
of Her Majesty's Laws in that case provided, have either christened them at
home privately in your own house, or have carried, or caused them to be
carried to other Churches. And let them declare what Church, and what Minister
did baptize them, and where, and whether the same Minister, did at the same
baptism, sign the child with the sign of the Cross, and let them declare
the cause, why they did baptize their children out of the Parish.

Item, that the Ministers pevv or seat in the Church of B. aforesaid, by the
direction of the L. Reverend Father Note that the bishop of L. was not bishop
of the Diocese.
in God the Bishop of London that now is, being at the same Church, as also by
the consent of the Minister, and Churchwardens there, was placed in a very
convenient place of the Church, to the end the Parishioners there might the
better hear, and understand the Minister, at the time of reading the divine
service.

Item, We object unto you, that you the said F. B. within these vi. or 3.
months last past, have without any sufficient vvarrant, or commandment from
the Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London or his Clancelour, or other having
authority therein, very disorderly, and contemptuously, removed the same seat,
to the great offense of the Parishioners, and bad example of others.

Item, We object unto you, that you know, believe, or have heard say that Za.
G. is a Preacher of the Word of God, and a man of good life, and conversation,
and lawful Parson of B. aforesaid.

Item, We object unto you, that the premises notwithstanding, you the said F.
B upon a Sunday, within a quarter of a year, last past, when the Parishioners
of B. were assembled together, at the said Church to hear Divine Service,
caused diverse serving men, and others to sit in the Pevv or place, which
properly belonged to the Parson of the said Church: so that when the said M.
G. came to take his place, they thrust him, and very disorderly in the time of
Prayer, kept him out of the said place.

Item, We object unto you F. B. that about six years past you the said F.
brought into the town of B. a bastard child, as it is credibly thought of your
own, and there placed it at nurse, and have lately received it into your own
house, to the great offense of the inhabitants there, and the bad example of
others. Et obijcimus cum duobus and de quolibet. Subscribed, etc.

Whereunto in the foot of these Articles was added.

Master B. I pray you let this matter be followed ex officio, and the parties
presently to be sent for, by warrant. Subscribed, etc.

Now these Gentlemen, according to the Bishops direction, being presently sent
for by a Pursevant, to answer the Articles objected, they forthwith make their
repair to the Archbishop, with a Copy of the Articles, with whom they find
such grace, as in their beh^lfe immediately he writes to the Bishop as
follows.

SAlutem in Christo, My very good Lord, I have by means received these
Articles enclosed, signed by your Lordships hand, and can not but greatly
marveile, that contrary to the orders of the Commission Court, subscribed by
your self, and the rest of the Commissioners, Note that the sign of Cross in
Baptism by an Archbishops opinion is but of small moment, and that suspicion
of bastardy may easily be dismissed. Note that the 17. of October was the
Sabath day, at what time Arch* D. C, and D. B. sitting as Commissioners, the
Arch. took pen and ink, and crossed the Articles all overthwart, and so sent
them back with his Letter.
you would cause a Gentleman of such a quality, as Master B. is to be sent for
by a Pursevant, before the ordinary process of a Letter missive were served
upon him, especially for matters of so small moment. Neither will it be thought
to proceed of any just cause, but rather of some other misconceite, when it
shall be understood that there is a controversy in Law elsewhere depending,
between him and a kinsman of yours. And therefore for the avoiding of his
further complaint and other offense, that may grow thereby, I heartily pray
your Lordship to suppress the same, and proceed no further therein. Desiring
you withal to have due consideration of the cause, lest I be enforced to deal
likewise, in the defense of my kinsman, as you do for yours. And so praying
your Lordship to return unto me answer hereunto, and what you mean to do,
with my very hearty commendations I commit you to the tuition of Almighty God.
From, etc. the 17. of October, etc. Subscribed etc. Unto which Letter also was
added as follows. Master B. I pray you according to the tener of this Letter,
to see that this cause of M. G. and F. B. be dismissed from thence, and if any
be bound to prosecute the cause against them, let them understand that I mean
to hear it at, etc. otherwise let it wholly be dismissed, and the bands
delivered.

The Bishops Answer to the Archbishops former Letters.
MAy it please your Grace to understand that I was the more willingly drawn,
to send for M. B. in that sort, because he was often, and of long time accused,
not only to be a disordered man himself, but also a great and open
maintainer, and carier from place to place of that wrangling Puritan, VV. And
as it is to be proved, a refrainer from his Church, and from the Communion, as
I am informed. And therefore if we have omitted any circumstance or ceremony,
it is in zeal of the redress of such a disorderly person. Which if it should
be found in your own brother, I think your grace would not spare him.
Nevertheless if you your self take it in hand, to his redress, I for my part
shall be entreated, so that the man be amended, who has carried himself
cutragiously, both in that, and other things. And so referring the whole matter
to your graces discretion, I take my leave, praying God to bless us, in the
peace of the Church. From, etc. the 17. of October, etc.

Your Graces most assured in Christ, etc.

Whatsoever special cause might move these two great Prelates, to stand either
of them, for the defense of his kinsman, is not a thing material to this
Treatise. But this honestly enough may be averred, that it is no very good nor
moderate kind of ecclesiastical discipline, either for the Archbishop and his
associates, in regard of his kinsman presented to a benefice by the Gentleman,
to cancel the articles of his colleague, and fellow commissioners: or for the
Bishops upon a spleen taken against the Gentleman, for standing upon the right
of his patronage, against his kinsman, to violate the public orders, of the
high commissioners, whereunto he himself had subscribed.

Many other forms of ecclesiastical discipline of late years have been used
by the high commissioners: But whether they were all very good, and moderate
disciplines or no is greatly doubted, by many wise, learned, and godly men. And
namely it is doubted, whether such ecclesiastical commissioners, as by letters
patents, under the great Seal of England were authorized from the Queen, to
exercise, use, occupy and execute, all manner of jurisdiction, privileges,
and preeminences concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, be
able to prove unto the Realm, that they had lawful power and authority, by
the statute of 1 Eliz. c. 1 or by the Queens letters patents made according to
the true intent of that statute, or by any other law or statute of the Realm
to depute and substitute any other person under them, to use, exercise and
execute any part of that jurisdiction ecclesiastical, which by virtue of that
statute and letters patents, was committed only to their fidelities and
discretions. And whether it were a very good manner of ecclesiastical
discipline which was used, exercised, and executed either by the person so
deputed, or by the Commissioners themselves, upon any process or proceedings
made by the said person substituted. Again, it is doubted whether it were a
good manner of Ecclesiastical discipline, for the high Commissioners to
command the Magistrates Ecclesiastical di^cipline against the^^ Magistrates of
Banbury
of the town of Banburie, at the suit of certain popish companions to reset
up a Cross, which by virtue of the Queens injunctions, they had peaceably,
and lawfully pulled down. It is also doubted, whether it were a very good
manner of Ecclesiastical discipline for the high Commissioners, to detain
Master More one year or two in prison, depriving him also from his living, for
his confident asseveration that William Summers with diverse others in
Lancashire were possessed, and that Master Dorrell was not an impostor.

The occasion of the Admonitors great commendation, of a very good manner of
ecclesiastical discipline, used by the high Commissioners, has necessarily
drawn me, to show the differences of the disciplines used by the same. To the
intent the Kings Highness might be pleased with the advice of his Parliament,
to consult, whether it were not more agreeable to the good laws, statutes, and
customs of the Realm, and more convenient, for the good government of the
Church, to have one certain form and rule of Ecclesiastical discipline, to
be established, and to be used, by the high Commissioners; rather than thus at
random, to suffer their only discretion, to be the Mistress of all
Ecclesiastical discipline; especially sithence without any manner of appeal,
or supplication to be made from them unto the King, they use what manner of
discipline soever seems good in their own eyes, whether moderate, or
immoderate, Civil or Ecclesiastical, without check or controlement. Than the
which there cannot seem any thing more prejudic^all and burdensome unto the
people.

ADMONITION. Page 8^.

Further more the^r whole drift, as it may seem, is to bring the government of
the Church to a Democracie or Aristocracie: the principles and reasons whereof,
if they be made once by experience familiar in the minds of the common people,
and that they have the sense and feeling of them, it is greatly to be feared,
that they will very easily transfer the same to the government of the common
weal For by the same reasons they shall be induced to think that they have
injury, if they have not as much to do in civil matters, as they have in
matters of the Church, seeing they also touch their commodity and benefit
temporally as the other does spiritually, and what hereof may follow, I leave
to the judgment of other.

ASSERTION.
Let it be granted, that their whole drift is to bring the government Book of
common prayer, title communation and confirmed by 5 and 6 Ed. 6. c 1. prim.
Eliz. c. 2, 8 Eliz, c, 1, Aristocracie in the Church not hurtful to the common
wealth,
of the Church to that manner of government which the learned call
Aristocracie, what incommoditie should the Church or common weal receive by
such a government? when as the same government is not only authorized by the
holy law of God, but also commended unto us by the desires and wishes of sundry
acts of Parliaments. For says the book of Common prayer, the Discipline of
the Primitive Church, is greatly to be wished. Aristocracie therefore, and the
discipline of the Primitive Church, differing but in name, and not in nature,
it cannot be hurtful to the common weal, that the principles and reasons
thereof should by experience be made familiar in the minds of the common
people; nay it cannot but be beneficial unto the common weal, when the same
shall understand, that the best observers of the law of God, and the best
friends unto God and his people, are to be the Officers in the house of God.
Neither is their whole drift, to be disliked, but to be commended, that labor
to bring the government of the Church from a Papal Prelacie, to a Christian
Aristocracie: the one viz. Aristocracie, according to the interpritation of the
name Aristocracie in the Church optimatum, Praelacia pessimatum potestas.
thereof, being optimatum potestas, a power of the best observers of the law;
the other, viz. Prelacie, according to their practice, being pessimatum
potestas, a power of the worst observers of the law: the first derived from the
law of God, and practice of Gods people; the other reduced from the laws and
customs of the Gentiles and idolatrous Priests. And this of necessity, in
defense of the truth, the Admonitors argument, forces me to speak; for by an
implication of the dislike of bringing the government of the Churches by
Pastors and Elders, to a Democracie or Aristocracy, he has by consequence,
disclaimed and disavowed the government of the Church by Prelacie, to be any of
those two. And what other government then should we think Prelacie to be, but
either Oligarchie, or Tyranny? For neither Monarchy may it be, neither
Prelacie either Oligarchie or tyranny.
Policy, or political estate can it be: and other kind of government besides
these there is not any. For my part, I more charitably judge of the government
of the Church by prelacie, than to match it with Tyranny. And although the
Admonitor, and the perusers and allowers of his book, were men in their
generation wise, yet had they well weighed the nature of the government of
Oligarchie, they would rather in this argument, have been silent, than upon
disclaim of Democracie, and Aristocracie, (governments both of them
commendable in their kind) have cast the commendation of their own government
of the Church by Prelacie, to so desperate an estate, as is the estate of
Oligarchie. Wherein if any do glory, because not many of the best, but some
few of the wealthiest, and richest sort do govern, then let him hearken and
consider, what (long since) was preached before Pope Urban the fifth, by one
Nicholas Orem, a man singularly commended for learning in his time. Amongst all
the regiments of the Gentiles, Act. and Mo. Nich. Orem his opinion of
Oligarchie.
none (says he) is more to be found, wherein is to be seen so great and
exceeding ods, than in the policy of Priests: Amongst whom one is drunken,
another is sterved, amongst whom some be so high, that they exceed all Nobles
and Princes of the earth; some again be so abased, that they are under all
rascals; and such a common wealth (says he) may well be called Oligarchie. But
Thomas Aquinas, he seems to set the di^commodities of Oligarchie a pin
higher: for (says he) as a Kingdom has in it the commodities Tho. Aquin.
what he thinks of Oligarchie. Aristocracie a good regiment.
of all other good regiments; of Aristocracie, that the Noblest and chi^fest
persons among the people, be taken to Council: of policy or political
estate, where an assembly of all estates is had, and when the very best of all
sorts, are chosen, to consult, and deliberate, of the public weal^: so does
Tyranny contain, and has in it all incommodities, and vices of all
naugh^inesse and corrupt regiments: of Oligarchie it borrows, that the most
wicked and corruptest men be Counselors, and that as it were a rout of
Tyrants do govern. The reasons and pillars of which Oligarchie, are
immoderatenesse, Oligarchie a corrupt regiment
excessivenesse, disparitie, and inequality, passing and beyond all mean and
measure. Now if our reverend Bishops shall show themselvea to be male contented
with me, as though out of the opinions of these learned men, I would gather
that the government of the Church by Prelacie, is one of he corruptest
governments; I am to desire them to have patience until hey shall plainly
demonstrate unto us, that the same is not Oligarchy. For if hereafter they
shall revoke their former disgraceful judgments, against the discipline by
Pastors and Elders, containing in it the very nature of true Aristocracie; and
wi^hall, instruct ^s better of the true nature of their own government of the
Church by Prelacie; they shall find us filyable to their opinion, so that it be
grounded upon the principles and reasons of truth. In the mean season (after
the fashion of the Admonitors manner of admonishing the people, we most humbly
beseech the King and Parliament to be informed, that it is greatly to be
feared (if Prelacy be Oligarchie) that the Prelates It is to be feared least
(by the example of Prelates) Oligarchie be brought in the commonweal
will endeavor, to transfer that manner of government, from the Church unto
the Commonweal. And that the Commonweal shall as miserably be rent, and
torn, with factions and uproares, as now the Church is disquieted by schisms
and divisions. For if only a few of the richest and welthiest sort, shall get
an head, and bear all the sway in the Commonweal, they shall think by the
Principles and reasons of Oligarchie, that they have inju^y, if they have not
as much to do in civil mattes, as the Prelates have to do in the matters of
the Church: And what hereof may follow, as the Admonitor leaves, so do I also
leave it to the judgment of other. Only if the way hereof already has been
trodden A caveat against Oligarchie.
out unto them, by some who have not written, nor spoken, but yet practiced the
principles and reasons of Oligarchie in the Commonweal, only then this I
say, and add as a Caveat, that the danger to come, is more heedfully to be
prevented. For like as in good harmony (to make the Music perfect) is
required a moderate, and proportionate inequality of voices; which, if it too
much exceed, takes away all the sweet melody, so by too much immoderate
inequality, or disparitie of Citizens, the Commonweal falls to ruin. But
why may not the Government of the Church by Prelacie, The government of the
Church by Prelacy, is not Monarchical.
be a Princely and a Royal Government? Indeed this question, if it should be
resolved, by the Rules and Principles of the Canon Law, I could hardly disprove
that government to be Princelike: for, (as has been said before) quilibet
Ordinarius in Diocoesi, est major quolibet Principe. Yea and every Bishop, by
the same Law, has as absolute a spiritual power, within his Diocese, as a
King has a temporal power within his Kingdom. But because that Law with the
rules and principles thereof, is, or ought to be discarded out of this
Kingdom, we will not wade in it. Only we say that the government of the
Church by Prelacy, cannot be any kind of Royal and Monarchiall government,
because Prelates have not like power spiritual, as Kings and Monarchs have
power temporal. For there was never yet lex regia, de Praelatorum spi^ituali
imperio, lata, qua Praelatis and in eos omne imperium suum, and potestatem, aut
Deus, aut Institut. de jure nature. gent and ci. Sed and quod.
populus Dei contulerit. And therefore where the people have made the fore said
regal Law, as there it is justly said, quodcunque Imperator per Epistolam
constituit, vel cognoscens decrevit, vel edicto praecepit, legem esse constat:
and quod Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem; So likewise, where there is no
such regal Law, made in the Church, there it is justly affirmed: quod Praelato
placuit, legis non habet vigorem; quodcunque Praelatus per Epistolam
constituit, cognoscens decrevit, vel canone praecepit, legem non esse constat.
And then how can every Prelate, or why does every Prelate, by his sole
authority, injoyne Canons, Articles, Injunctions, and orders, to be observed
as Laws, in all the Churches of his jurisdiction? If the Admonitor supposed
the government of the Church by Prelacy to be Monarchiall, because the Queen
was a Monarch, and that If the government of the Church by Prelacy be
Monarchical, the^ may the government by pastors be^ so to.
the Reverend Bishop governed under a Monarch; then what did he else, but put a
weapon into the hands of Pastors and Elders, to prove their government also, to
be Princely and Monarchiall? Because Pastors and Elders desire not to have that
manner of government, to be brought into the Church, otherwise than by the
Royal assent, Sovereign authority, and express commandment of Our most
Gracious King and Monarch. Besides, if any government may be therefore said to
be a Monarchy, because the same is derived from an earthly Monarch, how much
more than may the government of the Churches, by Pastors and Elders be
adjudged Monarchical, by reason the same is deduced from our heavenly and
everlasting Monarch. For the Reverend Bishops by their public M. Horn, bishop
of Winch. M. ^ewell, bishop of Sali M. Bilson, bishop of Winch.
preachings, and apologeticall writings testify, that power and authority to
ordain and depose Ministers; to excommunicate and to absolve; to devise and to
establish rites and Ceremonies in the Church; to define what is truth; to
pronounce what is falsehood; to determine what is schism; and to condemn what
is heresy: our Reverend Bishops (I say) confess this power, to be originally
decided, unto the true Bishops, and Pastors of the Church from the Kingly and
Sovereign power of our Savior Christ. By what name therefore soever the
government of Pastors and Elders in the Churches be called, there is no manner
of cause to dislike of the planting of that government in a Monarchy, because
the same is instituted by No cause for a Monarch to fear, that his Christian
subjects should have the sense of Aristocracy in Church government
the Monarch of Monarchs, who is able, and ready, to uphold the state of all
Monarchies in Commonweals, together with the state of Aristocracie in his
Church. Neither is there any cause for any Monarch in the world, to fear the
making of Christian common people, by familiar exp^rience, to have the sense
and feeling of the principles and reasons of Aristocracy.

For if a people have once submitted their necks to the yoke of Christ, they
can live a peaceable and godly life, under all kinds of powers, because they
know all kind of powers, to be the ordinance of God. But especially, there is
not, neither ever was, neither ever can there be, any cause for any King, or
Monarch of England, greatly (as the Admonitor insinuates) to fear, that the
common people, will very easily transfer the principles, and reasons
Aristocracie, to the government of the Commonweal; and thereupon be induced
to think that they have injury, if they have not as much to do in civil
matters, as they have in matters of the Church, seeing they also touch their
commodity and benefit temporally, as the other does spiritually. And certes it
seems that the Admonitor was drawn very dry of reason, when he was feign to
pluck this stake from the hedge, to make a fire, and to kindle the wrath of
the Magistrate, against the form of Discipline, by Pastors and Elders. For
whether he intends that the Pastors and Elders will think themselves to have
injury, if they deal not in all causes of the Commonweal, as well as in all
causes of their Churches; or whether he meant, that the common people, w^ll
easily transfer, the government of the Commonweal, from a Kingly Monarchy,
to a noble Aristocracie, there is neither soothnesse nor soundness in his
meaning. For sithence the Lea^ned Ministers against the reverend Pastors
disclaim to deal in civil matters
Bishops by the holy rules of our faith, maintain that it is not lawful for a
M^nister of the Gospel, to exercise civil Magistracy, and that it is not
lawful for the man of God, to be entangled with the affairs of this life;
how is it probable, that those Ministers, will easily oppugn their own
knowledge, by their own contrary practice? Or how is it probabl^, that they
would overleade themselves with that burden, to ease the Church whereof they
have contentedly exposed themselves into a number of reproaches, contempts,
bytings, and persecutions? As for that other intendment of ^he Admonitors, that
it is g^eatly to be feared, that the common people will easily transfer
Monarchy, unto Democracie, or Aristocracy, if the principles and reason
thereof, by experience, were made familiar in their m^nds: this reason (I say)
might seem to carry some show of affr^ghting a Monarch, if the same were
insinuated unto a King, whose people were never acquainted with the Principles
and reasons of Democracy, or Aristocracy: but this fear being insinuated unto
our late Sovereign Lady the Queen, whose people ever since the time they
first began to be a people, have had their wits long exercised, The people of
England have their wits exercised with the sense of Democracy and Aristocracy
with the sense and feeling, of the reasons and principles, as well of
Democracy, as also of Aristocracy, what sense had the Admonitor to urge this
fear? That in the Kingdom of England, the common people have already the
sense and feeling of the reasons and principles of Democracy cannot be denied.
For in every cause almost, as well of criminal, as civil justice (some few
only excepted) to be executed in the Commonweal, by the common laws of the
Realm, have they not some hand, and dealing in the same, by one mean or
other? Nay which is more, have they not the sense and feeling, of the making,
and unmaking their own laws in Parliament? And is not their consultations in
Parliament, a mere Democritall consultation? As much also there is to be
avowed, for the sense, and feeling of the reasons, and principles of
Aristocracy, to be already in the minds of the Peers, the Nobles, the Judges,
and other great men of the Realm. For are not the Wisest, the Noblest, and the
chiefest taken out of these, by the King, to be of his Counsel, and to be
Judges and Iusticers in his Courts? Yea, and is not their Assembly also in
Parliaments, a mere Aristocraticall assembly? And what translation then is
there greatly to be feared, out of the Church to be made into the Commonweal,
when the minds of all sorts of our common wealths men, be already seasoned,
with the things which he feare^h? And when the Commonweal is already seized
of the Principles and reasons, which he would not have familiarly known unto
it? Wherefore that the King, the Nobles, and Commons, may no more be feared,
with the strangeness of these uncouth, and unknown Greek names, of Democracy,
and Aristocracy, written in his book with great and Capital Letters; I have
thought it my duty, by these presents to inform them, that the government of
the Church by Pastors and elders now wanting amongst us, and desired to be
brought into the Church, by the Sovereign authority of our King, Nobles, and
Commons in Parliament (for the outward form and manner thereof) is none other
manner of Government, nor form of policy, than such as they, and their
Progenitors and Ancestors, for many hundred years together, without
interruption have used and enjoyed in the Commonweal. And that therefore it
will be a very easy matter, to transfer the same, to the government of the
The manner of Policy, by Pastors and Elders in the Church, is agreeable to the
government in the common weal. The government of the Church by prelacy,
disagreeable to the government used in the common weal.
Church. For by the reasons and principles of their own government, in the
Commonweal, and by the sense, and feeling thereof, they may well be induced,
to think, that they have injury, if they have not as much to do in matters of
the Church, as they have to do in matters of the Commonweal, seeing they
touch their commodity and benefit spiritually, as the other does temporally.
And withal on the other side, I shall do my best endeavor, to advertise them
that the government of the Church by Prelacy, is such a manner of Government,
as was never yet in the administration of justice by any subject (no not
touching the outward form thereof) once admitted into any part of
Commonweal: and that therefore the same (if it may please the King) will very
easily be sent, and transmarined unto Rome, whence it first came, and where it
had it original and birthright. And to the end, that we may clearly
discern, whether the nature of the Government of the Church by Prelacy, or the
nature of the Government, desired to be planted by Pastors and Elders, be more
agreeable to the nature of the policy, received and used both by the Nobles,
and common people, in the Commonweal; it is necessary that the manners and
forms, both of Prelaticall, and Pastoral Government, be made familiar unto
the mind of the Reader. And because we have already declared, the manner of
the election, and confirmation both of a Bishop, into his Episcopal See, and
of a Minister, into his Pastoral charge; what the one is by the Law already
established, and what the other, by a Law desired to be established, ought to
be, we will not any more speak of their entrance, into either of their
places, unless only (a little to recreate the Reader) we merely note what
answer some Bishops have made, when as long chasing after Bishoprics, they
have chafed in their minds, for fear of losing The answer of an Italian
Bishop, loath to lose his Bishopric.
their prey: as was the answer of that Italian Bishop, who being thrice
demanded of the Archbishop, (as the manner is) vis Episcopari? vis Episcopari?
vis Episcopari? and being willed by one standing by, thrice again to answer
(as the manner is) nolo, nolo, nolo. He making n^ bones at the matter,
answered aloud with an The answer of an English Bishop, having obtained his
congedelie^
oath, Proh Deum, dedine ego tot millia Florenorum, pro volo Episcopari, and
jam debeo dicere nolo? or as was the answer of that English Bishop, who having
promised a Courtier one annuitie of twenty pound, during his life, out of his
Bishopric, if he could procure the speedy fe^ling of his congedelier: within
a while after, when it was sealed, he rapt out an oath, and swear by Jesus God,
that the same Gentleman had done more for him, than an other great Courtier,
who before hand, for that purpose, had received from him one thousand marks:
But whether all Bishops buy their congedeliers dearer, or better cheap, is not
a matter incident to this treatise; only if they buy dear, they may happily
think with themselves, that they may sell dear, vendere jure potest, emerat
ille prius, sets not any price upon any wares in the Royal Exchange. But to
return The manner of the administration of spiritual Justice in the Church, by
Prelacy.
to our purpose, whence by occasion of those Bishoply oaths and answers, we
have a little digressed: let us see what is the manner and form, of the
administration of spiritual justice, in the government of the Church, by
Prelacy, as the same is ordinarily administered, in all places throughout the
Church of England. Wherein that we be not mistaken, it is to be understood,
that the manner of administration of justice, whereof we speak, is that
administration of justice only, which respects the punishment of crimes
Ecclesiastical to be inflicted by spiritual censures. In all which cases,
penances, suspension, and excommunications, in the Bishops consistory, proceed
from the judgment, and authority of the Bishop alone, if he be present, or
from the sentence and power of his Vicar general, or Commissary alone, and if
he be absent: Nay does not every such censure likewise in the Archdeacons
consistory, proc^ed from the sole authority of the Archdeacon? or if he be
absent, from the sole authority of his official? But if the like course of the
execution of Justice as this is, cannot be found, to be an o^dinary course of
Justice, in the Commonweal, where Justice is administered in criminal causes,
by the Ministry of a subject: I would feign learn, what prejudice may be
feared to redound unto the Common Weal, if the administration of spiritual
Justice (after a sort) were established, to be after the same manner in the
Church, after which civil Justice is already practiced in the Commonweal. I
said after a sort, to this end, least I should be mistaken. For the meaning is
not, that spiritual Justice should be ministered exactly, in No one subject in
the Common Weal, can alone exercise civil justice, in causes criminal.
every respect, after the manner of civil Justice, but the comparison stands
only in this; that, as not any one temporal subject alone has authority to
hear, to examine, and to judge any one criminal cause, in any Court of civil
justice, in the Commonweal; so likewise that any one spiritual person alone
should have authority, to be examiner and judge of any one criminal cause in
any Court of spiritual Justice in the Church. For if certain principal and
godly persons, associated unto a learned and zealous Pastor, in the presence,
and with the consent and authority of the people of every Parish, did enjoyne
penance, suspend, or excommunicate a spiritual The administration of
spiritual Justice, by pastors and Elders, agreeable to the execution of civil
justice in the Commonweal Master D. Bancroft what his assistants Letter, able
to repress puritans in one parish. D. Stanhope, alone to repress all in a
Diocese.
offender, were not this form of administration of spiritual Justice, more
consonant, agreeable, and conformable, to the daily execution of civil Justice
in the Courts of the Commonweal, than is the administration of spiritual
Justice, by the Bishop alone, or by his Vicar general alone, in his
Consistory? and to make this matter more familiar in the mind of the Reader,
for an instance or two let us suppose, that Master Doctor Bancroft Parson of S.
Andros in Holborne, had chosen Master Harsnet to be his Curat, and withal that
Master Dodge, Master Mercury, Master Flower, and Master Brisket, (all chief
attendants on his late great Lord and Master) were inhabitants within the same
Parish, and that the chief men, of the same Parish, had chosen those to be
assistants to him, and to his Curat, for the inquisition of the demeanours of
all the Puritans and Precisians within his Parish; let this (I say) be
supposed, would not he and they (trow we) think it a high scorn, and an
indignity to be offered unto their Masterships, in case it should be
insinuated, that Master Doctor Stanhope, were better able, with one little
blast of breath upon a piece of paper, to blow away all Puritanisme, out of the
City and Diocese of London, than these great Chapleins, and discreet
Gentlemen, with their thunderings, and with their lightnings, were able to
fright the same out of one poor Parish in HOLBORNE? And again, to make this
matter yet a little more familiar to the mind of the Reader, let us suppose
again that thundering Master Merbury now Lecturer in the Church of Saint Mary
Overis, were Pastor of the same Church, and had, to be his assistants in the
Ministry, but simple M. Butterton, and that they two, for the Elders of the
same Church, to be chosen by the Parish, had such, and such, and such men,
lovers of all honesty and godliness, and enemies unto all dishonesty, and
ungodliness; could not these learned and grave Ministers, with the assistants
of such wise and godly Borough-Masters, be as well able, to reform Papists,
Atheists, Swearers, prophaners of the Sabbath, drunkerds, adulterers, and such
like, within the Borough of Southwarke; as is Master Doctor Ridley, to bring to
any good amendment of life, all such kind of persons, within the whole Diocese
of Winchester? If the examination and judgment of all theeveries, pickeries,
burglaries, robberies, murders and such like, were committed to Master D^ctor
Ridley alone for the Diocese of Winchester, and to Master D. Stanhope alone
for the Diocese of London, were it not like, that for one such malefactor, as
there is now, we should shortly have an hundred? And therefore to hold us still
to the point in question, it is very plain and evident, that this manner of
spiritual justice, mentioned to be executed, by the Pastors and Elders, is
more correspondent to the administration of civil justice, in the
Commonweal, than is that manner of the execution of spiritual Justice, by
Doctor Stanhope, or Doctor Ridley; by the Bishop of London, or by the Bishop of
Winchester. For to begin with our meanest, and basest Courts, let them show
unto us, any Court, Leete, Law-dayes, Matters in Leets and Law days not
overruled by one alone.
or Sheriffs turns, within any County, City, Town, Borough, Village, or
Hamblet within the Realm, wherein matters of civil justice are heard,
examined, and adjudged by one man alone. If for the common benefit of the
Tenants against incrochments, over-laying of commons, wast, nuisances, or such
like, any pain is to be offered, or presentment made, the same is not set or
made, by the Steward, Sheriff, or other Officer alone, but by the common voice
and consent of all the homagers, and suitors to the Court. The Steward indeed is
the director, and moderator of the Court, the giver of the charge, and the
mouth of the whole Assembly, to pronounce and enact the whole work of their
meeting, but he is not the only inquisitor, the presenter, the informer, or
the Judge, to dispose all things according to his own discretion. Besides,
matters of the Kings peace, are not committed in any County, or other place
within the Realm, only to one Justice of the peace alone. For neither at the
general Sessions of the peace, nor at any other less public meetings, any
person, for any offense, Breaches of the Kings peace, not punishable by one
alone.
(whereof he stands indighted, or for which he is punishable) can be
fined, amerced, or bodily punished, at the discretion of one Justice alone, but
by the greatest part of the Justices assembled, his penalty is to be imposed
upon him. Furthermore, this manner of the examination of the fact, and
declaration of the Law, for the trial of the fact, and judgment of the Law,
does not reside in the breast of one Iuror or Judge alone. In the Court of the
Kings Bench, if a Prisoner he brought to the Bar, Justice in any of the B.
Courts, is not executed by one Judge alone
and confess not the Crime, by the Justice of that Court he can receive no
judgment, unless he be first indicted, by inquisition of twelve grand
Jurors at the least, and afterward again be tried by other twelve brought
judically into the Court face to face. Yea and in this Court, neither the
interpretation of the common Law, nor the exposition of any statute depends
upon the opinion, credit, or authority of one Judge, or not of the Kings chief
justice himself alone; for his other three brethren and Co-juges; varying from
him in point of law, may lawfully overruled the Court. The same manner of
Judgment, for the Law is in use, and is practiced by the Judges, in the Court
of common Pleas, and by the Barons of the Exchequer in the Latin Court of the
Exchequer. And not In the Courts of Equity are many assistants, Court of
requests,
only in these Courts of law and Justice, but also in all the Kings Courts of
equity and conscience; it is not to be seen that any one person alone, has
any absolute power, without assistants, finally to or^er, judge, and decree,
any cause appertaining to the jurisdiction of those Courts. In the Court of
Requests, there are not fewer than two, yea some times three, or four, with
Master of Requests in commission, to hear and determine matters of equity in
Court of Wards,
that Court. In the Court of Wards and liveries, there sits not only the
Master of the Wards, but also the Kings Attorney, the Receiver, and other
Officers of the same Court. In the Court of Court of the Chequer Chamber.
the Exchequer-cham^er, with the Lord Treasurer (who is chief and president of
that Council) yet with him as assistants, do sit the ^hancellour of the
Exch^quer, the Lord Chief Baron, High courts of Chancerie,
and the other Barons. Whatsoever d^cree final is made in the Kings high Court
of Chancer^e, the same is decreed, not by the Lord Chancellor alone, But by
the Lord Chancellor, and the high Court of Chancerie: wherein the Master of
the Roles, and the twelve Masters of the Chancerie as coadjutors, do sit and
give assistance. In the most honorable Court of Star Chamber, the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, and the president of the Court of
Star Chamber, 3 H, 7 c. 1, and 2, H, 8 c, 20,
Kings most honorable Council, and Keeper of the Kings privy Seal, or two of
them, calling unto them one Bishop, and one temporal Lord, of the Kings most
honorable Council, the two chief Justices of the Kings bench, and Common
pleas for the time being; or other two of the Kings Justices in their absence,
have full power and authority, to punish, after their demerits, all misdoers
being found culpable before them. If we search our statutes (besides the
Courts, and matters determinable in these spoken of before) we shall find,
that the complaints of error, whether it t^uch the King, or any other person,
made in the Exchequer, should be 31 E, 3 c, 21,
done to come before the Chancellor, and Treasurer, who taking to them two
Justices, and other sage persons, are duly to examine the business; and, i^
any error be found to correct and amend the 14, E, 3, c 5,
Roles, etc. By reason of delays of judgments, used in the Chancerie, in the
Kings bench, common bench, and in the Exchequer, it was assented, established
and accorded, that a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons chosen by the
Parliament, by good advice of the Chancellor, etc. shall proceed to take a
good accord and to make 10 K. 2 c. 1
a good judgment. When it was complained unto the King, that the profits etc.
of his Realm by some great Officers, etc, were much withdrawn and eloyned,
etc. it pleased the King, etc. to commit the surveying, as well of the estate,
of his house, etc. unto the honorable Fathers in God, William Archbishop of
Canterbury, 26 H. 6, b 11 H. 7 c. 25. c 19 H. 7 c. 7.
and Alexander Archbishop of York, etc. by a statute of commission for Sowers:
by a statute for punishment of perjurie: by a statute against making or
executing of acts, or ordinances, by any c Masters, being not examined; etc. by
the Lord Chancellor, d 27 H, 3, c. 27 c 32 H. c. 45. f 27 E c. 8
Treasurer, or chief Justices, etc. By a statute for the erection of the Court
of d Augmentation: by a statute for erection of the Court of first e fruits and
tenths: and lastly by an f act for redress of erroneous judgments in the
Court commonly called the Kings bench: By all these Statutes (I say) it is very
apparent, that the Administration of public affairs, in the common weal,
has never been usually committed, to the advisement, discretion, or
definitive sentence, of any one man alone. Which point is yet more fully, and
more perfectly Lord president, and council in Wales. Lord president and
council in the North parts. Lord Deputy and council in Ireland. The King and
his honorable privy Council. The King and his grand council in Parliament.
to be understood, by the establishment, and continuance, of the Kings Lord
President and Council of Wales; of the Kings Lord President and Council
established for the North; of the Kings L. Deputy and Council within the Realm
of Ireland; of the K. highness most honorable privy Council, chosen by him
for the assistance of his Royal person, in matters appertaining to his Kingly
estate; and lastly of the supreme and grand Council of the three estates in
Parliament, for matters concerning the Church, the King and the common weal.
For whether respect be had unto the secret affairs of the Kings estate,
consulted upon in his Highness Council Chamber, by his privy Councellers, or
whether we regard the public tractation of matters in Parliament, there can be
no man so simple, as not to know, both these privy and open negotiations, to
be carried by most voices of those persons who by the K. are called to those
honorable assemblies. And what a vain jangling then does the Admonitor keep,
and how idely and wranglingly does he dispute; when against the government of
the Church by Pastors and Elders, he objecteth, that the same will interrupt
the laws of the Realm: that it will be great occasion of partial and
affectionate dealing, that some will incline to one part, and that the residue
will be wrought to favor the other; and that thereby it will be a matter of
strife, discord, schism and heresies? Howbeit if never any of these
extremities and dangers, have fallen out in the common weal, by any partial
ot affectionate dealing of the Kings Deputies, Presidents, Judges, Justicers,
and other Officers and Ministers, associated unto them for the administration
of Justice, or equity in any of the Kings civil Courts; how much less cause
have we to fear any partiality, affection, working inclination, favor,
strife, debate, schismatic or heretical opinions, if once Pastors and
Elders in every Congregation, and not throughout a Diocese one Bishop alone,
had the spiritual administration of the Church cause? Can many temporal
Officers, Justicers and Judges, rightly and indifferently administer the Law,
and execute j^stice and judgment, without that, that some do incline to one
part, and without that the residue be wrought to favor the other part? And
cannot spiritual Officers dispatch spiritual affairs, without that, that
they be partially and affectionally disposed? What? is it so easy a matter
that the Ancients of God, and the Ministers of Christ, can the one part incline
to righteousness, and the residue be wrought to favor wickedness? can some
incline to God and unto Christ; and can other some be wrought to follow Satan
and Antichrist? For what other controversy, is requ^red to be decided by
Pastors and Elders, than the controversy of sin, between the soul of man,
and his God? And is there any Christian Pastor or Elder, that will be wrought,
rather to favor the sin of a mortal man, than the glory of his immortal
God? But to leave the state of the kingdom and common weal, and the good
usages and customs of the same; let us come to the state of the Church it
self, and to the lawful government thereof, established even amongst us at
this The government of the Church, ought not to be by one alone,
day.

For whatsoever our Reverend Bishops practice to the contrary, yet-touching
ordination and deposition of Ministers; touching excommunication and
absolution; touching the order and rule of Colleges, Cathedral Churches and the
Universities, the Ecclesiastical law does not commit the administration of
these things, and regiment of these places to any one person alone. The
Universities admit not the government of the Chancellor being present, nor of
his Vicechancellour The government in the Universities not by one alone. The
government in Colleges not by one alone.
(himself being absent) as of one alone, the Doctors, Procurators, Regents,
and non-Regents, have all voices, and, by most o^ their voices, the University
causes take success. The businesses of Colleges, by the statutes of their
founders, are commended to the industry and fidelity of the President,
Viceprovost, and Fellows; unto the Provost and Viceprovost, and Fellows; unto
the Warden, Sub-warden, and fellows; unto the Master and fellows; and unto
such like Officers and fellows. The Cathedral The government of Cathedral
Churches not by one alone,
Churches, their livings, and their lands, their revenues and their dividents,
their Chapiters, and their co^ferences, depend upon the will and disposition of
the Deane and Chapter, and not of the Bishop alone. Neither can the Bishop
alone, by any ancient canon law (pretended to be in force) place, or displace,
excommunicate, or absolve, any Ecclesiastical person, without the judgment of
the Chapter. Ex de exces. Prela. c. 2. Exc. de hiis quaes. cons. cap, c, novit
And as well by a statute, 21. H. 8. c. 13. as also by the book of consecrating
Archbishops, etc. the presence of diverse Ministers, and the people is required,
at the ordi^ation of every Minister. As for the deposition, or degradation of
Ministers (under the correction of the reverend Whether the degradation of a
Minister be warrantable Monsieur de ^ Iesis 164. in the 2 book of the Mass,
Bb. be it spoken) I think, they have not so much as any color of any law for
it. The form of the degradation of a popish and sacrificing Priest, by the
Canon law can be no pretext to degrade a Minister of the Gospel, because a
Minister of the Gospel is not set into his charge, per calicem, and patinam,
with a cup full of wine, and dish full of hosts: neither receives he any
character at all of a shaveling priest. And because a Minister of the Gospel,
is ordained only after that manner, which the statute law has appointed, how
should the ordination made by so high an authority, be undone by any other
power? unto the former manners, of the administration of the causes of the
Universities, Colleges, and Cathedral Churches, may be added the execution of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, committed The ecclesiastical Commission
exercised by many commissioners, and not by one.
heretofore by the Queen unto the Ecclesiastical Commissioners. For althought
by the words of the statute, her Highness had full power, and authority, by
her letters patents, to assign, name, and authorize, any one person, a natural
borne subject, to execute spi^ituall jurisdiction; yet nevertheless, according
to the laudable usages, and customs of her Kingdom, and courts temporal, she
evermore authorized, not one alone, but diverse and sundry, as well temporal as
Ecclesiastical persons, for the execution thereof. Which manner of The
ecclesiastical commission commanded by the Bishops if it please the King may
be enlarged unto all parishes wherein are godly preaching Ministers.
commission, because the reverend Bb. commend the same, and avow that it would
do more good, if it were more common, it cannot but seem to be a most grateful
thing, unto all good men, especially unto those reverend Fathers, if humbly we
beseech the king, that his highness would be pleased, to make it more common.
And therefore in the behalf as well of the reverend Bb. as of all the learned
and grave Doctors, and Pastors of every Church, we most instantly entreat our
most gracious Sovereign Lord the King, that where in any parish there shall
be found a learned preaching Minister, resident upon his benefice, that there
be would be pleased by his authority royal, under the broad Seal, to enable
him, and some other godly and faithful Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens,
Borough-masters, or other chief men of the same parish, to execute spiritual
justice against drunkards, adulterers, swearers, railers and such like
ecclesiastical offenders, inhabitants only within the same parish. For in this
case we say, as the reverend Bishops say, bonum quo communius, eo melius. If
any exception should be taken, or challenge made scoffingly, and with scornful
terms, against these lay parochians, as hereto fore has been used, against
Lay Elders, or lay-Aldermen No exception to be taken against lay Elders, to be
authorized by the king in every parish; sithence the King authorizeth
Lay Elders, in ecclesiastical commission.
(as they call them) let him that takes such exception, advise himself well,
and remember before he speak, that in speaking he control not the policy,
the practice, the wisdom, and the authority of our late Queen deceased, and
of our Sovereign Lord the King now reigning; who authorized, and does
authorize lay men to be Ecclesiastical commissioners. Which kind of lay men,
or lay Elders (as they call them) that they have joined in the exercise of the
chiefest censure of the Church, viz. excommunication, with Ecclesiastical
persons, has been already proved, by the sentence of excommunication
pronounced against E. by Master W. and his associates, whereof diverse were lay
men. Again if one lay Elder dwelling at Winchester, may call and associate
unto himself, one Ecclesiastical Elder, dwelling at S. Georges in Southwarke,
to excommunicate any parochian or Minister subject unto the Archdeacon of
Surrey, in what parish soever of the same jurisdiction the party shall dwell:
if it be lawful (I say) for every Ordinary to join one lay Elder, and one
Ecclesiastical Elder Discipline of excommunication exercised by one lay Elder
and one Ecclesiastical Elder.
together in commission, the one to pronounce sentence of contumacie, the other
to denounce sentence of excommunication, for every spiritual contumacie,
committed within his jurisdiction; what reason can any man pretend, why it
should not be much more lawful, for the King by his Royal authority, to
appoint a learned, and preaching Pastor, with the assistance of some company
of faithful inhabitants of the same parish, to exercise all manner of
spiritual justice within their own parish?

If the King shall stand in doubt, whether any Discipline by excommunication
be exercised, after this and this manner, in the Church of England, then to
put his highness out of all doubt hereof, may it please the King to consider
the precept of the reverend Bishops made in their convocation; together with
the practice of the venerable Archdeacon of Surr. following; The precept is
this; Vnusquisque Vicarius generalis, Officialis, seu Commissarius, qui ordines
ecclesiasticos non susceperit, eruditum aliquem presbyterum, sibi Arriculo pro
Clero c. de buibusdam circa excom: excessib: coercend. 1584
accerset, and associabit, qui sufficienti authoritate, vel ab ipso Episcopo,
in jurisdictione sua, vel ad Archidiacono (presbytero existente) in
jurisdictione sua munitus, idque ex praescripto jud^cis tunc praesentis,
excommunicationis s^ntentiam pro contumacia denunciabit. Every Uicar general,
Official, or Commissarie, which has not taken upon him ecclesiastical
orders, shall call and associate unto him some learned Presbyter, who being
armed with sufficient authority from the Bishop in his jurisdiction, or from
the Archdeacon, being a Presbyter in his jurisdiction, shall denounce, and that
by the prescript of the judge present, the sentence of excommunication for
contumacie. Now the manner of the practice of this precept, ensues in D. Hones
practice of the Bishops a^^icle.
these words: Johannes Hone, legum Doctor, Officialis venerabilis viri domini
Archidiaconi Surr. omnibus and singulis rectoribus, etc. salutem. Cum nos rite
and legitime procedentes, omnes and singulos quorum nomina, etc. in no^
comparendo coram nobis, etc. seu saltem in non satisfaciendo mandatis nostris,
etc. pronuncia verimus contumaces, ipsoque, etc. excommunicandos fore
decreverimus. Cumque discretus vir magister Roll. Allen presbyter, eosdem omnes
and singulos subscriptos, ex officio nostro excommunicaverit in scriptis,
justitia id exigente, vobis igitur committimus, etc. quatenus eos omnes, etc.
sicut profertur ex officio nostro mero excommunicatos fuisse and esse, etc.
palam denuncietis, etc Datum sub sigillo officialitatis nostrae, 19. Die
Decembris, Anno Domini, 1587. John Hone Doctor of the Laws, Official of the
venerable man, and Archdeacon of Surr. to all and singular persons etc.
greeting: Whereas we, otherwise rightly, and lawfully proceeding, all and
singular whose names are underwritten, in not appearing before us, or at
leastwise, in not satisfying our mandates, have pronounced contumacious, and
decreed them to be excommunicated: And whereas also the discreet man M. Rowland
Allen presbyter, one of our office, has excommunicated, all and singular under
written, justice so requiring, wherefore we charge you that openly you
denounce, and declare them, and every of them, so as aforesaid out of our
office to be excommunicated. Given under the seal of our officialitie. The
19. day of December. 1587.

By this practice, it does appear, that Doctor Hone and Rowland Allen canvaced
many poor men very piteously, and that this poor curate Rowland Allen, had a
warm service, to attend upon D. Hone, and to jerk those, whose points soever
he shall untie. But because this precept, was an article concluded upon by the
reverend Bishops in their convocation, and confirmed (as I suppose) by the
Royal authority of our late Queen, we will forbear, to speak what we
think, might justly be spoken, against the incongruitie thereof. Only this
without offense, to the reverend Bishops, we may safely demand: sithence every
ordinary, whether he be a Bishop, or a Presbyter, by this article of their
own device, has such an absolute power, resiant in his person, as that
thereby, thorowout his whole jurisdiction, he may thus commit, the execution of
Discipline, by excommunication, partly to one lay person, and partly to one
ecclesiastical person, partly to a supposed spiritual elder, and partly to a
Lay elder: sithence (I say) this is so; we may safely demand, what reason they
can produce, to hinder the King, from having authority to command three, or
four, The K. has as good right to command, excommunication, to be exercised
by a Pastor and Elders, as the Bb. have to commit the same to a Curate, and one
lay Elder.
or (if occasion serve) five or six lay elders (as they call them) and one
spiritual pastor, being a true spiritual elder in deed, all lawfully chosen
ecclesiastical Officers in the house of God, that they jointly should not
execute the discipline of Christ, viz. excommunication and other censures of
the Church, in every parish within his kingdom? If it be answered, that in
this case, the Presbyter alone does excommunicate, is it not, as if one should
say, that the executioner does give judgment when at the commandment of the
Judge, he smites off the head, or casts down the ladder? or may not as much
be said, for the execution whereof we speak, that the Pastor only should
excommunicate, when by virtue of his office, with the consent, and not by the
prescript of the elders associated unto him, he should declare and pronounce
the party to be excommunicated? but let it be granted that Rowland Allen,
denounces the lesson which is written in the paper, for him to read; yet it is
clear by the precept, that the same must be done, by the prescript of Doctor
Hone, Besides Doctor Hone, he cites, he precognizateth the parties, and they
being absent, he pronounces them contumaciter absentes, and in poenam
contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi, decrees them to be excommunicate: and are not
all these necessary parts incident to the execution of discipline by
excommunication? And how then can the Minister, be said to excommunicate
alone, when Doctor Hone of necessity must play three parts of the four;
without all, or without any one of which parts, the excommunication by reason
of a nullitie, is merely void? Again, the Act being done, as it were uno
puncto, ac uno halitu, and Rowland Allen, and Doctor Hone, having their
commission from the Archdeacon, in solidum, how can their judgment be divided?
Furthermore, to say that Rowland Allen does excommunicate, by the authority of
Doctor Hone, were to overthrow the intendment of the article: Because by the
scope of the article, it is plain, that the presbyter, to be associated to the
official, must only derive his authority from one who has taken
Ecclesiastical orders. But those orders Doctor Hone, never took, otherwise
Rowland Allens presence, had been unnecessarie and superfluous. And therefore
if the excommunication be of any validity, then is discipline, by
excommunication in the Church of England exercised, partly by our lay-Elder (as
they call him) and partly by one Ecclesiastical Elder; wherein again, it is
worthy the observation, for the matter we have in hand; that D. Hone, a mere
lay and temporal man, has authority from the Archdeacon, to call, and
associate unto him, and to prescribe R. Allen a Presbyter, and an other man's
hireling Curate in Southwarke, to excommunicate, not only the Parochians, of an
other Pastors charge, but any other Pastor whatsoever, subject to the
Archdeacons jurisdiction. And has not the Kings highness then, as good right,
as great a privilege, and as high a Prerogative, to command Master Doctor
Andros, or Master Doctor King, and lay Elders, by a lawful election to be
associated unto either of them to excommunicate either of their own
parishioners, for public drunkenness, or other notorious sins, committed in
their own parish? For if it be lawful, at the voice of a lay stranger, that
an hireling and stipendarie Curate, should chase an other man's sheep out of his
own fold, how much more is it it lawful, that a true shephea^d, should
disciplinate his own sheep, feeding and couchant within his own pasture and
within his own fold?

Furthermore touching the admittance of governing Elders, or lay Elders (as
they call them) unto the Minister of every congregation, according to the
former pattern of one lay Elder, that the same is not, a matter so strange, for
lay men to be joined in this charge Lay men appointed by the Queens
injunctions, to execute some part of discipline.
of ecclesiastical government, as the opposites bear us in hand to be: it
shall not be amiss, to call unto their remembrances, one of our late
Sovereign the Queens injunctions, whereby certain lay persons, called
overseers, were commanded, to be chosen by the ordinaries, in every parish, for
the better retaining of the people in obedience, unto divine service. In every
parish (says the Injunction) three or four discreet men, which tender Gods
glory, and his true religion, shall be appointed, by the Ordinaries,
diligently to see, that all the parishioners duly resort, unto their Church,
upon all Sundays and holidays, and there to continue, the whole time, of the
Godly Service. And all such as shall be negligent, in resorting to the Church,
having no great, or urgent cause of absence, they shall straightly call upon
them, and after due admonition, if they amend not, they shall denounce them to
the Ordinary. Thus far the injunction. Which, that it is not meant of the
Church wardens, appears by the very next article; for unto them, as is
assigned an other name, so also another office. That sidemen also, are not
these kind of overseers, is plain, in that they be neither so many in number,
as are here required, neither chosen by the Ordinaries, neither yet do they
admonish and denounce, according to this article. Wherefore because it is meet,
that the effect of this injunction being religious, should be put in due
execution, it seems a thing very reasonable, and much tending to the honor
of the King, that his Highness under his letters patents would be pleased to
appoint three, four, or more discreet and faithful persons in every Parish,
not only to perform the effect of this article, but also generally to oversee
the life and manners of the people, that without great and urgent causes they
resort not unto Typling-houses, or houses of evil note, and suspected fame;
and that upon the Sabbaths, they use no heathenish dancing, about their
disguised May-poles: And after due admonition if they amend not, to denounce
them to the Pastor of the place. For then might the Pastor Book of the form of
ordeining Priests.
be encouraged, to give his faithful diligence, as at the time of his
ordination, he solemnly promises unto the Bishop, always to Minister the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded;
by which words inserted it the book, there is a plain and open confession
made by all estates in Parliament, that Christ has not only established
discipline, but a certain form of discipline in his Church, and that the
pastor to whom Every Minister ought to minister the discipline of Christ in
his own cure, by consent of Parliament.
the care, and charge is committed to teach the people, ought to minister the
same discipline. For it had been a very absurd part for the Parliament, to
appoint the Bishop, to receive a promise from the Ministers, to minister the
discipline of Christ, if Christ had not instituted a discipline; or that the
same discipline, which he instituted, had not in their judgments belonged unto
the Minister. And therefore this very letter of the book convinces the whole
answer made unto the abstract, touching this point to be very erroneous,
frivolous and impertinent, to the point in question: For whereas in the
abstract it is alleged, that the Bishop by virtue of the order and form
appointed, by act of Parliament; binds the Minister, as well to Minister the
discipline of Christ, within his cure, The Minister by promise binds himself
to minister the discipline of Christ, page 55 page 60
as the doctrine and Sacraments of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, etc.
hereunto first he answers, that these clauses do not dispositively, ordain
any thing for discipline, as though the law meant, by authority hereof, to
establish, that the order in these things, by the Realm received, should be
holden as agreeable to the Word of God, but must be taken enunciatively, to
declare and affirm, that following the order by law established, they should
do agreeable to Gods will. But alas what repugnancie is there heard? for how
can the law declare and affirm that the Ministers following the order by law
established, shall do agreeable to Gods will, if the order in these things, by
the Realm received, should not (by the meaning of the law) be Repugnance ^^
the answer to the abstract.
holden as agreeable to the Word of God? What? does the law mean, that a man
can do agreeable to Gods will, in any thing, which is not agreeable to his
word? or if the law have established, an order in the discipline, which is not
agreeable to Gods word, shall the Ministers do agreeably to Gods will, if they
follow the Law? For the meaning of the Law is plain, viz. that the Minister by
virtue of his promise made to the Bishop, shall be no further bound to
Minister any Doctrine, Sacraments, or Discipline received by the Realm,
unless the Realm have received the same, according to the commandment of
God. For the Parliament having a religious consideration, that the Minister of
Christ, must not have so much respect, what the law of the Realm, as what the
Law of God commands, carefully provided for his indemnitie in this behalf.

Besides, what a frivolous comment, has he made upon the words of the book,
when he says, that these words of the Bishop, do not A frivolous comment upon
the words of the book of ordaining of priests. etc.
dispositively ordain any thing for discipline? When as the question is not
whether the Bb. words, but whether the law and book dispose any thing for
discipline? For the Bishop being but a servant to the book, and to the law,
and one unto whose fidelity the execution of the law and book is committed,
though he do not by his words, dispose any thing of discipline; yet by his
demand, he shows unto the Minister, that the office of the Ministration of
Discipline, within his cure and charge, is committed unto him, and that by his
ordination, his person is fully enabled, as well to minister the Discipline, as
to preach the doctrine of Christ. And hereupon also falls to the ground, his
other answer, as wholly impertinent to the point in question. For where he
says, that the Law meant not, by authority hereof, to establish that the
order of these things, by the Realm received, should be holden as agreeable to
the word of God; The answer to the abstract wholly impertinent to the point in
question.
this (I say) seems wholly impertinent to the purpose of the abstract. For
there is no such thing insinuated, to be intended by the statute: only the
scope of the Authors drift, in that place seems to be this: viz. That every
Minister, by virtue of his promise, enjoined by act of Parliament, to be made
by him, and by the office of ministry taken upon him, at the time of his
ordination, has bound himself, to minister the doctrine, sacraments and
discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded. And what then if the law,
have not authorized, disposed, or established in particularitie, the order The
not disposing in particularity, all rites and ceremonies of discipline, does
not hinder the exercise of discipline by the Minister.
of these things, or if the Scripture have not delivered every ceremony,
form, or circumstance, about these three things, shall not the Minister
therefore, minister these, or any of these three things at all? And suppose, I
pray you, that neither this, nor any other law, had in particularitie,
appointed the ceremony of the Cross, the ceremony of Godfathers, or any
other ceremony in Baptism; or that the Law had not appointed the ceremony of
kneeling, or any other ceremony, at the celebration of the Lords Supper,
should not the Minister therefore, minister neither Baptism, nor the Lords
Supper, in the charge committed unto him? yes he should. And why: forsooth
because he has promised so to do, and because the Lord has commanded him so
to do. Besides, sithence every Minister, by virtue of his promise, and force
of this law, is bound to teach the doctrine of Christ, to the people of his
charge, notwithstanding he be not tied by the law of the Realm, nor by the
holy Scripture, to any rite, ceremony, or circumstance, or to any exact form,
or particular manner in teaching, what reason can any man pretend, that the not
particularising, of all rites, ceremonies, or circumstances, in the Scripture,
or the not establishing of any order, by the law of the Realm, touching
discipline, should altogether hinder Answer to the abstract* page 59. page 55.
every Minister, from the administration of all discipline in the Church: For
as touching the Answer, that the Ministers may, and do exercise not the least
parts of Discipline, of declaring by Doctrine, according to the word of God,
men's sins to be Dis. of declaring by doctrine, is called disc. erroneously.
bound and loosed, and the censure of rebuking and reproving openly, and that
the discipline which the Minister is to execute, reaches no further, than to
teach his parish, with all diligence to keep, and observe so much of the
Doctrine, Sacraments and Discipline of Christ, as appertains unto them, as
touching this answer (I say) it is as erroneous, as the former we^e frivolous
and impertinent. For as consolation and comfort, by way of exhortation, so
reproof and sharp rebuking, by way of dehortation, belong properly to that
part of the Ministers function, which concerns the binding and loosing of
sinners by doctrine, and not by discipline, and is but an application of the
doctrine to a wounded, or seared conscience. He therefore that leaves no other
dissipline, to be executed by the Pastor of the Church, than of declaring by
doctrine, men's sins to be bound, or loosed, and by teaching his Parish, to
observe doctrine, sacraments, and discipline, confounds the matters both of
discipline and doctrine. Again if not any other discipline, D^scipline and
doctrine confounded by the Answerer.
was meant to be attributed, to every Minister, than such as is declared by
doctrine, then these words, viz. (and the discipline of Christ) were
superfluously, and idly added by the Parliament. For then had it been
sufficient for the Parliament, to have enjoined the Bishop, to demand of the
Minister only this and no more: viz. whether will you give all fai^hfull
diligence, to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments of Christ? There is
therefore some other kind of Discipline of Christ, intended by the Parliament,
to The Parliament intends some other disciplin^^ ^han of declaring by
doctrine.
be attributed unto every Minister, and wherewith also the law of the Realm
does enable every Minister, than is this manner of discipline o^ declaring by
doctrine and teaching the people. And this discipline also must needs be
understood, to be of the spiritual censures of the Church, because Christ
never instituted any other discipline. And therefore because our opposites
agree with us in a generality, that the doctrine, Sacraments, and discipline
of Christ, are to be ministered as the Lord has commanded only, and none
otherwise, and yet nevertheless do dissent from us touching the persons,
Answer to the abstract, 55, 60,
by whom this discipline is to be ministered, because (say they) every
particular ceremony, rite, or circumstance of external policy, are not set
down in Scripture, because of this their answer (I say) it is to be
considered; First, unto what persons, the function of the ministration of the
discipline of Christ, by the holy Scriptures is committed. Secondly, whether
the same persons with their functions, be arbitrable, ceremonious, ^^^rituall,
or circumstantiall To what persons the disc^pline of Christ by the Scriptures
is committed, and whether the persons be arbitrable or no, Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 9,
5, and 7,
to be altered, and changed by authority of the Church, as things
indifferent, yea, or no. To the first, seeing to one and the self same person,
the holy Scriptures attribute these two names, Bishop and Pastor, thereby
signifying what are the two duties, which belong to the same one person; and
seeing also no one person by Gods word is called a Bishop or Pastor, in regard
of his fellow brethren, the other Bishops or Pastors, but in regard of his
own flock, which he overseeth; and seeing also in well ordered Churches, by
the Ordinance of God, certain men of approved godliness 1 Timothy, 3, 1,
(called according to the common name of the Hebrews, by the common name of
Elders, whom partly calls Governors) 1 Cor. 12, 28.
were joined as Ecclesiastical Magistrates, to the Bishop, Pastor, or teaching
Elder, by whose common direction, and authority, Ecclesiastical discipline was
practiced; seeing (I say) these things are so, we affirm that the persons, to
whom the ministration of the discipline of Christ, rightly belongs, are the
persons only above specified and none other. And further we say if any
spiritual Discipline, or The Discipline of Christ p^ophaned, if the same be
ministered by other persons, than the holy Scriptures do appoint.
power, which directly be longs unto the Conscience, be ministered in the
Church, by any other persons, than by those persons only, that the same
Discipline is not to be called the Discipline, but a mere profanation of the
Discipline of Christ. For as it is unlawful, for any person, to usurp any
part, of the Bishops or Pastors office, which consists in spiritual teaching
the word and administering the Sacraments; so is it also unlawful for any
person to usurp any part of a Bishops, Pastors, or Elders office, which
consists in spiritual rule and government. Whereupon it secondly follows,
that the same persons, with their functions, are not arbitrable, ceremonial,
rituall, and circumstantiall, as things indifferent to be altered, by the
authority of the Church, but perpetual, substantial, essential, and as it
were the very maine and fundamental pillars, to uphold, and stay the House of
God, from all spiritual sliding, and falling down. And therefore from the
execution of the Discipline of Christ, we seclude the persons of all humane
Archbishops, humane Bishops, Suffrafanes, Archdeacons, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials, and all Rowland Allens, because their persons together
with their functions, are arbitrable, ceremonious, rituall traditionall, or
circumstantiall, yea and removeable at the pleasure of the King and State.

Neither does this disagree, from that which was erst said of a A Bishop.
Pastor and Elder, and our Lord ^, diffr.
Bishop or Pastor, that they be all one, in respect of their function. For it
is not said that an humane Bishop, and Pastor, but that a Bishop and Pastor are
all one. For a Bishop simply so called, is not a Bishop, and Pastor, in respect
of his fellow brethren, but only in regard of his flock, which he over-seeth,
feeds, and rules. But a What a Lord ^, is.
humane Bishop is he, that is promoted, unto this dignity by man, and who by
man's authority takes upon him superiority, and pre-eminence over them which
are equal unto him, touching their function, that intangleth himself with
civil government, and worldly affairs, and whose Bishoply office consists
not so much, in the dispensation of Gods Word and Sacraments, as in Lordly and
Bishoply apparel, Crossing with the sign of the Cross, confirmation of
Children, sole imposition of hands, sole excommunication, sole enjoining of
Articles upon the people and Clergy of his Diocese, consecration of
Oratories, delegation of his Episcopal authority to his Suffragane Vigar
general, and principal official, and other such humane and Bishoply
functions. All which are after the customs, precepts, and traditions of men.
And albeit D. O. by virtue of the Queens congedelier, were chosen, by the
Deane and Chapter of Lichfield, in Episcopum, and Pastorem Ecclesiae
Lichfieldensis, The Lord Bishop of Lichfield is never honored with the title of
being Lord Pastor. Pastoral authority of a Lord Bishop and of other Pastors,
is equal.
yet is he never entitled with the dignity of being the Lord Pastor, but
only with the honor of being the Lord Bishop of Lichfield, so that one and
the self same person being a Bishop, and a Pastor, may be a Lord Bishop over
Pastors, but not a Pastor, over Pastors. Whereupon it follows, that the
Pastor^ll authority, which he has in common, with his brethren, the other
Pastors of his Diocese, is of superiority or proheminence, above theirs, and
that touching the function, both of his, and their Pastoral cure and charge,
there is a paritie between him and them, by reason whereof, he can have no
power over them; because par in parem non habet imperium. But why is it, that
he can not be called Pastor Pastorum Ecclesiae Lichfieldensis, Lord Pastor of
the Pastors of the Church of Lichfield, and yet may be called Dominus Episcopus
Pastorum Ecclesiae Lichfieldensis, Lord Bishop of the Pastors of the Church of
Lichfield? Why? but only for that there is custom, tradition, and the Law of
man, for his Episcopal jurisdiction, and for that his pastoral function (if
he have any) belongs unto him in common, with his brethren the other Pastors,
jure divino. The Whether a lord Bishop minister the doctrine, Sacrament and
discipline of Christ, by virtue of his lorldly episcopal or pastoral office.
Bishop then having these two several and distinct offices imposed upon his
person, the one by divine, the other by humane Law, the one humane and
Episcopal, the other without pomp, and pastoral; there arises from thence
this question: by which of those two functions he may lawfully (I mean
according to Gods Law) minister the Doctrine, Sacraments, and censures of
Christ? If it be answered, that it is lawful for him, by virtue of his
Pastoral office, to minister the doctrine and Sacraments; and by force of his
humane Episcopal office, to minister the censures of Christ, then is not the
answer fitted to the question, the same being made, a been conjunctis, ad male
divisa. For the censures of Christ, as well as the doctrine of Christ, being
simply of divine ordinance, it must follow (if his Episcopal power be only of
humane right, and pastoral power be only of divine institution) that the
censures may be ministered by authority derived only from man, but the
doctrine and Sacraments, by power derived only from God. Which commixion of
divine and humane right, in the execution of the ordinances of God, can no
manner of ways be sound, pure, and sincere, and therefore also can not be
pleasing unto God. For no more can the censures of Christ, to the pleasure of
God, be lawfully administered, by the authority of any one whose function is of
man, and not of God; than could the sacrifice of God, be offered by one, who
was a priest of man, and not of God. Now that humane Episcopality, or
B^shoppisme, in the Church of England, is authorized, and deduced from Lordly
Episcopality authorized only by the Law of the Realm.
the power and Law of man, viz. of the King and Realm alone, is evident, as
well by the donation and endowment of the Bishoprics founded by the Kingly
Prerogatives of the Kings of this Realm, as by the erection and establishment
of the new Bishoprics of Chester, Gloucester, Bristoll, Peter borough, and
Oxford, with their Cathedral Churches, Seas, Cities, meeres and bounds of
those humane Bishops, for the exercise of their Episcopal administration,
according to act of Parliament, authorizing the Kings Highness, to make
Bishops by His Letters Patents. Nay further that humane Episcopal Note that
King Henry the eight by letters Patents made Bish. therefore, etc. 31. H. 8. c.
9
jurisdiction within the meres and bounds of every Diocese within England is
merely of humane, and not of divine institution appears by that power and
authority which the King has in translating, and dissolving of Bishoprics, in
conserving Episcopal jurisdiction, sometimes to such persons, as be no Bishops
(as did William the Conqueror, when he gave Episcopal power to the Abbot of
Battle,) and lastly, by the very manner and form of the nomination, license
of Election, and authority of investiture, confirmation, and consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops, established by the more positive Law of the Realm.
But if it be answered, 25. H. 8. c. 20,
that the Bishop, by his humane Episcopal power, does minister the Doctrine,
Sacraments, and discipline of Christ, then is the case worse with him than it
was before: because then not only the Discipline of Christ, but also the
doctrine and Sacraments of Christ, should be ministered by that authority which
is of humane institution. Besides, the answer should be untrue, because the
Bishop at the time of his consecration, does not receive any authority to
preach the Word, and minister the Sacraments; (for that authority was then
committed unto him, when first he was ordained to be a Presbyter:) But the
authority which he receives at the time of his consecration, is to correct,
and punish such, as be unquiet, disobedient, and criminous within his
Diocese. Whereby once again is that confirmed which was erst said, viz. That
Episcopal power in England is not of divine, but of humane institution.
Especially for that, by the Scriptures, it can not be proved, that there be
two several and distinct forms of ordinations; the one called consecration,
proper to a Lord Bishop, for the exercise of Discipline; the other called
ordination, peculiar to a Pastor, or teaching Elder, for the ministration of
the Word and Sacraments. Whereunto lastly may be added another maine reason,
that Episcopal power in If the Lord Bish. have power to minister dis^ipline by
divine right then no more can he commit that his power, to an other, than he
can commit the power which he has of preaching to another.
England, to minister the Discipline, can not therefore be of divine
institution, because, if it were of divine institution, the Bishop could no
more surrogate the same his Episcopal power to his Suffragane, to his Vicar
general, or Rouland Allen, to minister the censures of Christ in his own
name, than he can depute them or any of them, to minister the doctrine and
Sacraments in his own name. But how does it appear, that the Vicar general,
Rowland Allen, or any other Presbyter, did ever excommunicate by the power, or
in the name of the Bishop? For the proof hereof we shall not need to search
any other authentical record, then the precept, and the practice before
entreated of. For it is not said in the precept, that the Presbyter, being
armed with authority from Christ, but it is said, that the Presbyter, being
armed with authority, from the Bishop, or Archdeacon, shall denounce the
sentence of excommunication; the practice also of Doctor Hone, every way,
confirms as much. For therein Doctor Hone does not challenge to be an Officer
unto Christ, but he says, that he is the official of the venerable Archdeacon
of Surrey; and that Master Rowland Allen Presbyter, by virtue of his office,
does excommunicate, the parties who obeyed not his mandates, who made not their
appearances before him, etc. If it be answered that Rowland Allen, though he be
not an immediate officer from Christ, that yet nevertheless, he is a mediate
officer, depu^ed to his office, by an immediate officer unto Christ, viz. the
Lord Bishop, or Archdeacon: then we reply, and say: First, that the Lord
Bishop and Archdeacon, be neither immediate, or medi^te Officers, appointed by
Christ, to be ministers of his discipline. Secondly, if they were immediate
officers from Christ, that yet they have no authority by the Law of Christ, to
transfer their right, or any part thereof, to an other person, in their name,
or by their authority, to excommunicate. As for these words, viz. In Dei
nomine, Amen: nos Johannes Hone, or nos Roulandus Allen, etc. sometimes used in
their scedule of excommunication; it is but a profaning of the holy name of
God, whereby they make themselves guilty, of the taking of the glorious name of
God in vain. And thus much touching both the question and answer, whether the
discipline of Christ, may be ministered, by the Bishops humane Episcopal power,
yea or no. But now on the other side (because no divine censure, can lawfully
be executed in the Church, by that authority which is of humane institution) if
it be answered, that the Bishop, by reason Whether L. Bishop^ by pastoral
authority. may excommunicate a Pastor.
of his pastoral power (which he is said, to have over all the Pastors and
people of his Diocese) may lawfully not only minister the Word and
Sacraments, but also the Discipline of Christ, unto them all; then it
follows, that by a Pastoral power, one Pastor, may be a Pastor of
Pastors, which is against the Scriptures, and contrary to the brotherly and
fellow-like authority, which is common to all Pastors under the Sun, and
between whom, touching their Pastoral functions, there is to this day, by the
Scriptures, as little superiority, and as great a paritie, as ever there was
between Apostles, and Apostles; between Prophets, and Prophets; or between
Evangelists, and Evangelists; and as at this day, there is between Bishops,
and Bishops; between Archbi^hops, and Archbishops; or between Patriarchs, and
Patriarchs: yea, and as is between Earls and Earls, Dukes and Dukes, Kings
and Kings, Emperors and Emperors. For no greater superiority, or
pre-eminence, has any one Pastor, over the person or function o^ an other
Pastor, touching the administration of any thing properly belonging to either
of their pastoral functions, than has one Pastors over small flocks, are as
truly pastors as pastors over great flocks As great paritie! between pastors
and pastor, as between Apostles and Apostles.
Emperor, over the person or function of an other Emperor, or one King, over
the person or function of an other King; or one Lord Bi^hop over the person or
function of an other Lord Bi^hop, or one Archbi^hop, over the person or
function of an other Archbishop, or than had one Apostle, over the person or
function of an other Apostle. Nay then has one eye over an other eye; one hand
over an other hand, one arm over an other arm, or one foot over another
foot. And therefore if touching the functions which Pastors, either among
themselves, have in common one with the other, or which they have over their
flocks, there be no disparity, but that the Pastors, to whom small flocks are
committed, do as really, and as truly participate of the nature of true
Pastors, as those great Pastors do, upon whose great shoulders, great burdens
are imposed; it behooves great Pastors, to prove unto us, by the holy
Scriptures, that by the institution of their great pastoral function, they
have their power so enlarged, as that thereby they may preach the Word,
minister the Sacraments, and excommunicate: and that on the other side, the
little Pastors, have their power by the institution of their petie pastoral
offices, so streitned, as whereby they may only preach the Word, and administer
the Sacraments, but not excommunicate: it behooves (I say) great Pastors, to
be able sufficiently to show unto us these things out of the holy Scriptures:
or else it seems to stand, with reason and equity, deduced from the same
Scriptures, that a Pastor over a few, should have like power to teach, and to
govern a few, as a great Pastor over many has to instruct and to rule many.
Marry, if they think, that only great Pastors be true Pastors, and that
great powers spiritual, be only true powers spiritual; then let them also
conclude, that only great Knights be true Knights, that only great Dukes be
true Dukes, that only great Kings be true Kings, and that only great
principalities temporal, be true principalities temporal. Which conclusion
if they shall judge, to be conclusionlesse; because King Rehoboam had Not only
Kings of great kingdoms, but also Kings of small kingdoms, be true Kings.
as large a Patent, to feed, and to commmand two Tribes, as King Solomon his
Father had to command, and to feed twelve; or as the Archbishop of York may
suppose himself to have, over nine or ten Counties, as the Archbishop of
Canterbury, can have over nine and thirty or forty: then me thinks it a
matter, very reasonably of them to be confessed, that all true Pastors, whether
they be great Pastors, or little Pastors, may lawfully exercise, all manner of
such true power spiritual, as unto true spiritual Pastors by the holy
Scriptures does appertain. For if Bishops, being great Pastors, may therefore
preach, and minister the Sacraments, because they be as they say, true Pastors;
then also may little Pastors, therefore excommunicate, because they be, (as
the Scripture says) true Bishops. Wherefore, if the Lord Bishop of London, by
virtue of his Pastoral office, (as he thinks) which with his brethren the
other Pastors of his Diocese, he has in common deriveth unto him, immediately
from the Word of God, may lawfully excommunicate: then the Pastoral office,
which Master Doctor Andrews has over the people of his Parish of Saint Giles
without Creeplegate, and the Pastoral function which Master Doctor White has
over the people of Saint Dunstones within Temple-barre, being as absolutely,
and as immediately, deduced unto them, out of the same word; what proof can
be made out of the word, that the Bishop being not Lord Pastor of the
Pastors of his Diocese, may lawfully by the word excommunicate, all manner of
offenders both Pastors and people, within his Diocese; and yet nevertheless
that neither Master Doctor Andrews, and Master Doctor White, by the same word
may excommunicate, any one of their Parishioners at all? Nay further, what
reason can there be afforded from the Law of God, that Master Doctor Abbot,
Deane of Winchester, that Master Brown, Master Barlow, and diverse other
Prebendaries, in the Church of Winchester, having certain parochial, and
Pastoral Churches, annexed to his, and their Deanery, and Prebendes, and Master
D. Gray in his Parish by their pastoral functions, should have absolute
authority (unless it be during the time of the L. Bishops trienniall
visitation) to exercise the discipline of Christ, within their several, and
peculiar Churches; and yet notwithstanding, that neither Master Richman nor
Master Burden, being both of them, grave, godly, and learned Pastors should
have at any time, any pastoral authority, to exercise any censure at all? And
as it is in the Churth of Winchester, so is it in the Church of Paul's, in the
Church of Salisbury, and in well nigh all the Cathedral, and Collegiall
Churches, throughout the Realm. The Deane, Prebendaries and Canons, having
certain parochial Churches exempted from the Bishop within their exempt and
peculiar jurisdictions, by mere Pastoral authority (for Episcopal authority,
by the Laws of the Church have they none) may exercise all manner of
spiritual censures, and that as well by their substitutes as by themselves.
Nay, Rural Deanes in Cheshire, etc. use some part of Episcopal power.
Episcopal power to excommunicate granted by papal privileges, or prescribed
use. Power to excommunicate, if it be of divine right, may not be prescribed.
which is more, in Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Richmondshire, and other
Northern parts, there be many whole Deanries, exempted from the Bishops
jurisdiction, wherein the Deanes and their substitutes, have nor only the
probate of Wills, and granting of administrations, but also the cognizance of
Ecclesiastical crimes, with power to use the Ecclesiastical censures. Yea and
this authority of the execution of Ecclesiastical censures, have those Deanes,
either long since by some papal privileges obtained, or else by long use
prescribed against the Bishops. Whereby again, it is clearly convinced, that
Episcopal excommunication used in the Church of England, is not of divine
Institution, but only by by humane tradition. For were it of divine right, then
could the same no more be prescribed, or by papal immunity be possessed,
than could these Deanes prescribe power, or be enfranchised to preach the word
or to administer the Sacraments.

These things have we thus at large and more fully intrea^ed of, to the end
that the Kings Highness, and His Parliament, and all sorts of people, might
well understand, how it is not altogether, an unusual and unaccustomed thing,
in the Church of England, that private and inferior ministers (as they call
them) in their own right, and in their own parochial Parishes, without any
authority from the Bishop, should exercise even the highest censure of the
Church. And that in sundry places of the Realm there is no preeminence in the
matter of the execution of the censures, attributed to a Bishop above a
Minister. Nay which is more, than is attributed to a Bishop No more
prcheminence given to a B than to a Minister, or to a lay man in some places
for the use of excommunication.
above a Lay man: yea than to such a lay man, who is authorized only, by a lay
man to his office. Which is evident by Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and
censures, exercised a long time by Lay men, in the peculiar jurisdictions of
Newton, Gronbie, Anstie, Soke of Rothely, Evington, and other parishes and
Hamlectes in the County Leycester. The Officers of all which places, for their
spiritual authority, having not had any other warrant, than such only as has
been signed, sometimes under the hand and seal of the right Honorable the
Earl of Huntingdon deceased; sometimes of the Honorable Sir Henry Gray
Knight; sometimes of Henry Skipwith Esquire, and sometimes of others.

For the avoiding therefore of sundry intolerable inconveniences which hitherto
has ensued for want of that authority, which the Law settled, does enable every
Minister with, It is most expedient, that all humane authority in the execution
of spiritual censures, be utterly taken away, and that the divine and
Evangelicall censures of Christ, be ministered in every Congregation, where
learned and godly Pastors, with discreet Elders may be had, as from the mind
of the Lord they were executed, in the Apostolical and Primitive Church.

I had almost forgotten to speak of one common and usual kind of
jurisdiction spiritual in the use of the censures of the Church, by the
Archbishops, which in cases of their Prerogative, they have prescribed against
the Bishops over the Presbyters and people of every Bishops Diocese, and
Archdeacons jurisdiction, within their provinces: of one other common and
usual kind of pretensed spiritual jurisdiction, and use of the censures,
which the Archbishop and sometimes the Deane and Chapter, (sede
Archiepiscopali, or sede Episcopali vacant) exercise: and lastly, of that
spiritual kind of jurisdiction and censures, so called of the Church, which
Suffraganes, and Archdeacons, have and do use.

As touching which supposed spiritual power, both of the Archbishops and
Archdeacons, because the same their power, does not only belong unto them jure
consuetudinario and non scripto, by unwritten, and not by written Law; I must
conclude against the jurisdiction of the Archbishops Prerogative, and against
the Archdeacons jurisdiction in all cases, as out of St. Cprian, King Henry the
eigh^ concluded against the Pope. viz: That their authorities can not be from
Christ. Because Christ said, ego sum via, veritas, and vita. He never said, ego
sum consuetudo.

Touching the jurisdiction of the Deane and Chapter, the papal Law being
abrogated, how the same may lawfully now be used, otherwise than by sufferance
and consent of the King, and Realm, I know not. But of all spiritual
authority exercised at this day in the Church of England, the same seems to
draw most near to the semblance of the government practiced by the Apostles
and Primitive Church. And might be approved in many points, if so be the Deane
and Chapter, being as it were a Senate of preaching Elders, did no more commit
the execution of their Ecclesiastical juridiction, to the wisdom of one Vicar
general, or principal official, than they do put over the leassing of their
Lands, or dividents of their rents to the only discretion of one of their
Bayliffes, or Stewardes.

As for Bishops Suffraganes, in England and in Wales, how many there may be,
and what Cities and Towns, are to be taken and accepted, for their Seas, it is
at large expressed in a statute, made for the nomination of Suffraganes. By
which statute also we are given to understand, that it remains only in the
disposition, and liberty of every Archbi^hop and Bishop within this Realm,
etc. to name and elect two honest and discreet spiritual persons, being
learned, and of good conversation, and them to present unto the King by their
writing under their Seals, making humble request to give to one such of the
said two persons, as shall please His Majesty, such title, name, style and
dignity of Bishop of such Seas specified in the said act, as the Kings
Highness shall think most convenient for the same, so it be within the same
Province, whereof the Bishop that does name him is: Besides after such title,
style, and name given by the King, it is said that the King shall present,
every such person by his Letters Patents, under his great Seal, to the
Archbishop of the same Province, wherein the Town, whereof he has his title,
name, style and dignity of Bishop; and that the Archbishop shall give him all
such consecrations, benedictions and ceremonies as to the degree and office of
a Bishops Suffragane shall be requinte. It is further enacted, and provided
that every person nominated, elected, presented, and consecrated according to
that act, shall be taken, accepted, and reputed in all degrees and places,
according to the style, title, name and dignity, that he shall be presented
unto, and have such capacity, power and authority, honor preeminence and
reputation, in as large and ample manner, in and concerning the execution of
such Commission, as by any of the said Archbishops or Bishops, within their
Diocese shall be given unto the said Suffragane, as to Suffraganes of this
Realm heretofore, has been used and accustomed. And that no Suffragane made
and consecrated by virtue of this act, shall take or receive any manner of
profits, of the places, and Seas whereof they shall be named, nor use, have or
execute, any jurisdiction or Episcopal power, or authority within their said
Se^s, etc. but only such profits, jurisdiction and authority, as shall be
licensed, and limited unto them, to take, do, and execute, by any Archbishop
or Bishop within their Diocese, to whom they shall be Suffraganes under their
seals. And that no such Suffragane shall use any jurisdiction ordinary or
Episcopal power, otherwise nor longer time, than shall be limited, by such
Commission to him given upon pain, etc.

From which Act touching the use, and exercise of Episcopal power, and
censures by the Suffragane, we may again safely conclude, that the EPISCOPAL
power, granted by the Bishops, to be used by the Suffragane, is not of divine
right, and institution, but only from humane device and ordinance. For the
Suffragan could not exercise any power called spiritual or Episcopal, unless
by the Bishop he were nominated, by the King elected and presented, by the
Archbishop consecrated, and by commission under the Bishops seal authorized,
in what manner, and for what time he should exercise the same. Custom then
being not from heaven, but from the earth; and again the Bishops Commission
limiting the Suffraganes delegated power being of man, and not of God, it
follows necessarily, that, that Episcopal power, which the Bishops use and
exercise in England, can not be divine but humane. Because Episcopal authority
which is divine, being conveyed from the Royal and Sovereign authority of our
Savior Christ, the giver of all power unto every officer within his Ceurch,
cannot be transferred, to any other person, by the same Bishop, by the King,
by the body of the state, or by custom. For the Kings Person, and body of the
state, nor being made capable by the holy Scriptures, to use and exercise that
Episcopal power which is of divine Institution, can never transfer the same
to others, whereof they be themselves incapable. And to defend that custom,
or any municipall Law, should transfer divine Episcopal power from a divine B.
to any human officer, is more erroneous.

And from hence if the now L. Bish. of London judge his Episcopal power to
belong unto him by divine, and that by the same right, he have power, as well
to ordain, depose, suspend and excommunicate Presbyters, as to confirm boys,
girls, young men and maidens,) there seems to be good reason that the same
B. should make it apparently known unto the King and Realm, by what power or
commission descended from heaven, he may delegate under his Seal, the same
his divine authority, of ordination, deposition, suspension, excommunication,
and confirmation, unto Doctor Stern his now Suffragane of Colchester.

For if from the holy Scriptures, he can produce no warrant, for the making of
a delegation of any part, of that Episcopal power which he holds to be
committed unto him from our Savior Christ: then well may we conclude against
the o^dination, deposition, suspension, excommunication, and confirmation made
by the same his Suffragame, that the same his Suffraganes ordination,
deposition, etc. is not divine. For how can an ordination, a deposition, etc.
made by a Suffragane, be divine, when as the Commission granted by the Bishop,
is merely humane?

Wherefore seeing the Bishop himself, has plucked certain of his principal
feathers from his own spiritual wings (if so be his own wings may be
spiritual) and imped them with an untwysted thread of humane policy, to the
humane train of his Suffragane; and seeing also his Archbishops grace of
Canterbury, in cases of his metropoliticall prerogative, the Archdeacons,
London, Midlesex, Essex, Hertford, the Deane of Paul's, and certain
Prebendaries in Paul's, the Deane of Westminster, the Master of the Savoy, and
diverse other Persons, have by Papal privileges, or by ancient custom
prescribed almost all other parts of his Episcopal power; there seems good
reason, that the Bishop should again declare, whether the Churches within the
said Diocese after the decease, or translation of his Lordship shall stand in
need of any Lordly Successor, to sit in the same Sea, for any other profitable
use or purpose, than only for wearing of a white rochet, walking with a
pastoral staff, keeping seven years Sabbath, from preaching in his Parish
Church at Fulham, consecrating of Chapels, hallowing of Fontes, Christening
(as they call it) of Belles, whiting of Walls, painting of Tombs, garnishing
of Sepulchers, preserving of superstitious Monuments in glass Windows,
repairing and gilding rotten and outworne Crosses, confirming Leases of
Benefices, with cure of souls, upon small rents, improprying Churches, or such
like. For if the great things of the Episcopal power, may be transferred,
either by express, or by secret consent, either by commission or custom, and
that as well to an inferior, as to a superior, as well to a Suffragrane, a
Deane, an Archdeacon, and a Prebendary, as to an Archb. then it seems
reasonable, that the smaller things, before spoken of, may well be performed,
without any Lordly authority.

When I had thus finished, according to our line, that which I first
undertook, against the Admonitors pre ensed dangerous alterations,
innovations, and inconveniences, and was also purposed, to have added that
which (in mine opinion) seems to prove that, which the Admonitor by his
opinion, denies; viz. that the external government of the Church should
always, and in all places be one, when (I say) I had thus purposed, by reason
of some other present, and for the time more necessary occasion, I was driven
to alter my mind, and to show the same, in a place somewhat more convenient.

And yet in the mean while, it shall not be amiss, but a thing very
necessary, in this place, so to clear the state of the question between the
Admonitor and me, as the same being rightly before hand understood, there might
no prejudicate opinion be conceived against the truth.

The Admonitor against the not having one form of external policy in all ages
and states of the Chutch, of Christ, alleges that in Denmark, they have
Bishops, both in name and in office: that in Saxony they have Arcbishops, and
Bishops i^ office, but not in name: that in Tigure, they have no Senate of
Elders; nor the discipline by excommunication, which they more mislike, that in
Geneva, in Scotland, and in other places, they have a government not much
unlike that platform which is desired to be among us: that in Saxony, and
Basil they kneel at the Lords Supper: all Tigure they sit, and it is brought
unto them, and that in other places they go and receive it, for the more
expedition, as they pass. And that he doubts not but that the learned men,
whom God sent, to instruct those Churches in which the Gospel in those days
was first received, have bin directed by the spirit of God, to retain this
liberty, that in external government, and other outward orders, they might
choose such, as they thought in wisdom, and godliness, to be most convenient,
for the state of their Country and disposition of the people.

Unto all which we answer briefly; viz. that Bishops both in name and in
office being of divine institution, ought as well to be in the Church of
England as of Denmark, that it is an error (by their leave) in the Church of
Saxony, not to have Arch. and Bb. in name, if so be they hold it lawful to
have Archb. and Bishops in office. For what should a necessary officer do,
without a convenient name? And touching the Church of Tigure, it is not
material, what the same Church does think not tolerable, or does more
mislike, but what she ought not to mislike, or what it ought not to think
tolerable. And then what a poor proof is there here made (trow we) for the
confirmation of the corruptions in the Church of England by producing of two
witnesses, two errors in the Church of Tygure. For not to like a Senate of
Elders, and more to mislike excommunication, is more and more to slide out of
the right way.

And sithence we have the whole Christian Kingdom of Scotland, the most
famous, and renowned Church of Geneva, and sundry Churches, by his confession
in other places, to be lights unto us, and to agree with us, in a government
not much unlike to that, which we desire: we have not only great cause, to
rejoice in this our desires, but also to be much comforted and encouraged, by
these examples, by all holy means, to labor the full accomplishment thereof.
For by this testimony, and by these instances given and produced by himself,
the Admonitor has quite and clean weakened, and disabled, his own general
position, opinion, and thoughts of the unnecessaries, and inconvenientnesse, of
having the Apostolical and Primitive government, in the time of Peace, under a
Christian Magistrate.

For has not the free Kingdom of Scotland, the free City of Geneva, and
other Sovereign and free Princes, Potentates and powers, (not being under
Tyrants, and persecution) received the same, as being the best, the fittest,
the convenientest, and most necessary government (yea even in the time of peace
and under their Christian Magistracy) for the state of their Country, and
disposition of their people?

And as touching rites and ceremonies, we affirm not, that every rite,
ceremony or circumstance to be used in the external execution of Church
government, is precisely set down in the holy Scriptures, but touching the
substance of government, thus we say, and thus we hold: viz. that the Officers
and Governors appointed by our Savior Christ, to be over the Churches in
every Country (observing the general rules of decency, comeliness, and
edification) have liberty, with the consent of their Christian King, or other
supreme Magistrate, to choose what rites and ceremonies, they in wisdom and
godliness shall think most convenient. And therefore we grant that the
officers of Christ, in the use and dispensation of their functions, are no more
exactly tied, by any direct commandment in the holy Scriptures, to use at all
times, and in all places, one only manner of rites and ceremonies than were the
Priests of the Law, to use all one manner of knives, to kill their sacrifices,
or the si^gers to sing all songs after one manner of tune, or upon one kind of
instrument, or then are Kings and Princes in all Countries commanded, to use
all kind of circumstances, in the outward execution of civil justice in their
Commonweals.

As then, as it was lawful for the Priests to have knives and trumpets of
diverse fashions; and for the Levites to have their Musical instruments of
diverse forms: Nay as sundry Justices of Peace, in sundry Shires of the
Kingdom, are not bound to keep their quarter Sessions, all in one day to
begin, and to break their Sessions at one instant; to stand, to sit, and to
walk, whenever they speak, to wear all one fashion, hats, caps, cloakes,
or gowns, and such like: so likewise, is it with the Bishops, Pastors and
Elders of the Church.

In the ministration of Baptism, there is no direct commandment, that the
vessel to hold the water, for the Childs Baptism, should be of stone, of
pewter, of brass, or of silver; whether the Minister should descend to the
lower end, or the child ascend to the upper end of the Church: Whether the
child should have a great handful, or a little sponefull of water powered upon
his head. In the celebration of the Lords Supper, it is directly commanded,
that the people shall stand, fit, or pass: whether it should be celebrated
every first or second Sabbath of the month; whether in the morning, at noone,
or at night. In the ordination of Ministers, there is no just proof to be
made, that any certain number of Ministers, are to lay on their hands, that
the day of ordination should be always one: that the Minister should be of
such an age, or that the prayers should be of this or that length and form of
words. And therefore touching these and such like things of indifferency, we
agree with the Admonitor and Reverend Bishop that one ferme of external
orders, rites and ceremonies is not of necessity, to be in every Church,
because there is no such order witnessed by the holy Scriptures to be of
necessity. But touching the joint, and several functions of Bishops, Pastors,
and Elders, that they, or any of them, should in any age or state of the Church
of Christ be wanting, or that such offices as by warrant of the Scripture are
coupled together, should be appointed, to execute any functions in the Church,
then such persons only, as for their functions, have warant from the holy
Scriptures, we cannot in any sort thereunto agree. And why? forsooth because
all, both offices, and Officers in the Church, must only, and alonely, be
derived from our Savior Christ, as from the only fountain and bestower of all
officers, and offices in the House of God. And therefore, albeit we should
grant, (as the Admonitor has said) that the outward order used in the
Primitive Church, touching rites and Ceremonies, by Bishops, Pastors and
Elders, is neither necessary, nor so convenient as it may be otherwise, in the
time of peace, and under a Christian Magistrate, yet we may not hereupon imply,
as his negative implies: viz. that Bishops, Pastors and Elders, or any of
them, are neither necessary, nor so convenient officers, or governors, as
other officers of man's invention might be. For which our opinion (by the help
of God) we shall assay (as before has been mentioned) in an other place, to
lay down, out of the Word of God, some just proofs, (according to the
Admonitors request) that there ought to be in all ages and states of the
Church, this outward order and form of government: viz. that Bishops, Pastors
and Elders, ought evermore to be spiritual governors, and that evermore they,
and none other, ought to use that essential kind of spiritual government,
and none other which was practiced by the Bishops, Pastors and Elders, in the
Apostolical and Primitive Church. Always leaving the outward rites and
ceremonies of their spiritual kind of government, to be indifferent, as
erst has been said.

FINIS.
Speeches used in the Parliament by Sir Francis Knoles: and written to my LORD
Treasurer, Sir William Cecill.
TO the end I may inform your Lordship of my dealing in this Parliament-time,
against the undue claimed superiority of the Bishops over their inferior
brethren, Thus it was,

Because I was in the Parliament time, in the 25. year of King Henry the
eight. In which time, First, all the Clergy, as well Bishops as others, made an
humble submission to King Henry the Eighth, acknowledging his Supremacy, and
detesting the usurpation of the Bishops of Romes authority. Upon which
submssion of the Clergy the King gave unto the said Bishops the same ample
rule, that before they had under the Pope, over their inferior brethren;
saving that the same rule was abridged by stature by this parenthesis
following, that is to say (without offending the prerogative Royal of the
Crown of England, and the laws and customs of the Realm.) In the later end
of the Statute, it was added, that whosoever offends in any one part of that
statute, and their Aydors, Counselors, and Abbettors, they did all fall into
the penalty of the praemunire. And after I had recited this statute in the
Parliament house, I declared that in King Henry the Eight days after this:
There was no Bishop that did practice superio rity over their inferior
brethren. And in King Edwards days, the said Bishops, obtained a statute,
whereby they were authorized to keep their Courts in the Kings name: the which
statute was repealed in Queen Mary's days, and was not received in her
Majesty's time that now is, whereupon it was doubtful to me, by what authority
the Bishops do keep their Courts now in their own names, because it is
against the Prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, that any should keep
a Court, without sufficient warrant from the Crown. Whereupon I was answered,
that the Bishops do keep their Courts now by prescriptions, and it is true
that the Bishop may prescribe, that King Henry the 8. gave them authority, by
the statute of 25. of his reign, to have authority and rule over their
inferior brethren, as ample as they had in the Popes time. But this was no
special warrant for them to keep their Courts by, and that in their own
names. And yet they have none other warrant to keep their Courts (as they do
now in their own names) to my knowledge. And this was the cause that made them
obtain a statute in King Edwards days, to keep their Courts by, in the Kings
name. Now, it is a strange allegation, that the Bishops should claim authority
at this present to keep their Courts in their own names, (as they do) by
prescription, because the statute of 25. does restrain them generally from
offending of the Prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, and the Laws and
customs of the Realm. And no man may justly keep a Court without a special
warrant from the Crown of England, as is aforesaid. And the general liberty
given by King H. the 8. to the Bishops to rule and govern, as they did in the
Popes time, is no sufficient warrant to the Bishops to keep their own Courts
in their own names by prescription, as I take it. And therefore the Bishops had
done wisely, if they had sought a warrant by statute to keep their Courts in
the Queens name, as the Bb. did in K. Edwards days: In which time Arch.
Cranmer did cause Peter Martyr and Bucer to come over into this Realm to be
placed in the two Universities, for the better instruction of the Universities
in the word of God. And B. Cranmer did humbly prefer these learned men without
any challenge to himself of any superior rule in this behalf over his
inferior brethren. And the time has bin, that no man could carry away any
grant from the Crown of England by general words, but that he must have
special words to carry the same by: Therefore how the B. are warranted to
carry away the keeping of their Courts in their own names, by prescription: it
passes my understanding.

Moreover, where as your Lordship said unto me, that the Bishops have forsaken
their claim of superiority over their inferior brethren, (lately) to be by
Gods ordinance, and that now they do only claim superiority from her
Majesty's supreme government* If this be true, then is it requisite and
necessary, that my L. of Canterbury, that now is, do recant and retract his
saying in his book of the great volume against Cartwright, where he says in
plain words (by the name of D. Whitgift) that the superiority of B. is Gods
own institution: Which saying does impugn her Majesty's supreme government
directly, and therefore it is to be retracted plainly and truly. For Christ
plainly and truly confesses, Ioh. 18. 36. That his Kingdom was not of this
world. And therefore he gave no worldly rule or pre-eminence to his Apostles,
but the heavenly rule, which was to preach the Gospel, saying: Ite, praedicate
in omnem mundum, qnicunque crediderit and baptizatus fuer^t, salvus erit: qui
non crediderit, condemnabitur. Go and preach in all the world, whosoever shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe, shall
be condemned, Mark. 16. 15. But the Bishops do cry out, saying, that Cartwright
and his fellows, would have no government, etc. So, belike, the B. care for no
government, but for worldly and forcible government over their brethren, the
which Christ never gave to his Disciples nor Apostles, but made them subject to
the rule of Princes, who ought not to be resisted, saving that they might
answer unto Princes, that they must rather obey God than men (Acts 5. 29.) and
yet in no wise to resist the Prince, but to take up the Cross and follow
Christ.

FINIS.

