A SERMON Preached at a Public ORDINATION AT St. Peter's Cornhill.

MARCH 15th. 1684/5;

BY EDW. STILLINGFLEET, D. D. DEAN of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, HENRY, LORD BISHOP of LONDON, One of the
LORDS of His MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
My LORD,
WHen I lately received Your Lordships Command for Printing the Sermon I
Preached at Your last Solemn Ordination, I thought Your Lordships Authority and
Judgment ought to Overruled my own Inclinations; although the Experience of a
former Storm, on a like Occasion, might justly make me unwilling to venture
abroad again, unless there were some Hopes of a Calmer Season. But whatever the
Issue be, I have the Satisfaction of doing my Duty; and I hope others will have
so much, at least in Reading it, as to be convinced, how unjustly I have been,
not long since, represented to the World, as an Enemy to the very Being of
Churches in general, and to the Constitution of this Church in particular.

A Calumny so groundless and ridiculous, that the Author of it does not
produce one considerable Argument (for I envy him not the rare Embellishments
of his Style) to prove the Church a distinct Society; which I had not made use
of to that Purpose in a Discourse published above Twenty years since.

But this must never be taken notice of, nor any of those passages in my later
Writings; wherein I had fully asserted and vindicated the Churches Power in
general, and the particular Constitution of this Church, lest the World should
laugh at the Folly and Malice of such an unskilful Maker of Controversies, who
follows the Schoolmen only in two things, viz. a Barbarous Style, and a Rude
Way of Disputing with his Brethren.

But that is a small thing with him, who in one Of the subject of Church Power,
p. 514.
single Page of his Book, charges no less than two of our Renowned Archbishops,
Whitgift and Bancroft, and the Learned Bishop of Winchester, Bilson, with
Writing Inconsiderately; and that for a new sort of Henrician Heresy, viz.
deriving the Magistrates Power from Christ.

If this Person had not with great humility written himself the Vicar of Cosmus
Blene, one might have thought, by these passages, he had fancied himself
another kind of Vicar; especially, when he proceeds so like a Judge of
Controversies, and after an imperious manner, summons me, by a kind of
Citation, to answer to such Questions as he should demand of me; but out of
Respect to Your Lordships Authority, and Jurisdiction over me, I declined
giving any Answer to him. And he has since Printed his Monitory Letter in the
Preface to his Book. Therefore left my silence on this Occasion, should make
others think, there were some ground for such a Public Accusation of me; I
shall, in few words, lay open before Your Lordship, (to whom I owe an Account
of my Actions) the Nature and Merits of this Cause, and the only Foundation of
all this Noise and Clamor, that Your Lordship may Judge, how well I am treated
by this Accuser of his Brethren.

It happened, my Lord, that in my younger days (about Twenty five years since)
I thought it necessary to inform my self, as well as I could; in the state of
the Controversy about Church Government, which had been managed with so much
Heat among us, and was then like to be revived. And to that end I applied my
self to the Reading and Considering the Authors of greatest esteem on both
sides; and by diligent perusing of them, I thought them more happy, in
overthrowing each others Hypothesis, than in setting up their own. And
supposing no better Reasons could be produced than I found in them, I from
thence concluded, that the Form of Church Government was left at Liberty by any
Law of Christ, and was therefore to be determined, as served best to the great
Ends of Peace and Order; which were the plain and standing Laws of the
Christian Church.

To make this more clear, I considered the Nature and Force of Laws; what there
was in the Christian Society, which was taken from the Law of Nature, what from
Divine Positive Laws; whether the Places of Scripture, or Testimony of
Antiquity, or Reformed Churches, did determine this Matter. All which being put
together, I did adventure to publish at that time, hoping by that means to
bring over those to a Compliance with the Church of England (then like to be
Re-established) who stood off upon the Supposition, that Christ had appointed a
Presbyterian Government to be always continued in his Church; and therefore
they thought Prelacy was to be detested, as an unlawful Usurpation. In the
very first Chapter of the Book I set my self to Answer the Presbyterian
Arguments, without mentioning their Books, in which they may be still seen, and
so Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, etc.
quite through I omitted nothing that was pleaded by them against Submission to
Episcopal Government. And I dare challenge any Man to produce one Passage in
the whole Book that tended to encourage Faction or Schism, or Opposition to the
Church of England; but on the contrary, I endeavored to recommend the
Episcopal Government, as having the Advantage of all others, and coming nearest
to Apostolical Practice; and I concluded all with the Proposal of King Charles
I. at the end of his second Paper at the Isle of Wight, as most highly just and
reasonable, viz. The reducing Episcopacy and Presbytery to such a
well-proportion'd Form of Superiority and Subordination, as may best resemble
the Apostolical and Primitive times, so far forth as the different condition of
the times, and the exigences of all considerable circumstances will admit.

And now, my Lord, You see my Crime; and if in this last I erred, it was with a
most Excellent Prince, and a True Friend to the Church of England, whose
Sufferings could never make him warp from what his Conscience and Judgment
directed.

I do not deny, my Lord, that I do now think much more is to be said for the
Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy, than I at that time apprehended (as will
fully appear in the following Sermon:) But I confess, I yet see no Cause for
such Clamours against this Book, as though nothing could satisfy but a
Recantation of it, as Public as the Error, Scandal and Offense given by it.
These are the Terms prescribed me by the Lofty Superintendent of Cosmus Blene;
but they are, in Truth, a Reflection on all my Superiors in the Church, who,
for so long a time, have been pleased to treat me with more Kindness, than so
much as to mention any such thing to me, with respect to that unlucky Book, as
my Accuser calls it. For they were so wise, to consider the Time when it was
Written, viz. before the Church was Reestablished; And with what Design it was
Written, viz. to gain upon the Dissenters from our Church. And it did not want
Success that way, both here, and in a Neighbor Kingdom. But suppose there were
Errors and Mistakes in it (as no doubt there were) they were so wise to make
Allowances for the Scepticalness and Injudiciousness of Youth, and for the
Prejudices of Education. All Men are not so happy to be born or bred in settled
times, when they have had no Temptation to think otherwise than they do: but
suppose a Man brought up when all things are in Confusion, and every one at
liberty to choose his own Way; Was it not a fair step toward the Church of
England, even then to receive Episcopal Orders, and to follow the Directions of
an Excellent Bishop of this Church? Which things I can truly affirm of my self
at that time. And for many years since it is well known, that besides the
constant Duties of my Place (in which I have always opposed Faction and Schism)
I have made it my Business to defend the Church of England, against its Enemies
on both sides.

But it seems nothing can Atone for such an Error with these Implacable Men,
but a Public Recantation. And are we sure that will do it? It seems to me to
be a Commendable Piece of Ingenuity in any Person, to Retract a former Opinion
upon full Conviction, when it proceeds from Judgment and Choice; (for otherwise
a Man is but like a Speaking-Trumpet, uttering the Words which others put into
him:) but yet some Men love to be still rubbing upon the old sore, and
upbraiding such a Man with what he has Publicly Disowned, and with his very
disowning of it: Which looks, as if they were glad he had been in the Wrong,
and were unwilling he should be otherwise. So that, when Men are resolved to
find Fault with others, no Recantation can do them good; but it is very hard
for us now to be under such a rigorous Dispensation, which makes every slip
unpardonable. Especially, when it is set up by those, who have been such
Offenders themselves. For some of these are most apt to be severe toward
others; as if it were some Atonement for their own Miscarriages, to be always
finding fault with their Brethren. And I heartily wish, my Enemies have none
greater to answer for, than such as arise from too great a zeal for Peace and
Unity among our selves. Yet if even therein I have gone beyond my bounds, I beg
pardon of my Superiors; Since it is too evident, that an untractable Spirit on
one side, as well as a pretense to an Infallible Spirit on the other, render
all Projects of Accommodation useless.

This I mention, my Lord, because I hear some Proposals of mine, when I was
Writing against the Dissenters, have given offense to some, and have been made
use of to ill purposes by others. But those who consider the Design and
Tendency of them, and the Circumstances of that Time when they were made, will
see no Cause to pass any severe Censure upon one, who Designed to serve the
Church of England by them; as the Dissenters themselves confessed, and thought
they would end in the Ruin of the Separation; and therefore never thanked me
for them.

And now I hope Your Lordships Goodness (of which I have had so large
Experience) will excuse all this Unpleasant Discourse (as usually Apologies
are) but since my Accuser thinks Posterity will be concerned in his Writings in
this Cause (I dare say not to make a Pattern for Style out of them) I was
willing to take this opportunity to clear my self for once, to Your Lordship
and the World.

As to his Accusation about Archbishop Cranmer's MSS. I think he has heard
enough of that already: and he owes me a Public Recantation upon his own
Terms, for charging me, with Unfaithfulness therein, for the Scandal and
Offense has been very Public.

I am afraid I have exercised Your Lordships Patience too long, and therefore
humbly beg your Lordships Blessing upon,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant.
Edw. Stillingfleet.
London, June 1st. 1685.
1 TIMOTHY 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man.
THESE words are Part of the Charge given by St. Paul to Timothy, whom he had
entrusted with the Care of the Churches of the Proconsular Asia, when he
departed from thence into Macedonia. For, although St. Paul says, he besought
Timothy to abide still at Ephesus; 1 Timothy 1. 3.
yet we are not to suppose, that his Care extended no farther, than to the
Church in that City; seeing, by means of St. Paul's Preaching there, St. Luke
affirms, That all Act. 19. 10.
they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and
Greeks: Which can neither be understood of the greater, or lesser Asia; but of
that Asia, which lay about Ephesus, and whereof it was the (...). Chrysostom. in
Ep. ad Ephesians. Certum est celeberrimam illam civitatem primas semper tenuisse
inter ^^nes hujus Dioeceseos Metropoles. Berter. Diatrib. 1. c. 2. (...), in
Nummis Galieni, Saloninae, Gordiani apud Holsten. not. in Steph. Byzant. p.
123. (...) seu Primae vulgo Graecis dictae quae Romany Metropoles, seu Gentis
Capita. Ezekiel. Spanhem. de Numism. dissert. 9. p. 885.
chief Metropolitan City, the Prima Civitas sed que Proconsuli^. Holsten.
Ephesum vero, alterum lumen Asiae remotiores convenient. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 4.
c. 29.
Roman Proconsul keeping his ordinary Residence there, and holding those Solemn
Courts, to which the Inhabitants of that Province were obliged to resort. But
withal, this was the Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 13.
Principal City in the Common Assembly of Asia, Strab. l. 14. Aristid. Orat. de
Concord. ad Civit. Asiat.
a Place of great Trading, the Seat of the most Magnificent Temple of Diana, H.
Vales. not. in Eufeb. l. 4. c. 13.
where the Citizens of Asia met to Worship; on all which Accounts, there was a
great Concourse of People thither from the parts thereabouts. It is no wonder
therefore St. Paul should fix his abode so long in this City Act. 20. 31.
for about the space of three years in all. And yet a long time for him,
considering the quickness of his Progress in other places, Bar. An. Dom. 46. n.
12.
some allowing no longer time to his first Peregrination, ( Usser. Annal. A. D.
45, 46. Jac. Cappell. Centur. prima Eccles. Christian. A. D. 43. 45.
others not so much) wherein he and Barnabas planted Churches in Act. chapter 13
and 14.
Seleucia, Cyprus, Pisidia, Pamphylia and Lycaonia, Act. 14. 23.
and ordained Elders in every Church with Fasting and Prayer: from whence it is
very reasonable to infer,

(1.) That this Church at Ephesus was certainly beyond the compass of a
particular Congregation; or else St. Paul had very little success in all the
Pains he took there; which he so Act. 20. 20. 25.
particularly mentions in the solemn leave he took of the Elders of the Church
whom he sent for to Miletus. And St. Luke speaking of the Jews and Greeks
dwelling in Ephesus, says, Act. 19. 17. 20.
That fear fell on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. So
mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed. And St. Paul himself takes
notice, 1 Cor. 16. 8, 9.
that at Ephesus a great and effectual Door was opened unto him. What, for one
single Congregational Church to be formed, in so great a City, with all the
success St. Paul had in his Preaching there; when, in far less time, he planted
so many Churches in other Places!

(2.) That the Extent of St. Paul's Care did reach beyond the Bounds of the
City: it being very improbable, that those of Asia should so long hear St. Paul
Preach at Ephesus, and yet no Churches be founded, by his means, in any of the
neighbor Cities.

But withal, it seems probable to me, that the Elders of those Churches were
not as yet removed from Ephesus, where St. Paul ordained them, with a design to
fix them in their several Stations; For it is observable, that Act. 10. 17. 20.
St. Paul sent to Ephesus for the Elders of the Church to come to Miletus;
whereas, if they had been dispersed, he would have sent to their several Places
of abode; and yet when they came to Miletus from Ephesus (which were not far
difstant, If by Miletus that Place be meant, which is now called Figena, or
Scala Nova, as some imagine, that lies but 10 Miles from Ephesus to the South
west; but that rather seems to be the Phygela of the Ancients. The Modern
Geographers, who make it to be Melasso, are certainly mistaken, not only
because of the too great distance from Ephesus, but because its Situation does
not agree with that of Miletus; for it appears by Livy and Solinus Solin. c. 40.
, that the Meander ran into the Sea, between Miletus and Priene; and but 10
Stadia from Miletus, says Pliny Plin. l. 5 c. 29.
; but Melasso is a great distance from it. Our latest Travelers think it
Palatsha; but Dr. Spon confesses that to be some Miles from the Sea; and
therefore it seems yet to lie undiscovered in its Ruins, as is well observed by
Sir G. Wheler. Ferrarius places Ephesus at 30 Miles distance, between Smyrna
and Miletus. Spon says, It is a day and a halfs journey from Ephesus to
Palatschia. Arrian describes Miletus as not far from Ephesus, and very near the
Sea. Voyage du Levant. To. 1. p. 359. Wheler's Voyage into the Lesser Asia, p.
272. Arr. de Expedit. Alex. l. 1.

he discourses to them of his Affairs from the time of his coming unto Asia; v.
18.
after what manner he had been with them at all Seasons, and had kept back
nothing profitable for them v. 20.
; but had showed them, and taught them publicly, and from house to house.
Which being spoken to the Elders of the Church, do imply a particular care he
had there of fitting Persons for the Pastoral Charge, besides, his Testifying
both to the Jews and to the Greeks Repentance v. 21.
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And, to these Elders, he
not only commits the Church of Ephesus, but all the Flock over which the Holy
Ghost had v. 28.
made them overseers, i. e. all that had been converted in Asia, through his
means, during his adode there. Iren. l. 3. c. 14.
Irenaeus understands St. Paul, as though he summoned them from the Neighbor
Cities as well as Ephesus; but St. Paul v. 16.
was in so great haste, that he would not so much as go to Ephesus, nor send
any whither 17.
but to that City; and yet those to whom he committed the whole Flock then in
Asia, came from Ephesus to Miletus; which makes it probable, that there St.
Paul had raised a Nursery for the Churches thereabout, as Clem. Epist. p. 54.
Clemens observes the Apostles were wont to do in Fruitful Soils; with a
prospect of such Churches as were to be formed. (...). Now where these were not
yet settled, such Persons remained under the. Apostles immediate Care and
Instruction, who by their Doctrine and Example, were still preparing them for
so great a Work. And Clemens takes notice that the Apostles were wont to pitch
upon their First Fruits, or most early Converts; and of these at Ephesus we
meet with Twelve Persons, upon whom Saint Paul, at his first coming, laid his
hands, and Act. 19. 6. 7.
the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with Tongues, and Prophesied.
And so were qualified, in an extraordinary manner, to be Teachers of others;
and might be in the number of these Elders, whom St. Paul charges to take heed
to themselves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them
overseers.

When St. Paul sent for these Elders to Miletus; Timothy was with him: For, we
find him amongst those who waited for his return at Act. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Troas, upon his coming back from Macedonia through Greece; and therefore his
leaving Timothy at Ephesus, was, when he first went into Macedonia, being
forced Act. 20. 1.
away by the Uproar that was raised against him there. And in his return
through Greece, where he abode three Months, he sends this Epistle to Timothy,
then at Ephesus, and taking Care of the Churches thereabout: As he afterward
left Titus in Crete, to set in order Tit. 1. 5.
the things that were wanting, and to ordain Elders in every City, as he had
appointed him. To this purpose he directs this Canonical Epistle to Timothy;
wherein he gives him very particular Directions about the due Exercise of that
Apostolical Office, which he was entrusted with the management of; And
especially about these things,

(1) The great regard he ought to have to the Doctrine that was taught by
those, who were to instruct others; that thou might charge some, that they
teach no other Doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 3.


(2.) The due Performance of the Public Offices of Divine Worship; that
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks 1 Timothy 2. 1. 3.
be made for all Men; for Kings and for all that are in Authority, etc. And
this order Timothy was to see observed in the Churches under his Care.

(3.) The proper Qualifications of the Bishops and Deacons of the Church, as
the proper Chapter 3.
Officers of it under Timothy; who was to take care of fit Men, to succeed
those who were then in being, or to provide more.

(4.) The manner of proceeding in Church Censures against Elders and Widows,
and open Chapter 5. 1. to the 21th.
Offenders: Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before two or three
Witnesses. Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. Which
plainly shows, that there was a Right of Judging and Censuring Offenders in
Timothy, by virtue of his Office.

(5.) The Caution to be used, in admitting Persons to these holy Functions, the
Qualifications whereof he had laid down before: And for this he gives a general
charge, to do nothing in these matters by Partiality; v. 21.
and then mentions the Consideration and Circumspection necessary in the laying
on of Hands; Lay hands suddenly on no man.

Some have thought these words relate to the Reconciliation of Penitents, and
not to the Ordination of the Bishops and Deacons before mentioned; because it
immediately follows, neither be partaker of other men's sins; but I see no Cause
to recede from the Sense generally received, for these Reasons,

(1.) Because St. Paul had not mentioned laying on of hands in relation to
Penitents; but he had done it in this Epistle, with respect to Ordination; and
that in Timothy's own Case; wherein St. Paul as the principal Person did in an
Authoritative manner, lay on his hands, as himself expresses it, in the second
Epistle; and the Presbyters assisted in 2 Timothy 1. 6.
laying on their hands, to manifest their concurrence and Approbation: but the
laying on of hands is no where in these Epistles, applied 1 Timothy 4. 14.
to the other Sense; nor in any other place of Scripture.

(2.) If these words do not relate to Ordination, St. Paul would have given
Timothy no particular direction, about that which was one main part of his
Office. As it is expressed concerning Titus, That he was appointed to ordain
Elders in every City: And no doubt Timothy had the same Commission, which is no
where intimated but in these wo^^^

(3.) Supposing, laying on of hands then equally used in both Cases, yet the
Apostle gives no Rules concerning the Qualifications of Penitents, as he does
concerning Bishops and Deacons; and therefore we have more cause to apply it
according to the chief intention and design of this Epistle; but he says
nothing before, what Penitents were to be reconciled; and after what time, and
under what Conditions they were to have hands laid on them in token of
Reconciliation. And there is no concurrent Evidence of such a Practice, so
early in the Christian Church.

(4.) The following words are capable of a very good meaning, acccording to
this Sense. For then being partaker of other men's Sins, does imply, that as it
is a Fault in those who rudely, and inconsiderately, without due preparation of
Mind, do rush upon so Sacred an Office; so those cannot acquit themselves of a
great share in their Guilt, who do not use their best endeavors, by due
Examination and Trial of the Persons, to keep them from entering upon it, till
they are prepared and qualified for it.

(5.) The great use of the laying on of hands in the New Testament, is for the
setting Persons apart for the discharge of a Sacred Office. So, when the Office
of Deacons was first instituted, it is said, They were set before Act. 6. 6.
the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. And
which is more considerable; when Barnabas and Paul, by the particular
appointment of the Holy Ghost, were to be separated unto the Work whereto God
Act. 13. 2, 3.
had called them; it is said, And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid
their hands on them, they sent them away. Here it was not for miraculous Cures,
as the Apostles sometimes used Mark 16. 18 Act. 28. 8. Act. 8. 15. 15. 19. 6.
it to Sick Persons; nor for conferring miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as
at other times they used it; (and probably this was the Gift of God which
Timothy had, by laying on of the 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Apostles hands;) neither was it a mere Rite of Benediction, as Jacob laid his
hands on the sons of Joseph; and our Savior on the Children Genesis 48. 14. Mark
10. 26.
when he blessed them; but it was a solemn Rite of Dedication of particular
Persons to God, when they are set apart for the Exercise of a Function which
immediately related to his Service. I confess, that among the Jews, it was not
used in the Consecration of Exodus 29. 9, 10. 15. 19.
Priests; For, Aaron and his sons were to lay their hands on the Sacrifices
that were offered on that occasion, and particularly on the Ram of
Consecration; but the Ceremony was performed by putting some part of the Ra^,
Lev. 8. 14. 18. 22.
and the Cakes, and the Wafer upon Aaron's hands, and his sons hands. For the
Priesthood 26. 27. 28.
of the Law being a Work of the hands, the Ceremony was very fitly applied to
them; but that of the Gospel being more intellectual and spiritual, the laying
on of hands on the Heads of the Persons devot^d thereto, was more agreeable to
the design of it. And this was an ancient Custom among the Jews in employments
of the highest nature. So Moses laid his hands on Joshua; and then it is said,
that he was full of the Spirit of Wisdom, Numb. 27. 18. 23. Deuteronomy. 34. 9.
for Moses had laid his hands on him: and from hence it came to be an usual
Ceremony among the Jews, in the Solemn Designation of Persons for Sacred
Employments, either to be Rulers or Teachers in their Synagogues. And from
thence it was not only brought into the Christian Church, but made use of to
express that Right and Authority which Persons do receive together with it, for
the Exercise and Discharge of their Ministerial Function.

So that from these Words, there are Three things considerable to be spoken to,

(I.) The Nature of the Office to which they are ordained, by laying on of
hands.

(II.) The Authority here supposed in Timothy, to admit Persons to this Office,
by laying on of hands.

(III.) The great Care and Circumspection necessary for the right performing
it; Lay hands suddenly on no man.

(I.) The Nature of the Office; which may relate both to Bishops and Deacons
before mentioned; But the principal parts of that Office, which is here chiefly
meant, are by St. Paul said to be these two; Ruling well, and Laboring in the
Word and Doctrine. v. 17.


(1.) Ruling well; Not, in opposition to Timothy, who was to Rule them well;
nor so as to imply, that the entire Power of Government was lodged in a College
of Presbyters Hier. Comment. in Epist. ad Tit.
then, as St. Jerome imagins; for what had Timothy then to do in the governing
them? I cannot find any Argument of Force in the New Testament, to prove, that
ever the Christian Churches were under the sole Government of Presbyters. For
what St. Jerome alleges, does by no means prove it: I grant he proves, That
the Name of Bishop and Presbyter were at that time common to the same Persons;
But what then? Suppose the Bishop and Elder here in Timothy's Epistle were the
same: Does this prove, that these Governed the Church without Timothy? The true
Question is not, about the Sense of Words, but about the Authority of these
Bishops or Presbyters, i. e. Whether the whole Care of their Churches were
committed to them, without any Superior Jurisdiction? What if it be yielded to
St. Jerome, That the Bishops and Deacons at Phil. 1. 1.
Philippi were no other than the Presbyters and Deacons; as long as the
Apostle, either in Person, or by some other appointed by himself, did rule over
them? What, if the Bishops summoned to Miletus, were no other than the Pas^ours
and Teachers? Did not St. Paul himself, Act. 20. 28.
at that very time, call them together, and give a Charge and Direction to
them, as one who had Authority over them? So that it does no where appear in
Scripture, that the Presbyters were invested in the Supreme Power over the
Church.

But yet they were not excluded from all kind of share in the Government, for
then they could never be said to Rule well, who had nothing at all to do in
Government: And those who are under a Supreme may be called. Governors, and
are to be obeyed according to 1 Pet. 2. 14.
the Nature of their Authority; which does relate to Men in another capacity,
and for very different ends from what Civil Government does.

For the Church is a Society in its Nature, Design, Duties, Offices, Censures,
really distinct from any mere Humane Institution. And no Christian, who
believes that the Kingdom of the Messiah was to be an external, visible
Kingdom, can be of another Opinion. And although Christ be the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and therefore Revel. 17. 14. 19. 16.
as Kings they are subject to him; yet that Authority which Christian Kings do
exercise over their Subjects, does not overthrow the Rules and Orders which
himself has established in his Church. For no Power derived from him can void
or destroy his own Laws and Institutions. Since then the Church does subsist by
virtue of Christ's own Appointment, and that Church is to have peculiar
Officers to instruct and govern it, it must follow, that even in a Christian
Kingdom, the Church is a Society distinct from the Commonwealth.

(2.) Laboring in the Word and Doctrine. Not to distinguish them from another
sort of Elders, whom St. Paul never thought of: For he knew of none but such as
were set apart by laying on of hands, and therefore dedicated to the Work of
the Ministry; and if St. Paul's Bishop and Elder were the same, they must have
the same qualifications; and one of the chief of them is, that he be apt to
teach; so that they may as well plead for a Lay Bishop, as for a Lay Elder; or
else the Elder must be one apt to teach, if the same with 1 Timothy 3. 2.
the Bishop.

But some may say, There was then indeed great need of laboring in the Word
and Doctrine, when the Christian Doctrine was not well known, or understood in
the World; But what necessity is there of it now, when all People own the
Profession of Christianity among us? And this continual Preaching does but fill
the Peoples heads with too much Knowledge, and makes them more opinionative,
and less capable of being governed.

To which I Answer, If Christ appointed Preachers only for the Conversion of
Infidels, this Argument would have great force: But the Apostle tells us, That
Christ has appointed in his Church, not only Apostles and Evangelists, but
Pastors Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect 13.
Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Therefore as
long as the Church is in its imperfect State, as long as it may want Unity or
Knowledge, or Improvement, this Office of Teachers is to continue. And those
Elders will still deserve double honor, who do not perfunctorily and rarely
discharge this Duty, but who do labor in the Word and Doctrine.

There are indeed many sorts of Preaching, which the Church stands in no need
of, because they tend so little to Edification: Such are all fine Harangues in
the Pulpit, i. e. Words well put together without suitable Matter; All dry,
flat, insipid Discourses, about things of no great consequence to Men's
Salvation; All affectations of Jingling Sentences, Farfetched Allusions,
Elaborate Trifles; All impertinent Disputes about needless, vain, intricate
Controversies; All Enthusiastic unintelligible Talk, which tends to confound
Men's Notions of Religion, and to evaporate the true Spirit of it into Fancies
and Eastern Modes of speaking: Lastly, All Corrupt and Seditious Doctrine,
which Poisons the Minds of People, with dangerous Errors, or Factious
Principles.

But setting all these aside, there remains a Grave, Serious, Pious,
Affectionate, Convincing way of Preaching; which is profitable, in its degree,
for the same ends for which the holy Scripture is useful, viz. for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Righteousness, i. e. for the best purposes in the World. And can any think
such a Work to be now unnecessary, as long as Men have Consciences to be
awakened, Errors to be confuted, Vices to be reformed, and stand so much in
need of good direction in the way to Heaven?

Can we be employed about a better or more useful Work than this? While the
Souls of those under our Care, are in such perpetual danger, either of being
overspread with Errors, or overcome with Temptations, or overset with
Difficulties, or overwhelmed with Fears? When should the Pilots show their
Skill and Courage, and Diligence, but when the Sea is rough, and the Weather
Tempestuous, and Banks of Sand appear of one side, and Rocks on the other, and
so many Wrecks before them; and the common Mariners are bold and unskilful,
unable to govern, and impatient of being governed? Is it time then to say,
There is no need of Pilots now, but they may lie in their Cabins and sleep, for
the Ship will steer it self well enough, and the Mariners cannot fail of their
Duty, as long as the Coasts are known, and the Rocks have been discovered to
them?

It is very true, that the way to Heaven is not now hard to find; but it is no
easy matter to bring Men to look in earnest after it, or to keep them in it.
And here lies the main of our Work of Preaching; We are not to teach Men new
Doctrines, but to Clear, Defend, and Apply the old, to the Consciences of Men.
It is very easy to shoot over the Peoples heads, and to spend an hour to
little or no purpose; but it requires all our skill to Preach plainly without
flatness; and to set the Matters of Religion in the best light, and to
recommend them to the Minds of People, with the greatest force of Persuasion.
It is no hard matter to trifle away the time, but it is not so to speak
Suitably, Warmly and Effectually to the Hearts of our Hearers; to make them
find the same effect of our Preaching, which the two Disciples did, when Christ
unknown was discoursing with them; When they said to one another, Did not our
hearts burn within us while Luke 24. 32.
he talked with us, and while he open^d to us the Scriptures? That is then the
best way of Preaching, which has Light and Heat together; which clears the
Scriptures to the Peoples Capacities, and warms their Affections to Spiritual
things. And it is hardly possible to mistake, as to the best Method of
Preaching, if Men do but judge aright concerning the End and Design of it. For
there must be Strength and Clearness to convince; and a close Application to
Men's Consciences, to Excite and Persuade them to the Practice of those things
which Men can hardly be ignorant of, and yet are very backward to do. And
therefore this must be the chief Work and Business of our Preaching.

Which none ought to undervalue or be ashamed of, who do in earnest believe God
and another World; none ought to neglect, whose peculiar Office and Dignity it
is to take Care of Men's Souls; and none will be careless in it, who have a
regard to their own or others Souls. For in doing this, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
says St. Paul to Timothy, speaking of his diligence in his Function, Thou
shall both sav^ thy self and them that hear thee; as though a Man's own
Salvation, and that of his Hearers, went together. That is indeed the most
desirable thing in the World to be the Instruments of carrying Souls to Heaven;
for they Dan. 12. 3.
who convert many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever:
but yet, the most careful Endeavors do not always meet with Success; and even
our Blessed Savior's Preaching, who spoke as never man spoke, was ineffectual
to many; (What then may we expect!) But this is our Duty, and the most likely
way of doing good to Souls, as appears by our Savior's own Practice; and if we
do not meet with success to our desires, let us not give over doing our Duty;
and say, We have labored in vain, and spent our Isa. 49. 4.
strength for naught and in vain; for surely our judgment is with the Lord, and
our Work with our God, as the Prophet speaks; and if we fail of a Recompense in
this World, we shall not in another.

II. And so I come from the Nature of the Office, to the Authority of
Conferring it; these words implying it to belong to Timothy, as being spoken
particularly to him, Lay hands suddenly on no man. For although he often speaks
of the Bishops and Elders before; yet he gives no charge about Ordination, but
only to Timothy.

True, some say, in this particular Case; but this was by virtue of an
Extraordinary Commission given to him, as an Evangelist by St. Paul: But what
is this to the standing Rule and Practice of the Church in succeeding Ages?
which is not to be governed by such Precedents, unless the Succession in the
same Office be made appear in the following Bishops of the several Churches.

To make this Matter as clear as I can I shall recommend these things to
consideration. (I. Consid.) That from hence appears evidently, That the
Apostolical Power of Governing Churches, and Ordaining Elders in them, was not
limited to the Persons of the Apostles, but was capable of being communicated
to others whom the Apostle entrusted with it. And this is a very material
Point, to Prove, that this Power was not so peculiar to the Apostles, but it
might be transmitted to others, and therefore might be continued in the Church.

But the great Objection against Timothy's being a Pattern for Episcopal Power,
is this; That it appears by Scripture, he was sent up and down to several
Places, as St. Paul thought fit. For he took him into his attendance at Act.
16. 3.
Lystra; from whence he accompanied him through ^.
Phrygia, Galatia, Macedonia, (and 12. 17. 1. 10.
there from Philippi to Thessalonica and Ber^^) And when he went to Ath^ns, he
v. 15.
sent for Timothy to him, and sent him from thence back to Thessalonica; and he
returned from 1 These. 3. 1. 2.
Macedonia to him Act. 18. 5.
at Corinth. From thence St. Paul went into 18.
Syria, and so to 19.
Ephesus; and there again he sent Timothy into Act. 19. 22. (20. 1.
Macedonia with Erastus; whither St. Paul went afterward himself. And upon his
return to Miletus, he speaks to the Elders, and not to Timothy, as their
Bishop. From hence, they say, St. Paul took him to Jerusalem, and so to Rome,
as appears by the Epistles Written from thence.

From this Series of the Story they conclude Timotby to have been only an
Evangelist, and not a fixed Bishop.

To which I Answer; That the frequent removes of Timothy, before this Epistle
to him at Ephesus, are not material to this purpose. But it is very material to
consider, what Power of Government St. Paul then committed to him. Which is a
certain Proof, that such a Power was not ^o peculiar to the Apostles, by virtue
of their immediate Commission from Christ, but it might be delegated to others
in their stead. Whether for a longer or shorter time, whether while the
Apostles went up and down, or near their Decease, makes no difference, as to
the Point of Delegation. And if it be granted, that such an Apostolical Power
of Governing Churches might be committed to others, and was actually so by the
Apostles; then there is no more to be done, but to enquire, whether upon their
Remove, or Departure, they did entrust any Persons in such a manner, as it is
certain from Scripture Saint Paul did Timothy, as to the Churches of Asia, when
he went into Macedonia.

Some think, that St. Paul's leaving Timothy at Ephesus, was upon his return
out of Macedonia, when he was going up to Jerusalem, knowing that they should
see his face no more; and that while he staid for him at Troas, he sent this
Epistle to him. But St. Paul's words are too plain to be avoided, that he left
him at Ephesus, (...), which can never be interpreted returning from Macedonia.
And there was as much need of one to look after the Churches of Asia, when St.
Paul was then absent in Macedonia, as when he went to Jerusalem: and so
Theodor. Praefat. in Epist. Pauli.
Theodoret understands it. But if Timothy were then with St. Paul, as appears
by his being at Act. 20. 4. 5.
Troas, when he went from thence to Miletus, that was sufficient Reason why he
did not address himself to him, but to the Elders which came from Ephesus; whom
he put in mind of their Duty by his Speech, as he had done Timothy by an
Epistle not long before directed to him.

Whose Office was no more superseded by this Charge given to them; than a
Proconsuls was by the Senats Instructions to his Legates, when hmself was
present.

If it were evidently proved, that St. Paul then carried away Timothy with him
to Jerusalem, and so to Rome, there would be greater force in the Objection.
But how does that appear? Not from Scripture. For when St. Paul appeared at the
Temple, the Jews laid hold on him, because they supposed Act. 21. 29.
he had brought Trophimus the Ephesian with him into the Temple, whom they had
seen so much with him in the City. How came Timothy not to be as much taken
notice of, if he were there? For, he being discovered by the Jews of Asia,
there was far greater Reason for them to have raised a Tumult about Timothy,
than about Trophimus.

After this, we find Act. 24. 27.
St. Paul kept two years in Prison, and not a word of Timothy, whom we may
justly suppose exercising his Charge all that time at Ephesus. When Saint Paul
was carried to Rome, we find not Timothy in his Company; no mention being made
of him till he Wrote the Epistles to the Phil. 1. 1.
Philippians and Coloss. 1. 1.
Colossians, and then Timothy was with him. For St. Paul had sent for him from
Ephesus in his Second 2 Timothy 4. 9.
Epistle; where, in all probability, he remained till that time. During his
stay at Rome those Epistles were Written, as likewise that to Philemon, and to
the Hebrews; in which it is said, Heb. 13. 23.
That he had been Imprisoned, and was then at Liberty; and intended shortly to
return into the Eastern Parts. From henceforwards we read nothing of Timothy in
Scripture. But Hier. in Catal.
St. Jerome himself makes him Bishop of the Ephesians, and so does Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.
Eusebius; Theod. in 1 Timothy 3. 1.
Theodoret calls him, The Apostle of those in Asia; and St. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 5.
19. Hom. 15.
Chrysostom says, The whole People of Asia were committed to his Charge, i.
e. of this Proconsular Asia, which lay about Ephesus.

And now let any reasonable Man consider, whether there be not sufficient
Proof, that the Apostolical Power of Governing Churches was communicated to
others besides the Apostles themselves; and consequently there might be a
Succession in that Power, in as many as the Apostles thought fit.

It is confessed by some Walo. Messal. c. 1. p. 40. 50. 81.
That there were Secondary Apostles, such as besides Timothy and Titus, Linus,
Clemens and Epaphroditus are said to have been; but these are called Itinerant
Preachers, and not fixed Bishops. But the same Persons observe from Theodoret.
in Argum. Epist. 1. ad Timoth.
Theodoret, not only that these were called Bishops afterward; but that the
Reason why St. Paul Wrote Epistles to some, and not to others, was, because
some he took with him, and others he entrusted with the Government of Churches.
(...), which can hardly agree to Itinerant Preachers.

But it is said, These Secondary Apostles were not sent by Christ, but by the
Apostles. And what then? Would the Apostles betray their Walo, and c. p. 5^.
Trust, and commit part of that charge to others, which was entrusted only to
themselves? But if this Office were by the Will of Christ appropriated to the
Persons of the Apostles, they could not commit it to others without breach of
Trust. and if it were not so, then this Power might be communicated to as many
as the Apostles judged convenient; and so (as I said before) we have nothing
farther to do, but to enquire, whether at their removal from particular
Churches, they did not put this Power into the Hands of others.

(II. Consid.) Whether the Apostles, upon their withdrawing, did pass this
Power over to others, as St. Paul did plainly in the Case of Timothy and Titus,
is a matter of Fact; and to be proved in such a manner as such a thing is
capable of. We find plainly, the Apostles had this Power in themselves, and did
convey it to some others; but whether Universally, and with a design to
continue this Order, must be proved by the best means, we can do a matter of
Fact of so great Antiquity.

(III. Consid.) There can be no stronger Proof of such a matter of Fact, than
the general sense of the Christian Church in the Ages next succeeding the
Apostles.

Now, as to the finding out the general sense of the Church, as to this matter,
I shall premise Three things. (1.) It is not necessary to prove from Scripture,
that the Apostles did observe the same method in all Churches; which we find,
as to the Churches of Ephesus and Crete. For we have no such particular
account, as to the other Churches; but we are certain St. Paul would do no
irregular thing, nor communicate an Office to others, which was to expire with
themselves.

(2.) It is not at all necessary, to prove, that all the Bishops mentioned in
Scripture had this Apostolical Power; for the contrary appears in the Bishops
under Timothy and Titus: and therefore the Succession is not to be drawn from
the Bishops mentioned in the Epistles to them, but from themselves; the want of
considering this one Point, has caused more perplexity in the Controversy
about Episcopacy, than any one thing besides.

(3.) It is not necessary that the Succession in this Apostolical Power be made
equally clear in all Churches; since the Records of the Church may be more
doubtful and defective in some Churches which are not in others. But yet there
are these ways to make out the general Sense of the Christian Church, as to
this point.

(1.) That the Evidence of the Succession is clear in the most conspicuous
Churches, by undoubted Testimonies.

(2.) That those who seemed most doubtful about the first Succession, do yield
the general Consent of the Church in the Practice of it.

(1.) As to the undoubted Testimonies of this Succession in the most
conspicuous Churches; I shall first appeal to Irenaeus and Tertullian, as least
liable to Exception. The former not only mentions a Succession of Persons to
the Apostles; but he says, Qui ab Apostolis ipsis instituti sunt Episcopi in
Ecclesiis -- quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant -- quos and Successores
relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
The Apostles committed the Care of the Churches to them; and left them to
succeed in their Places: Which implies, that as the Apostles themselves had the
Care of the Church, so they committed it to the Bishops, whom they chose to
succeed them. Tertullian not only mentions those in general who succeeded the
Apostles, but particularly instanceth in Polycarp, placed by St. John at
Smyrna; and Clemens, by St. Peter at Rome; and then adds, Proinde utique and
caeter^ exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici
seminis traduces habeant. Tert^ll. de praescript. c. 32.
That the other Churches had Bishops placed in them like to these. So that what
Authority Polycarp had at Smyrna, or Clemens at Rome, that Tertullian affirms
the Bishops had in other Churches. Now Irenaeus says, That Clemens had
Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae, i. e. the Episcopal Power of governing
the Church which the Apostles delivered to them. And St. Chrysostom says of
Chry^. To. 5. p. 499.
Ignatius, That he Received the Government of that Church from the Apostles own
hands. And the Commentatour on the Apocalypse, under St. Ambrose's Name, calls
the Angels of the Seven Churches, The Governors of those Churches. From all
which, we may justly infer, That this Succession was not in mere Presidency of
Order, but that the Bishops succeeded the Apostles in the Government over those
Churches. But as Theodoret well observes, The Name of Apostles was not
continued, out of Reverence Theod. ad 1 Timothy c. 3.
to the Apostles; but the Name of Bishops was then appropriated to the
Successors of the Apostles. Which alteration of the Name, has proved another
great Occasion of the Confusion in this Controversy. But that the Bishops did
succeed the the Apostles, we have the general Consent of the Ancient Cyprian.
Epist. 3. 66. ed. Ox. Hier. in Psalm. 44. ad Evagr. Ep. 85. ad Marcellam. Aug.
in Psalm. 44. Ambro^. in Ephesians. 4. 11. and in ^^^^ Cor. 12. 28.
Fathers, who were the most competent Witnesses in this Case; which is an
Argument, they believed the Apostolical Power, with respect to the Government
of Churches, did not expire with the Apostles, but was to continue, as long as
Christ had promised to be with them, i. e. to the end of the World. Matt. 28.
20.


(2.) That those who seemed most doubtful about the Original of Episcopacy,
do yield the general consent of the Church in the Practice of it. Some few of
the Ancients must be allowed to have had singular Fancies and Opinions of their
own, about this Matter. And the not yielding this, has been another great
Advantage to the Enemies of Episcopacy.

But, as to those few among the Fathers, who have advanced singular Opinions
about the first Government of Churches, I desire these things may be observed.

(1.) That it is no wonder there should be different Opinions about the
Beginnings of things, which are generally very obscure; and therefore thinking
Men are apt to frame different Hypotheses about them. As about the Original of
Civil Government; some founding it in Dominion and Property; others on Consent
of the People; others in a Natural Right of Sovereignty, which one preserves,
and the rest part with; others in Primogeniture; and lastly, others most
reasonably in Divine Providence and Institution. Whilst these things lie only
in Speculation, a difference of Opinions is hard to be prevented, and of no
such ill consequence to the World: but if Men, from those Speculations, draw
such Inferences as tend to disturb the Peace of the World, and to withdraw Men
from Obedience to Government; then such Opinions are to be looked on as
Dangerous and Seditious, and care must be taken to prevent their spreading. So
here, about the Rise of Episcopal Government, if the Question were only a
matter of Curiosity, Whether the Apostles did first try the Experiment of
Presbyters governing in common, and upon the inconveniences of that Government
set up Bishops, as St. Jerome seems to think; or, Whether there were at first a
Succession in Course, as another of the Ancients imagined, till the
inconveniences of that made a Choice necessary: Sub Nomine Ambros. in c. 4. ad
Ephesians.
If it went no farther than bare Speculations, though these Opinions may be
both false, yet they are not dangerous: But when any from hence infer, the
Episcopal Government to be an Usurpation, and that Men are bound to restore the
Right of Presbyters in opposition to them, notwithstanding the Universal
Consent of the Church, from the Apostles times; then such Opinions change their
Nature, and become mischievous in their Consequences.

(2.) It is a great Argument against these singular Opinions, that they
contradict each other; and therefore the General Sense of the Church is to be
preferred before them. For St. Jerome affirms, That from St. Mark 's time,
Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagr. 85.
in the Church of Alexandria, the Presbyters always chose one of their Body,
whom they made their Bishop: So that no such thing could ever be practiced
there, as a Succession in Course, which the other affirms. And as it is the
great Advantage of Monarchy, that it had the General Consent of Mankind in the
Eldest times; and that those who would set up Popular Government, differ so
much in the First Principles and Fundamentals of it; So it is, as to the
Government of the Church by Bishops, that even these who differ about the First
Form, yet agree in the early Change, and the Universal Consent in it.

(3.) If St. Jerome be understood of the setting up Episcopacy in the
Apostolical Churches, after the Apostles times, and a trial then made of
Governing by Presbyters, he cannot be excused from contradicting himself as
well as the rest of the Fathers. For what Experiment was there of that kind in
the Church of Alexandria, if from St. Mark 's time, the Presbyters set up one
above themselves, as an Army making choice of a General; which are his own
Expressions? Will any Man say, An Army is Governed by a Council of Inferior
Officers, when they have a General over them, though of their own choosing? So
in the Church of Jerusalem, he says. St. James Hieron. ad Gal. 2. and in
Script. Eccles.
was the first Bishop; How was that Church then Governed by a College of
Presbyters? At Ephesus, he confesses Timothy was Bishop there; and Titus in
Creet In Catalog.
. At Rome he makes Linus and Clemens to succeed in the Bishopric there. At
Antioch, he says, Ignatius was Bishop, and he owns his Epistles, and surely
there is nothing like the sole Government by Presbyters in them. At Smyrna, he
says, Polycarp was appointed Bishop, and had care of the Churches of Asia.
Where then, according to St. Jerome, is this Government by Presbyters to be
found after the Apostles times?

(4.) No Man lays down greater Reasons for the Change of this Government, than
St. Jerome does. For he says, That Episcopacy was found necessary Quod autem
poste^ u^^ electus est qui c^^teris praeponeretur in Schismatis remedium factum
est, ne unusq^isque ad se tra^ens Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. Ad Evagr.
to prevent Schisms and disorders, and tearing the Church in pieces. What could
be said Ut unus de Presbyter is elect us superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis
Ecclisie cu^a pertineret, and Schismatum sensina tollerentur. In Comment. ad
Tit.
more to the Advantage of any Government than that it was brought in upon the
best Reason for Government in the World, viz. the preserving of Peace and Order
in the Church? We need not carry the matter so far, as to make St. Jerome
charge the Apostles with Indiscretion before, in not preventing the first
Occasion of Schisms. For he might think, the Presbyters would have thought
themselves hardly dealt with, to be excluded from Government till the
Experiment were tried, and the Confusions following convinced themselves of the
Necessity of a Superior, and so made them more willing to submit. Saint Jerome
seems to have had the same kind of Notion of Church Government, which others
have of the beginnings of Civil Government, viz. That at first there was a
State of War among Mankind, and the inconveniences of that made men willing to
part with their own Rights for the sake of Peace; so these Presbyters, finding
so much Disorder and Confusion, by being left to themselves, were far better
contented to yield to such Government as would best keep the Church in Peace.

(5.) St. Jerome yields, that this Alteration of Government did Universally
obtain. For nothing less than that can be meant by his In toto orb decretum
est: He does not speak clearly, whether he means a Decree of the Apostles to
bind the Church, or a General Consent; but whichsoever be meant, he supposes no
difference, or opposition about it. If he had said it was done by the Apostles
in plain terms, he had taken away the force of his own Argument, which goes
upon the Apostles Times; but yet it is hard to conceive how such an alteration
should happen without the Apostles Act. For, if they had left the Presbyters in
full Power of Government, it is not to be imagined, they would so universally
part with it, without being obliged thereto, by those who had Authority over
them; but this St. Jerome leaves to be gathered by the Event.

(6.) St. Jerome never supposes this Alteration to have been made against any
Institution of Christ. All that he says, is, That there was a time when the
Presbyters were left to themselves, and so did Govern the Church by common
Consent. And at that time the Apostles Writing to them suppose a Bishop and
Presbyter the same: but he never says that Christ had appointed, that none
should be set over them. For then there could be no Alteration without
Violation of a Law of Christ, which he could never suppose would so universally
obtain without opposition. And he never dreamt the setting up of this
Government to be any part of the Mystery of Iniquity then working; unless he
could imagine the preserving the Peace of the Church to be it. On the contrary,
St. Jerome makes this Government in the very same Places to bear an Analogy to
Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites in the Temple, to Moses and the LXX. Elders
under the Law: and in other Places out of the heat of Dispute, when the Roman
Deacons were not in his head, he makes the Bishops the Fuerunt O Ecclesia,
Apostoli Patres tui -- Nunc quia illi recesserunt a mundo, habes pro his
Episcopos filios, quia te creati sunt; sunt enim and hi Patres tui, quia ab
ipsis regeris. Comment. ad Psalm. 44 Caeterum omnes Apostolorum Successores
sunt. Ad Evagr. Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent. Ad Marcellam.
Successors of the Apostles. But if they had come in by Usurpation, he would
have called them the Successors of Simon Magus, of Diotrephes, of Caiaphas,
and according to his warm manner of Expression, of Lucifer himself.

(7.) St. Jerome concludes this Alteration to have been made on such good
grounds, that all Persons are bound to submit to it, and to be subject to the
Bishops as their Spiritual Governors: Nay, he makes the Peace and Welfare of
E^to subditus Pontifici ^^s and quasi Animae Parentem suscipe. Ad Nepotian.

Nec hoc dico quod iftiusmodi Gradibus in Ecclesia non debeatis esse subjecti.
Quicunque enim maledixerit Patri aut Matri morte morietur. E^ Apostolus docet
P^aepositis in Ecclesia obediendum. In Mich. c. 7.

Ecclesia Salus in summi Sacerdotis Dignitate pendet, qui si non exores quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens-detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientu^ Schismata,
qu^t Sacerdotes. Advers. Luci^erianot.


the Church to depend upon it. And nothing more can be said in that respect for
any Government, than even St. Jerome speaks for Episcopacy.

(IV. Consid.) The Universal Consent of the Church being proved, there is as
great Reason to believe, the Apostolical Succession to be of Divine
Institution, as the Canon of Scripture, or the Observation of the Lord's Day.
We do not doubt but it is unlawful to add to, or to diminish from the Canon of
Scripture; and yet there is no plain Text for it, with respect to all the Books
contained in it, and some of the Books were a long time disputed in some
Churches; but the Churches coming at last to a full Agreement in this matter,
upon due search and enquiry, has been thought sufficient to bind all
after-Ages to make no Alterations in it. And as to the Divine Institution of
the Lord's Day, we do not go about to lessen it, but only to show, that some
Examples in Scripture, being joined with the Universal Practice of the Church
in its purest Ages, has been allowed to be sufficient ground not only for
following Ages to observe it, but to look on it as at least an Apostolical
Institution. Now it cannot but seem unequal, not to allow the same force, where
there is the same Evidence. And therefore our Church has wisely and truly
determined, That since the Apostles times there-have been three Orders, of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and in a Regular, well constituted Church, are to
continue to the World's end.

III. The last thing to be spoken to, is the Care and Circumspection necessary
in admitting Persons to the Exercise of this holy Function here mentioned, Lay
hands suddenly on no man. And that will appear very reasonable on these
accounts, because the Welfare of the Church, the Honor of Religion, and the
Salvation of Men's Souls depend so much upon those who are admitted to holy
Orders; and therefore it is not only Negligence and Stupidity, but
Unfaithfulness to the Trust reposed in them, if through their Fault they suffer
unfit Men to take upon them to be the Ministers of holy things.

(1.) The Welfare of the Church is so much concerned in it. It is true, some
have higher Places, greater Authority, more powerful Influence on the State of
the Church than others have; but yet every Wheel must be in its due Order and
Motion, or the whole may be easily disturbed. A loose, irregular Clergy have so
great Influence on the Minds of some People, with respect to the whole Church,
that they will never think well of that Church where such Persons are employed.
For they will not distinguish the Good and Bad, where it is more suitable to
their Interest, and Prejudices not to do it.

And we find, by too sad Experience, if those who are disaffected to our Church
have met with unfit Persons in their Places, though very obscure and remote,
what perpetual Clamor they make with it all their Lives after; and what
Insinuations are given, that the rest were alike; and this is still pleaded,
how unjustly soever, as the most popular Argument for Separation. So that a
Scandalous Clergyman does unspeakable Mischief, not only to his own and
others Souls, but to the whole Church he owns himself to be of. And very many
good Examples do not signify so much to the Benefit of a Church, as a few bad
ones do to the Mischief of it.

(2.) The Honor of Religion lies at Stake too; which suffers very much, when
those who pretend to Teach others the way to Heaven, are seen going themselves,
and drawing others into the Broad Way to Destruction. Our Preaching to the
People their Duties, does but make them more narrowly watch and observe our
Lives, to see whether we live agreeably to the Directions we give them. And if
we slight in our Practice what we Preach in the Pulpit, if we act our selves
just contrary to what we require from them, it will be hardly possible to
convince them we are in earnest, and believe any thing of Religion our selves.
And how can we imagine they should regard what we say in the Pulpit, if they
plainly see we regard it not our selves when we are out of it? It was
Aristotle's observation long ago; That it is not what Men speak, which moves
the People so much, as the Opinion they have of the Person that speaks: and
therefore the Orators of old put into the Definition Fab. Quintil. l. 2. c.
16. l. 12. c. 1.
of one fit to persuade the People, that he must have the Reputation of a good
Man; otherwise all he speaks will be thought only Art or Design.

I know no way to have the reputation of a Good Man, like being so: and we are
infinitely more concerned to be so, than those, whose great Business was to put
false Colors upon things. We speak the Words of Truth and Soberness; let us
not then make the People question them, by not finding the due effects of them
in our own Conversations. They are very apt to suspect we look on Preaching as
our Trade, and mind it no more than the Silver-smiths did the Shrines they made
for Act. 19. 24.
Diana, which they set off to the best advantage, not for the Reverence they
had for Diana, but for the Gain She brought to the Craftsmen. We have no such
effectual Way to convince our Auditors, that we mean what we say, as when they
find us to be great Examples our selves of the Duties we press upon them, viz.
of Devotion, Humility, Charity, Sobriety, Mortification, Contentedness,
Peaceabless, and Universal Holiness and when the People see our Light shining
before them, by the good Works we do, we shall there by excite them to
glorify God, to think better of Religion, and to follow our Example.

(3.) The Salvation of Men's Souls depends very much upon the Care and Conduct
of those who are to be their Guides to Heaven. For, if they lead them astray,
whom they think they are bound to follow, their destruction will be
unavoidable. When the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the Di^ch; but
yet the blind leader falls first, and falls heaviest and deepest, and the other
falls upon him, and sinks him lower. It is a sad thing to have the Guilt of
other Men's sins, as well as our own to answer for; when by our Wilful Neglect
of our known Duty, or by our Examples, or by our Erroneous Doctrine, we prove
the Occasion of damning those Souls, which were committed to our Charge to
conduct them to Heaven.

The Care of Souls would be a dreadful thing indeed, if we were to answer for
all the Miscarriages of the People committed to our Charge: But if they are
such as happen through the voluntary and plain Omission of the Duty laid upon
us; or our being Accessory to their Commission of them, they may be justly
charged on our Account.

With what Care and Caution then ought all Persons to enter upon so weighty, so
holy, so tremendous a Charge? What Preparation of Mind is necessary to consider
it! What Fasting and Prayer to obtain God's Assistence in it! What Wisdom, and
Piety, and Resolution to discharge it!

But let us not be disheartened; we serve a Gracious Master, and in the best
Employment; and although we may meet with many Difficulties, within and
without, and on all sides, yet let us be steadfast, unmovable, always abou^ding
in the Work of the Lord, for as much as we know, that our labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 18. l. 21. dele not.

37. in the M^rgin, l. 1^. r. cui ^i non exo^.


