A STOCK OF DIVINE KNOWLEDGE.

Being a lively description of the Divine Nature.

OR, The Divine Essence, Attributes, and Trinity particularly explaned and
profitably applied. The first, showing us what God is: the second, what we
ought to be.

By the late learned and laborious Preacher, and worthy instrument of Gods
glory, RICHARD STOCK, Sometimes Rector of Alhallowes Breadstreet in London.

This is life Eternal to know thee, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.

John 17.3. LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Philip Nevil, and are to be sold at
his shop in Ivy Lane, at the sign of the Gun. 1641.

TO THE WORTHILY HONORED, THE RELIGIOUS and virtuous Lady, the Lady ANNE
YELVERTON, Wife to the right Worshipful, Sir CHRISTOPHER YELVERTON of Easton
Maudet, in the County of Northampton, Knight, Grace and Peace.
THE whole counsel of God concerning man's salvation, is comprised by the
Apostle in these two, Acts 20.21 cum 27.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. The whole
duty of man is contained in David's charge to Solomon his son, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and a
willing mind. The whole matter of condemnation is 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
Ignorance of God, and disobedience to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
This last is the natural condition of all mankind, Titus 3.3.
we were foolish and disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, etc. He that
thinks himself the wisest, is Job. 11.12 Acuti ad vana hebetes ad aeterua.
Amb. hex. l. 5.
borne like the wild Ass colt (it may be quick-sighted in vain and earthly
things) in matters spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.14.
neither receiving the things of God, nor able to know them, in this point
worse then the Devils James 2.19.
for they believe and tremble) and like the senseless stones, or Psalm. 49.20.
(...). Clem. Alex. adm. ad genesis
the beasts that perish. Every man is a child of disobedience, a servant to
diverse lusts, stuffed with rebellion against God, in this point Joh. 8.44.
like the Devils, and worse then the senseless creatures; of which the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119 91 Non intelligere belluinu^ est, intellecta non agere,
ultra belluina immanitatis rabiem esse videtur. Hill. de Trinit. l. 1.
They are all thy servants; Therefore the Apostle pronounces universally
concerning all, that they are children of wrath by nature. Ephesians. 2 3. (...).
Clem. ubi supra.
We (the Apostles and believers) were children of wrath by nature, as well as
others, no less then Pagans and unbeleevers.

The freeing of men from this estate, is the work of the Spirit, the Spirit of
Ephesians. 1.17.
wisdom and revelation; of wisdom to 1 Cor. 10.11.12.
search the deep things of God; of revelation to discover them: the spirit Joh.
16.13.
of truth to lead into all truth; the spirit of holiness 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. (...).
Chrysostom. in Joh. hom. 1.
to sanctify throughout the whole soul, the whole spirit and body. It is the
end of the Scriptures, they were written Psalm. 19.7.
to give wisdom to the simple, and to convert the soul: It is the end of the
Ministry, which was ordained by Christ Ephesians. 4.10.
for the collection and edification of the Church, Act. 26.18. (...). Basil.
hexa. hom. 1. and in Psalm. 1. in initio.
to turn men from darkness to light, and from Satan to the living God.

Contrariwise, to hold men in the estate of Darkness, and to drown them in
perdition and destruction, through either ignorance or disobedience, or both,
is the whole business and employment of the Divill, the Prince of darkness:
he always compasses the earth 1 Pet. 5.8.
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Madam, it is a woeful spectable to behold, how exceedingly this Prince of
darkness prevails; how many eyes the 2 Cor. 4.3, 4
God of this world has blinded, that the glorious light of the Gospel cannot
shine unto them; how many Gal. 3.1.
fools he has bewitched, that they should not obey the truth; how many have
Psalm. 36.3.
left off both to understand and to do good; most men live Ephesians. 2.12.
without God in the world; Some like natural bruit beasts, Jer. 2.8. (...).
Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 2.
neither knowing him, nor asking nor inquiring after him. Others (worse then
these) Job. 21.14.
rejecting knowledge, and saying unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, shutting their eyes against the light, stopping their
ears against the word, and despising the means of knowledge; many miss-led by
seduced, (...) ad Smyrnen. (...). Basil. (...). Naz. orat. 1.
or willingly seducing guides (beasts in the shape of men, as Ignatius terms
them) when they think they know God, are farther from, and harder to be
taught true knowledge, then they that know nothing at all; Many say Tit. 1.6.
Ignat. ad Magnesios. (...). Clem. Alexan.
they know God, and by their works deny him, being corrupt and abominable,
divorcing (what God requires should be joined together) obedience from
knowledge, adulterate and false money, that have the imprease of God in their
understandings, and the image of the Devil in their hearts; like Toads that
have a precious stone in their beads, and in their whole bodies nothing but
poison.

The serious and sad consideration of the imminent danger, and infinite
multitude of those that know not God, or disobey him, being known, should
excite in all that tender the everlasting welfare of their immortal souls, a
more then ordinary solicitude of joining these two together, Repentance to
their Faith, Obedience to their Knowledge; which if seen in one (like Castor
and Pollux appearing at once) do promise a prosperous navigation; if they be
separated each from other, they menace a ship-wracke. They that know God and
disobey him, are like the Gentiles, Romans 1.28.
who when they knew him, did not worship him as God, but captivated the truth
under unrighteousness. They that think to serve him, and know him not, are
liable to the Samaritans condemnation, Joh. 4.22.
Ye worship ye know not what: and equally guilty with the superstitious
Athenians Acts 17.23
who erected an altar to the unknown God. Both these miss salvation, the one
for want of knowledge, the other for want of obedience: both these fall into
the pit; the one blindfold and not seeing it, the other seeing it, and
desperately leaping into it.

If we desire to attain salvation, (...). In Genesis hom. 13.
and escape hell (says Chrysostom) we must be adorned both with the
knowledge of the orthodox faith, and the integrity of a holy life. Happy is he
that finds wisdom Prove. 3.13.
says Solomon, and Job 28.2 S.
Job describes that wisdom: The fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to
depart from evil, is understanding. Blessed are your eyes, for they see, Mat.
13.16.
says our Savior Christ, and yet not unless ye see to do. Joh. 13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

These graces must be joined together, because severed they be not graces. The
grace of knowledge consists not in the naked and perfunctorie theorie and
apprehension of divine truths, but in conformity to them. A man knows no more
truly, then he puts in practice. 1 John 2.4. Cognoscere non in sola, and
perfunctoria scientia est, sed in eorum operatione quae oporteat fieri. Amb. de
Parad. c 6. Non est vera scientia boni, nisi ad hoc comprehendatur ut agatur.
Prosp. Nihil estaliud scientia nostra quam culpa, qui ad hoc tantum modo leg
emnovimus, ut majore offensione peccemus. Salv.
He that says, I know God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him; if a man know God, and disobey him, his knowledge is
his fault. Obedience without knowledge, is not obedience, but will worship and
superstition; as faith without works is a dead faith: so works without faith,
are dead works; the prayers of ignorant persons, (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom.
2.
in their own conceits good prayers, are not good, because the sacrifice of
Eceles. 5.
fools; their meanings, which they call good, are not good Pro. 19.
without knowledge the heart is not good, etc Light is in the second (as in the
first creation) the first work. 2 Pet. 1.3.
All things that appertain to life and godliness, are given us through
knowledge: therefore without knowledge there cannot be either life or
godliness, or any thing that belongs to them.

The image of God (in which we were at first created, unto which we must be
renewed) consists chiefly in knowledge and holiness, not in one of these, but
in both. The glorious Angels (who are proposed to us as patterns) are
understandingly obedient; Psalm. 103.20
they do his commandments, hearkening to the voice of his word: If we know
God and serve him we are like the Angels, (...). Ignat. ad Ephesians.
like our patterns, perfect pleasing to God: if either of these be wanting,
the danger is great, the blind and the lame equally an abomination.

God has given to man an understanding and a will, an eye to see, and a band
to execute; and having given both, (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 2.
he requires both, one of these parts will not serve his turn: He has given
us a mind to know him, 1 John 5.20.
says the Apostle: He has made us to understand more then the beasts, says
Elthu in Job. 35.11.
Job, that we might know him, which the beasts cannot do; It is an injury to
God, Non sufficit Deo intellectus nisi fiat in amore ejus voluntas, imo nec
haec duo sufficient nisi and memoria, etc. Amb. de dign. hum. c. 2.
and a debasing of our understanding, to lay out those intellectuals which God
has bestowed on us for himself, on earthly and other things, and to yield him
a brutish (because a blind) obedience: He has given us will and affections,
and a body to love him, to fear him, to delight in him, to serve him, etc. It
is no less injury and unthankefulnesse to God, to withdraw these from him,
(...). In Joh. hom. 6.
and bestow them on our lusts, on sin, on Satan, on the world, on the
creatures, on vain things, by which, for which they were not made. I conclude,
with Chrysostom, Let us give all diligence that we may obtain a clear
understanding of the true faith, and add unto that a holy life, and a shining
conversation.

Amongst all those points which are objected to our knowledge, there is none
more generally necessary and useful, then this of God and Christ, of God in
Christ: This is the first principle and foundation of faith and obedience: Heb.
11.6.
He that comes unto God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him, says the Apostle: without this knowledge no
grace can be obtained, no salvation can be hoped for: upon this depends faith:
(for Psalm. 9.10.
they only that know his Name will trust in him: that which ignorant persons
mistakingly call faith, is mere presumption) and patience (for Heb. 10.32.
they only that are illuminated, can endure the fight of great afflictions,
others may be senseless, brutish, stupid, these only truly patient:) and all
obedience (for Psalm. 119.34.
they only can keep the commandments, to whom he has given understanding,
others as they desire not the knowledge of his ways, so they say in their
hearts Job. 21.14.15.
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit should we have
if we pray unto him? or as Exodus 5.3.
Pharaoh, who is the Lord that I should obey his voice?) upon the knowledge of
God in Christ depends interest in mercy, and salvation; Psalm. 36.10.
God will draw forth his loving kindness to them that know him; they that know
him not, are as far Ose 27.11.
from finding favor as from knowledge, God has bound it with an oath, Psalm.
95.10.11.
That the people that have not known his ways, shall not enter into his rest.
Notable is that speech of holy Ignatius: (...). Ep. ad Smyrnen.
If a man believe not that Christ is incarnate, if he confess not his cross,
his passion, his blood which he powered forth for the salvation of the world,
(and this be cannot do without knowledge) he cannot obtain everlasting life;
though a King, though a Priest, though a Ruler, though a private person, though
a Master, though a servant, though a man, though a woman; let him that
receives, receive it, let him that hears, hear it. The ground of this
speech is that of our Savior Christ. 1 John 17.3. (...). Chrysostom. in Joh.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and him whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ: because this knowledge of God is thus useful, and of this
absolute necessity to salvation. It ought to be the business and maine study
of every one that desires grace, or glory, to search after him, and that he may
find him, to search after him first, where he may be found, and secondly, as
he will be sought.

First, God may be found in his word, there is no point in which nature is more
blind, from which it is more averse, then this of God, and Christ; God is
great, and we know him not says Elihu, this Well is deep, and we have nothing
of our own to draw with. There are manifest impressions of God stamped upon
the creature: The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power, and Godhead; Not only the Heavens, and the firmament, his
glorious, and magnificent workmanship, declare his glory, but the beasts, the
fowls, the earth, the fishes, the least, the most contemptible of his
creatures, show forth his handy work, yet the wisest of men by these know not
God, by these (which is worse) were taken off from God, from seekeing him, from
serving him, from seeking him while they employed their understandings wholly
in the search of the secrets of nature, and spared no time to enquire after the
God of nature, from serving him, whilst they doted upon, and deified the
creature, worshipping the Sun, the Moon, the Host of heaven; nay, four
footed beasts, and creeping things, and plants, and herbs in stead of God But
after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, (...).
Athan. cont. Gentes, (...). Clem. Alex. ad gentes adm. Quae Deus occulta eum
voluit non sunt scrutanda, quae autem manifesta fecit non sunt neganda ne in
illis illicite curiosi in istis damnabiliter inveniamur ingrati. Prosp. de
vocat. gentes.
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe; It
has pleased God to discover himself (so far forth as we are able, and it is
needful to salvation to know him) in his holy word: in this God may be found,
in this God must be sought. This is that light in which, and by which we may
behold and gaze upon God; within this we must contain our inquiry after him,
that we wax not vain in our empty speculations, and be precipitated into
errors: as far as this we must extend our inquiry after him, lest we be
found guilty of wilful ignorance, and convict of Atheism. He that desires to
find God, must to the Law and to the Testimonies, must search the Scriptures,
they testify of him; As the sun discovers himself by his own beams, and
the fire by his own light; so God reveals himself by his own word; a light
more bright then the sun in his glory, discovering God, and opening our
blind eyes that we may see him.

Secondly, he must seek him as he will be sought, and that in these
particulers; First, with diligence of endeavor, consisting in the dailinesse
and serious earnestness of inquiry; this mystery is great, man's capacity is
slow, it is constant labor that must raise up slow capacities, to great
mysteries: Joshua had a charge to meditate in the book of the law day, and
night; (...). Chrysostom. in Joh. hom. 53.
the Bereans had a commendation for doing it, and the Eunuch a reward, and we a
promise if we do it. If thou incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply thy
heart to understanding, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy
voice for understanding, if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her
as for hid treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God. This is that which our Savior requires in his
command. (...). Athan. hom. 2.
Search the Scriptures; for what is it to search but carefully and diligently
to inquire out something that is hidden, the daily, and serious reading, and
meditation of the w rd, make the language of the holy Ghost familiar to us, and
the eye of the soul quick sighted.

Secondly, Qui vindemiam colligit vasa prius mundare consuevit quibus vinum.
infunditur -- Emunda oculos mentis -- ne qua festuca peccati ac em tui
perstringat ingenii, Ambr. Hex. lib. 4. (...). Clem. Alex. Chrysostom. in Joh hom. 1.
with a washed and a pure conscience; this is the Apostle Saint James his
council. Lay aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness; with him
agrees S. Peter. Lay aside all malice, and all guile, etc. as newborn babes
desire the sincere milk of the Word: No man will power precious liquors into
unclean vessels, nor new wine into old bottles: God will not infuse saving
knowledge into sensual hearts, but the secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will teach them his covenant; they that desire to see God,
and know him as he is, must prepare themselves with preparations befitting God,
for an unsanctified eye cannot see him as he should be seen, nor know him as
he should be known.

Thirdly, with a teachable, and a tractable heart, ready to entertain that
light which shines into it, and embrace and submit unto that truth which God
reveals concerning himself, (...). Basil in Psalm. 115.
without consulting with flesh and blood: This is a necessary condition;
foolish man that cannot perfectly comprehend the nature of the smallest, of the
basest creature, is too ready to measure God by his brutish understanding:
there is a generation that make reason (which they tear me right) the judge of
faith, and boggle at, Concedamus cognitione^ sui Deo, dictisque ejus p^a
veneratione famulemur: Idoneus enim sibi testis est, qui nisi per se cognitus
non est. Hill. de Trin. lib. 1.
or plainly deny those mysteries which reason cannot reach to, and others that
profess not so much to the world, secretly harbor the same principle in their
hearts, and manifest it in their disputes: they that will know God, must lay
aside carnal reasonings, and bring with them faith to believe what God has
revealed concerning himself, though they apprehend it not. God knows himself
best, and is a sufficient witness to himself, no words can describe him, Hoc
mirabilis magis Dei virtus est quod intelligi ab homine magnitudo justitiae non
potest ut quantum ad imbecillitatem humanam pertinet pene injustitie especiem
magnitudo justitiae habere videatur.
no mind can conceive him as be is, if they could he should not be infinite,
and so not God. In this (says Salvian) is the excellency of God more
admirable, because man cannot understand his justice, (say the same of all his
attributes, man cannot understand his wisdom, power, mercy, etc.) but the
greatness of his justice seems to man to be in a manner injustice; (...).
Chrysostom. in Heb. hom. 2. (...). Just. Martyr cum Tryphone.
It should be sufficient to persuade us to believe, that God has said it: it
is one part of that glory which we must yield to God, and comfort that we must
afford to our selves, to acknowledge that we serve such a God as infinitely
exceeds all that we can speak or think.

Fourthly, with prayerfull hearts; The same spirit by whom the Scriptures were
inspired, is the expositer of the Scriptures: There is a veil over every man's
heart naturally, when he reads the word; where this Spirit is, the veil is
done away, no man can see the things of God, but he to whom God reveals them,
and be reveals them to them that ask him. But of this in the Treatise.

Lastly, he must make use of the Ministers of God, of their lips and labor:
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should enquire the Law
at his mouth. The Eunuch read the word, but understood it not, God sent Philip
to instruct him: Cornelius fasted and prayed, but understood not; the Angel
warnes him to send for Peter, and hear words of him. This was done for our
instruction, to teach us to make use of those Pastors which God raises up
according to his own heart, to teach us in wisdom and understanding.

Madam, it is the scope of this Treatise to reveal God, and show what use
should be made of this knowledge. It was pe^ned by an able minister of the
Gospel, in his time a burning and shining light, eminent above others for his
learning and for his labors. Diverse other books of this subject have out run
this into the world (as Ahimaz did Cushi) I doubt not but this that comes after
them, will deliver the message as fully as any that went before it: the Author
in it has clearly opened dark points, has brought down high points to low
capacities, has unfolded intricate questions, cut in sunder the sinews of
many heresies made profitable applications of all points herein discussed: I
confess it comes not forth so gorgeously attired as some others; it is an
orphane, the womb that bred it had not strength to bring it forth: it wants
the enticing words of man's wisdom, the Apostle wated them, and gloried in it,
(...). In Joh. hom. 1.
he was rude in speech but not in knowledge, he did discover (as Chrysostom
said of Saint John) the naked truth with a naked head, he was a preacher and
not an Orator, Devita contemplat. lib. 1 cap. 23.24.
he persuaded God, and not man, and therefore did (what Prosper counsels all
Preachers to do) lay aside Rhetorical paintings much fitter to obscure plain
matters, then illustrate dark ones; Non tam otiosorum auribus pl^ceant, quam
aegrotorum mentibus prosunt. Salvi.
it is their duty not to rub itching ears with froathy eloquence, but to cure
sick hearts with sound doctrine. This was the purpose of the Author in this
treatise, which how far be has attained, I leave it to others to judge: the
nurse is many times as fond of the infant she suckles, as is the mother that
brought it into the world: my judgment therefore may be partial.

Madam, this book as it is, I present to your Ladyship, it is not any
personal engagement has enforced me to it, (though Iowe you my self) but
your goodness which I acknowledge and desire to help. (...). Just. Martyr cum
Triphone.
Madam, it is a certain truth, that God has bestowed on women as well as men,
a reasonable soul, and has given to them a capacity of performing all works
commendable and virtuous: he implanted in them his own image; this they have
lost (the woman was first in the transgression) and are in as a woeful a
condition naturally as man, and must be saved out of it by the same means, and
in the same method a man is saved, by repentance toward God, and faith toward
Christ, the joining of knowledge and obedience concerns them. (...). Chrysostom. in
Joh.
Madam, I have heard your Ladyship plead for these things, and know in part
your pains and your progress in them: I know a book of this subject will not
be unacceptable, will not be neglected by your Ladyship. Ministers (like
husbandmen) sow their seed with most readiness where they expect the greatest
increase. Madam, your growth and increase in those graces which are already
eminent in your Ladyship, is the thing I desire, and this book, with Gods
blessing on it, may procure. The prayer of the Apostle for the Colossians,
shall be mine for your Ladyship, that you may be filled with the knowledge of
Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that you might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God.

Your Ladyships to be commanded in Christ, JAMES CRANFORD.

The Table of the Contents of the Chapters, Titles, and Texts, hanled in this
book.
Chap. 1. Its man's wisdom to know the true God Page 1 Text. Jer. 9.23.24. Thus
says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom etc. But let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me etc.
Chap. 2. How to know the true God. Page 7. Psalm. 147.19.20. He shows his
word unto Jacob: his Satutes and his Judgments unto Israel, etc.
Chap. 3. Why God is to be sought in his word etc. Page 18. John 5.39. Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life: and they are they,
which testify of me.
Chap. 4. The Scriptures were written by divine inspiration. Page 29. 2 Timothy
3.16. All Scriptures are given by divine inspiration of God.
Chap. 5. Of the authority, and sufficiency of the Scriptures. Page 39. Text. 2 Timothy 3.16.17. All Scriptures etc. And are profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, etc.
Chap. 6. Of God. Page 50. Heb. 11.6. He that comes unto God must believe
that God is, and that he is a rewarder etc.
Chap. 7. Of God and his Essence. Page 60. Exodus 3.14. And God said to Moses, I
am that I am.
Chap. 8. That God is a spirit most perfect. Page 71. John 4.24. God is a
spirit, and they that worship him must etc.
Chap. 9. Of the Simplicity and Eternity of God Page 84. Exodus 34.6. The Lord,
the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, etc.
Chap. 10. Of the Immutability and Infiniteness of God. Page 96. 1 Timothy 6.16.
Who only has immortality dwelling in lights.
Chap. 11. Of the life and wisdom of God Page 108. 1 Timothy 1.17. To the
invisible and only wise God etc.
Chap. 12. Of the will of God. Page 121. Esaias 46.10. My counsel shall stand,
and I will do all my pleasure.
Chap. 13. Of the Truth of God. Page 133 Deuteronomy. 32.4. Thou art a God of Truth.
Chap. 14. Of the goodness of God. Page 143. Text. Psalm. 34.8. Taste and see
how gracious the Lord is.
Chap. 15. Of the Love of God. Page 155. 1 John 4.8. God is Love.
Chap. 16. Of the Grace of God. Page 170. Ephe. 2.8. For by grace are we saved
etc.
Chap. 17. Of the Mercy of God. Page 188. Psalm. 147.8.9. The Lord is gracious,
full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. etc.
Chap. 18. Of the Justice of God Page 199. Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is a righteous Lord,
and all his ways are judgment.
Chap. 19. Of the Anger of God. Page 212. Jer. 64.5. Behold thou art wrath, for
we have sinned.
Chap. 20. Of the Hatred of God. Page 224. Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all the
workers of iniquity.
Chap. 21. Of the Authority of God. Page 236. Psalm. 22.28. For the Kingdom is
the Lords and he is the governor amongst the Nations.
Chap. 22. Of the Power of God. Page 246. Job 9.19. If I speak of strength,
lo he is strong.
Chap 23. Of the Persons in the Trinity. Page 256. John 5.7. There are three
which bear record in heaven: the etc.
Chap. 24. ibid. Chap. 25. Of God the Father. Page 268. Text. Heb. 1.5. Thou
art my Son this day etc.
Chap. 26. Of God the Son. Page 279. Heb. 1.5. Thou art my Son this day have
I begotten thee etc.
Chap. 27. Of God the holy Ghost. Page 291. John 15.26. The spirit of truth
which proceeds from the Father, he shall etc.

OF GOD AND HIS ATTRIBUTES.
CHAP. I.
JER. 9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wiseman glory in his wisdom,
etc. -- But let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord.


QUESTION.

WHerein consists the chiefest wisdom of man?

Answer. In the true knowledge of the true God.

The first thing observable in this Text is this; That the chiefest wisdom of
every man consists in the true knowledge of the true God: For out of it I
reason thus; That is man's chiefest wisdom, in which he ought more to rejoice,
then in all worldly wisdom, or worldly strength, or all earthly riches; in
which most men have their chiefest rejoicing. But, every man is bound to glory
more in the knowledge of God, then in worldly wisdom, etc. Therefore, etc.

This is confirmed, Jer. 31.33, 34. I will make a covenant with the house of
Israel; and this is the sum of the covenant, They shall all know me, from
the least of them to the greatest: In which place is showed what is the
chiefest end of man's new creation, viz. the true knowledge of God: and
therefore the people, Hosea 6.3. after that the Lord had raised them from death
to life, say, And we shall know the Lord.

Qu. Why does the chiefest wisdom of man consist in this?

Reason 1. Because without the knowledge of God, a man cannot know himself.
The knowledge of a man in things natural is an excellent knowledge; yet it is
nothing without the knowledge of himself, as Saint Augustine says. Though a
man know all mysteries, to the breadth of the earth, and the depth of the sea,
and know not himself, he is like to a man that makes a building without a
foundation: but without the knowledge of God, no man can know himself; because
of that wicked pride that is naturally in man, that when he looks upon
himself, he thinks himself so holy, just, pure, etc. that he thinks
injustice to be justice, impurity to be purity, etc. but if once he comes to
see the face of God, then he sees his own justice to be injustice, and his
own purity to be impurity, and his own righteousness to be folly; therefore
it is the principal thing for a man to know God.

Reas. 2. Because without this, a man cannot worship God aright, which is the
end of his creation: and to this purpose there are many places of Scripture
call upon us, Pro. 12.13. Psalm. 100. Come, let us worship the Lord, for he
has made us. The worship of God is commanded in the first Table, and the
principal thing in the first Table is the knowledge of God; intimating thus
much, That there is no worship of God, where there is no knowledge of God: and
therefore, that man might know how to worship him, he first declares himself,
saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage: and this is the method which David lays down to
Solomon; first, Know thou the God of thy Father, and then, serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

Reas. 3. Because without this, a man cannot be partaker of true happiness.
Christ says, John 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God,
that is to say, There is no way to attain to life, but in the knowledge of the
true God. It is not the knowledge of all the things in the world that can make
a man happy; but the knowledge of God can: for, as Saint Augustine says, He
is an unhappy man that knows all things, and is ignorant of the knowledge of
God; but, says he, he that knows thee, and is not vain in his conversation,
but labors to worship thee, he is the happy man; but every man else is worse
then a Toade or Snake. And he (says the same Father) that has a tree, and can
tell the height and breadth of it by a Jacob's staff, and knows not the
Creator of it, is an unhappy man; but another man that has a tree, and cannot
tell the height of it, nor knows the number of the branches of it, yet knows
thee the Creator of it, he is the happy man; if he be never so poor, nay,
if he be as poor as Job, he is the true happy man: but if he know all
things, and know not thee, there is no way, but he must needs perish.

Use 1. This then shows, That the chiefest folly of men is their ignorance of
God; whether it be a necessary ignorance in them to whom God has denied the
means of knowledge; or a negligent ignorance in them who have the means, and
do not apply themselves to them; or a wilful ignorance in them who pull
themselves from the means, whether they be Idiots, that know nothing, or men
of understanding and learning, that know other things, yet are fools in the
knowledge of God. Where is the Scribe? where is the learned Egyptian? where is
the disputer of the Law? but God has chosen the poor and the base things of
this world, that they should confound the mighty, 1 Cor. 1.20. So, I may say,
Where is the learned Egyptian? has not God made the wise men of the world
fools? We have a Proverb, The greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men;
True, if ignorant of God, and see not that true wisdom stands in this. I may
say, as the Wiseman says, Why is there a price in the hand of a fool to get
wisdom, and he has no heart to it? Pro. 17.16. Why is there such
understanding in other things, and men have no heart to seek after this?
Certainly, the holy Ghost calls them fools; for Solomon in Eccles. 4.13.
faith, he preferrs a young and wise child, before an old and foolish King that
will not be instructed. So I say, a poor man, if wise in the knowledge of God,
is better then the wisest Clerk in the world, being ignorant of God: Brethren,
come out of this ignorance, labor for the knowledge of God, and labor for
this in the first place, to know that ye are but fools, in all that ye know
besides God: and certainly, this will be the beginning of the best wisdom;
for then ye will say with the heathen man, Though I know all things, yet I
know the least part of that which I ought to know. And let me tell you, this
is the bane of knowledge, because you think you know enough: The more knowledge
a man has, the more ignorant he seems to himself; and, he that thinks he
knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.

Use 2. This shows their error, or rather impiety, that think the knowledge of
God not necessary for women; of this fault are the Papists guilty; If this be
an error, I pity them; but if impiety, I abhor it: for Solomon says, that
error is worthy the pitying; but iniquity is worthy to be abhorred. Are not
women bound to know themselves, which they cannot do without the knowledge of
God? stand they not bound by creation to worship God aright, which they cannot
do without the knowledge of God? must they not be made partakers of the same
glory, and eternal happiness with men? deny these if thou dare. Brethren,
they are bound to know, God the Lord that made them, made man male and female
in his own image. If the woman must renew that she lost in Adam, then she
ought to know God; so the Apostle, Be renewed in knowledge, after the image of
him, Col. 3.10. Undoubtedly, this is nothing but the spite of hell, to hinder
women from the knowledge of God.

Use 3. Brethren, believe you this that I say, that it is the chiefest wisdom
of man to know God? if so be you believe, faith will breed care to accomplish
what you believe; you make known to us that you do not believe, if you do
not take this care: And you must give me leave to believe, that if you do not
believe, then certainly you are Atheists. Brethren, do you believe this to
salvation? then you must do as men do in Trades, look what knowledge is most
gainefull for them, and for that they labor above all others; this knowledge
of God is the chiefest knowledge that belongs to the trade of a Christian,
labor for this. As Saint James says, Show me your faith by your works if you
be willing to be saved, or else you thrust your selves into the mouth of the
Devil. Saint Augustine says, that a Christian without the knowledge of God,
differs nothing from an Indian or a Pagan; they are beyond thee, in the
knowledge of Arts and Trades, they do exceed thee: Now this knowledge of God
is that which makes thee a Christian; without this thou art no better then an
Indian or Pagan: Wherefore, if thou will differ from Atheists, labor for the
knowledge of God, else there is no difference: therefore submit your selves and
your families to this order of catechizing; that you may pull your selves and
your families out of the claws of the Devil. And further, for help, you must
use prayer and meditation, that you may come to it prepared. Art thou a
Christian, and can thou let the morning pass without private prayer with thy
family, and with thy self alone? One demanded what would make a good Scholar;
another answered, A good Master, and a good student, and thirdly, to teach
others; and if you follow this course, happy shall you be.

CHAP. II.
PSALM. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with every Nation, etc.


THis Psalm shows us what is the chiefest wisdom of a man; and we have
found it out, that it is the true knowledge of the true God; Therefore,
forasmuch as God is invisible, and no man has seen God at any time (a
principle so certain, that for this cause the Jews put the Prophet Isaiah to
death, because he said, that he saw God, Isa. 6.1. sitting upon a throne, high
and lifted up, etc.) a necessary question will arise, that since God cannot be
seen,

Quest. How can a man come to know God?

Ans. God is to be known two ways; First, by Nature, and those natural
notions that are in the minds of men; or, by those effects that declare this
excellent workmanship, as his wisdom, his power, his justice, his mercy, and
the like. Secondly, by Revelation; both of these intimated in that text that I
have read, where he says, that God gave unto his Church his Law and Statutes.
That we may further confirm this, It is manifest, that all Nations at all
times have (as it were) groped after God, to find what a kind of one he was,
that they might know him: This does appear by those excellent Writings that
many heathen men have written; as the books of Tully, etc. as also by many
testimonies of Scripture; as Saint Paul, when he had to do with the Gentiles,
pressed this thing, that by natural reason God was to be known, and that two
ways; either by the natural and inbred notions that are planted in the minds
of men; or by those great works which were wrought by God. This appears,
because that which might be known of God, is manifest by his works, Romans
1.20. the Apostle there speaks of the Gentiles, and of the wise men of the
Gentiles, that God might be known in knowing of themselves and of his works.
The learned understand that place only of Philosophers, who by search have
known God; and they should have taught this knowledge unto others, that God
might have been known by others also: but they, out of the pride of their
hearts, kept it to themselves: And to this purpose there is an Epistle extant
of Aristotle's, which he wrote to Alexander the Great, wherein he says that
he had written them (meaning his Physics) as if he had not written: and the
same Apostle says, Act. 17.27. that God was near to every one of them by
these effects, by his wisdom, by his power, and the rest, as the Creator and
the things created; because a man cannot look upon any thing that God has
made, but he shall see some footsteps leading to the knowledge of God; much
more when he shall look upon the frame of heaven and earth; Psalm. 19.1. The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy-works.
The holy Ghost shows that there is something by which the most barbarous
Nations that are cannot be ignorant of God: therefore we add that which the
Apostle has, Romans 1.20. the invisible things of God, even his eternal power
and Godhead, are clearly seen, being considered in his works, as his
government, and preservation of all things; therefore says the same Apostle,
The Lord left not himself with out witness, in that he did good, and gave us
rain, etc. Act. 14.17. that though they had not his Word, yet they might grope
after God. the Apostle alleges a proof out of one of their own Poets, that
taught them, you are Gods generation; if you be of Gods generation, you must
have reason and understanding that you may in your selves find out the
knowledge of God. This specially appears in man's body, because the body of man
is called a little world, upon any part whereof if a man look, he may find
God; so that a man by natural knowledge may come to know that there is a God,
and what he is. And this is the Answer to the first Question.

Quest. 2. Why is God to be known naturally?

Answ. 1. The Answer stands in three things: First, because there never was any
Nation, City, or Family without religion, and a kind of worship.

2. Because that men by this natural knowledge might be provoked to search for
a more perfect knowledge.

3. Because all men might be without excuse.

First, the answer stands thus; There have been many Nations that knew not God
by Revelation; but there never was any Nation, City, or Family without some
kind of worship. From whence we infer, that they have some natural knowledge
of God; for, where there is religion, there is some knowledge that there is a
God. This principle of the being of God was so deeply planted in them, that
rather then they would not have a God, they worshipped the works of their own
hands: and this shows they have some natural knowledge.

Secondly, God has still kept his Church in some eminent place, whither they
(moved by this natural instinct) might fly, to be more fully instructed in
the knowledge of the true God, as Esaias speaks, Come and let us go up to the
house of God, for he will teach us his ways. Indeed, we know something of him
by nature; but we know nothing as we ought to know; as it appears further by
the Apostle S. Paul.

Thirdly, Because all men might be without excuse; so the Apostle affirms,
Romans 1.20. that the invisible things of God, as his eternal power and Godhead,
were seen in his works, that they might be without excuse; they had such a
knowledge as told them that God was their Creator; that when they knew God, and
glorified him not as God, etc. they might have no excuse: and for this cause it
was that they had such natural knowledge. And this is the first thing.

Use 1. Is there then such light naturally in the heart of man? this draws us
to this good meditation: Oh what an excellent knowledge was that in which we
were first created! We may gather this from the light that is left in us, even
as the bigness of Hercules his body was gathered by his foot, and as a man
may see the bigness of a Lion by his claw, or by looking upon the ruins of a
great house, may see what a Palace it sometimes was; so when we look upon the
ruins of nature, we may see in what an excellent estate we were at the first.
For conclusion then, Let us take notice of our loss, that it may be a
provocation to make us recover our selves; seeing that we had such a
knowledge, that we knew God perfectly, we may endeavor to know him so again;
or, as men that have had great estates, and are fallen to decay, are careful
to recover themselves, and neglect no means whereby they may recover their
loss: so we, looking upon our selves, may see our loss, and labor to
recover it.

Use 2. Then ought we continually to see God in the heavens, and in the earth,
that by these visible things we may come to see the invisible God, as the
eternal power and Godhead; these things should not be passed over slightly.
The Apostle S. Paul, to draw us to a consideration of this, calls it the
knowledge of God: so Christ teaches us to consider the Lilies of the field,
and the Ravens, to see God in these; this David does, Psalm. 104. which whole
Psalm does notably set forth God to be known by his works; so that in the least
creature we may see God; yea, even in the least Fly, as well as in the
greatest Elephant; so that by the meditation of the creature, we may see the
beauty of the Creator. Saint Augustine meditating, or looking upon the
creature, Lord, says he, thou art beautiful, therefore have thou made them
beautiful; thou art good, therefore they are good; thou have a being,
therefore thou gave them a being.

This we know, yet this our knowledge being compared with the knowledge we had,
is nothing but ignorance: therefore let us labor to meditate on this, that by
searching we may find out God. He is a good Clerk that can read in these
books, and shall be drawn to see the wisdom, power, and justice of God: but
as the Prophet ( Isa. 5.11, 12.) complains, that no man considers the works of
the Lord, they have the Pipe and Lute in their Feasts: So we may say, that
many are so taken up with pleasure and other vanities, that they will not
consider the works of God; and therefore no marvel that they are so ignorant,
because they will not go out of themselves.

Quest. How is God known above nature?

Answ. By Revelation; and that either by his Word or Spirit. The knowledge of
God which is by Nature is a common knowledge, it belongs to all men: but this
that is above nature, is the particular voice that sounds in the Church.

The first way whereby God is known to us above nature is the Word; whereof
David speaking, Psalm. 19 7. says, The Testimonies of the Lord are sure,
enlightening the eyes, revealing the object, enabling the organ. He has given
his Laws and his Statutes unto Israel, he has not dealt so with every
Nation: and Christ says, that No man has seen God at any time, but the only
begotten Son of God, and he to whom he will reveal him, John 1.17. So
Saint Paul, Act. 17.23. speaks to the Athenians, him do I declare unto you
whom you ignorantly worship.

The second way that he reveals himself, is by his Spirit, Mat. 11.25. I
thank thee, O Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to babes. Also 1 John 2.27. You have an
ointment, says the Apostle, and you need not that any one teach you, but the
Spirit of God teaches you all things.

Quest. Why has God made himself manifest after this manner?

Ans. For three reasons: First, because that knowledge which we have by nature
is obscure. Secondly, because that knowledge without this is imperfect and
partial. Thirdly, because the knowledge of the Word is not effectual without
the Spirit.

For the first; God has revealed himself by his Word, because the discovery
which nature makes is mavelous obscure. Simonides, a great Philosopher, being
asked by Hieron the Tyrant, what God was, desired two days respite; and then
being asked, he desired two days more; and then being asked, he desired two
days more: then the Tyrant asked him why he did so; because says he, the
more I seek after him, the farther off I am from finding him; so that nature is
obscure. And secondly, it is imperfect, because that knowledge of nature
without the Word, knows but a piece of God; and therefore, because God would
have his Church know him perfectly, he adds his Word to his works; and in this
reveals himself more fully, and discovers those wonders which nature could
not only not discover, but not comprehend being revealed, as the great mystery
of the Trinity, etc.

2. The knowledge of Nature is not a saving knowledge; for though it knows God
as Creator, yet it knows him not as Redeemer. John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them you find eternal life, and they are they that
testify of me; and therefore God adds his Word, that he may be known as a
Redeemer and Reconciler, etc.

3. The knowledge of the Word is not effectual without the Spirit. 1 Cor. 3.5,
6. It is neither Paul, nor Apollos, etc. but God that gives the increase. The
knowledge of the Word is outward, but the knowledge of the Spirit is inward,
and man cannot teach inwardly; and therefore there cannot be such a knowledge
without the Spirit, for man can but speak to the ear; yea, though he may
press it vehemently, yet without the Spirit it is nothing; God therefore has
joined the Word and Spirit together: and so the answer is cleared in these
three things.

Use 1. Seeing that by the principles of Nature a man cannot come to saving
knowledge, he must therefore labor for the knowledge of the Word of God; he
must not be a stranger to the Word, nor the Word a stranger to him, that he
may know God. If a man cannot be partaker of true happiness but by the
knowledge of God; and if all saving knowledge be by the Word, then it
necessarily follows, that he must be acquainted with the Word: If he be a
stranger to the Word, and the Word a stranger to him, surely he is a stranger
to the life of God. I will not stand to show how the Devil bewitcheth many
wise men, that are careful to provide for their children, and bring them up in
natural knowledge, but scorn this which we must most labor for, to have the
Word familiar; we must hearken to the counsel of the Apostle, Col. 3.16. to
let the Word of God dwell plentifully in us in all wisdom. Chrysostom
pressing this place, Let the Word dwell in you richly, etc. says thus, It is
not, Let the Word come into you as a stranger for a night; but let it dwell in
you as a familiar friend. Why sir, we may know a sentence or two; No, but the
Apostle says, Let the Word dwell plentifully in you: If a man have learned
some sentences by heart, as children have learned whole books, this is not that
which the Apostle means, but let it dwell in you in all wisdom; where the
Apostle will have us diligent to understand the Word: Why so? because there God
has revealed himself. Pro. 2.5. If thou apply thy heart to instruction; it is
not, if thou will read a Chapter or two, but thou must beat thy head about it,
and apply thy heart unto it; for what says the Wise man in the 5. verse? If
thou search for her as for silver and gold, then thou shall understand the way
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. It is not to be gotten by
carelessness; but, as Christ says, Search the Scriptures, as men do when they
have lost any thing, as the woman that lost the groat; it argues a diligent
searching: this is that the Author to the Hebrews speaks of, about which we
ought to have our wits exercised through long custom. Brethren, It is
inexcusable (if not damnable) idleness in many men, that they have no heart to
read the Scriptures: Whatsoever you pretend, that you cannot for your callings;
I tell you, that neither your callings, nor the works of your callings will
excuse you in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; you
do abuse God, you ought to afford your selves time, and you must afford your
selves so much time: you have time enough to spend in courting, and in
wantonness, and in other idle vanities. Will you have Christ to know you, and
acknowledge you, when your callings, and all other vanities are gone, and
cease? what a question is this? who would not have that willingly? then must
you take care to know Christ here, or else he will not know you hereafter.

Use 2. Seeing that this is so, then every man should labor for the Spirit of
God, that he may be able to profit by the Word preached or read. Without him a
man may have a knowledge, but not a saving knowledge: It is an excellent
benefit for a man to have good teachers; but it is no benefit in comparison of
this, that the Spirit becomes our teacher; for, who teaches like him? Job
36.22. therefore labor for this teacher. Saint Augustine says, the teachers
are without; but he sits in heaven that must teach the heart, therefore look
to him: we can but make a noise in your ears by any our most earnest
expressions and vehement cries, but it must be the Spirit that makes all
effectual. I pray you tell me, says the same Father, what does the
Husbandman? can he do any thing but the outward work? does he do any thing
inwardly? can he make an apple? can he make a leaf? he cannot; it is God that
does that. Ask the Apostle Saint Paul, and he will tell you, It is Paul that
plants, and Apollos that waters, but it is God that gives the increase;
therefore labor that you may have that annoynting: you may not be negligent
of the Word, which is the means that God will have used, who will not give
effectual knowledge without it; therefore Ministers must plant, but if you
will have fruit by the ministry, you must labor to have the Spirit. That
which makes the Word unprofitable is, that men look so much upon the
husbandman, therefore God does oftentimes send a bad harvest. Origin says, it
is somewhat in the goodness of the ground, and somewhat in the husbandman if
the harvest be good; but saving knowledge is no where to be looked for, but
from God: therefore every man must labor earnestly to have the inward teacher.
It is said in Genesis 30.1. that Rachel was barren while she looks upon the
husband; but when she goes to prayer, in verse 22. then she conceives: so, many
of you look too much upon your Ministers, and therefore there is little
profit; but lift up your selves in prayer to God, and he will make you profit,
so that ye shall have the saving knowledge of God in this life, and after this
life salvation it self, even life eternal, etc.

CHAP. III.
JOHN 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me.


WE have heard of a twofold knowledge of God, the one by Nature, the other by
Revelation, and that is by the Word and Spirit; by which you have heard how a
man may come to saving knowledge: Now to proceed; The next question is,

Quest. In what Word is this knowledge to be sought?

Answ. It is to be sought in the written Word of God, the old and new
Testament. Seeing God has revealed himself in his Word, and that there is a
sufficient knowledge to be found in it, though not effectual without the
Spirit; (I think) this seems reasonable, that before we speak of God himself,
we speak something of the holy Scriptures, the fountain of knowledge, in which
God has revealed himself to the world, that we may know with what warrant we
may ground our faith upon them: Therefore it is necessary that we know first
what this Word is, and then what Author it has?

Answer is made, that this saving knowledge is to be sought and found in the
written Word of God. This is warranted upon that which I have read, Search the
Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me: this is further confirmed,
Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimonies: if question arise concerning God,
where shall we find answer? To the Law and to the Testimonies; go to the
written Word of God: of this the Apostle says, in 2 Timothy 3.15. that it is able
to make a man wise to salvation, and therefore it carries in it the wisdom and
knowledge of God, by which a man must be saved. Saint Peter also, 1 Pet. 1.19.
calls it a more sure Word (making opposition between it and the word they
heard from heaven in the holy mount) to which we ought to take heed, as to a
light shining, etc. Finally, our Savior Christ speaks of this in the Parable
to the rich man, They have Moses and the Prophets; if they will know any thing
concerning God, faith, repentance, etc. what need one be raised from the dead?
So then, these testimonies show, that the saving knowledge of God is to be had
in the old and new Testament. This Question brings another, and that is this,

Quest. Why is knowledge to be sought in the old and new Testament.

Answ. First, because this is the perfect rule containing all things to be
known and believed. Secondly, because it is a certain and a sure rule.
Thirdly, it is an infallible rule, that neither deceives, nor can be deceived.
To explain this:

Reas. 1. Because it is a perfect rule, therefore this knowledge is to be
sought there: Deuteronomy. 4.2. Thou shall add nothing to it, nor take any thing from
it: Add to it, and thou make it imperfect; take from it, and thou make it
no less imperfect, because it is of it self an absolute and full rule. The
Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.16. The word is given by inspiration, to instruct,
rebuke, etc. It is able to make the man of God perfect, etc. It is full for all
purposes, for instruction, correction, etc. and for all persons; it perfects
the Minister in his work and calling; and if him, then much more every other
man.

Secondly, It is a certain known rule: That which is the rule of salvation,
must be a certain known rule (if it be unknown, it is no rule) to those that
shall be saved. The Word sometime, from Adam to Moses, was wholly unwritten;
yet then no doubt but God revealed himself to the faithful. But when the
Church was grown up to be a Nation, and mixed with unfaithful and faithful;
God, that he might make a certain rule, by Moses writ his Word: And that the
Word was written for this end, it appears, Luke 1.3, 4. These things have I
written unto thee, most noble Theophilus, that thou might be certain of
these things: there goes a report of Christ what he did, and what he suffered,
these things have I written, that thou might be certain: and therefore our
Savior Christ being asked the question in the Gospel, what was to be done to
inherit eternal life, he answers, How read thou? Luke 10.26. Will thou be
certain? then read the Scriptures, and they will manifestly and surely declare
what is to be done, and give a perfect answer to such questions.

Thirdly, we are to come now to the written Word, because the written Word is
an infallible rule; an infallible rule is such a rule as cannot be deceived
nor deceive; for if it could do either, it were not infallible: but that the
Word of God is such, that it cannot deceive nor be deceived, I manifest it
thus, because God and his Word are one Truth, therefore it cannot deceive; John
17.17. Sanctify them with thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. As light is not the
cause of darkness, so the Word is not the cause of error. This is a right
rule, says S. Augustine, thy Writings are my delight, by them I shall never be
deceived. And this is the first point.

Use 1. If this be so, here are overthrown all humane traditions which are by
man added to the Scripture: all traditions that are either written or carried
from hand to hand are rejected; whatsoever is taught without the Scripture, is
to be abhorred; for the Word is the rule, and he that brings any other
doctrine, let him be accursed.

Use 2. This serves to provoke men to labor for the knowledge of the Word.
Here I will take an occasion to speak of it, because I see the carelessness of
this age. If there be any amongst us that desire the knowledge of God, then
we should labor for the knowledge of his Word: Why? because we cannot know
God, unless we know his Word. This is ingratitude against God, that he
should vouchsafe his Word, and we not labor to know it; this is impiety
against our selves, that look to be saved, and yet neglect the knowledge of
the Word that brings salvation. There is a knowledge of God by nature; but the
remainder of the light that is in man's nature is mavelous dark: Though the
foolish heathen say, If a man follow nature he cannot err, we know that
nature is stark blind in matters appertaining to God; therefore men should
labor to know the Word, that it might dwell in them in all wisdom. Saint
Bernard says, This is the portion of the Jews, that they have the letter
only, and so the portion of all heretics, and not of Christians. Saint
Augustine says, Oh unhappy heretics, which regard nothing but the outward
sound of the letter, having a body without a soul! Therefore men that will
have a body and a soul together, must labor to have the understanding of the
places that they read; and to this end, they must add meditation to their
reading, and constant and earnest prayer to God to their meditation, that he
would give his spirit of wisdom and revelation: and by this means they shall
be able to search out hidden and secret things that are not discerned by
others. Saint Bernard says, when he was entered upon a text upon Cant. This
Well is deep, and I have nothing to draw; but yet I see by experience, that if
a man cover the Well with a linen cloth, he shall wring out some moisture
which otherwise he should not: I have therefore bended my self upon it, and
stretched my hands to thee, that thou would reveal something to me, for
every man bending and stretching himself, his heart and his hands to God,
shall receive something; for, the entrance to thy Word, says David, gives
light. Solomon says, a diligent hand makes rich; a little stock to begin
with, being diligently employed, makes rich: So it is in spiritual things, a
diligent hand makes rich; if a man have a little knowledge, if he have a
diligent heart and hand, though the Word be as it were in a dark place, yet
he shall see more and more.

There are two things to be enquired of concerning the written Word of God;
First, by whom it was written: Secondly, for whom it was written. For the
first; that is, by whom this Word was written, time will not give me leave to
speak of; therefore I will proceed to the next.

Quest. For whom was this Word written?

Answ. For all men, of all ages and conditions; the text that I have read
proves it: Search the Scriptures; to whom did Christ speak? To all men, of all
Nations and Countries that were gathered there together. Act. 2.39. The promise
is made to you, and to your children, and to as many as the Lord God shall
call: the promises were not made to the Jews only, but also to the Gentiles,
even to as many as the Lord shall call; therefore the Word is written for all:
Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
learning; they were not written for them only, but for us also, upon whom the
ends of the world are come: These things are come upon them for examples, 1
Cor. 10.11. Therefore it is apparent, that the Word was written for all men.
Out of this arises another question.

Quest. How is it proved, that it is written for all men?

Answ. Three ways, besides the testimony of Scripture: First, because the Lord
that writ it is Lord over all, perfect in wisdom. Secondly, because this
written Word is Gods revealed will. Thirdly, because there is but one way to
salvation for all men, and this is laid down in it.

We will manifest this: First, because it is Gods Word; and God is over all
times, over all places, and over all persons, as well successors as
predecessors, as well them that go before, as them that follow after;
therefore the Word belongs to all. We have a Proverb, New Lords, new Laws: but
it is not so here; God does keep always one Law; Kings that have their
several Kingdoms, have all several Laws; the reason is, because they cannot
make Laws without their subjects, and amongst them, one thinks this fit,
another thinks that: but the Lord is an absolute King, that makes Laws without
men; for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, Psalm. 24.1. I add to
this, that he is perfect in wisdom: men, when they have made Laws, they
repeal them again, because they are imperfect in wisdom, and cannot foresee
what will be convenient for after times. But God is perfect in wisdom;
therefore his Laws are always the same.

Secondly, because it is Gods revealed will, the rule of justice, by which
things are made good or evil; and therefore it must needs be a universal
Law; his will is over all, his Word and himself have the same extent, without
any restraint whatsoever.

Thirdly, because there is but one way to salvation, and that is by the Word;
the Word brings salvation to all men of all times, and of all conditions; never
had any man any way but one, and that is, by fulfilling of the Law: only there
is this difference between the Law of works, and the Gospel; for that by the
covenant of works, all that will be saved by the Law, must do the works of the
Law themselves; by the covenant of grace, all that will be saved by the
Gospel, must apply by faith the fulfilling of the Law by Christ; for he is the
end of the Law to salvation, he must be applied to every man that will be
saved: so that here is an admirable conclusion, that man must be saved by mercy
and justice; and for this the Word was written for all men, and for all ages.

Use 1. If this be so, then it is necessary that all men should have the Word
of God in their own language, though it was written in another language, and
before they were, yet it was written for them; a point that our Jesuits cry
down, that every woman, and every boy, and every maid should have the Word;
they cry out of it, but if God writ it as well for the unlearned as for the
learned, why should they not have it? when God first writ the Bible, did he
write it in a strange language? If God had been minded to have had the Word
shut up from the people, he would have writ it in a strange language; but God
in his wisdom wrote it not in a strange language, but in such a one as all
might read: Nay more then this, the Churches at all times have had their Bibles
translated into their own languages. Certainly, the Spirit of God never knew
that which the President of the Council of Trent says, A Distaffe was more
fit for a woman then a Bible; when as God has commanded that women should read
it as well as men; a Distaffe is fit in due times and seasons: but these do
accuse God, as the Devil in the Serpent did, when he said to Evah, God would
not have you to know this; this is nothing but the brood of the Serpent. Saint
Chrysostom says, Thieves when they mean to steal, first put out the candle;
so heretics, when they mean to deceive, first corrupt the Scriptures. The
Papists themselves have translated the old and new Testament into English, but
so darkly, that none that reads them (unless he be a Scholar) can understand
them: their translating proves against themselves the lawfulness of a
translation; for how dare they do that which they judge unlawful? their
affectation of obscurity is a mocking of God and of his people.

Use 2. Was the Word written for me? then I ought to have a care to read it,
and to understand it: This is the ground of all; we shall never do you good
with teaching, except you read the Scriptures privately; God has written them
for you, as if your names were expressed in them. If a man had lived in the
Church of Corinth when the Epistle was written to the Corinthians, would he
have thought that he had been excluded? nay, he would rather have thought
himself to have been bound to have read it. The whole Word of God is Gods
Epistle to the creature. If an Emperor should write a letter to thee, says
Gregory, thou would not rest till thou had read it; but when God writes
this letter of life and salvation, will thou not read it? how ungrateful art
thou to God? Thou will confess the whole Church worthy to be condemned, if it
should neglect the reading of the Scriptures: then thou being a member of the
Church, condemnest thy self. A man may read other books, but he must read
this; there is a necessity laid upon him, therefore he must read them: And
know, thou man and woman, thou art in a fearful estate, when thou may read
the Scriptures, and yet neglectest them. Brethren, know it for a truth, (for
you shall one day know it) that though you have now excuses why you cannot
read (as because you cannot neglect your callings, etc.) yet the time will
come when you shall have no excuse to keep you from being condemned: If ever
therefore you look to have salvation, you must read the Scriptures.

Use 3. This must teach us, that a man must not read only, but he must apply
also to himself; he must not read it for others, but he must apply it to
himself, to his estate and condition. We have a common speech, That that
which is said in general, is spoken to none; but it is not true here: that
which Christ said to all, Watch, he said to every one; that which God says to
all, Read, he says to every particular person: as Tertullian says, in
reading the Scripture, We are to observe every several occasion, to make use
of every sentence. Does the Word command any thing to be done? or does it
forbid any thing? does it threaten any evil, or promise any mercy? labor to
know it, that it may comfort thee, that it may instruct thee, etc. and this is
to read the Word profitably, for every man to learn his own lesson thereby:
many bad Scholars, when they cannot read their own lesson, can read another;
so, many can learn others lessons, but they cannot learn their own; as, they
can say, This text meets with such a one. See what a trewant thou art in this
School of Christ; labor to know thy lesson; as, this threatening serves to
terrify me, this promise to comfort me, etc. Brethren, many men make a
partial application; some will apply the promises, but not the threatenings;
take heed of eating too much honey, the promises will do thee no good, if
first thou have not applied the threatenings; he that takes not his part in the
threatenings has no part in the promises: therefore take a view of the whole
Book of God. Again, they that have a trembling conscience can see nothing but
threatenings; these are only such as the Lord leaves for a while, they cannot
apply the promises to themselves; but the other are in a worse condition then
these, for of these there is hope, because the Lord is fitting them for
himself: but labor thou to apply the whole Word, that thou may see thy
self. The holy Scripture is a looking-glass, says Saint Gregory; and a
looking-glass, we know, is to see both what is comely, and what is deformed; so
is the Word, to distinguish things that differ, and to discover good and evil:
by the Law is the knowledge of sin, and duty; therefore labor to make use of
it. All the Word is written for thee as well as for any, every part of it as
well as any part; therefore apply it to thy self, that thou may have
comfort and mercy in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.

CHAP. IV.
2 TIMOTHY 3.16. All Scriptures are given by divine inspiration of God.


IT has been showed, that the saving knowledge of God is to be found in the
Word, and that the Word is written: It is necessary to be considered who writ
it, and for whom it was written; Of the former of these, By whom it was
written, is now to be handled at this time.

Quest. By whom was this Word written?

Answ. It was given by God, by divine inspiration, 2 Pet. 1.21. the proof of
which is manifest out of this text that I have read, All Scriptures are by
divine inspiration; and in this respect it was called Scripture, because, that
not only the matter, but the voice, the style, the phrase was by inspiration
from God. Other writings may be the Word of God; but this was by Gods
appointment, the writing was the writing of God, Exodus 32.16. for Moses, at
first writ not the Commandments, but God; and after the Tables were broken,
they were no less the Word of God then before, Exodus 31.18. others were the
penmen, but God the hand; others the instruments, but God the maker and author
of this Word, Isa. 30.8. Therefore it is that the Apostle Saint Peter has it,
2 Pet. 1.20, 21. there is no Prophecy but it comes from God; holy men of God
writ them, and they spoke them, not by the will of man, but by the holy Ghost.
This truth, because it is of weight, and has great opposition of men, and
breeds great doubts in men, we will labor to establish, and for further
confirmation of it, we will confirm it by internal and external arguments;
internal I call those that are in the Scriptures themselves, and in the mind
of men; external, those that do confirm these.

Quest. How does this appear, that it was written by divine inspiration from
God?

Ans. By internal arguments, that are in the Scriptures themselves.

First, from the doctrine it self, and excellency thereof. Secondly, from the
majesty of the style. Thirdly, from the perpetual consent of Christ and his
Apostles. To examine these:
Reas. 1. The first argument is, the doctrine which is so holy and divine, that
no man could write but a divine wisdom; and that is thus manifested: 1. From
the greatness of these things written, surpassing all humane reason. 2. From
the purity of the Word, which convinces men of injustice, and yet teaches all
men to be just. 3. From the consent; there is an admirable communion between
justice and mercy; between the salvation of men by the satisfaction of Christ,
and sanctification by the holy Ghost: No man could think of any such thing,
till the Scripture did reveal it. 4. Lastly, The end of the writing, which is
only the glory of God, as the Apostle says, Let him that rejoiceth rejoice in
the Lord; this abaseth nature, and advances grace, therefore it cannot be but
by divine inspiration.

Again, no writing can bring comfort to a man but the Scriptures; Romans 15.40.
These things have been written, that we through patience might have comfort
of the Scriptures: these are such things that a man could never attain to but
by God.

Reas. 2. The second proof that we gave, was the majesty of the style.
Whosoever is exercised in reading the Scripture, shall plainly see, that no
mere man was ever able to write it of himself. The excellency of the style is
so great, that, as Eusebius reports, they thereby tried the writing of
heretics; if the style does not agree to this of the Prophets and Apostles,
they are to be rejected. If we will know all true authority, we must know it
by the style; for, howsoever a false Writer may take to him the name and frame
of another man, yet he cannot take his style; for, as every man has his
several countenance, and several color, that though two be never so like,
yet there are some things whereby they may be discerned; so the writings of
other men may be known from the Scriptures, on which the holy Ghost has set
such a style as is not to be found in all or any the writings of all the world
besides.

Reas. 3. The third ground was the consent of Christ and the Apostles with the
Prophets that went before them; the latter Prophets consent with the former,
and the former agree with them; therefore this must needs be from a divine
direction. For, amongst men who have written of the same subject we may find
often variance, but these did never really contradict one another, there is no
discrepance in them to be found: there were some thousands of years between
the first Prophets writings and the Apostles, and some thousands of miles
between the Prophets and Apostles that wrote at the same time, yet all do
agree together: the ground is this, because Truth (as God) is ever constant to
it self. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy reproves Hanani, Jer. 28. because he
did not consent to the Prophets that went before him; and the Apostle
pronounces an anathema against himself, or an Angel, or whosoever should
teach any other doctrine. All which shows, that there is a mavelous consent
in the Scriptures, and therefore they must needs be written by God, and not by
men.

Quest. What other internal Arguments are there in the minds of men, to prove
the Scripture the Word of God?

Answ. It is proved, first by the Spirit of God, who witnesses the same in the
hearts of the Elect: Secondly, by the power and efficacy of the Word, and the
working it has in the hearts of men. To explain this,

First, the Spirit of God witnesses this in the hearts of the Elect; God is
the best witness of himself, so is the Spirit the best witness of the Word,
which is not believed until it be settled in the heart of man by the Spirit
that wrote it; for till then we reject it. Some apply that of the Prophet,
Isa. 59.21. My Spirit that I have put upon thee, and my words that I have put
in thy mouth, etc. In this manner the Spirit and the Word must agree together,
and continually bear witness each to other; whatsoever is suggested by the
Spirit, and agrees not with the Word, is to be rejected; whatsoever is
expressed in the Word, is not believed till witnessed by the Spirit. I add to
these Christ's own speech to the Jews, John 8.42, 43. who bragged that God was
their Father; if God be your father, why do you not believe my words? for if
God be your Father, then you have the Spirit of God; but it is apparent, that
you have the Spirit of God, because you believe not my words, and therefore God
is not your Father. John 10.27. My sheep hear my voice; that is, they do
acknowledge that this is my voice: Ver. 16. I have other sheep that are not of
this fold, them also I must bring in, and they shall hear my voice: and ver.
3, 4. the shepherd calls his sheep by name, and they follow him, and a
stranger will they not follow: where he shows, that the sons of God have the
Spirit of God in them, whereby they are able to discern the writings of God
from other writings; the Spirit of God giving them a clear understanding to
see, and a persuasion to believe the truth of them, and such a persuasion as no
man knows out of himself, but in himself. It is true (as we said before)
That the majesty of the style, and the consent of the Writers, are great
arguments to prove the Scriptures Gods Word; but yet they give a man no
assurance, but only breed in him a kind of reverence, as Salvian says: But
if a man be once enlightened with the Spirit of God, he rests not on his own
judgment, nor on the judgment of all the world, because he has inward
judgment in himself, which is the Spirit: And thus much for the first
internal argument.

The second argument is taken from the minds of men, and from the power and
efficacy that the Word has in the hearts and consciences of all men: It has
a power to convert them to God, to terrify and awaken them, and also to
comfort them in distresses, to wound them, and to make them whole, which no
other writing can do; therefore it cannot be humane, but divine: This is
manifest, Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. No
Philosopher can convert the heart (though he may bring men to outward
civilitie) like unto this. The Word gives wisdom to the simple, and therefore
is divine: It was that which made S. Paul to know that he was dead; for before
the Law came he was alive, but when the Law came he was dead. This the Apostle
Saint Peter presses to the Gentiles, Act. 2.27, 28. by which he wounded them,
and with the same Word he healed them; no other Word could ever bring them to
despair of their own righteousness, no other could sustain them despairing;
this is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. Finally, it is powerful in
operation, Heb. 4.11. it is mighty to make a man at variance with himself, the
father against his son, the mother against the daughter; nothing was ever
able to do this but the Word of God.

Quest. What external proofs are there?

Answ. First, the fulfilling of the Prophecies in the Scripture, in the same
manner and the same circumstances, in the same time, and in the same persons;
things many hundred years before foretold, are so accomplished as foretold:
this therefore cannot be but a divine prediction. Isa. 41.22. The Prophet
speaks of the Idols, Come, and let them tell us what shall come to pass
hereafter; arguing, that to do so must be a divine thing. The Devil cannot
foretell things to come; he may guess at them, but he has always his
shifting holes; but the holy Scripture has set down in plain terms the
time, and the persons, and other circustances, as 1 Reg. 13.2. Isa. 45.1. Genesis
15.13, etc. therefore it must needs be a divine wisdom that did indite and
inspire them.

Secondly, The second external argument is the antiquity of these, they are
ancienter then any other writings whatsoever: the Egyptians indeed brag, That
they had writings before Moses; but it is nothing but bragging and untruth.

Thirdly, The great opposition that has been made against them, and their
preservation. It is true, that Aristotle burnt the books of his Master Plato, a
great Philosopher, that himself might be the more observed; but he could
never burn them all; he was but one, and many opposed him: But when whole
Kingdoms and Countries, even the whole world have violently, for a long time,
and many ages set themselves against these, and yet they are preserved, the
preservation of them argues a special divine care of them, as of divine
writings. Mac. 1.7. Antiochus burnt this book, and made a law, that whosoever
had this book should die the death; yet it is preserved, that not so much as a
syllable of it is wanting. Writings, and whatsoever else is of man, may be
destroyed by man, may fail of themselves, as says Gamaliel; but the things of
God, and divine writings shall abide for ever: See this difference in the
writings of Solomon, those of his own wisdom are lost, those inspired by God
abide till this day, etc.

Fourthly, The persecutions that have been made at all times against the
professors of this Book, their constancy in believing it, obeying it, and
laying down their lives for it, which none could have done, had not the
writing been divine. (Indeed, a few desperate men have laid down their lives
for their own writings; but not any that has so valiantly laid down his
life, as the professors of the Gospel:) All these are sufficient proofs for
this point.

Use 1. This must first teach us, that the Word is clear and plain (because
the writing of God) for the instruction of men: certainly, God would never
write obscurely and in the dark: 2 Pet. 1.13. It is a light in a dark place.
When we say it is plain and clear, it is so in it self; though the natural man
discerns it not, and to the regenerate man it may be hard. Chrysostom says,
the Saints never pray to God, Make thy Law easy; but, Give us understanding,
and open our eyes, that we may see thy Law: the truth is, there are many
difficulties in it, but there is nothing difficult which in other places is not
made plain, if necessary to salvation. The Scripture, as Saint Gregory says,
is both meat and drink, drink needs no chewing: some places are easy, that
they need no chewing; and some places are hard, to stir up men to seek them
out, 2 Pet. 3.16. There are many things in Saint Paul's Epistles that are hard,
but to whom? to the ignorant: they are easy in themselves, and to the
regenerate; therefore says one, What need have we of Commentaries added to the
Word, if Commentaries add not light to the Word, but the Word makes
Commentaries light.

Use 2. This teaches us, that because the Word was written to every man,
therefore every man was bound to study it, and to read it; and seeing the Word
was inspired by the Spirit of God, therefore when a man goes about to read it
and hear it, he ought to pray for understanding, and for Gods Spirit by which
he writ it; for they that wrote it, did it not without Gods Spirit: men should
pray that God would give them his Spirit of wisdom to open their
understandings; surely, the greatest light in the world cannot make a blind
man see in the midday, an eye that has not internal light cannot see. The
Scriptures, in the old and new Testament, are the two great lights that God
has ordained to rule the Church; which, though they shine never so brightly,
yet there is required an internal light in man, that they may be seen. A man
may look up to the heavens, says Saint Chrysostom, where God does sit, and
yet not know God, nor see him shut up in heaven: So many men read the
Scriptures, and yet see not God shut up in them. No man knows what is in man
but the Spirit of man, and we have received the Spirit of God, that we might
know the things that are given us of God: The Wisdom of God has given the
Spirit to man, whereby he is able to discern. If so be a King should write a
Letter to his subjects in a strange language, and not send his Secretary to
interpret it, they were never the better; nor we for the Scriptures without
the Spirit.

Justin Martyr says, that Ptolomy wrote to the King of Judah for the Law; and
withal he desired him to send him a man that might make him to understand it:
So they that will understand the language of the Scriptures must have the
Spirit of God. If a man had the Prophets themselves to preach to him, they
cannot make a man understand to salvation; why? because they can but teach the
ear, they cannot teach the heart. When I cannot have Moses to tell me the
meaning, says Saint Augustine, give me that Spirit that thou gave to Moses:
And this is that which every man that will understand must pray for: this David
prayed for, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of
thy Law: and verse. 19. hide not thy Commandments from me: and Christ says,
If you, being evil, can give good things to your children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask of him? Luke 11.13.
So that then we shall see the secrets of God.

Use 3. If any man pray for the Spirit of God, he must not think it comes
without means, and therefore neglect reading. It is Gods finger that presses
the diligent care of reading; and it is the means whereby we may come to have
the Spirit: you must not look to have the Spirit in your heart, unless you
have the Word in your mouth, that is, the continual reading thereof; neither
prefer a little ease before the Book of God. Thou have no part in the Spirit,
if thou have not a great desire to have a great part in the knowledge of the
Word of God.

Use 4. In the fourth place; Did God write it? Then ought we to make
application of every part of it, of the promises, and of the threatenings, and
of the commandments, etc. Of the promises, because it was God that promised
them, and he will confirm and make them good: of the commandments, because
if thou disobey them, he is a just God, and he will be revenged of every
contemner: of the threatenings, because if they had been written by man, a man's
word might have been contemned, but whither shall we flee from God? Therefore
think of this Word, and labor to apply it, and give obedience to it; they are
Gods own Laws, and it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God; therefore let us fear and obey that which is Gods Commandment,
lest for our neglect he throw us to everlasting destruction.

CHAP. V.
2 TIMOTHY 3.16. All Scriptures are given by divine inspiration of God, and are
profitable.


THe last day we spoke concerning the Scriptures, and therein we handled the
Author that wrote them, and from whom they did flow; and you heard, it was from
God himself, and that by divine inspiration. It remains then that we should
speak of the second thing that we have thought fit to be spoken of, viz. The
dignity of the Word, which has two parts: the first, the Authority of it; the
second, the Sufficiency of it, because we are to build on it, and to rest
upon it as the ground and rule of Faith: and these are the two things which we
will handle at this time. For the former of these,

Quest. What is the authority of the written word?

Answ. It is that by which it is authentical, and worthy of credit in it
self, being the divine and only Canon and Rule for all things to be believed
and done. That the Word of God has this authority, this verse which I have
read does prove: So also Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimonies, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them: if
questions be asked about the dead, To the Law, and to the Testimonies,
whatsoever others say, reject it; this has authority of it self: to this is
added 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word: to these I add Gal. 6.16. As
many men as walk after this rule, peace be on them: this is the rule of all
things; Joh. 2.16. If any man bring any other Doctrine, bid him not to thy
house; where the word shows, that there is no other word of any authority but
this Word; thus the Word witnesses of it self; therefore it must be true:
John 10.35. the Word cannot be broken, therefore it must be of that authority,
worthy of credit in it self; and being divine, we must believe it, and it
must be the Rule and Canon by which all things must be done; And this is the
proof of the first point.

Quest. What ground have you for this, that the Scriptures are thus
authentical?

Ans. There are these: First, because they are Gods word, to whom it belongs to
appoint every one a cannon and rule, that must give them direction to all
things to be believed and done.

Secondly, Because God has written them for this end, that they might be such
a rule that might be always in the Church, that men should not dare to swerve
from it.

Thirdly, Because this Word is the first divine truth of God himself.

To explane these; first, they are Gods word, etc. This is manifest of it self,
that it belongs to God to appoint a rule and a cannon: we further confirm this
thus, Deuteronomy. 7.11. Keep my commandments, my statutes, and my judgments, why
so? because they are my statutes, I command you: the Word is a lantern to my
feet (says David) Psalm. 119.105. Thou shall keep my statutes: so that if we
enquire into the ground, what the reason of the authority of the Scripture is,
it is manifest, it is authentical, because it is the word of God: who should
teach me (says Saint Ambrose) the things that appertain to heaven? God, and
not man. Who can better teach me concerning God, then God? All other Divine
things had need of testimony, says Salvian: but only these things spoken by
God, need no more testimony: while therefore it is God that has wrote this,
and he only has Divine authority, therefore this must needs be of Divine
authority.

The second answer was thus much; because that this was written by God, to that
end, that the Church might always have a rule, from which it should not dare to
swerve. Deuteronomy. 5.32. Take heed to my statutes, turn not to the right hand, nor
to the left: and that Romans 15.4. These things were written, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: therefore from hence it
is manifest, that they are written to be a rule.

Thirdly, because that this is the first divine truth of God himself;
therefore it has this name, Ephesians. 1.13. John 17.17. thy Word is truth; with
an emphasis, that there is no truth but this: so Ephesians. 2.20. it is the
foundation of the Church, it is builded upon the Apostles and Prophets: we say
it is the first truth of God himself, because it must be first believed before
we can believe by a divine faith any thing that is revealed in it; faith does
first spring out of it, and is last of all resolved into it, and so it is the
first truth. This is the principle of principles, and though it be not
believed, yet it has the same authority: gold is gold, though no man have it:
the Sun in the first day it was created, was to rule the day, and measure
time though there was neither man nor beast to take notice of it. In the Gnomen
of a dial, the shadow of it shows the hours of the day though men sleep;
principles in all Arts are to be granted, are not denied without gross
absurdities. Here are our first principles; that there is a God, that God has
a Word, that the Scripture is the Word of God; these are and ought to be
assented unto by whosoever would be called Christian; the denying of any one of
these, is to open the gate to Atheism, and all profaneness: so then this is
manifest, that this Word of God is of Divine authority.

The first Use then teaches us, that then falls to the ground, the Doctrine of
Popery, that tells us, that the Scriptures have no authority but from the
Church: some have spoken very blasphemously of the Word of God, one for all;
the President of the Council of Trent says, that the Scriptures have no more
authority then Esops Fables, without authority from the Church of Rome: and
others say, they have no more authority then any other profane books: others
more moderate say, they have no more authority in them then they receive from
the Church: the question is not what authority the Church does give to the
Scriptures, but what authority they have in themselves: the Church can but
declare their authority, the Scriptures have it in themselves, I had not
believed the Scripture (says Austin.)

We never denied that the Church has excellent Offices concerning the
Scriptures; as first, it is to keep them and preserve them; therefore the
Church is compared to a public Notary, like to the Court of Rowles; the
Master of the Roles gives no authority to Records, but keeps them. Secondly,
the Church is to publish the Scriptures; therefore she is compared to a crier,
and this is the fidelity of the crier, to publish the speech of the Prince; and
the Churches duty is to publish the Law of God. The third office it has, is to
discern the true Scriptures from forgeries, and apocryphal. It cannot make
that which is Apocrypha, Canonical; but it has a power in discerning which
are Apocryphal, which Canonical: as it is in a City, the Magistrates
receiving a letter as from the Prince, out of their experience are able to
discern whether it be the Princes letter or not: so they that are Gods
Ministers, can do nothing but discern the Word, they cannot give any authority
to it: we conclude, the Scripture has authority in it self, Ephe. 2.20. It is
the foundation of the Church, then the Church cannot give authority unto it.

The second Use serves to admonish us, to receive the Scriptures for
themselves, for their own authority, and not for any man's authority
whatsoever; not for any man's person, nor upon the authority of the Church; for
if we do so, we cannot have true saving faith. Every man ought to receive the
Scripture for its own authority; not that any man should condemn the authority
of the Church, but he may not depend only upon it, no not upon Saint Paul
himself, but must search the Scriptures, to see whether it be so or no: we
ought not to receive the testimony of any Church in the world, except it be
grounded upon the Scripture: we will use that which Aquinas says of the woman
of Samaria (we may use the help of an enemy) when she told them what things
Christ did, they believed, but when they came to Christ himself, they believed
not for her saying, but because they heard him themselves: so we use the
authority of the Church, as a means to come to believe; but when we believe,
let us not believe for the saying of the Church, but for the Scriptures
themselves.

Use 3. This is to admonish every man, when he has received the Word, to know
it is the truth of God, and therefore to labor to make it the Cannon of his
faith, for the authority it has in it self: we ought to examine our selves by
this Word: Have thou done any thing that has not this ground? repent of it;
and for the time to come, labor to make this the Cannon of thy life, and the
rule of thy obedience. Art thou tempted by thy own corruptions, or by any
other? ask them, Is there any such Word that will give leave? if not, thou
must believe and hold to this; for this is the Cannon by which thou ought to
do all things. Hierome complains of some in his time, who did wrest the Law to
their own wills, and not their wills to the Law; but we must be far from this:
for whosoever walks after this rule, Gal. 6. mercy and peace shall be to him;
but if he walk not after this rule, he shall have judgment merciless.

Quest. The next question is, what is the sufficiency of this Word?

Answ. The answer is, that it is that by which it is perfected, concerning all
things necessary to salvation; that place which the Apostle has, 2 Timothy 3.17.
does prove this; it is able to make the man of God wise unto salvation, and
therefore it is sufficient: so Deuteronomy. 12.32. Thou shall keep all these
Commandments, thou shall add naught thereto, nor take ought therefrom; and
therefore it must needs be perfect: that to which nothing can be added, and
from which nothing can be taken, must needs be perfect: also Psalm. 19.7. the
Law of the Lord is perfect, Revel. 22. Whosoever shall add unto this book,
God shall add unto them the plagues that are written in this book. Thus the
Word testifies of it self; and therefore seeing the Word is true, it must
needs be a perfect rule.

Quest. What Reason do you show for further proof of this?

Answ. First, because it was the written Will and testimony of God.

Secondly, Because after the Lord had given the Law in writing, the Jews were
never guided by any unwritten word.

Thirdly, Because Christ and his Apostles never proved their Doctrine by any
unwritten word. To explane these:

First, It is the written Will and testimony of God; therefore we call these,
the old and new Testament: a man's will after it is confirmed, no estate will
admit to be altered; therefore if we may not alter man's will, much less may we
alter Gods.

Secondly, It is sufficient, because that after the Lord had given his Law in
writing, the Jews were never guided by traditions: before the giving of the
Law, the truth went from hand to hand, but after that God had written the Law,
they never came to him, but upon some especial occasion: as for the
Blasphemer, etc. Bellarmine confesses this, that there are some Catholics
speak with great probability that the Jews, after God had written the Law had
no traditions: Austin says, in the old Testament the Gospel was hid, but in
the new Testament it was made more plain: If God would teach the Jews by
nothing but by the written Word, when it was more obscure, much less us, who
have it more clear.

Thirdly, Because whatsoever Christ and his Apostles, taught, they proved by
the written Word; thus says a Prophet, and thus says the Psalms; nay,
certainly, Christ opposed traditions, when he found that their authority
corrupted the Law, Mat. 5. but I say unto you, rejecting those traditions, the
true word of God is this: therefore the conclusion is, that the Scriptures are
a perfect rule containing all things to be believed and done.

Use 1. The first Use teaches us, that then must fall to the ground, all
unwritten traditions, the ground of all which is said to be the insufficiency
of the Scriptures; but if the Scriptures be sufficient, then traditions have
nothing to lean upon; but it is blasphemy to think, that God would not
perfect that Word he began, and therefore traditions are nothing. Oh! say they,
the Scriptures do not contain all fundamental points for faith. To this I
answer: If they had said, the Scriptures do not contain all the fundamental
points of their faith, I would willingly subscribe to it; the word of God no
where speaks of Saint Peter's successors; the word no where speaks of
invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, indulgences and pardons, these
things the Scripture does not contain; but these are all of them contrary to
the foundation; but we believe nothing as necessary to salvation besides the
Scripture. We do not doubt but that the Saints kept many excellent speeches,
and sayings of Christ, (as that in the Acts, as the Lord said, it is a more
blessed thing to give then to receive,) but if there be any such tradition,
that is not for substance to be found in the word, that we reject, because the
Scriptures are sufficient; for the conclusion, we will end with a speech of St.
Austin: I seek in the Gospel, if I find it not there, where shall I find it?
so may I say, if we find not traditions in the word, where shall we find them?

Use 2. This teaches the Ministers of God, that they must prove the Doctrine
they teach unto the people; where shall they have that light, no where but from
the word? they must not follow the vision of any man, but only the word;
wherein God has comprised every thing that he will have his people taught: as
it was in the creation, the light was at large before the Sun was created;
but after that was created, God enclosed all light in the Sun; so some time the
word of God was taught from hand to hand, God informed some, and they taught
others: but after that God had written the Scriptures, all were to receive
their light from these; there was none to be had any where else, and in this
case it is manifest, 1. Pet. 1.14. Give attendance says the Apostle to
reading: in what? in the written word of God, Acts 26.22. The Apostle speaks
of nothing but of Moses and the Prophets: so the Ministers of God should speak
of nothing else; and as Lactantius says, learn to teach that which has been
taught before, so shall thou teach no new thing.

Use 3. This seems to instruct men, if they want counsel, if they want advice,
where it is to be had; let them resort to the book of God, to the law and to
the testimonies; this shall make them wise, this shall comfort them; the
Scripture is able to make the man of God perfect to salvation, how much more a
private man? That book that can teach a man to be a Captain, can teach a
common soldier how to order himself; if he cannot find sufficiency in it,
then he must blame himself, for the defect is in his own part. Saint
Augustine, having given certain rules, by which a man might understand the
Scriptures, says thus; if any man by these rules cannot understand the
Scriptures, let him not blame the Scriptures, but let him blame himself: as if
I, says the Father, do show a man a star with my finger, and he has a weak
sight and cannot see it, let him not blame my finger, but his own weakness:
for conclusion, every man ought to get a bible, what wants any man for
salvation and spiritual comfort, that is not here? there is distress, but
here is a remedy for it; no discomfort, but here is a comfort, etc. It is like
the Apothecaries shop, there is no wound but there is a remedy: but if a
stranger come unto the Apothecaries shop, though all these things be there, yet
he cannot tell where they are, but the Apothecary himself knows: so in the
Scriptures, there are cures for any infirmities; there is comfort against any
sorrows, and by conferring Chapter with Chapter, we shall understand them: the
Scriptures are not wanting to us but we to our selves; let us be conversant in
them, and we shall understand them, when great Clerks who are negligent, are
kept from them.

CHAP. VI.
HEB. 11.6. He that comes unto God must believe that God is, and that he is
the rewarder of them that etc.


HAving spoken of the ground of the true knowledge of God, and of so many
things concerning the word, as were thought necessary: It remains that we
proceed to that which God teaches us, first, concerning himself. Secondly,
concerning his will. First, that there is a God. Secondly, that there is but
one God. Thirdly, what this one God is, in the unity of Essence, and trinity of
persons, and now concerning these.

Quest. What does the word teach us concerning God?

Answ. The answer is, first, that there is a God; for the proof of this, my
text shall serve for many: he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and
that he is the rewarder of them that seek him; also the first of Genesis has this
many times, In the beginning God created etc. And in the verses following, God
saw, that all that he had created was exceeding good. Therefore it shall be
needless for me to bring more proofs, for all men confess there is a God.

Quest. What reasons have you to confirm this?

There be diverse reasons; first in man: secondly, without man; within man the
very being of body and soul with the powers and parts of them: and secondly,
the terrors of conscience when they have done ill, and joy and comfort when
they have done well: these and the like works in man do manifest that there is
a God.

Secondly, without man, the wonderful frame of the world was not made by it
self, nor by nature, nor by man, therefore by God; with the motions that are
in it, each of these we will explane: that these proves, that there is a God,
appears by the bodies of men, whence have they themselves? of themselves? No,
Psalm. 108. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves; It appears
manifestly in that a man cannot comprehend one part of his body, he knows not
himself, nor the several secrets that God has made in him; but it may be said
though a man made not himself, yet his parents did; no, nor his parents:
because his parents did not know what they did beget and conceive; but if
parents were the cause, then they should know the effect: therefore it was God
that made them; Their souls are made by him, who is above reason; there is
nothing that has reason but men and Angels, but they made not the soul, and
nothing is above reason, but God; This is apparent for the body, Psalm. 94.4. He
that made the ear, shall he not hear? it was God that planted the ear, and
not man. And for the soul, Eccles. 12. The spirit returns to God that gave
it. God made man, and he breathed into him the breath of life, ( Genesis 2.7.) and
he became a living soul. Whereupon the Poet Arratas of whom St. Paul speaks,
says, that we are of the generation of God, because we have our souls from
him, which are endued with reason and knowledge, and in this respect he is
called the father of spirits; so that if we look to the beginning of man, when
he was first endued with wisdom and reason, and made with noble qualities, it
appears that there is a God.

Secondly, the second ground is in man's self; the conscience of man when he
has done ill is full of horrors, all men are so: Adam hid himself: David's
heart smote him, 2 Samuel 24.10. Esa. 33.14. Sinners in Sion are afraid, fear
has suppressed the hypocrites. And this is that in Psalm. 53.15. They were
afraid where no fear was; that is, where no outward cause of fear was;
conscience the deputy of God did terrify them; This was that which did fill
Judas so full of terrors; Yea, but say some, they may fear lest those things
they have done, should come to the knowledge of the Magistrate, and so law
should take hold of them; I answer, this adds to their fear: but Adam had none
to fear, because he was the first: David had none to fear, because he was
king and so above all; but yet the deputy of God was in them, and that made
them afraid: to add to this, if a man commit a thing in the wilderness where
no man knows it, yet he is afraid, for sometimes he tells it in a frenzy, and
somteme in sleep, as the Prophet Esai speaks, Esai. 66.14. Enforced by the
worm in them that never dies.

Secondly, the comfort that it gives unto men when they have done well, when
they know the acceptance of their own works, and live in expectation of
reward; and this is not only when they have done well in the sight of men, but
also when their left hand knows not what their right hand does; nay when men
mock at them and scorn them, as Mychall scorned David, then they have joy; yea
the Martyrs have laid down their lives rejoicing: whence comes this but from
God? the Apostle speaks to this purpose, Heb. 10.34. You suffered with joy the
spoiling of your goods: why? because you know you have in heaven a better and a
more enduring substance; all which proves that there is a God.

The second thing is without man, and that is from the wonderful frame of the
world; it had a beginning but it was not made by nature, nor by man, nor by it
self, nor by chance; It had a beginning, and therefore subject to alteration,
and change, and therefore it made not it self, nor came it by chance. If a man
come into a strange place, and see a small cottage, he will say it was made by
some body; much more, if a man look upon the frame of the world, he cannot
think it was made by it self; well, who should make it? it self? or nature?
or man? First, chance made it not, which is a casual concurrence of things, and
nanature made it not, for if it did, then there should be a natural reason of
all things in the world; but there are Millions of things in the world of which
none can give a reason; as the ebbing and flowing of the Sea. The master of
reason could not find it out, and therefore said, because I cannot find thee,
thou shall find me, and cast himself into the Sea: who can give a reason of
the colors in the Rainbow, and who can give a reason for the heat of a man's
stomach, that digesteth all things that it receives, and consumes not it self?

Neither did man make it, it was made for man, and he was brought into it as a
guest, therefore man could not make it; besides, there is such skill in the
frame of the world, that man could not do it; and Christ teaches us, that man
has not power to make a hair of his head white or black, much less to make
such an earth, and such an heaven as there is, therefore it could not be made
by man; as the Apostle says, the invisible things of God are seen by the
creation of the world. Romans 1.20. Hereby they that have doubted whether there
was a God, have been brought to confess one: for Pliny says, that when he saw
a Butterfly or a gnat buffing about him, he confessed that there was a God;
because that so little a creature could not else make so great a noise: to add
to these, the motions that are in things, it is the reason that Philosophers
have had to prove, that there must be a God; because all inferior things, must
be moved by superiors: that as the pulse carries a man's eye, or reason to the
heart, so these to God; especially, when all these things move to one
principal end, though things have two or three causes, yet all comes to one
end, Prove. 16.4. God made all things for his own glory; so that by these
arguments we have proved that there is a God.

Use 1. This serves to confute all Atheists, such as deny that there is a God,
and say that religion is nothing but a mere invention to keep men in awe; Saint
Austin; in his confession, says; If there be any that deny God, I know not
what to say, I know not with what manner of arguments to go to them; but I
should offend in speaking to them: Tully in his book of the nature of God,
makes mention of one Protagoras who wrote a book, and in the beginning of the
book, he wrote thus: The Gods whether they be or not, I know not: the
Athenians abhorred this, and for this, they banished him out of the Country,
and burnt his books in a public assembly: this I say, if there be any
Atheists amongst us, I could wish they were banished the Court, and Country; I
add this further, as Seneca speaks, there are no Atheists though there would
be some; if any say there is no God, they lie; though they say it in the day
time, yet in the night when they are alone they deny it; howsoever some
desperately harden themselves, yet if God does but show himself terrible to
them, they confess him. Many of the heathen, and others, have denied that
there is a God, yet when they were in distress, they did fall down and
confess him, as Diagoras that grand Atheist, when he was troubled with the
strangullion, acknowledged a diety which he had denied; these kind of
Atheists, I leave to the mercy of God, of which I doubt it whether there be any
for them.

Use 2. The second use, serves to teach every man to bethink himself, and to
humble himself, for these Atheistical thoughts, in which he has called into
question, and disputed whether there be a God, or no: Brethren know thus much,
if thou be a man that do believe, thou can not be perfectly without
these thoughts, arising out of the seed of thy own infidelity, to call into
question, whether there be a God: for the devil out of his malice which he
bears to God, labors to corrupt men in this, that so they may call their faith
into question: It may be a man by grace may resist these thoughts: but know,
that there is no man so resists a temptation of Satan, but that it leaves
some filth behind it: a man cannot perfectly resist him by reason of his
weakness, therefore every man ought to humble himself; for he that is least
troubled with them has least faith; but he that wrastleth with them, and
humbles himself for them, may have comfort. Therefore labor to strengthen
thy self against these, that if they come, they may be but as a flash of fire.
For the conclusion of this use, what shall a man do? even as St. Chrysostom
says (teaching how we may make the devil naught to himself, and good to us)
labor for more strength by his temptations; It grieves the devil to see us
bettered by him; if we were watchful against occasions, and temptations, and
resisted them, by this means we should grow strong in faith, and gain by him:
and to this end the Apostle says, resist the devil, and he will fly from thee.

Quest. What does the word teach us concerning God?

Ans. That there is but one true God, it is manifest where in my text: he that
comes to God, must believe that God is, and that there is but one God: when God
spoke to Abraham, of Isaak he said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed,
So Isai. 44.6. I am the first and the last, and besides me there is no God.
John 17.3 This is eternal life, to know thee to be the only true God. 1 Cor.
8.5. Though there be many that are called gods and lords, yet unto us there is
but one only true God.

Quest. What Reasons are there of this?

Answ. There are three: First, from him are all things.

Secondly, Because there can be but one Infinite.

Thirdly, Because there is but one Omnipotent.

For the first: Because from him are all things: thus the Apostle Paul reasons
with the Gentiles, that from him, for him, and by him, are all things, Romans
11.36. If all things be from him, then there can be but one for all; other
things come from him, as maine roots have their first original from one root;
so all beings have their being from God, who is the first being. And as all
things come from him, so all things return to him again, and serve to
manifest his glory; and therefore he is called the Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending.

The second Reason is, because (as the Master of reason says) there can be but
one infinite being and wisdom, and that must be the first mover, and that is,
he that fills heaven and earth, Ios. 23.23. I fill heaven and earth: and
therefore there can be but one God.

The third Reason is, because there can be but one Omnipotent; It appears
manifestly that there cannot be many: for (as Lactantius speaks) if there be
two, they must be equal, and then they agree, or disagree; if they agree, then
one of them is superior; if they disagree, then there will be a confusion:
therefore it follows, that there can be but one; for (as Saint Austin says) a
King cannot endure a fellow; no more can God endure a copartner: when was there
heard that two Kings reigned together, but the one sought the overthrow of the
other?

Use 1. This serves to overthrow the multitude of gods that the heathen have
had and worshipped, and the heretics have invented. It shows, that they were
fictions of their own brains, because they made a multitude of them: the true
God has not his name, nay, he will not have his name given to another; a true
Husband cannot endure a fellow; a true Mother cannot endure the parting of her
child: this argues that the Gentiles gods, were false gods, because if they
might be gods, they cared not how many there were. And that was the reason why
the Romans refused Christ, because they would have their gods with him, and he
would be worshipped alone, without them.

Use 2. This teaches us from whence it is, that the world continues, and is
not destroyed; not only because there is a God, but because there is but one
God, and he always preserves it: Saint Chrysostom says, as it is with the
body, If God do forsake it, it cannot continue; so is it with the world, if
God did not uphold it, it would come to nothing: he says further, the world is
like unto a ship, the Mariners are the men, the sails are the heaven; why
does this ship never perish? because there is but one Governor; if there were
two governors, the ship must needs perish; for while the one would hoyst up
sail, the other would cast ancor, and so there would be a confusion. Saint
Athanasius says, if there were as many Governors and Coronels in one Army as
soldiers, the Army would soon be confounded; this is the safety of an Army,
that there is but one General, and so all are preserved; so is it of the
world, that there is but one God.

The third Use is for matter of practice, to restrain men from wronging one
another; because there is but one God. It is not my use, but the Prophets, Mal.
2.10. Have not we all one Father? and the Apostle in the new Testament exhorts,
that we live in peace, etc. he adds, because there is but one God, Father of
us all, etc. so he that is about to injury another, ought thus to reason with
himself; there is but one God, and he is his God as well as mine: and if any
man injury me, shall I go about to take revenge? therein shall I sin against
God, for there is but one God: Well might it be, if an English man and a
stranger should injury one another in a strange place, they might return
revenge, because they are not both under one supreme Governor; but we may not
do so, we have all one God: a Master of a family that has two servants fallen
out, is most angry with him that strikes the second blow: so with him that
offers wrong, God is angry, but he is much more offended with him that takes
revenge: therefore we ought to reason thus with our selves, he is his God and
my God, therefore I may not transgress against him: and this is not only
general, but particular, for the Master to the servant, for the King to the
Subject; we have but one God, and his God is my God; I may not wrong him, for
he will punish me, and defend him: and this is the argument that Job uses, If I
did despise the counsel of my maid; that is, if I was a tyrant over them, and
would not hear them speak, but would have done what I pleased: what was the
ground that restrained him? he that made them, made me; therefore deal equally
with your servants; you have but one God, and there is no difference between
him and you; therefore let every man take heed of himself, especially that ye
transgress not one against another; and every one shall receive of God as he
has done: And so much for this time.

OF GOD AND HIS ESSENCE. CHAP. VII.
EXODUS 3.14. And God said to Moses, I am that I am.


THE word of God, the fountain of knowledge, teaches us; first, concerning
God himself: Secondly, concerning the will of God.

Concerning God himself, we proposed three heads: First, That there is a God:
Secondly, That there is but one God. Thirdly, What this God is. Concerning the
two former; That there is a God, and that there is but one God, we have already
spoken: now it remains that we proceed to the third; What this God is. The
nature of man is so weak and imperfect, that it is altogether impossible for
it to find what God is; and that made the Naturalists say, that it was no
easy thing by nature to find that there is a God; but to find out what he
is, is altogether impossible: The light that we have in his Word is imperfect,
and we can see but in part, as the Apostle speaks: God has showed himself
unto us, as he did to Moses, by his back parts; that is, so much of himself as
we may be saved by; and no more may we seek after, and be saved; and therefore
as Moses says, and Saint Ambrose building upon him, Secret things belong to
God; he has kept them to himself, and what things God has kept secret, we
may not look after; and those things he has revealed, we may not neglect;
therefore we must follow the Word and the light of it, and go along therein as
others have done before us, who labored to see this God. For me to tell you
the many descriptions, the ancient Fathers have given of God, would take up a
great deal of time, therefore to pass by all these, and to come to that which
may give us profitable knowledge.

The first Question is this:

Quest. What does this word teach us concerning God?

Ans. It teaches us what he is, namely one spiritual Essence, most perfect,
distinguished into three persons: this description of God is the ground
whereupon we must lay that which follows, wherein you must see that he is an
Essence; secondly, that he is but one Essence; thirdly, that he is a spiritual
Essence; fourthly, that he is most perfect: this question and answer we will
explane in other questions and answers; I come then to the first.

Quest. Namely; what is this that is said to be an Essence? or why is it said
to be an Essence?

Ans. The answer is, that Gods Essence is that by which he is, and existeth
true God: To explain this, it appears out of these words that I have read,
that Moses being sent by God to Israel, that he might answer them when they
said, who sent thee, God says, I am, that I am; I am, and Essence are all one:
for though in Scripture this word Essence is not to be found, yet in sense and
meaning it is; this is manifest, Revel. 1.8. God says of himself, I am, etc.
Moreover, this is manifested to us by that name which is given to God, even
Jehovah and Jah, names that are not given to any that are not Gods by nature,
though Gods by office; that these two names are always given to him that is
God by nature, I might show infinite examples, Psalm. 83.18. Thou whose name
alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth. So Exodus 12.2. The Lord
is my strength: where the word is (Jehovah Jah:) Now this word Jehovah is
derived of a root or Radix, that signifies (to be) and thereupon it comes to
pass, that he is called (I am.)

Quest. Why is God such an Essence?

Answ. Because he existeth absolutely of himself: Secondly, because his
Essence is eternal, immutable, and ever the same. Thirdly, because it gives an
Essence and being to his Word and Promises. Fourthly, because he gives an
Essence and being to his Creatures: and of all these in their place.

Essence or being, is common to God and his creatures: these four things make
the difference.

Reas. 1. First, That he existeth absolutely of himself: this appears by many
places, Isai 43.10. You shall know and believe me; that is, you shall
understand that I am, and how? namely, of my self: for before me there was no
God, neither shall there be after me: so he is absolute of himself. So also
John 8.38. Before Abraham was, I am: our Savior speaking of his Deity, says,
that he was long before Abraham, though in respect of his humanity he descended
from Abraham: things created have their Essence and being, but they have it not
of themselves, but from God who has it of himself: hereupon it is said, an
essence and being are both one in God: and this is the first ground why he is
called an Essence.

The second Reason is, because his essence is eternal, immutable, and
therefore always the same. Psa. 90.2. Thou art from everlasting, thy years
never fail: according to this, Psalm. 102.2. Mal. 3.7. I am the Lord, I change
not, James 1.13. With him there is no changing nor shadow of changing. Saint
Bernard says, the true and sole Essence is the Essence of God; created things
have their Essence from another, he from himself; and they sometimes wear
not, but he was ever the same, and therefore properly has this name given unto
him.

The third Reason is, because he gives a being to his Word and Promises; and is
therefore called an Essence, even an Essence, giving being to others: for in
the accomplishment of them, he gives them a real being. Exodus 8. I was known
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by my name Almighty; that is, I was known to be
almighty, when I created the world of nothing; and I was known Almighty in
destroying the world again: I was known by my name Almighty, when I blessed
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, yet was not I known by my name Jehovah, in giving a
being unto my Promises; that is, in bringing them out of Egypt; I will now make
that a real being; therefore after God had delivered them, he says, I am
Jehovah, that brought thee out of the house of bondage. To this purpose S.
Austin says, he does not promise, and others perform; but he promises and
performs himself.

Reas. 4. Because he gives a being to all other creatures, in their several
kinds; some have a bare being, and some have a lively; some a sensitive, some
a reasonable being; all these have it from God, Esa. 44.24, I stretch the
heavens, I the Lord made all these: this is that the Apostle says, that
through him, and for him, and by him, are all things. It is he that gives us a
being, In him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17 28. Saint Bernard
says, by his benefit all have life, but no man is beneficial to him; he it is
that is maker of all: therefore he is properly called an Essence, because he
has his being from himself, and all other things from him.

Use 1. This teaches us to put a difference between the true God, and false
gods. The true God is one Essence, those have no such Essence; there be many
gods which bare superstition has invented, but it never gave them a being; but
the true God has a being of himself; they worship those (says the Apostle)
which by nature are no gods, and therefore they are false gods; they had a
being from man, and therefore they are beholding to man for it: and thence it
appears they are no gods; why? they have no eternal being: even the Heathen
Poets which were the Prophets of those gods, speak of their manner, and
parents, and birth; and if they had parents from whom they received beginning,
they must have an end; for every thing that has his beginning; must have an
end. Again, they that have a being and have no life, are false gods; for they
have their being from man, and the errors of man, so they are gods made with
hands; therefore it is manifest they are false gods, and superstitious men give
them false names, as Salvian observed; that in his time, they gave their Idols
celestial names, yet were not these the true God, because he that is the true
God has his being of himself, and depends not upon any other; and so much for
this use.

Use 2. This teaches us that we should serve this God with fear, because we
have our being from him; he is an Essence that has his being from himself, we
had our being from him; we hold not our being but by him; we ought therefore to
serve him by way of Christian Policy that he may continue our being, we ought
to serve him with fear, Psalm. 100. Again, he has given us a being, and
though he has made us, he has no need of us; and therefore we ought to fear
him; God has no need of our service. Thou that art a master, thy servant has
need of thee, and thou have need of thy servant, that he may serve thee; but
God is the true God, and has no need of any man, but every man has need of
him, therefore it is necessary that every man should return his being to him.
Again, he has no need of man's piety, as Job speaks; can a man be profitable
to God, there is no benefit that a man can yield to God, but man receives all
from him, and he may take all away at his pleasure, and therefore we ought to
serve him; no man will say that God had need of us: If a man goes to a River
and drinks to satisfy his thirst, will a man say the River had need of him, no
but that he had need of the River? so here: therefore every one ought to serve
this God with fear: for that God who made thee a man, might have made thee a
beast, or a snake, but has not; and therefore seeing we do but draw our
breathes from him, there is reason that we should fear him, and serve him,
that we may have the continuance of our lives here, and eternal life
hereafter, and this shall suffice for this use.

Quest. The next question is, whether this Essence be one or many?

Answ. The answer is made that there is but one simple Essence without
division, or partition; we instance this my text, I am, that I am; here is no
more but one simple Essence without any partition, like unto this is Zach.
14.9. And they shall worship one God. The meaning is, that after Christ shall
come, the Gentiles with the Jews shall all worship one and the same true God.
And this is that which Christ speaks, I and the Father are one; this argues a
plurality of persons, in that he says, I and the Father, but when he comes to
the Essence, he says, are one; and there he instances in the singular number,
John 5.7. There are three that bare witness in heaven; the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit, these three are one. Where the Apostle does show that these
three persons are one in Essence.

Quest. Seeing there are three persons, why should there be but one Essence?

Answ. First, because there can be but one God.

Secondly, because this Essence is most perfect.

Thirdly, because these three are alike Coeternall.

Reas. 1. First, there can be but one God, therefore there can be but one
Essence: for it is a true position that the learned have, that the Essence of
God is God, therefore if there were many Essences there would be many Gods; but
there can be but one God, as has been showed: mark the reason, if the
Essence were divided, there must be three Gods, for where the Essence is
divided there are three, as Peter, James, and John are three; why? because
their Essence is divided; but in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
these are not three Essences, but one Essence, as Saint Bernard says; this God
is the true God, which is so simple that he cannot have parts, and so one that
he cannot have number, therefore if he be but one God, he must needs be but one
Essence.

Reas. 2. Because this Essence is most perfect, in the highest degree; that
which is perfect in the highest degree can be but one, because that one must
contain all perfections; If there should be many, there could be none most
perfect; because in every one, some perfection, or some degree of perfection
would be wanting. Therefore these three persons being in the highest degree
perfect, can be but one Essence.

Reas. 3. Because they are all eternal alike; that is manifest: for it is a
maine Article of Religion to be believed, that the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost are Coeternall: there can be but one eternal; and whereas the Father is
before the Son, in regard of order, yet not in time; they are alike eternal,
therefore there are not several Essences.

Use. 1. The first use serves to condem all those heretics that denied the
diety of the Son, and holy Ghost, and yet denied not simply that they were God,
but that they were Gods by nature: we say they are here confuted: for if the
God head be but one Essence, it must needs follow that these persons are Gods
by nature, or not at all.

In created things, they that have a like nature are said to be the same
Essence; as in birds, beasts, and men; whatsoever has the nature of a man, we
say it is a man, though he have not the same singular nature that others have,
yet we say he has the nature of a man: there is difference, as the Learned
observe, between the like Essence, and the same Essence; he that has the like
Essence of some one man, has not the same Essence of that man; but the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, are one and the same Essence.

Use. 2. Here is direction for our faith, what we must believe of God, if we
will be saved; we must believe aright in God: and we cannot believe aright,
unles we understand him what he is; and here our knowledge, and faith must
distinguish these three persons one from another, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, but yet our faith may not divide the Essence; we must distinguish the
Essence from the persons that do subsist in it; therefore if we believe aright,
though there be three persons; yet there is but one Essence; and we must hold
this as a maine Article of Christian faith; Salvian says, speaking of the
Creed, he that denies the first Article, overthrowes all the rest: so I say, he
that holds not this, has no faith at all.

Use. 3. The third use is this, here is matter of comfort to those that are
Gods; and that which is the especial means of comfort, is prayer: they may
come boldly to the throne of grace, and go away assured that they are heard,
because there is but one Essence; you will ask me how it follows upon this, I
explain it thus; they that pray, and pray aright, cannot pray to God the
Father, but in the name of the Son; neither can they pray of themselves, but
the spirit makes request for them: Romans 8. those that the Father commands to
pray, and the Son prays for, and the spirit helps; shall they not have
assurance, seeing that God entreates himself for them: for prayers are made to
the Father, through the Son, and by the holy Ghost. Saint Augustine speaking
of Christ, says, Christ prays for us, and in us, and is prayed to of us:
Christ prays for us as he is our Priest; he prays in us, as he is our head:
and he is prayed to of us, as he is our God; now no doubt but we shall
prevail, when we have the Son a mediator, and the spirit of God our helper,
therefore we may go away with assurance: for if a great Prince would not only
vouchsafe to let poor creatures put ut Petitions for them, and his Son to
present them to him, but also appoint his secretary to draw their petitions
for them, and his Son to present them to him, undoubtedly they should speed;
and therefore they should go with assurance: so God vouchsafes this mercy,
that he will let us come to put up our petition to him: and he gives us his
spirit to make them, his Son to present them, and these three are one; and
therefore we may go with boldness, as Cyprian says: if any man pray to God
and use that prayer his Son made, he may have good hope to be heard: and we
say he may be assured to be heard when he makes that prayer which the spirit of
God made; and thus have we comfort in this, that the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, are but one Essence.

OF GOD AND HIS ATTRIBUTES. CHAP. VIII.
JOHN 4.24. God is a spirit, and they that worship him etc.


THE last day, you heard these things concerning God, that he is one spiritual
Essence, distinguished into three persons. In which description of God, I have
showed you that we are to speak of these particulars. First, that he is an
Essence. Secondly, that he is one Essence. Thirdly, that his Essence is
spiriuall. Fourthly, that it is perfect, of his Essence, and that he is but
one, was spoken of the last day. Now to proceed to the third, viz. that it is a
spiritual Essence according to our order, the question and answer stand thus;

Quest. What is meant, when it is said, that God is a spiritual Essence?

An. That God is a spirit, and his nature, and substance is indivisible, and
corporeal; we may come to see what he is, by that which he is not; as it is
not possible to tell what God is, so it is hard to describe what a spirit is;
but yet by that which he is not, we may see in part what he is, as Saint Austin
says, to know what God is, is the safest way to know what he is not. To prove
this description of God, that he is a Spirit, 2. Cor. 3.17. The Lord is a
spirit invisible, that a spirit is invisible, Christ says, Luke 24.34 see,
feel me, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see I have, 1. Tim.
1.17. To God only wise, invisible: and he is described by negatives: Col 1.15.
The Image of the invisible God; where it appears, that God is a Spirit,
invisible and incorporeall.

Quest. How do you confirm this by reason?

Answ. By three reasons, First; because he is most simple without composition.
Secondly, because he cannot be contained in any space, or place. Thirdly,
because he is insensible, he cannot be perceived by any sense; therefore he
must needs be invisible, and incorporeall; to explane every one of these.

Reason 1. First, that God is most simple, without composition, as you have
heard out of Saint Bernard, he is so simple, that there are no parts in him: if
he have no parts, then he must needs be simple, and without composition; and
indeed of what should he be compounded? He was before all things; therefore
necessarily, he must be without all composition; all created spirits are
without bodies, but all created spirits have a kind of composition, but God
has none: all created spirits, both Angels, and souls of men, have a kind of
composition, they are compounded of act, and power; but God has neither
matter, nor form, nor is compounded of act, and power, therefore he is without
composition, and it may well be said, that he is a spirit invisible and
incorporeall.

Reason 2. The second reason is; because he cannot be comprehended, or
contained in any place, or space; corporeal things, are comprehended, as the
bodies that are in this place may be circumscribed the reason is; because they
have length, breadth, and depth; but no such thing is in God: I say all spirits
are without these, and free from circumscription, then much more this Spirit;
this is that Solomon speaks of, 1. Kings 8.2, Does God indeed dwell among men,
behold the heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee. So Ier. 23.24. I
fill heaven and earth. Saint Cyprian says, God is such an essence as is
spiritual, and is in every place, and excluded out of no place, nor included
in any place, but fills every place, therefore, he must needs be a spirit
invisible and incorporeall.

Thirdly, because he is insensible, it must needs follow he is a spirit; for
spirits are not subject to senses; so you heard out of Luke 24. feel, see, a
spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have: The reason is, because
spirits have not sensible qualities, which are the object of men's senses; much
less has God any such qualities; in God there is no mutability, nor change,
therefore he is not subject to sense; for whatsoever is subject to sense is
mutable; that which is the snarpest sense, and best able to comprehend, is the
eyes, but this cannot comprehend God; God is infinite, and therefore cannot
possibly fall under finit sense of man; that which is subject to sense, is
subject to man's understa^ding; but God exceeds man's understanding: he is great;
we know him not, says Elihu: we know him no futher then he does reveal
himself, and when we know the most how little of him do we perceive? Therefore
it follows, from hence, that God is a Spirit.

Use 1. The first use: if this be so, it reproves the error of those heretics
called the Anthropomorphite, that taught, that God had a bodily shape; they are
confuted by this, that God is a Spirit, in whom there cannot be any such thing;
Ob. Yea, but say they, the Scriptures give these things to God, hands eyes,
ears, and feet. Answ. These are given to God by a Metaphor, by a kind of
borrowed speech; namely, that which man does with these members, God does
without them, and these are given to God in Scripture for our capacity; when we
say God has a head, feet, or other members, it is by effect, and not by
nature; we say that God is life (says St. Ierom) wisdom, and has eyes, etc.
we say God has eyes, because he is wholly an eye, and sees every thing, in
every place; and so we say he has feet, because he is wholly feet, he is in
every place, and does behold all things, and works all things: Obje. And
whereas it is said, that man is made after the Image of God; Answ. He is indeed
but not in bodily shape, but in the soul, in righteousness, in wisdom,
holiness, knowledge, etc. therefore these are but cavells of theirs.

Use 2. Secondly, this reproves any representations of God, in any Images,
either internal, in the mind, by thoughts, or external by Pictures: there
cannot be any representation of God, for God is a spirit, and a spirit cannot
be represented by any gross or earthly matter; much less can God, who is more
spiritual then spirits: It is not befitting his Majesty to to be pictured; and
hereupon it is, that he forbids all representations of him; neither did the
people of God, (howsoever God did appear to them in bodily shapes) at any time
in any manner represent him: the molten Image is a teacher of lies, says the
Prophet; it is the original of diverse errors, which they have justly fallen
into, and justly deserve to fall into, that will not seek God in his word, but
in painted walls: from these the people of God have been preserved, because
they have ever sought him in his word; and as all outward representations of
God, so all inward conceits of him, besides the word, are unlawful; to
abstain from Images is easy, but to abstain from inward thoughts is hard;
and that partly by reason of the corruption of our natures, and partly by the
suggestion of the devil: therefore we should be more careful, not to conceive
of God as like to any thing; nor to make any resemblance of him in our mind:
and then this is the comfort that a man has, that though these thoughts come,
if he dislike them, and strive against them, they are infirmities that God will
cure them, and not condemn us for.

Use 3. This teaches us, when we are about the worship of God, to think of
the nature of God, what he is; that he is a spirit, without division, or
composition; and though we should glorify God with our bodies, for God will
have them, yet especially we should do it with our spirits, which God in a
special manner requires: why? because that is most agreeable to his nature,
and most pleasing to him; he that will serve a man, must labor to do it
principally outwardly; but he that will serve God, must do it especially
inwardly, in the heart; if he do it in the heart, he cannot but do it in the
outward man; man respects more the outward, then the inward; but God respects
more the inward, then the outward: if a man worship God in spirit, though he be
hindered in the outward by occasions, God will excuse it. God never excuses a
man, for the want of inward affections, but has oftentimes taken the inward,
when the outward has been wanting: S. Gregory says, there is this difference
between God and man; man requires the outward, and does not so much look at
the inward; but God requires the inward; man can go no further then the
outward, but God measures the outward service, by the inward affections: there
is no true service in the outward, where the inward is wanting; therefore when
thou come to prayer, hearing the word, or singing of Psalms, whom have thou
to deal withal, with God who is a spirit? then thy worship must be spiritual:
if thou have a mouth to speak to God in prayer, thou must have a mouth in thy
heart also; else thou art but an hypocrite, and art abhorred of him: David
says, praise the Lord O my soul! and all that is within me, praise his holy
name: therefore with thy outward service, thou must join the inward, or else
thy service, is but a stinking thing to him.

Quest. The next question is, what mean you by that when you say, he is most
perfect?

Ans. The answer is, that he is sufficiently perfect, and needs nothing out of
himself, nor retains any thing from any other, Genesis 17. I am God
all-sufficient, walk before me: there God says to Abraham, I am God in my
self, and out of my self: the same phrase is often used in Genesis, the God
all-sufficient be with thee, when Izaack blessed his Son, and in respect of
this he is called the happy God, 1 Timothy 1.11. the Gospel is called a happy
Gospel, and in the 6. chap. 15. verse, he is happy, because he is
all-sufficient in himself, Psalm. 16.12. thou art my Lord, and all my well doing
extends not to thee: God needs nothing, whatsoever a man does, it is nothing
to him; he made all mankind, God is not worshipped with men's hands, as if he had
need of any thing, so that every part of this description is proved that he is
sufficient and perfectly happy in himself, etc.

Quest. Have you any grounds for this you say?

Ans. We have three, first because he was thussufficient and happy, before
there was any creature made.

Secondly, because he is the author and cause of all good, and perfection in
all creatures.

Thirdly, that good and perfection that is in the creature, was first and most
perfect in him; these we will explane.

Reas. 1. First, before there was any creature made he was sufficient, and
happy: then it follows that he must be perfect of himself; for of whom
should he have this perfection? that he was thus, we prove, Psalm. 92. Before
the mountains, were made, and before the hills were laid, from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God; arguing that he must needs be sufficient: the same
is in Psalm. 102.25.26. speaking of the works of God, They shall perish, and go
away like a garment, but thou art the same, and thy years never fail: that
is, the same thou wast, the same thou shall be still: whence it appears
plainly, that God was before any creature was made; and though it be said,
Pro. 16.4. That God made all things for himself: yea the wicked, etc. yet he
made them without their help; and though he made all things for himself, yet
he had need of nothing; but made them that he might communicate his goodness to
them: for this is the nature of that which is good, not only to preserve it
self, but to communicate it self to others.

Reas. 2. Secondly, because he is the author of all the good and perfection
that is in the creature: Act. 17.25. He gives life and breath, and all things,
that is to say, God gives a man his life and breath, and the good things that
he has. This the Apostle asks the question, Cor. 4.7. What have thou, that
thou have not received? what has man? If man have nothing, what creature
should have any thing? as for man, he received all from him, he is the father
of lights, of whom comes all good things. This is his perfection, that he is
not only sufficient for himself, but for all others; this is manifest, for he
gives all things to all creatures, yet nothing diminishes his own store: what
good any creature has, it has it from him (as St. Basil says.) This argues a
man has much, when he has sufficient for himself, and to give to others.
This is a proof that God is rich, after another manner then men are; for when
men give, they have the less; but when God gives, he has nothing the less:
for that he gives to man, he is like to a springing Fountain, says the
Father, the more that you draw, the more it has. What can you compare God to?
for he is perfect; but we are glad to fly to imperfect things, to show his
excellency: so that this is the conclusion of this Reason, that he is
sufficient of himself, because sufficient for all other things.

The third reason is this, because that good and perfection that is in the
creature, was first in God, Genesis 1.17. God made man after his own Image; the
Image of God, what is it? Principally, that man received authority over all the
creatures; no, but knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness; this is to be
made after the Image of God. Hence, it necessarily follows, that God had them
first, and most perfectly, because man is but the Image; therefore he cannot
have them so perfectly as the thing he represents: We add further, they might
be more perfect in man if God would make them so; but God cannot be made more
perfect, because he is perfection it self: add to this, that man has this
perfection with many imperfections; man is said to be just, but not to be
justice; to be loving, but not love; to be wise, but not wisdom; but God is
justice it self, love it self, and wisdom it self: this is manifest, 1
John 1.5 God is light; he says not thus, God is a thing lightened, but that he
is light without darkness; whereas man, if he have light, has darkness
also; but God is void of all imperfection. Lastly, I add, these perfections
in man are accidents, but in God they are very substance; in man and Angels
they are accidents. An accident is that which may be added to a substance, and
after be taken away from the substance, without destroying of the substance.
These things, wisdom, knowledge, holiness, as in Angels and men are
accidents they may be lost, and lessened; the Angels are fallen, their justice
and righteousness, being qualities in them, are lost. Again, they may be
lessened and have degrees in men, and so righteousness and holiness are but
accidents in the very Saints of God, so they are at one time more righteous
then another; they sometimes decay, sometimes grow in grace, but in God they
are substances; his knowledge is himself, his justice himself: look how far
the Essence of God passes the nature of man, these pass that perfection that
are in men; therefore it must needs follow that God is most perfect, having all
things from none, but from himself, communicating to all creatures the
perfections they have, and having in himself their perfections more perfectly.

Use 1. The first Use then teaches us, that seeing God is so perfect, no man
when he performs any service to God, profits God any thing; God is so
absolute in himself that he needs nothing: If any man does not perform this
service to God, does he detract any thing from him? no, though he does not
perform it, he detracts nothing from God; for God is perfect in the highest
degree; whereupon it follows that a man's service that he performs to God, is
for his own benefit, and not for any benefit to God: God never commands any
worship for himself, there cannot be any thing added to him: Saint Austin
says, they are deceived who think that in commanding any thing, God does it
either in respect of his own pleasure or profit: they are deceived, for God
never commands any thing but for the profit of the doer. If you ask the ground
of this, he is perfect, he is the true God, he has no need of any man's
service; (as we said the other day) other Lords need the service of their
servants, but God never needs it: therefore whosoever offer any service to God,
they tend to their own profit, and if men contemn these things, they do not
take any thing from God, but themselves, are less perfect; for herein is man's
perfection, to serve God; and not to serve God, is his imperfection, Job 35.6,
7, 8. If thou sin against God, what is that to him? if thou do
righteously, what give thou to him? there is nothing added to God: he is so
perfect, that no sin can hurt him; and so righteous, that no righteousness
can benefit him: you heard in Psalm. 16.3. Oh Lord my righteousness extends
not to thee! thou have no need of my righteousness. Acts 17. God has no need
of any thing.

The conclusion is, We serve God for our own good; we increase our selves: the
Scripture calls for services only by way of justice, because we are bound to do
them: therefore Christ says, Luke 17.20. When you have done all things that
you can, yet you must say that you are unprofitable servants.

Use 2. This should provoke every man to labor to serve and please this God;
because he is a God most perfect in himself, sufficient to enrich men with
graces and gifts: this is not my use, but God himself makes it to Abraham,
Genesis 17.1, 2. I am God all-sufficient; what then? walk before me: there is the
use that God has made of it. Every man, that he may receive a blessing (as
Abraham, the father of the faithful did) must do this, walk before God: for
he will be the portion of all that walk before him: Walk before me; use no
unlawful means whereby thou may be made rich: if thou do, thou art an
Infidel: God is sufficient both in spiritual, and in temporal things: our
nature, that it might be, must have God the creator, says Saint Austin: and
that we may be wise, we must have God our wisdom; and that we may be happy,
we must have God our happiness: that we may have God, walk with God, and he
will bestow himself upon us. Every man, if he might be his own carver, if he
might choose whom he would serve, would serve a King, that he might receive
great gifts of him; as the Proverb is, There is no fishing to the Sea, etc.
Here is a King that is richer then all the Kings of the earth; for he can make
all beggars Kings. Therefore labor to serve this King, and please this King:
the same that he said before, Walk before me, etc. so I say, believe God is
all-sufficient, then go on, walk on in a godly course; walk after God, stand
not still, look not backward, but go on without breaking of this course; it
is enough that thou have such a God that is thus sufficient. And think not
that thou art holy enough, and pure enough; if thou do, thou art an Atheist.
Christ says, Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect, as your father in heaven is perfect:
Thou must go on still, and never think thou art holy enough, etc. if thou
think so, thou never did yet walk with thy God; and it is a question,
whether he be thy God or not; he may be thy God as creator, but not as
redeemer: every man therefore must labor to proceed in godliness, that is,
walk in this way. Bernard speaks of that speech of Paul's, Philip. 3.12, 13.
mark how he presses toward it: he was a man (says he) full of grace and
goodness, and he had a long time walked with God, yet he says, I do not
count as though I had attained to perfection, but I press hard toward the
mark, and stretch my self, so that I forget that which I was before. This is
that which all men ought to do (for the more grace any man has, the more
weakness he feels in himself:) and therefore let every one affect this
course. It is not sufficient that a man has begun to run well, there is danger
to begin to sit down; what if he should then be set upon by the dart of death?
was there not danger? but if a man sit not down, let death come upon him, he
shall dye in peace. If death find thee walking, thou shall rest with God, and
shall have all things in this life; and in the life to come, eternal
happiness.

THAT GOD IS MOST PERFECT. CHAP. IX.
EXODUS 34.6. The Lord, the Lord, strong, mereifull, and gracious.


GOD has revealed himself in his word, wherein we are taught, as you have
heard what he is; which we reduced to this short sum, that he is a spiritual
Essence most perfect, distinguished into three persons: in the which
description, are many things to be considered: as First, that he is an Essence.
Secondly, that he is but one Essence. Thirdly, that he is a spiritual Essence.
Fourthly, that he is most perfect, all these belong to his Essence; and lastly,
that he is distinguished into three persons. Now the perfection of God, is in
his Attributes, and is made manifest to us by them; and therefore in the next
place, we are to speak of them, and so I propound this question for orders
sake;

Quest. Wherein consists the perfection of the Divine Essence?

Answ. In Attributes which God has given unto it, to make it better known to
us: which are either incommunicable, or proper, or else communicable: these
things are commonly spoken of Gods Attributes, and properties, and saving other
men's judgments I like of them, that do distinguish between Attributes and
Properties. Attributes are those that belong to the Essence, and Properties to
the persons themselves: so that the Attributes are to be spoken of, when we
speak of the Essence and Properties, when we speak of the persons: Attributes
are nothing else, but the divine Essence of God, yet they are called
Attributes, because God has taken them to himself, to make himself better
known to us, so far as we are able to conceive of his divine Essence: now
these Attributes are of two sorts: either incommunicable and proper to God, and
not communicated to any other: and of this sort are his simpleness, eternity,
immutability, and his immensity: others there are communicable, they are not
indeed in the same measure in us, as they are in God; for that they cannot be,
but they are the like: therefore we say, that they are communicable, of which
we will speak when we come unto them: and so much shall serve for the first
question. Now the next question which is the point to be stood upon, is,
concerning the Simpleness of God.

Quest. What is the Simpleness of this Divine Essence?

Answ. It is an incommunicable Attribute, whereby God is conceived to be
without all composition: this must be confirmed, and this place which I have
read, will prove it; the Lord, the Lord, etc. wherein it is manifest that he is
Jehovah of himself, and by himself; and though there be many things that we
take to be in him, yet there is nothing in him, but himself: in him there is
no composition, therefore these Attributes that are given to God in the
Scripture, are given in the abstract, to show the simpleness of his nature: as
John 8.12. I am the light of the world. 1 John 1.5. God is light: not a thing
enlightened: God is love, 1 John 4.16. What does this intimate? but that all
these are his Essence, without composition: every thing that is loving is
compounded, but that which is love it self, is simple; he is so simple that he
has no composition; no not so much as of accidents: and this is grounded upon
the place we have set down: the Lord, the Lord, etc. then he adds his
Attributes, strong, merciful, and gracious, and thathe is such, it is clear,
Isa. 43.22. I, even I, forgive thy sins for my self: the Lord when he
forgives sins, he forgives not sin for the merit of man, but for his
mercies sake, and to show that mercy and goodness, is not in him as it is in
man, therefore he says, for my self.

Quest. What grounds establish this truth?

Answ. The answer is, First, he is most perfect. Secondly, he is truly
eternal. Thirdly, he is not subject to any accident or quality. To explane
these, I say he is most perfect, then most simple.

Reason 1. Because every thing, the more perfect it is, the more simple; for
composition detracts from perfection; we manifest it thus: In mettalls, the
more simple, the more perfect; therefore Founders do use their art, to
separate the dross, to make the metal purer; the purer it is from other
mettalls, the more perfect: so all liquid matters, as in wine, the more
perfect, the more free from lees: so for the Elements, the purest water is in
the bottom of the sea; because we have not perfect things to resemble God by,
we use imperfect; this shows us, that God is of a simple nature.

Reason 2. The second reason is, because he is truly eternal, and therefore
free from any composition: we say, truly eternal, for God is without
beginning, without ending, therefore he must needs be without composition; for
if there be composition in God, two things are required; a compound, and
simples, whereof he may be compounded, but neither of these two can be in
reference to God, for God is eternal: if another should make the composition,
God should not be before all things. If he should compound himself, he should
be before himself: and as there was no compounder, so for the same reason,
there was no simple to be compounded; because that God gives being to every
simple: Isa. 43.10. I was before there was any God: therefore it must needs
follow, that the Essence is without composition.

Reason 3. Because there are no accidents fall into God, God is subject to no
accidents, or qualities: from which if he be free, it must needs follow, that
he is most simple: for when we affirm that God is gracious, and good, etc.
when we speak of these things in God, we speak of them, not as they are
virtues in men, but as they are merely his Essence. In man they are qualities,
but in God they are his Essence: those in man may be changed, but in God they
cannot: S. Bernard speaking of the love of God, breaks forth of a sudden,
and says; Let no man think when I speak of Gods love, that I mean qualities in
God; for when I say God is love, I mean no new thing, but that same which the
Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 4.16. God is love: now then there is a double love;
there is love giving love, there is love the substance, and love the quality:
If it be the name of the substance, it is given to God; if the name of the
quality, it is given to man: and whatsoever is said of love, may be said of any
other Attribute, as mercy, justice, etc.

This teaches us, that there is but one Essence; though there be three
persons: if thou ask the reason, why? It is because the Essence is most
simple, and without composition; where there is no composition, there is no
number; therefore there cannot be many Essences: and again from hence it
appears, that howsoever these things are attributed to God, that he is love,
mercy, favor, and anger, howsoever they are spoken, as though they were many
and different, yet in God they are but one, and the same. True it is, that we
are of a compounded understanding, they are as several things to us; because
we cannot conceive God as he is, yet by faith, we are brought to believe that
there is no such difference between them in God: that which is the love of God,
is the hatred of God; and that which is his wisdom, is his power also; because
there is but one and the same Essence; Saint Austin speaks to this purpose;
God is simple, he is great, and without weight or bulk: and he is wise,
without any wisdom: we cannot say that his justice is one thing, and his mercy
another; both these are his Essence, but we are of a compounded understanding,
and cannot but distinguish them.

Use 2. Is God thus simple, that his love, his mercy, and his justice are his
very Essence; we then will join these two together; here then, is matter of
joy, and comfort, and matter of terror and fear: first, matter of joy, and
comfort, mercy and love, are Gods Essence. What is the comfort of a male
factor? that he has a merciful Judge, 1. King. 20.31. The servants of Benadad
say, we have heard that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings. So is a man in
misery; what is his comfort? he has a compassionate friend, full of
compassion, and yet these are but accidents in man, and may deceive: how much
greater comfort then is this, that God is love it self, mercy it self,
justice it lelfe, (with reverence may I speak it;) he may cease to be, before
he can cease to be merciful, and good? etc. This is that the Prophet uses to
comfort the children of God with, Isai. 54.8. For a moment have I hid my face
from thee, but with everlasting compassions will I embrace thee: So Ie^. 31.3.
I have loved you with an everlasting love. Man loves, and he loves but for a
time; the same man that loved upon a small occasion, comes to hate as
extremely, as he loved tenderly: the reason is, because man is mutable; but God
loves more earnestly then man can do; for it is his Essence, and he never
changes: here is the comfort, Isa. 49.15. Can a mother forget her son? her son
new born, though some mother can be so unnatural (says God) yet I will not
forget you: yea Christ himself says, if you being evil can give good things,
how much more shall your heavenly father give his holy spirit to those that
ask him?

Secondly, this serves also for fear, and terror: why? because Gods anger, his
mercy, his justice, are his Essence, and he is unchangeable: The anger of a
King is much to be feared, it is like the messenger of death: Prove. 14 7. yet
the anger of a King is mutable, for a man of wisdom will appease it; but Gods
anger when he sets it upon any, it should make him tremble; it is his Essence,
God himself is against that man; these Attributes are his Essence: therefore
there is no reason why any man should presume upon the mercy of God, for God is
justice; nor despair, for God is mercy: thus we have ground of comfort, and
fear: there is no sound comfort, where there is no true fear, these two ever
go together; true fear of his justice, and comfort of his mercy. Saint
Bernard speaks to this purpose, Bernard. sex. bre. 25. Duo sunt pedes etc.
God has two feet, and one of these two feet is fear, the other love; and
with these two God walks in the hearts of men; when he comes to the crevice of
the heart of man, he puts in the foot of fear, and look how much fear, so
much comfort. If thou will know that God walks in thy heart in love, he first
sets in his left foot of fear; and therefore know thus much, thou must have
part in these two: first, in the fear of God, and so in the love, and comforts
of God: these must both go together, and therefore get thy heart smitten with
the fear of God, or else thou art but a vain man, to presume of comfort: and
thus much forth simpleness of Gods divine Essence.

The next thing is, the Eternity of God: and the question is:

Quest. What is the eternity of the divine Essence?

Answ. The answer is, it is an incommunicable attribute, whereby the divine
Essence is without beginning or ending, and without succession: the parts of
this we will explane: first, it is said to be an incommunicable Attribute,
because it is communicated to none, but proper to God. Secondly, that it is
without beginning, or ending; all this appears, because God has this name of
eternity given to him, Genesis 31.33. Abraham made an Altar, and offered to the
God of eternity. Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.
Isai 44.6. I am the Lord, and before me there was no God, neither shall there
be after me. Romans 1.20. The invisible things of God, as his eternal power, and
godhead, are seen. To what tends all this? but to tell us, that he had no
beginning, neither any ending. Thirdly, the third thing is, that he is without
succession; that is, has neither first, nor latter; neither present, nor to
come. There can be no succession without time, there is no succession with God;
for, a thousand years with God, are but as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8. so that with
man there are successions, but with God there are no successions; for all
things are naked, and bare before him: so the holy Ghost, Psalm 2. speaking of
the eternal begetting of the same (says,) Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee.

Quest. What grounds have you for this?

Answ. The answer is: first, because he is the true Jehovah; that is, has his
being of himself, etc. Secondly, he is the creator of all things, and of time
it self. Thirdly, He is the author and giver of eternal life, to those that
have it. To explane these:

Reas. 1. First, He is Jehovah: so we have heard the word explaned: a God that
has his being of himself, and not receiving it from any other: for if he have
his being from any, he must receive it from himself, or from some other:
receive it from himself he could not; for nothing can be the efficient cause
of it self: again, he could not receive it from any other, because that all
other have their being after him, and from him: he is the first and the last,
Revel. 7.8, 10. If the first, then none before him: then he received it not of
any other: so that this is true which Saint Austin speaks, This eternal, can
speak to the heart of man; I am, that I am: and it can only be said of him,
that he is, I am.

Reas. 2. The next Reason is, Because he is the creator of all things; even of
time it self: and whatsoever was before time, must be eternal. If God made
time, he must needs be before time; and therefore he must needs be eternal:
for whatsoever is within time, is temporal, and momentary. I cannot see (says
Saint Austin) that there should be space of time in eternity: why? because
space of time is made by the motion of things past, and to come: I cannot see
any such thing in eternity; for there nothing is past: for then, that which is,
should cease to be: nothing to come; for then that should have been always,
which yet is not.

Reas. 3. The third Reason is, Because he is the author and giver of eternal
life, to those that have it. Thence it appears, that he must needs be
eternal himself; for whatsoever can give eternity, that is eternal: there is
an eternity that has a beginning, and so the Angels, and souls of men are
eternal; but that is such an eternity, as differs from the eternity of God:
all Angels, and the souls of men, though eternal, are in themselves
corruptible, and capable of an end; but by the power and goodness of God, they
are kept still: the souls of the wicked to torment, and the souls of the
godly, to eternal life. The good Angels to glory, and the apostate angels to
hell fire: and thus we have made the point clear.

Use 1. The Uses then are these: first, here is encouragement in life and
death. It incourageth to go on in a pious course, and though we meet with
black tongues, although we meet with scoffs, though we bear the marks of the
Lord Jesus, yet let us go on still: here is our comfort, God lives for ever to
reward, and recompense us, for that which we shall suffer: therefore this
serves to encourage us to go through reproach, and evil speeches; because God
lives for ever: there is no greater encouragement for a soldier that is in the
field, to make him fight, then the hope of reward, and that he has a rich
General, that will reward him; yet he has this discouragement, it may be the
General may dye in the battle, and then, who shall reward him, for that he
has done? and so, according to the proverb, that which is done for old men
and children, is all lost: because old men dye, and children forget: so we may
say, whatsoever is done for man, is lost: But this King lives for ever;
whosoever thou be, go on in the service of God, and thou shall have plenteous
reward, as the Apostle says, Heb 10. God is faithful, and he will not forget
your work, and labor of love: so we may make it our use, he will not forget
the blasphemies, and scoffs that men undergo in his service: thus says Saint
Austin, he that rejoices in his soul now, shall one day be sorrowful;
because that God is eternal: he that rejoices in worldly things, the time
will come that he will sorrow; on the other side, the children of God which joy
in God, shall rejoice, when the world shall weep: will a man have a lasting
joy? cleave first to the eternal God; go on in a good course, be not
discouraged.

Use 2. The last Use of this Attribute of God, that he is eternal: that as he
is the first, so he is the last: so the Scripture describes him: then here is
matter of discouragement to the wicked, because they are they that contemn
God, and contemn his word; they are they that account the proud happy; they
are they that scorn the yoke of Christ; they are they that scoff at those
that submit themselves to God: there is terror for them: have they prosperity?
have they honors? have they bags full? when all these part, and they go out
of the world, then God lives to recompense them: for Christ says, Luke 19.27.
Let those mine enemies, that would not have me to rule over them, be bound hand
and foot. This may cut the combs of all such as scorn at, and disgrace Gods
people: Oh that you could always think of this eternity of God! he lives for
ever. Remember this when you are sick, and when you are well: oh! then what
goodly promises have the Ministers from you? how carefully you will walk
before God? but you, like Atheists, think, God is mortal, like your selves:
it is undeniable, that you think thus; for if Atheism had not possessed your
hearts, this would have awakened you: oh that this would be thought upon! oh
the vanity and toys that your hearts are possessed withal! Alas! you must give
an account to God, for every penny gotten: oh that this were written in your
hearts! Finally, then this is matter of comfort to the godly; when a good man
comes to dye, that has walked with God 10.20. or 30. years, and yet is loath
to depart from his wife, and children, and friends; he should stir up his
heart, to be willing; for he goes to that God that lives for ever; and
therefore he should not fear to go to him. As a Father reports of an old
Christian, when he was to dye, found himself unwilling, he says to himself;
Why art thou afraid to go to him, whom thou have labored to serve 70. years?
then this shall be the reward of the godly man's well doing in this life; in the
life to come, he shall go to God, that lives for ever: this may comfort him,
that he has a God, that will give him a plentiful reward, glory, and
happiness hereafter.

OF THE IMMVTABILITY OF GODS NATURE. CHAP. X.
I TIM. 6.16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in light.


THE perfection of God, as you have heard, is made known to us by his
Attributes: and his Attributes be of two sorts; either communicable, or
incommunicable, such as cannot be ascribed to any other: and of the first sort
of these, you heard the last day. In the next place, we are to handle two more;
and these are, his immutability, and his infiniteness: and now concerning the
first of these, the Immutability of God: according to our order; the question
is:

Quest. What is the Immutability of God?

Ans. It is an incommunicable Attribute, whereby he is void of all corruption,
and alteration. This attribute is given to God diverse ways: there is an
immutability of his nature, and there is an unchangeablenesse of his course,
and of his will: but we will not here speak of any other immutability, but the
unchangeablenesse of his nature; for the immutability of his Counsel, and his
Will, will fall in their place to be spoken of. I say this is an incommunicable
Attribute, because it is not common, neither can be attributed to any other,
but God: for though there are things that are immutable, yet they are subject
of themselves to alteration: the souls of men are subject of themselves to
alteration, through the condition of their creation; but they are kept by God,
if he would, he might leave them, and then they are mutable.

This Immutability, not to be subject to corruption, is properly attributed to
the divine Essence: that it is so, is manifest in this place I have read, He
only has immortality, 1 Timothy 1.17. he calls him the King immortal: the same is
in Psalm 102.26, 27. They shall change, speaking of the heavens and the earth,
but thou shall endure: thy years never fail: so the Apostle says, Heb. 2.12.
And this shall suffice for this question.

Quest. For what cause is the divine Essence free from corruption and
alteration?

Answ. The answer is, Because the power of it is so great, that it cannot be
corrupted, by any power whatsoever. Secondly, because it is without quantity,
and cannot be less or greater. Thirdly, because it is without quality, and
cannot be better or worse: nor in any other condition: we will manifest these
severally.

First, concerning Gods power: Christ says, John 10.26. My Father that gave
them me is greater then all and no man is able to pull them out of his hand:
why? because there is no power greater then himself: And this is the nature of
every thing, to preserve it self: If any thing had power enough, it would not
be corrupted; we apply this to God that has all power; none can corrupt him:
our Savior Christ alleges, that place, Ioh. 10. to show that his sheep can
never perrish: why? because my father that gave them me, is greater then all:
Saint Augustine uses these words, If any of these sheep perish, (speaking of
the children of God) God is overcome by the faculty of man, or some power that
comes from him.

Secondly, again, God is without quantity: and therefore can be neither lesser
nor greater, as Saint Augustine says; he is great without quantity: and where
there is no quantity, there can be no diminution, for God cannot be lesser or
greater: he cannot be greater, for then he should not be infinite; and he
cannot be lesser, for then he should cease to be infinite; and therefore he
cannot be lesser or greater, so is void of all alteration.

Thirdly, again, he cannot be better, or worse; why? he cannot be beter, for
then he should not be perfect; he cannot be worse, for then he should cease to
be perfect; neither can he be in a less good estate, for if he be, then he
loses the good he had, and takes the ill he had not: if he lose the good he
had, then he wants, and so still should be imperfect, and therefore he is
thus without quality, etc. so immutable.

Use. 1. This confirms us, that we serve the true God, and not the false Gods
of these nations; because we serve the Immortal, and the Immutable God: they
serve false Gods, because their Gods are mutable; how appears this? thus,
because their Poets which were their prophets, tell us, they were Adulterers,
etc. and the Apostle says they were subject to sin; because for sin, death
went over all flesh; therefore they are false Gods, and they serve false Gods:
Saint Bernard speaking of celestial creatures, says, they are subject to
sin; for the Angels, some of them sinned and became devils: and some of them
did not sin, not because they were not able to sin; but for that God
assisted them, that they sinned not; they also were subject to sin, and so to
death after their kind; for there is none free, no not the Angels by their
nature, but as they are established by Christ: So that we see the Gods of the
nations are false Gods, and as they say they are Gods of the mountains, and
not of the valleis.

Use. 2. The second use is, to establish the certainty of our faith; because
God is immutable: we trust not to mutable man, we make not flesh our Arm,
whose breath is in his nostrils; but we trust upon him that is immutable: Here
is the certainty of our faith; our strength rests not in us, but in him, on
whom it is built: and it is with us, as it is with children, who have but a
weak hand and arm, notwithstanding, if they be helped by their father who is
a strong man, they can perform something: wherein is the child's strength? it
is plain it is not in the child, but in the father; so says Saint Bernard,
man holds not God, but God him: And this is the comfort that we have, when we
feel our faith weak, we are kept by the power of God unto salvation;
Therefore this Attribute shows, that our faith being so kept can never fail.
I do not doubt, (for the Disciples began to doubt, we hoped that this man
should have redeemed Israel,) but it cannot fail; for it must needs be
certain because grounded, and built upon God.

Use. 3. The third use is matter of comfort, to all those that are Gods
children, and so in the love of God: what is their comfort? their King that
loves them is immortal: they have not the favor of a mortal King, but of an
immortal King; how great is that worldly honor, that earthly joy, and that
temporal rest, that many men have in the favor of Princes? and yet
notwithstanding, what are these Princes? even mortal, such as must most
certainly die, and none can tell how soon; this therefore is a vain thing to
trust to; for we see in what a trice, Nebuchadonozer was taken away, and
Belshazzer his son, even in a moment; all their honor was taken away and
laid in the dust: yea and more then this, they that have the favor of earthly
Princes abuse it and grow proud and insolent of their inferiors; who as soon
(or before) as the Kings bones be cold, labor to pluck them down from their
excellency: as Bathsheba said to David, 1 King. 1.21. When thou my Lord shall
be gathered to thy fathers, I and Solomon shall be reputed offenders; So they
may say, when the king shall be gathered to his fathers, they shall be counted
vile; so that this is a comfortless comfort, to depend upon a mortal man; but
here is the comfort and happiness of those that have the favor and
countenance of God; they depend upon the favor of an immortal King that never
dies, but ever lives, and will preserve all those that are his: they need not
fear any earthly power, if they have confidence in Christ; they need not
fear, if their own corruptions do not provoke God: so then we see here is
matter of comfort to Gods people, they have the love of an immortal king that
lives for ever, and loves for ever, and will be their God, and the God of their
seeed: Therefore parents if they labor to make their children great, let them
not have that excessive care to get riches for them, but labor to make them
religious, that God may care for them: that same that Barzillat said to David
2. Sam. 19.37. When David would have had him to go over with him; no says he
take my Son; and we see David gave Solomon charge of him when he was a dying;
here is the comfort of good children, when their parents fear God: God lives
for ever to help and bless them, though their parents be dead; but where the
parents will excessivelv care for them, God leaves them: how many do we see
come to poverty that have had thousands left them? how comes this to pass? God
has with-drawne his blessing and providence from them: their parents took
care to gather, and heap up, but not to sow religion in their hearts, and
intrest them in God. Brethren if you would bestow half the time in laboring
to make your children religious, that you spend to make them great, and rich,
Gods favorable providence would be greatly seen toward them; but for want of
this, the same riches that perchance carry the father to hell in getting them,
may bring the son after him in spending them: thus then we see, to Gods
people it is a marvailous comfort that we have a God that lives for ever; that
will take care for us, and our posterity; and thus much for this Immutability
of God.

To come to the next thing, his infinitenes; and to avoid all descriptions,
defining infinitenes, and divisions, showing how many ways God is infinite:
and to keep our selves to this place: It affoords only the Infinitenes of
place, and this is the thing that we are now to speak of.

Quest. What is the Infinitenes, and the Immensity of the Divine Essence?

Ans. It is an incommunicable property, whereby it is presentin all places in
the world, and out of the world, ^tone time; to explane this.

First I say, it is an incommunicable Attribute, because it cannot be
attributed to any other; for though some creatures are not to be limited by
external bounds; yet there is no creature but may be limited by his nature; and
thus Angels, and spirits, that are not to be limited by external bounds, yet
by the bounds of their own nature they may; and though they have not
substantial bodies, external, yet they are limited in themselves internally;
but God is so infinite that he is not limited externally or internally, and
this is solely proper to God, that he should be in all places in a moment, and
not divided in any place, but the whole Essence is every where; we do not say
part of the Essence: as if a man were so great that his head were in England,
his legs in Spain, his arms in France; but the whole is not in every place.
I do not say so, but our God is never divided, he is never parted, but his
whole Essence is every where. We explane this, by the similitude of the soul;
the whole is in every part of the body; there is not some in the foot, some in
the head, and some in the hand, but the whole is in every part; thus have I
explaned this question: I now come to prove it, Psalm. 139. Whither shall I go
from thy presence? if I ascend up to heaven, thou art there: If to the utmost
part of the earth, thou art there: There is no place to which we can go from
God; for he is in every place, and excluded out of no place, Isai. 66.1. Heaven
is my throne, and earth is my foot sloole: (St. Hilar. de trin lib. 1.)
observes the Prophet so speaks, to show that the Lord fills heaven and earth.
Ier. 23.24. explanes it, I fill heaven, and earth; and more then this, he is
near to every one: Act. 17.27. This shows, that God is within the world, and
without the world; that apeares in, 1 King. 8. The heaven of heavens are not
able to contain thee; how much less the house that I have built? and thus the
Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 40.12. He has the sea in his fist, and has
measured the heavens with his Spann; where is be that shuts up the dust of the
earth in a void place, and has weyed the mountains? therefore it is manifest
that he is in all places, both within and without the world.

The next question is:

Quest. Why is he so infinite, in every place?

Ans. The answer is, because he is simple, neither having nor possible to have
parts; secondly, because the power of the Divine Essence is every where:
thirdly, because there is but one Essence in three persons of the Diety, common
to them all; To explane these:

Reas. 1. First, that the Divine Essence is most simple, I explaned it the last
day. The next, that, it is without parts, it follows, if it have no parts, it
is whole; and this is the reason that Philosophers, and ancient Divines have
given, that the soul should be whole in every part, because it is most simple,
and has no parts.

Reas. 2. Secondly, because the power of the divine Essence is every where, for
nothing is in God, but his Essence; if therefore the power of God be every
where, then it must needs follow that God is every where; It is manifest, that
his power is in the creating of every thing, we will not now stand to prove it:
therefore he being the only maker of all things, shall necessarily be in them:
but God does not only make all things, but su staineth all things made, and
therefore he must needs be every where: this is manifest, Genesis 1.2. the Spirit
moved upon the waters; that is, for the sustaining and the upholding of them by
his power: what power but his Essencial? As a hen hatches her eggs by sitting
over them, so does the holy Ghost sustain all things, by mooving upon them;
and therefore his Essenciall presence must be every where: This the Apostle St.
Paul teaches, Act. 17. he is near to every one of us: in him, we live, move,
and have our being; so that by this, it appears, that God is infinite.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, because there is but one Essence of the three persons in the
deietie: that is common to them all, and is in several, and distinct places,
at one, and the same time, then it must follow that it is infinite: for first,
the Essence is not divided, part in the Father, part in the Son, part in the
holy Ghost; but is entire in each person, as has bin proved: Secondly, these
three are in several places, not at several times, as a finite thing may be,
but at the same time, which nothing can be that is not infinite: This appears;
the Father is said to be in heaven, who is the same Essence with the Son, who
was sometimes on earth and dwelt amongst us: the Son at the same time was in
heaven, when he was upon the earth, Ioh. 3.13. Heaven and earth are distinct
places, therefore it must needs follow, that the same Essence being in them
both at the same time, is infinite: the scripture makes this more plain, Ioh.
16.32. I am not alone, but the Father is always with me; So likewise, Ioh.
14.11. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; How is this mutual immeation
made? they have both the same Essence; therefore the persons though
distinguished yet cannot be separated, as shall afterward be declared.

The holy Ghost is the same Essence with the Father, and the same is in the
hearts of all the faithful, whersoever they be, and how far distant one from
another; for they are the temple of the holy Ghost: who dwells in them not only
by his grace, but by his Essence; therefore this Essence is infinite. Ambrose
proves the deity of the holy Ghost by this infinitenes of his Essence: who
dares say, (says he) that the holy Ghost is a creature, when he is not
limited? so then we see by these reasons that God is infinite.

Use. 1. The first use then serves to confute the doctine of Popery, and the
ubiquitaries that hold, that the body of Christ is in all, or in many places at
the same time, which cannot be so; my reason is, because that Christ's body, is
a finite creature, and though it be glorified, yet it is not deified; and it is
an incommunicable attribute of the deity, to be in many places at one and the
same time: Christ his body though it be glorified, yet it remains a body
still; and therefore contrary to these opinions, can be but in one place at
one time; for to be circumscribed in a place, is an inseparable property of a
body.

Use. 2. The second use is for our instruction. Is God in every place by his
Essence? certainly, if this were known, and believed, it would be a special
means to restrain men from evil; for they would know that whatsoever they
do, they do it before the face of God: be they never so secret, there is no
place from which God is excluded, but in every place is that God, who is of
more pure eyes then to behold sin, and can abide to look upon any
wickedness: therefore wheresoever a man is, this should make him afraid to
sin against God, whatsoever his place be, or whatsoever his wealth be, yet
this should restrain him: This should not only restrain men from eternal
sinning, but even from the inward evil thoughts of the heart; for God is in
every place, and ever present in the heart; this presence of God being rightly
considered, is like a grave Matron coming among wanton maids; as when she
comes all is quiet: so this will set the heart free from that coveteousnes,
pride, that hatred which is ordinary in it. Again, if God dwell in us, and if
we be desirous to have God to delight to dwell in us, let us delight in good
duties, and labor to be the same inwardly, that we seem to be outwardly; for
God takes notice of our meditations, as well as he takes notice of our outward
actions; God is in every place, therefore this should make every man labor
inward purity and holiness. Indeed man may forbear the act of sin for
outward, and carnal respects: but to have a pure heart, because God is
present, this is to be like him that loves truth in the inward parts: God
delights in him that trembles at his word; therefore labor that God may
delight in thee; labor to be good in secret places where no body sees, for God
is present in secret, to reward openly: To conclude this point; It is much to
be lamented, that many men know not this doctrine of Gods omnipresency, that
more believe it not; for if they did, it could not be, that they should live so
ungodly as they do: certainly, the men of this age are mere infidels; it
appears in this, when they come into the Church, the house of God, and the
place where they apprehend him present, what holiness and reverence do they
make a show of? when they depart from thence, they leave their holiness with
the place: A great fault which Clemens Alexandrinus pedagog. l. 3. c. 11. sub
finem. complained of in the Christians of his time: whereas if they did know,
and believe that God fills every place, even their secret cogitations, what
manner of men would they always be? we think that God does not see us, but God
does see us, therefore let us walk in the sight of God, and we shall keep our
selves from many corruptions.

THE LIFE OF GOD. CHAP. XI.
1 TIMOTHY 1.17. To the invisible, and only wise God.


IN the nature of God, we considered his greatness, and his goodness: his
greatness is discerned by his incommunicable attributes; which are,
simpleness, eternity, immutability, and immensity: of which we have spoken.
His goodness is best discovered by his communicable Attributes, of which we
now come to speak: about which, observe, that we do not call them
communicable Attributes, as if they were communicated so to the creature, as
they are in the creator; but because there is in man's nature something in
proportion, or in effect, like to these excellencies that are in God: In man,
wisdom, justice, mercy, etc. are accidents; in God, not so, but are his
Essence: these things are truly said of man in the concrete; that he is wise,
just, merciful, etc. but of God in the abstract, that he is wisdom, justice,
mercy: in man, these things are different, justice is not mercy, mercy is not
wisdom, etc. but in God they are all the same; his most simple Essence being
his justice, wisdom, mercy, etc. In man, they have a mixture of imperfection;
but in God, they are perfect: those Attributes which are incommunicable,
running also through these, and so as it were, making these also
incommunicable: to explane it, God is good, and the creature good, but God is
simply, eternally, immutably, infinitely good, and therefore goodness is Gods
alone; as our Savior, there is none good but God: in which respect also, the
Apostle calls him only wise, because only simple, eternally immutable,
infinitely wise. In a word, God takes these attributes to himself; not because
these do fully and perfectly express what he is, but because our shallow and
weak understandings cannot ascend higher, in conceiving the nature of God,
then these perfections do reveal him: of these we speak in order: and first
of the life of God.

Quest. What is the life of the divine Essence?

Answ. The answer is, it is a communicable attribute, whereby we conceive that
God lives of himself, acting and moving of himself. To open this? first, it
is a communicable attribute, not that life is in man, as it is in God, but that
there is in man somewhat that is like to this life in God: man has life, and
the man and his life are two things; but in God, his life, and his Essence are
all one: and there is nothing in God but his life. This is that which acts and
moves of it self, without receiving any thing from any other. It is that which
lives eternally, without beginning or ending: this appears by those places of
Scripture that call him the living God, Deuteronomy. 5.28. My soul thirsts for God,
even for the living God, Psalm. 42.2. and other testimonies, where God says of
himself, that he lives, Ezekiel. 33. As I live says the Lord: so by these forms
of oaths that they used, Judge. 8.24. As the Lord lives: So Ruth. 3.3. As the
Lord lives: attributing this to God himself. Hereupon it is said, that he is
life, I am life, and therefore he calls him life, 1 John 5.10. the true God, and
eternal life: this life is eternal, and has no beginning, nor ending: so
Deuteronomy. 32.46. I live for ever: I have a perpetual life without change: and so
he is called the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9.

Quest. Why is this life attributed to this divine Essence?

Answ. Because he understands, wills, and works of his own power. Secondly,
because he has life in himself, without any manner of participation from any
other. Thirdly, because God gives life to all other living things: whether life
of nature, life of grace, or life of glory. To explane this; he is life,
because he understands, wills, and works.

Reas. 1. All these be actions, which none can do, but such as have life;
therefore it must necessarily follow, if these be in God, then life is in him.
If any should be so senseless, as to deny these things in God, he must be a
Pagan rather then a Christian: therefore as Salvian says, If I be to speak to
Pagans that deny these things, I contemn to prove them, not because I cannot,
but because they are so sottish. So I say, if there be any that deny this, I
contemn to prove it, not because I cannot for want of proofs, but because I
am in no hope to do them any good. These three things, are three distinct
things in man; the soul, the motion, and life: the soul is one thing, the
motion another, and the life another; whereupon these are three in man, but in
God his Essence is all one, by which he wills, works, and understands:
therefore it must needs be that God is life.

Reas. 2. Secondly, because he lives of himself, without any participation
from others: therefore is life truly attributed to God. John 5.26. The Father
has life in himself, and has given to the son to have life in himself:
therefore he is said to be the fountain of life, ecause as the fountain
receives not water from any other, but conveys it to others; so, neither does
God receive life from any, but does communicate it to all things that live: so
then, God has life in himself, whosoever shall separate life from him, shall
separate him from himself, and destroy God: therefore seeing that God lives
without participating life from any other, it must needs follow, that life is
truly given to God.

Reas. 3. The third reason is, because they that have life, whether the life of
grace, the life of nature, or the life of glory, have it of God. The Scripture
speaks of all these three lives. The life of nature is common to all living
things, trees, beasts, men live: but not to speak of life but as it is in men;
men receive their natural life from God; therefore it is said, God breathed in
man the breath of life, and man became a living soul, Genesis 2.7. The life of
grace is called in Scripture, the life of God; they were alienated from the
life of God, Ephe. 4. that is, they had not that life, that God gives to those
that are his: God gives a natural life to all; but not the life of grace,
which, because it comes from God, and leads to God, is called the life of God;
he also gives the life of glory, to those that by continuance in well doing,
seek glory, immortality, Romans 2.7.
eternal life: etc. so that seeing God is the author, and giver of these
lives, it is plain that life is truly attributed to God.

Use 1. This teaches us, that certainly, we serve the only true God, because
we serve the living God: for the true God, is the living God, that has life in
himself, and of himself: the Gods of the Nations are false gods; the heathen
worship the host of Heaven, stocks, and stones, silver, and gold, the works of
men's hands, that have no life, or if they had life, they have no such life, as
is in the true God, which has his life in himself, and of himself: we may
say of their gods, as the Lacedaemonians profanely scoffed at Constantines god,
that he worshipped such a god, as no man could tell from whence he came; their
gods are made with men's hands, and have no life in them.

Use 2. Secondly, this shows the heinousness of that sin which is usually
committed among men, who when they speak earnestly, say as the Lord lives,
which is an asseveration, a kind of an oath; and though men think they do
not sin, yet they do abuse an oath, and a greater oath, then if they did
swear by God himself: an oath ought to be taken with fear and reverence, in
truth, righteousness, and judgment; and not to be abused, as Salvian observes
in his time: as if they were not oaths to bind men, but as mere complements
of speech; they who are now so bold to say, the Lord lives, swearing falsely
or profanely, shall one day find, and feel, that the Lord lives to take
vengeance of perjury and profaneness; and that it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God.

Use 3. This teaches us, how we may have life and length of days; it must be
by serving, and loving, and cleaving to God, the author and fountain of life,
this is the way to obtain life; it is not my use, but the use that Moses
makes; Deuter. 30.19.20. I have set before ye this day, life, and death; choose
life: how? by serving and obeying, and cleaving to the Lord, for be is thy
life: Where he shows, that a man may have life, and length of days; There is
nothing that man desires more then life, and length of days; and therefore the
devil, that could not prevail with Job in other things, yet for his life, he
thought he should: There is no way to attain this much desired long life, but
this, to cleave to God, the fountain, and giver of life. This is the course in
which, God himself directed Solomon; if thou will walk in my ways to keep my
statutes, and my commandments, then I will lengthen thy days: This is the
argument which Hezechiah used, and by which he prevailed, not only reversed the
sentence of death, but obtained a lease of life, for fifteen years; Remember,
oh Lord! how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: it
was not the strength of constitution, but the sincerity of spirit, that
prolonged the life, and vigor of Caleb, and Joshua, for forty years: How should
this consideration lift up our hearts in the ways of God? What man is he,
says David, Psalm. 34-12. that desires life, and loves many days, that he
may see good? nay, rather, what man is he that does not? Every man desires
life, and prosperity; then hear David's direction; Keep thy tongue from evil,
and thy lips from speaking guile, depart from evil, and do good, seek peace,
and pursue it. This is the way to obtain them: In humility, and the fear of
the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life. It is true, some wicked men live
long; but no wicked man can promise himself long life, he is under the curse,
Psalm. 55. The bloody and deceitful man, shall not live out half his days. It
is true, some good men die in their youth, but not till they are glutted with
life; The child shall die an hundred years old, Isa. 65.20. that is, as well
satisfied with life, as if he had lived an hundred years: Thus, to fear God,
is the way to live long in the earth; nay it is the way never to die: Eternal
life is promised, to those who with patience continue in well doing. To
conclude, God is life, God is the Fountain of life; unto him, we must seek for
the continuance of the life of nature, the inchoation, and preservation of the
life of grace, and the obtaining of the life of glory.

The next Attribute that is communicable, is the wisdom of God, and so
according to our order, the question is:

Quest. What is the wisdom of the divine Essence?

Answ. The answer is, that it is that, by which God knows, and understands
himself, and all things else; not successively, nor by discourse, or
reasoning, but in a moment, by one eternal act of understanding: this needs a
little explaning; and First, that it is a communicable Attribute, because there
is the like in man, though not the same. 2. By which he understands and knows
himself; and not himself only, but all things else, with the causes,
circumstances, and whatsoever else thereto belongs: how? Not successively,
and by discourse and reasoning; for though they be distinct one from another,
and come one after another, yet he in a moment understands them all by one act
of understanding. Therefore howsoever the Scripture tells us of three things in
God, that there is presence, science, and remembrance, yet they are all one in
God: for God, to speak properly, has neither presence, nor remembrance, for
he knows all things by one eternal act of understanding; he admits no
succession, howsoever in respect of us, God does foreknow, yet in God there is
nothing but science, for by one act of understanding, he knows all things: and
that it is so, that he understands himself, is manifest, Matthew. 11. No man
knows the Father but the son; no man has seen the Father: John 1.18. No man
knows the things of God, but the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2.11. In which places,
though Christ and the Apostle express the Son, or holy Ghost, yet they
exclude not the Father, but intimate him, teaching Psalm. 147.5. that this
knowledge is in them all, as he knows himself, so also all things else: The
wisdom of God is infinite; if it be infinite, then is nothing to be excluded
from it, Heb. 4.15. Every thing is manifest before him, with whom we have to
do: He knows things past, present, and to come, Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the
Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good; he knows all, Genesis
6.5. He knew the wickedness of man's heart was great: So Psalm. 139.4. Thou
see my thoughts a far off; there is not a word in my mouth but thou know
it. Whither shall I go from thy presence, the night and the day are all one?
Again, he knows all things without succession of time; as well that which is
present, as that which is to come: Therefore says David, Psalm. 90.4. a
thousand years are with the Lord, but as yesterday, when it is past.
Whatsoever is to be done with the Lord a thousand years after, is as present
with him, or as a thing already past. The Apostle Saint Peter speaks, A
thousand years is but as one day: So that we see, God understands all things
past, present, and to come.

Quest. Why is this wisdom Attributed to the Divine Essence?

Answ. The answer is, because this wisdom is this Essence it self. Secondly,
because he is the Creator, and governor of all things. Thirdly, because he is
infinite both in time and place; these things opened will manifest that he has
this infinite wisdom.

For the first, this wisdom of God is his Essence it self; as his will, his
holiness, his justice, his mercy are himself; so also the wisdom of God is
himself. You heard the rule, because he is most simple, and therefore of no
composition, nothing but himself; therefore in this case, seeing all is
himself, it will follow that his wisdom is himself.

Secondly, because he is the Creator, and governor of all things, therefore he
must needs know all things; else the holy Ghost reasons not substantially,
Psalm. 94. He that planteth the ear, shall he not hear? He intimates thus
much, that God knows all things, because he made all things: And in the 11.
verse, he says, he knows the thoughts of men that they are but vain;
therefore he must needs know all secret things; as it is with an Artist that
has made a Clock or some other instrument, that has motions in it, both
secret, and open; those that are open he sees, and all others may see them,
but those that are secret none knows but he that made them; so is it with God:
Those things which are in man no man knows, yet the Lord knows them, because
he is the maker of them. Secondly, God governes and guides all things to their
proper ends, so that he must both know the things, and the ends they are made
for; he made all things for his own glory. Thirdly, he sustaines and bears up
althings by his power; then he must needs know every thing that he has in his
hand. Again, he is the Judge of all men, then he must needs know all, that he
may rightly judge; for it is unrighteous judgment, if it be not according to
knowledge, but God judges righteously; I, the Lord, search the heart to give
to every one according to his works; to add to this, that he is not only a
Judge, but a most wise Judge; that will assure any thing upon his own
knowledge: Mal. 3.5. I will be a swift witness against you, says God; he will
be both the Judge, and witness; therefore he must needs know all things.

Finally, he knows all things, not successively, and by discourse of reason,
but by one act of understanding, because he is infinite in place, and in time,
without beginning, and without ending: this is the same which Saint Augustine
speaks of, that he is not prevented by any time, or place, but by one act of
knowledge, knows all things: and thus much for this.

Use. 1. The first use then teaches us that we serve the true, and living God,
because we serve the alknowing God; we may here discern the true God from
false gods: Thus the Lord himself in the Prophet, reasons; Let them bring
forth, and show us what shall happen; let them show the former things what they
be, or declare us things to come; show the things that are to come hereafter,
that we may know that ye are gods, etc. Isaiah. 40.21.22.23.26.

Use. 2. The second use does admonish men, that they should not conceive too
highly of themselves, for any good that they find in themselves, nor yet to
please themselves with this conceit, that other men do think well of them,
because the Lord is infinite in wisdom; he knows that by men, that they know
not by themselves, nor does any other know. This is the eye of the world, that
every thing is manifest unto: he knows that by us, that we know not by our
selves, therefore no man ought to please himself in his own goodness; God
knows all his thoughts, though never so secret; both past, present, and to
come: then no reason, any should presume upon any grace; The Prophet says,
Psalm. 19. Who can understand his own faults? no man can but God can: therefore
reason after this manner, as Saint Bernard says: I know and am known, I know
but in part, but God knows me and knows me wholly, but what I know, I know but
in part: So the Apostle reasons, I know, nothing of my self, yet am I not
hereby Justified; admit, that thou keep thy self so free, and renewest thy
repentance so daily, that thou know nothing by thy self, yet mark what the
Apostle adds farther; notwithstanding, I do not judge my self. I am not
hereby justified, but he that judges me, is the Lord: This is the condition of
all men, he that is infinite knows them; therefore they should not dare to
judge themselves, but (with the Prophet David in 19. Psalm.) entreat the Lord
that he would cleanse them from their secret sins.

Use. 3. The third use teaches us, that men ought to fear God, because he is
present in all places, and infinite in knowledge: Men may have things done
behind their backs, which they know not of, but it is not so with God;
therefore, every man should be wary of himself; even in the secret thoughts of
his heart, for there is a God that knows all things: every man must beware of
sin in all places, even in the secret places of their own hearts, for God
knows them: we have a foolish proverb, that thoughts are free; free indeed
from the law of men, because men know them not, but if men did know them, they
were in danger of the law, but they are free by reason of man's ignorance, but
to God all things are known; There are many men that seem to make conscience
of many things, because that God sees, yet they take liberty to them selves in
secret thoughts, and they think God knows not them; yes, God knows thy heart
better then thy self: that which thou know not to be sin, he knows to be
sin; they that take away seeing from God, says Salvian, they overthowe the
Essence of God; they are Atheists: he sees all things, and he knows all
things; therefore take heed of secret sinful thoughts that men see not: Though
thou carry, or color things, so that neither Master, nor Servant, nor Wife,
nor Husband see them, thou have a God that sees, and knows all things, and
will bring every thing to judgment; no thing so secret but he will make known:
therefore labor (in the fear of God) that thou walk secretly, and openly,
doing nothing that is displeasing to God, because thou can do nothing but
in the presence, and privity of God.

OF THE WILL OF GOD. CHAP. XII.
ISIA. 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.


IN order, knowledge is before will; for that we will, we know, and what we
know, that we may will; therefore we have first handled the wisdom, and the
knowledge of God: and now we are to speak, of the will of God, whereby he
wills those things, that he knows; for which I have made choice of this
text, my will, or counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: In
speaking of which, we will keep our order, and first show what his will is;
the question is:

Quest. What is the will of the divine Essence?

Answ. The answer is, it is a communicable Attribute, whereby it does freely,
and immutably will it self, and all other things, whatsoever it does will: the
opening of which in the several parts, will manifest this plainly unto us.
First, we say the will of God, and not the wills of God, because there is but
one will of God: and this appears in as much, as usually the Scripture speaks
of it in the number of one, as in this place, My counsel shall stand: there is
but one will; the like we find, Prove. 19.21. My counsel shall stand: Matthew.
6.10. our Savi^ur has taught us to pray, Thy will be done: Ephe. 1.5.
According to the good pleasure of his will: so then there is but one will:
Again I say, it is a communicable Attribute, given to this divine Essence; I
call it communicable (as I said before) not because it is in any creature as it
is in God; but because there is the same in proportion in man, there is some
thing like it; whereby it freely, and immutably wills it self, and all other
things: First, the divine Essence most freely wills it self: for howsoever
it wills it self by necessity of nature, yet it wills freely without any
compulsion: so as the Apostle speaks, in other things, the Lord cannot deny
himself; so we say, the Lord out of the necessity of his nature, wills
himself: but yet voluntarily, out of the goodness of his nature: but when he
wills other things, there is no such necessity of nature, but he wills them
most freely: but whatsoever he wills, he wills freely, out of his own will,
there being no cause of Gods will, but the will it self, which is the cause of
all causes: as appears, Matthew. 11.25.26. I thank thee oh heavenly father,
that thou have hid these things from the wise, etc. even so, for it is thy good
pleasure. It is not lawful for me, to do what I will with my own, says
Christ: Romans 9.18. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy: he has mercy on whom he will have mercy: there is
nothing in man that moves him, it is still his will, he wills freely.

The next thing is, that this will is immutable; that is, when he has willed,
it is without change: this was drawn out of the mouth of the false Prophet,
Number. 23. The Lord is not as man that he should lie, nor as the son of man that
he should repent: the Lord cannot repent: I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 36.
The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying: surely as I have thought, so shall it
come to pass, and as I have purposed so shall it stand; Isai. 14.24. He has
said and will he not do it? Number 23.19. So that whatsoever he does will, he
wills it always, and eternally; my will shall stand for ever; God wills from
eternity; whatsoever he wills, as the Apostle, Acts 4.24. Thou had
determined before to be done. God might have willed otherways before, but when
he has willed, it shall stand.

The next thing is, that he wills himself; that as he knows himself, so he
wills himself; that is, his own glory; the willing of himself, is the
willing of his own glory: Pro. 16. He has made all things for himself, for
his own glory: I will not give my glory to another; our Savior teaches us to
pray principally, Hallowed be thy name; a thing most to be desired; and
whatsoever you do, let it be done to the glory of God, says the Apostle, thus
he wills himself. Secondly, he wills all other things; other things, are of
two sorts, good, and evil; now God wills that which is good, the things which
himself does, are good: Gen 1. He looks upon all that he had made, and lo
they were exceeding good. Psalm. 116.3. The Lord is in heaven, and does
whatsoever he will: So he has chosen us according to the good pleasure of his
will; the like may be said of other things, that others do good things God
wills, for he commands them to be done, and approves them, when they are done;
he does delight in them, and rewards them, that do them.

Finally, he wills evil things, and they are of two natures: First the evil
of sin. Secondly, the evil of punishment: the evil of sin, does not
properly fall under the will of God; he cannot will sin, as sin: Thou art not
a God that love iniquity: Psalm. 5.4. therefore in this case, it is not willed
by God; notwithstanding, it may in some respect, be said to be under Gods will,
because he does permit it: as appears Acts 14.16. The Lord suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways: He suffered them, not because he could
not hinder every thing from being, but because he would not; when God does not
hinder sin, he is said to permit it: Psalm 81.12. I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, to walk according to their own evil wares. Secondly, the evil
of punishment, falls under Gods will; here the will of God is the chief cause;
he willingly plagues men with evil, for their neglecting of good; for though
there be some things in man, which would bring evil upon him, yet the chief
cause is in God: Isai. 45.7. I create evil, I make peace, I the Lord do all
this: shall there be evil in the City, and I not do it? Even all evil, the
evil of punishment, the evil of sin, as it is a punishment of sin comes
from God; and that is manifest, in that the Lord hardens men's hearts, as a
punishment of precedent hardness, so also of the lying spirits that were in
the mouths of Ahabs false Prophets. It is said the Lord put a false spirit
into the mouths of them; not as the Author, but as the punisher of sin: so it
is said, God gave them up to vilde affections, and all this was as a
punishment. 2 These 2. God gave them up to strong delusions, to believe lies:
Finally, add to this, one thing more, the transgressions of men, as they are
actions come from God, for in God we live, move, and have our being; but as
they are transgressions of the law and so evil, they are from men. The next
question, to amplify the proof of this, is this:

Quest. Why speak you of the will of God as of one?

Answ. The answer is, because his will is himself, and he is but one,
therefore there cannot be many wills; his life is himself, his wisdom
himself, his will himself, nothing in him but himself; then it follows that
his will must needs be but one; but understand thus much, that howsoever his
will is but one, yet it may be said to be many, in respect of us, and that two
ways; either in respect of the diversity of the things willed, or in the
diverse manner of willing; we manifest both: First, in respect of the diversity
of things willed; there are some things in the Old Testament, and some things
in the New that are diverse. Again he wills some things that he will do to
man, and somethings he will have done by man, lest his anger break out upon
him. Secondly, in the diverse manner of willing, he wills diversely; he wills
good for it self, and bad for some other good; he wills sometimes absolutely,
and sometimes conditionally; yet so that there is no condition with God, but
with us, and according to this manner we are to conceive of the will of God.
The next question is;

Quest. Why say you that he wills freely and Immutably?

Answ. The answer is, because there is nothing before nor greater then the will
of God, for which he should do any thing. Secondly, because he is omnipotent,
and most wise, and cannot be resisted. To explane these: First, he wills most
freely, because there was nothing before him, nothing greater then himself; if
there were nothing before him, nor greater then he, what should move him to
will? for that which moves this will, must be before and greater then this
will; that there was nothing before, nor greater then his will, appears by
this, because whatsoever is in him, is from his will; therefore it cannot be
before, nor greater then his will: thus then there is nothing without God that
can move him, neither is there any thing within him; if any thing, it must be
his knowledge; but besides that, his knowledge extends further then his will
(he knows things he wills not;) his knowledge and his will are both his
Essence, one and the same thing in God, and therefore to be moved by his
knowledge to will, is to be moved by himself; his own Essence moves it self
to will. Secondly, we say he wills immutably, because he is omnipotent, and most
wise; for if his will be mutable, the mutability of it must needs come from one
of these two; either first, because it is resisted by a greater power which
cannot be, because he is omnipoten, as you heard out of the 115. Psalm. 3. he
has done whatsoever he will, he is in heaven. Secondly, or else because some
unexpected accident not foreseen falls out, which occasions him to rescinde
his determination; but neither can this be, because as it has been showed,
God knows all things, both past, present, and to come, with one most simple
act of understanding; as the Apostle, known unto God are all his works from
the beginning of the world; therefore seeing that no power can hinder the
execution of his will, who is omnipotent, nor no accident be sudden to him,
who is most wise: It follows necessarily, that he wills immutablely. The next
question is;

Quest. Why it is said that he wills himself and other things?

Answ. The answer is, because the object of his will is good, or goodness,
therefore he must needs principally will himself, for he is goodness it
self; he wills himself principally, because himself is the chiefest good,
and chiefest to be beloved. In other cases, whatsoever he wills, he wills it as
in himself; the object of the understanding is truth; falsehood does not fall
into the understanding, but by reason of truth; God understands himself, as
being the first truth, and other things in himself. The object of the will is
goodness; God is the chiefest good, and therefore he wills himself first, and
he wills other things that are good as they are good, and as they have in them
impressions of his Image, and as they tend to him that is the principal good,
and so he wills every thing.

Quest. Why then does he will evil?

Answ. Because it is the execution of justice, and so good, for it is good
which is just; for whatsoever is just, is certainly good; if it be evil, yet
if it be the execution of justice, it is good; whereupon the sins of men
which are brought as punishments of sinners, are good. Thus says Saint
Austine, this is the Justice of God, but not the sinfulness of God; this is
the execution of Justice, and so good: and thus I have confirmed and explaned
the Doctrine of the will of God, etc. By order we are to come to the uses, but
there are many doubts, whether the will of God be free, and unchangeable, but
out of many, we will speak but of a few.

Object. To will freely, and immutably, are opposite, for freedom is that
which is mutable.

Answ. There is a freedom, where there is immutability, for immutability takes
not away the freedom of actions. Adam was created with a free will to good,
and evil: Adam, now glorified, has a free will, only to good: the Devils,
and damnned have an immutable will to evil, and yet free, and Gods will is most
immutable, and yet most free. God wills himself by the necessity of nature, he
cannot do otherwise, but must needs will himself, and yet this he does most
freely, because not by constraint or compulsion: God wills other things, not
out of any such necessity, he might not have willed that which he does will, or
he might have willed another thing then what he wills, but when he has once
determined his own will, it remains for ever. Immutably determined from the
necessity of his nature; for God cannot deny himself: this determination of
his will, was most free: merely, and only from himself. In a word, to will
freely, and to will immutably are not opposite, but are in God, who wills all
things out of himself freely, because he might have not willed them; and
immutably, because having willed them, he will not, nor can he rescinde his own
decree.

Object. The will of God is not immutable because he changes his will; for he
wills one thing under the law and he abollishes that, and wills another thing
under the Gospel.

Ans. The answer is easy, there is no change in the will of God; for
whatsoever was done in time, was willed from all eternity; he willed that, that
which was under the law, should be for a time, and then be changed; and willed
that, which is under the Gospel should succeed it, and continue, and this
outward manifestation of the will of God, is but the execution of his will,
which was from eternity.

Object. The Lord is said to repent: Genesis 6.6. It repented the Lord that he
made man; 1 Samuel 15.15. It repented the Lord that he had made Saul King,
therefore his will is not immutable.

Ans. The answer is thus, there is no change in God, but in the works that are
done by God: These speeches are figurative; God is not as man that he should
repent, but is said to repent when he does in time make a change in the matters
of the world, which he had decreed should be changed before the world was.

Object. One thing more he threatens sometimes and never does it, nor never
meant it: 2 King. 20. As to Hezechias; Put thy house in order for thou shall
die: So Jonah. 3. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet neither
Hezechiah died, nor Nineveh was destroyed.

Ans. The answer is, you must mark the difference betwixt the denouncing, and
understanding of these threatenings; these are absolutely denounced, but not to
be absolutely understood, but with the condition that stands after this manner;
namely, if they do not use the means to prevent it; and they are such means
as he has appointed: Hezechiah prayed earnestly, and the other repented, for
the Lord had a purpose that Hezechiah should live still; and he threatened
death to stir him up to prayer; he purposed, Nineveh should not be destroyed,
and threatened destruction, that by repentance it might be prevented: and this
is to be understood, for in Iere. 18.7.8. If I speak against a Nation, etc. If
that Nation repent, I will repent also; where the change is not in him, but in
them; it is in other things, not in God. A man walks by a Church, backwards,
and forwards, and the Church standing still, is sometimes on his right hand, and
sometimes on his lest hand; there are changes, not in the Church, which is not
moved, but in him that walks too and fro; so God, sometimes is on the right
hand of men, and sometimes on the left hand; that is, when they change: So that
this is a full answer to this: and this is a profitable answer that Saint
Gregory has; God does not know how to alter his counsel, but how to alter his
sentence: the reason is, that the Lord does not always pronounce sentence,
according to his counsel, but according to the second causes, or according to
the minds of them, to whom he pronounces it: as Hezechiah was taken with
sickness, no way thinks he but death; this was his sentence, but Gods
counsel was, that he should live: and so when he says, Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be destroyed: his sentence was, that it should be destroyed; but
his counsel was, that it should be saved: the peremptory pronouncing of his
sentence, makes way to his counsel; Clem. Alex. Paeda. l. 1. c. 8.
because it is that which stirs them up to repentance, so that there is no
alteration in this; for if he had a purpose to have destroyed, then he would
not have threatened but destroyed: and thus much we have seen of the will of God.

CHAP. XIII.
DEUTERONOMY. 32.4. Thou art a God of truth.


THE divine Essence is made manifest unto us, by certain Attributes, and
these. Attributes are of two sorts; either incommunicable, or communicable: his
incommunicable, were his simplenes, his eternity, etc. and of these we have
spoken; the latter which are his communicable Attributes, we have spoken of
some, and diverse remain to be spoken of; and first of his truth, for there is
no wisdom without truth, nor any will can be good without truth: but before
we come to speak of this, we will finish that we lest the last day, concerning
the will of God.

The will of the divine Essence, you have heard what it was, a communicable
Attribute, whereby he did most freely etc. This description was proved, and
grounds given for every part; there also were answered diverse objections, which
we conceived were of two kinds; some as if God had changed his will, etc. but
these were spoken of the last day; but now of one or two more, that may be made:

Object. And the next is, that God in declaring his will; Ezekiel 33.11. As I live
says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner: yet there are many thousand
sinners that die for all this; therefore his will must be mutable.

Answ. The answer to this, is taken from the consideration of what kinds of
sinners the Lord speaks; of sinners, some be penitent, that see, and
acknowledge themselves sinners, and sorrow for, and turn from their sins,
and cry, and fly unto Christ for salvation; God does not will the death of such
sinners, neither shall they die: But he that confesses and for saketh his
sins shall find mercy; but others be obstinate, and hardened in sin, that
add drunkenness to thirst, and rebellion to sin, without repentance; God
will laugh at these, when their destruction comes; so then, as long as God is
pleased with repentance, and pardons the penitent, there is no alteration in
God, though the impenitent perish; nay, there would be alteration in him, if
they did not perish: or it may be said, and truly, that God is better pleased
with the repentance, then with the perdition of a sinner; there is joy in
Heaven, over one sinner that repents.

Object. Again it is objected, the Apostle Paul says, in Tim. 2.4. That God
would have all men saved: How should it be then, that any should perish,
unless his will be changeable?

Answ. Ambrose upon this place of the Apostle, expounds it thus: God will have
all men to be saved, but so as they come to him, he will have them saved; if
they will salvation to themselves; and if this sense be admitted, there is no
shadow of change in God, though many be not saved, because those many that are
not saved, do not seek salvation: Saint Austin, understands All; not
collectively, for every singular man, but distributively, for some of all sorts
of men; in which sense it is used, in other places of Scripture, and so the
meaning may be, God will have all men saved; that is, all sorts of men, Jews,
Greeks, bond, free, Kings, and Subjects, saved: and therefore prayers must be
made for all sorts of men, and in this sense, there is no change in Gods will;
though some of all sorts perish, because some of all sorts be saved; as in the
Arc: God saved from the deluge all living creatures, not in the particular,
but in the kind; because he saved some of every sort: again, Saint Austin, in
another place, explanes it thus: God wills all should be saved, because all
that are saved, are saved by Gods will; as a Physician is said to cure all, who
cures all that are cured: and for this cause, the Apostle enjoines, that
prayers should be made to God for all; because without God none can be saved:
and if we so expound it, though many be not saved, yet there is no change in
Gods will, who wills the salvation of all that are saved: As in Christ all are
said to be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. because all that are made alive, are made
alive by Christ: so in this place, in the same respect, may God be said to will
the salvation of all men: add to these our faith, thus; God will have all men
saved, he wills the salvation even of the reprobate, as a thing in it self
good, and suitable to the disposition of a gracious God: but yet he does not
determine, or appoint it, and therefore though many perish, there is no change
in Gods will: this place showing what God might approve of being done, not what
he determined to do; he wills it by an antecedent will, as in it self
considered; but not with a consequent will, and here is no change in Gods will;
finally we answer, that by all, may be understood the, all, of the elect; not
of the reprobate: as it is Romans 5.18. The free gift came upon all men, to the
justification of life: that is, in the verse following, By the righteousness
of one, many are made righteous; this, all, is many: so that when he says,
that God would have all to be saved, the meaning is, all that he purposes to
save; I determine nothing which of these interpretations should be followed,
but leave that to every learned and judicious readers choice; secure of this,
that which soever is preferred, Gods will does still remain Immutable, and
without shadow of change.

Use 1. The use is, that if the will of God be free, and no cause without God,
can move him to will, then it follows, that they er re that think, and teach,
that God is moved to bestow some good thing on man, because he foresees some
good thing in him: I say, this confuteth their error; for if this were so, then
Gods will were not free; but it is free, therefore this is erroneous: Earthly
Princes cast their benefits upon those that have no desert; how much more does
God who is not, as earthly Princes; but much more great, and more free, in
conferring of his benefits; more blessed, and glorious, then that he can be
either engaged, or recompensed: and indeed, what could any man do, before he
was, to make God his Debtor, what works could he do that was not? Ob. But God
might foresee, he would work. Ans. If God did foresee this, the Apostle, Romans
9.32. would not have cried out, Oh the depth both of the wisdom and counsel,
of God: here is no place for Pelagians, and Papists, they cannot see the depth
of his counsel, though they be so quick, and acute, that they can see that
which the Apostle could not.

Saint Ambrose pressing this against the Pelagians; The Apostle (says he)
speaks after this manner, Oh the riches of his mercy! then not of works, then
not for foreseen works: and indeed, says Ambrose, could he not well have
said, but of future works, or works to come; but he knew that the will of God
was free.

Then to shut up this, Saint Augustine in a case of Infants, the one is
baptized, the other not; the one is saved, the other not: I demand says he,
why God did save the one and destroy the other? will you say it was because he
did foresee the one would be good, and the other evil? this would be injustice
in God, to damn him for that he never did; seeing he takes them away, before
they knew good, or evil.

Use 2. This teaches men, that if they have any sense of Gods calling, and that
they are elected of God, and made partakers of the grace, and mercy of God, not
to be puffed up; because it is the free will of God, that has chosen them: the
more any man has received of God, the more indebted he is, and should learn to
be the more humble: let no man advance himself against another; what have thou
that thou have not received? and who has caused thee to differ from another?
thou art most proud, and boastest most of thy self; boast only of that which
is thy own; it is vanity, to boast of that which is not thine, thou have
nothing thy own but sin; nothing is due to sin, but shame, and death; thou
could do nothing to help thy self out of this condition; if thou art
delivered out of it, be not high minded, it is God that delivered thee, and not
thy self, of his free grace, not according to thy merits.

Use 3. This teaches us, that if a man have once assurance of election, and
salvation, he may have it for ever; as he was chose freely, so also immutably;
God cannot change his will; so that here is the comfort of a man that has any
assurance; God is immutable, therefore I cannot perish: So then, is any tempted
from Satan or from his own weakness, when he sees so much rebellion in
himself, and when he hears great Doctors teach that a man may be good to day
and naught to morrow? this may comfort him, God is immutable; this is that I
stand upon, God is immutable, therefore none can resist him; there is
corruption enough in man, but God is not overcome by the wickedness of man,
but as he will punish those that stand unreformed, so he will be good to
those that walk before him humbly.

Object. I, but say they, Gods salvation stands upon condition; and being upon
condition, therefore is changeable.

Ans. To this I answer; that the faith and repentance of them which have it, is
mutable in them, and may in it self be lost; but it is God that wrought it, it
is God that will not forsake his own work; it is God by whose power we are
kept to salvation, and have not our faith, repentance, life, salvation in our
own keeping: A man of himself may fall away, but God gives him perseverance:
Austin says, This gift of perseverance may be humbly sought of God, and when
a man has it, he shall not with Caine be cast out; for God is so good, that he
will never suffer a man to go so far as that he should cut himself from
him: and what is the reason? for the seed of God abides in him.

In the first conversion, a man is unwilling and retains grace unwillingly, but
God gives him grace to make him willing; so that the grace he has, and the
estate he has, he holds it not by his own will, but so that God keeps it;
for otherways the heart of man, would soon go from God; whereupon it
follows, that God and his will are immutable.

The next question is:

Quest. What is the truth of the Divine Essence?

Answ. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he knows all things certainly
without any ignorance, or error, speaking and working, indeed, and in truth,
without fraud and dissimulation, and performing constantly, whatsoever he has
said. To explane these: First, I say, it is the truth of God, (not truths,
though there be many) yet the Scripture speaks, but of one, John 14.6. I am
the truth.

Secondly, I say, it is a communicable Attribute, because that howsoever truth
is in a special manner Attributed to God; yet it is by proportion in man,
whereby he knows all things without error; for it is a general speech, he is
a true man that knows all things without any ignorance, or error; such is the
truth of God, without any ignorance, and error, he cannot deceive, nor be
deceived, he knows all things whatsoever; he cannot deceive, John 16.7.13. He
tells the truth, the spirit leads into truth, he cannot be deceived. All things
are naked, and bare before him, with whom we have to do.

Again whatsoever he has spoken, and wrought is in truth, and indeed without
faining, and dissimulation; so that there is no active falsitie in his ways,
he deceives none in any of his words, or in any of his deeds.

The truth of the word is, when the words are answerable, and agreeable to the
truth of the mind: for when a man speaks otherways then he knows, is to
lie; the old description of a lie is, for a man to tell a thing contrary to his
own mind: Now then whatsoever is in God is true, and so the Apostle speaks;
let God be true, and every man a liar; and again, when we came to you, our
words were not, yea, and nay, but yea; that is, a certain truth: Psalm. 111.7.
The works of God are true: Psalm. 119.51. The law of the Lord is true, and this
might be showed in all the works of creation, regeneration, and sanctification:
they are all true works.

Again, constantly performing whatsoever he speaks, this is made manifest in
his promises, and threatenings; whatsoever he has promised or threattened,
shall come to pass. A man is a true man when he has done that he said he
would do: Psalm. 89 33.34.35. I never falsify my truth, I have sworn, and
look what I have said I will perform; heaven and earth shall pass, but not
one jot, or tittle, of my word shall pass: Psalm. 119.19. Thy word endures for
ever: Isai. 40.6. All flesh is grass, but the word of the Lord endures for
ever: God will accomplish, and do all those things that he has promised, 2
Cor. 1.20. All the premises are, yea, and amen, in Christ.

Quest. Why is it said truth, as speaking of one?

Ans. Because though there be many truths in words, and works of men, yet all
flow from one truth: as all light comes from one sun, so all truth comes from
one God, he is the truth: as his goodness is the cause of all good, so his
truth is the cause of all truth.

Truth, is either moral, or metaphysicall; and this either in the mind of
God, or in the mind of the creature, or in the things that exist: Truth in the
mind of God, is that certain and distinct knowledge, and Idea of the nature of
things, according to which they are created in time: Truth in the mind of the
creatures, Angels, or men, consists in the apprehension, and knowledge of
things, as they are in themselves: Truth in the things that exist, is their
existens it self, suitable to their Idea in the mind of God: The truth in the
mind of God, is that which the Schools call exemplar is, or the pattern
truth, and is but one, and first is in God, and from thence conveyed to the
things, and minds in which it is. Truth is in things, and the minds of men
formally, as the Schools speak; and so there are many truths, but all derived
from the first truth, in the mind of God; and they are first in the things
known, and then in the understanding, that knows: Truth in the mind of God,
measures the truth in things, and minds of men, but is not measured by them:
Truth in things, measures the truth in the minds of men, and is measured by
the truth in the mind of God: Truth in the mind of man is measured by both
those truths; and is not the measure of them. And thus we see truth is but one,
because all flows from one; there is no truth in things, which God implants
not in them, nor in the minds of men, which the spirit of truth does not lead
into: No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: Saint
Ambrose says, whatsoever truth is in any man, is from God; and all lies are
from the devil, he is the father of them: when the Saints and holy men have
lied, it came from the Devil: when wicked men speak truth (as Cayphas
speaking of the death of Christ) it came from God.

Quest. Why say you, he knows all things certainly without error?

Answ. Because he is of infinite wisdom: his wisdom is infinite as himself:
Psalm. 147.5. A finite wisdom may err, because it does not know all things
perfectly: but infinite wisdom apprehends all things perfectly: therefore it
cannot err.

Quest. Why say you he speaks and works truth without faining and
dissimulation?

Answ. Because he is the chiefest good, into which no evil can fall: God is
the chiefest good; then dissembling cannot befall God: there can be no
darkness in him, because he is light it self: then no falsehood falls into God,
because he is truth it self. Moreover, faining and dissembling is the
corruption of the understanding, this cannot fall into God.

The works of Satan, when they are good works, are dissembling: as when he
testifies of Christ, that he was the Son of God, it was a lying speech;
because whatsoever he does, he does it to deceive: for if men will believe
him in one thing, he hopes they will in another: and so all the works of Satan
are lying works: but on the other side, all the works of God are good, and so
certain and true without faining, or dissimulation.

Quest. Why does he constantly perform whatsoever he has spoken?

Answ. Because he is faithful, and just to perform whatsoever he has
promised or threatened. Promises he any thing? he will perform it, because he
is true: and this is verifyed by the holy Ghost, Psalm. 90.12. Deuteronomy. 7.8. That
thou might know that the Lord thy God is a faithful God, that will keep
covenant and mercy. Mercy makes him promise, but truth makes him perform
Promises. Justice makes him threaten, and truth makes him recompense, his
enemies to their face. Thus Saint Augustine says, God has made himself our
Debtor by promises: and Bernard, that man should pay that he promises, because
he makes himself a debtor: and if the Lord keeps his promises with those that
are unworthy, will he not much more keep them with those he has made worthy
in his Son?

OF THE TRVETH OF GOD. CHAP. XIV.
PSALM. 34.8. Taste and see how gracious the Lord is.
YOU have heard the last day, the description of the truth of God: both what
it was, and the confirmation of the several parts of it: and now we will lay
down some Uses.

Use 1. The first: If God be true in word and work, this serves to awaken up
secure men, and to rouse them out of their natural security. These usually
bless themselves when they hear the judgments of God threatened against them,
and see them not presently executed: I say, they bless themselves, because God
does forbear, and is not a word and a blow; therefore, say they, the Lord will
neither do good nor evil, howsoever his Prophets, the Ministers speak thus.
But let them know, the Lord is true, and while they thus speak, or think of
him, they make him a liar: they believe not the truth, and hereupon it is, that
they sit in the seat of the scornful, Psalm. 1.1. scorn and scoff at those
means which holy men use, to escape judgment; I mean, prayer, and fasting,
because they make God a liar. But these men shall know, that the patience of
God should lead them to repentance; and therefore the Lord speaks, because he
would show mercy; he could execute as well as speak; but they do abuse the
patience of God, to bring upon themselves greater damnation. God is true, and
every man a liar, and their deceitful hearts that have deceived them, God
shall awaken: For most certainly, true it is, that God will make good his
threatenings, he will show himself true in executing his judgments, in his due
time. He has his own time for mercy, and for judgment, and he will punish
them who carry it out the most stoutly: for the Lord has spoken against them,
and they shall feel it with a heavy hand. And therefore though he do delay,
let them not be secure, judgment will be the more heavy when it comes.

The wise man in Eccles. 11.9. speaking to the young man, says, Go toyong man,
take thy pleasure; go on you young men, and also ancient men; but know, for
all this, God shall bring you to judgment. God is true, he has said it, and
shall he not do it? Psalm. 1.4, 5. they then shall be as stubble before the
wind: therefore be awakened out of that blindness and security, or else you
shall know it to your cost.

Use 2. Here is matter of comfort to every one that rests upon God by faith,
and constant obedience: for that which he has promised, their faith shall
never fail; God is true, it is builded upon God, and his word and truth; that
is the comfort of every one that believes, that he shall obtain that which he
hopes for. Certainly, God shall make it good, according to his truth:
therefore, if any man find weakness of faith; if any man be troubled with
doubting, What is the comfort? It is not our faith that makes the promise here,
but the promise makes our faith sure: if God be true, and perpetually true,
certainly God shall make it good; and whosoever thou be that buildest upon God
in that case, he will perform it, 1 Timothy 2.12. I know whom I have believed,
says Saint Paul: some expound this place thus; As a man that has a great debt
to pay, and relyes upon other men for the money, and some cast doubts in his
mind, what if they should fail you? the Apostle answers, I know whom I have
believed: so that having tasted of the sweetness of God in his soul, says, I
know whom I have believed: so ought every man to comfort himself upon God,
Romans 4.13. that howsoever there be doubtings, he may have joy: the holy man
Abraham was steadfast in believing, because he knew he was able to perform what
he had promised: we need not be weak in faith, because he is true: as Saint
Austin speaking of the Promises, says, they are thy Promises, whom should we
fear? It is truth that has promised, that cannot deceive, neither can be
deceived. So that if a man believes, here will be comfort, Ier. 29.11. I know
the thought I have toward thee; of peace, and not of evil: but how will he do
it? and when will he do it? God knows how to do it, though we see no means
how it should come to pass; let us leave to God his own work, the effecting
his gracious promises, and be employed in the work that concerns our selves
(as Chrysostom says;) when God promises fear not, only do that we ought to
do, to draw such promises upon our selves, for God never fails his.

Use. 3. The third use is to exhort to imitation: every one that thinks
himself Gods, must be like God, though he cannot be perfectly like him, yet
he must have truth in every thing; truth in speech, truth in performance,
etc. Pythagoras being asked what that was that makes a man most like the Gods:
when they speak truly says he; but Pythagoras was a liar, and all the gods of
the nations were liars; yet they saw this truth, that, that which made a man
specially like to God, was to speak truth; every man ought to labor to speak
truth: All lies must be laid a side, for he is the child of the devil that
makes sport of a lie: There be officious lies, as to lie for a man's benefit;
yet as Saint Augustine answers Saint Hierome, this makes a man, that when he
tells the truth he should not be believed; and this also makes them unlike
to God: So also there be pernicious lies which are worst of all, as when men
lie for the hurt of others; this makes men most unlike God: put away lying
says the Apostle, and every man speak the truth to his neighbor: So every
man ought to be constant, and faithful to perform whatsoever he promises,
Iam. 5.12. Let your yea be yea, and look that what you say that you perform;
Gods promises are yea and amen, so every man's word must be certainly kept in
things lawful, and holy: Gods promises are all made in wisdom, man's in
infirmity: this is that for which every man ought to labor, even to perform,
what he promises. We must be wary what we promise, and careful that we
perform; for it is lying to promise a thing, and never mean to perform it:
yea it is an impious thing, for he that is unfaithful in the less, is
unfaithful in the greater; if not, yet his faithfulness is not for love of
the truth: the refore men must consider what they promise, as Act. 5.4. Saint
Peter says to Ananias, Was it not thine own? but when he promised it, he put
himself out of his own power.

Quest. But is a man always bound to perform whatsoever he promises?

Ans. The answer is, yes, except in these and the like cases. First, if a man
can get him self free by him to whom he has promised: because he that bound
him may free him; and if he shall free him, a man needs not perform his
promise, and yet stand free still. Secondly, a man may promise a thing he
understands not to be unlawful, yet afterward comes to see that it was
unlawful, then he is free, not to keep it, and yet remains true. As if a man
should promise to conceal a secret prejudicall to the state and common wealth;
or an apprentice should promise to wast, or give away his masters goods: In
these, and such cases they were bound to be humble for, and repent of the
rashness of their promises, and are not tied to the performance of them. These
and such like cases excepted, promises are always to be kept.

The conclusion is, plain dealing is a jewel, for it will always more honor
a man, and comfort him both living, and dying, then all that is got by
deceiving, by lying, and dissembling; by officious lies, or pernicious lies:
But this is profanely added, that he that uses it will die a beggar; but I
say, he that uses it not, shall die much worse then a beast: for a beast has
not any understanding, and therefore he shall never come to judgment; but man
has understanding, and therefore shall come to judgment; even he that was
afraid to die a beggar, shall come to judgment: such deceitful men, the holy
one excludes out of heaven: Psalm. 15.

The next attribute is, goodness, and that belongs to the will of God; of that
goonesse of God we are to speak now; and therefore to avoyde all distinction
according to our order, the question is this:

Quest. What is the goodness of God; and of the divine Essence?

Ans. The answer is: It is a communicable attribute, whereby it is absolute in,
and of it self, good, liberal, and bountiful, communicating good to the
creature; This being the description, we must open the several parts: and
first, the answer says that God is good, liberal, etc. (and this is true:)
But yet to express the extention of that we have in hand; I say further that
he is goodness it self. God is an accident, and no accident is in God; God is
good, and whatsoever is in God is good: God is good, and such a good as has no
evil annexed to it; as that which is truly heat, is not mixed with any cold:
and that which is essentially sweet, is not mixed with any sour; so God is
such, as that whatsoever is in him is essential. Thus we find in Scripture,
as in Psalm. 52.1. Why boastest thou thy self, thou cruel man? seeing the
goodness of God, etc. Romans 2.14. The bountifulness of God, that is the
godnesse of God: so the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1.11. Secondly, I call it a
communicable Attribute, because this goodness is in some proportion in man,
though not as it is in God: therefore we call it communicable, not that there
is goodness in man, as it is in God; but a goodness whereby we resemble the
divine nature, as the Apostle Peter says. The next thing, that he is good, in,
and of himself: the ground of this, is that which Christ speaks, Mat. 19.17.
Why call thou me good? there is none good but God. There are good men, but
there are none eternally and essentially good, but God. There is a created
goodness, and there is an uncreated goodness; and therefore we say, he is
good in and of himself, and is good to the creatures: and this the Learned
call a relative goodness. This goodness in the extension (not essentially
relative, as it is in the three persons is here meant) but a relative between
the creature and God: and this is the same Gen 1.13. And he looked upon all
that he had made, and behold it was very good: so in many other things, Psalm
118.1. Praise ye the Lord because he is good, and his mercy, etc. he is good
showing mercy; that is, his bountifulness continues for ever, Psalm. 73.1.
However, God is good to Israel. The goodness of God admits this division; some
is spiritual, some temporal, some general, and some particular. Common
goodness he shows to all, but his special he shows but to some, Psalm.
34.11. The Lord is a sun, and shield, and he will give grace, and glory: what
to every man? no: but to the pure in heart. So Christ says, Mat. 7.10. If a
son ask his father bread, will he give him a stone? If you, being evil, can
give good things to your children, how much more shall your heavenly father
give his holy spirit to those that ask it of him? as Luke 11.13. so Mat. 5.45.
he makes the sun to shine upon the just and unjust. So Acts 14.7. he has
not left himself without witness, in that he has filled our hearts with food
and gladness; that as we know the goodness of the tree by the fruit thereof,
so we know this goodness of God by the fruits thereof in the creatures: and so
we have this description proved. The next Question is:

Quest. Why is such a goodness attributed to God, and his divine Essence?

Answ. The answer is, because he is desired of all, and above all. Secondly,
Because he communicates his goodness freely. To explane these.

First, Because God is desired of all, and above all: The object of the will is
good; for the will desires nothing, but that which is good either truly, or at
least in appearance. Truth is the object of the understanding; whatsoever the
understanding imployes it self about, is truth: so, whatsoever the will
imployes it self about, is goodness: nothing is good but God, and nothing can
be good, but it is desired. Now then if goodness be that which all desire, and
if all desires be bent upon goodness, it must needs follow that all must
desire God, the author of all goodness: as Saint Austin says, thou have made
our hearts for thy self, because thou art goodness: or thus, thou have made
us for thee, and our heart is never at quiet till it come to thee.

Reas. 2. Secondly, Because he communicates his goodness to others: this is
the only property of goodness, that it will communicate it self. The better
and more holy any man is, the more he desires to make himself common; The good
man is merciful, and lends, Psalm. 145. and Psalm. 9. God is good to all: and
his goodness is seen in the works of his creation, and in the works of
redemption, and the work of his desposing of all things: thus we shall find
he communicates his goodness to all. The next question is:

Quest. Why is it said that he is absolute good, in, and of himself?

Answ. The answer is, Because his goodness is perfect; It is infinite,
therefore cannot be from others. It is eternal: What is eternal, but to have
being when all other things are nothing? Who then can make that which is
eternal? Hence it must needs be that God is good, in, and of himself. But
besides this, his goodness is perfect: whatsoever is communicated to others by
participation, is imperfect, but Gods goodness is not imperfect, therefore it
is not communicated by participation, but is absolute in and of it self. In
him goodness is most perfect, in us it is unperfect; as the heat that is in
the Sun is perfect, but the reflection is imperfect; the reason is, because
the heat is most principally in the Sun: So the goodness that is in others
is imperfect, but the goodness of God is perfect. If he should receive his
goodness, it must be finite; if finite, then imperfect. A finite and imperfect
creature cannot communicate infinite and perfect goodness, of which themselves
are not capable. Therefore we see that God is not sustained in his goodness by
any, but is good, in, and of himself. The next question is:

Quest. Why is it said that he communicates goodness, and is good to all
creatures?

Answ. The answer is, Because what goodness soever is begun, and continued in
any, is from God, and the cause is in him only. It is not the creatures own
goodness. Psalm. 30.11. The goodness of God has made my mountain to stand
strong: where he shows that this estate and condition wherein he was, was
nothing from himself, all came from God. Therefore when as Esau asked Jacob,
how he came by that wealth, Genesis 33.11. The Lord has bin good to me, etc.
therefore I have all merely of his goodness: and hereupon Jacob says, Genesis
33.10. I am less then the least of all thy mercies: where he calls Gods
goodness, his mercy, because it comes from the mercy of God, 2 Samuel 7.8. Lord,
what am I? said David, or what is my fathers house, etc? So every man may say,
whatsoever he is, whatsoever he has; Lord, what am I, that thou have brought
me to this, etc? So, whatsoever any man has, it comes from the goodness of
God.

There be many Uses of this point, but we will content our selves with some.

Use 1. The first Use, is briefly this: It teaches us that, of the Apostle
Saint James is true, James 1.13. God tempts no man, God is not tempted; why?
his goodness, is such; that which is good of it self, has no evil mixed
with it: honey has no sour in it, the sun has no darkness, God nothing but
goodness; so that this is true, God tempts no man: the ground why man is
tempted, is in himself, not in God; because there is no evil in God: tempting
is when there is some setting upon, and receiving an assault, with rejection:
how can a man cast darts into the sun? God being good in himself, etc. cannot
tempt nor be tempted.

Use 2. Secondly, this teaches us that we should not sin against this God;
the reason is, because he is good, nay, because he is goodness; therefore we
ought not, this should be a restraint to us: how does every man condemn wrongs
done to a poor innocent, that has done no evil? so if we see a man full of
goodness brought to misery, every man will cry out of them, that brought him
to it: and do we so in respect of men, ought we not so to reason in respect of
God? that if God be so good in himself, why should I commit this wickedness,
against him? when Satan tempts, the world provokes, etc. What should be the
answer, if I should commit such a wickedness, you your selves, and Satan
would accuse me, for sinning against such a good God? and indeed the divill
inticeth to sin, for nothing, but to accuse us when we have sinned; therefore
get thee behind me Satan; shall I sin against this God? that is not only so
good in himself, but is good to all his creatures; look which way thou will,
thou can not but see the goodness of God: Oh what ingratitude! what impiety
were this, for a man to offend this God, that is so good in himself, and good
to all creatures? and why has God showed thee this goodness? but because he
would have thee good to him: S. Bernard has this saying, for a man to do good
for good, is natural, and for a man to do evil for good, is diabolical: now
then if there be but so much as common reason, we will return good for good;
but to return evil for good, is divelish; and the more good any man has
received, the more good he ought to be; as Salvian says: God has given us
good; then we ought to be good to him again: remember what good thou have in
thy creation, redemption, and renewing; let it be a provocation, to return
good again to God, or else the more shall be thy condemnation: let every man
therefore labor after this manner, to answer the goodness of God, that herein
may be his comfort; for then we are best to our selves, when we return good
again; and worse to our selves, when we return evil; therefore we ought thus
to approve our goodness to him, and have this ever upon our hearts: how does
the goodness of God call for obedience, that we may glorify God here, and
then by him, we may be glorious in the life to come?

OF THE GOODNESS OF GOD. CHAP. XV.
1. JOHN 4.8. God is love.
ACcording to our order, the next that followed, was the goodness of God; and
as you heard what it was, namely a communicable Attribute, etc. whereby God was
absolutely good of himself, etc. the parts of which, have been explaned, and
you heard we have made two uses, according as time suffered us; there now
remains diverse other uses, that might be made of this, but to teach two more.

Use 3. The use now (which is the third) is a confirmation of our faith,
against the Heretics, and Heresies concerning God: First, against Sardian,
who first raised up, and after him, Marcion, as Tertullian reports, wrote that
the God who was the creator, was not good, as the story reports; this Marcion
being some times of the Church, fell into uncleanesse, and being deprived of
the Communion of the Church, and so cast out, for deflouring of a Virgin, he in
envy taught, that God the creator was not good; but we see by this description,
which I have given of Gods goodness, the falsehood of this heresy; for God is
good, and there is no evil comes from him, as it is evil; (though the evil
of punishment comes from him,) for from that which is good, as it is good, no
evil can come; therefore when evils of judgment comes from God, they are
good: Saint Chrysostom says, he had a conference with a Marcionite, and he
reasoned thus: God was good, says he, if he would not take account for sin;
but seeing he does take an account for sin, he is not good: Chrysostom says, I
answer thee Marcionite; that God is good, because he does take account of
sin; for if men now exceed Lions, and Bears, when God does take account of
sin; what would they do, if God should take no account of sin? I dispute
with thee Marcionite, (says the father) thou have a family, if thy servants
despise thee, and thy government, and beat thy children, and thou do nothing to
them, tell me whether this were good in thee, or no? every man will conclude
no; and should we make God idle, that will suffer men to do what they list;
therefore we see the goodness of God is very good, though he take an account
of sin.

Use 4. The fourth use is, whosoever, has received any good from God,
spiritual, or temporal, outward, or inward, it teaches him, that he should be
thankful to God; thanks ought to be returned, but you will say,

Quest. How shall we be thankful?

Answ. I answer, two ways; in word, and in deed; we must use the goods we
receive, and use them well; whosoever is unthankful in word, he is also in
deed unthankful: he that uses not his talent, or uses it not well,
whatsoever his words be, is unthankful to God; whatsoever his talent be,
whether knowledge, wisdom, or riches: if a man shall hoard up riches, let him
remember what Saint Basil said, when he reproved such; they answered, they did
no man injury, are they not their own goods? I, but says he, did thou bring
them into the world with thee? no sure, then thou must be thankful; God has
honored men, when he has given them more then others, but yet has made them
but Stewards: that Steward dishonoreth his master, that keeps that he has to
himself, and does not use it, to the benefit of the family: those men provoke
the justice of God, to revenge the quarrel of his mercy, that use not his
mercies: many men receive good things, but they are unthankful in the use of
them; as the Prodigal son made an evil use of his portion, to the abuse of
his father.

For the conclusion, they are to use every thing three ways: for the glory of
God: to the benefit of others: and their own comfort: three things
unseparable: for if any man, use any thing to the dishonor of God, and hurt of
his brethren, or of himself, he is unthankefull: every man ought to return
part of that he has to God, part of it to the benefit of others: as the
Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 6.17. Charge them that are rich, that they trust not
in uncertain riches: on the other side, charge them that they do good, that
they be good, and that they be better for their riches: S. Cyprian complains
of some, that they were the poorer to God, the richer he was to them; every man
ought therefore, according as he has received, to return due thankefullnesse
again to God.

Now we come to speak of the love of God, and the question is:

Quest. What is the love of God?

Answ. The answer is; it is a communicable Attribute, whereby, God loves
himself, his son, and his spirit, and then his creatures, freely, but not
equally: to explane these points; we give love to God as other Attributes, not
as qualities, not as accidents, not as any thing coming from God, that was not
in him before; because there is nothing in God, that is not in God; Love is
given to God, as void of all imperfection, or error; it is a rule that the
Learned have, that whatsover Attribute is given to God, must be free from all
imperfection, and error, before we can Attribute it to him; and therefore love
as it is an Attribute given to God, must be purged from all imperfection: there
are three things in love: First, a good will, that one bears to another.
Secondly, a good work. Thirdly, a delighting in that which is loved: these
things are in God, none has a better will then God, none does more good then
God, and there is none that delights more in his beloved, then God himself:
again, we say it is a communicable Attribute, not that love is in God, as it
is in man, but because there is something in man, that is like this love of
God; man being made partaker of the godly nature; that is, they have this in
the quality, that God has in substance; and therefore we call it a
communicable Attribute. In the next place, we say, it is that whereby he loves
himself, his son, and his spirit; it is for his own glory, that he loves
himself, as it appears, in that the Scripture says, that God is a jealous
God, jealous of his worship and service: if he be jealous, there is a kind of
love of himself, goes with it; 2. Commandment; so he loves himself, and he
loves also his son, therefore he is called his beloved son, Matthew. 3.7. So
he loves the spirit as proceeding from himself, and being properly the love
whereby the divine nature loves it self; so he loves the creatures, as Angels,
and men, and other creatures: that he loves, this appears by many testimonies
of Scripture; Angels, and men, are called the children of God; Angels, Job 1.6.
Upon a time the children of God came, etc. So Adam is called the son of God,
Luke 3. last. Next he loves his creatures freely; the cause why he loves them,
is in himself, not in them; he loves some with a special love, and some with a
general, freely; that appears by the Scriptures, John 3.16. God so loved the
world. 1. John 1.3. Herein is the love of God made manifest, that he has given
us his son, 1. John 4.19. God loved us first; if first, then freely; and no
love in us, procured his love; again he loves them not equally, for he loves
men more then other creatures: Tit. 3.9. The love he bears to man is manifest;
yet further, he loves some men more then others; Exodus 19.5. You shall be my
peculiar people; as if he should say, though all the Nations be mine in
general, yet ye shall be my chief treasure; Tit. 2.14. A peculiar treasure;
these are as treasures, that men lock up; he loves those that are elected, and
those that are called; those that are elected, he loved them when they were
enemies; Ephe. 1.4. He loved them before the foundation of the world; But he
loves them better whom he has called, then those he has not called: Pro.
8.17. I love them that love me, those whom he has endued with his spirit:
Psalm. 146.8. The Lord loves the righteous, etc. To conclude this with that of
Saint Austine, God loves all that he has made; he loves especially men, and
Angels; and among men, he loves those especially, that are the members of his
Son; and most of all, he loves his Son, etc. and so we have made manifest
this description.

The next question is:

Quest. Why is love attributed to God?

Answ. The answer to this is, because there is none wills better, none works
better, acting upon men to make them good, nor delights in them more when they
are good: To explane these; First, that God is love, it is not an accident, for
Saint Bernard says, (let no man understand me:) when I say God is love, that
it is an accident, for then I should say there were some things in God, that
were not God; Again, there is none wills better: you have heard, there are
three things in love, to will good, to do good, and to delight in good; now
none does this better then God: Iam. 1.17. Every good and perfect gift comes
down from the father of lights, etc. Finally, he delights in those that he
has made good: Saint Bernard, speaking of this, says; thou lovedst them, when
they were not, that thou might make them to be, when they were; thou made
them beautiful, that thou might delight in them.

The next Question is:

Quest. Why say you, that God loves himself, and his Son, and his spirit?

Answ. The answer is, because they are all infinitely good, they are all one
Essence, and one will; as the object of the will is good, so the object of love
is good, and God is love; then no marvel, that he loves himself, his Son,
and his spirit, because they have the same Essence; every thing loves it self,
and then there is no marvel, as wisdom speaks, Pro. 8. That he was his
delight; Saint Bernard says, that the love in the Trinity (which is divine
charity,) keeps them together, and unites them in one, and therefore he loves
himself.

Quest. Why is it added that he loves his creatures freely?

Answ. Because he made them good; with a several goodness he loves them:
First, he loves them, being enemies; he loves them, not for benefit to
himself, but for their good; therefore we say he loves his creatures freely;
each of these we will explane: he made all things very good: Genesis 1.31. He
looked upon all that he had made, and behold it was very good: but it is said,
he loves them freely; he loved some before they were, before they could
possibly desire any thing, therefore freely; he loved some when they were his
enemies, Romans 5.8. When we were his enemies God set forth his love insending
Christ to die for us; as Saint Bernard says, God loves them for their own
benefit, not for his good: God has no need of the creature; he created them
not for himself, but that he might make them partakers of his own goodness:
and so we see that God loves them freely without any merit or desert in them.

Quest. Why is it said, he loves them not equally?

Answ. Because they are not all alike to him. Some creatures only, others
servants only; some children, and among his children, he loves those that are
called, better then those that are not called: I say, they are not all alike to
God: man loves the work of his own hands well, but he loves his servants
better, and his child best of all: if it be so with man, much more is it so
with God; some are his creatures, some his servants, some his sons; so that
he loves them not all alike; some are his children, but not begotten again, he
loves those with a good will and purpose to call them; those that he has
called, he has justified, sanctified, and has bestowed upon them faith,
repentance, and grace; and he delights in these, especially that he has
bestowed his grace upon. And thus I have laid open the love of God: and now to
come to the Uses.

Use 1. This teaches us first, that which the Apostle Saint John gives us to
know: he that loves not his brother knows not God, for God is love: let him
boast what he will, that he loves God, if he loves not his brother, he is a
liar, he knows not God to be love; he has not the experimental feeling of
it; for if he knows God to be love, he cannot but out of his experimental
knowledge love his brother: so the Apostle says, that man loves not God, that
loves not his brother; that is, he has no experience of the love of God: we
may allude to that which is said of Pharaoh, Exodus 1. that he used the people
hardly; the reason is given, because he knew not Joseph: for there was another
Pharaoh risen, that knew not Joseph: so we may say, that many men, because they
are ignorant of God, and the love of God, use his children hardly; they are
scoffers and mockers of those that desire to love God: certainly these men know
not the love of God, but they are fed like an Ox to the slaughter: Saint
Austin has a speech to this purpose. Do thou hear the Apostle say, God is
love? and dare thou so go against God, as not love thy brother? for to go
against those that are beloved of God, is to go against God; for not to love
them in God, and for God, is to deny God: and so much for the first Use.

Use 2. The second Use, Does God love himself? does he love his Son, and his
Spirit? then he commends his love to us; he makes his love wonderful, and
admirable to be seen toward us, because he has given his Son, yea, even
the Son of his love for us: Then he must needs love us, when he spared not
his own Son, but gave him to death for us. If he had had many sons, it had
been somewhat to have given one, hut when he had but one son, even the fonne
of his delight; this is wonderful love: if he had sent him but to judge the
world, it had bin somewhat; but to be a Savior, and a judge, it is admirable
love: If he had sent him in happiness, and glory, etc. but when he empties
himself of all honor, and glory, and puts on the form of a servant, and
became subject to death, even to the death of the cross, and became a curse
for us; oh then! how does this commend the love of God to us?

Object. If any should say to me, Sir, It should not seem to me by this, that
God should love us, because that he gave us his son; is it likely that he can
love his enemies, that loves not his son? God did not love his son, for if
he had, he would not have given him to death for us; and if he loved not his
son, he bears no love to us.

Answ. To this I answer, He loves his Son, even in this, that he gave him a
Savior for us, that he might give more glory to his Son; because he dying
for us, might have a people purchased to himself by his blood. Saint Bernard
says, this was his glory, that he purchased a people, even with his blood. As
he was a high Priest, he had no people before, but that he might have people,
he dyed, etc. Thus the Apostle manifests, Tit. 2.4. That he might redeem us a
peculiar people to himself. So Luke 24.26. Thus it became Christ to suffer,
and to enter into his glory. And now to end this point, What is his glory, if
he had not a people to communicate it too? For the conclusion, This shows the
great love of God; therefore let us labor to fill our hearts with the
apprehension of Gods love, we shall then think nothing too dear for him: it
was said to Abraham, Now I know that thou love me, because thou have not
spared thy only son, etc. So God commends his love to us, in that he has
not spared his only Son. The conclusion therefore is, that we should think
nothing too dear to return to God again: if thou have any children, or any
friends, or sin, even thy best beloved sin, that most opposes God, and thy
salvation, so shall thou commend thy love to God, and have joy of heart; and
God will love thee, and manifest his love to thee, and bring thee to glory and
happiness.

Use 3. The next Use then, is this, If God loves men, and loves them freely, it
has in it great matter of comfort against temptation: when a man does only
judge himself, and look into himself, and sees himself altogether unworthy
of love, and wholly deserving hatred, he begins to say with himself, he is not
beloved of God. To answer this objection, that the poor soul makes upon this
ground. The love of God is most free, and from himself, the cause is not in
man: If the cause were in man, the more unworthy, the more discomfort: shall
any man say that the fire cannot heat him, because he is cold? or the Sun
has no heat in it, because he cannot feel it? this has no ground; so,
notwithstanding man's unworthiness, he may be beloved, nay, the rather beloved
of God, when he feels his unworthiness: as the prodigal Son was the
fittest for his Fathers love, when he found himself unworthy; in like manner,
when Gods children find, and feel themselves unworthy, still the more
unworthy they judge themselves, the more fit they are for mercy; so that this
does not discourage a man, but rather encourage him, in the assurance of Gods
love. I do not say that every man that is unworthy of love, but every man that
has a feeling of his own unworthiness, is more capable of mercy; the
Publican that thought himself unworthy, went away more justified, then the
Pharisee that justified himself; God casts his love upon man that feels his
unworthiness; and the more unworthy we feel our selves, the more capable we
are of love: so that if we judge our selves, God will not judge us; if any man
judge himself unworthy, God will esteem him worthy.

Quest. Why then does not God love all, seeing he loves them for himself: all
are unworthy?

Answ. I answer that which the Apostle Paul says, Romans 9.22. There are some
vessels of honor, and some of dishonor; what if God, to make his power
known, etc? If any man ask, Why will God do so? Why will he show mercy to
some? etc. The Apostle answers in the 18. verse. He will show mercy on whom he
will show mercy: if you ask, Why upon this man, and not upon that? nothing but
his Will is the cause: and the Apostle says again in Romans 9.20. Who art thou
that disputest with God? what art thou that call God to an account? Aquinas
uses this similitude; A Bricklayer, in building a house, has all his brick
out of one mold; and in the building, he lays some in the bottom, and some on
the top; if any ask, Why is this laid in the bottom, and this in the top? the
Bricklayer answers, There must be a foundation, and therefore I lay them. I,
but why this brick below, and that on the top? Because it is my will; and if he
ask him, Why is it your will? he shakes him off as a wrangling fellow. So if
any ask me, why he shows mercy, etc. because he will show mercy: but why will
he? I answer still, because he will.

Use 4. The fourth Use, Does God love man? and does he love them freely, but
not equally? does he love some better then others? Then it admonishes, all
those that are specially beloved, that they would labor to return a special
love again: his general love requires a general love again; his special
love a special love; every man will challenge this, that God loves him better
then others: the Pharisee will challenge this of God; If God does love him, he
must return love again; nay, every man will profess that he loves God with a
special love; but put this upon the trial: First, if he have a care to keep
the Commandments of God. Secondly, if he show bountifulness. Thirdly, if he
be ready to suffer for God. For the first: If he be careful to keep the
Commandments of God, 1 Ioh. 2.3. Hereby we know we love God if we keep his
Commandments: in which we manifest our love to God: every man has a double
calling, and according to them he has a double command: he has a general
calling and a special calling; a general calling, as a Christian; a special,
in that place and condition of life, in which God has set him: for both these
he has Commandments; therefore he must labor for this, to be able to keep
the Commands, of his general calling, but withal, of his special calling.
For his general calling, John 15.10. He that loves me, keeps my
Commandments: He that loves God, sets himself to keep the Commandments of
God, and to please God; for this is that which God is delighted withal, he
will have obedience before Sacrifices, 1 Samuel 16.22. Again, for his special
calling, there are special precepts, John 21.15. Simon Peter, love thou me?
If ever thou will manifest the proof of thy love to Christ, do the duties of
thy special calling. Magistrates, if they will manifest their love to God,
they must do the duties of their special calling: so Masters, and servants,
and so all others: then the conclusion undoubtedly, is this, That many men love
not God, because they have no care of their special calling, and less care of
their general calling. Certainly, thy heart deceives thee, when it tells thee
thou love God, when thou have no care of thy general and special calling.
Secondly, True love is bountiful, 1 Cor. 13.4. Love is bountiful, what love
soever, even self-love, it is bountiful to the back, to the belly, to the
children, etc. So if a man had this love of God, he would be as bountiful to
God.

Quest. But wherein stands this bountifulness?

Ans. In three things; in time, in labor, in cost: for whom men love, to them
they are bountiful in time, and labor, and cost; bountiful in time, they
think no time too long for them: bountiful in labor, they think no labor
too much; bountiful in cost, they think nothing too dear: so if any man have
a love to God, he will think no time too much, no labor too great, nor cost
too dear to bestow upon his service; but alas brethren! as the people say to
God, wherein have thou loved us? so I may say to you, who say you love God;
wherein do you love God? how little time can you afford God? a day in seven?
and all that is too much; when it is to be performed; it is a weariness to us,
it goes against the hair; wherein is thy love to God, when thou think every
hour too much, and tedious in his service?

Finally, wherein, is thy bountifullnesse in cost? but the complaint of the
Prophet may be taken up, Will a man spoil his gods? but you have spoiled me;
you have robbed God of his due, and yet you say, you love God; but alas you
deceive your own hearts, while you err! etc. Thirdly true love is seen, in
being ready to suffer for God. 1. John 3.16. Herein is love, because he has
laid down his life for us: therefore we ought to lay down our lives for our
brethren, for their salvation, rather then that any should fall away, and
perish; if for our brethren, much more should a man do it for God: the
conclusion is thus much; if a man will not suffer the loss of any outward
thing for God; how will he suffer the loss of his life? etc. Cyprian says, we
should not prefer any thing before Christ; because he preferred nothing before
us; but has laid down his life for us: how do we love Christ again, when we
cannot endure a scoff, and a mock for him, when he endured death for us? etc.
what will such a man do, when he shall come to loss of goods? and if he
cannot do this, what will he do when he shall come to the loss of life? 2.
Sam. 16.17. When Hushi the Archite that was the inward friend of David, out of
policy went back from David, Absalom comes to him with this argument, Is this
thy kindness to thy friend? so may we say, is this your love to God? come a
little danger, come a little trouble, then you are offended; is this your love
to God? whosoever thou art, thou deceivest thy own heart: therefore he that
will manifest his love to God, must have a care to give him obedience in his
general, and special calling, etc. and so much for the Attribute of love.

OF THE GRACE OF GOD. CHAP. XVI.
EPHE. 2.8. For by grace etc.
THE next question is, concerning the Grace of God; there are three Attributes
which are the Attributes of Gods goodness; which are love, mercy, and grace;
now grace, and mercy, are all one; yet the several handling of these, will
afford a great deal of comfort: and therefore to speak, of the grace of God, I
have made choice of this text, wherein, I have taken liberty, not to show you
the coherence, etc. Now of this graee, the Scripture speaks two ways: Grace
as it is in the favorite, or as it is in the favourer; and here we are to
understand it, grace in him that shows grace; that we may know what this grace
is, we must consider it two ways; it is either general, or special, called
saving grace, which is that, we are to speak of, and so the question is this:

Quest. What is the grace of God, or of the divine Essence?

Ans. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he specially favors some; in
this some, though unworthy of themselves, bringing them to salvation; here in
this description, are diverse parts, we shall explane them as breifely as we
can: The first is this: grace, or the saving grace of God, contains 2. things;
the one as the cause, the other as the effects; the first is the free favor of
God, to the Elect; the second, the gifts of grace, or means of salvation,
which do flow out of this: to show each of these; first, grace signifies the
free favor of God: We are saved by grace, Romans 3. we are justified freely by
grace etc. Secondly, grace is taken for those gifts of grace that are bestowed
upon men, Act. 11.23. when they had seen the grace of God: that is, when they
had seen the gifts; for so the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.17. Every one have
received grace, according to the measure in Christ; and so the Apostle, 1. Pet.
4.10. Let every man that has received grace, as faithful disposers, etc. This
grace we speak of, is to be understood of the former, and not the later,
because it is the grace in God, and not that grace which is from God, in man;
again we say, it is a communicable Attribute, the reason is, not because this
grace is communicated to any man, (that is to say) that it is in man in the
same manner as it is in God, but because there is something in man, in a
proportion like this, therefore we call it a communicable Attribute: the next
thing is this, we say, it is that whereby he loves some in his son, we do not
say all; it is not universal grace, it is universal of all sorts of men, but
not of every particular man, and therefore we say he loves some: Romans 3.24. We
are justified freely by grace, but this grace is not without faith, therefore
in the 28. verse he says, We conclude that a man is justified by faith: now
this faith is the faith of the elect: Tit. 1. again he loves some in his
son, that is manifest by, Ephe. 1.6. We are elected to the glory of his grace
in Christ: again, unworthy in themselves: 2. Tim. 1.9. It is said we are
called with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
purpose and grace: again he loves them freely; or else grace should be no
grace: as Saint Austin says, grace is no grace, if it be not every way free;
and therefore it has the name of grace, because it is given freely unto man:
again, he loved some in his son, bringing them to salvation, or eternal
life: Romans 6.23. Eternal life is the gift of God; we are saved freely by
grace: faith is the instrument, Tit. 2.11. The grace of God that brings
salvation unto all men has appeared: therefore that, that brings a man to
salvation, is grace: so we have seen the several parts of this description
opened.

Quest. Why is saving grace attributed to God?

Answ. Because it is no created gift in the soul of man, but the uncreated
grace of God, who favors and accepts, according to his own will, and
pleasure: To explane this, it is no created thing in man: Tit. 2.11. The grace
of God which brings salvation to all men. What grace? The Apostle explanes, in
the third Chapter and 4. verse, that when that bountifullnesse, and that love
of God to man, did appear; what? to save man by works? he answers no, not by
works of righteousness, which we have done, but by grace we are saved: yet
further, it is manifest, when the Apostle Paul speaks after this manner, 2.
Tim. 1.9. We are called with a holy calling, not according to works, but
according to his purpose and grace, which God has before the world was; was it
before the world? then it could not be in man: that in Romans 3.24.28 We are
justified by grace; if that be too little, he says we are justified freely by
grace; not for the grace that is in us, because that is but the effect of grace
in God; if it were for any such thing, it were not free, but it is free, etc.

We see then, we are saved by grace, and this must be grace in God, through
faith: therefore it is not for the grace of faith, but of grace besides faith,
not of our selves; if for grace in our selves, then the Apostle would have said
so; but he says, not of our selves that no man might boast: the Pharisie,
boasted of himself, and his goodness, but he was not justified; there is
nothing in man to boast of, therefore it is manifest, that it is an uncreated
grace, by which we are saved: I shut up this point thus: this grace is
subjectively in God, and objectively in man; because the mind of man is
enlightened by faith, and finds sweet comfort in God: therefore we call it the
uncreated grace in God.

Quest. Why say you that he favors some unworthy in themselves?

Answ. Because that few only are elected, and they freely elected, and this is
the grace of election; to prove this: Matt. 20.16. Many are called but few are
chosen; A little to press this place, I do not say all, and that calling is
but an external calling, not the internal calling; for how many thousands are
there that never heard the sound of the Gospel: then if there be many not
called outwardly, then are there but few chosen; why? because those that are
outwardly called, are but a handful, in comparison of the world, and yet but
few of them chosen: yet further, the very word election shows there is a
chuseing; for to elect, is to choose some out of many, you have election in your
companies, of Masters and Wardens; now all are not Masters: but election is the
choice of some out of many to that place, Romans 9.22. where the Apostle speaks
of vessels of honor, and dishonor; there he shows there is not election of
all; nay further, some are not prepared for glory, etc. and take also that same
place, 1 Peter. 2.8. they stumble at Christ for which thing they were ordained,
therefore not elected, and therefore election, is but of few; Again, election
is free, Ephesians. 1.11. according to grace, for Christ was freely chosen to be
the Son of God: (according to his humanity) to be the head of the Church, to
be the honored of men and Angels; Augustine infers upon this, every faithful
man that will truly understand election and reprobation, let him look upon
Christ and he shall see himself; he was freely chosen to be the Son of God,
and therefore freely chosen, not for foreseen works, but by grace: for so the
Apostle calls it Romans 11. if election be by grace, and but to a few, then the
saving grace is but to a few.

Quest. But why say you he brings them to salvation?

Answ. Because that grace is the beginning both of salvation, and all means
tending to salvation: but this question shall be handled more at large
hereafter.

Use 1. The first use: If this be the saveing grace of God, etc. then whosoever
has been once truly assured that he is Gods, that he is in the estate of
election, its possible he may be always assured of it; if a man be but once in
all his life persuaded that he is in the estate of grace, he may attain to the
same assurance of his salvation after, because this grace is in God: There is a
greater certainty of faith, then of sense, because faith by the grace of God
assures a man of his salvation, and this grace is in God firm, immutable, and
unchangeable; besides a man may be certain by faith, though not by sense; one
place for many, Romans 4.16. It is by faith, that it might be of grace; to the
end that the promise might be sure to all the seed; mark how the Apostle
teaches us to reason; undoubtedly, the promise is sure: why? because it is by
grace, and grace is sure; and if the promise be sure, my faith is sure; so that
here is the comfort, here is the certainty of our faith, in a flat opposition
to works; then if our doubting hearts tell us that we are not the Lords, we are
to presume upon the grace of God: And if this be presumption as Augustine says;
I will presume: And therefore here is our comfort, and stay, against all
troubles whatsoever they be: Again, it is said that this grace, it is his
Son: what of this? not that he will make his promise more firm in it self,
but to make our faith more firm in apprehending it: why? because the ground of
this assurance is, that God cannot, nor will not, cease to favor his Son; so
neither will he cease to favor, those that he loves in his Son: but as the
favor of God, did never leave Christ, till he had brought him to glory, so
undoubtedly, he will never leave those that he loves in Christ; for if he dealt
thus with his natural body, he will deal thus with his mystical body;
certainly he will bring the mystical body, where he has brought the
natural body; for Christ has prayed, Father, I will that they should be where
I am; certainly if he has brought Christ to that glory, he will bring his
mystical body to it: why? because he has taken possession of it, in our
nature; and therefore, out of that love that God bears to them that are in
Christ, he will do it: and as Tertullian says, that our nature, has taken
possession of heaven already; therefore he that denies thee, that art a member
of Christ that thou shall be in heaven, he denies Christ to be in heaven; But
every man that would be prataker of the glory, must labor to make his election
sure, because there are but some that shall be partakers of this comfort: let
every man labor to see whether he be elected, and called; that so he may know
whether he be in the state of salvation. And these be the degrees, as the
Apostle lays them down in Romans 8. Calling, sanctification, and so proceeding
in that order, that the Apostle lays down there: every man must labor to
have the feeling of his calling, his sanctification, his justification, etc.
that the guilt of sin is taken away, etc. Thus every man should labor to
make his calling and election sure, so he may be certain of his salvation,
even then when God takes away his feeling of it: whosoever he is that does
labor to have these tokens, he has this comfort in this life, that he is the
Lords; and in the life to come he shall have glory and happiness for ever.

CHAP. XV.
EPHESIANS. 28. By Grace, ye are saved through faith.
THe last part of the description of Grace is, bringing men to salvation. To
explane this, we propound two Questions; the answering and opening of which,
will explane the point: The first question is this:

Quest. Why is it further added in the description of grace, bringing men to
salvation?

Answ. Because Grace is the chiefest motive, and the first beginning of
salvation, and all the means that tend thereunto.

Quest. 2. What are the means that bring men to salvation?

Answ. They are either external, as the preaching of the Gospel, and sending
Christ to suffer; or internal, as vocation, justification, sanctification, etc.

So that grace, which is the chiefest motive, and first beginning of salvation,
and the means tending to it, do show, that our salvation is of faith; because
the beginning of salvation is without our selves; in God, showing mercy,
wherein we are mere patients, howsoever we come to assent. And that this is
the first and chiefest principle, and first beginning of salvation, we
confirm: Why? because it is the foundation of election, 2 Timothy 2.19. The
foundation of God is sure; the Lord knows who are his: there is election, and
the foundation, is the grace of God. Election is of grace, you heard it proved
before; and the Apostle Paul says, Romans 11. that it is the free grace of God.
Again, the grace of God, is the first and chiefest principal cause, of the
means by which we are brought to salvation: the means you heard were of two
sorts, external, and internal; external, were the preaching of the Word, and
the sending Christ to suffer: the former of these, is merely of grace, Romans
1.5. We have received grace, and Apostleship etc. that is, as if he should say,
that all the means of salvation, are of grace: and so the Apostle says, I am
the least of all the Saints, yet have found grace. Secondly, sending his Son
to suffer, is merely of grace, 1 John 3.15, 16. God so loved the world, etc.
and the Apostle affirms manifestly, Ephesians. 1.17. So that the external means
are merely of grace. The internal means also are of grace: and the first of
these is vocation, and this is of grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. We are called with a holy
calling, according to his purpose, and grace: So that we see, that this is of
grace: and indeed, whom did ever the Lord call, that was not at the same time
worthy of condemnation? This we see the Apostle Paul makes clear, that before
his calling he walked so, that no man could say, black was his eye; yet for all
his civil, honest life, he confesses of himself, that he was worthy of
condemnation; and Saint Austin has a Meditation upon this, he cast him down a
persecuting Saul, and raised him up a Paul. I add to this, that this calling
of God is to little purpose, unless that man assent: but to have power to
assent, is not of man, but of God, Ephesians. 2.13. God works in a moment upon our
will, which is unwilling at the first; and therefore of grace.

The second means to bring us to salvation, is Justification; and that is
merely of grace: so you have heard, that justification is of grace, Romans 3.2,
4. We are justified freely by grace, not of our selves, not of works, but of
grace: Why? because there were no works before justification: for then men
begin to do good works, when they are justified. If justification be by
works, then they must go before justification; but they follow after it, as
Saint Augustine says, works come after we are justified; for (says he) an
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit; etc.

The third means is sanctification; and that is of the free grace of God: and
this is manifest, Tit. 3.4. We are saved by grace, not of our works, but
through the renewing of the holy Ghost: we are saved by sanctification; How
comes that? by the work of the spirit, Ephesians. 5.25. God loves his Church, and
out of that love comes their sanctification, that he might sanctify; he washes
it, so that it appears: this also is of grace. Graces in man, are but the
gifts of grace, and the fruits of the spirit: this appears, Ephe. 2.9, 10. We
are Gods work manship, created unto good works. So also Eze. 36.37. he
promises, that he will send his spirit upon, etc.

The fourth means is perseverance: and this is a special means to keep us
to enter into salvation; and this also is of grace, Ier. 32.40. I will put my
fear in their hearts, and they shall never depart from me. So there we see,
that all the means tending to salvation, are of grace: the whole mass of our
corruptions deserves to be condemned; and whosoever is called out of it, is
called freely of grace: so that salvation, and all the means tending
thereunto, are of grace. And thus we have explaned, and proved the Question;
and so now you have the whole explication of this description of grace.

Use 1. The Uses are, first, against those of the Church of Rome, that teach a
double grace: there is grace (say they) that God freely gives. Secondly, grace
that makes us gracious to God. Bellarmine says, This is not the grace of God,
which is in himself, but a created grace in man; as faith, love, and hope:
this is false: for we have showed, the grace of God, which brings us to
salvation, is that which is seated in God, and not in man: this is apparent in
I know not how many places. The Apostle when he speaks of grace, makes
opposition between it and works: Why so? that he might exclude all works,
both external, and internal, and whatsoever may be termed by the name of
works. So that we see that the Papists do err; for in all the Epistles of
Saint Paul, if he had meant inherent graces, he would have named them: but he
says, we are saved by grace, as speaking of one, but never does he speak, in
all the Scripture, that we are saved by graces, but by grace. I conclude, It is
a senseless thing to say, that a created grace in us, should deserve
supernatural glory; and to say, a defiled grace (for so it is as it comes from
us) should deserve undefiled glory: therefore we see the foulness of these
things.

Use 2. The second Use, is against the Pelagians: They tell us, first, that God
created all to glory, when they had fallen from God by sin, he elected them
all to glory again; and he sent his Son to redeem them all; and has given
to all sufficient, nay, efficient graee, whereby all may be saved: and there be
some of us which too much bend this way, which some of you love well: this by
the way. All these are false, and full of blasphemy. First, That God created
all to glory at first, is false: for they make election follow after creation:
God did not create all to glory: Why? the Scripture is manifest, Romans 9.22.
there are vessels of honor, prepared for glory, and vessels of dishonor,
prepared for destruction. First, the Apostle speaks there of things uncreated:
it was not upon a second thought, that God ordained some to honor, and others
to dishonor. Again, this position of theirs; is against the power of God,
against the wisdom, and immutability of God. What? did God create all to be
saved? why then are they not saved? Is God frustrate of his end? it must be,
either because he cannot, or because he will not; and to say either of these,
is not far from blasphemy. The Lord never willed any thing absolutely, but he
did accomplish it: if he did in the creation of man appoint all to glory, why
are they not all saved? There is a damnable Book which has bin written of
late, showing that all shall be saved. For the conclusion of this: If God
created all to glory, Why is this man glorified, and not that? Is it from the
will of man? or from the will of God? who puts the difference? It must be man:
but of this, when we come to it: but now we see the Apostle Paul says, he has
prepared some to honor, and others to dishonor: and therefore it is needless
for me to stand longer upon this.

The next thing that they hold, is, that there is a universal election:
Concerning this, it is false: Why? you heard the reason before: but we will
add a little more now. Certainly, there can be no universal election; for
where all are chosen, there can be no election: election is the choosing of
some out of many; if so, then all cannot be chosen. Again, if God did choose
all, Why then are not all saved? If there be an election of all, then the
election of God does determine nothing: who then? men, and so men are made the
cause of their own glory: and there be some (which mean well) say, that God
has elected all to salvation, if they will believe, where the election of God
is made conditional; depending upon the will of man. In this case who is it
that determines election? none but man, and therefore they say, Gods election
stands thus: I believe, therefore I am elected; thus they teach, if any man
will believe, God has elected him, he is elected; this is to make man
determine, his own election: Besides, if Gods election be conditional; then
it shows, that God before the foundation of the world, could determine no
thing: has God elected all? why, are not all saved? has men frustrated God of
his election? is the devil strong enough, to pluck any man out of Gods hands?
therefore etc. Again, is election universal; then we conclude, there is a
universal reprobation: but to say so, they account it odious; but there cannot
be universal election, unless there also be universal reprobation: there are
many things that might be said concerning this point, but it is so absurd, that
I will not stand any longer upon it.

They further say, that Christ has redeemed all by his satisfaction: I answer
to this, that it is as impious as before: we would offend no man, but those
that are of that mind, do too much help forward the Arminian heresy: indeed
the Scripture says, that Christ has redeemed all; but the Scripture tells us
again, that it is all sorts, not every particular man; but let us hear them
reason: Redeemption, say they, appertains to the Church: now the Church is
Catholic; we answer, are all men, (that is every singular man) that are in
the Church, saved? no, yet salvation belongs to the Church, and in it some
Kings, and Princes, and of all manner and sorts of men, are saved, as the
Apostle says, some, not many mighty etc. Again, Christ's death (says some) is
sufficient for all, but all do not receive it: These being Divines, I am very
loath to oppose them: sufficient for all, because they say, Christ's death was
infinite: saving their judgments, I cannot see it, this is that I say: to say
that Christ's death is sufficient, either in the intent of God, for all men, or
that he sent his son to die for all men, and that Christ in their person did
die, and gave himself for them: I hold to be false, therefore I would have them
speak more sparingly of this; that it was never the intent of God, I make it
manifest, it cannot stand with the wisdom of God, to send his son to die
for those whom he had determined should perish; he had made a decree of
reprobation, and so to destruction: Romans 9.22. when God had ordained some to
destruction, would he send his son to die for them? 1. Pet. 2.8. It is said
that Christ was set, A stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense etc. and the
Apostle says, they were ordained of old, to this condemnation; and is it
likely that God would send his son to die for them? this cannot stand with
common reason: Again, to say that Christ had an intent to save all, by giving
himself to death, is absurd, in as much as he knew who were to perish: would
Christ give himself to death, for those that were to perish? this stands not
with the wisdom of Christ. Christ knew the children of perdition; Christ knew
that Judas was the son of perdition: if these then were children of
perdition, Christ never died for them, and therefore he died not for all: John
6. I have chosen you 12. and one of you is a devil: Saint Austin well expounds
that place; he chose eleven by mercy, and the twelfe by judgment; he chose the
eleven, that he might be the instrument to power out the blood of Christ: so
that it is apparent, by all this, that Christ died not for all. Finally, that I
may not stand upon this, if Christ died for all, why have they not all the
benefit of his death? why? you will say, because they will not believe: then if
they would believe they might? but whence comes this will? not from man, for
none could believe, unless they were ordained to it; but what is this but to
make man the cause of his own salvation? I pray you, why was Peter sanctified,
and Judas wicked? you will say, because Peter believed, and Judas did not: but
I ask again, who put the difference? not man, I am sure, but God: did Christ
redeem all? then how are not all partakers of his redemption? etc. can any man
pull them out of his hand? he says, no man was able to pull them out of his
hand: he says, he had lost none: if the Father had elected them, and the Son
redeemed them, how should they perish? finally, did God redeem all? why then is
any man punished eternally? is God unjust? God forbid: you do speak after the
manner of men: if Christ had redeemed all, God could not in justice have
punished any: but God does justly lay torments upon some, casting them into
hell; therefore Christ never paid the price for all: Those whom Christ
redeemed, he sanctified; the Scriptures is apparent, 1. Cor. 1.13. He has
redeemed them, that he might sanctify them: whereupon I argue, that Christ
has redeemed no more, then he has sanctified; now how many millions have bin
in the world, that were never sanctified? but those that Christ died for, those
he sanctified; certainly, let Divines say what they will, that the death of
Christ was sufficient in the value, etc. we are sure that it is not sufficient,
in the intent, and purpose of God. As for example, a great Prince dies, and
gives a great legacy to redeem Captives, not all but some, thus and thus
qualified: now if a man should come to the Prison, and tell them this news;
this would be a great comfort for the Captives indeed, but yet only to some,
(so and so qualified) not to all: certainly the Scripture tells us, that Christ
gave himself for his sheep, and for his friends; unless thou be some one of
these, Christ never gave himself for thee: Augustine says, this is the
property of redemption; in those that are in the Church, the strong man is cast
out of them, and they are made the children of grace: and therefore it is an
idle thing, that some go up and down and say, that Christ died for all; if they
will but believe that Christ died for them: Brethren these things that I have
delivered; I have thought of, therefore beware of such men, they make way for
them that say every man may be saved, and such are the Pelagians etc.

Use 3. To our selves, the comfort was, you heard, grounded upon that of the
Apostle, that it must be of grace etc. So that here is certainty of salvation;
if God should leave a man in dissertion all his life time, yet the promise is
sure, there is his comfort grounded upon the grace of God.

Use 4. This should be a provocation of thankfulness to every man, that has
at any time had an assurance of salvation, to himself; by his calling, by his
justification, and sanctification: why? because God has put a difference
between him, and others: if the glory of this appertain to God, then it must
not be placed upon our wills, but on his free grace: this is that the Apostle
Paul says, Ephe. 1.6. To the glory of his grace has he chosen us. Beloved, if
it be to the glory, and praise of his grace it must be free, or else grace is
no grace; as you heard, that men might not boast, but might glorify God:
therefore do not insult over other men, but pity men, that have not the same
measure of saving grace, and give God the glory, and all too little for him:
Saint Chrysostom says, blessed be God, that when we could not be saved by
works, provided, we should be saved by grace: blessed be God, that has made a
separation between us, and others; we ought to be thankful. Saint Austin has
this question, why are some saved? why are not all saved? because God is a just
Judge to the one, and a merciful Father to the other: all this is to the
praise of the glory of his grace: be not therefore unthankful; but let him be
thankful that has, for he has cause to acknowledge this, that he has left
others in their condemnation, and has made choice of him; therefore whosoever
has the feeling of these things tending to salvation, etc. let him bless God,
that has begun them, he will perfect them etc.

OF THE MERCY OF GOD. CHAP. XVII.
PSALM. 145.8.9. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion; slow to anger; and
of great mercy: the Lord is good to all, etc.


THE last Attribute of the divine Essence, that we spoke of, was the Grace of
God: the next Attribute is Mercy, of which we must say as we said of Grace,
that it is all one with the love of God, but yet the diverse handling of it
apart, from the other, administers unto us good instruction: now to speak of
this, and follow the same order we have done, the words commend unto us, the
mercy of God; and therefore according to our order, the first question is:

Quest. What is the mercy of God, or of the divine Essence?

Answ. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he freely, and willingly
helps, succoureth, and assisteth his creatures in all their misery; though
some, especially more then others: To open every part of Gods mercy, it is
attributed to God; not as it is in man, but as other affections, according, and
after the manner of men, are given to God, so also is this; that which is
imperfect, and joined with error in man, is not so, when we attribute it to
God: the mercy that we attribute to God, is the same in substance, though freed
from the corruption that is in man: The Stoics do define mercy after this
manner; they say it is a grief of heart, arising from other men's evils, which
we think, or apprehend, they unjustly suffer; but in this manner it cannot be
Attributed to God; yet freed from the imperfection, and passion, and then it
may; for he being the chiefest good, and goodness it self, can have nothing
in him, but that which is good, and most perfect: in man, mercy is with
imperfection, and error; and so we may not Attribute it to God: but first we
must free it from imperfection; for the proof of this, that God is merciful;
we need not stand long, Exo. 20.2. He will show mercy to thousands. Psalm.
103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious. Lamen. 3.2. It is the Lords mercy
that we are not consumed. In the next place, mercy of the divine Essence is a
communicable attribute, because men have a kind of mercy in proportion,
answerable to it. The next follows: I say, it is that by which he does freely
succor his creatures, freely. It is manifest, I will have mercy, etc. Romans
9.18. he does it willingly and freely. Psalm. 100.5. The Lord is gord, and his
mercy endures for ever, etc. Again, his mercy, as it is in the latin word, is
Misericordia; which is compounded of two words, miseria and cordis, and then
Saint Augustine will have it thus; the misery of a man conceived by others,
moves mercy in the heart of others. Again, he is merciful to some more then
others; there is a double mercy, a general, and a special: A general mercy,
is that by which God is willing, and does help all his creatures; besides
experience, the Word manifests the same, Psalm. 104.27. All things wait upon
thee: and 147. Psalm. Thou feedest them, and thou give them food; yea, the
Ravens that cry, etc. Luke 6.15. Be you merciful, as your heavenly Father; how
is that? it hangs upon the 35. verse, for he is kind unto the unkind, and to
the evil.

The special mercy is that which is showed more specially to some; it is not
only a temporal mercy, but also a spiritual: for he shows mercy more
specially to some, to those that are his own, not only in temporal, but also
in spiritual things: as it is manifest, Exodus 20.6. show mercy to thousands:
as a father pittyeth his son, so does the Lord them that fear him, Psalm
103.13. Heb. 12.7. God offers himself, as a father. So 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a
blasphemer, etc. but I found mercy. Romans 9.18. I will have mercy, etc. And so I
have briefly explaned the meaning of this description.

Quest. Why is mercy thus attributed to God?

Answ. Because mercy in him is natural and eternal. First, it is natural, 2
Cor. 1.3. he is called the father of mercy; and Saint Bernard says, Why the
father of mercy? because it is himself: it is his nature to show mercy, and
this mercy is eternal; for as God is eternal, and has no beginning, and no
ending, so is his mercy, Psalm. 107. Praise the Lord, for he is good, and his
mercy endures, etc. It was not first in man, and then in God; but first in God,
and then in man; and so communicated to man, as other graces: he is the father
of mercy; therefore it is first in himself, and men are persuaded to imitate
him, as you heard in Luke 6. be ye merciful, as your heavenly father is
merciful: here is the difference, mercy in God, is the will of God; mercy in
man, is in the will of man, but joined with passion, and grief; in which
particular it differs from the mercy of God.

Quest. Why is it added, that he willingly, and freely assisteth all his
creatures in their miseries?

Answ. The answer is this, because his mercy proceeds from his goodness; his
goodness causes love, and love causes mercy. To open this: Mercy is not
goodness in him that obtains mercy, but in him that shows mercy: man has
need of mercy, but he deserves none, Psalm. 107. Praise the Lord, for he is
good, and his mercy, etc. God is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Why? because he
has freely loved us: wheresoever there is love in any, either men or beast,
there is always pity; for such as their love is, such is their pity: then
undoubtedly, as there is love in God to all his creatures, so his mercy is to
all his creatures: but his special love to man, Tit. 3.4, 5. When the
bountifulness, and goodness of Gods love to man appeared, etc. So that
goodness breeds love; love, mercy: and this goes back again; for mercy argues
love, and love goodness. The love that is in God is double; one is natural,
the other is voluntary. The natural love is between the Trinity, the Father
loving the Son, the Son the Father, and the Spirit loving them both: so
that these cannot but love after this sort: God cannot but love himself; and
there is a voluntary love, which God may change if he will; but for that he
has bound himself by promise, he will not change it: and this is that with
which he loves his creatures.

Quest. Why conclude you, that he does specially show mercy to some, rather
then to other?

Answ. Because mercy is from his free love: he loves some more then others,
therefore he shows mercy to some more then others: it is very natural to God
to show mercy; and where we love most, there we labor to show most mercy:
therefore we are delighted to help our children, and friends in their misery.
God loves all his creatures, yea, he loves the wicked, but yet specially his
own: he is merciful to the wicked, but he is much more merciful to his own.
To express this: He is merciful to the wicked, but in one thing; but he is
merciful to the godly in many things; he shows mercy to the wicked in their
punishments, but he shows mercy to the godly, both in their punishments, and
sins: we do confess indeed he does show mercy to the wicked in their
sins, in being patient toward them, Romans 9.32. He is merciful to them in
suffering them to enjoy many outward blessings, that they are unworthy of; nay,
he is merciful to them, when he lays any evil upon them; he never lays so
much as they deserve (as good Divines think) no not in hell: so that he is
merciful to them. To his own he shows mercy, both in their punishments and
sins: in their punishments, Hab. 3.2. the Lord in wrath remembers mercy,
Lam. 3.21. Though he afflict for a while, yet he will not forsake for ever: so
that same Heb. 12.7. If we endure chastising, he offers himself as a father:
he deals mercifully with his own, as a father to his children, Psalm. 103.13.

There is a special mercy that the Lord shows to his own, in respect of
their sins: in respect of the guilt of sin, the infirmity of sin, and the
punishment of sin. First, in respect of the guilt of sin, he is merciful
in pardoning of it. In respect of the corruption of sin, in the purging of
it. in respect of the punishment of sin, in proportioning of it. That God is
merciful in all these, is proved, Psalm. 103. He pardons iniquity, heales
infirmity, deals not with us after our sins: as far as the heaven is above
the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him: wherein stands the
greatness of his mercy? in taking away the guilt, power, and punishment of
sin, Isai 43.25. I am he that forgiveth sins. So Micah 7.8. Who has a God
like to our God? who forgiveth sin, and passes by the iniquity of the
remnant. This is such a God, as there is none like him. And thus we see there
is a special mercy to the godly, which the Lord shows to them, both in their
punishments, and sins.

Use 1. The first Use teaches us, with what confidence, with what assurance
men may comfort themselves in their miseries, seeking unto God. They go to him
that is the father of mercies, the fountain of mercies: if any man have any
mercy, it springs from this fountain; so that then we may with great assurance
fly to God for mercy: may the poor fly to the rich? may any man fly when he
is in misery to another for succor? may a child fly to his father? then
undoubtedly we may fly to God: if there be such refreshing water to be had
from men, what is there then in the fountain of mercy? if a child come to his
father complaining of his miseries, and make known his wants, he presently
pitties him, and by a natural instinct shows mercy to his child: shall not
the Lord do it much more? and therefore we need not go doubtingly, as the
heathen King did, that knew not whether God would be merciful or no, Jonah
3.9. ( who can tell, says he, whether God will repent) but being better
informed, and better knowing God, may go with assurance, because we know that
God is merciful. No man that is a cold will go doubtingly to the fire, saying,
it may be the fire will warm me, but he knows it will: so no man doubts
whether the sun will heat, because it is the nature of fire to warm, and
the sun to heat; so men need not to go to God doubtingly, because it is the
nature of God to show mercy.

Indeed there may be some things, that may put obstackles, between us, and the
fire, and so may keep away the heat; and so some sins, may stand between us,
and Gods mercy; but if these be not, we may go to God with assurance: who is he
that has felt the mercy of God? and has had the experience of Gods mercy?
that will not still depend upon it? he that finds the benefit of the fire, he
needs not go doubtingly to the fire; he that has the experience of Gods mercy,
every day he may go with assurance to be heard: the servants of Aram, 1. King.
20.31. We heard that the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings: but we need not
say so; but every one that has conscience to walk with God, may say, we know
that God is merciful: for the conclusion, every one ought to labor, that he
may be fitted for mercy; let him lay no obstacles in the way; that same is
true, that Saint Chrysostom says, upon 33. Ezekiel. 11. If we die, we may blame
our selves; we cannot say but God has showed us the way, and means, to avoid
destruction.

Use 2. The second use: does God show special mercy to some, and those his
elect? then by this a man may know, whether he appertains to God, or no;
because if he have the special mercy of God, it is that which he bestows upon
none but his elect.

Quest. But some will ask, wherein consists the special mercy of God, to his?

Answ. To this I answer; many ways God shows special mercy: First, in this,
that when a man deserves to be condemned, the Lord sends temporal afflictions
that he might prevent his condemnation: and this is a special mercy, that God
will by a temporal evil, deliver men from an eternal: 1 Cor. 11.32. When we
are chastized, we are chastized in this world, that we might not be condemned
in the world to come: as Saint Ambrose speaks; if God lay his hand upon his, it
is not the execution of his revenge, but the working of forgivenes of sins,
therefore it is a special mercy; we will leave the examination of this, to
every man's conscience. Secondly, it is a special mercy of God, in that he lays
no more upon them then they are able to bear: This is manifest 1 Cor. 13. God
is faithful, that will lay no more upon you, then you are able to bear: Psalm.
103.14. He considers whereof we are made; a special mercy that God shows unto
his, to remember their infirmities; so that of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1.5. As
the suffering of Christ abounded, so our comfort abounded through Christ; where
he would not lay greater afflictions, upon them, then they were able to bear,
but yet such afflictions, as they should be able to endure, and that either by
lesning their afflictions, or else by strengthening them in them, and so this
also is a special mercy of God. Thirdly, it is a special mercy of God, that
he makes afflictions a means to purge and to break off sin: Thus the Lord
dealt with his Church, Hose. 2.6. I hedge up the way with thorns, that when
they were resolved to go on in sin, yet he would keep them from it; so the
Apostle obtained this mercy, in 2 Cor. 12. he received the messenger of Satan
to buffet him, a prick in the flesh, a special mercy of God, that he gave him
a sharp affliction, to keep him from being lift up: Prove. 13.13. The blewnes
of the wound serves to purge folly; afflictions are like fire to the golden
Ore, or the Iron, which purges the dros from the gold, and the rust from the
Iron; afflictions are like the wind, which separate the chafe from the Corn;
or like the pruning knife that cuts off the unprofitable branches, by
afflictions, as St. Bernard says, their corruptions are lessned; so that by
this we may see the special mercy of God. Fourthly, God exercises his
special mercy, when he seems to be most angry, as Parents do when they
forbid their children, sometimes their Table, sometime laying Rods upon them, and
yet they are in that good unto them; so it is with God, not only when we know
him kind unto us, but then also when he seems angry with us: Afflictions are
made profitable when God gives grace to profit by them; this is a special
mercy, because a man cannot do it by nature; as Physic will not profit a man,
except he have nature to work upon it, no more will afflictions without the
grace of God: afflictions are ordained of God to profit his, but afflictions of
themselves profit not, but when they bring humility, as in the Prodigal Son;
this is a special favor, when they breed holiness in men, this is a special
mercy; holiness is of two sorts; there is either external holiness, or
internal; this is inward sanctification; externallis without, wheresoever
afflictions works: The Apostle, Heb. 12. shows that God offers himself as a
father; what to do? to make us partakers of his holiness; not that
afflictions can do this, but God by an especial mercy does make them do it;
as Christ himself though he were the Son, yet learned he obedience; so every
one that learnes obedience by afflictions, has obtained a special mercy from
God: this is a special mercy of God to prevent sin, to purge sin, and to
cover sin; does any man find God merciful in pardoning of sin, in
covering sin, and purging sin? he may by that be assured of the especial
mercy of God.

Use 3. The third use: is any man miserable, are his miseries great, are they
spiritual, are they temporal? undoubtedly, if he be humbled in the sense of
them, and see himself unworthy of any mercy, he may still be assured of mercy;
though there be spiritual evils, yet if a man see himself wretched, and
miserable, the more heavy he finds his iniquity to be, the more hope of mercy
there is for him: the Lords mercy is over all his works, therefore is he much
more merciful to such: If a man has a feeling of his miseries, and
unworthiness, then he may use this argument for mercy; my miseries are great;
even as David did, Psalm. 25. O Lord be merciful to me! and pardon my iniquity,
for it is great; and the more miserable men are in their own sense, the fitter
objects they are for God to show mercy unto: Thus it was with the Publican, and
so with the Prodigal; therefore never doubt though thy iniquities be never so
great, there is a sea of mercy in God. Bernard, well observes the difference,
between Justice and mercy; Justice requires that there should be desert, but
mercy looks upon them that are miserable: and says the father, true mercy does
affect misery; mercy does not stand upon inquisition, but it is glad to find
occasion of exercising it self: Thus every man in the midst of his misery,
knows where to find mercy; he shall know he has obtained mercy when God does
purge sin, etc. then all his infirmities shall be passed over, God will never
see them, and he shall have peace of conscience in this life, and happiness
hereafter.

OF THE JUSTICE OF GOD. CHAP. XVIII.
DEU. 32.4. He is a righteous Lord, and all his ways are judgment.


THE three last Attributes, we have spoken of, were love, grace, and mercy,
which all proceeded from his goodness; which have in the several handling of
them, afforded great comfort, to wounded and distressed consciences; and there
be three more that follow, all proceeding from the same fountain, that is from
Gods goodness; namely, justice, anger, and hatred; and these serve, for the
awakning, and rowsing up of secure men out of their impenitency: of these
three, we may say as of the former, in substance they are but one; but yet
being severally handled, afford very great variety of instruction, and other
comforts; and the first of these, is the justice of God; and for the ground, we
are to speak of these two ways, that I have read; All his ways are just. To
handle this as the former: first we will see what justice is, and so the first
question is this:

Quest. What is the justice of God, or of the divine Essence?

Ans. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he executes his law upon
reasonable creatures; rewarding the obedience of the godly; and punishing the
disobedience of the ungodly: This description being laid down, we make it
manifest after this manner; Justice, or righteousness is Attributed to God, in
several respects, it is Attributed to him: First, as God. Secondly, as he is a
free Lord. Thirdly, as a father. Lastly, as a Judge. For the three first, they
all fall under the heads of other Attributes; therefore I pass them over, as
not pertaining to this: but the justice of God as he is a Judge, as he is a
just Judge; that is manifest by this text, All his ways are judgment,
whatsoever he does is just: Psalm. 119.117. Just art thou Oh Lord! and just are
thy judgments: therefore the Scriptures teaches us, that he gives to every
man according to his works, as Romans 2.6. and infinite the like; showing, that
this appertains to him: Again, we say it is a communicable Attribute, because
there is the like to be found in man, though not so perfect as in God; yet
there is a justice in man, and should be in every man, to give to every man his
own: The next thing we say, it is that, whereby he executes his laws; we call
it the execution of the law, not the effecting the law in reasonable creatures,
respecting the prescription; but the execution of the law upon reasonable
creatures, in respect of the censure: The former of these is the work of
grace, (as you have heard) a sanctified obedience: The latter is the work of
his justice; execution is the judgment of the law; and in this respect, the
law is called judgment, Psalm. 119. and in many other places, in respect of the
censure, or penalty, that follows the breach of the law; besides we say that
all Gods works are in judgment; as Salvian in another case speaks, that it
may be manifest that it was justice, and not power, that that did so; this is
justice that does it, and not power; we add to this, the rewarding of the
obedience of the godly, and punishing the disobedience of the ungodly: so the
Scripture is manifest, Psalm. 9.10. Thou will judge the people with equity Dan
4.34. Nebucadnezer says, that all the ways of God are judgment: this is that
the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 4.8. From henceforth is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which God, the righteous judge shall give me: And God is
faithful and just, Heb. 6 12. that will not forget your works, and labor of
love, that you have showed toward his saints: that is, will not forget to
recompense; and therefore it is said, Rev. 22.12. Behold I come, and my reward
is with me: And the Lord judges righteously without respect of person, Deu.
10.17. 1. Pet. 1.17. If you call him father that without respect of persons
judges righteously, then pass the time of your dwelling here with fear: both
are joined 2 These. 1.6. It is a just thing with God to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble you, and to give you rest: Finally, David in 18. Psalm, 21.
says, Thou have dealt righteously with me, and 25. verse, with every man. So
that I have opened every part of this description.

Quest. Why is it thus Attributed to God?

Answ. Because he is most willing to give every man his due; and whatsoever he
does, he cannot do unjustly: To examine, and explane this; I say, it is to give
every man his due; the Lawyers define justice, to be a constant, or perpetual
will, giving every man his due: if this be justice this may well be given to
God; for who gives to every man his right, more then he, the Scriptures are
apparent; for he gives to every man his own, according to his works, that he
does this, experience teaches, and he does it freely; he does it not upon
oath, he is not sworn to it, he is a free Lord; and out of his love to justice
he does it: it is not with him as with others, that may do justice, and have
no love to it, therefore it is fitly applied to him: it is added further;
whatsoever he does, is just, he cannot do unjustly; because the Lord is a free
Lord; his will is the rule of justice: he is not a Lord sworn to laws, as
Princes coming to their kingdoms are sworn, etc. but a free Lord. God cannot
go beyond law, his own will is his law, and the rule of justice; whatsoever he
wills, he wills it by his own Essence; therefore whatsoever he wills is just
etc. Will he justify the thief upon the cross, and condemn others? will he
call Peter, and condemn Judas? will he love Jacob and hate Esau? he does it
justly, Romans 9. (there is no rule for his will, but his will, which is the rule
of justice:) howsoever man sees no reason, that justice should be just:
Salvian says, we cannot say that justice is unjust: Gods will is the rule of
justice, and therefore it cannot be unjust; though man cannot be the reason of
the justice.

Quest. Why say you that he executes his law upon reasonable creatures?

Answ. Because such only are capable of law; therefore the sentence
appertains only to them, either of reward, or punishment: we manifest this,
they only are subject to the law, because the law was given to reasonable
creatures, and none else: In the first beginning, it was written in their
hearts, Romans 2.15. before it was written in tables of stone, it was written in
their hearts; in whose? in the hearts of the Gentiles. After, when it was
written in tables of stone, to whom was it given? to reasonable creatures; and
therefore they are bound to the obedience of it: so that the execution of the
law, belongs to them; as the Apostle says, whatsoever the Lord spoke, he spoke
it to those that were under the law; unreasonable creatures naturally have no
judgment, therefore they are not subject to the law: Saint Bernard says, true
it is, that Gods justice sometimes takes hold of the unreasonable creatures,
but it is not for themselves, nor any sin they have committed; but for their
sins to whom they belong, and for whom they were created, and that have the
use of them, Genesis 3.17. that judgment, cursed shall be the earth; but for
what? for its own sake? no, but for man's; as when God blessed the creatures,
he blessed them for man's sake; so when he curses them, he curses them for man's
sake; therefore we say, it is executed upon reasonable creatures.

Quest. Why say you, that by Justice he rewards the obedience of the godly, and
punishes the disobedience of the wicked?

Answ. Because he is bound, to the one by promise, and to the other by due
desert: we will open this; I say, he is bound to the one by promise; for the
righteousness, and conversation of any man whatsoever, never deserved any
thing at the hand of God; because that good which they do, is none of their
own: 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought.
Is there then a good will? no the Apostle says, God works in us the will and
the deed, Philip. 2.13 as Saint Austin speaks: my God whatsoever I have is thy
donation, thou give all: and in many other places; whatsoever he be, that
numbers his merits, he has nothing; if he have nothing what then can help
him? Again, whatsoever he has is stained: how then shall that which is
stained, tainted, and defiled like a menstruous cloth, merit any thing at the
hands of God? therefore if God reward any man's righteousness, he does it not
out of merit, yet out of justice: because he is bound to them by promise, Matt.
10.41, 42. He that receives a disciple, in the name of a disciple, shall have a
disciples reward: he that gives him a cup of cold water, shall not lose his
reward: whilst God promises so great a reward to so little a work, it shows
it is of promise, and not of merit: and hence it is that the Apostle Saint Paul
appeals to justice, 2 Timothy 4.8. I have fought the good fight, etc. from hence
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which God the righteous judge
shall give me. It is a crown given, not merited; yet an act of righteousness
to give it, because promised. God has made himself a debtor, (says Saint
Austin) not by receiving any thing from man, but by making promises to man; and
promise, we know, is due debt; therefore we say that he is bound to the one by
promise, to the other he stands bound by due desert. But it may be objected,
Why should the sins of men deserve, and not their good works? Because that
which is good, is neither their own, nor perfect, and is therefore recompensed
in much mercy, according to promise. That which is evil, is their own,
flowing from their own corruption, and absolutely evil, and therefore
punished according to desert in justice. Saint Gregory says, our good things
are not purely good, but our evil things are purely evil; and therefore God
when he comes to judge, he judges one by mercy, respecting his promise; and the
other by justice, duly rewarding them. And thus we have seen this description
opened.

Use 1. The first Use teaches us, that though the works of God seem to us,
at any time unjust, yet we must acknowledge them just. Though flesh and blood
cannot see the reason of them, flesh and blood must be silent, and say, it is
justice that has done it. Saint Austin says, the reason of man is after one
way, and the justice of God after another. All the works of God past, present,
and to come, are done in justice; all his ways are judgment: therefore though
we can see no cause why he should do them, we must lay our hands upon our
mouths: For instance; did God cast Adam out of Paradise for eating fruit? and
did he bring a curse upon all his posterity? though we can give a reason, or
though we could not give a reason for it, yet it is just, for God has done it.
You will say, What? for so small a thing, to bring a curse upon him, and all
his posterity? though humane sense can see no reason, yet it is just; so, that
that God did, in destroying Corah, Dathan, and Abiram and all their families,
wives and children, if we could see no reason for it, yet it were just. Again,
did the Lord elect some to salvation? and does he reprobate others? can we give
no reason for it? justice has done it: does he harden some, and show mercy to
others? all is justly done. In all these, though the reason be hid from us, yet
we may not deny that which is apparent: though we cannot see why it should be
done, yet God has done it, and we must rest satisfied, that it is just: has
God made vessels of honor, and dishonor? the Apostle teaches us, in these
cases to answer objections with this, Romans 11.33. Oh the greatness, and riches
of the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. how secret are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out; it is enough for us to stand amazed at them, not to
enquire into them. Secondly, if any ask further, Why did he so? the answer is,
Rom 9.14. that there is no unrighteousness with God. These two things Saint
Austin used to answer to the Pelagians: I have this answer (says the Father,)
Oh the deepenesse both of the wisdom and mercy of God, etc! and if you will be
wrangling yet; I answer further, Romans 9.14. There is no unrighteousness with
God: and if you will know any more, seek you other teachers; but beware you
do not find presumptuous men, that will take upon them to search Gods
counsel: happily, here may be other Objections, as this:

Quest. Is it just (seeing all men are concluded under sin) that God should
free some men from sin, and leave other men in sin: how should this stand
with Gods justice?

Answ. To this I answer: If God did free some men from punishment, without
satisfaction; then he could not be just, but when he frees none, but those for
whom he is fully satisfied, his justice is not impaired. It is true indeed,
that no man satisfies for himself, nor could find out a means of
satisfaction, but it was Grace, not injustice, for God, out of the greatness
of his mercy and wisdom, to find out a means to satisfy his justice, which
they that had sinned could never have thought of: It was free for him to send
his Son to redeem some; therefore the Apostle says, that our forgiveness,
is of mercy; but John says of justice, 1 John 4.9. God is faithful and just,
to forgive us our sins: the reason is from the 7. verse, Because the blood of
Jesus Christ his son, has cleansed us from all sin: and so he does it for
justice, and not without mercy. It is true, his election was free in respect of
man: Justification was free in respect of man, but it was grace that found out
a means to save some; and yet, because he would have his justice satisfied, he
sent his Son, that he might dye for them he would save.

Quest. Happily some will say, this seems to he injustice, that God should
punish his wicked servants, and also punish them upon the back of his dutiful
Son?

Answ. To this I answer, with Saint Chrysostom; true it is, that to the
righteousness of man's justice it seems he does injustice, that for wicked
servants does give to death a good Son; but says the Father, this is the
admirable piety, that the greatness of his justice exceeded man's reason;
though this justice has a show of injustice to man: that God should lay the
sins of others upon him; yet was it just, because their sins were accounted
his; he was the mediator, the head and husband of his Church; and therefore for
God to require their sins of him, was no injustice. Their sins were made
his, 1 Cor. 5.21. He that knew no sin was made sin for us: a sacrifice for
sin. Not to stand upon this, our sins are all laid upon his score: here
mercy and justice kiss each other; mercy in this, that he found out a means
to satisfy justice in this, that he would have satisfaction. And this he laid
upon Christ, because he willingly, and freely took our sins upon him.

Use 2. This does manifest, that there is a judgment of the last day, wherein
God will judge the world; and so answers that objection against the justice of
God, which sometimes stumbled David, Psa. 73. Ierem 12.2, 3. that the godly
have their ways hedged with thorns, and are in much affliction; but what is
the estate of the wicked? Now they have the Pipe, and the Harp, and are in a
prosperous and flourishing estate, etc. Well, amongst many other things that may
be answered, there is a day wherein he will judge them, though now sometimes
the Lord defers their punishment, yet he is not unjust, as one says well; that
that is deferred, is not taken away, forbearance is no quittance; God will
justly reward both the good and wicked, in a fit opportunity.

Quest. Why does he defer the punishment of the wicked?

Answ. Because by this means he would draw them to goodness, or make his
forbearance a greater means of their condemnation. And so he deferres to
recompense his own, because he would try their faith, and constancy, and
goodness; so that by this means they are more established in goodness,
whereas other men perish; ease slays the foolish: there are many secret
sins, that lie in good men, that God oftentimes by these means makes them to
find out. Of the wicked, says Saint Austin, some are punished in this life,
and that but a few, because he reserves them for an eternal punishment. So
then it is manifest, there must be a day wherein God will judge the world; and
though the Lord spares the wicked, it is no good to them, nor mercy; and it is
not against justice to spare them, that he might, when he comes, makes his
justice more apparent afterward: so that there must needs be a judgment to
come.

Use 3. Is God just? this is to awaken the secure and drowsy professor, and
also the careful Christian; though he must go through evil reproves and
slanders, yet God is just: howsoever he can call for nothing at his justice, by
merit and desert, yet by promise he may: let him lay hold upon the promises,
and they should stay and strengthen his heart. On the other side, justice
should make all carnal men to remember that they must come to give an account.
God should be unjust, if he should not recompense the ways and works of every
man: therefore these men should be awakened out of that security wherein they
are: do not thou think that thou have lost thy good works, and thy practice
of godliness shall go unrewarded; God is just in his promise: on the other
side, if thou have done wicked works (though God does not come presently to
punish them) presume not of impunity; if God be God, certainly those sins
which thou have committed when thou wast a youth, when thou wast a servant,
when thou wast a master, shall not go unpunished; for God is just. When the
act is ceased and gone, it may be thou think thy sin is gone; it is not
so, the act is ceased, the guilt remains still, and God will call every work
to judgment; every work, good and bad: therefore labor that thou never
forget it, unless thou do undo it by repentance: this should make every man
careful and watchful over his ways, as Saint Bernard says; God has two
feet, Mercy and Justice; there be two signs of these feet in the heart of man,
fear and hope; fear, because God is just; hope, because God is merciful:
sometimes the heart is fearful, then there is the image of his justice; and
sometimes there is hope, and then there is the image of his mercy: kiss not
one alone, and embrace not one alone; embrace not mercy without justice, lest
thou grow secure; nor justice without mercy, lest thou despair: keep both
these together, and they shall keep thee in the fear and love of God. We
conclude then, that this is an encouragement to the godly, and a discouragement
to the wicked, 2 Cor. 10.11. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ: we therefore, says the Apostle, knowing the terrors of the Lord,
persuade men: that is, seeing God is just, we labor to awaken men, we entreat
men, we encourage men in good, we dissuade men from sin, etc. therefore
brethren, knowing that God will bring every thing to judgment, let us break
off our sins: seeing he has appointed a time, wherein he will judge the
world; he commands every man every where to repent, that they may take away the
matter of his justice. Again, what manner of men ought we to be, in all holy
and godly conversation; in as much as we know, that our labor is not in vain
in the Lord: let us not be weary in well doing. In one word, let us not go on
in sin, for though we get the pleasure of it, yet remember what follows
after, God is just, and the wages of sin is death: it will be bitterness in
the end. Let us not be discouraged from the ways of God, from proceeding on in
goodness: let us withstand the provocations of sin, then shall we have peace
here, and hereafter the benefit of the justice of God, according to his
merciful promise, to reward our well-doing in the life to come for ever.

OF THE ANGER OF GOD. CHAP. XIX.
ISAI 64.5. Behold, thou art wrath, for we have sinned.


IN the former words, as you have heard, we have spoken of the Justice of God;
the next Attribute is the Anger of God: for the ground of which, we have made
choice of these words; Behold, thou art wrath, for we have sinned: and of this
in the same order as before: and so the first Question to be propounded, is:

Quest. What is the anger of God, or of the Divine Essence?

Answ. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he being angry with his
creatures (sinning) justly wills, threatens, and executes punishment upon
them; this is the description of Gods anger, and the opening of it is after
this manner. First, anger, as it is in man, a passion, is not, nor may be
attributed to God; for we say it does not become a wise man to be angry, much
less the wise God, but is attributed to God as the former: that is, as anger
is mixed with corruption, it may not be attributed to God, yet generally taken,
it may.

There be two things to be considered in anger, as it is in man; First, called
the matter. Secondly, the form: for the matter of anger, I say, it is a
passion naturally inflaming the blood with desire of revenge; and causes a man
to go out of himself: in which respect, it can be no way given to God,
because he is so simple pure, that no impurity can be given to him; now this
proceeds from the sensual part, and so it is both in man, and beast, and
cannot be attributed to God. Secondly, as it proceeds from man's will, joined
with detestation of evil, and desire to punish evil; so it may be attributed
to God: and of this the Prophet speaks, in this place: behold thou art angry,
for we have sinned. I say, that God is angry with sin; it is in this place
manifest, that all Gods anger, is against sin: so Romans 1.18. The wrath of God
is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness etc. where we see, that God is
angry with sin: and the Apostle Paul, Col. 3.5. recounts up several sins,
as fornication, wantonness, covetousness, etc. and for such sins, the wrath
of God comes upon the children of disobedience; and in the 5. Ephe. when he had
reckoned up diverse sins, in the 6. verse he comes and says, Let no man deceive
you with vain words; for these things the wrath of God comes upon the children
of disobedience. The next thing is this, whereby he is angry with his
creatures, justly willing, and decreeing punishment; it is just if he will it,
because his will is the rule of justice, and he wills not punishment out of
passion, as a man does; it comes not from the sensual appetite, as it does
from man, but it proceeds from Gods will averse from the creature, sinning: and
this willing, or decreeing punishment, is called the anger of God: and so anger
is put for the decree of anger: so it is taken, he is a God of anger, keeping
wrath for his adversaries.

The next we say, he does not only decree, but denounce judgment, and so
anger in the Scriptures, is put for threatening of anger: as Psalm. 6.1. Lord
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me, etc. that is, do not lay
upon me, that thou have threatened in thy law; where anger is not put for the
decree, nor the execution, but for the denouncing: so Matthew. 3.11. and so Isai.
11.9. I will not execute my fierce wrath; that is, I will not execute my wrath,
as I have declared it: Again, it is said, he executes punishment on the wicked;
he declares it not only, but executes it: so anger is put for the execution
of anger; Matthew. 3.7. Who has forwarned you to fly from the wrath to come:
that is, from the punishment, that the anger of God has decreed: so likewise
in other places, 1 These. 1. last verse, He has delivered us from wrath to
come. Romans 5.9. We are saved from wrath: So that this shows, that anger, is
put for the execution of anger. Next we say, that he does declare, and execute
punishment; punishment is two fold; it is temporal, and it is eternal: The
punishments in this life, are upon men's persons, estates, goods, etc. as is
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. eternal punishments, are they which are prepared for the
devil and his Angels, and those that are seduced by him. The next thing is
said, he executes his law upon all offenders: offenders, are of two sorts;
Elect, and Reprobate; some children, others servants; and of these, to the one,
he has decreed temporal punishment only: and to the other, he decrees,
declares, pronounces, executes, both temporal, and eternal punishments: his
own, are free from the eternal, but the other are not free from temporal:
but he lays upon the wicked, some temporal punishments, as a revenge against
impenitency; yet these satisfy not his justice, and therefore are followed
with everlasting torments, in hell fire, when God takes of wicked men, and
Angels, a full and just revenge, because they have not satisfied his justice:
chastisements, God lays upon his own, but not everlasting torments: because
his justice is satisfied for them, by his son; and therefore it is said,
Psalm. 139. that he is not angry for ever, neither deals he with us according
to our sins. Isai. 27.8. He deals with them in measure, in the branches, but
with the wicked in the root; he deals with his own, as the Husbandman deals
with his fruit trees, which he does prune, and cut off the unprofitable
branches, etc. On the other side, when he deals with the wicked, he deals
with them in the root, stocking them up; but not to stand long; God sometimes
inflicts punishments upon his own children, and they may be bitter, and sharp,
as the Apostle says, Heb. 12.1. No afflictions for the present, are pleasant:
but this he does, that they may not be condemned with the world: and he deals
patiently with the wicked; and this he does, because they are vessels of wrath
prepared for destruction: and thus I have opened this description.

Quest. Why is anger Attributed to God, or to the divine Essence?

Answ. Because that God is good and gracious. We will explane this, after this
manner: that which is good, must be angry because it is good: it is natural to
goodness, to be opposite to evil; as it is natural to evil, to be opposite
to good: experience teaches us, that the worser any man is, the more he is
offended, with that which is good; and no man can be good, unless he be
offended with evil; and the more good a man is, the more he is offended with
sin; therefore God being goodness it self, must needs have anger against
sin. Secondly, God is gracious: now these two, anger, and graciousnesse in
God are opposite one to another; the grace of God is only to some, not to all;
his anger is to others: all are not under favor, therefore there must needs be
anger in God; all by nature corrupted are under anger: so it is, Ephe. 2.3. So
we are by nature the children of wrath. They who are reconciled, are the
children of mercy: they that are not reconciled, are children of anger:
therefore God being good and gracious, anger is proper to him.

Quest. Why say you, by this anger, he wills, denounces, threatens, and
executes punishments?

Ans. The answer is, because he is most wise, most mereifull, slow to anger,
most just, not making the wicked innocent; to explane these: First, he decrees,
and therefore most wise, this comes from the wisdom of God; that he does, he
does it not upon passion, but upon deliberation; especially when he comes to
matter of anger: this appears, for God speaks of himself to Abraham, Genesis
18.21. I am come down to see whether Sodom be so wicked etc. before I do
execute, I will see; not that God knew it not, but to show how slow he is to
anger: in like case, Ier. 44.21. Does not the Lord remember and consider,
before he comes to execute his anger: when he has decreed it, he does not
presently execute it, but he does denounce it: why? because he is most
merciful, slow to wrath, and therefore he does denounce: Isai. 34.7. He is a
God that will not punish, but upon necessity; he would willingly be always
showing good, and when he is angry, he is compelled and provoked to it; and
because he would not willingly punish, therefore he denounces punishment; he
speaks often, before he will do it once, that if it might be, he might be
prevenred by repentance. Lastly, after threatening, he proceeds to execution,
not with delight; (God delights not in the death of a sinner, he afflicts not
willingly) but compassion. As Titus the Emperor, before he sacked the City of
Jerusalem, wept over it, pitying them he should destroy it; so does God, when
threatenings prevail not, and by them, men are not reclaimed, then he comes to
execution; because he is just; that he may not make the wicked innocent: how is
that? by sparing to execute his justice on them: for so I remember David said
to Solomon, that he should not make the wicked innocent: how is that? thou
shall not, says he, let them go with peace to the grave: though I did not
execute judgment upon them, yet thou shall do it: as Savian says of Sodom,
that God showed mercy, in that he was long before he did execute; and justice,
and wrath, in that he did execute at last.

Quest. Why is this wrath Attributed, to execute punishment upon offenders?

Answ. Because he punishes impartially, he respects no person; we will explane
this: it is true, it is the person he punishes, but he punishes him for sin;
who ever sins, him he punishes: he spares not his own, but punishes them,
sometimes more sharply then others; this shows that he is impartial, in that
he punishes them, not only when they be unrepentants, but when they be
repentants, though not in themselves, yet in their surety; that is Christ: so
that he accepts no man's person: repentance takes not away punishment, but does
so much prevail with God, that he lays it upon Christ; he was beaten for our
transgressions: and though sometimes he punishes one, and the same sin
differently, more in one then in another, it is not for the person, but to show
himself impartial; namely when circumstances make the sin greater; then he
lays the punishment greater, as Levit. 24.9. If the Priests daughter committed
fornication, she should be burnt, in as much as the circumstances made her sin
the greater; and thus, you see the ground of this.

Use 1. The first use is: This teaches us, that anger it not simply evil, when
the Scripture forbids it; it does not simply forbid it: why? because it is
attributed to God, and nothing that is simply evil can be attributed to God;
Saint Bernard says, simple affections are in us by nature; being corrupted by
our fall they are become sinful, whereas by creation, they are naturally good;
but they are morally good in God, so anger applied to God, is morally good:
Anger is so far from being ill, that a man cannot without it avoid evil, nor
walk in the practice of godliness as he ought. Anger preserves the works of
virtue: A man of anger is like to a Soldier that has put on his armor ready
at the command of the Captain; Anger is the hand of reason, the Soldier of
reason, to fight for God against sin; anger is the sinews of the soul; it
makes a man zealous against sin, and he that has not this is in small measure
godly, he is no way profitable, for anger helps a man against every iniquity;
hereupon the father uses a similitude: anger is like to the Shepherds dog:
how is that? thus, he barks at every stranger, but is quiet with his masters
friends, and faunes upon them: so is anger in the heart of man, let sin come,
anger sets upon it, etc. Anger truly sanctified is that which will oppose any
corruption that shall be offered: In these respects and many such, anger is
very profitable: Anger says one, is like the edge of a knife, and God has put
it into the hand of man; what use is there of a knife? to cut off all
unprofitable branches; so of anger, etc. thus much of this use.

Use 2. The next use is this, it should teach men to fear the wrath of God;
men ought to fear sin, because they ought to fear the anger of God: If men
sin, certainly God will be angry; look what sin God has revealed his
wrath from heaven against, that sin fear; for instance, God has revealed
his wrath from heaven against such as contemn the word, and sacraments: 2 Chronicles. 36.36. They mocked his messengers, and despised his Prophets, etc. then
his wrath came, and there was no remedy: So Matthew. 11.22.24. Woe unto
Capernaum, it shall be easier for Sodom, and Gomorrah then for thee: 1 Cor. 11.
for this cause many are sick, etc. God has revealed his wrath against the
injurers, against Sodom, etc. but especially against impenitency; that is, when
men notwithstanding they hear the word of God denounced against sin, yet
they bless themselves: Deutr. 29.29. he says my wrath and Jealousy shall
burn against that man. Read the Scriptures, and every where you shall find
some monuments of the wrath of God; consider, and when you are tempted to
sin, lay the wrath of God against that sin. Art thou a despiser of Gods
word, art thou an abuser of his servants, or a prophaner of his sabbaths, and
fear not thou the wrath of God, that he should break out against these
sins? this shows that thou art shut up in impenitency; therefore the wrath
of God and his Jealousy shall burn against thee.

For the conclusion, know, that he is the same God that he was; there is the
same justice, the same wrath, and he will certainly punish the same sins, out
of the same justice; art thou a desperate man? this should make thee fear; God
must smite thee, else he were unjust. If any man desire to get the fear of
God, what an excellent help has he from hence? let him consider God is the
Lord of fury: This one truth rivetted upon the heart of man, will purge out all
uncleanenes, and wicked works, that he shall not dare to move a member to
sin, nor give approbation to the least motions of iniquity injected to his
heart, though he cannot prevent the arising of them: for the expectation of the
punishment will keep him off, etc. as for instance, Jeroboam stretched forth
his hand against the messenger of God, but being smitten he spares him: so
many stretch their tongues, and speak against the ministers; if this
consideration were in their hearts it would keep them from this wickedness,
and they should escape the wrath to come.

Use 3. Is God a God of anger against men for sin? does any man lie under
this anger, and desires to be freed from it? let him labor to pacify this
anger of God; then you will ask me, but how is this anger pacified? I answer,
by taking away that with which he is provoked: Take away fuel from the fire,
and it will be soon extinguished; take away that which provokes God, which is
sin, and anger will quickly cease: Iere. 18.7.8. The Lord says, If I
threaten evil against a nation, and that nation repent, I will also repent:
Take away the matter, and Gods anger will be taken away; If Acham and his
excommunicate thing be stoned, and burnt, the anger of the Lord ceases against
Israel; If Jonah be cast into the Sea, the storm ceases; If the Ninivites
turn from their sin, the Lord will turn from their punishment; therefore if
any man would be freed from the anger of God, then he must take away sin; The
anger of God is like the Parents anger; Parents take delight in doing good and
are never angry, but when they are provoked: so it is with God, it is his
nature to delight in doing good, he is not angry but when he is provoked unto
it: This is that the holy Ghost speaks, Isai. 27. Anger is not in me; but how
shall this agree with that place before spoken of? God is the God of anger:
Nah. 1.2. I answer, Lam. 3.33. The Lord afflicts no man willingly: mercy is
natural to God, but to be angry, and wrath, is a forced motion: so that if we
cease that which provokes, he will stay his anger: they take a wrong course
that think of any thing to appease God, but the removing of sin: the holy
Ghost complains, Isai. 22.8. That when he threatened judgment to come upon
them, they began to think of their Armor, and their Fortresses, and their
strong Walls, but never thought of the matter that provoked the Lord: and
whereas they should have betaken themselves to fasting, etc. they betake
themselves to feasting; this iniquity (says he) shall not be taken away from
them until they die: when Asa, 2 King. was sick, he never sought to the Lord,
that was not the way he took for his recovery, but to the Physician; and Israel
to King Iareb, Hos. 5. but he could not heal him. There are some that seek to
God, yet they nevertake away sin, therefore they cannot have Gods anger taken
away; or if God do take away his anger from them, it is in greater anger: many
men bless God that he has eased them of a plague, when yet they have not left
their sin; I say to such, it is a greater judgment for thee to have the
plague removed: these men that when they are under a judgment, cry for ease,
but remove not the cause of their pain, which is sin; are like to the
patient, that goes to the Chyrurgian for ease, and there is yet in the wound, a
little bone, or splinter which he will not let the Chyrurgian take out, without
the taking out of which there can be no ease.

The conclusion is this; would any man have the anger of God taken away from
him? he must search to find the cause of this anger, he must search to find
the plague in his own heart, 1 King. 8. thus says Jeremiah, Lamen. 3. why is
living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin; let us search and try our
ways and turn unto the Lord: take away that which provokes the Lord, and
labor to be angry with thy sin, and God will cease to be angry with thee.

OF THE HATRED OF GOD. CHAP. XX.
PSALM. 6.6. Thou hate all the workers of iniquity.


THE next thing is, the Hatred of God: and to hold the same course we have held
before: our first Question is this:

Quest. What is the hatred of God?

Answ. The answer is thus much; the hatred of God is a communicable Attribute,
whereby he freely decrees not to show mercy, but to deny to most the grace of
election, destinating them to destruction, exactly punishing them when they are
wicked, and so hating all iniquity.

This description has a great deal of matter in it, therefore we will explane
it. Hatred, say some, is not to be attributed to God; we do not contend
against them, if they understand hatred to be a passion of the mind, which is
seldom without corruption; but when they take hatred, as the Scriptures speak
of it; then, as God loves that which is good, so he hates that which is naught
and evil: for as God is said to love, so he is said to hate. Again, I say it
is a communicable attribute, because that there is the like in man: next, it is
that by which he freely decrees not to show mercy to the wicked, to deny to
them the grace of election. To open this: hatred, in the Scriptures does many
times signify to refuse, to give and to deny favors; to put behind, and make
less account of one then another, as our Savior Christ says, Luke 14 26. He
that hates not his father and his mother, etc. that is, he that does not deny
his father, by putting him behind him, and neglecting him, when he commands
any thing, and God another: God saw that Leah was hated, that is, was not so
dearly loved as Rahel: so this hatred of God is to neglect to show favor, and
to deny the grace of election to the wicked: this is apparent, Romans 9.13. I
have hated Esan, and loved Jacob: this is not put down but with opposition: I
have loved Jacob, and hated Esau: that is to say, I have not decreed nor
offered this grace and favor of election to Esau, which I have allowed to
Jacob: it is that which is further manifest in the 18. verse of the same
chapter, I will have mercy on whom I will, and whom I will I harden, etc. This
God does freely from his own will; his will is the solitary cause of denying
the grace of election: the cause why he chose Jacob, and hated Esau, was
nothing but his will: it is manifest, Romans 9.11.12. before they had done good
or evil, God said, that the elder should serve the younger, that it might be of
grace: if you ask the Apostle a proof of this, he alleges a place out of
Exodus: if any man should wrangle with God, and say, God is unjust, that he
should love one, and hate another; the Apostle answers, There is no
unrighteousness with God, ver. 14. and for this he gives a proof, Exodus
23.19. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and whom I will, etc. As
God does absolutely love whom he will, so he does absolutely hate whom he will;
he denies the grace of election to the most: there are but a few that have
favor; Mat. 20.16. Many are called. The next thing is, that he destinates them
to destruction, as the punishment of sin. Jude 4. men were before of old
ordained to this condemnation: He has prepared Tophet of old, Esa. 30. ult.
not that God does delight in the torment of the creature, or created any thing
that he might destroy it; but out of his hatred to sin, and love of justice,
did decree, and prepare to punish all, and only such as should live and dye in
sin, without repentance. That negative act of reprobation, or preterition
finds all men alike, in the same condition; this positive act of predamnation,
respects men as sinners, without repentance. That first act is grounded only
on the absolute will of God, I will have mercy on whom I will, etc. and whom I
will I harden: but this latter act is an act not so much of power as of
justice, and always has respect to sin. The third thing, That he actually
punishes them when they are wicked: It is manifest, that they that be born in
sin, and live in sin, knowing it to be sin, be enemies to God, and to the
grace of God; and them he actually hates when they are wicked. This is
apparent; Thou hate all those that work wickedness; and that hatred carries
the punishment, as appears by the next words of my Text; and thou destroyest
all those that tell lies: and therefore he does not hate them, as they are men,
and his creatures, but as they are wicked. Bernard says, man could not endure
after Gods making, but he would be better; therefore he was cast out of
Paradise, Godhating all iniquity in whomsoever it was, elect or reprobate,
Psalm. 45.7. Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity: and this I might
show unto you, that there is no sin almost, but I can bring you a plain text
of Gods hatred of it; sometimes hating idolatry, sometimes hating blood,
sometimes false weights, sometimes contempt of his Word, sometimes wicked
thoughts; all which show, that he hates iniquity: two ways he manifests he
hates it; in some, because he destroys them for it: in others, because he
took it away by justice, in his own Son. And thus much for this description.

Quest. How justly can God decree and destinate men to hatred and destruction
absolutely?

Answ. The answer is thus: Because he is the creator of all, the Lord over all;
by either of which, he may decree what he please concerning his creatures. We
manifest this: first, that he is the creator of all, no man makes question;
then if he made all as he would, and to what end he would, (deformed in body,
or destitute of good, Esai 64.8. We are the clay, and thou art the potter, we
are all the works of thy hands,) may not he the Potter, of one and the same
lump, make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor. If he may make a
vessel as he will, then he may do with it what he will, Rom 9.20, 21. when he
had spoken of man's reprobation, there may be some that would question with him,
and say; How is this just? he answers, What are thou oh man! that disputest
with God? shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why made thou me
so? So verse. 20. The potter has power over the clay, and has not the Lord
much more power over us? Secondly, He is an absolute Lord over us, What
follows then? he may therefore for the manifestation of the greatness of his
mercy, appoint some to glory, and some to destruction. Why? because he is
absolute Lord: mark the place in which the Apostle speaks of the Potter, What
if God willing to show his wrath, to make his power known, endure with much
patience, the vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction; that he may magnify
his wrath upon the one, and his grace upon the other? So also in 2 Timothy 2.20.
in a great man's house there are vessels to dishonor, and some to honor; the
absolute Lord may appoint what he will: the Lord is absolute Lord of his house,
he may appoint some to honor, and others to dishonor. To conclude this with a
speech of Saint Augustine, against our universalists; they plead that Augustine
is all for them, he uses a pretty speech; the first man came into the world
without original sin, and was made of a pure mass; God might then appoint
some to destruction, and who dares come to God, and say, Why have thou done so?
shall they of like condition come and reason with God, Why did thou choose
him, and refuse me? there is the like in him as there is in me, Why have thou
done so? the answer shall be this; Has not the Potter power over the clay, to
choose one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor. So that we see that God
may justly deny the grace of election?

Quest. Why is it said, that God actually hates and punishes men, when they are
wicked?

Answ. Because he is just, he may actually hate them when they are wicked: he
decrees it before, but then he actually hates them: we manifest it after this
manner; Whatsoever he decrees, he executes not till he have cause, because he
is just. Of the former, namely that God should decree, Augustine says, there
are causes secret to man, but there is no unjust cause. Of the latter, that he
actually hates them, the cause is manifest, they are actually wicked.

Quest. The last thing: Why say you, that he hates all iniquity?

Answ. Because he is good and righteous, and loving; therefore he cannot choose
but hate sin: nothing is more proper to love, then to hate that which is an
enemy to that which is beloved: nothing more proper to God, then to hate sin,
as Saint Augustine, it is apparent thou love righteousness, and hate
iniquity. So that you see, I have opened this description: out of which there
may be made many Uses.

Use 1. This teaches us, first, what to believe and profess in those great
and controverted points, concerning universal grace, election, reprobation,
redemption, etc. in which we must be wise to sobriety, that we dash not into
errors: God (as has bin said) did love some above others, with a special
love, for whom he has prepared grace and glory: those whom he did not love
with this special love, he passed over, and for them he prepared neither grace
nor glory: and thus far we go without straights; for it is granted by all,
that God may deny that grace and glory, which he gives to others, and pass
them over; because to some grace and glory are his own free gift, and he may
do what he will with his own. But say some, God cannot justly destinate men
to destruction, before they are wicked; to do so, would be tyranny, etc. To
this we answer; it is high presumption, for dust and ashes to limit the
sovereignty and absolute dominion of the almighty, yea so much as to question,
what God may do; woe unto him that strives with his maker, says the Lord by
Isaiah: Who has enjoined him his way, says Elihu? if, as the Potter out of
the same lump, makes one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, who
shall charge him with injustice? Is God tied to any? who has given to the
Lord, to make him a debtor? Injustice is the violation of a right; there is no
injustice, where there is nothing due: indeed if God had destinated a creature
to torment, being innocent; this had not bin an act of justice, but of
sovereignty; yet was it not an act of injustice, because of sovereignty. But
this problematicall question is to us needless; there is no cause of flying to
the absolute dominion, and royal power of God, to answer this objection. To
the Law and to the Testimony, God has sufficiently declared and justified the
equality of his own ways; let us with meekness and humility of spirit, seek
and submit to the revealed truth: God has prepared grace, and glory, for some
that were not worthy of it: admire the richness, and freeness of his grace,
and goodness, he has not done the like for all; sit down in silence, he has
done thee no wrong: but he has prepared some for destruction; no, man prepares
himself for destruction by his sin: Thy destruction is of thy self, oh
Israel! God only prepares destruction for the sinner, he has prepared Tophet
of old; and what injustice is there in this? God made his creature holy, and
able to stand; his creature left to himself, forsakes his holiness, and sins:
God decrees to punish him for this sin, and does punish him; Are not the
ways of God equal? thus God cannot justly be charged with man's perdition.

Object. But he is the cause of all his sin, if this doctrine of reprobation
be true.

Answ. God forbid; he that prohibits and punishes sin, does not procure and
cause it; let no man say, (says the Apostle Saint James) When he is tempted, I
am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he
any man: But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
from the father of lights, etc. Neither does the contrary follow from the
doctrine that has been taught: God does deny his grace to some, but he does
not infuse corruption or sin, into any; and therefore cannot be charged, as the
author of sin: the denial of grace is the antecedent of sin, but not the
cause: between the antecedent and the consequent, there is no casuality: the
Sun not giving his light, there follows darkness on the earth, yet is the
sun the cause of light, not of darkness: God witholding his grace, and
spirit, from his creature there follows sin, and wickedness in the
creature: yet is God the cause of the grace, and holiness, of the creature,
not of sin and wickedness, which is in it: I stand not long on these things,
it is my purpose to teach, not to dispute, and these absurdities heaped upon
this doctrine, arise as directly and in as full force against the opinion of
the objectors; let them see how to salve themselves, and the same plaster,
will serve us, as well as them.

Again, they say, it is injustice, to hate where there is no sin; hatred
signifies; First, to love one less then another (as has been showed.)
Secondly, to decree. Thirdly, to denounce. Fourthly, to execute punishment. In
the first sense, it is no injustice, to hate without respect to sin; we may,
(and why then may not God) prefer one thing before another, both being of the
same goodness? and in this act, the thing preferred is loved, the other hated:
In the three last exceptions, there is no injustice; for God does not decree,
or denounce, or execute punishment, save only against sinners, and for sin:
Take it in a similitude; if a free Prince, of two beggars, advances the one to
riches, and honor, and deserts the other, and suffers him in his beggary,
there is no injustice in it: If Pharaoh restore his Butler and hang up his
Baker, both having offended, there is no injustice in it: If God set a special
affection, on some of his creatures which he denies to others: why should any
repine? is thy eye evil, because I am good? No say they, but God should not be
made the author of man's sin, and misery: there was something in man that did
provoke God to pass him over, and for which he did appoint him to wrath. I
answer, is this the thing you desire? agree then on this, that God is the cause
of man's grace, and glory; that there was nothing in man, that did move God, to
choose him, and predestinate him to life: how like you this? This doctrine will
not down with these disputers, they as much mislike, that Gods will should be
taught the cause of grace, as of sin, and would have a man the framer of his
own fortune: a man's election grounded on his faith, as his reprobation on his
infidelity: we know who answered the Apostles, who made thee to differ from thy
brother? with, Ego discrevi meipsum, I made my self to differ from my brother:
this is aimed at, though they blush openly to profess it; it is but a pretense
to cover this that they stand upon so much, that by this absolute decree, God
is made the author of sin, or misery: we only say with the Scripture, that
God to manifest the power of his wisdom, justice, grace, mercy, and other
Attributes, chose some to life, and passed over other some: If it be demanded,
why he chose those whom he chose, and not the other whom he passed over? The
answer is, because it pleased him: there was no excellency in Peter above
Judas, which should incline God to elect Peter, when he passed over Judas; nor
wickedness in Judas, which was not in Peter, which might provoke God to pass
over or reprobate Judas, when he chose Peter: according to that of the Apostle,
Romans 9.11. For the children not being yet borne etc. we say, that they whom God
passed over, sinned and continued in sin, and for sin, were decreed to be
punished with everlasting torments; and though sin be not the cause of
reprobation, yet is there no man damned, or decreed to be damned, but for
sin: Oh! but it seems contrary to the goodness of God, thus to hate, or
pass over any: I answer, God is good, and does good, and the whole earth is
full of his goodness: but it must be considered, that the goodness of God,
does not bind him to communicate to every creature, all that goodness of
which the creature is capable, and he can bestow without impeachment of his
justice: who dare deny, but God might have established the Apostate Angels,
that kept not their first estate, that they should not have fallen? he did it
not, was this contrary to goodness? God dispences not amongst men equally,
riches, honors, friends, etc. is it contrary to his goodness; it is
sufficient, that there is no creature, (much less no man,) which is not
abundantly satisfied with the fruits of Gods goodness, in some kind or
other; it is not to be expected, that this goodness, should in the same kind,
and measure, be extended unto all: God is a most free agent, is not bound to
any; that we have any thing, it is his bounty; we have no cause to complain,
we have no more, but be thankful, we have so much: it is Gods great goodness
to some, that he has looked on them in a low estate, and passed by them in
time of love, and drawn them to himself, and prepared for them grace, and
glory; and that he has not done, so much for all, is no detraction from his
goodness. But why should God pass over anger? Why do thou dispute with God?
He has done it because he would, Romans 9. He has done it for himself. Prove.
16.4. In a great house some vessels, etc. 2 Timothy 2. And why should they repine
at this? I demand this of them? If God has decreed all beasts of the earth, to
slaughter, for the nourishment of men, without injury to the beasts; Why may he
not decree men to destruction, for his own glory, without injury to man? is
not God the absolute Lord, as well of men as of beasts? might not he who made
thee a man, have made thee a beast? shall he lose his right of disposing of
thee, because he has made thee a man? is not? ought not, man to be as much
subject to his glory, as the beasts are to man's pleasure, or nourishment? I
conclude, we learn by the right understanding of this divine Attribute, to
keep our selves from being entangled in the erroneous doctrine of
Pelagianisme, the very destruction of all true religion, and piety, of all
sound comfort, and peace, as I might show at large; but of this use at this
time so far.

CHAP. XXI.
PSALM. 22.28. For the Kingdom is the Lords, he is the governor amongst the
Nations.


FRom the goodness of God, I have showed on the one side his love, his grace,
his mercy; and on the other side, his justice, his anger, his hatred: all of
which, are backed, and assisted by his power; and therefore in the next place,
the next Attribute we are to speak of, is the power of God; and before we come
to that, we are to add a use or two more, to the doctrine that was delivered of
the hatred of God; the use is thus much.

Use. Seeing Gods hatred is that by which he has denied the grace of election,
etc. then every man should labor to search, and know, whether he be under the
hatred of God, or the love of God? the most are (as we have showed) hated, and
this grace of election is given to few: it is therefore good for a man, to
look about him, whether he be not one of the most that are hated: if in the
Gospel where Christ tells his disciples, that one of them was a devil, they
fell all to searching themselves; How much more when twelve for one, is a
devil, ought we to search our selves? when so many are reprobated; it is
reason every man should search to know whether he be beloved, or hated.

But some will say unto me, Sir, it cannot be known, and then how vain is
that search? for who has known the counsels of the Lord?

To this I answer directly, no man knows the counsel of the Lord; and for any
thing I know, that is true, that some stand so much on, that every man is bound
to believe, that he himself is chosen, rather then rejected; yet a man may
know, whether he be in the estate of election or no: how is that? if a man be
not in the estate of grace, but in the estate of infidelity, if he be in the
hardness of his heart, and in the blindness of his mind, and be in a
benumbed conscience, to make no care of sin, and to conclude with wicked men,
if I be elected, I shall be saved, do what I will; but if I be reprobated, I
shall be damned, let me live never so holy; that man is not yet in the estate
of election: when a man hears his sin reproved, and is not bettered by it, but
spurns against the reprover, and the reprofe; this is a fearful sign of
reprobation: I say, let every man examine himself; because if this be the night
that God shall take thee way, (if thou be in infidelity and the more thou
hear, the worse thou art,) what shall become of thee? therefore look to thy
self, lest thou die, as the most do; and so in the estate with the most. I shut
up this; if any man find softness of heart, so that he sorrows, because he
cannot sorrow; if a man find in himself, hatred of sin, love of
righteousness, poverty of spirit, purity of heart, etc. that man may assure
himself, that he is not in the estate of reprobation; and he is to magnify
God, and to work out his own salvation with fear and trembling.

Use 3. A third Use is this, If God has showed this mercy to any, and given
them this favor, they have cause to rejoice herein, not only in respect of
the greatness of it, but because they are but few, to whom it is given: Haman
rejoiced because he was bid to the Queens feast, and none but he: how
exceedingly should men value this mercy; that whereas there are but few to whom
God shows this mercy, they should be of that number: Saint Augustine speaking
of this man that shall be saved, and of those that perish, says, they are by
nature both miserable alike. Therefore if whilst this man abides in his misery,
God be more merciful to thee that art saved; be not high minded, but fear,
and glorify God, and pity others, and be thankful to God, for thy self:
does God actually punish none, but when they are wicked? then let no man, when
he is punished, accuse God, but blame himself; for God punishes no man, but
for his own sins. In condemnation there are two things, the decree, and the
execution: of the decree, is no cause, but the will of God: the execution is
always for sin; he never punishes any but for sin.

Object. But some will say unto me, If God have decreed it, a man cannot choose
but sin: and as he says, Romans 9. what shall a man do?

Answ. The answer is with the Apostle, Romans 9.19. who has resisted his will?
if his will be not resisted, why does he complain? I answer, Gods
foreknowledge is no cause of the evil; for what if he did foresee it, and
foreknow it; that was no cause of it: Augustine, concerning that objection of
Pharaoh, that he could not be converted by the miracles of Moses, because God
did foresee he would not; answers, that God did foresee this; but (says he)
the foreknowledge of God, did not compel him to be wicked, but he was wicked
voluntarily. To shut up this; God does not infuse any evil into men, but
denying them grace, they of their own nature, necessarily fall into sin, and
therefore are justly condemned, and no man can accuse him, as ignorant foolish
men do; no cause shall be laid upon God, but as the Prophet Hosea has it,
None has deceived thee, thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel! but thy
salvation is of me. And so much shall suffice for the Hatred of God.

To explane the power of God; the Grecians to express it, use these two words
(...), and (...), and that the Latins call Domini, or potestatem, and this
potentiam, that is to say Dominion, or right, and power, or might. In the first
place, we will stand upon dominion or right, and therefore we have chosen this
Text: and the Question is this:

Quest. What is the Dominion of God, or of the Divine Essence?

Answ. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he is first and chief absolute,
and most free Lord over all, and over some more specially then others. To open
this: This power is given to God, that it might be known, that whatsoever God
does by his might and strength, he has right to do it: he does it not as
tyrants, but as a just Lord. I say, this is a communicable Attribute, because
there is the shadow of it in man. This power is attributed to God, as 2 Chronicles.
20.26. Oh Lord God of our Fathers! art not thou the God of all power? etc. in
this case we may see that which is applied to Christ, 1 Timothy 16.15. he is
called the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 17.14. The next thing, we
say he is chief; for he receives not his dominion from any other, but of him
others have that power that they have: therefore Solomon says, Pro 8.15. By me
Kings reign. Again, he is free Lord, as the Apostle, Romans 9.15. He will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and in the 18. verse. he will harden whom he
will: and in the 20. verse. who art thou that wilt call him to judgment? yet
further, over some more then others, for 1 Timothy 4.17. as he is the Savior of
all, but especially of those that believe: so he is Lord of all, but especially
of his redeemed, Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen, etc.
if he give them to his Son, he was Lord over them himself; especially over
those that are of the Church. And this is the explication of the first Question.

Quest. Why is such a Dominion attributed to God?

Answ. Because he is creator and possessour of all: first, he is creator, Genesis
1. That the creation of all was from him, the Apostle Peter has it, 1 Pet.
4.17. He is the faithful creator: thereupon the name Ichovah is given to him;
he that has a being of himself, and gives being to the creatures; the creator
has still power over the creatures. As creator, so possessour, Genesis 14.22.
when he made all things, he kept a right unto himself; and though he had given
the earth to the children of men, yet the right of possession he keeps to
himself: therefore dominion may well be attributed to him.

Quest. Why is it said that he is first and chief Lord?

Answ. For that his power is eternal, Christ teaches to acknowledge it in his
prayer, Mat. 6.13. thine is the kingdom, power and glory, for ever and ever:
therefore this power is eternal, it has neither beginning, succession, nor
ending. If any say unto me, How should that be, that this power should be
eternal, seeing the things that were created, were created in time?

Answ. It is true, he created things in time, but his power was before time;
God is nothing, but one essence, and this power was eternal, like himself;
and therefore the first and chief Lord.

Quest. Why say you, that he is the most absolute, and free Lord?

Answ. Because he may use all that he has made at his own pleasure, without
let of any other; for the salvation of his own, and the destruction of the
wicked: for this is to be absolute Lord, when one has a power over all things
to do as he pleases, and has no superior either to call him to account, or
hinder him. God is of such power, he may do what he list, without control, or
hindering. This appears first in man, for whom he made all creatures, he may
do what he will with him; he might make them, as he made them, no man can call
him to account. First, for the body, he may make the body perfect, or
imperfect, crooked or straight, and who shall say, Why made thou me so? for
his estate, he may make some poor, and some rich; so for his soul, he may
elect whom he will, and call whom he will, and justify whom he will; he may
show to some the way to salvation, and others not; and who shall call him to
account for it? and so for gifts, they are distributed according to his will.
Finally, in all other creatures; he sets the Sun in the firmament, and gives
him his course, to run, and he can bid it stand still: and so for fire, and
water; he makes water save his own people, and drown his enemies: he can make
the fire to consume Sodom, and to save his own children.

Quest. Why do you say, that he has power over some more then others?

Answ. Because he has power over some by right of redemption, and spiritual
marriage: he has a power over all by right of creation, but special power
over some by right of redemption, because he has redeemed some by the blood of
his Son, 1 Cor. 6.9. you are not your own, you are bought with a prace: and
the Apostle Peter shows what price, 1 Pet. 1.18. we are not redeemed with
silver and gold, but with the precious blood of the Lamb: and in the
Revelation, it is said, thou have redeemed us from among all kingdoms and
Nations. There is another spiritual right, and that is by spiritual marriage,
Ier. 51.22. we read it although I was a husband to them, or as Iunius reads it,
should I continue to be a husband to them: when therefore he has thus redeemed
them by the blood of his Son, and married them to himself, he has a
special right to some more then to others. Now to come to the Uses of this.

Use 1. The first is this: there is not, nor can be any injustice in God, to
dispose as he will of his creature: will he make his creature fair or
deformed? will he make his creature with one eye? will he make his creature to
want a limb? will he make this man a King, and that man a slave? no injustice
in God; Why? he is the Lord over all: it is not injustice, for he is Lord over
all. I wonder at the wrangling wits of some, calling God to an account, why he
should make one man fair, and another deformed? and why he should choose one
man, and refuse another, and make some rich, and others poor? Why should any
man call God to account for these? seeing he is absolute Lord: we conclude with
that, 2 Pet. 3.17. Seeing you know these things, take heed brethren that you be
not plucked away, with the error of the wicked, by these whispering spirits,
which go up and down. And so I end this Use.

Use 2. This teaches us, that if any man will have all creatures to do him
good, he must labor to have God on his side, who can command all those
creatures: As the Centurian says, Luke 7.18. I command whom I will; God can
much more say to every thing, do this, and it does it: therefore every man
should pray to God, to have him on his side; for instance, Jacob is afraid of
Esau, and had cause to fear, for he was told, that Esau came against him with
400. men; yet he remembered that God is the absolute Lord, Genesis 32.11. he
betakes himself to prayer; Oh deliver me from the hands of my brother: yet in
the next chapter, Esau comes and faunes upon Jacob: God had so changed his
heart: therefore every man after this sort, is to fly unto God by prayer, for
he is absolute Lord. If men will have help, as Jacob had, they must use means
as Jacob did, and seek unto God by prayer. The heart of the King is in the
hand of the Lord; as a boat upon the waters is easily turned with an oar, so
God can turn the heart of Kings at his pleasure: when Iehoram, 2 Kings 3.7.
and Iehosophat were friends, then my horses as thy horses, etc. so we may say,
if a man be at peace with God, then all the creatures of God are for him, Pro.
16.15. If a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his enemies to be at peace
with him: then this teaches every man to be at peace with God, and make him his
friend: men would have every thing to be good for them, nay, they think, the
things that they enjoy are good for them, but they are deceived; it is a great
anger of God, when he suffers men to go on and prosper, and does not show his
anger, when a man walks not in his ways: all shall work for the good of
those that love God, and are called according to his purpose; but all shall
work for the evil of those that go on in sin, and bless themselves in their
flourishing estate.

Obje. But some may say, who has more enemies, then those who are in league
with God? Christ himself says, In the world, you shall have affliction: how
is this true?

Answ. I answer, they want their love, and have their hatred; but it is when
their hatred is better then their love; if their love were better for them,
they should have it; but God sees their love would be evil to them, therefore
they are without it: Saint Augustine explanes that place, in 25. Genesis The elder
shall serve the younger; it may carry this kind of allusion, that wicked men
should serve the godly; persecutors, says he, are servants to the godly; how?
in the same manner as sire is servant to the metals, as the Oven and the mill
are servants to the Corn; now then, the fire is servant to the metals, to
purge out the dross; and the Oven, and the Mill, is servant to the Corn, to
grind, and bake them, etc. So the wicked is servant to the godly, because he
purges, and makes him fitter for God: so that all these things, by Gods power,
are made for their good; If God be absolute, etc. this teaches every man, that
they must labor to serve him; every one, in what condition soever, be they
never so much above others, be they high, or low, for he is Lord, therefore
they ought to fear him, and serve him: Saint Bernard says, power appertains
to him, that is Lord and master; does it so? then especially it belongs to God:
Mal. 1.6. If I be a master, where is my fear? So to every one, if he be Lord
of all, where then is his service? none can say, he is not subject to him; when
the Lord did deliver his law, Exodus 20.2. It was thus, with a preface, I am the
Lord thy God, therefore keep my laws, whatsoever I command thee; this is that
which every man should perform unto him, and say with himself, God is my
Lord, and I his servant, therefore I must endeavor still, to do him service;
every one ought to perform this unto him, and to obey him in all things: Psalm.
119.6. I had respect unto all thy commandments; as the Apostle James says; he
that says to thee, thou shall not commit adultry, says also, thou shall not
steal, etc. Salvian says, no servant when he is commanded, may choose in what
he will obey, if he will acknowledge his master; he that does what he list, he
does not his masters will, but his own: he that will obey God, must not do
what he list, but what God will have him, because he is absolute Lord: and this
is that duty that is required of us; to give him obedience in all his
commandments; and this shall comfort us, that we have obeyed and served him
here, and we shall have glory, and happiness hereafter.

OF THE POWER OF GOD. CHAP. XXII.
JOHN 9.19. If I speak of strength, lo he is strong.


THE power of God, which as you have heard, was two fold; (...) than is
authority, and (...) that is power, and might; of the former we have spoken, of
the latter we are to speak, concerning the power of God.

The next question is:

Quest. What is the power of God, or of the Divine Essence?

Answ. It is a communicable Attribute, whereby he is able to do all things
what he will, and many things that he will not: this must be unfoulded; the
thing that is described is power; the Master of Reason: Phylosophie tells us,
there is a double power; one passive, and another active: passive, by which a
thing is able to suffer some change, in substance, or accident; when we speak
of God, we may not think of this power, because God is Immutable without chang;
Iam. 1. he therefore having perfection, cannot change, nor suffer in substance,
or in accidents, which he has not, and therefore he cannot die, nor deny
himself; and this does establish his power, as after I will show: Active
power, we confess is to be given to God, not that God has accidents in his
Essence, but we speak after man's capacity; and hereof this place is meant: So,
Exodus 34.6. in the description of God, he is said to be strong; So in the
fowrth verse, of the ninth chapter of Job, that we have read for this time, he
is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: the former part of this chapter, is
but a description of the power of God: and Christ has taught us, Mat 6.13.
thine is the power, that is, this active power that we have described, we say,
that it is a communicable Attribute: for the reason we have before spoken of;
The next, that he is able to do all things whatsoever he will; hereupon he is
said to be omnipotent, whatsoever he will, whatsoever he please that he can
do; this power admits another distinction, it is either active, or absolute;
active is that by which he has, and do whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. Look
what it pleases him, that has he done in heaven, also in the earth. And so
also, Ephe. 1.11. He works all things, according to the counsel of his own
will: and by his actual power, he works, sometimes immediately, and sometimes
mediatly; immediately by his word, and beck; and so he does what he will,
without the concurrence of the creature: mediatly, when he uses the ministry of
the creatures, for the working of what he will: and this active power of his,
is as large as his will, and is limited by his will; he can do whatsoever he
will, and what he will not, that he does not: hereupon is that Saint Cyprian
speaks, Gods will is to do, if he will, it is his deed: Tertullian makes a
difference between the will of God, and the power of God, (if there be any)
Gods power is more large then his will. The next, he can do, what he does not;
and what he will not, he has power to do it: this is called absolute power, by
which he can do all things: heerupon is that which Christ has, Mat. 19.26.
Luke 1.37. There is nothing unpossible to the Lord. Ephe. 3.20. Job 4.2. I know
thou constable do all things: This power is not limited by his will, he is able to
do more then he will; and whatsoever he has done, he could do it better,
after a sort if he would, Matthew. 26.33. I could pray unto my father, and he
would give me more then twelve legions of Angels: And yet Christ, would neither
pray for them, nor the father give them. Matthew. 3.9. He can raise up children
of stones, that which he never did, yet thus the Scriptures shows, that his
power, is beyond his will; Ephe. 1.3. Who is able to do exceeding abundantly,
above all that we are able to ask, or think: who would call it into question,
but that God, if he would, could have made many, and also other worlds? nay, as
many men more as there are: Saint Augustine says, that he could, and can do
many things, that he will not do; so that this is manifest, that he cannot
only do all things, that he will, but also what he will not, etc. but yet we
must observe, that some things, sometimes are said to be impossible, and it is
not absurd; neither can any offend in saying, that there are some things,
unpossible for God to do, even by his absolute power: first, there are some
things impossible to be done in themselves, and their own nature; of which
number, are those things, that imply a contradiction; the affirming, and
denying of the same thing, in the same time, in the same respect, is called a
contradiction; for instance, to affirm that Peter, lives and breathes, at one
and the same time, and yet to say, Peter does not live, and breath; to say, it
is light, and to deny it is light; to say the world was created, and not
created, these are contradictions; then we apply this, God cannot make
contradictions true; he cannot make the world, and then make it never to have
been; when he has created it, he may destroy it, but yet it had a being. etc.
Secondly, we say that there are some things impossible, not because they are
impossible to be done, but for God to do them; the evil of sin is
impossible for the creator to do; but for the creature, it is possible; to
cat, to sleep, to walk it is impossible for God to do: to the like purpose,
the Apostle 2 Timothy 2.13. says, God that cannot deny himself. 1 Titus 2. God
cannot lie: man can lie, man can deny himself: Hab. 1.15. Thou art of pure
eyes, etc. that is, thou can not see sin, go unpunished; men may, but God
cannot: these things are possible to the weakness, and to the infirmities of
man, but they are not possible to God: and thus I have explaned this
description, of the power of God.

Quest. Why is power Attributed to God, or the Divine Essence?

Answ. Because he can make, mar, and destroy. Secondly, he can bring light, out
of darkness; good, out of evil. Thirdly, he gives to every creature, what
power soever it has; therefore do we justly attribute power to God: to
explane these; first, he makes, and destroies with his word, which the greatest
power in the world cannot do, for that must use the power of others; but God
if he speak the word, it shall be done, it is out of his wisdom, and
goodness, to man and not out of any necessity to himself, that he uses the
help of the creature in working; for whatsoever he does will, he can do it
with his beck; therefore it must necessarily follow, that power must be
attributed to him. The next reason is, power is attributed to him, because he
can bring light, out of darkness; good, out of evil: he has taught men
indeed that art, that they can make good out of natural evil; but out of
moral evil, they cannot; none have this power, to bring good out of sin,
but He: Saint Angustine says, that what is done besides his will, is not done
against his will, in that he suffered it to be done, and he never suffers
against his will: and that he would never suffer evil to be done, but that out
of his omnipotency, he would make good come out of that evil; so it comes to
pass, that though a thing, be done contrary to the will of God, yet the will
of God is done in it; as Judas in the betraying of his master; the act as he
did it, was contrary to Gods will, yet it is said, that he did nothing, but it
was before determined, by the will, and counsel of God; therefore power is to
be attributed to God. The last reason, there is no power that any creature
has, but they have it from him; great is the power, that is given to
creatures, to Angels, to men, Job 40. When Job spoke to God etc. The Lord says
unto him, has man the strength of these creatures, the Behemoth, and
Leviatham, that scorn the Armies, where had they it? I have given them it,
says God; the power that Angels have, we read that one Angel slew an hundred
fourscore and five thousand of the enemies of God, in one night; then what
power is he of, that gives such power to one of one kind of creatures?
therefore power is justly attributed to God.

Quest. Why do you say that God is absolute, to do whatsover he will?

Answ. The answer is, because his power is infinite: for seeing God is
infinite, his power must be infinite; for indeed the power of God, is nothing
else but the Essence of God, and the Essence of God is infinite: Gods power is
infinite in three respects: infinite in nature, in effect, and intention:
infinite in nature, because it is Gods Essence; for as an infinite power cannot
possibly be in an infinite subject, so an infinite subject cannot possibly be
without infinite power: infinite in effects, the power of every thing is
measured by the effects: for instance, the Sun is more powerful then all the
other stars, because it does produce more effects in the things below, then all
the stars; and if the sun could produce infinite effects, it should be
infinite: now God is infinite in his Essence, because he can do infinite
things; etc. as in creating, he could have created more worlds; indeed his
power is in the operation limited by his will, but he has a greater power in
himself, infinite in effects: Thirdly, infinite in intention, the Schoolmen
tell us, that Gods favor is infinite, extensively, and intensivesy;
extensively, because it can extend it self to infinite effects: intensively,
because it could be more powerful in every work, then actual it is: and thus
God is able to do above all we are able to think.

Quest. Why is it said, that God is able to do whatsoever is absolutely
possible?

Answ. Because some things are absolutely impossible to be done, as things that
are repugnant to the perfect wisdom, and purity, and goodness of Gods nature;
and yet it is not want of power, not to be able to do these: for instance, as
we said before, he cannot do the works of a natural body, he cannot eat, nor
drink, sleep, etc. why? because these things are repugnant to the perfection
of his nature; for these are works of weakness, and of a natural body, and
not works of an infinite Essence; he cannot change, because he is infinite,
and eternal; he cannot die because he is life it self: it is the greatest
power, not to be able to do these things: Saint Augustine says, the power of
God is not diminished, when we say he cannot die, nor deny himself; the reason
is, because if he could do these things, he should be of less power, for these
come from weakness, not from power; and the power of God appears in doing
whatsoever he will, not in doing that he will not, or that cannot be done for
the infirmity thereof; God therefore is able to do, whatsoever is absolutely
possible: we may explane this further: God cannot do this, or that: why?
because it is contrary to his truth, to make a man an Ass at the same time, is
contrary to truth; to make a body circumscribed, and not circumscribed, is to
make that which is faulty, true; these things are impossible for him: if any
man shall say, if God be omnipotent, let him make these things that he has
made, not to be made; this is to say, (says Saint Augustine) let God not be
true: and this is that the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.13. God is faithful; the
father there tells us, that whatsoever is contrary to the nature either of God,
or the creature, that is absolutely impossible to be done by divine power; for
it were weakness to do such things, he cannot lie, etc. because it is contrary
to his nature: Saint Austin says, God cannot do unjust things, because he is
the chiefest justice; so also the sun cannot make darkness, because it is
light it self: Saint Ambrose says, what is impossible for him to do, that
can do all things; but that which he is not willing to do? all things then
that can stand with the nature of God, he can do? whatsoever is repugnant to
his nature, that he cannot do; not only because it is no power to do them,
but the greatest power that can be, is never to be able to do them.

This Doctrine thus conceived, will make a man able to defend the power of God,
against all the idle objections that flesh and blood can make against it: there
is nothing that can be brought, but it is easily answered, by some one part of
this description that I havedelivered: if you look to be grounded in these
things, ye shall be able to inform both your selves and others.

Use 1. Here is great matter of comfort to the godly: what a comfort is this,
that they being once in the estate of grace, such as God has especially
favored, actually calling them and assuring them of his mercy, they cannot
fall away from that estate? say the old Pelagians and new Arminians what they
will; their calling, their grace is of the power of God, and God is able to
keep them. God is able to do whatsoever he will: I say, he can do it, if he
will; and he will do it, for he has called them, and given them grace without
themselves: and promises by Jeremiah 52.40. that he will marry them to
himself, with an everlasting covenant, that he will never turn away from them
to do them good. But how shall this be made good? Here is the assurance; He is
able to do whatsoever he will, and none can ever fail, whom God will uphold.
Indeed, if God will change his will, and loose his power, a man that is called
might fall away; but who shall make him to fail? Bernard says, that God has
two hands, one latitude, and the other fortitude; the one is rich in mercy, the
other ability in power: by the one hand, he gives bountifully, and by the
other, he powerfully defends whatsoever he has given. He that thinks such a
man may fall away, he cuts off, as it were, one of Gods arms: 2 Timothy 1.12. I
know whom I have believed: we have believed on him that is omnipotent: whilst
we have his word and power, we are sure; not that we should presume and grow
desperate, but that we should work out our salvation with fear and trembling;
and labor to see how weak we are in our selves: and yet when we look up to
the power of God, should triumph and rejoice.

Is God thus?

This teaches us to labor to fear this great God: Who will not fear thee, oh
King of Nations? Ier. 1.10. are you stronger then God? who art thou then that
dare provoke God to his face, and please thy self in sin? if he were a
weak God, that thou might make thy party good with him, it were somewhat;
but when he is a spiritual God, of such might and power to avenge himself;
how should this work fear in thee? two evils draw men into sin, and are
occasions of much evil; presuming on Gods mercy, and fearing man's power; these
two says Saint Austin, are a cause of much evil: many perish by presuming,
others by fearing the power of men, because they can kill the body; how shall
men be able to prevent these? in few words, to resist these poisoned darts,
consider of the power of God; when thou considerest he is merciful and
gracious, think withal, that he is powerful and just, that by presuming thou
sin not against him: if he were a God of patience without power, then a man
might do what he list: again, if a man take this God to be omnipotent, then
he will not fear him that can kill the body: when these stand not together,
the power of men and the power of God, then fear the great power of God, which
is able to take thee body and soul, and throw thee to hell. And thus much for
this Attribute.

OF THE TRINITY. CHAP. XXIII.
JOHN 5.7. There are three which bear record in heaven; the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit, and these three are one.


THE knowledge of God, as was propounded, was to be sought in his written Word,
which taught us not only that there is a God, and that there is but one only
God, but also what that God is: the description of whom, out of the Scriptures
you have heard, that he is one Essence, most perfect, distinguished into three
persons, etc. to the perfection of God, belongs all the Attributes, as you have
heard: of all the proper attributes of God, we have spoken at large; there be
other attributes, which the learned call Metaphorical; there are but few of
them, but may well be reduced under these.

We are now to go on with the last thing of our description; that is, that God
is distinguished into three persons: for the ground of handling the Trinity we
have made choice of this Text, that there are three that bear record in
heaven: This mystery is only to be found in the word of God, and so only
known of the Church of God, which has the true word of God, and the Church
has endeavored to speak as plain as it can in such a mystery. I remember a
speech of Saint Augustine, who wrote a book of the Trinity: of this great and
excellent point, we must speak with modesty, and fear, we ought to hear with
great attention; for where unity of the Trinity is to be showed, says the
Father, men err most dangerously, and nothing is enquired with more
difficulty, nor found with more profit: so that we must have great care to
endeavor to understand it: so far as it is revealed, God has revealed it,
and it is sinful, and damnable negligence not to seek after that which is
revealed by God: but let us labor for humility, that we look not into this
mystery further then is needful. The weakness of man can look on the beams
of the Sun, but not on the body of the Sun; so man in this case, if he
look too far, may lose his eyes. The men of Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 4.6. had the
hand of God upon them, when they looked into the Ark of God: will it not
therefore follow, that we must be sober in this, seeing God has really
manifested his anger against them in that manner? Hence comes the blasphemy of
Heretics, because they have looked into this mystery further then is meet;
therefore we will labor with fear to keep our selves within the bounds of
modesty and sobriety: much time may be spent in explaning of words, as of
unity, and trinity, and Essence, etc. but I think that our time shall be more
profitablely spent, if we apply our selves rather to the matter, then to
explane words: once take this for a truth, and as a thing granted, and as a
ground that will hold; That as it was with Adam before the fall, he gave names
to every beast, so in this case, the Church may give names and use expressions
of her own, to declare this great mystery, without just offense to any; and
therefore now to come to the matter. This is a great and principle thing to
bespoken of. That there are three persons, and that they are three distinct
persons: for the opening of this mystery the better, we must first describe
what a person is, and then show why they are such.

Quest. What is a person?

Answ. The answer is, It is a substance subsisting of it self, undivideable,
incommunicable, living, understanding, and willing: of which description, to
open every word briefly, because it is but an introduction to that which
follows: First, it is a substance subsisting; I do not say that it is a
substance barely, but subsisting with such a property, and in such a manner,
that it cannot be another then it is; for instance, Peter and Paul are two
persons, they are both substances subsisting; but Peter is in such a manner
Peter, as he cannot be Paul; and I say, after this manner a person is a
substance subsisting. Secondly, by it self; so it is not an attribute, nor
part of another thing. An accident subsisteth by another thing, for it is not a
substance in it self, but in another; every accident is in some substance, as
white and black. Again, it is not part of another, for that which is part of
another, does not subsist in it self, but in the whole of which it is part;
for instance, the matter whereof a man is made in the womb of a woman, so long
as it is part of the woman, is no person, till it have in it a soul, and then
cease to be a part: and so the humanity of Christ has subsistence in the
second person of the Trinity, and is no person of it self, because it has no
subsistence of it self.

Thirdly, Individual, that is a particular; it is one in number.

Fourthly, Incommunicable, it is not Communicable, as the Essence is: as the
nature of things is communicable to all that are of that kind, the nature of
man is communicable to all men, the nature of Angels is communicable to all
Angels; so the Essence, and nature of the divinity, is communicable to all the
persons, but the persons are not so amongst themselves; therefore we say it is
incommunicable.

Fifthly, we say it is living, for that which is without life cannot be a
person; a Book or a Board cannot be a person, neither is every thing that has
life a person, and therefore I add understanding, and willing; that is so
living, that it understands and wills; thus a Beast, and Trees have life, but
they want understanding and reason, therefore they cannot be a person; so now
you have the description of a person.

Quest. How many such persons be there in the Diety?

Answ. Three; the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: we must prove that
these three be substances, etc. It is manifest, first in general, the Father
is a substance, subsisting by himself, individuable, incommunicable, so is the
Son, and so is the holy Ghost: therefore there are three persons in the
Trinity: Genesis 11.7. Let us go down and confound their language: let us go is
more then one, and God does not speak to the Angels by way of consultation,
let us, but of command, go you; and in the eight verse, it is said, the Lord
confounds their Language: Isai. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy, Lord, etc. three holies
is spoken of three persons, applied to one that is called the Lord, that is one
Essence; that this is meant of three persons, is aparent; it is granted by all,
that the Father is one, and then the Son is another: John 12.34.40. The
Testimony of the Prophet is alleged, and there used as applied to Christ; thus
says the Evangelist, Esai spoke of him when he saw his glory, therefore the
Son is a person, the same is also for the holy Ghost: Act. 28.25.26. Well
says the holy Ghost, etc. that which is spoken of the Father in the old
Testament, the holy Ghost applies to the Son, and to himself in the new,
therefore there are three substances, etc. my text is a manifest proof of
this; there are three which, etc. they are not three names, nor three
properties, nor three several words; they are three, that is, three substances
or persons; three that are several, that we may manifest this a little more,
and that particularly. There was never any Heretic that denied the Father to
be God; concerning the son, these testimonies: Genesis 32.24. Jacob wrestled
with a man, this same man that Jacob wrestled withal, was God; so says, Hosea
12.3. that Jacob wrestled with God: the text in Genesis says it was man; the
other text says it was God; but how appears this, that it was the Son,
because that the Father never appeared in any shape? Again, 1 John 1. In the
beginning was the word, here he is called the word; to this may be aded: John
8.28. Before Abraham was, I am, a person severed from the Father: John 17.5.
Now Ftaher Glorify me with that glory which I had with thee, before the world
was; A person speaking to the Father, severed from the Father: Thirdly the holy
Ghost is a person: John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall send you
another comforter, here is plainly seen, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
he speaks not of comfort, but a comforter: 2 Cor. 13.13. the Apostle prays,
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. therefore not only to God the Father,
but also to God the Son, of whom grace is desired, and to the holy Ghost, is
prayer made; so that by these Scriptures appears there are three persons,
living, understanding, etc.

Quest. What reason is there, that there are such three persons in the Trinity?

Answ. First, they are all God. Secondly, they all created the world. Thirdly,
because that men in baptism, are dedicated unto them all, and make a covenant
with them all, as well as with one: we manifest it thus: first, that they are
all God; to say nothing of the Father, for that is confessed of all: it
appears that the Son is God, Romans 9.5. speaking of the Son, He is God over
all, blessed for ever: so also Heb. 1. O God thy throne indures for ever! of
the holy Ghost, that one shall suffice: Acts 5.3.4.5. The Apostle Peter
chalenges Annanias, and Saphira, that they had not liedunto men, but unto God;
and then he tells them, that they had lied against the holy Ghost; so then, the
holy Ghost also is God.

Secondly, because they all created the world, it appears, Genesis 1.1. In the
beginning, God created the world, that the father did create the world, will be
confessed of all: that the Son created the world, Col. 1.16. the Apostle
speaking of the same, says, By him were all things created, whether things
visible; so John 1.3. By him was created, whatsoever was made, and without him,
was nothing made, that was made: so Heb. 1.10. Thou Lord have laid the
foundations of the world: That the holy Ghost did create, appears, Psalm. 33.6.
By thy word were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of
his mouth: so Genesis 1.2. The spirit moved upon the waters. What is that? as the
Hen does upon her eggs, to hatch them, so the holy Ghost preserves them: etc. in
the 26. verse, he says, Let us make man in our Image; not in the image of
Angels, but in the Image of God: now then, if these did create the world, and
give it a substantial being, they must needs have a substantial being in
themselves.

Thirdly, because in baptism, men are dedicated unto them all, and make a
covenant with them all: they cannot be dedicated to them, that have no being:
Matthew. 28.21. Go, etc. baptising them in the name of the father, of the son,
and boly Ghost: and therefore these three must needs subsist by themselves; and
therefore they must have all understanding, and actions, and are all persons
etc. more particularly we manifest it, of these that be in question, the son
and spirit: if the father be granted of all, to be God, and a person: why is
the Son set apart by some? but is proved to be God, and a distinct person, by
excellent reasons. First, because the Son did descend, and take the nature of
man. Secondly, because he is of the same Essence with the Father. Thirdly,
because he ever was, and shall be the mediator of his Church. To explane these;
a mere name, a property, or quality, as heretics say he is, cannot descend:
John 3.13. Who is he that ascended, but he also that descended? the second
person did descend, the humanity did not; What did he when he was descended? he
took the nature of man, John 1.14. The word was made flesh; that is, it took
flesh to it: for mark, Heb. 2.14.16. Because that the children were partakers
of flesh and blood, therefore he did partake, etc. in the 16. verse, He did not
take the nature of Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham: therefore before
he was made flesh, he was a person, even before he did descend: the reason,
that he is a person distinct from the Father, is because he is, and ever was,
and shall be, Mediator of the Church, and the Angel of the Covenant, even
before he was made man: we prove it; as soon as man sinned, God was offended;
and then man could not be saved, without a Mediator; therefore he was the
mediator; yet so still, that before his incarnation, he was a person. 1 Cor.
10.9. Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them tempted him; where he calls us
to remembrance, that then Christ was in the wilderness with them, etc. so that
he was a mediator before his incarnation: Job 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday and
to day, and the same for ever; therefore mediator, and then there is but one
mediator, and that is the man Christ, he is called the Angel of the Covenant:
Mal. 3. and therefore he must needs be a person: and thus I have in particular
confirmed this, concerning the Son. Now for the holy Ghost, he is also proved
to be a person: first, because that he did often appear in a visible shape.
Secondly, because there are effects attributed to him, which cannot be
attributed to any thing, but to a person. The first of these, thus: Mat. 3. at
the baptising of Christ, he descended upon him, in the shape of a Dove: and in
the second of Acts, He appeared in cloven tongues upon the Apostles: and
therefore is not a property, or quality, as heretics teach. Secondly, because
that to the holy Ghost there are given such effects, such appellations, which
cannot be given to any, but such a substance: for there is given unto him, to
know secret things, that are to come. Secondly, to determine controversies, to
give gifts to men, to pray, to be prayed unto, all actions of a petson, and of
a divine person. First, that he knows secrets: 1 Cor. 2 11. The spirit knows
the secret things of God: therefore he must needs be a person: he did know, and
foresee things, that should be: how appears that? 1 Timothy 3.2. The spirit
speaks evidently etc. that is, the holy Ghost foretells, what shall be in the
latter times. Secondly, he decrees, and determines, Acts 15.28. It seemed good
to the holy Ghost, and to us: therefore it follows that he is a person.
Thirdly, gifts are attributed to him; Gal. 5.22.23. The fruits of the spirit,
are joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, etc. 1 Cor. 12.8. By the same
spirit to one is given, the word of knowledge, and these are disposed of,
according to his will: and therefore no property, nor quality, but a person,
etc. Again, he helps men to pray, and prays for men: Romans 8. We cannot pray
as we ought, but the spirit helps our infirmities, he makes sighs, and
groans. 1 Cor. 13. The fellowship of the holy Ghost be with you; he that makes
prayers for us, helps men to pray, and is prayed unto; he cannot be a name, and
property, etc. as heretics say, but a person. And so I have showed you, the
holy Ghost is a person: I remember one thing now, which I should have given
before; a reason that I gave, why the Son is a person; is, because that he
was of the same nature with the Father, because he is the Son, a son begotten
of his father; not a created son, but a begotten son: Col. 1.15. The first
begotten etc. Pal. 2.7. Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee:
showing an everlasting begetting; as the Son is everlastingly begotten, so
the Father everlastingly begets, so that the Son, must be a person distinct
from the Father, in Divinity, and also in Humanity, he is the Son of God; as
God, he is the Son of God, begotten of his Father, and so of the same nature
with the Father, and not a name, but a person: as man he is the son of God,
God the Son, is joined unto the humanity, and therefore Christ says, I go
to my Father, and your Father; my Father by nature, your Father by adoption:
therefore he must be a several, and distinct person.

Use 1. This teaches us, to confute all Heretics, as the Sabellian, who will
have but one person, in the Divinity; and for diverse respects called Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, having no several being, that the Son has not the same
Essence, with the Father; nor the holy Ghost, the same Essence with them both:
but by this ground you are taught to abhor these, and the like Heresy.

Use 2. It teaches those, that have heard this doctrine, by faith, to conceive
three persons, as they are delivered unto us: this surpasses the reason of men,
and Angels, therefore every man ought to labor to know this by faith; and not
to rely on sense, and reason, but on the word of God: Saint Bernard says, I
shall speak this boldly, that which I do not understand, I believe, that
which I cannot conceive, yet I believe never the less: and so ought every one
of us, to labor to believe, though we cannot tell how it should be: there is
great necessity of believing this truth, no salvation can be, except a man do
hold this Trinity: therefore every man ought to labor to believe, he must
walk by faith, and not by sense: it is unpossible that the shallow conceit of
man should be able to find these mysteries, if God had not revealed them, it
were as possible to empty the Ocean with a spoon, as to find them out: because
they are matters of faith, and not of sense; hold fast that which God has
revealed: no man may go further then God has revealed, so far he must go:
further is dangerous curuosity: Deuteronomy. 22.29. Secret things belong to God, but
things revealed to us, etc. that which is manifest, says Saint Austin, is
ours, because we cannot see that which is hid; therefore labor to conceive, so
far as God has revealed: and yet notwithstanding, if any man ask, how it may
appear, that there are three in one? Saint Austin has a pretty similitude, to
express there are three: the Spring, and River, and a portion taken out of
these, are three distinct, etc. but if any man should ask, what is the Spring?
water: what is the River? water: what is the portion taken out? water: come to
a Well says he, and fill three cups with water: we can say, they are three,
but we cannot say, that they are three several waters; these mysteries being
hard, ought to be studied, and prayed for: Saint Augustine says, give me that
I love, what is that? when I set my self to know thee, I beseech thee, give me
a heart, that I may know thee, even these great mysteries of salvation: thus
every man ought to pray, etc.

CHAP. XXIV.
JOHN 5.7. There are three which bear record in heaven; the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit.


Quest. HOw are these persons distinguished? or how are these three
distinguished?

Answ. The answer is, they are three, not divided, but distinguished, truly,
and really: not essentially, but personally, and that by their order,
properties, and works I say, they are distinguished, not divided; there is a
double distinction of persons, one is called an essential distinction, then
the persons are so distinguished as they are divided, and there is a personal,
but not essential distinction; then one person is not severed from another,
because the Essence is not severed. Three persons of men essentially
distinguished, are three men; but the persons of the Trinity distinguished
only personally, are not three Gods, but one. The former three persons are
three men, because their essences may be divided, although not in the general,
yet in the special; the latter three persons, are not three Gods, because
their essence cannot be divided. Three men have all one nature, all one
humanity, in the general, but they have not all one nature in the special;
for the nature of one is not the nature of another: now in this, the reason is
manifest, because that their essence is finite, and divisible; but here, there
are three persons, and cannot be three Gods, because their essence is infinite
and indivisible: so that in the Trinity, there is, as a Father speaks, alius
and alius, not aliud and aliud; that is, there is but one substance, yet many
persons. As the Father is another person, but not another thing from the Son,
and the holy Ghost another from them both: and this is manifestly proved after
this manner:

Three must needs be a personal distinction, they are three witnesses, (and a
witness cannot change his habit, as Heretics say,) yet so as they are but
one, John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God: the last of these manifests that the Essence is not
distinguished, but the persons; for the Word was God: That there is such a
distinction, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord; there the person
speaking, and the person spoken unto, are distinguished: the Lord said to
Satan, The Lord rebuke thee; where in the first place is the Son, the Lord
rebuke thee, he means the Father, John 5.32. there is another that bears
witness of me: and in John 8.18. I bear witness of my self: John 14.10. I
am with the Father: he does not say, I am the Father, but I am with the Father:
whereupon it must needs be, that there is distinction, between the Father,
and Son, and the holy Ghost is distinguished personally from them both, Mat.
3.15. there is a voice from heaven, and the Spirit descended like a Dove, the
Father speaking, and the Son is he of whom he speaks, the holy Ghost he that
descended, John 14.16.27. I will pray the Father, and he shall send another
comforter in my name: whence it follows, that therefore the Father who sends,
and the Son who prays, and the holy Ghost who is sent, are three persons
really distinguished. This may suffice to show unto us, that there are three
distinct person.

Quest. But how are they distinguished in their orders?

Answ. First, because they are one before and after another, by an unchangeable
order; first, second and third, they are not one before another in dignity, but
in order, and that is unchangeable; for the first cannot be the second, nor the
third; the Father cannot be the second person, nor the Son cannot be the
first, nor the third, etc. the reason of this is, because the Father is of
himself, not of another, having the foundation of personal existance or
substance in himself and of himself; therefore it must needs be, that he must
be the first; that is that which some think Christ intended, John 5.26. The
Father has life in himself; that is, first, and originally.

Secondly, the Son is of another, and therefore he cannot be the first
person, because he has the foundation of a personal subsistence from the
Father; and so he cannot be the third person, because he has it only from the
Father: this is that same in John, As the Father has life in himself, so has
he given to the Son to have life in himself etc. he receives it from the
Father. The holy Ghost is neither of the Father alone, nor of the Son alone,
but he is of them both; therefore he is the third person receiving the
foundation of personal subsistence from the Father and the Son; then this
immutable order does distinguish them. It is true, that the Scripture places
the Son before the Father, and the holy Ghost before the Son, 2 Cor. 1.13.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, etc. 2
These. 2.16. Jesus Christ our Lord: Revel. 1.4, 5 John wishes salvation to the
Churches, first, from the Father, secondly, from the Spirit: this is not to
change their order, but because the matter they speak of requires it; and to
show that there is none greater or lesser then other.

Quest. How are they distinguished by their properties?

Answ. They have every one incommunicable properties, by which they are
distinguished; the Father begetting the Son, the Son being begotten, and
the holy Ghost proceeding; these properties are such as cannot be communicated
to others without them, nor amongst themselves; such as they had before there
was any beginning of the world; this is as some Divines say, nothing but the
proper manner of existing; for they say, the Father is the nature of the Divine
Essence, subsisting by the incommunicable property of begetting: The Son is
the nature of the divine Essence, subsisting by the incommunicable property of
being begotten. The holy Ghost is the nature of the divine Essence, subsisting
by his incommunicable property of proceeding. I say, by these relations they
were distinguished amongst themselves, before there was any creation. The
Father is unbegotten, begetting the Son: The Son is begotten by an
unsearchable generation; the holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son, after a
wonderful manner, which is called procession.

That they are thus distinguished, is gathered out of the Scriptures, thus;
because the Scriptures never tell us of any original, or beginning that the
Father had, therefore is unbegotten. Again, the Scriptures tell us that there
was one begotten, and that was the Son, Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee, John 1.14. the only begotten Son, Romans 8.32. he is
called his own Son: then it is manifest, that there is a second which is
begotten. Lastly, the Scriptures tell us of one that proceeded from them both;
it is manifest, John 15.26. The comforter that I shall send, is the holy Ghost;
and thereupon he is called the Spirit of the Father, Mat. 10. and the Spirit of
the Son, whom the Father will send in your hearts; why? because he proceeds
from them both: observe a little more, these are the particulars of the
persons, the Father begets, (I do not say, the Essence begets) the Son is
begotten, (I do not say, the Essence is begotten,) this is understood of the
person, not of the Essence; why? because they must have the Essence of
themselves, or else they cannot be God. These personal actions, which they
exercise one to another, are called internal works; and hereupon that ground
is, that the Schools hold, that their internal works are divided, that they
cannot be communicated; the Father in begetting, the Son in being begotten,
and the holy Ghost proceeding.

Quest. How are they distinguished by their works?

Answ. Their works are creation, redemption, sanctification, and the like,
which in the substance are common to them all three, but in manner of working
are proper to some one.

To explane this, There is a rule, that the works of the Trinity without them,
are undivided; these three persons are together, and work together: for there
is but one work, they work all together. The Scripture speaks plainly, Genesis
1.26. Let us make man: where we see, there is a common work; the Father faith
not to the Son, I will make man, or make you the man, etc. but, let us make,
etc. This is that which Christ speaks, John 5.25. The Father works hitherto,
and I work: and so John 16.15. All that the Father has is mine; whatsoever it
is that is the Fathers, is mine; the difference is in the order, and manner of
working: this is manifest, 1 Cor. 15. Thanks be unto God that has given us
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: where God gives the victory, but by
Christ. The Fathers use much one testimony of Paul, to this purpose, Romans
11.36. Of him, and through him, and for him, are all things, to him be glory
for ever, Amen. The Apostle speaks there of works, which we call works a
dextra; he names three manners of working, and yet he says, there is but one
God, and therefore to him be glory. Now on the other side, as the Essence may
not be divided, so the persons are not to be confounded; for he says, of him,
and through him and for him, are all things: the Father works all things of
himself, by the Son; and the Son works from the Father, by the holy
Ghost: this is the manner of working. And before I come to the Reason, let me
add one thing more; a distinction which Martin Luther had: the works of the
Trinity are to be considered absolutely as they are God, so they are common to
them all; and relatively, that is to say, that every one works according to
his personal property, and so one creates, and another redeemes, and another
sanctifies. The reason is this, for the Father, he is of himself, and
therefore works of himself; the Son is not of himself, as a person, but from
the Father; and therefore he works from the Father, and the holy Ghost from
them both, and is not of himself as a person, and therefore works not of
himself, but from them both: thus the ground of their working, is the manner
of their subsisting; therefore we give the Father the beginning of the work,
and the Son the forwarding and framing, and the holy Ghost, the effecting, etc.
So that we see, by this that I have opened; first, what is communicated to them
all, wherein they differ, and how they differ (viz.) by order, properties, and
manner of working.

Use 1. This takes away an imputation, that Heretics have laid upon the
Church, that it has brought in vain appellations, in expressing this misstry;
and they tell us that it is forbiden that a woman should speak in the Church;
the meaning of which place they say is, that Philosophy which is but a
handmaid, should not speak in the Church: Arius, Sabelliens, the great grand
heretics denied the diety of the Son, and the holy Ghost; they had this
cavell for themseves, we speak no other way, then God speaks, we are cast out
of the Church, and excommunicated, because we will not admit these profane
voices, of Trinity and Unity; but the Church is not worthy of blame, neither is
there any excuse for them; for the Church does not take up these names out of
any affectation of novelty, but as Saint Austin speaks, merely out of a
necessity of speech; namely, because, that otherwise, they could not meet with,
nor distinguish heretics, that they might be better known when Heretics
began to oppose this doctrine; they would say there was one God, and when they
saw there was three persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; they would say
these three were one God, but how? as it is said, Acts 2. the Saints had all
one heart, therefore the Church takes these terms, one in Essence, to discover
these Heretics; so they will say, that there was a Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, but that the Father was sometimes the Son, and sometimes the holy
Ghost: so that he was the Father in one respect, and the Son in another:
hereupon the Church, upon warrant of the Scriptures, found out these words,
that whereas Heretics would speak with the Church, and would not conceive and
mean with the Church, they might be severed and known to be Heretics.

Use 2. Secondly, here is direction, for every man that will truly and
savingly believe, in one, and three; in one Essence, and three distinct
persons; not dividing the Essence, nor confounding the persons: he that
believes in a God, and not in three persons, has a fiction of his own brain,
which he believes in; he that believes, that there are not three persons
distinguished, and one Essence, cannot be saved; for a man cannot be saved, but
by true faith: but he that believes not in the trinity, as he has revealed
himself, has not true faith; every man therefore must labor after this
manner to believe: whereupon brethren, we infer the necessity of the
knowledge of this mystery; for a man cannot believe, unless he know it,
therefore every one ought to bend his ears, and his head to know it: if God
had revealed himself in general, it had bin enough to know him so; but God
has revealed himself in particular, how he is one, and how he is three:
therefore the Church knowing that this is necessary, has appointed us a time
to consider of the premises: dare any man say, that this knowledge of God is not
necessary? if this knowledge of God had not bin necessary, he would never have
taught it; therefore ignorance of this is sin, especially when a man is
negligent, upon this supposition, that it is enough to know that there is a
God, and no more; therefore every man ought to know this: it is necessary that
every man that would be saved must believe, and no believing without a distinct
understanding of the Trinity; he shall be in danger of hell fire that does not
labor to know and understand it, when he has the means; and yet there are,
that will not know this distinction, but are content to have an implicit faith;
it is the Doctrine of the Church, that a man that believes not this
distinction, cannot be saved, 1 John 1.23. he that denies the Son, has not
the Father.

Use 3. This instructs every man to worship God aright: how is that?
undoubtedly, as he has revealed himself in unity and trinity, not denying the
Essence, nor confounding the persons: he that worships God, and not three
persons, worships an idol; and he that worships three persons, and not one
God, worships three idols: therefore to avoid all idolatry, a man must be able
to distinguish them; how? as a child only by three names; no, it is not
enough to know no heresy, but men must know to worship him him aright;
therefore every man must labor to conceive of him aright, as he has revealed
himself, and here is the image that every man isalowed unto him, unity and
trinity, etc. it is not enough for a man not to conceive erroneously, but he
must conceive truly. The worship of God is necessary; for whom? for God:
nothing less; it is nothing to God, that thou worship him; it is necessary for
man, and it is necessary to worship aright, then necessary as he has revealed,
and this they cannot do unless they know him. Turks, they cannot be saved,
because God has not revealed himself, one in three persons to them: the
Jews, they cannot be saved, because God has not revealed one in three persons
to them: though God did in the old Testament shadow this out, yet he did it so
darkly, that they understood it not. Then every one that is in the Church may
be saved? no: they that live in the Church, and do not endeavor to understand
as God has delivered to the Church, cannot be saved, Romans 10.13. Then every
one that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved? no: there is nothing
more used in the Scriptures, then to put down invocation, for all the worship
of God, and so it is taken there: Then every one that worships God aright,
shall be saved; yea, but how can a man invocate God, if he know not the
advocate and mediator Jesus Christ? so, how shall a man perform any worship to
God, but a fiction of his own brain, except he know this mystery? therefore,
fearful must needs be the condition of such, as are ignorant of this sacred
mystery: This should be a provocation to every man, to labor to know these
mysteries; you must go and meditate about these things, and beat your heads
about them: so that walking in the worship of God here, he will honor you,
etc.

OF GOD THE FATHER. CHAP. XXV.
HEB. 1.6. Thou art my Son, this day, etc.
IN the next place it follows, that we speak of every one of the persons in
their order: and the first is the Father, this text that I have read, gives
ground to speak of him, concerning whom, the first Question principally to be
handled is this; namely:

Quest, What is the Father?

Answ. He is the first person in order, not in time; begetting the Son,
creating the world: the thing that is described, is the Father: This word
(Father) is applied to God in Scriptures two ways. First, Essentially.
Secondly, Personally. Essentially, in the first place; that is, when divine
things, are opposed to humane; eternal, to earthly; God to the creature: and
Father in this sense, is not applied to the first person in Trinity, but to the
whole Essence: and this is that which Christ taught us, Matthew. 6. Our Father
which art in heaven: Father, there belongs to all. Mal. 2.10. We have all one
Father; and in this respect the Son is called Father; Isai. 9.6. Father of
eternity: Heb. 2.13. Here I am, and the children that thou have given me:
speaking of Christ, and those that were begotten by his word: and in this
respect, the holy Ghost may have the name of Father, given to him: because it
is he that begets us again, in which respect it is, that God is called Father,
by creation, and Adoption.

Secondly, the Father is to be taken personally, and that is with reference to
the Son, and not to the creature: and so in this description, Father is to be
applied to the fitst person; as appears by that which I have read. The next
thing, I say, he is a person; the Essence is common to them all: but the
distinction is three fold: by his order, and by his properties, and by his
works. First, order, I say, the Father is first in order, not in time; because
the Son is coeternall with him, he not before him: John 1.1. In the beginning
ginning, (when other things began) there was the word with God. Prove. 8.22. He
possessed me, in the beginning of his ways: a place so manifest of the Son
of God, as Arrius, the grand enemy could not deny it; where he says, I was
with him before the world was: and thus the Prophet Micha 5.2. has it,
speaking of Christ, His goings forth have been of old, from everlasting: there
is mention, of two goings forth: one in time, and that is, as he was man, his
incarnation. Secondly, another from everlasting; and this was his begetting, of
God from everlasting and so the Father was not before him, in time: Heb. 9.14.
He is called the eternal spirit: a place commonly understood, of the divine
nature of Christ: so that by all this it appears, he was before him, in order;
not in time. The next thing is his property; begetting his Son, included in
the name Father; the Father is unbegotten, and begets the Son; the Son is
begotten, because he has a beginning of his person, from the Father: as Saint
Basil observes; the Father has his foundation within himself; we may believe
the reason, because that never any Heretic denied it; now he begat his Son, I
showed you it before: Psalm. 2.2. Thou art may Son this day etc. and so here,
unto which of the Angels, did he say, thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? and therefore he is called the only begotten Son: John 1.14. We
saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God: therefore he is
called the first begotten: Col. 1.15. If any ask me,

Quest. How begat he him?

Ans. I answer, I know not; no tongue can express, no heart can imagine, God
has not revealed it: that he did beget his Son, that is revealed; but the
manner how, he has not revealed: yet this we are sure of; in the negative, we
may understand how he was not begotten; every thing that is applied to God,
being purged, and freed from corruption, and made perfect, is applied to him;
therefore in general, with men, there is imperfection, that the Father should
be before the son in time, this is imperfect; that the Father should beget, a
son out of himself, is imperfect; this is imperfect, for a father to beget a
son by motion, and corruption, this is imperfect: but it is perfection, to
beget him without motion: this is imperfection, for a father to beget a son
with part of his Essence, but this is perfection to beget him without
difference in Essence: here the Father, and the Son, are both at one time; the
Father begets him, in himself, not of himself: thus much for the second
distinction of the roperty.

The third distinction from the work, or manner of working, creating the
world; of this we need no further proof: it is enough that we believe in God,
the Father almighty, etc. where Father is distinguished by his power: that as
his Son has the work of redemption; the holy Ghost of sanctification; so
the Father of creation: then I say, it is manifest, that the Father created the
world, begetting his Son in himself, of the same substance with himself,
creating the world out of himself, of an unlike substance to himself, being
every way diverse etc. This shall suffice for the opening of this distinction.

Quest. Why is he first in order, and not in time?

Answ. Because he is the eternal Father; therefore he must have an eternal
son, and spirit, an eternal wisdom, and power.

First he is an eternal Father; therefore he must have an eternal Son: for
Father, and Son, are relatives, one gives the being, to the other: Husband,
and wife, are relatives: Kings, and Subjects, are relatives: Kings give a being
to the subjects; so in this, Father, and Son are relatives: no Father,
without a Son, and no Son without a Father; and no sooner a father, then a
son: if a man be a father, he he must be elder then his son; but God cannot
be a Father elder then his Son: therefore as Father, and Son, they are of the
same age; as it were the same day, the same hour, as I may so speak, they are
coeternall, and therefore both of the same time: Saint Basil says, how shall
not he be from the beginning, that had nothing before him, but himself, from
whom he had his beginning? In the next place, because he is an eternal God,
and has an eternal wisdom: no God without his wisdom; deny wisdom, and
deny the Son: so Prove. 8. He is called the wisdom of his Father. 23. verse,
he says, I was before his works, before all creatures whatsoever: he and his
wisdom, were never separated; therefore it follows, that he must needs be an
eternal Son: hereupon is it, that which Solomon calls the wisdom of God:
Saint John calls the word of God, in the beginning was the word: therefore he
must be an eternal person.

Thirdly, the eternal God, must have eternal power, for God without power is
nothing: so Luke 1.35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of
the most high, shall overshadow thee: where God is not without his power; then
we conclude, that seeing he is an eternal Father, he must have an eternal
Son, and spirit: and the eternal God, must have eternal wisdom, and power,
therefore he is put first in order.

Quest. How is he distinguished by begetting?

Answ. By communicating his whole Essence from all eternity: the Son is
begotten; how? by receiving his whole Essence from his Father: The Father
begetting the Son, by communicating his Essence; but how gives he to him, his
whole Essence? not by alienation, but by communication: we thus open it; he
gave him his whole Essence, because the whole Essence of God, is so simple,
that it cannot be divided; if it were divided, it were the overthrowing of the
whole Essence; therefore when he communicates, he communicates not a part, but
the whole; and when he communicates, he does it not by alienation, for then it
should cease in him that gave it; but it does not cease so, but by
communication it is so given; that abides his still, though he communicates it
to the Son; one testimony for many, Collo. 2.9. In him dwells the Godhead
bodily. For in this Generation, there is no division, nor transmutation, and
yet there is a true multiplication of persons, but not of the Essence; that
never divides.

Qu. The third thing, how is he distinguished by the work of creation?

Answ. Not by working, but by the manner of working; because the Father creates
by the Son, and by the holy Ghost: the work is common to all, for all create,
but the manner is different: you heard the reason before; these cannot be
divided; but the Father begins the work, and executes it by them, and the
reason is because the Father, has his beginning of his person himself; and
the Son, and the holy Ghost, receive it from the Father; therefore it is the
Father creates by them; and is distinguished from them, not in the matter
wrought, but in the manner of working: and thus I have opened this Doctrine.

Use 1. This teaches us, how we ought to believe concerning the Father: namely,
that he is thus distinguished in order not in time: if any man should have a
thought, and nourish it, that the Father should be before the Son, or spirit,
in time, he does not only overthrow the Trinity, as much as in him is, but the
Deity: S. Ambrose says, if the Father had beginning before the Son, then he
was God first, and Father afterward, that cannot be; God turn this thought
from our hearts, says he: tell me then, how do thou believe, that he is the
immutable God? if he be so, (how can this stand?) there is a mutation, by this
accession of Father, there is a change: how is he without change? if a God
first, then a Father: God turn such conceits from us; it may well be with men,
he is a man now, and father some years after, for he is subject to change; but
bring the nature of God to a change, and thou overthrowest the nature of God;
therefore we must beware of this: thus we are to believe, that the eternal
Father, is with the Son; and the eternal Son, with the Father: he that will
worship God aright, let him join these two together, that the Diety has
joined together; beware you separate none of these. It is true, we are to hold
it, after a divine manner; not to judge of it, by a humane generation; as that
the Father, must be elder then the Son, we are not to judge after this
manner, for this is the ground of errors: again, if the Father beget his
Son, then he is divided; we hold no such thing, he did not beget him in time,
and if they will follow humane generations, then the Father must have another
sex, to beget him upon; and if you will have it, as in humane generations,
then the mother must have a womb to carry the Son, nine or ten months: if
these be absurdities; why would you tie us to this, contrary to the word? this
we are to hold, and to look to that which is revealed; and to go no further:
we conclude this use, with a speech of Saint Ambrose: it is impossible says
the father, for me to know, the secrets of this generation; he says well, for
we may not search into these secret, and high mysteries; it is such a thing,
that when I think of it, my mind fails me, I know not how to utter it: Phil.
4. the Apostle says, The peace of God which passes all understanding. How
much more this, the Father begetting the Son? clap thine hand upon thy mouth,
and admire at these things! thou know he did it, but thou must not search
how it was, he did it; let us rest with that which God has revealed that we
may not fall into error.

Use 2. Secondly, this commends the great love of God to man; that when he had
a Son, a natural Son, begotten in, and of himself, yet he would adopt
other sons, to be heirs of the same glory with this Son; this is great
love. It is the love in men, that if a man be childelesse, and have not a son,
he adopts a stranger; this is accounted great love, that he will adopt another
son, and make him his own; but when a man has a son, then to adopt, and
then to take an others, it will be accounted exceeding love: many men, when
they have a natural son, desire to have no more; some men have many sons,
and desires to make the eldest great, the eldest shall have all, and the younger
nothing (God made another law, but we forget nature and law too, this by the
way:) but if parents love be such, Gods is much more; that when he had a
natural Son, he adopted many to be heirs with him, Romans 8.17. Jacob set
forth this love to Joseph, that when he had twelve sons, yet notwithstanding
he loved Ephraim and Manasses, the sons of Joseph; he would adopt them, that
they should be the heirs of the land of promise; and yet there was some
reason; but see, here is greater love in God, when he had but one Son, he was
content to adopt enemies to make them sons, that they might be heirs
together with him, of the same heavenly inheritance.

Object, Some may say, you talk so much of Gods love to others, that you
lesson his love to Christ; surely the world will say, he loves him not, that he
makes other heirs with him.

Ans. I answer, the great Emperors of the world cannot make a division of
their Empires, but they must lessen them; but such is the riches of God, that
this Son shall not have the less for divisions: for as Saint Augustine
speaks of the Sun; the Sun (says he) God has so created, that it may
enlighten many men, and so every man has abundance of the light of it, and yet
the Sun has nothing the less it self: so God can communicate his
celestial glory, and heavenly kingdom to all his sons; he can make them all
kings, and sons, and heirs, and fellow heirs with Christ; so that man shall
have enough, and he not the less, for there is no dividing.

Use 3. Again, this teaches us, Has he begotten the Son? has he an only
begotten Son? we remember (says Saint Ambrose) the first begotten, because
there was none before him; and the only begotten, because there was none after
him; he was his own and only Son, What Use make you of this? This: Consider
of the Justice of God, and the great strictness of justice, that he had but
one Son, and he voluntarily took our nature upon him, and also took our
sins, to stand in our rooms, to answer for our sins; yea, that this
natural Son, this only Son entreated his Father, that if it were possible
this cup might pass from him: yet notwithstanding, he would have him drink of
it for the satisfying for our sins: this would be counted great severity with
an earthly King, if his son should transgress, to cut him off; but when he
had not committed any thing, to cut him off for others offenses, it would be
counted great injustice. If so be it was an evidence of strictness of justice,
which stories speak of heathen men, that an Emperor, when his son had
offended the Law, and both his eyes were to be put out, put out one of his own
eyes, and one of his sons, to satisfy the law: 1 Samuel 14.29. Or that of
Saul, he that has done this, shall dye, though it be Jonathan my son: how
then does this argue a great strictness, and love of justice, seeing there is
one, that for our sins, though he was Gods natural Son, was given to death
of his Father? What of this? Mark here the love, and justice of God, that he
has showed toward men; who, that he might spare them, would have his justice
satisfied by his own Son; and though he entreated him, yet he would not
hear him: know hence, and see the severity of God to sinners, and the mercy of
God to us: therefore let us make more conscience of sin; let us see the
fearful condition of those that reap no benefit of Christ's satisfaction.

This serves to strike terror and fear into the hearts of Gods own children;
for if they sin, they are subject to the hand of God, till they repent; for
if we be wanton and careless, he will not spare his own adopted sons, that
spared not his natural Son; therefore labor to know him, and serve him, and
we shall have eternal life hereafter.

OF GOD THE SON. CHAP. XXVI.
HEB. 1.5. Thou art my Son.
THE first person is the Father, of whom we have spoken: the second person is
the Son, of whom we are now to speak: the ground of both, this text of
Scripture will manifest.

Quest. What is the Son?

Ans. He is the second person in the Deity, begotten of the Father, redeeming
the World. To open this description: the Scriptures speak of the sons of
God, four ways:

First, by Creation; and so are principally men and Angels: whereupon, in the
first of Job, the Angels are said to be the sons of God: and so Mal. 2.10.
men are said to be the sons of God; we have all one Father: so Luke 2.3. Adam
is said to be the son of God, and successively all mankind.

Secondly, by Regeneration; and so all the elect being begotten anew, are
sons, Romans 8.15, 16. they that have the spirit of God, are his sons, Gal.
3.16. by faith we are all the sons of God, Gal. 4.6. because we are sons,
etc. many such testimonies there are, but they are needless to our purpose.

Thirdly, by Generation, and so the second person in the deity, is begotten of
his Father.

Fourthly, by Union, and so only the humanity of Christ, by that union it has
with, and subsistence in the second person, is the Son of God, though
naturally the son of Mary. As a woman is said to be such a man's child, when
she has married his son; and as the soul is not naturally begotten, but
joined to the body, yet we say the soul and body are but one; so the humane
nature of Christ is the Son of God, by way of personal union: now that Son
which we speak of, is not by creating, nor recreating, nor uniting, but by
generation, of whom we say he is a person, and the second person in order, not
in time, as we have showed of the Father; this we add as a difference, that he
is a second person of the deity: my reason is, because I would by this prove
that he is God; for the Father, none do make question, but for the Son they
do, therefore we will manifestly prove, that he is the second person in the
deity, cosubstantiall with the Father; we manifest this, John 5.7. There are
three that bear witness, of what? namely, that Christ was the Son of God,
and the Son of Mary: it shall suffice us therefore; first, his Father
witnesses at his Baptism, and transfiguration; at his Baptism, Mat. 3.7.
This is my beloved Son, etc. at his transfiguration, Mat. 17.5. So then it is
manifest by the testimony of the Father, that he is the Son of God by
generation. Secondly, the Word witnesses it, that he is the Son himself,
John 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son: not to
stand upon this (his only begotten Son,) then he must be a Son by
generation: but it is added, whosoever believes in him shall be saved: never
was there any other Son of God, that could deliver any, no, not from
temporal destruction, much less from eternal, by believing only in him: but
this Son of God does so; for what says the Prophet, though these three,
Noah, Daniel and Job were there, they should save neither son nor daughter,
but their own souls; therefore it follows, that this Son must needs be
God: add to this, John 11.17. The Father works hitherto, and I work: it is
as much to say, I am God: how gather you that? it was a phrase so apparent
among the Jews, that he would make himself God (by calling himself the Son of
God,) that they challenged him with blasphemy, because he said he was the Son
of God Ioh. 10.30. I and the Father am one: there is the unity of the Essence,
and distinction of persons: one, how? one in will, and power, and Essence; and
therefore it was, that they went about to kill him; he asked them, why will you
kill me? they answered him, because thou being a man, make thy self God:
again, John 11.4. concerning the death of Lazarus, this was done to the
glorifying of God, and that the Son might be glorified; mark what he says,
that the sickness of Lazarus, and his death, was for the glory of God: how?
for the glorifying of God? for the glorifying of the Son of God; intimating
unto us, that the Son of God, and God are all one; so that all these serve
for the testimony of the Son. Thirdly, the testimony of the holy Ghost, who
gave no such testimonies as these, but gave testimony by the Prophets and
Apostles, for he spoke by them, as Isaiah 9.6. he shall be called the mighty
God; wherein he showed that he was God: it is not said, he shall be made the
mighty God: not by office, (so men are:) And though the name god, is given to
men, yet the omnipotency of God, Jehovah, is given to none but God; and in the
same place he is called the Father of eternity, therefore he must needs be God,
Genesis 22.1. God appears to Abraham, and that God was Christ; that appears in
the second verse, because he commands him to do that which was contrary to the
Law, namely, take thy Son, etc. who could command this but God, and not
sin? this was not the Father, because that in the 11. verse, he is called the
Angel of the Lord, but never was the Father called the angel of any;
therefore it must needs be the Son: but was it not a created Angel? no: that
appears, because in the 22. verse, he says, because thou have not spared thy
son for my sake, etc. and therefore it must be the Son of God, and also by
reason of that same which is added, it cannot be any other but the Son,
because he bids him stay his hand: and finally, in the 16. verse, he swears by
himself, that he shall be rewarded, which no created angel could do, and
therefore it must needs be the Son, Phil. 2.6. he thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; that is, in such estate, that God was: so Col. 2.9. the
godhead dwelt bodily in him; that is, the whole deity; and not as some would
distinguish his divinity, for then it might have bin some qualities, but he
says the deity.

The next thing is, his property; he is the begotten Son, it must needs be
the Sons property, and this is considered, Psalm. 2.17. Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: (This place applied by the Apostle to the
resurrection of Christ is not weakened, because by the resurrection his eternal
generation was declared, Romans 1.4. declared to be the Son of God, by the
resurrection from the dead:) so you heard John 1.14.33.16. Col. 3.15. he is
called the begotten Son of his Father. The Son is unbegotten in respect of
his Essence, yet begotten in respect of his person, because he had his
personal existence from his Father; begotten (here is to be understood with
purging from all impurity) before all time, not in time; not out of the Father,
but in the Essence of the Father: he is not begotten by any motion and
corruption; he has not part of the Essence, but the whole Essence, therefore
all imperfection being taken away, he may be said to be begotten.

Thirdly, by the work of Redemption; redeeming the elect from their bondage
wherein they were, from sin and satan, Romans 4.9. we are said to be justified
by the blood of Christ, Romans 8 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? it is Christ that justifies, etc. Ephesians. 1.7. We have redemption
through his blood, from satan, Luke 11.21, 22. the strong man is cast out, 1
John 3.8. he came to dissolve the works of the devil, and from death, he was
made a curse for us; and therefore the Apostle so triumphs, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6. Oh
death! where is thy sting? thanks be unto God, who has given us the victory
through Christ Jesus: and so this description is made plain to you.

Quest. Why do you say, that he is the second person in the Deity, and so God?

Answ. Because he is equal to God. Secondly, because the name Jehovah, is
given unto him. Thirdly, because Essential Attributes, are attributed to him.
Fourthly, proper works, and so divine works are given to him: to explane
these.

First, we say, he is equal to God. John 16.15. All that the Father has is
mine. It is manifest, that there is equality; an adopted son cannot say, that
all, that my father has is mine, he cannot challenge it; but Christ chalengeth
this to himself: therefore, necessarily it must be, that he is God: Philip.
2.6. He that was in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God: by form is meant Essential form, whereby he was equal to God, not an
accidentually form, as men are said to be partakers of the divine nature; but
if he have a form that was equal to God, it must be an Essential form; it
appears, the Apostle says, that he took upon him the form of a servant: what
was that? not the shape of man, but the Essential form of a servant: so also
he was in the Essential form of God, and therefore equal to God. Col. 2.9.
The Godhead dwelt in him bodily. If the son of man, be man, because he has all
the parts of man, because he has the same kind by generation: Christ then
having the same spiritual nature, must necessarily, be equal with God. The
second thing, the name Jehovah, is given unto him: a title as we heard before,
which is given to none but the true God: so the Psalmist, Psalm. 83.18. Thou
whose name alone is Jehovah. That this is given to Christ appears, Ier. 22.5.6.
speaking of raising up a branch of David, he says in the 6. verse, They shall
call him Jehovah our righteousness: and in 33. Chap. 15.16. verses, He shall
be called the Lord our righteousness. A multitude of other places might be
noted: in the old Testament, he is called Jehovah; in the new Testament it is
said, that they tempted Christ, in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.1.6. there it is
said, that they tempted the Lord; whence it follows, that the name Jehovah,
was given to Christ. Thirdly, Essential Attributes are given to him, as in
that place before, all that the Father has is mine, eternity, omnipotency,
etc. John 1.1.2. In the beginning was the word etc. omnipresency, being in
every place; Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there I am in the midst of them. Matthew. 28.20. I will be with you till the end
of the world. John 3.13. Who is he that ascended, but he that descended?
Intimating, that while he was upon the earth, he was in heaven, etc.
omnisciency, knowing all things: Matthew. 12.15. He knows the thoughts of men's
hearts John 21.17. Lord thou know that I love thee: for thou know all
things; omnipotency, so it appears, John 5 19. All that the Father does, the
same does the Son; and all that the Son does, the same does the Father.
Philip. 3.21. Being strengthened by his mighty power, by which he is able to do
all things: so that these things, being given to him, he must be God. Lastly,
proper works of God, are given to him, as creation, that is given to him; John
1.3. He created all things that were made. Heb. 1.10. The holy Ghost said, that
he created, and so the working of miracles, as to raise up the dead, these were
the works of God. Lastly, divine worship is given to him, John 5.23. That all
men might honor the Son, as they honor the Father; That which is given to
the Father, may be given to the Son; which could not be except he were God:
etc. John 4.14. You believe in the Father, believe also in me. Acts 7.50. Lord
Jesus receive my soul. So the Apostle, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
with you. Philip, 2. At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: that is, all
should worship him; therefore it necessarily follows, that he is God: etc. and
so you have this explaned.

Quest. Why is he said, to be begotten of the Father?

Answ. Because he received the whole Essence by communication, not by
alienation; in which there is no motion: Saint Ambrose says, the Son is
begotten without passion, without action; so that he communicates the whole
Essence to him. Col. 2.9. In him dwells all the Godhead bodily: Essentially, as
a candle receives light without corruption; as the sun that communicates his
beams, and has no dimunition.

Quest. But why say you, that he redeemes the elect?

Answ. Because he only took the nature of man; gave himself as a price to set
them free, from death, and hell, and reconciled them to God: from the work of
redemption, we exclude not the Father; yet notwithstanding there is a
difference, the Father sends his Son, the Son gave himself, the holy Ghost
applies it, but the manner of redemption is far different; what is that? he
took the nature of man, and so the word was made flesh; and satisfied the
justice of God; and thus he only paid the price: Mat. 20.28. He gave himself
a ransom. Acts 20.28. He purchased them with his blood. Titus 2.14. He gave
himself for them, that they might be a peculiar people unto himself: and
therefore he must be a person distinguished: and thus we have run thorough
this description.

Use 1. The use is, First, for the matter of confutation: this must inform us,
how we ought to believe to salvation, concerning the Son; that we may avoid
their heresies, which say, that he is not God by nature, but by office: neither
may we think, that because it is said he is begotten, there was a time wherein
he was not, for he was from eternity: Saint Basil speaking to them of his time,
take heed of this, says he, when we say that he was begotten: we do not say,
that he was after the Father; but show whence he had his person, nor make him
inferior in time; but show that he had his person from the Father: take heed
therefore of this; though we cannot see this, yet we are to believe it by
faith: This generation of Christ, is to be adored by silence, and faith; and
not to be enquired into; he was begotten, when there was neither time, nor
spectator; neither was there any interpreter to tell us: Why then should the
mind of man imagine, and speak of this any more? the Apostle Paul speaking of
his generation as man, 1 Timothy 3.16. says, Great is the mystery of godliness:
God manifested in the flesh, this was a mystery; if this was so great a
mystery, what is the divine generation? some shadow it after this manner: it is
no unreasonable thing, that the begetter, and the begotten, should be both at
one, and the same time: the mind begets a reason, the mind is the begetter,
and the reason begotten, are both at one and the same time: Saint Austin says,
it is no absurd thing, to say that the begetter, and the begotten, may be
together: as there are in a candle lighted, two things; the light, and the
fire; if the question be, what is the cause of the light? the answer must be
fire: but if we should ask, whether the light, or heat, were first? we could
answer, they are both together: if it may be thus in the creature, how much
more in the creator?

Use 2. This in the next place, commends unto us, the love of Christ; though he
was God, and equal to God the Father; though he was the eternal, and infinite
God; yet he became our redeemer: the work does not so much commend his love,
as the manner of the working; if comparisons may be here modestly admitted, it
seems, there is a greater love, that Christ does manifest, then the Father,
etc. the Father shows his love in appointing, and sending, and giving; but
the Son gives himself for us; the Fathers love is apparent, Isai. 45.4.5. I
will give men for thee etc. where God shows his love, to the intent (says the
Lord) that I might free thee; I put thee into their hands, yet what are these?
these are nothing in comparison of his love, in redeeming his elect; he put his
own Son, into his enemies hands: so we may see, John 3.16. So God loved the
world. Romans 5. God sets forth his love, that when we were enemies, Christ died
for us. Yet notwithstanding, see the greatness of the love of Christ in this,
he being God, humbles himself to the lowest degree, that he might redeem his:
as first, he took flesh. Secondly, he dies. etc. Now all this, is grounded
upon this, that he being God, humbles himself, (laying aside all his glory)
to the death of the cross: What shall I say, what could he have done more?
this amplifies the love of Christ, to give himself freely; there was no
necessity of nature, or sin compelled him; but merely voluntarily, that he
might redeem us: Saint Augustine says, do you think, that the spears could
have pierced him, unless he himself, had suffered it? as he says, Matthew. 26.
I could entreat my Father, and he could give me more then twelve legions of
Angels: but yet he being the mighty Son of God, lays all aside, and puts on
all baseness: what of all this? this should provoke us to thankfulness, (as
David in 116. Psalm.) to say, What shall I render to Christ for all his
benefits? Israel, when they were delivered out of Egypt, and passed the red
seas, sung a song, etc. if such a small thing required this; what does this,
that we are delivered from sin, and Satan, require? It is not enough that we
sing songs, and speak good words, but let Christ have his end, for which he
has redeemed us: what is his end? Luke 1. That we should serve him in
holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our lives: let us give our
selves to his service, and fear: 2 Samuel 19.9. There the people reason after
this manner, David has delivered us out of the hand of our enemies; and shall
we be slack? thus we should speak to our hearts; has Christ delivered us from
death, and the thraldom of Satan; and shall we be slack in giving honor to
Christ? Ezra 9.13.14. the people reason thus, that being delivered (say they)
shall we turn back again, etc. how then should every one speak to his own
heart, thou have tasted of this, and shall I turn back again, and
transgress against Christ? therefore learn to remember what the Apostle
says, Titus 2.14. He has redeemed us a people to himself, to be zealous of
good works; and thou that condemnest well ordered zeal, thou have no dram of
religion in thee; for no true zeal, no religion: thou criest out of zeal,
thou art a slave to Satan still: therefore let every man bring forth
righteousness, and deny ungodliness, and live soberly in this presen world,
walking, and glorifying God here, that we may be glorified of him hereafter.

OF GOD THE HOLY GHOST. CHAP. XXVII.
JOHN 15.26. The spirit of truth which proceeds from the faber, he shall etc
THE third person of the Trinity is the holy Ghost.

Quest. What is the holy Ghost?

Answ. He is the third person of the Diety proceeding from the Father, and the
Son, sanctifying the elect.

The thing that is described, is the spirit, which in the Scriptures signifies
many things; it may be reduced to these heads; I will but name them: First, it
has relation to the creature. Secondly, to the creator; as it has relation to
the creature, the word signifies many things, I will but name them: sometimes
it signifies power, sometimes the soul of man, sometimes the life of beasts,
sometimes Angels, sometimes natural motions in the heart of man; and diverse
others, which I pass over.

In respect of the creator, it has a double signification; and it is taken,
Essentially, and personally: Essentially, and so all the three persons of the
Trinity, are said to be a spirit; according to this, we have it, John 4.24. God
is a spirit; where the whole Diety is put under the name of spirit. Secondly,
it is taken personally in the Diety, concerning whom: spirit may signify two
things, either the person, or the gifts; the person it self, it is manifest in
this place; the spirit that proceeds from the Father; the gifts and graces of
the spirit: 2 Kings 2.19. Let thy spirit be double upon me: So Numb. 7.11. 1
These. 5.19. Quench not the spirit; understanding it, of the grace of the
spirit: again, I say the third person, I need not stand upon that, to show
that it is a person, common to him with the other; all persons are distinct one
from another, really, and truly; he is a person distinct three ways: in order,
in property, and working; in order he is the third person; in property, he
proceeds from the Father, and the Son, in working, sanctifying, the elect: the
Father is the first, not in time, not in dignity, but in order: so the Son the
second; and so the holy Ghost the third: we add, the third person in the
Diety, that we may have occasion to manifest, that he is God as well as the
other; that he is God, there may be many testimonies, Samuel 27.23. David the
sweet singer of Israel, the Lord God spoke by me, the Lord said; that, that is
in the former the Lord, and God; in the next is said to be the spirit: Acts
5.34. Peter said to Ananias, why have you lied to the holy Ghost? and in the
fourth verse, You have not lied to men, but unto God: that in 1 Gor. 3.16. You
brethren are the temples of God, and the holy Ghost dwells in you: temples of
God, and temples of the holy Ghost, both one.

The next thing, I say, is the third person, proceeding from the Father and the
Son: his property is proceeding: he is, as Athanasius Creed has it, not
made, not begotten, but proceeding. That he does proceed from the Father and
the Son, appears, first, by these places, that he is affirmed to be the
Spirit of the Father and the Son: not because he was sent, but because he
proceeds both from the Father and the Son; and that is this which Saint
Augustine observes, when he gave the Spirit, he breathed upon the Apostles,
John 20. to signify, that when he gave the spirit, it was proceeding: and this
is the same which the Psalmist called the breath of God, Psalm. 33.6. by the
word of God were the heavens made, and the host of them by the breath of his
mouth: and thereupon he is said to be the breath of the Son: also in 1 These.
2.8. he shall consume Antichrist with the breath of his mouth: further, that he
did proceed from the Father, is manifest by the place which we have read, John
15.26. and that he proceeds from the Son, John 15 16. all that the Father has
is mine: so he says he shall receive of mine; therefore the procession is from
them both: so that when our Savior Christ says, that it proceeds from the
Father, he does not exclude himself, but after a special manner of speaking,
he sets his name, after the name of his Father: Why? because he has his person
from the Father, and the holy Ghost received it from them both; therefore we
may give it to the Father, as the beginning: and this shall suffice to manifest
this; therefore we will conclude as Saint Nazianzen does, How is it that the
Son is of the Father, and the holy Ghost is of them both, coming from them
both differently? the Son from the Father, as the light from the light; he
shines by the manner of begeting; the holy Ghost, he is from the lights, not by
manner of generation, but by manner of procession.

The third distinction, by which he is different from the other, is the work
of Sanctification, Romans 1.4. therefore the name of life is given to him; it is
he that mortifies the old man, and quickens the new man, Romans 8.7 The law of
the Spirit of life, has freed us from the law of sin, and of death:
therefore he is after compared to water, John 3.5. Except a man be borne of
water and the holy Ghost: now the nature of water is to cleanse, and to make
fruitful, and to revive things that are ready to dye: so the Spirit is he that
cleanses us from our filthiness: so in Ezekiel. 36.21. I will power clean water
upon you, and you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness. What is that? in
the 27. verse, I will power my Spirit upon you: so that the Spirit, you see, is
compared to water. In this respect also it is compared to fire, Mat. 3. He
shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire: that does quicken up the
heart, and cheer it, and sanctify it: therefore hence it is in many places,
that holiness is called the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. the fruits of the
spirit are joy, and peace, gentleness, meekness, long-suffering, etc. all
these are fruits of the spirit; therefore it follows, that the holy Ghost is
he that has this work of sanctifying the elect.

Quest. Why say we, that he is the third person in the deity, and so God?

Answ. Because he has the name of Jehovah. Secondly, Essential Attributes.
Thirdly, works proper to God. Fourthly, divine worship; and therefore he is
God. First, the name Jehovah is given unto him: that appears by these texts of
the old testament, Ier. 1.14. Ezekiel. 1.4. and so in the new testament, is given
him the name of Jehovah. Act. 7.51. You stiff necked that resist the spirit of
God, as did your fathers, so do you, they resisted him in the Prophets, and
you now do follow them, resisting him in the Apostles: one place more, Isai
6.9. that which is said, The Lord says go and make the heart of this people
fat: that same 28. Acts 20. the Apostle Paul says, The holy Ghost spoke by
Esai as the Prophet; and therefore the name Jehovah being a peculiar name,
given to none but to him, that is naturally God; the spirit having this name,
must needs be God.

Secondly, there are given unto him, Essential Attributes: now Essential
Attributes, are four principally; eternity, ubiquity, omniscience,
omnipotency, all these are given to the spirit: first, he is eternal; for
before the beginning, he moved upon the waters, and Heb. 9.14. He is called the
eternal spirit. Secondly, omnipresence. Psalm. 139. Whither shall I go from
thy spirit? the holy Ghost is said to dwell in the Saints; Romans 8.9. 2 Cor.
1.16. 1 John 2.27. arguing that it is proper to him to be every where. Thirdly,
he is omniscient, and knows all things. John 14.26. He shall teach you all
things. John 16.13. He shall lead you into all truth. 1 Cor. 2.10.11. He
searches the hidden things of God, and no man knows the hidden things of God,
but the spirit. Fourthly, omnipotent; because it is he that casts out devils:
Matthew. 12. The spirit of God casts etc. this cannot be done by any created
power, but he must be God that does it: 1 Cor. 12. It is God that works all
in all: And in the 11. verse, The spirit works all these things; and
therefore he must be omnipotent: and so by these four Attributes, we see he is
God.

Again, he must needs be God, for the proper works of God are given to him:
Genesis 1.2. The spirit moved upon the waters, that is preserving them; Job 26.13.
The spirit of God has garnished the heavens; So in the 33. Job 4 The spirit of
the Almighty has made me: Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens
made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.

Fourthly, because divine honor and worship, cannot be without sacrilege
given to any person that is not God, but is given to him: Mat. 28.19. Baptizing
them in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; And so the Apostle
prays, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the father, and
the Communion of the holy Ghost: Nazianzen has sufficient to this purpose; he,
says he, whom the Church does profess to believe in, is God; now the Church
does profess to believe in the holy Ghost, so that by these it necessarily
follows that he is God.

Quest. How comes he to proceed from the father and the Son?

Answ. Because he received from the father and the son the whole Essence,
communicated to him by way of procession: that we manifest thus; the Sons
begetting of the Father you heard, to be by receiving the whole Essence from
him, by way of begetting: so the holy Ghost is said to proceed from the Father,
and the Son, because he received the whole Essence from them by way of
proceeding; the thing is manifest, that he proceeded from the Father, and the
Son; and therefore is not said to be begotten, but to proceed: and as the
Scripture has been strict, and careful, to reserve these relations
unconfounded, so the Church has diligently imitated them, and always says,
that the Son is begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeds: and therefore as it is
said of the Son, that he is the only begotten Son, of the Father: so it is
said in the same place of the spirit, that he proceeds from the Father, and the
Son; but how may we understand this, he received the whole Essence? how? he
received it without division, he received it without multiplication; because
that which is infinite, cannot be multiplied; yet he received it without
alienation, because he received so the whole Essence, as it abides still in the
Father, and the Son.

Quest. How is he said to sanctify the elect?

Answ. Because he dwells in the elect, creating faith in them, incorporating
them into Christ, applying Christ his death, and resurrection to them. To
explane this: First, he dwells in them: first, he is said to sanctify the
elect, in that he dwells in them: in this we do not exclude the Father, and
the Son, any more then we did in the former; they are all works ad extra,
and therefore undivided; yet understand the manner of working: the holy Ghost
is said to dwell in the elect, and it is he, that creates faith in their hearts
etc. they all sanctify; the Father, and the Son, mediatly by the spirit, the
spirit immediately by himself: and why? first, he dwells in them, namely, not
as by his gifts, but a person, therefore we may say this is his work: the
Father not by any phrase of Scripture, is said to dwell in them, though they
are said to be the temples of God; he dwells in them not by his gifts only,
but by his person; because he is called the spirit of his Son, when he dwells
in them: and again, God has sent the spirit of his Son: Romans 8. If the spirit
that raised Christ from the dead dwells in you: therefore they go together,
Romans 5. God has shed his love in our hearts: there is love which was the gift,
and the spirit which was the person: again, he created faith, that (the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.9.) By the same spirit he gave to one the gift of
miracles, and to another the gift of faith: etc. 2 Cor. 4.13. He is called the
spirit of faith: faith is that, that does sanctify as an instrument: Acts 15.
After that he had purified their hearts by faith.

Next, that he does incorporate men into Christ: Romans 8.9. He that has not the
spirit of Christ, he is none of his; intimating, he that has the spirit of
Christ, he is his: John 4.13. Hereby we know that God dwells in us by his
spirit: 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all baptized into one body by the spirit, then we
are all united into one body, by one spirit: for as Romans 8 10. If the spirit be
in you, the body is dead by reason of sin, but the spirit is alive for
righteousness sake: and by this he does apply unto us the death of Christ, to
the death of sin, and the resurrection of Christ, to the life of grace: Rom
6.3.4.5. As many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into the death of
Christ: by baptism, we are also ingrafted into the similitude of his
resurrection, therefore the spirit sanctifies; and when he dwells in every one
of the elect, etc. it is necessarily, and fitly said, that it is he that
sanctifies the elect: and thus I have explaned this point, so much as I thought
fit to communicate unto you.

Use 1. This teaches us, that we ought to labor for the knowledge of this,
that we may keep our selves from error: it was a commendable diligence of the
ancient Fathers that taught, when the spirit, was taken for the person, and
when for the gifts, because heresies have sprung from hence, because they
understood the words amiss; therefore, that we may hold the truth, we are to
labor to know it; and in this case, although we find not a proper name given
to the third person, yet we must acknowledge him distinctly; because we know
there is a Father, a Son, and a Spirit.

Object. You tell us he is a Spirit.

Answ. We answer, so is the Father, and so is the Son, but so the name of
Father is common to all; and the Son is said to be the Father, and the holy
Ghost also: therefore there is no reason why we should conceive them to be
three names given to the same God, in diverse respects; but rather conceive,
that there was but a common name given to him; because he was the common
substantial joy, and love, between the Father, and Son.

Use 2. This serves to confirm us in the faith, against all heretics, that
deny the holy Ghost; not to stand upon their arguments: the Macedonians stand
up as it were to oppose the Diety of the holy Ghost, and say he is not God; and
they think they have a color for it, from the counsel of Nice; in which we
say, we believe in the Father, God, and Lord, and in the Son, God, and Lord;
but when they come to the holy Ghost, we believe in the holy Ghost; and
therefore these heretics say, that he was not God: Saint Basil answering to
this objection, from the Nicen counsel, says; they had no reason to explane
this concerning the spirit, (as they had done the Father, and Son,) for no
man then, made any question of the divinity of the holy Ghost; nay says
Nazianzen, this is a sufficient confession of his Deity; for they say a
particular thing, assenting by it, that he is God, because they believe in him;
and whereas they observe, that the spirit is taken for the gifts of the spirit,
true it is; it is so, but it is put for the person also; and therefore though
it be taken sometime for the gifts, yet it does not overthrow that he is a
person: as the Arians that could not deny of Christ, that he was a person, said
notwithstanding, he was but a made God: so these say of the spirit, that he is
not a God by nature; but it is manifest, that he must needs be a God by nature,
when he has the name Jehovah, and the proper works of God attributed to him;
yea but say they, if he were a God by office, yet he had a created nature, and
so not God from eternity: the Fathers called these by that name (...), which
signifies fighters against the spirit of God; for they say, there was no
spirit, till after Christ's glorification; grounded upon John 17.39. The spirit
was not given, because that Christ was not yet glorified: and hereupon they
added, that blasphemy, the Church in the beginning was content to believe in
one God; afterward the counsel of Nice, must have two persons, and after this
the counsel of Constantinople must have three; but to answer their cavil,
that he was before all these, appears, John 1.32. I saw the holy Ghost says
John Baptist (at Christ's baptism) John 1.33. Thou see the holy Ghost to
descend, after he was risen: John 20.21. He breathed upon the Apostles, and
says, receive the holy Ghost.

Object. But they instance, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, but then he gave the spirit, therefore it
means the gifts; not the person of the spirit.

Answ. True, he then gave gifts, but what gifts? not the gifts of
sanctification, but the gifts of tongues; which is spoken of, in Acts 2. and so
notwithstanding this, it is manifest, that he is God from eternity.

Use 3. This teaches how we ought, and how we may believe truly in the holy
Ghost; namely, to believe in him as God, the third person, proceeding from the
Father, and the Son, sanctifying the elect: he that changes any thing of this
description, cannot believe in him aright, as he that believes in the holy
Ghost as God; yet as begotten, but not proceeding, believes not aright.

Object. But some will say unto me, why may we not say, that the holy Ghost is
begotten, as well as the Son, when as begetting is, receiving the whole
Essence by communication? and what is proceeding, but receiving the whole
Essence by communication? and why do we say the Son is begotten, and the holy
Ghost proceeds?

Answ. To this I answer as Saint Chrysostom did, that which is not written,
thou ought not think, or speak; if thou find it any where written, then
thou may, if not thou may not: amongst many things, Saint Augustine,
observes two in this misery; why should not we say, that the holy Ghost is
begotten? he answers, because the second person is said to be the Son, yea,
the only begotten Son; therefore I dare not go from that to ascribe the
begetting to any other; besides it is said, that the holy Ghost proceeds; he
goes on to this purpose, if any ask:

Quest. How does begetting, and proceeding differ?

Answ. I answer that they, do differ I am sure, but how? I know not: Again,
what is the difference to be begotten, and to proceed; I am insufficient, to
speak, or express: Nazianzen, presses the point well; tell me, says he, what
is to be begotten, and I will tell thee what is proceeding? and yet if either
shall undertake to do this, by searching into it, we may be both mad, and lose
our wits; therefore we say the Father is of himself, not from another; the Son
is of the Father alone, by way of begetting, the holy Ghost from them both, by
way of proceeding: And if this seems strange, says Nazianzen, take an Image
of it: There is Adam, Seth, Evah; Adam not begotten, Seth begotten, Evah
proceeding from Adam; there was one begotten, that was Seth, and there was one
proceeding that was Evah, and one begetting, that was Adam; in a word, thus we
are to believe of the personal Essence of the third person in trinity, the
holy Ghost.

Use 4. It follows in the description, he sanctifies the elect; therefore this
admonishes every profane man, that scoffs at purity, to see and repent of
this profaneness, because purity is the work of the holy Ghost; what do you
then deride when you mock at purity? tell me whom thou mockest at? even at the
holy Ghost. I say, thou scoffer at purity, and holiness, whatsoever thou art,
thou scoffest at the spirit of God: Pro. 17. He that mocks the poor, derides
him that made him; So I say to thee, that mockest the pure, that are made holy,
etc. thou mockest the holy Ghost that made him pure, and thou may be said in
a sort to commit a sin against the holy Ghost: I say, not that unpardonable
sin, but a sin against his personal work of holiness; I am sure, this one
thing does make manifest, that thou art not sealed by the spirit of promise and
redemption; even thy mocking at holiness, which is his work; know then for
certain, the more base that holiness is in thy sight, the more base thou art
in the sight of Gods spirit: better had it been for thee, that thou had been
made the most venomous creature on the face of the earth, then that thou
should not be made holy by this sanctifying spirit of God; pray then, if it
be possible, the thoughts of thy heart, and the words of thy mouth might be
forgiven thee; for thou have not spoken against holy men only, but the holy
spirit of God, as often as thou haft spoken against holiness.

Use 5. Here is matter of comfort; Is holiness the work of the spirit, (which
is God?) is holiness begun? (as in truth here is but the beginning of it; here
is but the earnest, the first fruits?) is it so that thou wrestlest with thy
corruptions, thou would, and yet thou can not be perfect? comfort thy
self, it is certain that he will perfect it in his own time, Philip. 1.6.
Certainly he that has begun this good work will perfect it; although we have
many weaknesses, as the Apostle cries out, Oh! wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? etc. when he fights with
infidelity, and with lust, and cannot overcome it, yet here is the comfort, I
say it again, here is the comfort, he has given thee that grace by which thou
resistest, and by which thou shall overcome evil; only remember this, he will
perfect it: as thou could not teach him, how he should begin grace in thee;
so thou must not teach him, how or when to perfect it in thee; howsoever in the
mean time thou criest out, miserable man that I am! who shall deliver me from
the body of sin, if thou hunger and thirst after righteousness, he will
perfect it, but thou must continue wrestling, till the change of the body come,
and who would not wrestle for so holy a prise?

Use 6. Lastly, we note the blasphemy of the Pelagians and Papists, when they
tell us of falling away from grace, here is manifestly the contrary: It is the
spirits work to make the elect holy, will he be wanting in his own work?
away with such blasphemies from us, let us serve the providence of God for our
perseverance by attending upon the word and Sacraments here, and he will in
part sanctify us here, and will not leave us until he has perfectly
sanctified us throughout, the whole soul and body and spirit, at the day of
appearing of the Lord Jesus. And thus much in special of the third person in
Trinity, the holy Ghost, as also in general of the description we gave of God
in his own nature.

A Table of the Contents.
A AEternity of God, what. 91. God is Aeternall. 92. Therefore lives to reward
the good and bad. 93. etc. Afflictions, how signs of Gods love. 196. 197 Anger
of God, what. 212. 217. In Anger two things. 213 Anger is, and why it may be
given to God. 216 Anger is not simply evil. 219 Anger in God incensed by sin.
220 Anger appeased by removing sin. 221 Judgments sometimes removed in
Anger. 223 Atheism confuted. 55 Atheism ground of humiliation. 56 Ascent to
God, is of God. 179 Anthropomorphites confuted. 74 Approbation of man not to be
rested in. 118
B Begetting and proceeding how they differ. 302 C Church offices concerning
the Scriptures: 43 D Dominion of God what. 239 Dominion why given to God. 240
Creatures have their power of God. 251 Why God works by creatures. 250
E Essence of God proved to be one, 66. which distinguishes the true from false
Gods. 65. Confutes Heretics, and directs faith. 68. 69. Comforts in prayer. 69
Election and grace immutable. 137 Election may be known. 175 Election how made
sure. 177 Election is of a few. 174. 182 Evil things how and why willed of
God. 124. 128
F Father what. 269 Father taken Essentially, and Personally. 269 The First
person how. 270 Fore knowledge no cause of sin. 239 Faith shall not fail. 99.
Strengthened. 144 Fear God. 119. 220 Faith directed. 265
G There is a God proved by reason. 50. 51. etc. God is but one. 56. 57. 88 God
what he is. 61 Uses to be made of the Deiety. 55. 58. etc. Goodness of God
what. 148 Goodness of God proved. 150 Goodness in God absolute. 151 Goodness
communicated to the creaturs 152 Uses to be made of Gods goodness. 153 Grace
of God what. 171 The object of Grace. 172 Grace, why ascribed to God. 173 Grace
the cause of salvation. 178 Grace may be made sure. 175 Grace ground of
thankfulness. 187 Grace is not universal. 229 Godly comforted. 89. 100. 210
Godly cannot fall from Grace 254 Generation of the Son to be adored in silence.
287 Against falling from Grace. 305
H Hatred of God what. 224 Hatred what it signifies. 225 Hatred against some is
absolute, yet just, 226 Uses to be made of Gods Hatred. 229 Gods people Hated
in the world, and why. 245 Heresies confuted 68. of Marcion. 155 Humility the
ground of it. 136 Humbled sinners find mercy. 198 Holy Ghost what. 291. Is
God, 292. 295. proceeds from the Father and the Son, 293. 297. dwells in the
elect, 298. Incorporates into Christ. ibid.
I Immensity of God what and how proved. 102. 103. etc. Immensity of God should
restrain from sin. 107 Immutability of God what, how many fold. 96
Immutability of Gods number proved. 97 Immutability proves God the true God. 98
What uses to be made of it. 98. etc. Immutability not opposed to freedom. 128
Objections against Gods Immutability, answered. 132 Ignorance of God the
greatest folly, 4. kinds of it. ibid. Justice of God what. 200 Justice why
given to God. 202 Object of Justice. 203 It is Justice to reward the godly. 204
It is Justice to free some from sin, and leave others. 207 It is Justice to lay
the punishment of the elect, on Christ. 208 There is a day of Judgment proved.
209 Acknowledge God to be Just. 205 Judgments remooved in anger. 223
Impossible things of two sorts. 249. 252
K Knowledge of God chiefest wisdom. 1. 2. 3 Knowledge of God is natural. 7.
8. etc. Knowledge of God by revelation. 12. 13. 14 Knowledge of God in the
word, 15. 16. by the spirit. 17 Knowledge of the Trinity necessary to
salvation. 266
L Life of God what, and how proved. 109 Life proves God the true God 112 Long
life how attained. 113 Love of God what. 158 Love why ascribed to God. 160
Object of the Love of God. 161 God Loves his creatures freely, not equally.
161. 162. 166 He that Loves not, is not of God. 162 Love God again; signs of
Love. 167 Love in God natural or voluntary. God an absoltue and free Lord,
241. therefore is not unjust disposing of his creatures. 243 He that has God
has all things. ibid. He must be served of all. 245 Love of Christ
demonstrated. 288
M Merit condemned. 135. 204. 205 Mercy of God what. 189. general and
special. 190. 196 Mercy is natural, eternal, free. 191 Mercy is more to some
then others. 192 Mercy shown to the elect in three things. 193 Uses to be made
of Gods Mercy. 194. etc. Macedonians confuted. 300
N Nature cannot find God. 61 P Pictures of God unlawful. 74 Perfection of
God what. 77 Perfection of God proved. 78. etc. Perfection of God different
from that of creatures. 79 Perfection of God wherein it consistes. 84 Please
God. 82 Uses of Gods Perfection. 80. etc. Promises whether always to be
performed. 147 Papists and Pelagians confuted. 180. 181 Punishment of the
wicked why deferred. 209 Punishment two fold 214. Impartially inflicted. 218
Power of God what. 247. Active or absolute. 248 Power why given to God. 250 It
is infinite. 252 Provoke not God. 255 A Person what. 258. There are three
Persons. 260 The Son a Person 263. and the holy Ghost 265 The Persons how
distinguished. 258 Persons are distinguished, not divided. 259 Persons one
before another, not in dignity, not in time, but in order. 260 Persons
distinguished by their properties 261 Persons distinguished by their works 263
Purity not to be scorned. 303 Purity begun shall be perfected. 304
R Redemption not Universal. 183 S Spirit what it signifies. 291 Spirit how
distinguished from other Persons. 292. 294 Services of men reach not to God. 80
S mplicity of God what. 85 S mplicity of God proved. 86. etc. Uses to be made
of it. 88. etc. God a Spirit proved. 71 etc. God must be worshipped in Spirit.
75 Swearing condemned. 113 Syncerity commanded. 119 Security awakened. 143. 210
Scriptures reveal God 12. 13. to be searched. 15. 21. 26 Scriptures a perfect
sure infallible rule. 19 Written for all men, 23. to be translated 25 and
applied, 27. 39 The word of God 29. and 36. plain reveald by the Spirit. 37
Canonical 40. and 45. Sufficient. 45. and 49 Sat han why he tells truth. 14
Sabellians confuted. 256 Son eternal with the Father. 269. 270. 287
T Truth of God what. 138 Truth but one. 139 Object of Truth. 141. Uses of it.
143 Be True as God is. 146 Traditions to be abhorred. 21. 47 Threatenings how to
be understood. 132 Thankfulness 156. 187 Trinity known by the word, 257. by
faith. 256
V Vbiquitaries confuted. 106 Unworthiness comforted. 165
W Wicked terrified. 90 Will of God what. 121. is but one. 125 Will of God
free, and immutable. 122. 123. 126. 129 Object of Gods Will. 123. 127. Uses of
it. 135. etc. Wisdom of God what. 115. How proved. 116 Uses of Gods wisdom.
118 Women bound to know God. 5 Wicked men punished. 229 Works of the Trinity
undivided. 263 Worship God aright, and how. 267

ERRATA.
Page 75. lin. 23. condemn us for them. p. 100. l. 3. it may doubt. ibid. l.
24. Insolent against their inferiors. p. 106. l. last but two, from external
sinning p 115. l. 17. and 19. prescience, p. 134. l. 11. one says, p. 140. l.
19. formally. p. 145. l. 4. promise sure. p. 148. l. 25 Good is an accident p.
158. l. 14. blot out (in) p 171. l. 9. in his Son though. p. 176. l. 8. is in
his son, p. 185. l. 15. he chose the twelft. p. 196. l. 8. 1 Cor. 10. p. 208.
l. 10. 11. blot out. And also punish them. p. 210. l. 6. reports, 212 from the
end, blot out the parenthesis. p. 213. l. 12. simply. p. 217. l. 4. d. fine,
blot out it. p. 220. l. 14. injurious. p. 224. in the text, Psalm. 5. 5. p. 225.
l. 9. one thing. p. 226. l. 23. may not he make them, to etc. p. 230. l. 5.
deny to some that grace, ibid. l. 16. if he as the potter. p. 239. l. dominion.
p. 244. l. 11. horses are thy horses. p. 246. l. 5. ^ fine, blot out which.
ibid Job 9. 19. ibid. l. 4. a fine, that is authority, p. 249. l. 1. blot out
that, yet. p. 254. l. 4. a finite subject. ibid. 11. effectings. ibid. l. 20.
actually it is. p 253. l. 17. false true. p. 254. l. penult. fall. p. 255. l.
19. Jer. 10. p. 302. l. 15. two mysteries in this.


