The Right Reverend EDW. STILLINGFLEET D. D. Lord Bishop of Worcester.


THIRTEEN SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions. Three of which never before
Printed.

By the Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Third VOLUME.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. ST. Luke XV. 18. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say to
him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee. page 1 SERMON II.
Coloss. II. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him. p. 40 SERMON III. Pet. IV. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear. p. 91 SERMON IV. Eccles. XI. 9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes;
but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment. p.
132 SERMON V. 2 Timothy I. 7. For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of
Power, and of Love, and of a sound Mind. p. 169 SERMON VI. 1 Timothy I. 15. This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came
into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. p. 209 SERMON VII. St. Luke
VI. 46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? p.
255 SERMON VIII. Romans VIII. 6. For, to be carnally minded is Death; but to be
spiritually minded is Life and Peace. p. 294 SERMON IX. St. John III. 17. For
God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World; but that the World
through him might be saved. p. 336 SERMON X. St. Jam. IV. 17. Therefore to him
that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin. p. 375 SERMON XI.
St. Matthew. XXVI. 41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation; the
Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak. p. 413 SERMON XII. Acts XXVI.
8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise
the Dead? p. 453 SERMON. XIII. Eccles. VII. 16. Be not Righteous overmuch,
neither make thy self over wise: Why should thou destroy thy self? p. 490
ERRATA.
Page 107. line 5. for These read There. p. 238. l. 17. dele from Yet to l.
21st. p. 284. l. 21st. for or r. we. p. 296. l. 25. for Lord, r. Law. p. 298.
l. 14. put out ^. p. 344. l. 9. dele little. p. 417. l. 7. for heatedness, r.
heartedness. p. 418. l. 18. for Weakness, r. Willingness. p. 434. l. 18. For
Truce r. Time. p. 463. l. 1st. before of, put in out. p. 464. l. 17. for Sea,
r. Sun. p. 483. l. 25. for Laws r. Lives. p. 485. l. 24. after now, put apt. p.
490. Sermon 13. In the Text, for lover, r. over. p. 496. l. 29. before To, put
in (1.) p. 501. l. 17. before known, insert have. p. 503. l. 6. blot out that.
p. 506. l. 22. for gain, r. again. p. 507. l. 1st. for This, r. Thus. p. 508.
l. 27. for endanger, r. indulge p. 509. l. 6. for Molochi r. Moloch. p. 522. l.
7. for exasperate r. extenuate. p. 528. l. 16. for Solitude, r. Solicitude.

SERMON I. Preached at WHITE HALL, February the 19th, 1685/6;.
St. Luke XV. 18. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say to him,
Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee.
IN the foregoing Verse, we find the Prodigal Son so far awakened and come to
himself, as to be sensible of the miserable Condition he had brought himself
into by his own folly and wickedness. But, before he came to this, there is a
remarkable Turn in the Course of his Life, set down by our Savior in the
beginning of this excellent Parable. For, he was first very impatient of being
under the wise Conduct of his Father, and thought he could manage his own
Affairs far more to his Contentment and Satisfaction, if he were but permitted
to use his Liberty, and were not so strictly tied up to the grave and formal
Methods of living, observed and required in his Father's House. Which might
pass for Wisdom in Age, and be agreeable enough to such whose Life and Vigor
were decayed; and who were now to maintain their Authority over their Children
by seeming to be so much wiser than they: But it is a rare thing for Youth and
Age to agree in the Opinion of Wisdom: For it is not the Care, the Experience,
the Judgment of a wise and tender Father, that can allay the Heats, or calm the
Passions, or overruled the violent Inclinations of Youth; but whatever it cost
them afterward, some will be still trying the Experiment, whether it does not
more conduce to the happiness of Life to pursue their own Fancies and Designs,
than to hearken to another's Directions (though a Father's) whose Circumstances
are so much different from their own. Thus our Blessed Savior represents in
the Parable this young Prodigal, as weary of being rich and easy at Home, and
fond of seeing the Pleasures of the World: and therefore nothing would satisfy
him unless he were entrusted with the Stock which was intended for him, that he
might show the difference between his Father's Conduct and his own.

And this very soon appeared; for this hopeful Manager had not been long
abroad, but he wasted his substance with riotous living. And to make him the
more sensible of his Folly, there happened a more than ordinary Scarcity, which
made his low and exhausted Condition more uneasy to him. But the Sense of
Shame was yet greater with him than that of his ^olly; and whatever shifts he
underwent, he would by no means yet think of returning home; but rather chose
to submit to the meanest and basest Employment in hopes to avoid the Necessity
of it. But at last, Reason and Consideration began to work upon him, which is
called, his coming to himself: and then he takes up a Resolution to go home to
his Father, and to throw himself at his Feet, to confess his fault ingenuously
and freely, and to beg pardon for his former Folly, in hopes of Forgiveness and
Reconciliation. I will arise and go to my Father, and say to him, Father, I
have sinned against Heaven, and before thee.

Under this Parable, our Savior sets forth the state of a Sinner, (1.) In his
wilful degeneracy from God, his Father, both by Creation and Providence; his
uneasiness under his just and holy Laws; his impatience of being restrained by
them; his casting off the Bonds of Duty to him; and running into all kind of
Disorders without regard to God, or his own Soul. (2.) In the dissatisfaction
he found in his evil Courses; being very much disappointed in the great
Expectations he had in the Pleasures of Sin; wasting his health, interest,
reputation, estate, and above all, the Peace and Tranquillity of his Mind,
which was more valuable than any other Delight whatsoever, and he now found
impossible to be enjoyed in a Course of Rebellion against his heavenly Father.
(3.) In the Conviction of his Folly upon due Consideration of what he had done;
which is Emphatically called Coming to himself; having before acted so much
below himself, and against himself; unworthy of the Relation he stands in to
God; of those Faculties he had bestowed upon him; and of those hopes and
expectations he might have had from him either as to this or another World.
(4.) In the Resolution he takes upon this Conviction, no longer to delay his
purpose of repenting and returning home, but to embrace the present opportunity
of doing it freely, heartily and ingenuously, I will arise and go to my Father,
etc.

Having formerly in this Place, and on a like Occasion considered the prodigal
Son's coming to himself, I shall now pursue the Method of his Repentance in the
Resolution he here takes to arise and go to his Father, etc.

And therein I shall enquire into these things.

I. What grounds a Sinner has to encourage him to repent; or to form such a
Resolution in his Mind that he will arise and go to his Father, when he knows
he has so much provoked and offended him.

II. How necessary it is in order to true Repentance to form a fixed and steady
Resolution to go through with it, I will arise and go, etc.

First, What grounds a Sinner has to encourage him to repent; or to make
Application to his Father in order to Forgiveness, since he is convinced he
has so justly offended him. For, if we consider the Circumstances here
mentioned, he had no such Reason to hope to be received into Favor upon such
easy Terms, as are here expressed; For,

(1.) He had wilfully forsaken his Father's House, without any just Cause of
Complaint of any hard usage there.

(2.) He had embraced such a Course of Life, which he knew was displeasing to
him, living riotously and disorderly, in a way contrary to his Will.

(3.) He never thought of returning home, till mere Necessity forced him; till
Hunger and Poverty made him come to himself.

And what could be more disobliging to a Father, than such Circumstances as
these?

(1.) His Father never forced him from home, nor made his Condition uneasy
there. Our Savior here represents Almighty God, as dealing with Mankind like a
tender and indulgent Father, and not like a severe and hard Master; his Laws
being intended for our Good, and not for his own Advantage. There is no Duty of
ours toward God, or our selves, or others, but is founded on this Relation to
God as a Father to Mankind. Nothing can be more reasonable in general than that
the Father should order and direct his Children, and give such Rules which are
fitting for them to observe; And if we examine the particular Laws of Nature,
or the Dictates of Reason as to Good and Evil, we shall find them very
agreeable to God's Paternal Government.

What is the Duty of Prayer to God, but asking daily Blessing of our heavenly
Father? What is our Thanksgiving, but a solemn owning his Paternal Care and
Bounty toward us? And in these two, the main Duties of Natural Religion
consist. The Neglect whereof, is such a disrespect to our heavenly Father, as
is not consistent with our believing him to be so. For, as God himself argues
in the Prophet, A Son honors his Father, and a Servant Malac. 1. 6.
his Master: If then I be a Father, where is mine Honor? And if I be a Master,
where is my Fear? God was a Father by the Right of Creation and Providence: but
he was a Master to the Jews in respect of the Bondage of the Law; and as there
was a Spirit of Bondage on that account in them, which inclined them to a more
servile Fear; so there ought to have been a natural Spirit of Adoption toward
God as their Supreme Creator and Father; which should excite all Men to such a
dutiful Love, such a reverential Esteem, such a Mixture of Awe and Kindness as
is in Children toward their Parents. Yea, it ought to be much greater than
that can be supposed; because the Distance is Infinite between God and us; and
our Dependence more immediate and necessary; and there is in him a Concurrence
of all Perfections, which may cause in us the highest Esteem, and the humblest
Adoration. There is an unquestionable Duty owing by Children to their earthly
Parents, but how much rather Heb. 12 9. (...).
(says the Apostle) ought we to be in subjection to the Father of Spirits? The
Fathers of our Flesh may be very Kind, but not Wise in their Love; or Wise and
not so Kind; or they may be both Wise and Kind, but not able to help their
Children. They may love and pity, and pray for them, when they are in Misery,
or Sickness and Pain, but after all, they are unable to relieve them; For the
most indulgent Father, when his bowels yearn, and his heart is ready to break
at the sight of a Child lying under the Agonies of Death, is not able to give a
Moments Respite to the terrible Pangs, which he can neither behold nor abate.
But our heavenly Father has not only Infinite Wisdom, but Infinite Kindness
and Power; and where all these are joined together, what Honor, what Love,
what Fear is due unto him! Although there be defects in their Parents, yet
Children are still bound to obey them, and to show a mighty Regard and
Reverence toward them; but here it is so much otherwise, that if we could
conceive our selves without this Relation to God, yet his Perfections are so
many, so great, so infinite, as to deserve and require our utmost Veneration.
The prodigal Son could then have no Reason to complain of the Duty which he
owed to his Father.

And was it not fit for him to appoint the Orders of his Family, and to expect
that his Children should behave themselves therein, as became the Relation they
stood in to himself and to one another? That they should have a decent Regard
to themselves in Sobriety, Temperance, Command of their Passions, and Care of
their Words; That they should behave themselves toward their Brethren with
Sincerity, Kindness and Justice; which comprehend all the Duties we owe to one
another?

And what now was there in all this, that the Prodigal could have any Cause to
complain of, or that should make his Father's House so uneasy to him? But his
Father had just Cause to be provoked, when his wise Counsels, and prudent Care,
and constant Kindness, and righteous Government were so much slighted and
despised by a disobedient and ungrateful Son; who had so little Sense of his
Duty or his Interest as to be weary of being so well at home, and therefore
impatiently desiring to find out new Methods of living well, as he then
thought, when the best Orders of his Father's Family were become so displeasing
to him.

(2.) But what were these new and fine Contrivances for his own happiness? He
began to suspect his wise Father did not allow his Children liberty enough at
home, and that he concealed from him the great Mystery of the Happiness of
Life, and therefore concluded, that if he did give way to those Desires which
he found to be natural, but his Father thought unreasonable, he should enjoy
much more Pleasure and Satisfaction than he did at home. And being resolved
upon this, he gives way to those Inclinations he found strongest in himself,
denies himself no Pleasures of Life, accounts Virtue but a Name which sour and
morose Persons put upon their own humors; and Religion but a Device for Fools
to deceive themselves, and Knaves to deceive others by. And so he throws off
all checks and restraints upon himself, and never regards the Good or Evil of
what he does, for his Lusts are his Laws, and the satisfaction of them he now
looks upon as the only real Happiness of Mankind.

And could any thing be supposed more provoking to his heavenly Father than
such a wicked and dissolute way of living? So contrary to his Father's Will, to
his own Reason, Conscience, Interest, Reputation; and which soon brought him to
Shame and Misery?

(3.) But that which added yet more to the height of the Provocation was, that
he did not think of returning home to his Father, upon the first apprehension
of his own Folly; but he resolved to undergo any difficulty, and submit to any
hardship, rather than do what was necessary in order to Reconciliation with his
Father.

How hard a Matter then is it to bring an habitual Sinner to Repentance! It is
not easy to bring him to any due and serious Conviction of the Evil of his
doings; but it is far more difficult to change the inward Disposition of the
Mind, and to alter all the great Designs and Pleasures of Life. It is but a
mean Notion of Repentance which is apt to prevail in the World, as though it
implied no more than some Acts of Contrition for greater Sins, when the Habit
and Disposition remain the same. But true Repentance is the turn of the whole
Soul from the Love, as well as the Practice of Sin; and this is not a thing to
be done easily or suddenly; a Sinner will bear a great many Checks and Reproofs
of Conscience before he will part with his beloved Sins; he will struggle a
great while with himself; and endure many Conflicts between an awakened
Conscience and rooted Inclinations, before the penitent Sinner can assure
himself that his Repentance has had its due and effectual operation upon him.
For we see here nothing but extremity brought the Prodigal to himself, and made
him at last to resolve to arise and go to his Father, etc. As Themistocles said
of the People Aelian. var. hist. l. 9. c. 18.
of Athens, they did by him, as Men commonly do by a great Tree, they run to it
for shelter in a Storm, but care not how they use it another Time; that is too
true of Sinners with respect to God; when they can make a shift for themselves
any other Way, they despise Religion; and make God their Refuge only at a day
of Extremity, but not their Choice, when their Conditions please them.

But when the prodigal Son had so slighted his Father, broken his Commands,
despised the Advantages he had at home, and was so hardly brought to think of
returning thither, how came he now to be so encouraged in his Mind to arise and
go to his Father, and confess his fault with hopes of being forgiven after all
this?

We find no other Account here given, but that he was his Father, however he
had offended him; and therefore he was resolved he would arise and go to his
Father; as though there were charms and force enough in that word to answer all
Discouragements. Which being an Argument taken from the Bowels of Pity and
Compassion which a Father has toward a relenting Child, we must enquire, how
far this will hold with respect to God, who is so infinitely above all the fond
Passions of humane Nature, that it is a diminution to his Glory and Majesty to
be thought like to Mankind; and therefore his thoughts and ways are said to be
as far above ours Isa. 55. 8, 9.
as the Heavens are above the Earth?

To clear this, we are to consider, not only that our Blessed Savior does here
lay the force and weight of the Parable upon the tenderness of a Father to his
Son; but that he elsewhere argues from it in such a manner as to convince us
that God has far greater Pity and Compassion toward Mankind when they make
due Applications to him, than Fathers can have toward their Children even when
they ask for necessary Sustenance. What Man is Matthew. 7. 9, 10, 11.
there of you, whom if his Son ask bread, will he give him a stone? Or, if he
ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then being evil know how to give
good gifts unto your Children, How much more shall your Father which is in
Heaven give good things to them that ask him? There have been Philosophers so
severe against the Passions of humane Nature, that they would not allow any
Pity or Commiseration toward others, whatever their Condition or Relation
were, but only acting according to Reason in supplying their Wants. But the
Christian Religion does far more reasonably allow such Passions in Mankind as
dispose them to do good to others, by fixing such an impression on their Minds
of others Misery as does excite them to do what is fitting for their Ease and
Support. And Compassion is not, as some imagine, such a mean and selfish
Passion, as does arise only from the Apprehension that we may suffer the same
things our selves, which we pity others for; but it is a generous Sense of what
others feel, joined with a Readiness to help them according to our Power. And
in this Sense, our Savior not only allows it in Fathers toward Children, but
looks on it as necessary in humane Nature in order to the good and advantage of
Mankind; and therefore himself taking our Nature upon him is said to be touched
with Heb. 4. 15. 5. 2.
the feeling of our Infirmities; and to have compassion on the Ignorant, and on
them that are out of the Way.

But although this be allowable in humane Nature, how can such a thing as
Compassion be attributed to the Divine Nature which is incapable of such
impressions and motions, which we are subject to?

And yet the Scripture is very full and clear in attributing Pity and
Compassion to Almighty God with respect to his Creatures. The Psalmist says,
The Lord is full of Compassion and Mercy; P^. 103. 8.
long-suffering, and of great Goodness. St. James says, He is very pitiful,
and Jam. 5. 11.
of tender Mercy. And in that wonderful Appearance to Moses, when God himself
declared his own Attributes, the greatest part consists of his Kindness and
Mercy toward Mankind; The Lord Exodus 34. 6, 7.
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and
Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.
And the Psalmist uses the very same similitude of a Father's Pity to his
Children, Like Ps. 103. 13.
as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. And
when the Prophet speaks of God's thoughts and ways being so much above Man's,
it is for this end to prove thereby that God may show more pity to Mankind,
than they find in their hearts to show to one another. Let Is. 55. 7.
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon; For my thoughts are not your thoughts, etc. But
setting aside all this, the whole Scheme of the Gospel is drawn upon the
Supposition of God's Pity and Compassion toward penitent Sinners; which is the
Reason our Savior insists so much on the Proof of it in this whole Chapter.
Wherein we not only read of Joy in v. 7. 10.
Heaven at the Repentance of a Sinner; but the Compassion of God Almighty
toward a penitent Sinner is set forth with all the tenderness of an indulgent
Father running into the Embraces of his Son, when he saw him at a distance
coming toward him.

What now is the meaning of all this? Are we to conceive of God as one like to
our selves, who either do not see faults in those we love; or do not hate them,
as we should do; or are too apt to pass them over; or are at first, it may be,
apt to be angry upon a slight provocation, and then as easily made Friends upon
as little Reason as we were made Angry? But none of these things ought to enter
into our Minds concerning God with respect to the Follies of Mankind.

And in this Case, if we will form in our Minds right and true Conceptions of
the Divine Nature (as we ought to do) we must have a great Care lest we
attribute any thing to God, which looks like Weakness and Imperfection, as the
Motions and Changes of Passions do; therefore to understand his Pity and
Compassion, and Reconciliation to penitent Sinners, we must first know what his
Anger and Displeasure against Sinners mean.

Some think that Epicurus did in earnest Lact. de Ira Dei, c. 4.
believe a God, but he was therefore forced to deny Providence, because he
could not conceive that the Government of the World could be managed without
such resentments as were inconsistent with the complete Happiness of the Divine
Being; and therefore he rather chose to make him careless and easy, than
active and liable to Passion. The Stoics attributed to God all that was good
and kind and obliging; but would by no means endure that ever he should be said
to be angry or displeased; which Doctrine did in effect overthrow Providence
with respect to moral Actions, as much as the Epicureans. For if God did not
regard the difference of Men's Actions, but was equally kind to them whether
they did good or evil, such a Providence would have as little influence on
Men's Lives as if there were none at all. We must then suppose, if we would
uphold Religion and Morality in the World, not only that there is a Providence,
but that God has a different regard to Men according to the Good or Evil of
their Actions. The Regard he has to Men for being good and doing good is
called his Love, his Kindness, his Goodwill, his Grace and Favor; that which
he has to things that are Evil is called his Hatred; that which he has to
Persons for doing Evil is his Anger, Wrath, Displeasure, Indignation; according
to the different Nature and Circumstances of their evil Actions.

But in order to the preventing any false or mean Apprehensions of the Divine
Nature, when the Passions of Mankind are attributed to it, we must consider
these two things;

(1.) That we must by no means attribute to God any thing that is unreasonable
in our selves; such are all irregular Motions, which we call violent Passions,
arising from Surprise, Mistake, Inadvertency, Weakness, or corrupt Inclination.
But setting all these aside, the original Passions of Mankind, which are
agreeable to Reason, are no other than what arise from an Inclination to what
we judge to be good, and an Aversion from what we apprehend to be evil; which
holds as to the Divine Nature.

(2.) That there is an observable Difference in the very Nature of some
Passions, which imply a Repugnancy in themselves to the Divine Perfections,
which others do not. For Love and Kindness, and Joy, and inward Satisfaction
have nothing in them supposing their Object good, but what agrees with the
Divine Nature; but the Passions contrary to these, as Envy, ^ll-will and
Revenge are not only repugnant as Passions, but in their own Nature; for God
cannot envy the Good of his Creatures, nor bear ill will to them as such, nor
take pleasure in their Torments. And of this Nature Anger properly taken is, as
it does imply a present Disorder and Disturbance within, from the Apprehension
of some Injury done or intended, with a Desire of Revenge on those who do it;
all which is inconsistent with the necessary Perfections of God; for they argue
Meanness, Imperfection and Mutability.

We must therefore fix on such a Notion of Anger as becomes the Almighty Wisdom
and Goodness; and that lies in,

(1.) A Displeasure against the Sinner on the account of his Sins; for God
cannot have any Complacency in those who displease him as all Sinners do,
whether they design it or not.

(2.) A Will to punish Sinners according to their Demerits; which being
according to the Rules of Wisdom and Righteous Government, cannot be said to
argue an indecent Passion.

(3.) The actual Execution of his Justice upon great Provocations. And so God
is said to be angry when he punishes; especially when he does it suddenly and
severely; as Men in their Passion are wont to do. But whatever God does in this
kind, he does it with the Wisdom and Temper of a Judge, and not with the Fury
or Passion of an angry Being.

And there is nothing in all this unbecoming the Divine Nature, but very
agreeable thereto. And this is all which in strictness of Reason is understood
by God's being angry with Mankind. For we must never imagine that God acts
according to sudden Heats and Passions; but whatever he does is according to
the Counsels of infinite Wisdom and Goodness.

I do not deny that the Scripture does represent Anger in God as if it were a
Passion raised upon great Provocation, and capable of being laid by Submission
and true Repentance. Thence we read, of God's Wrath waxing hot, of his Exodus
32. 10. Isa. 5. 26. Jon. 3. 9.
Anger kindling against his People, and his turning away from his fierce Anger,
and many such Expressions; but so we read of the Fire of his Indignation, the
Sword of his Wrath, the Stretching forth of his Hand; which all grant are not
to be literally understood. If then in these Expressions, the Perfections of
the Divine Nature are to be our Rule, according to which we must interpret
them, because the literal sense implies an incongruity to the Divine
Perfections which are all wholly Spiritual; then from the same R^ason we must
remove all Perturbations from it which are as inconsistent with the absolute
Perfection of it, as Eyes and Ears and Hands and Feet are, although they are
all mentioned in Scripture.

From whence we justly infer, that there is a wonderful Condescension to the
ordinary Capacities and common Apprehensions of Mankind in the Language of
Scripture, concerning the Divine Nature, which makes deeper impressions on
meaner understandings, and those who are of finer thoughts will see cause to
attribute only such a Sense of things relating to God, as is consistent with
his Infinite and Divine Perfections.

But what now shall we say to this Tenderness and Compassion of God toward
penitent Sinners? Can he be moved by our Trouble and Sorrow and Acts of
Contrition for our Sins? If we be righteous what does it profit the Almighty?
And if we be evil, how can it hurt him? And if when we have sinned, we repent,
we do no more than is fitting for us; but why should we imagine the Great and
Wise God should have Compassion upon us, when we become sensible of our own
Folly? For when we sin against God, wilfully, deliberately, knowingly,
habitually, we do what lies in us to provoke him to Wrath and Indignation
against us; we reject his wise Government, we slight his righteous Laws, we
prefer the pleasing our corrupt Inclinations and sensual Lusts before our
heavenly Father. And what can be more provoking to him than to be so despised
by one who had his Being and all the Comforts of Life from him?

Suppose now such a disobedient, rebellious Son, as here in the Parable, be
made sensible of his Folly, is his Father bound to receive him? Was it not his
own choice to go from him? If he has suffered by his Folly, he may thank
himself for it; and if his Father lets him alone in it, he has no cause to
complain.

But such was the Tenderness of the Father toward his repenting Son, that he
showed the greatest Compassion imaginable; for he did not stay at home
expecting his Son's solemn Submission before his Family, but he ran toward
him, and fell upon his Neck, and kissed him.

What Conceptions now ought we to have of God's Compassion toward penitent
Sinners answerable to all this? This I shall endeavor to clear in these
Particulars.

(1.) That God's hatred is not primarily against Persons who are his Creatures;
but against that which is evil, which is none of his making; and against
Persons only so far as they are corrupted with Evil. Thou love Righteousness,
Psalm. 45. 7.
and hate Wickedness, faith the Psalmist. God hates nothing for its own sake,
but Sin; and for the sake of that he hates all Workers of Iniquity. Ps. 5. 5.


(2.) There may be Good Will toward the Person of a Sinner at the same time
when God discovers the hatred of his Sins. I do not say, God takes any Pleasure
in him while he goes on in Sin, for that is against the Eternal Rules of
Righteousness in God; but that he may have so much Good Will toward him, as to
design to reduce him from his evil Ways. And this every Father finds in himself
toward a disobedient Son; while he hates his evil Courses, yet he would make
use of the best Methods to bring him to himself, and to his Duty. And upon this
is grounded that Love and Kindness of Tit. 3. 4.
God toward Mankind, in sending his Son to be our Savior, and all the
Promises and Invitations which are made to Sinners in the Doctrine of the
Gospel.

(3.) It is very agreeable to Infinite Wisdom and Goodness for God to show
himself full of Pity and Compassion toward penitent Sinners, i. e. so as to
forgive them their former Sins, and to receive them into his Favor. For Pity
and Compassion in God is to be judged, not according to the inward Motions we
find in our selves, but according to these two things.

(1.) A readiness to do good to his Creatures according to their Necessities.
Which being in general, is his Bounty and Goodness; but considered with respect
to the Persons of Sinners, it is his Clemency, or readiness to forgive; and
with respect to the Punishment they deserve by their Sins, it is his Mercy and
Pity: Which in us is Aegritudo ex Miseri^ alterius, and therefore called
Misericordia, because the Heart is touched with the Sense of another's Misery;
but we are not so to apprehend it in God; but that such is the Goodness of God
toward repenting Sinners, that he is as willing to show Mercy as they are to
repent.

(2.) God's Pity and Compassion lies in the proper Effects of it; which here in
the Case of the Prodigal were, passing by his former Extravagances, and
receiving him into as much Favor as if he had not gone astray. This my Son was
dead, and is alive again; was lost, v. 24. 32.
and is found. Those who think, they stand not in need of so much pardoning
Mercy as others do, are apt to repine at the Favor showed to great Sinners
when they repent; and therefore the Elder Brother could not bear the expressing
so much kindness toward such a disobedient Son, though now a Penitent. But
that there is nothing disagreeing to Infinite Wisdom and Goodness in such
Compassion toward penitent Sinners, will more fully appear, if we consider,

(1.) That God is not bound to deal with Sinners according to the utmost Rigor
and Severity of his Justice. Because he is under no fatal Necessity; no
superior Law; and therefore may act freely in the forgiving Offenders as seems
best to his Infinite Wisdom. The whole Race of Mankind is a perpetual Evidence
that God does not act according to the strictness of his Justice, for if he had
dealt with them after their Sins, or rewarded them according to their
Iniquities; their Spirits would have failed before him, and the Souls which he
had made; they had been long since destroyed from the Face of the Earth, and
not suffered to continue in their Provocations. But God has not only forborne
Sinners long when he might justly have punished them; but he gives them many
real Blessings and Comforts of Life, freely and bountifully. Now if God deal so
mercifully with Sinners while they continue such, is there not greater Reason
to suppose he will be far more so, when they cease to be such?

(2.) A penitent Sinner does what in him lies to vindicate God's Honor. I do
not say, he can make satisfaction to Divine Justice; for that is impossible for
him to do; and God has provided for that by his own Son, whom he has made a
Propitiation for the Sins of the World. But a true Penitent takes all the Shame
and Dishonor to himself; he clears the Justice of God's Government, and the
Equity of his Laws, and owns himself guilty of unspeakable Folly in his
Disobedience. O how justly, says he, might God have taken me away in the midst
of my Sins, when my Conscience checked me for my Sins, and yet I had no heart
to repent of them! When I could not but see my danger, and yet was unwilling to
come out of it. I can never be sufficiently thankful for so great a Mercy as
his bringing me to my self has been; I had gone on in the same secure, stupid,
senseless Condition, that others lie in, if he had not thoroughly awakened me,
and roused me out of my impenitent State. How dreadful had my Condition for
ever been, if my first awakening had been in the Flames of Hell? Nothing but
infinite Goodness and Patience would have waited so long for the Repentance of
such an Offender as I have been. I have sinned so often, that I am ashamed to
think of the Number of my Transgressions; so deeply, that I am confounded at
the thoughts of them; so foolishly, that I am unworthy to be called thy Son,
who have acted so unlike thy Children (so the prodigal Son here speaks to his
Father.) And if thou would admit me but to the meanest Condition of thy
Servants, I shall ever esteem it as the greatest Privilege of my Life, and
endeavor to serve Thee for the future though in the lowest Capacity. Thus the
repenting Prodigal goes on, v 19. And in a suitable Manner every true Penitent
behaves himself toward God with great Humility, and a deep Sense of his own
Unworthiness; and is thereby rendered more capable of Divine Favor. For God
re^steth the proud, but Jam. 4. 6.
gives grace to the humble. And therefore it is very agreeable to infinite
Wisdom and Goodness to show pity toward a truly humble and penitent Sinner;
For a broken and contrite heart he will not despise. Ps. 51. 17.


(3.) If God were not so full of Compassion to penitent Sinners, there would
have been no encouragement for Sinners to repent; but they must have sunk into
everlasting Despair. For if God should forgive none that Sin, then all Mankind
must be condemned to Eternal Misery; for all have sinned; and Romans 3. 23. Eccl.
7. 20.
there is not a just Man upon Earth who sins not; and so the best and worst,
and all forts of Sinners must here suffer together; which would have taken away
all the Notion of any such thing as Mercy and Clemency in God toward Mankind.
But if we set bounds to it as to some particular kinds and degrees of sinning;
we limit that which is infinite; we determine what we know not, viz. how far
God's Mercy does extend; we destroy the Power of Divine Grace in changing and
reforming the worst of Men. But the Scriture has recorded some remarkable
Instances of great Sinners, who have been great Penitents, and upon that have
been pardoned (such as Manasses, and some others) that no penitent Sinner might
be discouraged in the Work of Repentance. For a true Penitent searching to the
bottom, and setting all his Sins before him, with their several Aggravations,
can be kept from Despair by nothing less than the Infinite Mercy of God to
those who truly repent.

(4.) Because there is nothing so provoking in Sin, as obstinate Impenitency,
and Continuance in it.

It is true, God hates all Sin for its own sake; but not all equally; some Sins
being of a higher Nature than others are; being against plainer Light, stronger
Convictions, more easy Commands, stricter Obligations than others are; but yet
it is the Temper of a Sinner's Mind, which is most provoking, when Sins are
committed, not through Infirmity, or sudden Surprise, or a violent Temptation;
but habitually, knowingly, wilfully; especially when they are done in Contempt
of God and his Laws, and with an obstinate Resolution to continue in the
Practice of them. This is so provoking to God, that the chief Reason of the
severe Punishments of Sinners in another World is taken from thence; because
God hates obstinate and impenitent Sinners. And thus Exodus 34. 7. 1 John 5. 16,
17.
he will by no means acquit the Guilty. There is a Sin unto death, says St.
John, and there is a Sin not unto death. There is a Sin unto death, which
Christ has said he will never pardon; and that is blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost; a Sin which none who do truly own Christianity, Matthew. 12. 32.
are capable of committing.

But is there then no Sin unto death to them? Yes, it is possible for Men who
have clear Convictions in their minds of the Truth of the Gospel, to act so
plainly, and wilfully, and directly against it, as either to provoke God to
take them away by an extraordinary Judgment, and so it is properly a Sin unto
death; or to withdraw his Grace from them, and leave them to the hardness of
their own Hearts, and so it becomes a Sin unto a Spiritual death. But besides
these Cases; every wilful Sinner who adds Impenitency to his Sin, commits the
Sin unto death; because there is no other Condition of Pardon allowed by the
Gospel without true Repentance.

How infinite is the Goodness of God that excludes no Sinners from the hopes of
Pardon who have a heart to repent sin^erely of their Sins! And how just is God
in the final Punishment of those Sinners, who still go on in their Sins, and
refuse to repent; after all the Invitations and Encouragements which are given
them to that End! Can we in Reason suppose that God should stoop lower toward
Sinners, than to offer them pardon of former Sins, if they do repent; and to
tell them they must expect no Mercy in another World if they do not repent?

But suppose we are come thus far, that we are convinced we must repent, what
Course and Method must we take in order to it? Of this briefly, and so to
conclude.

Secondly, I know no better than to follow the Example of the prodigal Son
here: And in the first place to form a present, sincere, fixed and peremptory
Resolution of do^ng it; I will arise and go to my Father, etc. If we suffer
Convictions to cool upon our Minds, the force and spirit of them will soon be
gone. It has been of late observed by the strictest Enquirers into Nature,
that Harv. Exerc. 16, 17, 18.
the beginnings of Life are very small, and hardly discernible. It is but as a
spark that appears, and may easily be exstinguished; but if it be encouraged by
a continual heat, a wonderful Alteration soon follows, and the distinct parts
begin to be formed; the first which is discerned is the Eye, but the Fountain
of Life is in the Heart; and when the Course of the Blood is there settled, the
other parts come to their due formation with greater quickness. This may be a
Representation of the first Beginnings of Spiritual Life, that which answers to
the Eye is the Conviction of the Mind, where the inward Change first appears;
that which answers to the Heart is Resolution, and when that is fixed, a mighty
Reformation will soon follow. But Spiritual Life as well as Natural is in its
first Beginnings a very nice and tender thing, it may be easily stopped, and very
hardly recovered: It is therefore of very great Concernment to keep up the
Warmth of our first Resolutions, and to improve them into a present Practice
agreeable thereto; as the prodigal Son here did, who when he had resolved upon
it, did accordingly arise and go to his Father, v. 20.

I do not think there are many Persons in the World who have Convictions upon
their Minds of the Evil of their Ways; but do resolve at one time or other
before they die to repent of their Sins, and to make their Peace with God. But
alas! these are Ova subventanea, they make a fair appearance, but there is no
principle of Life in them; or as St. Jude expresses it, they are Clouds without
Water; of no Consistency, Jud. v. 12.
but carried about with winds; hurried to and fro with the force and power of
Temptations; and then their Resolutions are like the Vapors St. James speaks
of, which appear for a little Time, Jam. 4. 14.
and then vanish away. Trees they are without fruit, as St. Jude goes on,
(...); not that make no show or appearance of Fruit; but it has no such
firmness and substance in it as to endure the nipping Frosts, and so it drops
off, and withers away. Just such are the Effects of faint and imperfect
Resolutions, they never hold out long, and only aggravate the Sins committed
after them. For every such Sin is a plain Sin against Conscience; or else they
would never have made any Resolution against it. And those who continue to sin
after Resolutions against their Sins, not only lose all the Peace and Comfort
of their Minds, but make it much harder for them, either to make or trust their
Resolutions again, and consequently to be satisfied of the Sincerity of their
Repentance.

If we would then lay a sure Foundation for the Satisfaction of our Minds in a
matter of such unconceivable Moment as the Truth of our Repentance is, let us
call our selves to an Account as to this matter of the firm Purpose and
Resolution of our Minds. Have we strictly examined our selves as to our
particular Sins? For there is no Age, no Employment, no Condition of Life but
has its Temptations belonging to it; which require not only our Care and
Consideration, but Resolution to keep us from them. But suppose we have been
overcome by the Sin which does so easily beset us; the Work is harder to
recover the Ground we have lost, than at first to maintain it; but if we have
sinned, we must repent; and the sooner the better; but it is not to be done
without awakening the drousie and benumbed Faculties of our Minds, and
exercising the secret and hidden Powers therein. Not as though this were to be
done without the Grace of God preventing and assisting us; but because God
works in us to will and to do of his good Pleasure, we ought to work out our
own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Let us then trifle no longer in a Work we can never do too well, nor too soon;
nor go about it with too much Resolution. It is the want of this, which ruins
such a Number of those who would fain go to Heaven, but have not Courage and
Resolution enough, to own their Repentance, and to break off their former Sins:
They are half Penitents; they are inwardly troubled for them, and wish
themselves able to withstand the next Temptation; but when it comes, they yield
and suffer themselves to be drawn away, as a Bird hastes to the Snare, and
knows not that it is for his Life. Prove. 7. 23.
Now in such Cases, Resolution is not only a convenient and proper thing; but a
very wise thing. For, when once a Resolution is found to be serious, and in
good earnest, the former Companions in wickedness will leave off to solicit;
and if once a penitent Sinner can endure to be despised, and exposed for a time
by evil Men for owning his Repentance, he will find the other parts of his
Change grow more easy to him; and the Devil's Instruments in tempting will be
like himself; i. e. they will give over tempting when they see no hopes to
prevail. And let no Men ever complain that they want Power to break off their
former Sins, till they have tried what the strength of a Vigorous Resolution
will do. But because we have always Reason to suspect our selves, let us make
our devout Applications to Almighty God to give us the Assistance of his Grace
through the only Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

SERMON II. Scripture and Tradition COMPARED; In a SERMON Preached at
Guild-Hall-Chapel, November. the 27th 1687.
Coloss. II. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him.
THERE are two things observable in the manner of St. Paul's expressing himself
to the Colossians in this Epistle,

1. That he had a very good opinion of them at present, as appears by the
foregoing Verse. For though I be absent in the Flesh, yet am I with you in the
Spirit, joying, and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in
Christ.

What could be said more to the Advantage and Honor of a Christian Church? For
Order is the Strength and Beauty of any Society, uniting the several Parts to
each other, and thereby preserving and adorning the whole Body. And the more
there is of this in any Christian Church, the more it resembles the Body of
Christ, and the greater Honor it brings to the Christian Profession.
Especially, when it is joined with a stedfastness of Faith in Christ, i. e.
with a firm and well settled Resolution to adhere to that Faith which Christ
himself delivered. For the true Faith of Christ is not only the Mark which
distinguishes, but the Soul which enlivens the Body of the Church, and by its
Vigor and Influence makes the several Parts of it become the living Members of
Christ's Body.

But if all this were seen by St. Paul in the Church of the Colossians, what
need he to write so warmly and earnestly as he does to them? Must we think, as
some do, that he uses these Expressions as gentle Methods of Insinuation, and
commends them for that, which he would persuade them to? But this does not seem
agreeable to the Apostles simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
which he elsewhere sets such a value upon. But it is far more probable that
hitherto they had been very orderly and steadfast: But Epaphras going to St.
Paul had informed him thoroughly of their condition, viz. That they were like a
Garrison closely besieged on all sides; and although hitherto they had held out
with great Courage, yet he did not know what earnest Solicitations, and fair
Promises, and tempting Motives might do with them, and therefore the Apostle
writes this Epistle to encourage them in their stedfastness, and to warn them
against Temptations. Which he does in such a manner, as shows,

2. That he had a more than ordinary Apprehension of the danger they were in.
And this I say, says he, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words,
v. 4: And beware lest any man spoil you with Philosophy and vain deceit, after
the Traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ,
v. 8. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels, etc. v. 18. All which expressions do imply, that he had
just reason to fear and to give them caution in time, that while they did yet
think that they stood, they should take heed lest they fell.

And this is that which the Apostle aims at in the words of the Text; As ye
have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.

Receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, does not here relate to his Person, but to
his Authority, and to his Doctrine; so the Apostle himself explains it in the
next Verse, Rooted and built up in him, and established in the Faith, as ye
have been taught.

Walking in him is an Eastern-way of speaking and supposes both an adhering to
that Faith they had then received, and living according to it, looking on
Christ and his Doctrine, as their only way to Heaven.

And as ye had received him, so walk ye in him, implies that the manner of
their receiving Christ and his Doctrine at first was different from that which
the false Apostles endeavored to bring in among them, and that they were bound
to keep close to that pure and primitive Doctrine which they at first received.

From hence we may consider a double Obligation lying upon them.

1. To keep steadfast to that Faith which they first received, without being
seduced from it by the Arts of Deceivers, who were then busy among them.

2. To live according to it, by making that Faith the Principle of a Christian
Life; and so walking in him, as they have received him.

1. As to the former, the Reasonableness of it cannot but appear from the
supposition here made, viz. that they had received Christ Jesus the Lord.

For, thereby they declared, that they received him as the Christ, i. e. as him
who was anointed of the Father to teach and instruct his Church; and therefore
they were bound to adhere to his Doctrine; there being no other, whom the
Father has sealed and appointed to declare his Will; and in him were hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Col. 2. 3.


They received him as Christ Jesus, that is, they hoped for Redemption through
Col. 1. 14.
his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins. And if their hopes of Heaven depended
upon his Mediation, they had the greatest Reason to adhere only to him.

They received him as Christ Jesus the Lord, and therefore they ought to submit
to his Authority, to obey his Commands, and to observe his Institutions, and in
all Circumstances of Life to keep steadfast to the Doctrine which he delivered.

But here arises the great Difficulty, how they should know by any certain
Rule, what was the true and genuine Doctrine of Christ, which himself
delivered? For,

1. The false Teachers among them pretended to deliver the true Doctrine of
Christ as well as the Apostles.

2. That which they at first received was no certain Rule. For the false
Teachers might have been before them. And first Possession gives no Title in
Religion.

3. The Apostle does not put the whole Trial merely upon their Judgments or
Memories, or Capacities; viz. What they thought, or remembered was at first
taught them for the Doctrine of Christ.

For, it was very possible for them to have mistaken, or to have mis-remembred,
what was at first delivered.

Nothing can be more weak than to imagine that the Judgments of People in
Matters of Faith, must be formed according to the skill and excellency of their
Teachers. For the hearers of Christ himself; although he spoke as never Man
spoke, yet did very often mistake his meaning. And at one time so remarkably,
that although he took care to rectify their misapprehension, yet it is said,
From that time many of his Disciples John 6. 66.
went back and walked no more with him. So that the highest Infallibility in
the Teachers, does not prevent the Possibility, or the danger of mistaking in
the Hearers. And whatsoever any vainly pretend, nothing can do it, but
Transfusing the Spirit of Infallibility into all.

If we look over the Apostolical Churches while they were under the Care and
Conduct of an infallible Spirit; yet this did not prevent their running into
great Errors and Mistakes, as appears by the Account we have of them, given by
that Spirit which cannot deceive in the Apostolical Writings.

In the Church of Rome it self, even at that time, when its Faith was spoken of
throughout the World, yet there were Romans 1. 8.
dissensions and differences there, and such as were contrary to the Doctrine
which was delivered. And St. Paul bids them to mark such which caused them; 16,
17.
he does not say, it was impossible for them to introduce any thing contrary to
the Doctrine which they had learned by Tradition from the Apostles; but he not
only supposes it very possible, but he bids them have a particular Eye to them,
lest they should be deceived by them.

The Church of Corinth was planted by Paul, and watered by Apollos; and there
were Disciples of Cephas and of Christ himself. And yet in the Midst of so many
infallible Teachers, they had like to have lost all their Faith; as one of them
tells them. How say some among 1 Cor. 15. 12. 14.
you there is no Resurrection of the dead? And if Christ be not risen, then is
our Preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain. Could not they remember to day
what was taught them yesterday, and so what the Apostles at first preached to
them?

The Churches of Galatia had such an opinion of St. Paul, upon his first
preaching the Gospel among them, that they received him as an Angel of God,
even as Gal. 4. 14.
Christ Jesus; yet presently after he says, am I therefore become your Enemy
because I tell you the Truth? What! Of an Angel of God, or of one received as
Christ Jesus, 16.
to become their Enemy, and that upon the most unjustifiable Account, because
he told them the Truth! But, where Truth can make Enemies, Errors may easily
gain Friends. And so we find it was in the Apostolical Churches, even under the
Conduct and Teaching of the Apostles.

The Colossians were not yet so far gone; but they were in such danger, that
the Apostle writes this Epistle with great Concernment for them. He tells them
v. 1. he had a sharp Conflict in his own mind about them. They had not yet seen
his Face in the Flesh, being converted Chapter 1. v. 7. 4. 12.
by some sent by him, of whom Epaphras is most taken notice of; but he was
present with them in Spirit, v. 5. i. e. He was deeply affected with their
Condition; for he understood the Designs and Artifices of the Seducers among
them. He knew what fair and plausible Pretenses they had; viz. that they went
about not to undermine Christianity, but to advance it, by taking in some
Jewish Customs, and some Gentile Observances, and Modes of Worship which might
easily be accommodated to the Christian Doctrine; and so a great deal of the
Animosities both of the Jews and Heathens would be removed; and Christianity
would thereby gain more Friends, and meet with fewer Enemies.

The Apostle finding how necessary it was at this time, if possible, to keep
them steadfast in the Faith,

1. He assures them, that the Christian Doctrine was of it self so sufficient
for the good of Mankind, that it needed no Additions, either from the Law of
Moses, or the Philosophy of the Gentiles, which might introduce several things,
with a specious Appearance of Wisdom, Humility and Mortification; but they
ought to be assured, that from Christ they had all that was necessary or
useful for Salvation; For in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and v. 3.
Knowledge.

2. That this Doctrine was at first truly delivered to them, and they ought to
be steadfast in it; which is the design of the Text.

But they might object that Epaphras was no Apostle of Christ himself; and if
he were, yet there were many Apostles, and the false Apostles pretended to be
true ones; and although St. Paul interposed his Authority; yet he was but one,
and the Judaizers would not yield to it, but were ready to suggest, that the
other Apostles were more favorable to the Jewish Customs than he; and
therefore it was necessary some more general and common Rule be found out,
whereby to distinguish the Original and Genuine Doctrine of Christ from that of
Pretenders and Seducers.

The clearing of this is in it self a Matter of great Consequence; and not only
was to those of that Age, but is so in every Age of the Christian Church, where
the same Question may be put: What was the true Primitive Doctrine of Christ;
and by what means may we come to it? which concerns us at this day as well as
them.

And the Answer lay in two particulars, which I shall endeavor to clear.

1. That which the Apostles did in common deliver to the Churches planted by
them, was the Genuine Doctrine of Christ.

2. That which they have left in their Writings, after it came to be contested
which was the true Doctrine of Christ.

1. That which the Apostles did in common deliver to the Churches planted by
them. For, we have all the reason in the World to believe, that the Apostles
delivered one and the same Faith to all the Churches; having the same
infallible Spirit to direct them. There was no need for them to meet together
before their dispersion, and to agree upon some common Article of Faith, as
Ruffinus Ruffin. iil Symbol.
imagines, lest they should differ from each other; For how could they differ,
who had the same Spirit of Truth to lead Joh. 16. 13.
them into all Truth? And we find nothing like a Combination among the
Apostles, as to Matters of Doctrine: And if there had been, it would have
rendered the Faith they delivered more suspicious, in that they durst not trust
particular Persons with delivery of it, without an antecedent Confederacy among
themselves, which would have looked like a mistrust of that Promise of the
Spirits being fulfilled, upon all of them. And we find, when the Gospels were
to be written, there was no such meeting together, to settle the several Parts
of it; and yet this was of as much consequence to the Church of God; but St.
Matthew writes his Gospel in Judoea, at the time, says Irenoeus, that Peter
and Paul preached and founded a Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
Church in Rome, St. Mark either at Rome or in Egypt, not till after their
decease, says the same very Ancient Father: St. Luke in Greece, after St. Paul
planted Eusebius. l. 5. c. 18.
Churches in Rome, and St. John in Asia, after all the rest. But there was the
same Divine Spirit, which assisted them all, and therefore there was such a
concurrence as showed their veracity, but such a variety as showed there was no
Combination.

But it is observable, that none of the Gospels were written till the Doctrine
of Christ had been preached by the Apostles in many Places, and many Churches
were formed and established by them. And there were two great Advantages
thereby.

1. The Unity of the Faith delivered by the Apostles was the more seen; because
then without the help of a written Rule, they so unanimously agreed in the
Doctrines they delivered. Not, as though it were less possible to mistake
without it; but on the contrary, there being a much greater liableness to
mistake, so Universal a consent, was the stronger Argument of a Divine
Assistance. If there had been any difference in the Doctrines preached by the
Apostles, there were so many Enemies both of Jews and Infidels, and false
Apostles, who would presently have reproached the Christian Churches with it.
But no disagreement is ever so much as mentioned, as to what the Apostles
themselves taught; They had one Body, one Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. Wherever
the Apostles went, whether into Scythia, Parthia, Mesopotamia, or any Provinces
of the Roman Empire, all who were converted by them were baptized into the same
Faith, which St. Jude calls the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Jude v. 3.
But once delivered though by many Persons, and in very distant places; and so
once delivered, as the same Faith once delivered is to continue to the World's
end. For nothing can be made the Faith of Christ, which was not always so; for
that were to lay a new foundation, and to make another Covenant than what
Christ has sealed with his Blood. But he is the same yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
to day, and for ever. The Terms of Salvation can never be altered, unless
there be a new Savior, and new Apostles, and new Teachers. But if we go to
Heaven by Christ, we must go that way that himself has directed. For Men and
Angels joining their Powers together cannot save one Soul; Christ alone being
the Way, the Truth and the John 14. 6.
Life; and none can come to the Father but by him. This the Apostles very well
knew, and were therefore careful to deliver nothing to the Church but what
they received from Christ, as St. Paul says of himself, For I have received of
1 Cor. 11.
the Lord that which I delivered unto you. Not by way of Tradition from Men,
but by immediate Divine Revelation; for as he says, he was not an Apostle of
Men, or by Men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Call. 1. 1.
Father; and not long after he says, he neither received the Gospel of Man,
neither 12.
was I taught it but by Revelation of Jesus Christ.

There was none of all the first Preachers of the Gospel so liable to the
Suspicion of setting up for himself, and varying from the rest as St. Paul was.
For he was none of the Original Number of Apostles, and he was a known
Persecutor of the Disciples of Christ and sudden Converts are always suspected;
and Ananias had a Vision to satisfy him, and yet he could not tell what to
think at first concerning him; and the Disciples when they first heard him were
amazed; after this, he took a Acts 9. 13. 21. Gal. 1. 17.
course by himself, and did not go up to Jerusalem to the College of Apostles
there resident, but went into Arabia; so that, if any one might be thought to
set up another Doctrine, it was he; but he was so far from it, that he
established and confirmed the Truth of what they delivered, and was very
successful in his Apostleship in all Places. And when there had been some
Whispers concerning him, as though he proceeded not in the same way with the
rest, he went up to Jerusalem, and there upon full examination, James and
Cephas, and John, who were the leading Apostles, 2. 9.
gave him the Right Hand of Fellowship; in token of their full consent in the
same Faith.

2. The truth of the Gospel was the more plainly discovered.

All this while, the Apostles only preached and delivered their Doctrine to the
several Churches by verbal Instructions; but after these had been received in
the hearts of such Multitudes, that there could be no suspicion that a false
Representation of Christ's Doctrine or Actions could be received by those
Churches, then the wise Providence of God took care for Posterity, and employed
several Persons in distant Places and Times to write the History of our
Savior. And there was this advantage to the Church that the Gospels were
written no sooner. For all the Churches planted by the Apostles, were then made
Judges whether the Gospels written were agreeable to the Doctrine which the
Apostles had taught; and if not, there would have been just reason to have
questioned either the Truth of what had been taught them, or what was delivered
in the Gospels.

But when they found the main to be fully consonant to what they had been
taught, the Testimony of every one of these Churches did show the concurrence
of all the Apostles, as to the Doctrine contained in the several Gospels.

And that which adds to the strength of this Proof is, that when the true
Gospels were written, there were several false and counterfeit Gospels
dispersed abroad under the Names of the Apostles themselves. As of St. Peter,
St. Thomas, St. Matthias, and others; as Eusebius informs us; and as we have
Eusebius. Hi^^ l. 3. c. 25.
the genuine Acts of the Apostles, so there were the pretended Acts of Paul, of
Andrew and John, and the other Apostles. How came these to be rejected, and the
other to be carefully received? Here lies the true Advantage of Original
Tradition before the written Gospels, that by it the several Churches were
enabled to pass a true Judgment concerning them when they came to be dispersed
among them. For they could presently tell, whether what they read were agreeable
to what they had heard and received from the Apostles. As suppose the Gospel of
St. Matthew being published in Judoea, were carried into Mesopotamia or Persia,
where many Christian Churches were very early planted; these being thoroughly
instructed by the Apostles in all things relating to the Life, Death,
Resurrection and Doctrine of Christ, could presently judge whether St.
Matthew's Gospel agreed with what they had heard or not, and the like holds as
to all the Churches in the Roman Empire. So that the consent of the Churches so
soon, while the Memory of the Apostles Doctrine was so fresh in their minds, is
in effect the consent of all the Apostles who taught them.

And this is very different from the case of particular Persons in some
Churches, who might mistake or forget what was taught; for this is a concurrent
Testimony of all the Apostolical Churches, who could not agree to approve an
Error in the Gospels contrary to the Faith delivered to them. And that while
some of the Apostles were still living. For the other Gospels were received and
approved, before St. John wrote his.

The case had been far otherwise, if no Gospels had been written in that Age;
for then it might have been suspected, that either the Impressions of the first
Teachers were worn out, or they had been by degrees altered from their first
Apprehensions by the cunning craftiness of those who lay in wait to deceive
them.

After the decease of the Apostles, the common Tradition of the Apostolical
Churches was useful in these cases;

1. To convey down the Authentic Writings of the Apostles or Evangelists,
which were delivered to any of them.

2. To bear Testimony against any pretended Writings, which were not first
received by the Apostolical Churches to which they were said to be written. For
there can be no Negative Testimony of more force than that; it being improbable
to the utmost degree that such a Church should not know, or not make known any
true Apostolical Writings.

3. To overthrow any pretense to a secret Tradition from the Apostles different
from what was seen in the Apostolical Writings. And to this purpose Irenoeus
Iren. l. 3. c. 3, 4. Tertul. de Praescript. Haer.
and Tertullian make very good use of the Tradition of the Apostolical Churches
against the pretenders to such a Tradition, which those Churches were not
acquainted with.

But they agree that the Apostles committed the same Doctrine to writing which
they preached, and that it might be a Foundation and Pillar of Faith; that this
Doctrine was contained in the four Gospels; and that the Apostolical Churches
did receive them from those who first wrote them, and that within the compass
of the Apostolical Age.

It was therefore most agreeable to the infinite Wisdom of God in providing for
a constant Establishment of the Faith of his Church in all Ages, neither to
permit the Gospels to be written till the Churches were planted, nor to be put
off to another Generation. For, then it would have been plausibly objected; if
these things are true, why were they not recorded, when there were Persons
living who were best able to have either proved, or confuted them? Then we
might have been satisfied one way or other; but now the Jews are dead, and the
Apostles are dead; and although there are many left who believe their Doctrine,
yet this can never reach to the Testimony of those who saw and heard the things
themselves, or whose Doctrine was attested by those who did so. And this is now
the mighty Advantage of the Church ever since that the things concerning Christ
were written by such Persons. With what another kind of Authority do those
words command our Assent, That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3.
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled of the Word of Life; For the life was manifested, and we have seen
it, and bear witness, and show unto you that Eternal Life; which was with the
Father, and was manifest unto us, that which we have seen and heard declare we
unto you; then if all the Testimony concerning Christ were to be resolved into
those who heard some say, that others told them, they had it from such, who saw
those who conversed with them who saw Christ in the Flesh? At such a distance
the Authority of a Testimony is extremely lessened; which is not like a River
which grows greater by running; but like a mineral Water which loses its
strength by being carried too far. We find in the time of Papias who lived but
in the second Century, the Authority of bare Tradition was mightily sunk; For,
Eusebius says he conversed Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 39^
with the Disciples of our Lord and his Apostles, he says of himself, that he
went up and down to them to get what he could from them, having a greater
esteem of what he could learn from them than of what was written. And what
Advantage did this bring to the Church? It brought some idle opinions into
reputation, says Eusebius; for afterward they thought it enough to fix them
upon Papias. But how was it possible for him to mistake? Eusebius says, that
being a Man of mean capacity, he might easily misunderstand the meaning of what
was spoken. But if Tradition might fail after such a manner so near the
Apostle's times; then we must be assured of the Capacity as well as Integrity
of those of every Age through whom a Tradition passed, or else they might
deceive, or be deceived about it.

But God was pleased to provide better for the security of our Faith, by
causing the Gospels to be written either by the Apostles themselves, as St.
Matthew and St. John, or by the Disciples of the chief Apostles, while the
others were surviving, as St. Mark and St. Luke; and the latter gives this
account of his undertaking to write it, viz. That thou might know the the
certainty of those Luke 1. 4.
things wherein thou have been instructed. His instruction was by an Oral
Tradition; but that it seems wanted something to strengthen and confirm it; and
that was by St. Luke's writing his Gospel. How could they add any assurance to
him, if all the ground of his certainty were to be taken from Tradition? St.
Luke thought it necessary then, that those things which concerned the Life and
Doctrine of Christ should be put into Writing, that they might be more
certainly conveyed; and that while they had the Testimony of those, who were
Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word.

2. And so I come to the second Rule of discerning the Primitive Doctrine of
Christ; viz. The Writings of the Apostles, when Matters of Doctrine came to be
contested, were the infallible Rule, whereby they were to judge, which was the
true and genuine Doctrine of Christ.

There are some who pretend, that the Apostle's Writings were merely Accidental
and Occasional things, but that the main Design was to lodge the great
Assurance of the Doctrine of Christ in Tradition from one to another; and what
they wrote was not to make any Rule of Faith, but only to give some good Advice
to those Churches they wrote to.

But I shall now prove that the Writings of the Apostles were intended by the
Holy Ghost to be a standing Rule, whereby the Church was to judge which was the
true and genuine Doctrine of Christ.

1. From the Reasons and Occasions of writing the Books of the New Testament.

1. As to the Gospels, we must distinguish the General Reason of writing them,
from the particular Occasions as to the several Gospels. The general Reason is
to be drawn from the Divine Wisdom which inspired and guided them; the
particular Occasions relate to the circumstances of writing them.

The General Reason is that which Irenoeus gives, viz. That the Gospel which
Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
they had first preached, was by the Will of God put into Writing, that it
might be a Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. Not merely to keep up the
Remembranee of it, which Feuardentius yields, and thereby overthrows the
Infallibility of Oral Tradition; but that so it may be a certain Rule of Faith
to all Ages. The Evangelists says St. Augustine, were but Christ's Aug. de
Consens. Evang. l. 1. ^. 54.
Hands, which himself as the Head, directed in writing the Gospels, and
therefore we are to look on the Gospels as his own Handwriting. The Holy
Ghost, l. 2. c. 53.
says he, directed the Minds of the Evangelists, as to the order and manner of
their Writing. Which varied according to the particular Occasions, but yet were
all subservient to the General Reason.

St. Matthew wrote the first Gospel, says Eusebius, to the Jews to whom he had
Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 24.
preached, because going into other parts he would supply the want of his
Presence among them by his Writing. What need this, if Tradition were a certain
and infallible way of conveying the Doctrine of Christ? St. Chrysostom says,
the Jewish Christians desired him to put into Writing Chrysostom. Hom. 1 in Matthew;
what they had heard him preach. Did not they understand the force of Tradition
better? Or why should St. Matthew put them out of an infallible way? The Author
of the imperfect Work on St. Matthew says, they desired him to Opus Imperfect.
in Mat. in Prologo.
write his Gospel, that wherever they went they might carry an Account of
their Faith with them. Clemens Alexandrinus says, the occasion of writing St.
Mark 's Eusebius. l. 2^ c. 15.
Gospel was, that the people were not satisfied with an unwritten delivery of
the Holy Doctrine, and therefore importuned Mark, who was the Disciple of St.
Peter, that he would leave a Monument of his Doctrine in Writing; which St.
Peter understanding by Revelation, approved and confirmed his Gospel for the
use of the Churches. Origin says, he wrote it according to St. Peter's
directions. Epiphanius Eusebius l. 6. c. 25. Epiphan. Haer. 51. Athanas. in
Synopst. p. 155.
says, by his Authority. Athanasius says, it was dictated by him at Rome.

It seems that Peter himself did not think fit to leave the Doctrine of Christ
to an Oral Tradition, even at Rome, but Irenoeus thinks it was written after
St. Peter's decease, who therein differs from the rest, and shows how uncertain
mere Tradition is. Tertullian says, St. Mark 's Tertul. c. Marc. l. 4. c. 5.
Hieron. de Script. Eccles.
Gospel was attributed to St. Peter, and St. Luke 's to St. Paul. St. Jerome
mentions the Opinion of some, that when St. Paul says according to my Gospel,
he means that of St. Luke.

But St. Luke himself plainly gives an Account of the occasion of his writing.
St. Ambrose thinks by those who had taken Ambros. in Luc. 1. 1.
in hand to write of those things which were firmly believed among us, he means
the Authors of the counterfeit Gospels, as that of the Twelve Apostles and St.
Matthias. But we have no evidence that these were older than St. Luke; his
meaning is, that in those parts where he was, there were some who did undertake
to give an Account of the Life and Actions of Christ, who wanted the Advantages
which he had; having had great opportunities of knowing circumstances from the
Eyewitnesses; and therefore he set himself to give an exact Relation of them,
that not only Theophilus, Epip^. Haer. 51.
but every one that answers his name might know the certainty of those things
wherein they had been instructed. But, did not they know the certainty of these
things by the Apostle's Preaching? Yes, but the things they heard might slip
out of their Memories; and to prevent this, says Theophylact, St. Luke
Theophyt. in Luc.
wrote his Gospel, that they might retain these things with greater certainty.
And words that are only spoken are more easily misunderstood; which Maldonat
Maldonat. Com. in Evang prol.
assigns, as one great Reason of the Evangelists writing their several Gospels.

St. John likewise gives an account himself of the Reason of his writing; and
that the greatest imaginable. But these are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is Joh. 20. 31,
the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his
Name. Why written that ye might believe? Did the Apostle in his old Age
mistrust the Understandings or the Memories of Christians? Was not the
Apostle's Teaching sufficient to keep up the Principles of the Christian Faith
in the hearts of the People; no, not while St. John himself was yet living? He
had certainly a very mean Opinion of Tradition, that thought it necessary for
him to write that they might believe that Jesus is the Son of God. For there
was no point of Faith more necessary than this, which was required of all
Persons to be owned before Baptism.

Yet for all this, and whatever else can be said, St. John thought it necessary
that these things be written that they might believe.

He lived the longest of any of the Apostles, and therefore saw how little
Tradition was to be trusted; for it was already corrupted in so weighty a point
as the Divinity of Christ.

Cerinthus and his Followers allowed the general Tradition of the Church, that
Jesus was the Son of God; but then they gave their own sense of it, by
extraordinary Favor and Adoption. And from hence the Fathers agree that St.
John took occasion to write his Divine Hierom. Prooem. in Matthew. De Script.
Eccles. Epiph. Haer. 51. Chr^sost. Ho^^. 1. in Matthew. E^seb. l. 3. c. 24.
Gospel, to clear this Fundamental point of the Christian Faith.

And withal observing that the other Evangelists insisted chiefly on the
Actions of Christ for one year, viz. after John 's Imprisonment, he resumes the
whole Matter, and adds those things which were omitted by the rest; that so the
Church might be furnished with a full Relation of all that was necessary to
complete and establish the Faith of Christians.

2. As to the Epistles.

The first Epistle we read of in the Christian Church, (and in probability the
first writing in the New Testament) was the Decretal Epistle of the Council of
Jerusalem. Act. 15. 23.


What should make the Apostles put these Decrees into Writing? They were very
short, and concerned the Practices of Men, and withal were sent by Barnabas
and Paul, and Judas, and Silas. Were not these sufficient to deliver the
Apostle's Sense to the Churches, without Letters from them? What a pitiful
thing did they take Oral Tradition to be, if they thought such Men could not by
it give full satisfaction to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, unless they
sent it under their hands?

The Epistle to the Romans was written by St. Paul on purpose to clear some
main Points of the Christian Doctrine, which were then warmly disputed between
the Jews and the Christians, and between the Judaizing Christians and others,
as about Justification, Rejection of the Jews, the difference of Meats, etc.
And St. Paul took very needless pains in writing that excellent Epistle, if he
knew of Christ's appointing a Judge of Controversies there; or if he thought
Writing were not a certain way to make a Rule of Faith, whereby they were to
judge in those Matters.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians was written not merely to reprove their
Factions and Disorders; but to direct them, and to establish and prove the
Faith of the Resurrection, which was ^ Cor. 15. 12.
then contested among them. The Epistle was sent by Stephanus and Fortunatus,
who could have carried the Apostle's Sense without his Writing; but there are
many weighty things, besides the particular occasions which are of lasting
concernment to the Church in all Ages; as there are likewise in his second
Epistle to them.

The Epistle to the Galatians was written on occasion of one of the greatest
Points of controversy at that time, viz. the Use and Obligation of the Law of
Moses. And St. Paul found by sad experience among them, that it was very
possible for those who had the best Instructions, either to forget them, or to
grow out of love with them, and to be fond of a change: else he would never
have said, O foolish Galatians, who has Gal. 3. 1.
bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth? And I marvel that ye are so
soon 1. 6.
removed from him that called you into the Grace of Christ into another Gospel.
How! was it indeed possible for them to be removed, and to be so soon removed,
who had received the Faith by the Delivery of St. Paul himself? Then, for all
that I can see, humane Nature taken with all its Advantages and Motives, and
Evidences, is a very fallible thing; and if then it might be deceived, and that
so easily and grossly; then much more in any following Age of the Church; unless
humane Nature be mightily changed for the better, since the Apostle's times; or
any Teachers since be more effectual, than the Apostles, and especially than
St. Paul, who labored more 1 Cor. 15. 10.
abundantly than they all.

The Epistle to the Ephesians, though written upon a general Argument, yet does
suppose that they were in continual danger of being deceived; and tossed up and
down, and carried about with Ephesians. 4. 14.
every wind of Doctrine by the slight of Men, and cunning craftiness whereby
they lie in wait to deceive.

And therefore he advises them to be upon their guard, and to have their Armor
about them, and one choice part of it, is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God. 6. 17.


The Philippians were assaulted by a rude, violent, headstrong Faction of
Judaizers; which the Apostle bids them to beware of; and writes his Epistle to
Phil. 3. 2.
them for that purpose, and he exhorts them to stand fast in one Spirit, with
one 1. 27.
mind striving together for the Faith of the Gospel.

In the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and in both Epistles to Timothy,
he ^ Thessalonians. 2. 3.
gives notice of a great Defection from the Christian Faith; he describes the
manner of it, that it shall be with signs ^0.
and lying words, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth; that they shall speak
lies in Tim. 4. ^, 3.
hypocrisy, and forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats, being evil
Men, having a form of godliness, and denying 2 Timothy 3. 1. 5.
the power of it. I meddle not now with the time when this Apostasy began; but
from hence, it is evident that St. Paul supposed, that those who at first
received the Christian Faith by Tradition from the Apostles themselves, might
notwithstanding through their own Weakness and Folly, and the Artifices of
Deceivers be drawn from it; and that to prevent such mischievous consequences,
he knew no better means than a written Rule, which he tells Timothy was able to
make him wise to Salvation; 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
and to make the Man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good Work.

And to name no more, the Colossians were set upon by some who thought to
refine Christianity; or at least to make it more passable in the World, and
therefore would have introduced into it some Rites of the Jews, some
Austerities of the Gentiles, some ways of Worship which would recommend them to
their Adversaries; and upon this occasion he writes this Epistle to them to
convince them that Christianity alone was far beyond any Mixtures of the
Fancies or Traditions of Men, and therefore he could give them no better
Advice, than as they had first received the Doctrine of Christ to continue in
it, or in the words of the Text, As they had received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
to walk in him.

The design of what I have said is, that although the Gospels and Epistles were
written upon particular occasions; yet those occasions were so great and
considerable; and the Assistance of the Holy Ghost did so direct the Hands and
Pens of the Evangelists and Apostles in writing them, that what they have
therein delivered contains a complete Rule of the true and genuine Faith, as it
was at first delivered to the Church.

But against this, it is objected, that St. Paul himself charged the
Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
to stand fast and hold the Traditions which they have been taught either by
Word or by his Epistles. From whence it appears, that there were other
Traditions to be held, that were not written.

The force of all this will be taken away, if we consider when that Epistle was
written; viz. one of the first which St. Paul wrote, and soon after the former
Epistle to the Thessalonians; which was some time before St. Luke's Gospel,
which was first received in the Churches of Greece planted by St. Paul.
Therefore all the proper Doctrine of Christ himself, and all that relates to
his Life and Actions were then but Traditions among them; and therefore St.
Paul had great Reason then to require them to stand fast to the Traditions they
had been taught; i. e. to the Doctrine of Christ they had received in that
manner.

But it is urged, that he mentions before, something he had said about
Antichrist's Bell. de verbo. l. 4. c. 5.
coming when he was with them, v. 5.

If this be allowed, it will be more against than for Tradition. For, what is
become of that Tradition? If it be lost, then it follows that Tradition is no
infallible Way of conveyance; and therefore we have more Reason to adhere to a
written Word.

2. Which leads us to the second Reason from which I designed to prove, that
there ought to be a written Rule for discerning true primitive Christianity;
and that is from the notorious un^ertainty of mere Tradition. I say, notorious,
because there never was any Trial made of it, but it failed, even when it had
the greatest Advantages.

I might insist upon the Tradition of the first Ages of the World; when Men's
lives were so long, and the Principles of the Natural Religion so few; and yet
both before and after the Flood, Mankind was strangely degenerated from them.

I might insist on many Instances in the first Ages of the Christian Church; so
many, that scarce one can be produced wherein they pleaded mere Tradition, but
they were mistaken in it; As about the Millennium, the Age of Christ, the time
of Easter (on one side or other) the communicating Infants. For St. Augustine
quotes Apostolical Tradition for it. Aug. de Peccat. Meritis. l. 1. ^. 4.


But I shall wave all these, and only mention a very necessary and important
thing, which was a long time trusted to Tradition, and yet they differed so
much about it, as evidently proved, that mere Tradition was no infallible Means
of conveyance. And that is about the Apostle's Creed which was to be repeated
by all that were to be baptized.

We have many plain Testimonies to prove, that this was not to be written; but
to be conveyed from one to another, by an Oral Tradition; In Symbolo Fidei and
Spei nostrae, quod ab Apostolis traditum, non scribitur in Charta and
Atramento, sed in tabuli^ cordis carnalibus. Hieron. ad Pammachium advers.
Errores Joh. Hierosol.
St. Hierom, Nec ut eadem verba Symboli teneatis, ullo modo debetis scribere,
sed audiendo perdiscere; nec cum didiceritis scribere, sed memoria semper
tenere and recolere. August. de Diversis Sermon. 75.
St. Augustine, Idcirco denique haec non scrib^ chartalis and membranis, sed
requiri credentium cordibus tradiderunt, ut certum esset haec neminem ex
lectione, quae interdum pervenire etiam ad infideles solet, sed ex Apostolorum
traditione didicisse. Ruffinus in Symbol.
Ruffinus all affirm it.

And the Creed was commonly then called Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 12, 13, 14,
21. De Virgin. Vol. c. 1. Advers. Praxeam c. 2. August. Sermon. 59. 186. 213.
215. Retract. l. 2. c. 3. Enchirid. de Fide, n. 15. De Symbol. ad Catech.
Ruffin. in Prooem.
the Rule of Faith; which showed that they looked on all the Articles therein
contained, as the Standard of necessary Points.

And yet there is a plain and considerable difference in the Ancient Creeds;
some Articles being in some which were not in others; Although we have Reason
to believe the necessary Points were at first the same in all. Or else the
several Churches must have different Rules of Faith.

The Church of Jerusalem was called Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
the Mother of all Churches by the General Council of Constantinople; and in
the Creed there delivered to the Catechumens. Cyril. Catech. 11.
St. Cyril mentions the Eternal Generation of the Son before all Worlds; and so
does Theodo. l. 1. c. 12.
Eusebius at Coesarea in the Creed, which he says, he learnt at his Baptism,
which was long before the Nicene Creed. Cassian de fucaru. l. 6. c. 3, 4.
Cassian makes it a part of that Creed which the Apostles delivered to the
Church, and was particularly received in the Church of Antioch.

But no such thing was delivered in the Western Creeds as far as now appears,
by what St. Augustine, Russinus, and others say in their Expositions of it.

St. Jerome writing against the Bishop of Jerusalem, urges him with the Creed,
Hieron. ad Pammach.
(no doubt that which was received in his own Church) and he says, it
consists of three main Points, the Confession of the Trinity, the Unity of
the Church, and the Resurrection of the Flesh.

And the Creed of the Church of Aquileia went no farther, says Ruffin. in
Symbol. p. 191. V. Usser. de Sym. p. 8, 9.
Ruffinus; nor some old Copies of the Roman Creed.

But Marcellus of Ancyra had Eternal Life in his Epiph. Haeres. 72.
Creed, and so had Cyrill. Catech. 18.
Cyril of Jerusalem; so had the African Church in St. Aug. de Symb. l. 1. Petr.
Chrysol. Serin. 57, etc.
Augustin's time; so had the Church of Ravenna; but not the Church of Turin;
nor the Gallican Churches; if Maximus Taurinensis, and Venantius Fortunatus
explained all the Articles of their Creeds.

Ruffinus confesses the Article of Descent into Hell, was not in the Roman, nor
in any of the Eastern Creeds.

The Creeds of Jerusalem and Aquileia had not the Communion of Saints; nor
those of Marcellus and Epiph. Ancorat.
Epiphanius.

The Title of Catholic was not added to the Church in the Creed in St. August.
de Fide and Symbolo. Et de Symbolo Sermon. 243.
Augustin's time; for the makes it a Periphrasis, utique Catholicam, from
whence probably it came to be added afterward.

Ruffinus takes no notice of it, and it was not extant in the old Copies of the
Roman Creed; nor in that of Marcellus Ancyranus. These things I mention, not in
the least to shake the Faith of the Articles of the Apostle's Creed; which
DeSymbolo ad Catech. c. 1.
St. Augustine says was gathered out of Scriptures, and is agreeable to them;
but to show what an uncertain way of conveyance mere Oral Tradition is, when a
thing so easily remembered, so constantly used, of so much weight and
consequence, fell into such varieties in the greatest Churches, while they were
so scrupulous about the writing of it.

What cause have we then to be thankful to God, that has taken so much care
of his Church, as to provide us an infallible written Rule in the Holy
Scriptures, whereby we certainly know, what the true Primitive Christianity
was, which was delivered by Christ and his Apostles?

But here is a great difficulty to be removed, as to the written Word.

How can we be certain, we have it, if not by Tradition? and if Tradition be so
uncertain, how can we be made certain by it, that we have that written Word
which the Apostles delivered? For might not that fail in this, as well as the
Creed? And then what security can we have for our Faith?

In Answer to this, I shall show,

1. What Advantage things that are written have, as to the certainty of
conveyance above things merely committed to Memory and Tradition.

2. What Advantage the Scriptures have, above any other things committed to
Writing as to the certainty of their conveyance.

1. As to the Advantage things written have above those committed to Memory and
Tradition only. Which will appear by these things,

1. It was the way God himself made choice of, where the Reason for Tradition
was stronger; I mean as to the Ten Commandments, which were short and plain,
and easy to be remembered, and very agreeable to the Sense and General Interest
of Mankind; yet the Wise God who perfectly understood the Nature of Man, would
not leave the Ten Commandments to an Oral Tradition, but God delivered to Moses
Two Tables of Stone written with the Finger of God; and on them he wrote the
Ten Commandments. What a vain and superfluous Deuteronomy. 9. 10. 10. 4.
thing were this, if Oral and Practical Tradition were infallible? But God's
own pitching upon this way, after so long a Trial of Mankind in the other; is a
Demonstration of the greater certainty of it, if we suppose that God aimed at
the benefit of Mankind by it.

2. When Religion was corrupted among the Jews, the only way of restoring it
was by a written Book of the Law.

As we find in the case of Josiah's Reformation, which was made by the Book of
the Law, which was found in the 2. King. 22. 8. 23. 2, 3.
House of the Lord.

This was the Rule by which Hilkiah the High Priest, thought it necessary for
Josiah to go by; and not by any Tradition left among them concerning the Law
which God had given by Moses.

3. This was that which our Savior appealed to in all his Disputes; search
Joh. 5. 39.
the Scriptures, says he to the Jews; not run to your Traditions, for those
were then very corrupt, especially about the Messiah, as that he was to be a
Temporal Prince, etc. which was then a dangerous and fundamental Mistake; and
therefore Christ ap^eals from them to the Scriptures; And they are they which
46.
testify of me. Had ye believed Moses, 47.
ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; but if ye believe not his
Writings, how shall ye believe my Words? And our Savior severely checks the
Matthew. 15* 3. 9.
Pharisees for regarding their own Traditions more than the written Law. And
yet they pretended to an Oral Tradition down from Moses; as the Jews do to this
day; and none are more grossly deceived than they.

4. The general Sense and Experience of Mankind agrees herein, that all matters
of consequence are more certainly preserved by Writings than by mere Words.
There is no Invention has been more valued by the wiser Part of Mankind than
that of Letters; because it is of such excellent use for conveying the sense of
our Minds at a distance to others. All men have so great a Mistrust, either of
the capacity or memory, or fidelity of others; that what they would have done
with security they commit to Writing. And whatever we truly understand of the
Ages before us, we are beholden to Writing for it; all those memorable Actions,
and Institutions, either of Philosophy or Religion which were not written, are
long since buried in Oblivion, without possibility of a Resurrection.

But where they have been committed to Writing they are preserved after so many
Ages; and by it we certainly know the History of the Patriarchs, and the
strange Revolutions that happened from the beginning of the World. By it, we
converse with the wisest Persons of former times; and are able to justify the
Scriptures by the concurrent Testimonies of other Writers. By it, we are
enabled to interpret Prophecies, and to make plain their Accomplishments, which
without it, we could never make out. Yea by it, the Wisdom of those is
preserved for the benefit of Mankind, who thought fit to write nothing
themselves, as Socrates and Pythagoras, but their Disciples took care in time
to write their Doctrines. So that we have the general Consent of the wisest
Part of Mankind, that Writing is a far more certain way of conveyance than mere
Tradition.

2. And especially in our case where there are so many particular Advantages,
as to the Holy Scriptures, above any other Writings.

1. From the special Providence of God, with respect to them; for since it is
agreed by all Christians, that these were written by Divine Inspiration, it is
most reasonable to believe, that a more than ordinary care would be taken to
preserve them.

And therefore to suppose any Books of Scripture to be lost, which contained
any necessary Points of Faith is a great Reflection on Divine Providence. For,
if God watches over his Church, he cannot be supposed to let such Books be lost
which were designed for the universal and lasting Benefit of his Church.

2. From the mighty Esteem which the Church of God had always for them; for,
they built their Hopes of Heaven upon the Promises contained in them. The Book
of Scripture was their Evidence for their future Inheritance; the Foundation of
their Hope, and Rule of their Faith; their Defense against Assaults and
Temptations; their Counselor in cases of Difficulty; their Support, under
Troubles; and their surest Guide to a happy Eternity; and therefore the
Primitive Christians chose rather to endure any Torments than basely to betray
it, and give it up to their Enemies.

3. From the early disputes that were about them. Which shows that they were no
Invention of Aftertimes; nor were brought into the World by Stealth and Art;
for, they endured the greatest shock of opposition at first, while the Matters
of Fact concerning them were the most easily proved. And having passed the
severe Scrutiny of the first Ages, when so many counterfeit Writings were sent
abroad, the following Ages could have no Reason to call their Authority in
question.

4. From the general Consent of divided Churches about them. It might have
pleased God to have kept his Church from those unhappy Breaches which have been
in all Parts of the Christian World; but the East, and the West, the North and
the South can all bear Testimony to the sad Divisions of Christendom; and those
of many Ages standing. But yet, we have this considerable Advantage by them;
that we can have no Reason to mistrust a conspiracy where the several Bodies
are so much divided.

5. From the great internal Satisfaction which the Minds of good Men have
concerning them; and which no other Writing can pretend to give. For here we
read of the Promise of Divine Assistance to sincere and humble Minds. And that
Assistance carries a Lumen Fidei into the Mind; as Aquinas calls it 2. 2. a 3
ad 2. and by that, he says, the Mind is united to Truth, that its Assent is
only fixed upon it; and therefore there is no danger of Damnation to those who
are in Christ Jesus, and are thus illuminated by Faith in him. Not that this is
an Argument to convince others, who have not that inward Sense which they have;
but the same Holy Spirit which did at first indite them, may give such an
inward and effectual Testimony as to the Truth of the Matter contained in them;
that from thence they may firmly conclude these Books to contain the Word of
God. And that Assurance which the Minds of good Men have from the Influence of
Divine Grace, may be more effectual and powerful in them, than all the
pretended Infallibility or Demonstration in the World. It is certain those
cannot be deceived whom the Holy Spirit teaches; and the best and wisest of
the Ancient Schoolmen did make the great firmness and certainty of Faith not to
depend on outward Motives, but on inward Grace; which so enlightened the Mind,
and fixed the Inclinations of the Soul, that nothing is able to remove it. This
sort of Faith is no blind Assent; but after all the Evidence which it has to
make its Assent reasonable; it takes so fast a hold of Divine Truths by
discerning the excellency and value of them, that he that has it is willing to
let go any thing rather than that; and although the Apprehension of Faith be
not so clear as that of Science; yet the Hypostasis, as Heb. 11. 1.
the Apostle calls it, may be so firm, that no Temptations may be able to shake
it. And he that can die for his Religion has a stronger and better Faith, than
he that thinks himself never so infallible in the Grounds of it. That is a true
Divine Faith which purifies the Acts 15. 9.
Heart, and thereby enlightens the Mind; which works by Love, and not Gal. 5. 6.
by cavilling and wrangling about the Grounds of it; which overcomes the World,
1 John 5. 4.
and not that which is overcome by the Temptations of it. And such a Faith, and
only such a one will carry us to Heaven; when, if it were possible for us to
have the utmost Infallibility in the Act of believing; yet if it did not work
effectually on our Hearts and Lives, we might go infallibly to Hell.

And so I shall conclude this Discourse with the second Sense of the Obligation
which lies on those who have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so to walk in him:
i. e. to improve their sound Faith into the Practice of a good Life.

For alas! What advantage will it be to us, to have the most Primitive and
Apostolical Faith, if our Works be not answerable to it? Why call ye me Lord,
Luke 6. 46.
Lord, says Christ, and do not the things which I say? Why do we pretend to
receive Christ Jesus the Lord, if we do not observe his Commands? It is good,
says St. Paul, to be zealously affected always in Gal. 4. 18.
a good thing. And no doubt our Faith is such; but then let us be zealous of
good Works too, that we may show our selves to be that peculiar People who are
Tit. 2. 14.
redeemed by Jesus Christ. So that our Obligation arises every way from Christ
Jesus the Lord, to walk in him; if we consider him as our Lord, so we are to
obey him; if as Christ Jesus, so he died for us to redeem us from all iniquity.
We can have no pretense to live in our sins, if we have received him who
commands us to forsake them; for then we receive and reject him at the same
time. Let every one that names the Name of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
depart from iniquity, says St. Paul, what should those then do that profess
to receive him as their Lord, who are thereby bound to yield obedience to his
Laws? one of the great causes of the Degeneracy of the Heathen World was the
separating Religion and Morality; when this was left to the Schools of
Philosophers to instruct men in, whereas their Religion consisted only of some
Solemn Rites and Sacrifices. Let us have a care of as dangerous a Separation
between Faith and Works, or which is all one, between receiving Christ, and
doing his Will. For those are the proper Works of the Gospel, wherein we own
Christ as our Lord, and do them because he commands us. And the Apostle has
summed up the whole Duty of Christians in those comprehensive words, Teaching
us that denying ungodliness Tit. 2. 12.
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World; looking for that blessed hope, 13.
and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. To
whom, etc.

SERMON III. Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, February the 22d, 1688/9.
1 Pet. IV. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly
and the Sinner appear.
THis Epistle was written by S. Peter for the Encouragement of Christians under
all their Sufferings; but these Words seem to carry so much Terror and
Severity in them, as though none but Martyrs and Confessors could have any
Reason to hope for Salvation, and all others were to be left in Despair.
Although Mankind be not easily satisfied concerning the Punishment denounced
against the Ungodly and Sinner, yet the Justice of God, the Equity of his
Commands, the Freedom of their Choice, the Contempt of Grace, and their wilful
and obstinate Impenitency take away all just Cause of Complaint: But, that the
Righteous should scarcely be saved, seems hardly reconcilable with the Grace,
and Design, and Promises, of the Gospel. For the Righteous here are not vain,
proud, self-conceited Hypocrites, such who think they need no Repentance, but
such who by the Grace of God were brought off from their former Sins, and were
redeemed from their vain Conversation with the precious Blood of Christ, ^ Pet.
1. 18, 19, 20.
who had purified their Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit; Who were
a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an c. 2. v. 9.
holy Nation, a peculiar People; yet of such as these it is said, if the
Righteous scarcely be saved. But how can this agree with the infinite Goodness
and Mercy of God declared in the Gospel, whereby Sinners are courted and
encouraged to repent with the Hopes and Promise of Salvation? Did not Christ
come to save Sinners, and St. Paul call this a faithful saying and worthy of
all acceptance; and yet after all, shall the 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Righteous scarcely be saved? What Joy in Luke 15. 7. 10.
Heaven can there be over one Sinner that repents, if after his Repentance it
be so hard to come to Heaven? Does not Christ himself invite those who are
weary, and heavy laden, to come to him, with a Promise that he will give rest
to Matthew. 11. 28.
their Souls? But what Rest can they have, who, notwithstanding their coming to
him, do with so much difficulty attain to Eternal Rest? How can that be said to
be an easy yoke, and a light v. 30.
burden, which is of it self so hard to be born, and the Reward which is to
make it easy so hard to be attained?

If it be said that this Expression, that the Righteous are scarcely saved, is
to be understood of some Sufferings, and Persecutions, which the Christians
were then to undergo, and it was very hard for any though never so righteous,
to escape; and that to this, v. 17. referrs, I answer, That this does not clear
the Difficulty; For from whence does this Necessity of Suffering arise? Is it
not enough to repent and forsake our Sins, but we must undergo some Punishment
for them in this Life, although God remits that of the World to come? But how
is this consistent with the Fullness of Christ's Satisfaction, and the Freeness
of God's Remission of Sins? And if God's Justice be satisfied and the Sins be
forgiven, what need can there be that Persons must here suffer for their Sins
before they can come to Heaven?

So that for the clearing this Subject these things must be spoken to:

I. In what Sense the Righteous are said to be scarcely saved.

II. How this is consistent with the Grace of the Gospel.

III. What encouragement there is for us to hope for Salvation, when the
Righteous are said to be scarcely saved.

I. In what Sense the Righteous are said to be scarcely saved. That may be
understood Two ways;

(1.) With respect to accidental Difficulties arising from the particular
Circumstances of Times and Seasons.

(2.) With respect to the General Terms of Salvation, which are common to all
Persons and Times.

(1.) With respect to accidental Difficulties arising from the particular
Circumstances of Times and Persons. For the Difficulties of Religion are not
alike in all Times, nor to all Persons; for they are not like a Geometrical
Measure, which is always exactly the same; but rather like a Voyage at Sea,
which is to be managed by the same Compass and to the same Port; but it
sometimes proves calm and pleasant, and at other Times stormy and tempestuous.
Which chiefly happens, when a Religion appears New, or goes about to reform the
Old; for then it is sure to meet with all the Opposition, which the Passions,
and Interests, and Prejudices of partial Men can raise against it. It Is true,
he that stills the Raging of the Sea, and the Madness of the People, can, when
he pleases, calm the most violent Passions of Mankind, and make way for the
Reception of Truth in their Minds; but he thinks fit by such means to try and
discover what is in Men. Who never show their Passions more violently and
unreasonably than when they are masked under a Pretense of Zeal against Heresy
and Innovation. For that blinds their Understandings, corrupts their Wills,
inflames their Passions, hardens their Hearts, and shuts up all Bowels of Pity
and Compassion toward Brethren. Thus it was among the Jews toward the
Christians, both in Judoea, and in the several Places of their Dispersion: For
they looked on them as Apostates and Heretics, and treated them, not only with
the utmost Scorn and Contempt, but with all the Fury and Rage imaginable, and
where their own Power fell short, they called in the Assistance of the Roman
Governors, representing the Christians to them, as an Upstart and pernicious
Sect, seditious and turbulent, and therefore ought by all means to be suppressed:
By such Insinuations the poor Christians in the Eastern Provinces of the Jewish
Dispersion, were miserably harassed and proceeded against as Malefactors. Thus
it was at that time when St. Peter wrote his Epistle to the Jewish Christians,
who were scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
where there 1 Pet. 1. 1.
were abundance of Jews, and many Converts, but very hardly used among them.
St. Peter having been employed much among them, (the Apostleship of Gal. 2. 8.
the Circumcision being committed to him) and being withdrawn into the Kingdom
of Parthia, Although Babylon were very much exhausted, by the Neighborhood of
Seleucioe first, and afterward of Ctesiphon; yet I see no Reason to conclude
that Babylon was not then capable of having a Church in it, when S. Peter wrote
this Epistle. For Josephus, lib. 18. owns, that there was in Babylon (...) in
the time when ^yrcanus was sent thither; and out of such a Multitude of Jews a
Church might easily be gathered. The Calamities which befell the Jews of those
Parts afterward rather reach to the Country than the City of Babylon. And when
such Numbers of Jews are allowed to have been after them in Ctesiphon, Nearda
and Nisibis, which were all Cities in those Parts, I see no cause to question
that there were great Numbers of Jews at that time in Babylon; since even in
Trajan's time, they are confessed to have been very numerous in Mesopotamia
Strabo, lib. 16. says, that a great part of Babylon was deserted in his time,
and so it might well be, and leave room enough for a Christian Church to be
there notwithstanding. So that no reason appears sufficient to me to take
Babylon in any other sense, than for the City generally known by that Name,
without flying to any Mystical Sense, or a Strong-place in Egypt bearing that
Name; these being less probability of a Church in a Garrison, as Strabo
describes it, than in the Remainders of so great a City.
where he had planted a Church at Babylon, (not so desolate at that time, as
not to be sufficient for such a Number, as appears by Strabo and Josephus) from
thence he writes this excellent Epistle for the Advice and Comfort of the
suffering Christians. He advises them to behave themselves with great Prudence
and Care of their Actions, to give no Advantage against themselves, by doing
any ill things; and then, if it pleased God to call them out to suffer, they
ought not to murmur, or complain, or mistrust his Gracious Providence toward
them, but commit themselves to God in well doing, as unto a Pet. 4. 19.
faithful Creator. And if they did think it hard for them to suffer these
things, they ought to consider, there was a wise Directour of them above, who
had before hand appointed such a Series of Events, that although their Enemies
rejoiced to see them suffer in the first Place, yet their Turn would come not
long after, and then these Enemies of the Gospel would feel the Severity of
God's Wrath and Displeasure against them. Which is the meaning of the foregoing
Verse.

For the time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God; and if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of
God? i. e. Christ has foretold Desolation and Ruin to come upon the Jewish
Nation, for rejecting him when he came to save them; but he withal says, that
before these things, they shall lay their hands on Luke 21. 12.
you and perfecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into Prisons,
being brought before Kings and Rulers for my Name's sake. Which implies a
severe Persecution of the Christian Church, begun by the Jews, but carried on
by the Governors of Kingdoms and Provinces. And therefore says the Apostle,
although the time be now come that Judgment begins ^t the House of God, yet it
will not end there; but that which is only a Cup of Trembling and Astonishment
to them shall be a Cup of Fury and Destruction to the obstinate and impenitent
Jews. The cafe was hard to the poor Christians, but it would be much more
severe toward their cruel Persecutours; for if the Righteous, whom God loves,
meet with such sharp usage by his Permission for a time, the day will come when
God will avenge the Cause of his suffering People, and make their ungodly and
perfidious Enemies feel the smart of his displeasure in such manner that they
shall not know where to hide themselves, Where shall the sinner and ungodly
appear.

But that which I observe from hence is, that there are some accidental
Circumstances which depend on Divine Providence, which may make the condition
of some Men, as to Salvation, much more difficult than that of others: For it
is no such easy matter to go through many Tribulations into the Kingdom Acts
14. 22.
of God, i. e. to be content to be contemned and reproached as the worst of
Men; to be torn from Friends and Relations, and all the Comforts of Life; to be
cast into loathsome Prisons, and more loathsome Company in them; to be in
continual expectation of such cruel Usage and Torments, as make Death to be
looked on as their best Friend and most seasonable Deliverer.

If sufferings do not rise so high, yet when Men cannot keep Faith and a good
Conscience, without hazarding the loss of what Mankind are apt to set too great
a value upon, their Ease, and Riches, and Expectations in this World, even
these make it harder for such Persons to get to Heaven; because Sincerity and
Constancy are the necessary Conditions of it, which may be tried much more in
some than it is in others. We must all have the same Journey'send, if we hope
to get to Heaven, but some may meet with a freer Road, and a calmer Season, and
better Company, in their Journey than others. However it happens we must go
through all, and not be discouraged at any appearance of Difficulties upon our
way.

But herein Mankind are apt to be deceived, as though all the Difficulties lay
in a suffering Condition; whereas a soft, and careless, and voluptuous Life is
rather more dangerous to their Souls, because Persons are less apt to suspect
their Danger. He that is set upon by force and violence endeavors to defend
himself as well as he can; but he that is betrayed under a Pretense of Kindness
is drawn into his Ruin before he is aware, and goes on cheerfully to his own
Destruction. Prosperi^^ has the true Nature of an Opiate, for it stupifies and
pleases at the same time. The Temptations of the suffering Side are apt to
allarm, awake, and rouse up the sleepy Powers of the Soul; whereas the gentle
and easy Condition of Life either lays them asleep, by a kind of Intoxication,
or so div^^ts them from all serious things, as puts them out of the very way to
Heaven. For, the first thing in it is a steady and serious Resolution of Mind
to do what lies in them to go thither; which can never be done without a true
Consideration of the Vanities of this World, how pleasing soever; and a fixed
and settled Judgment, preferring the Happiness of Heaven before all the most
alluring Pleasures of this Life.

So that the different Circumstances of Life do make the way of Salvation more
difficult to some than to others.

But this is not all; for there are many things which make it more difficult to
some than to others, which are of another Nature. Some Tempers are more
flexible and pliable than others; more capable of harkening to Reason; and mo^^
^^t to reflect on their own Actions, ^hereas others are naturally stiff and
obstinate, who stick as fast to an Opinion or Prejudice which they have once
taken up, as if they were fatally determined to it; and such as these can
hardly ever be convinced they are in an Error, unless by a Power superior to
Nature. Some again, are very easily convinced of ^ Fault, but very hardly
reclaimed; for that Facility of Temper which makes them easy to be convinced,
lays them open to the next Temptation, which they are not able to withstand.
These are always repenting and amending and beginning to reform, but without
the Grace of God, not able to go through with it. Some are modest and bashful
Sinners, whom Fear and Shame may restrain; others are so hardened and impudent
in their Wickedness, that they deny even the very first Principles of Morality
as well as Religion, and not only refuse to hearken to Reproof, but reject it
with Scorn and Indignation. And it cannot be supposed that the Grace of God,
working on Men's minds in a way suitable to them, should have as easy an
Admittance into one as into the other; for the one are like a House with doors
shut, but easily opened; the other like a House not only shut, but bolted and
barracadod.

Again, some have had the Advantage of a Pious and Religious Education, by
which the Principles of Piety and Virtue have made an early Impression on their
Minds, and have been a continual Check upon evil Inclinations; and if they have
been too weak to subdue them, yet they have been strong enough to prevent their
Extravagancies, or to bring them to a speedy Repentance, and to take up firmer
Resolutions; and such are more easily brought to themselves and settled in a
virtuous Course of Life. But the Generality of Mankind, through a wretched
Carelessness, mind not the early Improvement of their Children in what is good;
and what Education they give them tends to any thing more than the planting the
Sense of God, and true Religion, and Virtue, in them. It were well, if they
would but let Nature alone in their Children; but instead of that, they often
place such about them, who humor them in their worst Inclinations, and give
them an early Taste of Profaneness and Irreligion; so that when they come into
the World, they run into all Manner of Wickedness, and commit it with
Greediness, having so quick a Relish of it; and then indeed it is a very hard
Matter to bring them to Repentance; for that is to take Shame and Dishonor to
themselves, to say they have been Fools, and have done wickedly; and rather
than do this, they choose to go on in their Impieties, and treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath.

Those who magnify the Freedom of Will in Mankind in this degenerate State,
seem to consider them only in Theory and Speculation; not as they are, but as
they ought to have been. It is like that which they call the Spring in some
Bodies, which are apt to dilate and expand themselves, but may be easily
oppressed with such a weight as makes it impossible for them to enlarge
themselves till it be removed. There is no doubt in Mankind, considered in it
self, a Power of acting according to Reason, which is the truest Freedom, (for
a Power of acting otherwise is Weakness and Folly,) but what through the
Natural Propensity to Evil; what through the Power of bad Examples; what
through the violence of some Tempers and Passions; what through the Cloudiness
of some Understandings, from bodily Distempers; what through the strength of
evil Habits, and corrupt Dispositions, there is scarce such a thing as Freedom
of Will left, especially as to Matters of Salvation. So that if the Scripture
did not so plainly express the Necessity of Divine Grace for the Conversion of
Sinners (as it does,) the mere Consideration of the state of humane Nature
would make me believe it, supposing that any Part of Mankind be designed to be
fitted for Heaven. For although the Difficulties be not alike in all, yet, of
one kind or other, they are such as cannot be overcome by our selves, without
the Power of Divine Grace Exciting, Preventing, and Assisting of us.

(2.) Having thus showed what Difficulties there are which arise from the
different Circumstances of Times and Persons, I am now to consider those which
arise from the Terms of Salvation, which are common to all Persons and Times.

Here we must suppose Salvation to be the thing aimed at, as the chief End or
Happiness of such Men; and here are two Kinds of Difficulties to be enquired
into;

(1.) Such as are implied in the general Pursuit of Happiness.

(2.) Such as immediately relate to this Kind of Happiness.

(1.) Such as are implied in the general Pursuit of Happiness: For Happiness is
not a thing of Chance or Necessity, but a Matter of Choice and Design. It is a
vulgar Mistake (and I wish it were only among the Vulgar) to account those
happy, who are fortunate: But this Notion of Happiness was unanimously rejected
by all the Ancient Moralists. Some of them indeed have thought it repugnant to
common Sense, to call those happy who were under great Calamities, i. e. who
were, in the Sense of Mankind, miserable: But then they utterly denied, that
the best outward Circumstances could make a Man happy; for that must depend
upon the Temper of a Man's mind, and his Improvement in Virtue. These are some
things which the Moralists agreed in, which may be of great use to us for
clearing the Christian Doctrine in this Matter about the Difficulty of
attaining Salvation.

(1.) That Happiness did consist in one uniform Design of Life, i. e. that a
Man must choose one proper and chief End to himself, and so order his Thoughts
and Actions that he may attain it. And therefore the dissolute and careless
Liver, that minds or thinks of nothing but Eating, and Drinking, and Sleeping,
and passing away his Time, was no more capable of Happiness than a Brute, which
exceeds him in that which he accounts the Happiness of Life.

(2.) That there must be a careful and attentive Mind to pursue this Design.
And that is by keeping close to those Maxims, which were laid down as necessary
to attain it. For, according to their different Notions, they had different
Maxims, or Rules of Practice, either as to Virtue or Pleasure, and as Men did
observe these, they were nearer to their Happiness: But if they broke their
Rules, they must blame themselves if they missed of it.

(3.) That any Man who desired to be happy, must above all things take pains
about himself: For without that they concluded it impossible for a Man to be
happy, let his outward Condition in the World be what it would: For that was
too uncertain a Foundation to build such a Structure upon. Therefore it was
necessary for any one that pretended to Happiness, to have a true Notion of
what conduced to it in his Mind; and to bring his Passions into Order. For all
the World cannot make one whose Passions are violent and extravagant, to be
happy; no more than him to be a sound and healthful Man, that has a Fever,
and a Dropsy, and Convulsions, at the same time upon him. For the Violence of
Lust is an inward burning Fever; Covetousness, or an insatiable Desire of
Riches, a perpetual Dropsy, which increases the Thirst by an endeavor to
quench it; an excessive Anger is a Convulsion of those Powers of the Soul which
ought to be sedate, and composed, in any one who pretends to Happiness. But
when they considered the Force of natural Inclinations, they found it was no
easy Matter to make the unreasonable Part to be governed by the Reasonable.
For the less of Reason, the more Wilfulness and Stubbornness; and therefore the
harder to be brought to Reason and to be governed by it. And herein lay the
main Difficulty; and after all their Arguments, and Rules, and Directions,
humane Nature was found too refractary to submit; and the Violence of Man's
Passions overthrew all the plausible Schemes of Happiness which the
Philosophers had set up. To which I add,

(4.) That those who consulted most the Ease and Pleasure of Mankind, were
forced to put Men upon some hard and unpleasant things to make any thing like
Happiness to consist in Pleasure. For they cast off all Riot and Excess, all
Intemperance and Luxury, because the Pain which followed exceeded the Pleasure;
and therefore they made Temperance and Chastity necessary to the true Pleasure
of Life. They reduced the Happiness of Pleasure to a fixed and settled State,
and so took it off from that which was only sensual. They brought Men's desires
within so narrow a Compass, that the true Lovers of Pleasure would abhor such
Confinements as they made necessary. And although they could never conquer the
Fears of invisible Powers, and of Death, yet they thought no Happiness was to
be had without it. So that all were agreed, that it was impossible to attain to
any thing that looked like Happiness without some real Difficulty, which was
necessary to be undergone, although the Success were uncertain.

(2.) Let us now consider the Difficulties relating to Salvation, or that
Happiness which Christians expect. And here I shall show,

(1.) That it is far more reasonable to go through Difficulties, for the sake
of it.

(2.) That they are not such, but that we may reasonably hope to overcome them.

(1.) It is more reasonable to expect Difficulties in the way of Salvation. For
the more excellent and desirable the Happiness is, the more it is worth the
while for us to take pains about it; especially when there is a Certainty of
attaining it. The Moralists had but very dark, and confused, and uncertain
Notions of Happiness; something they saw, but with a very glimmering light:
They found that all Men desired it, and wise Men sought after it; but wherein
it lay, and how to be attained, they could not agree. The most considering Men
were convinced it must be in the best Part of our selves, and that is our
Minds, and in the greatest Perfection of that, viz. Virtue and Goodness. But
they met with insuperable Difficulties in the way to it, and the best among
them sadly lamented the State of humane Nature, after all the Pains and
Endeavors they had used to rectify their Opinions, and to subdue their
Passions. For they found it too restiff and untractable, too much under the
Sway and Dominion of the sensitive Appetite, for them ever to hope by the mere
Power of Reason to bring it into such Subjection, as to pretend to a total
Conquest. And those who refined Pleasure so much, as to make it a Happiness fit
for Mankind to own, did make a Happiness just as they made their Gods, viz. a
Fine, Subtle, Airy, Pleasant No-thing, or that had no Solidity in it: For the
Epicurean Happiness, with all its Refinements, was rather a Matter of
Speculation than Practice; and after all was not worth so much Pains about it,
but like the Gourd, which after its paring, and cleansing, and dressing, is fit
only to be cast upon the Dunghill.

But it cannot be said that the Happiness offered to Christians is of such a
Nature: For it is really the best, the most valuable and desirable Good, not
promised to be enjoyed in this mean, despicable, and uncertain State of Life,
but reserved for a more free, spiritual and continuing State. So our Apostle
calls it, an Inheritance, incorruptible and 1 Pet. 1. 4.
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you. Such is the
Condition of the World without us here, and of the Passions and Infirmities
within us, that it is a vain thing to expect a true Happiness to be enjoyed in
this Life; the utmost we can hope for, is to be prepared for a better; and God
knows there is difficulty enough in that. We have Hearts so vain and sensual,
so addicted to the Pleasures and Impertinencies of this World, so prepossessed
with the Objects of Sense, that it is no easy Matter to bring them so much as
in earnest to consider of another World. But it is yet harder to fix the
Thoughts of it upon our Mind^ so as to make a deep Impression upon them, as
they must do, if we make the Happiness of Heaven our chief End and Design.
Supposing that Paradise were still upon Earth in its first Glory, and to be
found by the Description which Moses gives of it; a Man may think often
concerning it; where it lies, what the Rivers are by which it is to be
discovered; but all this amounts but to a mere Speculation: But suppose that he
takes up a Resolution to go thither, what other kind of thoughts has he then
about it, as to the Truth and Certainty of the Place; and the Way that leads
thither, and the Difficulties he is like to meet with? Which make another kind
of Impression than the former dry Speculation did. If a Man does not think
Heaven worth all the Pains and Difficulties which lie in our way to it, he
never yet had one serious and becoming thought concerning it. For the Happiness
proposed is really so great and invaluable, that the more we think of it, the
more we shall esteem it, and the more we shall despise and triumph over the
greatest Difficulties in order to it; it being no less than the perfect
Enjoyment of the most perfect Good, in a most perfect State of Life, and
nothing can be desired by humane Nature greater than this.

(2.) The Difficulties in our Way to Salvation are not such, but we may
reasonably hope to overcome them; i. e. if we set our selves about it;
otherwise a very mean Difficulty will appear too great for us. Therefore we
must suppose not only a willing Mind, but a firm Resolution to do what lies in
us. And there are two things to show that we may hope to overcome them;

(1.) That the most difficult Duties are in themselves reasonable to be
performed by us.

(2.) That God offers his gracious Assistance for the performance of them.

(1.) That the most difficult Duties are in themselves reasonable. I mean such
whose Difficulty does not arise from accidental outward Circumstances; but from
a Respect to the present State and Condition of humane Nature. Such as,

(1.) True Repentance; which is one of the hardest Works of a Man's life, when
he has been long engaged in a Course of sinning against Conscience. It is not
hard for such a one to be made sensible that he has done amiss; for he that
acts against his Judgment is, as Aristotle observes, apt to repent, i. e. to
(...) Nicom. l. 7. c. 8. Inter caetera mala, hoc quoque habet stultitia
proprium, semper incipie vivere. Sen. Ep. 13.
find fault with himself for his own Actions, and to resolve to amend. There is
a sort of Displeasure against Sin, which is consistent with the Practice of it,
which is called by the Casuists, Attritio Impoenitentium; but they say it is
without a Purpose of forsaking it, if there be such a Purpose that they say is
Attritio Poenitentium; but if it be an ineffectual Purpose, the Scripture no
where calls it Repentance. For as long as the habitual Practice continues, it
is certain that Man's love to his Sin exceeds his Hatred of it; and what
Repentance can that be which is consistent with a prevailing Love of Sin? When
Persons were first made Christians, their Repentance was easily discerned,
whether true or false, because it was a public and solemn Renunciation of all
their former Sins; but when Men have accustomed themselves to sin under a
Profession to renounce their Sins, it is a harder Matter to find out the
Sincerity of their Repentance as to those Sins. And here a difference must be
made as to the Nature and Kind of Sins: For there are some Sins which all agree
to be Sins, yet it is a hard Matter to convince Persons that they are guilty of
them, such as Hypocrisy, Schism, and Idolatry, which Men will find something
to excuse themselves from, notwithstanding the clearest Evidence against them.
Some are such Strangers to themselves, that they do not suspect themselves for
those Sins which others easily discern in them, as is common in the Case of
Pride, and Envy, and Covetousness, and Superstition. It cannot be supposed that
Persons should so particularly repent of such Sins which they are not sensible
of; but where Self-love blinds it cannot excuse. And where such evil Habits
prevail, Persons must repent, and search, and examine themselves in order to a
particular Repentance. There are other Sins which are really perpetual Burdens
to a good Mind, but it knows not how to get rid of them with the utmost Care;
such as inward Motions to Sin, sudden Heats and Surprises, mixed Infirmities,
Coldness in Devotion, Distractions in Prayer, and many Omissions of Personal
Duties; in such Cases as these, if we do not allow Sincerity of Repentance
without through Amendment, we make a general Repentance insignificant, and make
the Condition of many good Men desperate; for none can be saved without true
Repentance. And if there can be no true Repentance without actual forsaking all
such Kinds of Sins, there is no such thing as true Repentance to be found. But
there are other Sins of a more dangerous and malignant Nature, which argue a
very bad Mind; such as Malice and Hatred, a rooted Aversion to what is Good;
and a strong Inclination to Evil. There are some Sins that are gross and
notorious, of which St. Paul says, The lusts of the Flesh are manifest; i. e.
such Sins are easily known to be Sins, and Men's Consciences condemn them even
while they commit them; such as Murder, Adultery, Intemperance, Injustice,
Perjury, and such like. Of which the Apostle after declares, That they who do
such things shall never come to Heaven. Therefore as to them, such Gal. 5. 19,
20, 21. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6.
a Repentance is necessary as implies not merely a dislike and sorrow for them,
but a thorough Change of a Man's Mind, and the Course of his Life, with respect
to them. And surely it is no easy Matter to new mold the Temper of ones Mind,
and to turn the Tide of our Actions; to break off our beloved Sins, and to
bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance. This is indeed a hard Work; but yet it
is a most reasonable Work. It is hard, but it is like the taking violent
Physic in some Diseases, where the Humor must be purged out, or the Party
must die; the Uneasiness i^ not to be considered, but the Necessity; and in
such a Case the Mind cannot be at ease till it be done. So that the very
Difficulty of Repentance lays the Foundation for greater Peace of Mind
afterward. And who will think much of such a Difficulty, which is so necessary
to Peace with God and his own Conscience?

(2.) The love of God above all things. This is so fundamental a Duty, that we
cannot place our Happiness in God without it. For if we do not love God above
all things, we must love somewhat else so; and whatever we love above all
things, that we make our Happiness. But I am afraid the greatest Part of the
World love all things above him: For we are to judge of Men's love and esteem
by what they court, and pursue, and desire, and delight in; it is impossible
there should be such a Love of God, where the Stream of the Affections and
Course of Actions run quite another way; I mean, to the Vanities of this World,
of which the Apostle has said, If any Man loves it, the love of the Father is
1 John 2. 15.
not in him. But this is a hard Point: For some degree of love to this World is
allowable; else how can we thank God for the Comforts of it? And all Persons
who know God do grant, that his Perfections are far above all the World, and
therefore they seem to have a Value and Esteem for him above it. We must here
distinguish a notional Esteem from that which is Practical. A notional Esteem
implies no more than a mere Conviction that God must exceed all the
Excellencies which are scattered in the Creatures; but a practical Esteem is,
when the Acts of our Souls toward him are suitable to the Apprehensions we
have in our Minds concerning him. When we adore his infinite Perfections, and
delight in the Meditation of them; when we desire to do all things pleasing to
him, and avoid what we know to offend him; when we believe, and hope, and trust
in him, and commit our selves to his Conduct in this World, in hopes of being
happy with him in another. This is the Love of God above all things; but alas!
Where is this Love of God to be found? It is no very hard Matter to work up a
heated and devout Imagination to the Fancy of Raptures and Ecstasies and
Mystical Unions; but after all, This is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments. ^ Joh. 5. 3.
As the true Love of a Prince is not to flatter and admire him, and watch for
his Smiles; but to observe his Directions, and obey his Orders, and to do what
is most for his Service. And although such a Love of God be hard to those whose
hearts are full of carnal Affections, and are taken up with the Follies and
Vanities of this World, yet we cannot take one true step in the way to Heaven
without the Love of God. For even those who have most corrupted the Doctrine of
Repentance do confess, that there can be no true Contrition for Sin, which is
not founded on the Love of God as the Principle of it, and however they have
dangerously flattered and deceived those who are so weak to believe them, that
Attrition with the Sacrament of Penance is sufficient to put Men into the State
of Grace; yet St. Peter's Keys must have an extraordinary Virtue, if they can
change Nature into Grace, or Fear into Love, or mere Horror of Conscience into
true Repentance.

But although such a Love of God above all things be so hard a thing to Minds
prepossessed with the Love of other things; yet no one can deny that it is the
most reasonable Duty in the World. The very Thoughts of God, if they are such
as we ought to have, imply, that he is the best, the wisest, the most perfect
Being, and therefore the most amiable and desirable Object. And whither then
should the most Natural Stream of our Affections run, but toward him? What do
we mean to suffer so much Earth and Filthiness to obstruct the free Passage of
them in their most proper Course? What can we meet with in this deceitful
World, that can bear the least Proportion to such infinite Goodness? Oh what a
difference is there between our Reason and our Love? We verily believe that God
deserves our Love above all things, and yet how small a share has he in it? We
love what we profess to despise above all things, viz. our Sins and this vain
World; and we really too much despise what we still profess to love above all
things, viz. God and our Eternal Happiness. O miserable Condition of Humanity!
Made to be happy, and yet fond of Misery; loving what is vain, and yet despising
Vanity; hating what is good, and yet accounts it best; and therefore fittest for
our Choice and Love. The Love of God above all things is so just and
reasonable, that those who do it least approve it as the most excellent
Employment of our Minds; and those that do it most, think they fall short of
what God deserves from them. The more we know of God, the more we know that we
ought to love and delight in him; and all our Difficulty in the Practice of it
can never make us think it is unreasonable to love him above all things,
without whom nothing can make us happy, and who alone can do it.

(3.) Universal Holiness of Heart and Life. If this were not necessary to
Salvation, our Apostle would not have pressed it with so much earnestness as he
does; As obedient Children, not fashioning 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15, 16.
your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance, but as he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all Manner of Conversation; because
it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. Again, Dearly beloved, I beseech 2.
11.
you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which war against
the Soul. And again, That he no longer 4. 2.
should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of Men, but to the
Will of God. This is a hard saying to Mankind, who part with nothing so hardly
as with their Sins; yet these must be parted with, if ever we hope to get to
Heaven. I do not say, that a Perfection in Holiness is required, (for that were
to suppose Happiness in this World, since there can be no perfect Holiness
without it,) but there must be a constant, uniform, and sincere Endeavor after
it; by avoiding all known and wilful Sins, and doing all our Duties to God in
such a Manner as our Conscience cannot charge us with gross Neglect or
Insincerity. There are some things we cannot say are downright Sins; yet if
they lead to them; if they indispose our Minds to God, and his Service; if they
tend to Lightness and Vanity, and make us more easy to entertain the Devil's
Temptations, we ought to avoid them as the Snares of the Devil. So, on the
other side, there are some things which we cannot say are plain, and express,
and necessary Duties of Religion, yet they tend so much to keep up the Life and
Spirit of it, that a general Design of Holiness is enough to recommend them. As
to positive Duties of Religion, we cannot exactly fix the Time, and Measure,
and Season of their Performance, which must vary according to Circumstances;
but this we can say, that the more Persons set themselves to the Practice of
Holiness, and the greater Preparation they make for another World, the more
they will delight in the Performance of God's Service, and the more ready to
embrace any Opportunities for it. Those who would have all Religious Duties
determined as to the Circumstances of them, are like Men who would have
punctual Rules set down, how often two Friends should converse with each other,
and how long time they are to stay together. True Friendship will need none of
those things, but will incline them to embrace the best Opportunities for
mutual Conversation, lest too long distance beget a Coldness first, and then
the Friendship dissolves. It is no hard matter to pray as far as words go; but
to pray with Zeal and Devotion, to attend upon God with that seriousness of
Mind we ought to do, will require our utmost Attention. And it is no easy
matter to keep our Minds composed and fit to converse with God in Prayer, and
other solemn Duties of Religion. But as hard as this appears to us, it is most
fit and reasonable that we should do it: For what an unbecoming thing it is to
worship God in a careless, trifling, perfunctory Manner; as though nothing less
deserved the employing the Vigor of our Minds about, than the Service of God.
But how can we love him with all our Hearts, if we do not serve him with all
our Minds and Strength.

(4.) Resignation of our selves to God. This the Apostle calls casting all our
Care 1 Pet. 5. 7.
upon him. This is a very wise Duty if we can attain to it, because it eases
our Minds of many Fears and Perplexities, both as to our selves and others: But
it is no easy thing to set our Minds free from solicitous thoughts, about
possible Evils. We cannot mend our Condition, nor prevent what is determined by
our most anxious Care; but we may enjoy our selves with far greater Peace and
Tranquillity, if we can be content to commit our selves to the best Conduct,
and that is of him that governs the World. And whatever strugglings we may find
within our selves about it, yet the more we search, and weigh, and consider
things, the more we shall be satisfied, that the Resignation of our selves to
God, as to all our Concernments in this World, is the best means to calm our
Passions, and to abate our Fears, to prevent our Impatience, and so to attain
to that Ornament of a meek 1 Pet. 3. 4.
and quiet Spirit, which is with God of great Price.

But if all these Duties be so necessary to our being saved, and we lie under
such Difficulties as to the Performance of them, their appearing to be
reasonable makes our Condition so much worse: For to find it so hard to do what
we are convinced is most reasonable to be done, is one of the worst
Circumstances of our Condition. It Is true we do not want Faculties of
Understanding and Will; but what then, if our Moral Indispositions make these
useless to our Spiritual Advantage? A Man that is like to be stifled in a large
Vessel full of Downy Feathers, cannon complain of the hardness of what he lies
upon, for all things feel soft and easy about him, yet he may be stifled with
them; our evil Habits, and corrupt Inclinations, have nothing that feels hard
or troublesome to us; but if we cannot overcome them, they will certainly ruin
and destroy us. There is therefore a Necessity of a higher Principle of Divine
Grace to enable us to break through all these Difficulties. Which Grace is so
abundantly promised by the Gospel to those who seek it, that it comes at last
to be our own fault, if we be not saved.

II. And this helps us to reconcile the Difficulty of Salvation, with the
Easiness of the Terms of the Gospel: For that which is not only hard, but
impossible to us, in our own strength, may, by the mighty Power of Divine
Grace, become not only possible but easy to us: And withal those things are
accounted easy which bring ease, and that is a light Burden which rids one of
a far harder. And thus the Commands of Christ, however hard in themselves to
us, yet being considered with the Grace of the Gospel, and the blessed Effect
of inward Peace, which follows sincere Obedience, even his Yoke, which keeps us
most in, may be said to be easy, and his Burden, which sits hardest upon us,
may be said to be light.

III. And from hence we see what Encouragement there is still for us to hope to
be saved, if we be righteous.

There is none for the Ungodly and Sinner; i. e. for the profane Contemner of
God and Religion, or for the wicked Liver. For however they may flatter
themselves with vain and presumptuous hopes, there is no more ground to think
that the Righteous shall be saved, than that the Ungodly and Sinner shall not.
For both are alike made known by the same Word of God.

But what Comfort is it (may some say) to hear that the Righteous are scarcely
saved, when we are so conscious to our selves of our own Unrighteousness? If we
could think our selves righteous before God, there were some hopes, but we are
Sinners; and if we should deny or excuse it, we should be so much more so; what
hope can there be then for us?

To this I shall answer, and conclude.

(1.) The Righteous here spoken of were once great Sinners; for St. Peter
mentions their former lusts, and working 1 Pet. 1. 1^.
the Will of the Gentiles in lasciviousness, 4. 3.
lusts, excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries. Yet
these are said, to be redeemed from 1. 18, 19.
their vain Conversation by the precious Blood of Christ; and to be begotten
again 1. 3, 4.
to a lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, etc.

There is therefore, not merely a Possibility of being saved, but a just and
grounded Hope, if we renounce our former Sins, and become righteous, according
to the Terms of the Gospel; i. e. If we sincerely repent of our Sins, and turn
from them, and live the rest of our time, not to the Lusts of Men, but to the
Will of God. But if God 4. 2.
had declared, that he expected from Mankind an entire and perfect
Righteousness without any Sin, it were all one, as to publish a general and
irreversible Decree of Damnation to all, for all have sinned and come short of
the Romans 3. 23.
glory of God. From whence the Apostle well argues, that Men cannot save
themselves: But God of his infinite Pity and Mercy toward the deplorable
Condition of Mankind, has found out a way to save them, by the Redemption
which is in Christ Jesus, whom he has made a propitiation for their sins.
Although therefore as to our selves we have no hopes, yet herein God has
magnified his abundant Love toward Sinners, that although they have sinned to
a high Degree, yet if they be so far wearied with the Burden of their Sins, as
to take Christ's Yoke upon them, then he has promised Ease and Rest to their
Souls, which is the greatest Blessing in the World, especially to repenting
Sinners.

But (some may again say) we have repented and sinned, and sinned and repented
again, and can hardly yet tell which will get the better at last; we cannot say
that we have entirely submitted our Necks to Christ's Yoke, for that requires a
great deal more than we can perform; how then can we be thought Righteous?

I answer therefore,

(2.) Where there is a sincere and honest Endeavor to please God, and keep his
Commandments, although Persons fail in the Manner of doing it, God will accept
of such as righteous: But where they please themselves in their
Unrighteousness, and go on in it, hoping that God will accept some kind of
Repentance in stead of it; or, where there has been long struggling, and many
Acts of Repentance, and the Interest of Sin prevails; the Case of such is very
dangerous, but not desperate. For as long as there is hopes of a true
Repentance, there is of Salvation; and there is still hopes of Repentance where
Men's hearts are not hardened by an incorrigible Stiffness: For, according to
the best Measures we can take by the Rules of the Gospel, none are effectually
excluded from the Hopes of Salvation, but such as exclude themselves by their
own Impenitency.

SERMON IV. Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, March the 23d,
1689/90.
Ecclesiastes XI. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment.
IF Solomon had said, Rejoice not, O young man, in thy youth, neither let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth; walk not in the way of thine heart,
nor in the sight of thine eyes; for know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into Judgment, the Sense had been so easy and plain, that
there had been no Appearance of Difficulty in reconciling one Part with the
other: For the whole had been looked upon but as a necessary and seasonable
Admonition to such who by the Heats of Youth, and Strength of Inclination, and
Allurements of the World, are too apt to be transported with the Love of
sensual Pleasures. And this had been very becoming the wise Man toward the
Conclusion of his Book, wherein he had not only before set forth the several
Vanities of humane Life; but so soon after, bids Men Remember their Creator
Chapter 12. 1.
in the days of their Youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw
nigh of which they shall say they have no pleasure in them, i. e. in the days
wherein they are most apt to walk in the way of their hearts, and in the sight
of their eyes. For he knew very well, that nothing is so powerful a Check and
Restraint upon Men's Inclinations to Sin, as the serious Consideration of that
God that gave them their Beings, and will bring them to an Account for their
Actions.

But how then comes he in this Verse to seem rather to give a Permission to
young Men in the time of Youth to indulge themselves in their Mirth and Vanity?
Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, etc.

Some think that the wise Man only derides and exposes them for their Folly in
so doing; but that seems not agreeable with the grave and serious Advice which
follows. And we find nothing like Irony; or Sarcasm in any Part of the
foregoing Book; for he begins it with a Tragical Exclamation against the
Vanities of humane Life; Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher, Chapter 1. 2.
Vanity of Vanities: all is Vanity. And he pursues his Argument by a particular
Induction of the most tempting and pleasing Vanities of Life; and particularly
all sorts of sensual Delights; as Mirth and Jollity in the first Place, then
Chapter 2. 1.
Wine and Music, fine Palaces, curious Vineyards, Gardens and Pools, a great
v. 3.
Retinue, and, which was needful to v. 4, 5, 6, 7.
maintain all this, Abundance of Silver v. 8.
and Gold. But what a melancholy Reflection does he make on all these Pleasures
of Life? Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on v. 11.
the labor that I had labored to do; and behold all was vanity and vexation
of spirit. What encouragement then could the Wiseman, after so much Experience
of the World, give to young Men here in the Text, to rejoice in the days of
their Youth, and to walk in the way of their hearts, and in the sight of their
eyes? i. e. to pursue Vanity, and to lay the Foundation for greater Vexation of
Spirit, when they come to reflect on their own Follies.

What then is the meaning of these words? For this, we are to observe, that the
Preacher having declared his own main Scope and Design in the beginning and
conclusion of his Book, brings in sometimes the different Senses which Mankind
are apt to have concerning the Happiness of Life. And that is the Reason that
we meet with such different Expressions concerning it.

In one Place it is said, that there is no better thing under the Sun, than to
eat and Chapter 8. 15.
drink, and to be merry; but in another, he says, Sorrow is better than
laughter, and Chapter 7. 3.
by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.

In one Place he says, All things come alike to all, there is one event to the
Chapter 9. 2.
righteous and to the wicked: But in another, That it shall be well with them
that fear the Lord, but it shall not be well Chapter 8. 12, 13.
with the wicked.

How can such Passages as these be reconciled, if we look on them as expressing
the Sense of the same Person? But if we allow them to be the different Notions
of two sorts of Men in this World, they are easy to be understood, although
not to be reconciled. And the one sort is of those who place all Happiness in
this Life, without regard to Religion or Virtue, or another World; and the
other of those, who look on this Life only as a Passage to another; and that
all Persons ought to behave themselves here, so as conduces most to their
Happiness hereafter.

And according to these different Schemes, we have in the words of the Text two
very different sorts of Counsel and Advice to young Men.

I. The first proceeds upon the Supposition that all the Happiness of Man lies
in this Life, and in the Enjoyment of the sensual Pleasures of it; Rejoice, O
young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy Youth;
and walk in the way of thy heart, and in the sight of thy eyes. We have no
other Rule here given but the sight of the eye, and the way of the heart; i. e.
outward Appearance and inward Inclination; and these are the beloved Rules of
the most sensual and voluptuous Persons, and they judge of Happiness only by
the pursuit of them. Here is nothing mentioned of Reason or Conscience, or a
regard to Virtue in the Restraint of Natural Inclinations: Nay, here is nothing
of that Severity which Epicurus himself thought necessary toward the
maintaining of a pleasant State of Life; which he granted could never be done
without some Restraint of Men's Appetites and Inclinations to the Pleasures of
Sense; and it is not to be imagined, that Solomon should give young Men greater
Liberty than the corruptest Moralists did. Therefore I cannot look upon these
words as a Permission for them to do what is here expressed; but as a full
Description of that Method of Living, which the jolly and voluptuous Corrupters
of Youth would instruct them in, Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let
thine heart cheer thee, etc.

II. We have here the most powerful Check and Restraint laid upon all these
sensual Inclinations of Youth. But know thou that for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment. Which words are the wise Man's Correction of the
foregoing Liberty, or the Curb which Reason and Religion give to the pursuit of
Natural Inclinations, wherein every Word has its force, and ought to make a
deep Impression upon us; For,

(1.) Know thou: Thine is not then the same cafe with Creatures that have no
understanding; they are not capable of any Check from themselves, having no Law
of Reason or Conscience within them to control or govern the^ sensual Desires;
but God has given thee not merely a brutal Appetite, but a rational Soul,
capable of understanding the differences of Good and Evil, and the Reasons why
some things which appear pleasant are very difagreeing to the Principles of
humane Nature; i. e. to that Order, Decency, Modesty, and Regularity, which the
more elevated Frame and Capacity of Mankind do require.

(2.) For all these things; as light and vain as you esteem them, as soon as
they are over and forgotten by you, as secretly and closely as they are
committed, as much as you endeavor to palliate and excuse them, yet but for
all these things God will certainly bring thee into Judgment. Therefore you
have all the Reason in the world to consider what you do, since every thing
will Chapter 12. 14.
be brought to Judgment, whether it be good or evil, as Solomon concludes this
Book. Which shows the great regard God has to the Good or Evil of ou^ Actions;
and if the great Judge of the World has so, certainly we ought to have it, and
never think our selves at liberty to do what we please, in gratifying our
Lusts, and pursuing our Natural Inclinations to Evil.

(3) God will do it. If there were no God to call thee to an Account, yet there
are some Actions of Virtue so agreeable to Mankind, and some Vices ^o loathsome
and deformed, that there would be sufficient cause for them to love the one and
to abhor the other. If we could suppose such a Frame of things things and such
sorts of Beings as we now see, and no God to make them, (which is most absurd
and unreasonable,) yet we must suppose these Beings to have Natures and
Properties distinct from each other; so that we could not imagine Men to become
Beasts, and therefore they must not act like them, but preserve that Decorum or
Agreeableness in their Actions which is suitable to the peculiar Excellencies
of humane Nature. And there are some Sins so much below the Dignity thereof,
that no Circumstances, no Suppositions, can make them fitting for Mankind to
commit them; which shows that the Nature of Good and Evil is no Arbitrary
thing, but is founded in the very Frame of our Beings, and in the Respects we
owe to our selves and to one another. And since there is an Infinite and
Supreme Being which has absolute Power and Command over us, and gives us both
our Beings and the Comforts of our Lives, it is most absurd to suppose it not
to be a fault to hate his Goodness, or to despise his Mercy; or to slight his
Power, and to contemn his Authority: For in all these there is something
repugnant to the common Sense of Mankind, and to all Principles of true Honor
and Justice. And there are such common Principles of Morality arising from our
necessary Relation to God and each other, which are of so clear and convincing
Evidence, that every one that considers them will grant that wicked Men may as
well go about to dispute their Beings as their Sins; and may as easily prove
that they are not, but only appear to be, as that no Actions are really evil,
but only by false Glasses appear so to be. But however vain Men may deceive
themselves, God will not be mocked; for he not only sees and knows all our
Actions, but he will bring us to an Account for them.

(4.) God will bring thee into Judgment. It is a dreadful Consideration to a
Sinner, that God knows all his false Steps, all his secret Sins, all his
Falsehood and Dissimulation with God and Men: And there is nothing which Men of
Art and Design hate more, than to be discovered and found out in all their
double and deceitful Dealings; but to have these not only privately
discovered, but exposed and laid open to the view of the World; and not only
so, but to have every Circumstance examined, and every Action scanned, and that
by the great Judge of all the World, whom nothing can escape, nothing can
deceive, nothing can withstand; whose Justice is inflexible, whose Knowledge is
incomprehensible, whose Power is irresistible, and whose Vengeance is
insuppo^table: This we cannot but imagine must strike an awe and terror into
the Minds of Men, when they are pursuing the Pleasures of Sin, that for all
these things God will bring them into Judgment. But notwithstanding these and
many other Expressions to the same purpose in Scripture, wherein God has
declared that he will certainly Judge the World in Righteousness Acts 7. 31.
at the Great Day; that the Secrets of all hearts shall then be disclosed; that
Romans 2. 16.
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and that God will
render 2 Cor. 5. 10.
to every Man according to his Deeds: Romans 2. 6.
And notwithstanding it is a thing in it self very reasonable, from the
Consideration of God's Justice and Providence, and the Nature and Consequences
of good and evil Actions; yet the generality of Mankind go on as secure and
careless as if there were no such thing, or that they ought not to be concerned
about it. Therefore I shall not spend time in the Proof of that which I take
for granted you all believe, and I am sure have Reason so to do; but I shall
enquire into these things which are most practical and therefore proper for our
Consideration at this Time.

(1.) How a Matter of so great Importance as a Judgment to come makes so little
Impression on the Minds of the generality of Mankind, who profess to believe it.

(2.) By what means the Consideration of a future Judgment may have a greater
Influence on all our Minds.

(1.) How a thing of so great Importance as God's bringing us into Judgment
comes to make so little Impression on the Minds of the generality of those who
profess to believe it, when we are so tender and sensible of small things with
respect to this World.

For resolving this, we must consider, that there is a great Difference between
the Not-disbelieving Doctrinal Points of Faith, and the practical Improvement
of them in our Minds; without which, they remain there but as general and
confused Notions. Thus too many who abhor being thought Atheists, live as if
there were no God; not, that they deny or dispute his Being or Attributes, but
they have no Regard to them in the last Dictates of their Minds, or in the
Course of their Actions. To go about to prove such things to be true they look
on as lost labor, for they do not question them; but there is another thing
then which we are to give an Account of, viz. how it comes to pass that so
great and so weighty Doctrines, being received and allowed to be true, make so
little Impression on the Generality of Mankind; especially this of the Day of
Judgment; of which these seem to be the main Reasons.

(1.) Men's Impatience of considering great and weighty things at a Distance,
which cannot affect and move our Senses.

(2.) The bewitching and stupifying Nature of present and sensual Pleasures;
which draw off the Mind from greater things, and weaken all the Impressions
they make upon us.

(3.) A General Presumption upon God's Mercy toward Mankind on the Account of
the Frailty of humane Nature, notwithstanding the severity of his Threatenings
in Scripture.

(1.) I begin with Men's Impatience of Considering.

We flatter and please our selves with the thoughts that we are Intelligent and
Considering Beings, when, it may be, Considering (especially as to Matters of
greatest Consequence) is one of the things which Mankind have the greatest
Aversion to. For generally, they love to go no farther than the Outsides and
Appearances of things, and have their Minds wholly possessed with false and
flattering Imaginations, having neither Truth nor Consistency in them. And
those who account themselves of better Breeding than others, are often more
imposed upon than others in this way. The Pomp and Grandeur of the World, the
Gaity and Splendor of Living strikes their Fancies with such vehement
Impressions, that scarce any thing else gets into their Minds, or sinks deep
into them. There are many other things that seem to stand fair in their Opinion
at some times, but it is as they are thought serviceable to worldly Greatness
and Honor.

This, after all the Instructions of Philosophers, the Declamations of Heathen
and Christian Orators, and the far more powerful Arguments of the wisest and
best of Men, recorded in Holy Scripture, is still the great Idol of Mankind,
which they serve and worship with the truest and warmest Devotion. All other
things, how great and weighty soever in themselves, yet are really looked on by
them as a sort of Metaphysical Abstracted Notions of things invisible and
immaterial, quite out of the reach of their Imagination, which may serve for
the Amusement of some, and the Affrightment of others, and the Entertainment of
Speculative Minds; but, how to raise themselves in the World, to appear Great,
and have many Dependents; to pursue and carry on their own Interest (though
without regard to Justice and Honesty) these they account Great and Noble
things, and fit to employ their Minds upon. But alas! How much are such imposed
upon by mere Shows and Appearances of things, which are really what God made
them, but are not what we fancy them to be! There are, no doubt, real
Conveniences of Life in Riches, and Honor, and Ease, and Plenty, or else they
could never be esteemed Blessings, nor could we have reason to thank God for
them; but there is a great difference between the Fitness of things for our
present Use, and for our Happiness; i. e. when we make them our End, and do not
employ them in order to a farther End. But it is good Advice of St. Paul, Using
the World as not abusing it; for the Fashion 1 Cor. 7. 31.
of this World passes away: it passes like a Ship under Sail, while the
generality of Mankind, like Passengers, lie asleep in it. Sometimes when Sto^ms
arise, or Waves cross them, they seem to be awake, and to look about them, and
to think whither they are going; but those thoughts being uneasy to them, they
lie down again, and are carried they know not whither. But still it is but the
Fashion of this World; a mere Landscape, wherein there is great Variety but
little Satisfaction, the Show far out-doing the Substance. When the Devil
showed Christ the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, the highest
Matthew. 4. 8.
Mountain could afford but a small Prospect of them, but as some think he
caused a Representation in the Air of the most tempting Splendor and Glories
of them. And this was the truest Representation of them, by glorious
Appearances and bewitching Shows. But unless there be something in humane
Nature which makes it very apt to be deceived by such things, it were strange
the Devil should think to prevail on our Savior by them. We pity those who
traveling in the Night are deceived by false Fires and shining Meteors, and
follow them into Bogs and Precipices; but the case of such is so much worse who
are deluded by the deceitful Vanities of this World to their own Destruction.

And can there be any greater Argument of the want of Consideration, than for
Persons to suffer themselves to be so easily and so fatally cheated? It is a
wise Observation of Aristotle, that (...). Not. Ausc. l. 7. c. 4. n. 15.
True Knowledge and Wisdom lies most in settling and fixing the Mind. For it is
not the subtlety and fineness of Thoughts, not the quickness and sharpness of
Apprehension, nor the close and mathematical Deductions of Reason which make a
wise Man, but the having a calm and composed Temper of Mind, the subduing our
Passions, and governing our Actions with respect to our chief End. And in order
to this, Consideration is absolutely necessary; without which that which is
nearest to us, and offers it self first to our Choice, must prevail upon us.
And here lies the main Difficulty to persuade Mankind to choose a far greater
Happiness at a Distance and invisible, before a present Enjoyment of things we
are constantly conversant with, and have made an early Impression upon us. But
still we say, that it is nothing but Men's Impatience of Considering, which
makes them have so little Regard to another Life. For if they would but lay
both Worlds in the Balance one against the other, they would soon discover the
wonderful Folly of preferring that which this World accounts Happiness before
that which is offered to our Choice in another. For let us make all the fair
and reasonable Allowances that may be, as to our Inclinations, and Appetites,
and Circumstances in this World; as to the Distance, Obscurity,
Incomprehensibleness of the Joys of another World; yet every considering Man
that regards true Happiness will be sure to choose that which is to come. For,

(1.) Supposing the Happiness were Equal, yet there is no Proportion in the
Continuance of them; and a considering Man will be sure to choose a Happiness
that can never have an End, before one that may be irrecoverably lost in a
Moment; and can certainly be enjoyed but for a little time, if there were any
Certainty at all in the Enjoyment of it.

(2.) The more any have considered, the more they have repented placing too
much of their Happiness here, because Reason and Experience shows them the
Folly of it. But the more they have considered, the better satisfied the Minds
of good Men are in placing their Happiness above; where alone that good is to
be sound which can make us truly happy, and is to be enjoyed in that Fullness,
that Purity, that Certainty which makes it fit for the wisest and most
considering Men to prefer above a present Happiness, if it were to be enjoyed
on Earth.

(3.) He that looks after a future Happiness does not thereby lose any of the
real Conveniences of humane Life; but he that places his Happiness here,
cannot find it in this World, and is sure to be miserable in another: And this
makes a very considerable Difference in the Choice. Indeed, if God made it
absolutely necessary in order to future Happiness for us to forego all the
natural Pleasures and innocent Delights of this Life, the Terms would be much
harder, and hardly possible to humane Nature. For, if all Pleasures of Sense
must be renounced, we must not see the pleasing Varieties of Nature, nor hear
the melodious sound of Birds, nor taste the Meat when we are hungry, nor Drink
when we are thirsty; for there is really greater Pleasure of Sense when Nature
craves necessary Sustenance, than what the most voluptuous Epicurean enjoys in
all his Contrivances, first to raise his Appetite, and then to please it: For
what is most natural and necessary is the most delightful; every thing of
Force must have something Uneasy in it. But God has not dealt thus hardly
with Mankind; He allows us all the reasonable Desires of Nature, and has only
forbid us what is unreasonable and unnecessary. And upon the forbearance of
what is so, joined with our entire dependence upon himself for it, (which the
Scripture calls Faith working by Love,) he Gal. 5. 6.
has made the gracious Offer of Eternal Happiness. It is true, in
extraordinary Cases of Persecution he requires more, but then he proposes
extraordinary Rewards to make abundant Recompense for them; but in the common
and ordinary Case of Mankind, he requires no more than our avoiding those
Excesses in pleasing our Appetites which Nature and Reason condemn. And those
who consider, cannot but see how unreasonable it is to place their Happiness in
forbidden Pleasures; and to think that nothing can make them happy, but what
God has declared shall make them miserable. It is a strange Crossness in our
Desires, if nothing can please them but what displeases God. It were no hard
task to show, that God forbids nothing but what is really repugnant to our
Well-being here; and how then can any such thing as Happiness be hoped for in
such things? And when a Man ventures being miserable for ever, for what can
never make him happy here, if he had his full Liberty to pursue his Desires; he
shows how far he is from acting like a wise, rational, considering Being. So
that Impatience of considering is one great Reason why the thoughts of a
Judgment to come make so little Impression on Men's minds.

(2.) The second Reason is the Bewitching and Stupifying Nature of sensual
Pleasures. The Epicurean Philosophers, who managed the Theory of Pleasure with
the greatest Art, so as it might look like a proper happiness for Mankind,
found two things absolutely necessary in order to it.

(1.) The Retrenching all inordinate Desires, viz. such as had more Pain
following them, than there was Pleasure in the Enjoyment of them.

(2.) The removing the Fears of another World out of Men's minds. For as long
as these sunk into their Minds, they must rob them of that inward Tranquillity,
without which it were a vain thing so much as to talk of Happiness. But it was
impossible, upon their Grounds, to do either of these. For,

(1.) It is unreasonable to suppose that the Happiness of our present Life
should consist in the Enjoyment of Pleasure, and yet the Pleasure of Opinion to
be taken away, since the Pleasure of Opinion is the far greatest Part of the
Pleasure of Life; and that which is as much valued and esteemed by a^l those
who place their Happiness in Pleasure. If it were all to be reduced to that
which lies in satisfying the necessary Desires of Nature, then such as have
just enough for that, are far more happy than the Rich and Voluptuous, because
they have less Pains and Care. But if any allowance be made to the Pleasure of
Fancy and Opinion, then no stop can be given to inordinate Desires. For, who
can set bounds to Fancy, or lay a reasonable Restraint upon Desires, if the
Differences of Good and Evil be taken away? As they must be, if mere Pleasure
and Pain be to be regarded in our Actions.

(2.) As to the other, the Methods they used to remove all Fears of another
World were weak and trifling, and they had no Advantage in Point of Argument,
but what the Ignorance and Folly of the Idolatrous Part of Mankind at that time
gave them. But there is a far greater Advantage in Point of Interest, which
makes Men of sensual Lives very willing to be rid of the Fears of another Life.
And a willing Mind goes a great way in believing or not believing. Those who
place their Happiness in eating and drinking well (as they call it) and other
sensual Delights, which can never be enjoyed when this Life is ended, have but
a melancholy Prospect into another World; for they are shut out from the very
Possibility of being happy in their own Sense, (unless they would believe the
Eastern Impostour;) but when they once come to apprehend that there is no
Pleasure to make them happy but what is seated in the Body, they are apt to
conclude that when that dies, there is an end of all, for their Imaginations
can reach no farther. And the true Reason is, they have laid Reason and
Conscience asleep so long, that it is very hard to awaken them; their Notions
of Good and Evil are like the confused Apprehensions of Men half awake; they
see enough to perplex but not enough to satisfy them. And when their Fears
grow upon them, they have not the Heart and Courage to examine them, whether
they be reasonable or not; but rather choose to return to their former Opiates,
than undergo the trouble of an effectual Cure by a hearty Repentance and coming
to themselves, as the prodigal Luke 15. 17.
Son in the Parable did, when his Hardship had brought him to Consideration. We
do not know what had become of him, if he had been wise and frugal in his
Pleasures; if he had taken care of a good Stock and a plentiful Subsistence;
but he first came to be pinched with want, before he was awakened to repent.
But we have in Scripture a more remarkable Instance of the stupifying Nature of
sensual Pleasures; and that was in David after his Sins of Adultery and
Murder. It is a wonder, how a Man of such a tender Conscience in other things,
should continue so long under the Guilt of these Enormities, without being
awakened to Repentance: Did he not know these to be great Sins? And did not his
Conscience charge him with the Guilt of them? How came he then to need a
Prophet to be sent to him, and to deal so plainly with him, as to tell him Thou
art the Man? But this is a plain Evidence, 2 Samuel 12. 7.
how much the Pleasures of Sin are apt to stupifie Men's Consciences so far,
that unless God by his Grace be pleased to awaken them thoroughly, they never
come to a sincere and hearty Repentance. David saw nothing more as to the Guilt
of his Sins, when he penned his 51st Psalm, than his own Reason and Natural
Conscience might inform him before; but he had quite another Sense of his Sins
then; his Heart was broken and his Soul wounded under the Apprehension of God's
Displeasure; and this makes him pray so earnestly and so importunately to God
for the Pardon of his Sins. And if it were thus in the case of a Man otherwise
after God's own heart, i. e. afraid of offending him, and careful to please
him; what may we imagine it to be in those who in the time of Youth walk in the
way of their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes: i. e. allowing themselves
in all sensual Inclinations, and pursuing carnal Delights so far till they have
lost all Sense of God and another World; and such as these, nothing but the
powerful Influences of Divine Grace can awaken and recover.

(3.) The third Reason is, A General Presumption upon God's Mercy. The first
thing which Sinners, in the Heat of their Youth, and Pursuit of their Lusts,
aim at, is to think as little as may be of what they are doing, or what will be
the Consequence of their Actions. For every thought of themselves is very
uneasy to them, and every thought of God is much more so; therefore they drive
away all such Thoughts by one Means or other, by Sleep, Diversion, Company, and
such public Entertainments, as rather heighten and inflame their Vices than
correct them.

If all this will not do, but there will be some melancholy Hours, wherein
Conscience begins to rouse it self, and to awaken the Sinner to some Sense of
his Folly; then he is ready to hearken with Pleasure to any Raileries against
Religion and Morality; and admires the Wit of any one who dares say a bold and
sharp thing against the Wisdom of all Ages, and of the best Men in them. And
one or two such Sayings, without Proof, are cried up as far beyond the best
Rules of Morality, or the Evidence of natural and revealed Religion. Any
Skeptical Disputes are sufficient Demonstrations to them; and the most
unreasonable Cavils against Religion are embraced, because against the thing
they hate; and even a Jest against the Day of Judgment shall signify more with
them, than the strongest Arguments in the World to prove it. The true Reason
is, they love their Vices, and hate every thing which makes them uneasy to
them; and nothing does more so, than the thoughts of a Judgment to come.

But suppose after all, the terrible and frequent Expressions of Scripture
concerning the Day of Judgment, joined with the Reasonableness of the thing, do
make such Impression on their Minds that they cannot wholly shake off the Fears
and Apprehensions of it, then their last Endeavor is to mitigate and lessen
them, from a General Presumption of God's Merciful Nature; and therefore they
are willing to suppose, that however God, to keep the World in awe, has
threatened them with the dreadful Severities of the Great Day, yet as a tender
Father who threatens his disobedient Son, in order to reclaim him, with no less
than disinheriting him for ever; yet when it comes to Execution he may relent,
not from his Son's Deserts, but his own Compassion; so they hope, or believe,
(or are willing to do so) that God at the Great Day will not proceed according
to the Rigor which he has threatened to use. And to comfort themselves in
these hopes they find out all possible Extenuations of their Sins: If we, say
they, had been created purely intellectual Beings, free from this load of
Flesh, and the Inclinations which are natural to it, then it had been more
reasonable to have called us to a strict Account for every Action of our Lives;
for then every Inclination to Evil must have come from our Minds; but now our
Bodies corrupt and draw them aside; and the Inclinations to Evil grow faster
than our Reason, which should check and restrain them. And when those
Inclinations are strongest, Men have not that Judgment which is necessary to
the Government of unruly Passions. So that the very Frame of humane Nature
seems to plead for Sins committed in the Heat and Violence of Youth. Besides,
such is the Strictness and Purity of the Law of God, and so great the Weakness
and Disability, the Ignorance and Inadvertency of Mankind, that if God will
make no Allowance for humane Frailty, who can stand before his Tribunal? And,
if any Allowance be made for Sins of Infirmity, there are so many Abatements to
be made for Sins committed through sudden Passion, through Mistake, through the
unavoidable Impotency of humane Nature in this degenerate Condition, that the
Severity of that Day is not much to be feared.

This is the utmost of the Sinner's Plea against the Severity of the Day of
Judgment: But, to show how faulty it is, I shall offer these Considerations;

1. That God will certainly Judge the Act. 17. 31.
World in Righteousness; and therefore none shall have Cause to complain of the
Harshness or Severity of his Proceedings. For, this Righteousness is not the
Rigor of Justice, but that Equity which has a Regard to the Circumstances of
Actions, and the Abatement and Extenuation of Faults which arise from them.

2. None shall suffer at that Day, but for their wilful Impenitency, and
obstinate Continuance in Sin. For, this is not only agreeable to the Merciful
Nature of God, to forgive repenting Sinners; but it is one of the great Designs
of the Gospel to assure Mankind of it by the highest Testimonies, even by the
Death and Resurrection of the Son of God, and all the Miracles wrought in
Confirmation of it, and of the Truth of his Doctrine.

3. There are several Degrees of Wilfulness and Obstinacy, and Men's Judgments
shall be according to them. Some Men's Capacities, Opportunities and Helps have
very much exceeded others; some have broken through stronger Convictions and
more powerful Assistances of Grace than others; some have had more early
Instructions, more frequent Warnings, more obliging Favors from Heaven than
others. And as it is reasonable that Persons suffer for their obstinate
Continuance in Sin, so that they should suffer according to the Degrees and
Circumstances of it.

(4.) It is no unjust Severity in God, to deprive Men of that Happiness which
they have wilfully refused; and to condemn them to that Misery which their Sins
have deserved. Has not God made the most condescending Offer of Mercy and
Salvation, that it is possible for Creatures to expect from him, after so many
and great Provocations? Could Heaven stoop lower than it has done to vile and
ungrateful Sinners? When the Son of God came down from Heaven on purpose to
reconcile God and Man together: When the Spirit of God warns and excites their
Minds to the Consideration of their Eternal Welfare: When the Messengers of
this Reconciliation are to woo and entreat and beseech Sinners in Christ's
stead, as though God did beseech them by them, that they would be reconciled to
God; When the Patience and Goodness and Long suffering of God is exercised so
much on purpose to lead them to Repentance; When God instead of perfect
Obedience, is willing to pardon and pass by so many Offenses, if they truly
repent of them, and to receive them still into his Favor and Mercy; When after
all this Men do rather prefer the present Pleasures of Sin, before all that
Happiness which God so freely offers, is it any Injustice in him to suffer them
for ever to be deprived of that which they so wilfully, so ungratefully, so
obstinately refused? And supposing the Souls of Men to subsist in another World
free from all those Clouds of Error and Mistake, and the false Notions they
are deceived by here, as well as all the Diversions and Pleasures of this Life,
it is not to be imagined, but they must for ever suffer an intolerable Anguish
within (called, A Worm that never dies, and a Fire that Mar. 9. 44.
never goes out,) from the Reflections upon their own Folly. What Vengeance
beyond this God may inflict, we now know not, (may none of us ever know it!)
but we are sure it will never exceed the Proportion and Desert of their Sins.
Which is sufficient to clear the Justice of God in his Proceedings with Mankind
in the Day of Judgment.

2. It remains now only to show by what means God's bringing us to Judgment may
make a deeper Impression upon our Minds; By considering these two things:

1. That our not considering it will not make our Condition better, but much
worse.

2. That our Considering it is the best means to prevent the evil Consequences
of it.

(1.) Our not considering it will not make our Conditon better. There were
great Reason indeed to walk in the way of our hearts, and in the sight of our
eyes, and never trouble our selves with what will happen at the great Day, if
the putting it out of our Heads would make our Accounts the easier when it
comes. But alas! Whether we think of it or no, the Account runs on, and we must
answer to every particular at last; and how unprovided shall we be, if we spend
no time here in examining, stating and clearing of them as far as we are able.
It is a mighty Privilege we have by the Gospel, that God allows us to clear our
Accounts with him in this World; For, if we would judge our selves we shall not
be judged. i. e. If 1 Cor. 11. 31.
we call our selves to a strict Account for our Actions; if we repent heartily
and sincerely of our Sins; if we seek earnestly to God for Mercy; if we have
our Consciences cleansed by the Blood of Christ from the Pollution of our Sins,
then we may with Joy and Peace in our Minds think of the Great Day of
Recompense. But if we never enter into our selves, to search and examine our
own Actions, never look into the Habits of our own Minds, nor charge our selves
with the Guilt of the Sins we have committed, how can we ever hope to escape
the Scrutiny or avoid the Severity of that Day? For our Account continually
increases by our Neglect of it, and the Burden of God's Wrath must be so much
heavier when we have taken no care to lessen it, but after our hardness and
impenitent hearts have only ^om. 2. 5.
treasured up wrath against the day of wrath.

(2.) Our considering that God will bring us to Judgment is the best means to
prevent the evil Consequences of it. For, although we cannot hope to plead
Innocence; yet, (which is next in Point of Wisdom) this is the most effectual
Motive to bring us to Repentance: And that which makes us repent makes us to
grow wise in time, and to lay a good Foundation for Eternal Life. There are
many Arguments to induce us to it in the Folly and Shame of our Sins; the
Wisdom of Reflection and Reformation; the Instances of it and Exhortations to
it recorded in Scripture; but there is none more sensible and which touches Men
more in Point of Interest and Concernment than this of a Judgment to come. Must
I then, says a penitent Sinner, give a strict Account to God of all the evil
Actions of my Life, and suffer according to the Desert of them if I die in
Impenitency? How much does it then concern me to repent betimes, to repent in
good earnest, to repent while there is hopes of Mercy! Away then all ye
deceitful Vanities of this wicked World, ye have too long deceived and seduced
me: What will all this vain show, this busy Seducer, this impertinent Outside
of the World signify, when I must be stripped of all, and stand guilty and
accused by my own Conscience before the Judgment Seat of Christ? Oh! how
wretched shall I be, if my Conscience condemns me before the Sentence of the
Judge! Therefore, I am resolved to prevent the Judgment of that Day; I will
accuse, judge, and condemn my self; nay, I will proceed to Execution, as to all
the vicious Habits and corrupt Inclinations within me. And although I cannot
wholly mortify them, yet I will crucify them; i. e. nail them to the Cross,
and allow them no longer Liberty; and albeit they may struggle for a time, yet
I will never give way to their Dominion over me any more; that so Death and
Judgment may find me prepared, if not with unspotted Innocence, yet with hearty
and sincere Repentance.

To conclude all; let the Consideration of this Day of Judgment to come enter
deep into our Minds, and awaken us out of our Lethargy and Security. We are
very apt to put off unpleasing things from time to time, and to pass away our
time here as easily as may be. But this is no part of Wisdom, and we shall
extremely blame our selves for it one time or other. The best we can do now, is
to recover what is past by Repentance, and to set our selves to the making up
our Accounts with God in this World: For, we are all walking on the brink of
Eternity, and know not how soon we may drop into it. But what Eternal Horror
and Confusion must follow us, if we go on to slight the Opportunities he still
affords us of making our Peace with him who is to be our Judge? May God
therefore of his Mercy awaken us all to a timely and serious Repentance, and
then our Iniquities shall not be our Ruin.

SERMON V. Preached at The Assizes AT WORCESTER, Sept. the 21st, 1690.
2 Timothy 1. 7. For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power,
and of Love and of a sound Mind.
IF we look into the Scope and Design of this Epistle, we shall find St. Paul
at the time of writing it, under more than ordinary Apprehensions of the sad
Condition of the Christian Church.

As to Himself, he had great Satisfaction in the particular Care of Divine
Providence toward Him: For, God 2 Timothy 3. 11.
had not only formerly delivered him out of many Persecutions; but had lately
rescued him out of the Mouth of the Lion, i. e. from a great and imminent Chapter
4. 17.
Danger. And though he foresaw, that the time of his Departure was at hand; yet
that was so far from giving Chapter 4. 6.
him any Trouble, that he had the Comfort of a good Conscience in looking back;
I have fought a good fight, I have Verse. 7.
finished my course, I have kept the faith; and in looking forward, Henceforth
Verse. 8.
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous
Judge shall give me at that Day.

But all his Dissatisfaction did arise from looking about him; For without were
Fightings, and within were Fears. The Persecutions abroad were indeed so sharp
and severe, that none could keep a good Conscience without a share in them;
which makes him say, Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer Persecutions. But this Verse. 12.
was not that which troubled him most; for there were two things which seem to
have made a deep and sad Impression upon his Mind.

(1.) He observed a great Coldness and Indifferency among some who pretended a
mighty Zeal for the common Interest of their Religion before. Of this he gives
a strange Instance in his own Case. At my first Answer, says he, no man stood
with me, but all men forsook Chapter 4. 16.
me; I pray God it be not laid to their Charge. They might think it Prudence
and Caution at such a dangerous time, but the Apostle certainly thought it a
fault, or else he would never have prayed that it might not be laid to their
Charge. Something might be said in Excuse of those who were so near danger; but
what can be said for the general Coldness of those at a Distance? This thou
know, that all they Chapter 1. 15.
which are in Asia be turned away from me. A sad Consideration to Timothy, who
was entrusted by him with the particular Care of those in Asia! For, what
Comfort could he hope for among them, who were turned away from St. Paul? Such
a Defection as this must needs bring great dishonor to Religion, as well as
dissatisfaction to him.

(2.) He observed a busy sort of Seducers, who were crept in among them; who
were crafty, restless and designing Men; such as could not compass their own
ends without taking upon them a Pretense of Zeal for Religion. They were Men of
as ill Tempers as we can well imagine Men to be; They were lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. But he concludes their Character
Chapter 3. 1, ^, 3, 4.
with what one would have least expected from such a sort of Men, that they had
a Form of Godliness. They Verse. 5.
were such painted Sepulchers that made a more than ordinary Show and
Appearance, but within there was nothing but Rottenness and Corruption. Men who
pretended to Religion without Virtue; and hoped to be accounted Godly without
any real Goodness. They made a great Show of Zeal about some things, and were
industrious in gaining Proselytes; for which end they crept into Houses, etc.
but whatever they pretended, their own Interest lay at bottom; Supposing that
gain is Godliness; and they were so far from any hopes of Amendment, 1 Timothy 6.
5.
that St. Paul gives that dreadful Character of them, that they waxed worse
and worse, deceiving and being deceived. 2 Timothy 3. 13.


And what now should Timothy do under such a Complication of ill Circumstances?
Should he only stand still and see which way things would go? Or should he give
way to Despondency and sink under the Burden of his Fears? No, St. Paul,
although at a Distance, and a Prisoner, yet thinks fit to rouse, to animate, to
encourage him; and not only to put him in Mind of the Gift of 2 Timothy 1. 6.
God which was in him; but of that Spirit and Temper, which true Christianity
possesses Men's minds with.

For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love and of a
sound Mind.

Which words may be considered two Ways:

I. With respect to Difficulties and Troubles in the World; and so it is not a
Spirit of Fear, but of Power. Some render it Spiritum Timiditatis, a timorous,
pusillanimous Spirit; which is apt to be dejected with Fears, so as not to have
Courage and Resolution enough to do ones Duty for fear of Danger; and a Spirit
of Power is that which supports and bears up the Mind under a Prospect of
Difficulties, so as not to be hindered thereby from that Duty which lies upon
us.

II. With respect to the Humors and Passions of Men; and so it is a Spirit of
Love and of a sound Mind: Not a peevish, froward, exasperating, provoking
Spirit, but a Spirit of Love; Not a turbulent, seditious, unruly Spirit, but of
a sound Mind.

1. With respect to Difficulties and Troubles. Which may be understood two Ways:

1. As it may relate to such as St. Paul and Timothy; We have not received, i.
e. we that have an Apostolical Spirit given to us.

2. As it may relate to all Christians; We that own Christ sincerely and truly
have not received, etc.

(1.) I shall confider the Words with respect to the Apostolical Spirit;
because this day we commemorate one of them, (St. Matthew.)

Those who had the Apostolical Office committed to them, (whether Primarily by
Christ himself, or Secondarily by the Apostles, as Timothy and Titus and
others) had great need of this Apostolical Spirit. For, really, the
Difficulties were so great, which they were to go through, that no ordinary
Measures of Courage and Resolution would serve them. When men fight with
Enemies in the open Field, there is a Multitude combined together; among whom
there is abundance of Noise and Heat and Examples; and the Hopes of present
Victory, and the Shame and Danger of running away; which animate Persons in a
Day of Battle: But it is another kind of Courage which is required to make Men
bear up against the Malice and Subtilty of the Devil and of wicked Men; for
here the Combination is to all appearance much stronger on the worse Side; and
if we are to judge of Success by Numbers, those who promote Virtue and Goodness
could never bear up against their Adversaries; who were sure to carry it by the
Poll.

There were among the Heathens some few great Men, who endeavored to reform
the Vices of Mankind: But, alas! What poor Success had they in their Attempts
this way? Although they wanted neither Wit, nor Learning, nor Address to carry
on this Noble Design; such as Socrates at Athens and Epictetus at Rome, and
some others, who lived agreeably to their Doctrine; yet how little Effect had
both their Precepts and Example on the rest of the People either at Athens or
Rome? Socrates declared a mighty Resolution rather to die than to say or do any
thing unbecoming the Station God placed him in; and upon the Prosecution of two
malicious Men, the prevailing Party were resolved to try the Experiment, and
took him at his Word. After which, his Disciples durst not deal so plainly and
openly as he had done; and the Artifice they were put to, lost the force of the
best Part of their Philosophy; which they so mixed with Numbers and Figures and
abstracted Speculations, that it became a Mystery, instead of a plain Design to
reform the Manners of Men. The best and wisest of them seem to have taken more
pains to satisfy themselves, than to have instructed others; or if they did,
they were some few chosen Disciples, whom they initiated with as much Care, as
they were wont to do in their solemn Mysteries.

But the Apostles undertook to reform the World, as to two things, which
Mankind are the hardest brought off from, and those are Idolatry and Vice. And
they went plainly and roundly to work, which Men can the least bear; as we see
by the Persecutions they underwent almost in every Place as soon as their Design
was understood. There was a general Clamor against them as the Disturbers of
Mankind, as those Acts 17. 6.
who turned the World upside down; which in some sense was true, but not as
they meant it with respect to Order and Government. But when Men have no mind
to be reformed, they must have some Terms of Reproach to fasten upon those who
go about to do it. It being natural for them to put Pictures of Devils on
those, whom they have a mind to execute. And when they endeavored to convince
them of their Immoralities, they were very impatient; of which we have a clear
Instance in St. Paul's Preaching to Felix concerning Act. 24. 25.
Righteousness and Temperance and Judgment to come: which were excellent
Subjects, but they went too near him; he was too much concerned, to be willing
to hear any more of them. The Discourse of St. Paul had too much Force in it
for him to bear it any longer; for it caused such a disorder in his Mind as
affected his Body, for, Felix trembled: And then he thought it best to dismiss
him to a more convenient Season, which never came, that we read of. Which
shows, how much more willing Men are to continue in their Faults, than to hear
them reproved in order to Amendment. Am I therefore become Gal. 4. 16.
your Enemy, says St. Paul, because I tell you the Truth? No doubt of it: For,
no Truths can be so uneasy and provoking as those which gaul the Consciences
of Men.

The false Teachers whom St. Paul complains so much of, were sensible of the
Inconveniences which followed plain Truth; and therefore, to avoid
Persecution, they so mixed and adulterated the Doctrine of the true Apostles,
that it lost its main Force and Efficacy. And although by their shifts and
compliances with Jews and Gentiles, they escaped the hard Usage which others
underwent; yet the Effect of it was, that their Doctrine took no deep rooting
in the World: For, in Origen's time, a very inconsiderable Number of their
Disciples were left. But though the plain Simplicity of the Gospel met with
Persecutions on all hands; yet by the undaunted Courage of the Preachers of it,
the more it was opposed, the more it prevailed; and at last triumphed over its
greatest Persecutors.

(2.) These words may be understood with respect to all Christians; and so they
show what the Temper and Spirit of Christianity is, where it has its due and
proper Effect upon men's minds.

The Moralists speak much of an excellent Virtue, which they call Magnanimity:
which implies such a Greatness of Mind, that it carries a Man on in doing what
becomes him, without being discouraged by the Fears of what may befall him in
it.

And this our Savior does suppose to be so attainable by all his Disciples,
that he requires it from them. Fear not them which can kill the Body, but are
not able to kill the Soul; or Be not afraid Matthew. 10. 28.
of them that kill the Body, and after Luke 12. 5.
that have no more that they can do, i. e. Govern your Fears by the
Consideration of another World and not of this. But is this possible, to be rid
of our Fears as to this World? It may be some Heroical minds may attain to
this; or those on whom God bestows the extraordinary Gifts of his Spirit: But
can any by the common Measures and Assistances of Grace reach to it? Fear is a
natural and violent Passion; which is not easily dissembled, much less cured;
and the weaker any are, as to Mind or Body, the more they are subject to the
Power of it. There are some Constitutions by Reason of their dark and confused
and melancholy Apprehensions of things, can never get out of the Labyrinth of
their own Fears. And where Suspicions and Jealousies find an easy
Entertainment, it is not possible to cure such Person's Fears; for they are
afraid of all possible things. Such I must exclude as laboring under a Disease
of Imagination; as we do those who are under a Fever; And for whose
Unreasonable Fears I know no better Cure than there is of Madness, which is to
bring the Persons to the Use of Reason as well as we can; and if Reason does
not cure them, nothing else will.

But let us suppose the Fears reasonable, i. e. such as considering the State
of the World a prudent Man may justly apprehend; is it not possible to master
these Fears? Not to cure our Apprehension when it is reasonable, but to take
Care, that it do not torment and disquiet our Mind; but especially that it do
not hinder us from doing our Duty.

And this is that Spirit of Christian Magnanimity which I design to speak of;
and to make the Matter as clear as I can; I shall,

(1.) Enquire into those things which the Nature of Magnanimity requires in
general.

(2.) Show the particular Measures of it according to Christianity.

(3.) Consider the Possibility of attaining of it, and the Means in order to it.

(1.) As to Magnanimity in general; It is not so much any one Virtue, as a
Result from several put together; and especially these,

(1.) Integrity of Mind: Which implies these things.

1. A Freedom from any mean and sinister Ends in what we do. Aristotle, who
considered the (...). Arist. de Virt. and Vitiis.
Nature of Moral Virtues, as well as any Man, says, there can be no
Magnanimity without Simplicity and Truth. And Itaque Viros fortes, magnanimos,
eosdemque bonos and simplices, veritatis amicos, minimeque fallaces esse
volumus. Off. l. 1.
Cicero says, Men of Courage and Magnanimity, are Men of Simplicity and Truth,
and not given to Tricks. It is the Sense of its own Weakness which disposes any
living Creature to craft and cunning: The Lion knows his own strength and
despises it; the Fox is sensible he has not strength enough for his own
Security, and therefore tries all other ways to compass his End. A Spirit of
Magnanimity is above all little Arts and Shifts, which tend only to some mean
and pitiful End, not worthy to be regarded. Men of Artifice and Design may
think it Weakness and Folly; but it is really a Greatness of Mind which makes a
good and wise Man despise such things as unbecoming that true Greatness which
lies in a generous Integrity: which cunning Men can no more reach to, even when
they affect it, than an Actor upon a Stage can the true Greatness of a Prince.

2. Sincere and unaffected Goodness. Which is that, which Aristotle calls
(...), and makes absolutely necessary to Magnanimity. The first thing Nicom. l.
4. c. 3.
in the Character of a good Man among the Moralists is, that he be inwardly so;
not taking upon him the Appearance and Show of Virtue for the sake of others;
but forming his Mind and Temper according to the Principles and Rules of it.
And when he has done this, the whole Course of his Actions will be agreeable
thereto: he will not only be just and temperate, but kind and obliging, ready
to do good to all, according to his Circumstances; and behaving himself under
all, as becomes a good Man.

(2.) There must not only be Integrity, but Courage and Resolution; without
which, in difficult times, it is impossible to maintain Integrity. I do not by
this mean any sudden and violent Heats, which rather show the greatness of the
Passions than of the Mind; but a calm and sedate Courage, which exceeds the
other, as a Man of true Valor does one that is rash and foolhardy. The latter
may do bolder things than the other; but none of the Moralists allow it to be
true Fortitude; for that must be guided by Reason and Discretion. The bold and
daring Man never considers what he does; but he is carried on by a sudden and
violent Impetus, or such an agitation of Spirits, that suffer him not to think;
but on he goes, and if he meets with S^ccess, it is more owing to his Passion
and Heat, than to his Wisdom or Courage. Violent and furious Heats (although
under a Pretense of Zeal for Religion) are like the furious On-sets of
undisciplined Soldiers, which do more mischief by their want of Order, than
they do good by unseasonable Courage. True Courage must be a Regular thing; it
must have not only a good End, but a wise Choice of Means; and then the Courage
lies in the vigorous Pursuit of it: not being disheartened by difficulties, nor
giving over through despondency and disappointments.

(3.) There must be an Indifferency of Mind, as to the Event of doing our Duty.
Not a perfect Indifferency, which humane Nature is hardly capable of; but such
as keeps a Man's mind firm and constant so as not to be moved from the Dictates
of a well-satisfied Conscience by the Motives of this World. It was a
remarkable Saying of Socrates, which Antoninus takes notice of, That man, says
he, is of no value, Antonin. l. 7.. 44.
who regards any thing so much as doing his Duty. It is not whether a Man lives
or dies, but whether what he does bejust or unjust, whether it becomes a good
Man to do it, or not, which he is to look after.

If thou can not find any thing in life, l. 3.. 3.
says that excellent Emperor himself, better than Justice and Truth, a sound
Mind ((...) the word here used) and a discreet Courage; then make this thy
great business and apply thy self to it with all thy heart. Let neither popular
Applause, nor Power, nor Riches, nor sensual Pleasure draw thee off from it.
Choose that which is best and pursue it, (...) with simplicity of Mind and the
free Inclination of thy Will.

But the Roman Orator goes beyond them, when he says, That Nothing argues off.
l. 1.
so mean and narrow a Mind, as the Love of Riches; nothing savours more of a
great Mind, than to contemn them; and if Men enjoy them to bestow them in
Beneficence and Liberality. And again,

To value Justice and Honesty and Kindness l. 3.
and Liberality above Pleasure and Riches and Life it self, and the common good
above ones private Interest, argues a truly great Mind, and is most agreeable
to humane Nature.

These things I have mentioned, not only to clear the Nature of Magnanimity;
but to show what generous Notions these Heathens had concerning the Practice of
Virtue and Integrity, even when it was accompanied with Losses and Hardships
for the sake of it; and what a mean Esteem they had in Comparison of that great
Idol, which the World still worships, i. e. Riches.

(2.) I now come to show the true Measures of Magnanimity according to the
Christian Doctrine. And that consists in two things:

1. In studying to please God above all things.

2. In choosing rather to suffer than displease him.

1. In studying to please God above all things. Aristotle has observed that
Mor. l. 4. c. 3.
Magnanimity has a particular Respect to Honor: The Question then is, whether
it relates to what gets Esteem and Honor among Men; or, to that Honor which
comes from God. It Is ^^ue, the Heathen Moralists knew very little of this;
although Aristotle once mentions ^, 10.
the Kindness which God has for Persons of the most excellent and virtuous
Minds, as being nearest of Kindred to the Gods. But this was not settled as a
Principle among them; but it is the Foundation of all true Religion with us,
that our main Care ought to be to please God, and to value other things as they
are most pleasing to him. The most refined Atheists of this Age confess, that
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is very Pious and Virtuous; although
they look on them as deceived in their Imaginations. We take what they grant,
viz. that the Morals of Christianity are very good; but we say, that it is a
heightning and improving of Moral Virtues to make them Divine Graces; and not
to practice them merely as agreeable to Reason, but as pleasing to God. Those
who allow a God, who is wise and powerful, do confess, that no Sacrifices are
so pleasing to him, as a Pious, devout and virtuous Mind: but then they were to
seek, as to the Measures of Piety and Virtue. But that is the Infinite
Advantage by the Scriptures, which we enjoy, that by them we know what is most
pleasing to God. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what has Mic.
6. 8.
the Lord required of thee; but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God* When God shows us our Duty, we have no longer any ground
to dispute it; especially, when it is so agreeable to the Divine Nature, and
our own. What can we do better with respect to Mankind, than to do justly and
to love Mercy? What can become us more with respect to God, than to walk humbly
with our God? To walk with God, is to have a constant Regard to him in the
Course of our Lives; thus Enoch walked with God, and Noah and Abraham: and to
walk humbly with him, is to maintain a due Sense of our Distance from him and
our Dependence upon him. And this Humility of Mind does not take off from true
Magnanimity; for, it is the Magnanimity of Christians that I am speaking of.
The Magnanimity of Philosophers carried them beyond the due bounds of their
Dependence upon God; for they presumed upon their own Sufficiency, both as to
the Support of their Minds under Difficulties and the making themselves happy.
In both which they were lamentably mistaken. But the Humility of Christians in
depending upon God for Assistance and Happiness is so far from being
inconsistent with Magnanimity, that it is not to be had without it. For, says
St. Paul, I can do all Phil. 4. 13.
things. Can any thing be said greater than that? But how? Through Christ which
strengthens me. And this Dependence upon God for his Grace is no more
inconsistent with Magnanimity, than a Favourite's Greatness is with his Duty
and Service to his Prince. The Christian's Magnanimity lies in having but one
to please; but such a one, as is the greatest, the wisest, the happiest Being
in the World.

2. But if he cannot please God and the World together, then this Magnanimity
carries him rather to choose suffering under the World's Displeasure, than to
displease God. This seems a hard Choice; but there would be no Magnanimity
without Difficulty. It may please God, that our Duty and Interest may lie
together, and then it is Folly and Humor to choose to suffer when we need not.
Where there is true Magnanimity in suffering, there is an impartial and prudent
weighing and balancing all Circumstances together, before there can be a just
Resolution of suffering. And a Man's Courage in suffering depends very much
upon the Motives induced him to it; which every Man's Conscience must judge of.

But there are two sorts of sufferings Magnanimity may show it self in:

(1.) The Necessary and unavoidable Accidents and Calamities of Life.

(2.) The voluntary preferring a suffering Condition rather than sinning
against God.

(1.) As to the common Accidents of Life. It is observed by the Moralists, that
it is a harder thing to bear things Aristot. Mor. l. 3. c. 12. Aug. 83. q. 36.
that are troublesome, than to abstain from things that are pleasant: The Sense
of Pain and Suffering being much more uneasy, than the forbearing what is
delightful; which is only crossing a natural Inclination. And though many
Persons choose rather to yield to their vicious Inclinations than to avoid the
Pains and Diseases which follow them; yet that is because they look on them as
uncertain and at a Distance, and hope they may escape them.

But when it is certain and present, humane Nature is very tender and sensible
of Pain and shrinks from it; and requires inward Courage to support it self
under it. It is observed by the Roman Orator, that a peculiar kind of Courage
is necessary for suffering Pains and Diseases; for many that have been brave
Men in the Field, yet could not viriliter oegrotare, behave themselves like Men
when they came to be sick. The truth is, all Mankind abhor suffering so much,
that one of the great Inducements to the study of Morality of old, was to find
out some Antidotes against the common Accidents of Life.

For they soon found there were some Sufferings incident to humane Nature,
which all the Art and Skill of the wisest Men could never prevent. Our Bodies
are continually subject to Pains, to Diseases, to Corruption and Dissolution.
Our Estates to Violence, Fraud and Misfortune. Our Houses and Cities to Flames,
to Earthquakes, to Inundations. Our Friends and Relations are all liable to the
same Calamities with our selves, and that makes our Trouble the greater.

What now should wise Men do? Can they hope to stem the Tide, and to turn back
the Stream? No, that is too violent for them. Can they raise any Banks or
Sea-Walls against them to keep them out? All such are vain and fruitless. What
then? Shall they strip themselves of all the Comforts of Life, that they may
leave nothing to Misfortune? So some did, to no great purpose, unless they
could shake off their Passions too. But this does not look like Magnanimity,
but Cowardice; not overcoming an Enemy, but running away from him. By the same
Method, they must go naked to avoid Robbery; and live on the Tops of Mountains
to escape a Deluge.

But some thought these things looked most terrible at a Distance; whereas if
they considered how common they were, they would learn to bear them better. But
Carneades said well, Malevoli animi Solatium est turba miserorum; it is a kind
of ill-natured Comfort which one draws from the commonness of Calamities. And
after all it is no real Satisfaction to a Man's mind, to think that so many
suffer as he does; it is like the unnatural Pleasure of Revenge, which one Man
takes in another Pain.

There is one thing it serves well for, and that is to show the Folly of great
Impatience under such things which the rest of Mankind bear. Thus Julian in his
Epistle to Amerius relates a Story Epist. 37.
of Democritus his dealing with Darius upon the loss of his beloved Wife. After
several ineffectual Ways of comforting him; at last he asked him, whether
bringing her to Life would not put an End to his Grief? No doubt of it. But how
should this be done? Let me alone for that; said the Philosopher, if you will
provide me all the things I shall desire in order to it. After great Care taken
in providing many things for him, Darius asked him if he had all he wanted? No,
said he; there is one thing more I must have, and you are the most likely
Person to furnish me with it. In short, you must get me three Names to be put
upon her Monument of such Persons who have gone to their Graves without Sorrow
or Trouble; and you, said he, have very large and populous Dominions, and no
doubt if such a thing be to be had, you can procure it. Darius was struck with
this, and after some consideration said, he doubted he could not. Why then,
said the Philosopher smiling, are not you ashamed to be guilty of so much Folly
as to be so exceedingly cast down under such a Calamity, as though you were the
only Person in the World that underwent it? This was agreeable enough to his
Humor in exposing the Folly of Mankind; which was a Subject large enough for
his whole Life; but he was too pleasant upon it.

I do not deny but the Moralists did find out some very useful Considerations
to bear Men up under the common Accidents of Life; but those of greatest
Moment, were such as are much improved by Christianity; viz. the Wisdom of
Providence, the Usefulness of Trials, the Benefit of Patience, and the
Expectation of a better State.

(2.) As to voluntary and chosen Sufferings. We have in Scripture several
extraordinary Instances of this kind of Magnanimity; such as Abraham's leaving
his Kindred and Country and going he knew not whither on God's Command, and his
readiness to sacrifice his Son; which argued an entire Sacrifice of himself to
the Will of God. Such was Moses his choosing rather to suffer Affliction with
the People of God than to enjoy the Pleasures of Pharaob's Court. Such was the
Son of God's choosing to suffer for our sakes, with admirable Resignation to
the Divine Will; and praying for his Persecutors under the greatest Agonies on
the Cross., Such was the Apostle's Resolution and Courage, when they rejoiced
to be accounted worthy to suffer for the sake of Christ; when they were more
than Conquerors in the midst of Persecutions. And truly the Magnanimity of
Suffering rather than Sinning, was never so much shown to the World as in the
Case of the Primitive Christians. There were some few Heroic Instances of
Suffering for Truth among the Heathens; but they were no more to be compared
with the numerous Examples of the Primitive Church than the Miracles of the
Vestal Virgins were with those of the Apostles.

It could not but amaze the common sort of Spectators of Rome, who were wont to
see the Gladiators, (who were either hired or condemned to that cruel
Entertainment of others with their blood) to behold a sort of grave and serious
Persons expose themselves to so much Torment and Cruelty, when so small a
matter as burning a little Incense would set them free. This was a new
Spectacle to the World, and it could not but put them upon thinking what
strange sort of Philosophy this was, which inspired ordinary Persons with such
a Magnanimity in suffering. They had never found those who pretended to
Philosophy among them very fond of Suffering for the Doctrine they taught. They
rather liked the Example of Aristotle than Socrates; who when the People of
Athens were enraged against him, withdrew to Chalcis; and when he was upbraided
with it, made a witty Excuse, that he had no mind the City of Athens should sin
twice against Philosophy. Whereas the Christians were so forward to suffer for
their Doctrine, that it was imputed as a Fault to them; and it appears by
Tertullian that some Tertull ad Scap.
out-went the bounds of Christianity in offering themselves too freely to it.
This made such as Antoninus and others Antonin. l. 11. Sect. 3.
impute all their Sufferings to an invincible Obstinacy and a sort of Madness
Arrian. l. 4. c. 7.
which possessed them: which had been easily confuted, if they would have had
the Patience to have examined the Reasons and Grounds of their Religion, as
they did the peculiar Doctrines of the several Sects of Philosophers. But this
is not all which Christian Magnanimity does imply; for it is not only a Spirit
of Power, but of Love and of a sound Mind. And so it has

II. A Respect to the Humors and Passions of Men. And truly, there is such a
Variety and uncertainty in them; so much Folly and Mistake; so much Prejudice
and Peevishness in some; so much Wilfulness and Stiffness in others; so little
Regard to the true Interests of Religion and Virtue, under all the Pretenses to
it; that those who sincerely desire to promote them had need of Magnanimity to
bear them up against such Humors and Distempers of Men's minds. Aristotle has
well observed that Magnanimity does go beyond the Consideration of Dangers. It
makes a Mor. l. 4. c. 3.
man more ready to do Kindnesses than to receive them; and to forget Injuries.
I add, and to forgive them; for else, it is rather want of Memory, than
Magnanimity. It is well he adds one thing, viz. that he that has Magnanimity
is (...), Contented within himself; so he had need to be; for he will find very
little Satisfaction abroad, especially in an Age when Sincerity is almost lost*
when Men have used themselves to so much Hypocrisy and Dissimulation with God
and Man, that they can zealously pretend to love what they would be glad to
ruin, and cry up Peace and Unity only to get an Opportunity to destroy them.
But still true Magnanimity keeps a Man's own mind at Ease, and makes him to
govern himself, as the same Philosopher observes, with due Temper and
Moderation in all things. Such a one is not only easy to himself, but to all
others, as far as is consistent with his Duty. For a mind truly great, has
nothing of Bitterness, or Sowerness; Peevishness, or Ill Will to the rest of
mankind. All malice and cruelty argue a mean and base Spirit. The more noble
and generous any Tempers are, the more tender and compassionate they are, the
more ready to oblige, the more easy to forgive, the more willing to be
reconciled.

But to be more particular, there are two things implied in this Spirit of Love
and of a sound Mind.

(1.) The making all reasonable Allowances for the Infirmities of others. It
makes men to consider the Prejudices of Education; the Variety and Weakness of
most men's Judgments; the Power of Persuasion; the Biass of Parties; and the
Shame and Re^roach which Persons undergo that break off from them, after they
have been once ensnared by them. On these Accounts it makes them rather pity
than triumph over the Follies of mankind. There are two things which a great
mind does most abhor in Religion, and are most directly contrary to a Spirit
of Love and a sound Mind; and these are Hypocrisy and Cruelty; which make men
false to God, and Enemies to mankind. These two often go together; and although
they are masked under a Pretense of Religion, yet there are no two things more
opposite to the true Spirit and Design of it. St. John concludes that man to
have no true Love to God who does not love his Brother. He that loves not his
Brother whom he 1 John 4. 20.
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And we may argue the
other way; If a man does not love God, how can he love his Brother? When the
Love of God is the best Foundation for Charity and Kindness to our Brethren;
who were at first made after the Image of God, and have it again renewed in
them by the Power of Divine Grace in Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. 4.
24.
And even where that does not appear, yet there is a Tenderness and Compassion
due to mankind, as far as is consi^^ent with the Order and Government of the
World.

(2.) The Spirit of Love and of a sound Mind, consists in laying aside private
Animosities and Heats for a public and general Good. That is a thing too great
and too sacred, to be exposed and ridiculed, as though it were only a popular
Pretense for Faction and Sedition. Whereas nothing is more directly opposite to
it; for therefore it is called Faction and Sedition, because it is against it.
If it has been abused by Men of ill Minds, so have the best things in the
World; but they do not lose their Nature and Exce^lency by it. If there be not
such a thing as a common Good, whence comes any Man's obligation to preserve
Order and Government, and to seek the Safety and Welfare of his Country,
although it may be to the hazard of his own Life? If there be such a thing, it
deserves our Regard in the first Place, and we ought to lay aside all
P^ejudices, and mutual Animosities and the Interests of particular Parties, and
heartily to promote that which is our true common Interest, as we are
Englishmen and Protestants of the Church of England; which is a great and
considerable Part of the Christian Church, and the Chief of the Reformation. It
is hard for any not to see that the whole Protestant Interest lies at stake;
and that the Preservation of it depends very much on our Conduct and Union at
this time.

But if we find any to be humoursome and peevish, any to struggle more for the
Interest of a Party to make it uppermost, than for our common Good, although it
be a very sad Consideration and bodes very ill to us all; yet we have that poor
Comfort left us, that Men were as ill disposed even in the Apostle's times. For
says St. Paul, (at Phil. 2. 21.
a time when one would have thought they should have been much better inclined)
All men seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. I hope it
cannot be faid of all now; but I fear it is so true of too many, that it is one
of the worst Symptoms of the present State of our Affairs. And that which makes
it more deplorable is, that some Men have entertained such Suspicion and
Jealousy of each other, that he that goes about to reconcile them, instead of
making them Friends, is looked on as a common Enemy. I am afraid there is not
Sincerity and Integrity enough left to be a Foundation for uniting several
Parties among us; at lest there wants an Opinion of it. And as long as there
are such Mistrusts and Jealousies, the greatest Integrity is so far useless.

Some learned and good Men have been of late apt to persuade themselves and
others, that the glorious and happy Times of the Church are coming on; I could
be glad to be of their opinion; for it is a comfortable thing to a man who
travels in an ill Road and with bad Company, whom he is perpetually afraid of,
to see at a distance a pleasant and safe Country, where he shall be rid of his
Fears and Dangers. But I confess, I cannot much please my self with such
thoughts, till I see the Tempers of Men's minds begin to change toward one
another. If I could once see the Spirit of Love and a sound Mind prevail among
us; if men would be contented to sacrifice their Humors and Piques to the
public Interest; in short, if there were any hopes Men would be wise and good,
there were then a great Foundation for hope, that all things would be settled
among us, so as to continue for succeeding Generations.

But if Men will persist in their own wilful Humors; if they had rather all
should perish, than they not compass their own Ends; we need no foreign Enemies
to come in upon us, we shall soon come to that height of Animosity, as to bite
and devour one another; Gal. 5. 15.
and then it is an easy Inference, that we shall be consumed one of another. I
am far from thinking our Case desperate; for I hope Men have not lost all their
Sense and Zeal for our common Interest; but if Men's Heats and Passions
increase and grow fiercer, a Man needs not pretend to prophecy to foretell what
the dreadful Consequence will be.

The true Spirit of Religion seems to be buried in Men's warm Contentions about
it; and some have pretended to a sort of Zeal without Conscience, to Religion
without Faith, and to Scruples without common Honesty.

If ever God designs to do us good, there must be a great Alteration in Men's
Tempers and Manners. We must have more Sincerity and Integrity among us; the
want of which has caused such a general Mistrust of one another; that if Faith
were to save the Nation, I am afraid there is hardly enough left in it. And it
looks like one of the Symptoms of the Day of Judgment upon us: For, If the Son
of Man should come, he would hardly find Faith upon Earth.

But instead of discoursing of Magnanimity, I am sensible I have run into the
Object and Reason of our Fears. But therefore to conclude all, I shall speak
briefly to the last Particular, which was,

(3.) To consider what Arguments and Means there are to support us against our
Fears; or to attain to that Christian Magnanimity I have been discoursing of.
And there are two great Arguments which Christianity does particularly
recommend to us.

1. Let things go as ill as we can fear in this World; if we are sincere
Christians, there is a far better State to come; to which we shall be admitted
when we are once out of this troublesome and sinful World. There will be no
Hurries and Confusions, no Jealousies and Suspicions, no Piques and
Animosities. The highest Regions of the Air are the most calm and serene; all
the Clouds and Storms and blustering Winds are below and arise from the
Atmosphere. If our Minds were more loose from the World we should be more at
quiet: For, at the bottom, the Considerations of this World make Men so
troublesome in it. It is Honor or Power or Riches which make them so unquiet,
and endeavoring to supplant and undermine one another: If Men could learn to
be content with that which they pretend was all they so long and so impatiently
desired, there might be some hopes of seeing something like Peace and Unity
among us: but if Liberty be thought to signify nothing without Power, it is
reasonable to suppose that Power will signify nothing, unless it be all in
their own Hands. And what can they imagine the rest of the Nation will do? Will
they suffer an established Church, and such a one as ours is (which I think an
Apostolical Church, as to Doctrine, Worship and Government, if there be any now
in the World) to be run down with the violent Heats of some men, and look on as
wholly unconcerned? They are extremely mistaken in the Temper of the Nation who
think so. But if Men will not be quiet, when they have all they pretended to
desire, what can we expect but further Animosities will discourage our Friends,
animate our common Enemies, and expose us all to Confusion, if not to Ruin. If
Men loved this World less and another better, they would be more quiet here,
and be more careful to prepare for that better State. If our Conversation were
in Heaven, as it ought to be, with what Contempt should we look down upon the
busy Designs, the restless Cares, the vain Hopes and the perplexing Fears of
the greatest Part of Mankind? Then we should have more Peace and Tranquillity
in our Minds while we live, and greater Satisfaction when we come to die. For
Integrity and Innocence will keep us most from giving disturbance to others,
and from finding any in our own Breasts. Whosoever hearkeneth unto Wisdom, shall
dwell safely and shall be quiet from the Fear of Evil. Prove. 1. 23.


2. We are assured that we are under the constant Care of Divine Providence.
The Tranquillity of our Minds in this World depends very much upon the Esteem
we have of Providence and the Trust we repose in God. What makes Children pass
their time without solicitous thoughts about themselves, but the Confidence
they have in the Wisdom and Care of their Parents? What makes Passengers lie
down at rest in a Ship at Sea, but because they trust to the Conduct of their
Pilot? We cannot alter the Methods of Providence by all our Solicitude; God
will govern the World by his own Measures and not by ours. The Government is
his, the Duty of Submission is ours. Let us not then be peevish and quarrelsome
at what he does; but make the best Use of any extraordinary Instance of his
Providence which seems to be intended for our Good, unless we turn it another
Way.

But it is not enough to be merely contented with Providence; but we ought to
be active and useful in our own Places to promote the common Interest; and not
to repine and murmur at what is necessary for the Support of it. Let us not
torment our selves with Fears of what may and what may not happen; but let us
commit our selves to God in well-doing as to our Creator and Preserver.

SERMON VI. Preached at St. Laurence-Jewry, April the 7th, 1691.
1 Timothy I. 15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief.
IF these Words were to be understood without any Restriction or Limitation
that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, they would overthrow the
great Design of the Gospel, and make its excellent Precepts useless and
ineffectual. For, to what purpose should Men be put upon the severe Practice of
Repentance, Mortification and a continued Course of a Holy Life, if the mere
being Sinners did sufficiently qualify them for Salvation? This indeed would
be thought a Doctrine worthy of all Acceptance by the greatest Sinners; but it
could not be a faithful saying, being not agreeable either to the Nature of
God, or Revelation of his Will by Christ Jesus. But St. Paul speaks of such
Sinners as himself had been; i. e. such as had been great Sinners, but had
truly and sincerely repented. Of whom I am chief. What then? Must we look on
him as the Standard and Measure of such Sinners whom Christ Jesus came to save?
What will then become of all those who have been Sinners of a higher Rank than
ever he was? It Is true in the Verses before the Text, he sets out his Sins, as
a humble Penitent is wont to do, with the worst Colors and deepest
Aggravations, Who was before a blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious; but
yet he adds, that he obtained Mercy Verse. 13.
because he did it ignorantly, in unbelief. How then is St. Paul the Chief of
Sinners? Are Sins of Ignorance and Mistake the greatest of Sins, for which
Christ died? Is there no Expiation for any other by Jesus Christ? What will
become then of all such who sin against Knowledge and Conscience, and not in
Ignorance and Unbelief? Can none of these hope for Mercy by Christ Jesus,
although they do truly repent? But the Blood of Christ is said elsewhere to 1 John 1. 7.
cleanse us from all Sin; not, while we continue in them, but if we repent and
forsake them. And Jesus Christ is said Chapter 2. v. 2.
to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but for the Sins of
the whole World. And therefore this Expression of St. Paul notes his great
Humility and deep Sense of his own Sins; but does not exclude others from the
hopes of Pardon whose Sins have other Aggravations than his had. For, if we
leave out the last words as peculiar to his Case, yet the other contain in them
a true Proposition and of the greatest Importance to Mankind; This is a
faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
World to save sinners.

This, you may say, is a matter out of all doubt among all such who hope for
Salvation by Christ Jesus; for all are agreed, that one way or other we are to
be saved by him. But there is great Difficulty as to the Way of saving sinners
by Christ Jesus; whether by the Doctrine and Example of the Man Christ Jesus,
by the Power he attained through his Sufferings; Or, by the Eternal Son of
God's assuming our Nature, and suffering in our stead in order to the
reconciling God to us, and making a Propitiation for our Sins. These are two
very different Hypotheses or Notions of Christ's coming to save sinners; and
the former seems more easy to be understood and believed; and the other seems
to have insuperable Difficulties in point of Reason; and to run our Religion
into Mysteries, which expose our Faith and make Christianity appear
contemptible to Men of Sense and Understanding. Is it not therefore much better
to embrace such a Scheme of it, as will have the least Objection against it,
that so Men of Reason may not be tempted to Infidelity, and Men of Superstition
may not under the Color of Mysteries bring in the most absurd and unreasonable
Doctrines?

These are plausible Insinuations, and would be apt to prevail on considering
Men's minds, if they were to form and make a Religion that might be most
accommodated to the Genius and Humor of the Age they live in. And truly no Men
(by their own Authority) can pretend to a Right to impose on others any
Mysteries of Faith, or any such things which are above their Capacity to
understand. But that is not our Case; for we all profess to believe and receive
Christianity as a Divine Revelation; and God (we say) may require from us the
belief of what we may not be able to comprehend, especially if it relates to
himself, or such things which are consequent upon the Union of the Divine and
Humane Nature. Therefore our business is to consider, whether any such things
be contained in that Revelation which we all own; and if they be, we are bound
to believe them, although we are not able to comprehend them.

Now here are two remarkable Characters in these Words, by which we may examine
these different Hypotheses concerning the way of Salvation by Jesus Christ.

I. It is a faithful saying, and therefore must be contained in that
Revelation which God has made concerning our Salvation by Christ.

II. It is worthy of all Acceptance; i. e. most useful and beneficial to
Mankind.

Now by these two I shall proceed in the Examination of them.

I. Which is most agreeable to the revealed Will of God.

II. Which does offer fairest for the Benefit and Advantage of Mankind.

I. Which is most agreeable to the revealed Will of God. For that we are sure
is the most faithful saying; since Men of Wit and Reason may deceive us, but
God cannot. When the Apostles first preached this Doctrine to the World, they
were not bound to believe what they affirmed to be a faithful saying till they
gave sufficient Evidence of their Authority from God, by the wonderful
Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But now this faithful saying is contained in the
Books of the New Testament, by which we are to judge of the Truth of all
Christian Doctrines. And when two different Senses of Places of Scripture are
offered, we are to consider, which is most reasonable to be preferred. And
herein we are allowed to exercise our Reason as much as we please; and the more
we do so, the sooner we shall come to satisfaction in this matter.

Now according to Reason we may judge that Sense to be preferred,

(1.) Which is most plain and easy and agreeable to the most received Sense of
Words; not that which is forced and intricate, or which puts improper and
metaphorical Senses upon Words which are commonly taken in other Senses;
especially when it is no Sacramental thing, which in its own Nature is
Figurative.

(2.) That which suits most with the Scope and Design not only of the
particular Places, but of the whole New Testament; which is, to magnify God
and to depress Man; to set forth, the infinite Love and Condescension of God in
giving his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins; to set up the Worship of one
true God in Opposition to Creatures; to represent and declare the mighty
Advantages Mankind receive by the Sufferings of Christ Jesus.

(3.) That which has been generally received in the Christian Church to be the
Sense of those places. For, we are certain, this was always look on as a matter
of great Concernment to all Christians; and they had as great Capacity of
understanding the Sense of the Apostles; and the Primitive Church had greater
helps for knowing it than others at so much greater Distance. And therefore the
Sense is not to be taken from modern Inventions, or Criticisms; or Pretenses to
Revelation; but that which was at first delivered to the Christian Church and
has been since received and embraced by it in the several Ages; and has been
most strenuously asserted, when it has met with Opposition, as founded on
Scripture and the general Consent of the Christian Church.

(4.) That which best agrees with the Characters of those Persons from whom we
receive the Christian Faith; and those are Christ Jesus and his holy Apostles.
For, if their Authority be lost, our Religion is gone; and their Authority
depends upon their Sincerity and Faithfulness, and Care to inform the World
aright in matters of so great Importance.

(1.) I begin with the Character which the Apostles give of Christ Jesus
himself; which is, that he was a Person of the greatest Humility and
Condescension, that he did not assume to himself that which he might justly
have done. For let the Words of St. Paul be understood either as to the Nature,
or Dignity of Christ, it is certain that they must imply thus much, that when
Christ Jesus was here on Earth, he was not of a vain assuming humor, that he
did not boast of himself, nor magnify his own Greatness, but was contented to
be looked on as other Men; although he had at that time far greater and diviner
Excellency in him than the World would believe. Less than this cannot be made
of those Words of the Apostle, Who being in the form of God, he Phil. 2. 6, 7.
thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no Reputation
and took upon him the form of a Servant.

Now this being the Character given of him let us consider what he does affirm
concerning himself. For although he was far from drawing the People after him,
by setting forth his own Perfection; yet upon just Occasions, when the Jews
contested with him, he did assert such things, which must savor of Vanity and
Ostentation, or else must imply that he was the Eternal Son of God. For, all
Mankind are agreed that the highest Degree of Ambition lies in affecting Divine
Honor, or for a mere Man to be thought a God. How severely did God punish
Herod for being pleased with the People's Folly in crying out, the Voice of God
and not of Man? And therefore he could never have born with such positive Act.
12. 22.
Assertions and such repeated Defenses of his being the Son of God in such a
manner as implied his being so from Eternity. This in his Disputes with the
Jews he affirms several times, that he came down from Heaven, not in a
Metaphorical but in a proper Sense, Joh. 6. 32, 33.
as appears by those words, What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up
38. 50. 58. 62.
where he was before? In another Conference he asserted, that he was before
Abraham. Joh. 8. 58.
Which the Jews so literally understood, that without a Metaphor they went
about to stone him; little imagining v. 59.
that by Abraham the calling of the Gentiles was to be understood. But above
all, is that Expression which he used to the Jews at another Conference, I and
my Father are one; which they Joh. 10. 30.
understood in such a manner that immediately they took up stones to have
stoned v. 31.
him. What means all this Rage of the Jews against him? What? For saying that
he had Unity of Consent with his Father? No certainly: But the Jews
misunderstood him. Let us suppose it; would not our Savior have immediately
explained himself to prevent so dangerous a Misconstruction? But he asked them,
what it was they stoned him for? They answered him directly and plainly,
because that thou being a v. 32, 33.
man make thy self God. This was home to the Purpose. And here was the time
for him to have denied it, if it had not been so. But does he deny it? Does he
say, it would be Blasphemy in him to own it? No; but he goes about to defend
it; and proves it to be no Blasph^my for him to say that he was the Son of v.
36.
God; i. e. so as to be God, as the Jews understood it. Can we imagine that a
mere Man knowing himself to be such, should assume this to himself; and yet God
to bear witness to him not only by Miracles, but by a Voice from Heaven,
wherein he was called his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased? Could God
Matthew. 3. 17.
be pleased with a mortal, finite, despicable Creature, as the Jews thought
him, that assumed to himself to be God and maintained and defended it among his
own People, in a solemn Conference at a very public Place, in one of the
Portico's of the Temple? And this he persisted in to the last. For, when the
High Priest adjured him by the living Matthew. 26. 63.
God to tell, whether he were the Christ the Son of God, (for he, no doubt, had
heard of the Result of this Conference in Solomon's Porch) Jesus said unto him,
v. 64.
Thou have said. St. Mark, more expressly, Mark 14. 62.
Jesus said I am. And this was the Blasphemy, for which they put him to death;
as appears by the Evangelists. v. 64.
So that this ought to be a Dispute only between Jews and Christians; since
Matthew. 26. 66.
it was the very Point, for which they condemned him to death. And in his last
most divine Prayer just before his Suffering, he owns the Glory which he had
with the Father before the World Luke 22. 7^.
had a Being. And now, O Father, glorisie thou me with the glory which I had
Joh. 17. 5.
with thee, before the World was. Was this nothing but the Glory which God had
designed to give him? This is so far from being peculiar to Christ, that it is
common to all whom God designs to glorify; and takes away the distinction
between the Decree and the Execution of it.

(2.) As to the Apostles, the Reason we believe their Testimony is, that they
were Men of great Sincerity and Plainness, and of great Zeal for the Honor and
Glory of God. And according to this Character, let us examine what they say
concerning Christ Jesus.

He that was most conversant with him, and beloved by him, and lived to see his
Divinity contested by some, and denied by others, is most ample in setting it
forth in his Admirable, Sublime, and Divine Introduction to his Gospel. Which
all the Wit of Mankind can never make tolerable Sense of, if they deny Christ's
being the Eternal Son of God; John 1. 1, 2, etc.
and it is he, that has preserved those Conferences with the Jews, wherein he
asserts his own Divinity.

St. Paul was a Stranger to him while he lived; but at the same time when he
was so zealous to persuade the Gentiles to the Worship of God and not of
Creatures, he calls him God, over all blessed for evermore. And when he says,
that the Eternal Power and Godhead Romans 9. 5.
are known by the Creation of the Romans 1. 20.
World, he attributes the Creation of all things to Christ, applying to him
those Col. 1. 16.
words of the Psalmist, Thou Lord in the Heb. 1. 2. 10.
beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth and the Heaven, the Work of
thy hands. Which cannot be understood of any Metaphorical Creation.

And after the strictest Examination of Copies, those will be found the best,
which have that Reading on which our Translation is grounded. And without
Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God was manifest in the Flesh. So that God's being manifest in the Flesh is
made a great Part of the Mystery of Christianity.

But here arises a Difficulty, which deserves to be considered; i. e. If there
were nothing in the Christian Doctrine, but the Way of Saving sinners by the
Doctrine and Example of Christ, there would be little Objection to be made to
it; since the obtaining Eternal Life is certainly the best thing can be
proposed to Mankind, and the Precepts of Christ are Divine and Spiritual, plain
and easy to be understood, and agreeable to the Reason of Mankind; but many
other things are imposed on Men as necessary to be believed concerning Christ
Jesus, as to his Divinity, Incarnation, and the Hypostatical Union of both
Natures, which perplex and confound our Understandings; and yet these things
are not only delivered as Mysteries of the Christian Faith; but the Belief of
them is required as necessary to the Salvation of Sinners; whereas, if they are
revealed they are no longer Mysteries; and if they are not revealed, how come
they to be made Articles of Faith? The Scripture knows of no other Mysteries of
Faith but such as were hidden before the Revelation of them, but since they are
revealed they are plain and open to all Men's Capacities; and therefore it is a
great Injury to the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel to impose such
incomprehensible Mysteries, as necessary Articles of Faith; and it is abusing
the Credulity of Mankind, to make such things necessary to be believed, which
are impossible to be understood. But those who have ever loved to deceive and
abuse the rest of the World, have been always fond of the Name of Mysteries;
and therefore all such things are to be suspected, which come under that Name.
For, all such Points which will not bear Examination, must be wrapped up and
reverenced under the Name of Mysteries, that is, of things to be swallowed
without being understood. But the Scripture never calls that a Mystery which is
incomprehensible Discourse of the Word Mystery, etc. p. 5.
in it self, though never so much revealed.

This is the main force of the Objection, which I shall endeavor to remove by
showing,

(1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we
cannot comprehend.

(2.) That which way soever the Way of Salvation by Christ be explained, there
will be something of that Nature found in it; and that those who reject the
Mysteries of Faith run into greater Difficulties than those who assert them.

(3.) That no more is required as a necessary Article of Faith than what is
plainly and clearly revealed.

(1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we
cannot comprehend. It is to very little Purpose to enquire whether the Word
Mystery in Scripture be applied to such particular Doctrines, whose Substance
is revealed, but the manner of them is incomprehensible by us; for why may not
we make use of such a Word whereby to express things truly revealed, but above
our Comprehension? We are certain the Word Mystery is used for things far less
difficult and abstruse; and why may it not then be fitly applied to such
matters, which are founded on Divine Revelation, but yet are too deep for us to
go to the bottom of them? Are there not Mysteries in Arts, Mysteries in Nature,
Mysteries in Providence? And what Absurdity is there to call those Mysteries,
which in some Measure are known, out in much greater unknown to us? Although
therefore in the Language of Scripture it be granted, that the word Mystery is
most frequently applied to things before hidden, but now revealed, yet there is
no Incongruity in calling that a Mystery, which being revealed, has yet
something in it which our understandings cannot reach to. But it is mere
cavilling to insist on a Word, if the Thing it self be granted. The chief thing
therefore to be done is, to show that God may require from us the belief of
such things which are incomprehensible by us. For, God may require any thing
from us, which it is reasonable for us to do; if it be then reasonable for us
to give assent where the manner of what God has revealed is not comprehended,
then God may certainly require it from us. Has not God revealed to us that in
six days he made Heaven and Earth and all that is therein? But is it not
reasonable for us to believe this, unless we are able to comprehend the manner
of God's production of things? Here we have something revealed and that plainly
enough, viz. that God created all things, and yet, here is a Mystery remaining
as to the manner of doing it. Has not God plainly revealed that there shall be
a Resurrection of the dead? and must we think it unreasonable to believe it,
till we are able to comprehend all the Changes of the Particles of Matter from
the Creation to the General Resurrection? But it is said that there is no
Contradiction in this, but there is in the Mystery of the Trinity and
Incarnation. It is strange Boldness in Men Observations on Dr. Wallis ^is four
Letters, p. 4.
to talk thus of Monstrous Contradictions in things above their Reach. The
Atheists may as well say, Infinite Power is a Monstrous Contradiction; and
God's Immensity and his other unsearchable Perfections are Monstrous Paradoxes
and Contradictions. Will Men never learn to distinguish between Numbers and the
Nature of Things? For three to be one is a Contradiction in Numbers; but
whether an Infinite Nature can communicate it self to three different
Subsistences without fuch a Division as is among created Beings, must not be
determined by bare Numbers, but by the absolute Perfections of the Divine
Nature; which must be owned to be above our Comprehension.

For let us examine some of those Perfections which are most clearly revealed
and we shall find this true. The Scripture plainly reveals, that God is from
everlasting to everlasting; that he Psalm. 90. 2. Revel. 1. 4. c. 11. v. 17.
was and is and is to come; but shall we not believe the Truth of this till we
are able to fathom the Abyss of God's Eternity? I am apt to think (and I have
some thoughtfull Men concurring with Bisterfield. c. Grell. p. 50.
me) that there is no greater Difficulty in the Conception of the Trinity and
Incarnation, than there is of Eternity. Petav. de Trinit. l. 3. c 9. Sect. 15.
Not, but that there is great Reason to believe it; but from hence it appears
that our Reason may oblige us to believe some things which it is not possible
for us to comprehend. We know that either God must have been for ever, or it is
impossible he ever should be; for if he should come into Being when he was not,
he must have some Cause of his Being; and that which was the first Cause would
be God. But, if he was for ever he must be from himself; and what Notion or
Conception can we have in our Minds concerning it? And yet, Atheistical Men can
take no Advantage from hence; because their own most absurd Hypothesis has the
very same Difficulty in it. For something must have been for ever. And it is
far more reasonable to suppose it of an Infinite and Eternal Mind, which has
Wisdom and Power and Goodness to give Being to other things, than of dull,
stupid and sen^eless Matter, which could never move it self, nor give Being to
any thing besides. Here we have therefore a thing which must be owned by all;
and yet such a thing which can be conceived by none. Which shows the narrowness
and shortness of our Understandings, and how unfit they are to be the Measures
of the Possibilities of things. Vain men would be wise; they would fain go to
the very bottom of things, when alas! they scarce understand the very Surface
of them. They will allow no Mysteries in Religion; and yet every thing is a
Mystery to them. They cry out of Cheats and Impostures under the Notion of
Mysteries; and yet there is not a Spire of Grass but is a Mystery to them; they
will bear with nothing in Religion which they cannot comprehend, and yet there
is scarce any thing in the World which they can comprehend. But above other
things the Divine Perfections, even those which are most absolute and necessary
are above their Reach. For let such Men try their Imaginations about God's
Eternity, not merely how he should be from himself, but how God should coexist
with all the Differences of Times, and yet there be no Succession in his own
Being. I do not say there is such Difficulty to conceive a Rock standing still
when the Waves run by it; or the Gnomon of a Dial when the Shadow Passes from
one Figure to another; because these are gross un-active things; but the
Difficulty is far greater where the Being is perfect and always active. For,
where there is Succession there is a passing out of not being in such a
duration into being in it; which is not consistent with the absolute Perfection
of the Divine Nature. And therefore God must be all at once what he is, without
any Respect to the Difference of Time past, present or to come. From whence
Eternity was defined by Boethius to be a De Consol. l. 3.
perfect and complete Possession all at once of everlasting Life. But how can
we form any Conception in our Minds of that being all at once, which has such
different Acts as must be measured by a long Succession of Time? As, the
creating and dissolving the Frame of the World; the promising and sending the
Messiah; the declaring and executing a general Judgment; how can these things
be consistent with a permanent Instant, or a Continuance of being without
Succession? For, it is impossible for us in this Case, as to God's Eternity, to
form a clear and distinct Idea in our Mind, of that which both Reason and
Revelation convince us must be. The most we can make of our Conception of it
is, that God has neither Beginning of Being, nor End of Days; but that he
always was, and always must be. And this is rather a necessary Conclusion from
Reason and Scripture, than any distinct Notion or Conception of Eternity in our
Minds. From whence it evidently follows, that God may reveal something to us,
which we are bound to believe, and yet after that Revelation the Manner of it
may be incomprehensible by us, and consequently a Mystery to us.

Has not God revealed to us in Scripture the Spirituality of his own Nature?
That he is a Spirit and therefore will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; S
Joh. 4. 24.
For, that is a true Reason why Spiritual Worship should be most agreeable to
him. Now, if we could have a clear, distinct, (...) Notion in our Minds of
God's Spiritual Nature, we might then pretend that there is nothing mysterious
in this, since it is revealed.

But let such Men examine their own thoughts about this Matter; and try,
whether the utmost they can attain to, be not something Negative, viz. because
great Absurdities would follow if we attributed any thing Corporeal to God;
for, then he must be compounded of Parts, and so he may be dissolved; then he
must be confined to a certain Place, and not everywhere present; he cannot
have the Power of acting and self-determining which a mere Body has not. For
the clearest Notion we can have of Body, is, that it is made up of some things
as parts of it, which may be separated from each other, and is confined to a
certain Place, and has no Power to move or act from it self. But some of these
Men who cry down Mysteries and magnify Reason, to show how slender their
Pretenses to Reason are, have asserted a Corporeal God, with Shaps and Figure.
It was indeed well thought of by those who would make a Man to be God, to bring
God down as near to Man as might be. But how to reconcile the Notion of a Body
with Infinite Perfections, is a Mystery to me, and far above my Comprehension.
But if it be no Mystery to such Men, they must either deny God's Infinite
Perfections, or show how a bodily Shape can be capable of them. But some Men
can confound Finite and Infinite, Body and Spirit, God and Man, and yet are for
no Mysteries; whereas these things are farther from our Reach and
Comprehension, than any of those Doctrines which they find fault with. But to
proceed.

If we believe Prophecy, we must believe God's foreknowledge of future Events:
For, how could they be foretold if he did not foreknow them? And if he did
foreknow those which he did foretell, then it was either because those only
were revealed to him which is inconsistent with the Divine Perfections; or that
he does foreknow all other Events and only thought fitting to reveal these:
But how can they solve the Difficulties about Divine Prescience? Is there no
Mystery in this? Nothing above their Comprehension? What then made their great
Master deny it, as a thing above his Comprehension? Because Socin. Prael. c. 11.
nothing can be fore-known but what has a certain Cause, and therefore, if
evil Actions be foretold God must be the Cause of them, and Men will not be
free Agents in them. And yet it is most certain, that the Sufferings of Christ
by the Wickedness of Men, were foretold. What then? Must we make God the Author
of Sin? God forbid. Will the righteous Judge of all the Earth, punish Mankind
for his own Acts, which they could not avoid? Then we must yield, that there is
something in the Manner of the Divine Prescience, which is above our
Comprehension. And the most searching and inquisitive Men have been forced to
yield it at last, as to the Connection between the Certainty of Prescience and
the Liberty of humane Actions. Is it not then much better to sit down quietly
at first, adoring the Infiniteness of God's incomprehensible Perfections, than
after all the Huffings and Disputings of Men to say, In ignorantia sola quietem
invenio, as the great Schoolman did? Surely then, here Cajetan in 1. q. 22.
art. 4.
is something plainly revealed, and yet the Manner of it is still a Mystery to
us.

I shall not now insist on any more of the particular Attributes of God, but
only in general I desire to know, whether they believe them to be finite or
infinite? If to be finite, then they must have certain Bounds and Limits which
they cannot exceed; and that must either be from the Imperfection of Nature, or
from a superior Cause, both which are repugnant to the very Being of God. If
they believe them to be Infinite, how can they comprehend them? We are
strangely puzzled in plain, ordinary, finite things; but it is madness to
pretend to comprehend what is Infinite; and yet if the Perfections of God be
not Infinite they cannot belong to Him.

I shall only add, in Consequence to this Assertion, That if nothing is to be
believed, but what may be comprehended, the very Being of God must be rejected
too. And therefore I desire all such who talk so warmly against any Mysteries
in Religion to consider whose Work it is they are doing; even theirs who under
this Pretense go about to overthrow all Religion. For, say they, Religion is a
Mystery in its own Nature; not this or that, or the other Religion; but they
are all alike, all is Mystery; and that is but another Name for Fraud and
Imposture. What were the Heathen Mysteries but tricks of Priestcraft; and such
are maintained and kept up in all kinds of Religion. If therefore these Men,
who talk against Mysteries understand themselves, they must in pursuance of
their Principles reject one God, as well as three Persons; For, as long as they
believe an Infinite and Incomprehensible Being, it is Nonsense to reject any
other Doctrine, which relates to an Infinite Being, because it is
Incomprehensible.

But yet these very Men, who seem to pursue the Consequence of this Principle
to the utmost, must assert something more incomprehensible than the Being of
God. For, I appeal to any Man of common Understanding, whether it be not more
agreeable to Reason to suppose Works of Skill, Beauty and Order to be the
Effects of a wise and intelligent Being, than of blind Chance and unaccountable
Necessity; whether it be not more agreeable to the Sense of Mankind to suppose
an Infinite and Eternal Mind endued with all possible Perfections to be the
Maker of this visible World; than, that it should start out from it self,
without Contrivance, without Order, without Cause? Certainly such Men have no
Reason to find fault with the Mysteries of Religion because they are
incomprehensible, since there is nothing so absurd and incomprehensible, as
their darling Hypothesis; And, there is nothing which can make it prevail, but
to suppose Mankind to be as dull and insensible as the first Chaos.

Thus I have shown that it is not unreasonable for God to require from us the
Belief of something which we cannot comprehend.

(2.) I now come to consider, whether those who are so afraid of
incomprehensible Mysteries in our Faith, have made it so much more easy in the
Way they have taken. And notwithstanding all the Hectoring talk against
Mysteries and things incomprehensible in Religion, I find more insuperable
Difficulties in Point of Reason in their Way than in ours. As for Instance,

(1.) It is a more reasonable thing to suppose something mysterious in the
Eternal Son of God's being with the Father before the World was made by him:
(as St. John expresses it in the beginning of his Gospel) than in supposing
that although John the Baptist were born six Months before Jesus Christ; that
yet Christ was in Dignity before him. What a wonderful Mystery is this? Can
Men have the Face to cry down Mysteries in deep Speculations, and Matters of a
high and abstruse Nature, when they make such Mysteries of plain and easy
things? and suppose the Evangelist in profound Language and lofty Expressions
to prove a thing, which was never disputed, viz. that although Christ Jesus
were born six Months after John, yet he was in Dignity before him? Yet this was
a Mystery, which, as I remember, Faustus Socinus glories in that his Uncle
Loelius obtained by Revelation.

(2.) It is a more reasonable thing to suppose that a Divine Person should
assume humane Nature, and so the Word to be made Flesh; than to say, that an
Attribute of God, his Wisdom or Power is made Flesh, which is a Mystery beyond
all Comprehension; There may be some Difficulties in our Conception of the
other, but this is a thing beyond all Conception or Imagination; For an
Accident to be made a Substance is as absurd, as to imagine it to subsist
without one.

(3.) It is more reasonable to suppose that the Son of God should come down
from Heaven and take our Nature upon him, than that a Man should be rapt up
into Heaven, that it might be said that he came down from thence. For in the
former Supposition we have many other Places of Scripture to support it, which
speak of his being with God, and having Glory with him before the World was;
whereas there is nothing for the other, but only that it is necessary to make
some tolerable Sense of those words.

(4.) It is more reasonable to believe that God should become Man by taking our
Nature upon him, than that Man should become God. For in the former, there is
nothing but the Difficulty of conceiving the Manner of the Union, which we all
grant to be so between Soul and Body; but in the other there is a Repugnancy in
the very Conception of a Created God, of an Eternal Son of Adam, of Omnipotent
Infirmity, of an Infinite finite Being. In the former Case, an Infinite is
united to a Finite; but in the other a Finite becomes Infinite.

(5.) It is more reasonable to believe that Christ Jesus should suffer as he
did for our sakes than for his own. We are all agreed that the Sufferings of
Christ were far beyond any thing he deserved at God's Hands; but what Account
then is to be given of them? We say that he made himself a voluntary Sacrifice
for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind; and so there was a great and noble End
designed, and no Injury done to a willing Mind; and the Scripture as plainly
expresses this, as it can do in Words. But others deny this, and make him to
suffer as one wholly Innocent; for what Cause? To make the most innocent
Persons as apprehensive of suffering as the most guilty; and the most righteous
God to put no Difference between them, with respect to Suffering?

(6.) It is more reasonable to suppose such a Condescension in the Son of God
to take upon him the Form of a Servant for our Advantage; than that a mere Man
should be exalted to the Honor and Worship which belongs only to God. For, on
the one side, there is nothing but what is agreeable to the Divine Nature, viz.
Infinite Love and Condescension and Pity to Mankind; on the other, there is the
greatest Design of Self-exaltation that ever was in Humane Nature, viz. for a
mere Man to have the most Essential Attributes and Incommunicable Honor which
belongs to God. And whether of these two is more agreeable to the Spirit and
Design of the New Testament, let any Man of understanding judge. For as it is
evident, that the great Intention of it is to magnify the wonderful Love of
God in the sending of his Son; so it is as plain that one great End of the
Christian Doctrine was to take Mankind off from giving Divine Worship to
Creatures; and can we then suppose that at the same time it should set up the
Worship of a mere Man with all the Honor and Adoration which belongs to God?
This is to me an incomprehensible Mystery indeed, and far beyond all that is
implied in the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation. For it subverts the
very Foundation of the Design of Christianity as to the reforming Idolatry then
in Being; it lays the Foundation for introducing it into the World again; for
since the Distance between God and his Creatures is taken away, in the Matter
of Worship, there is nothing left but the Declaration of his Will; which does
not exclude more Mediators of Intercession but upon this Ground, that the
Mediation of Redemption is the Foundation of that of Intercession. And it is
far more easy for us to suppose there may be some things too hard for us to
understand in the Mystery of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, than that at the
same time it should be both a Duty and a Sin to worship any but the true God
with proper Divine Worship. For if it be Idolatry to give it to a Creature,
then it is a great Sin; for so the Scripture still accounts it; but if we are
bound to give it to Christ who is but a Creature, then that which in it self is
a Sin, is now become a necessary Duty; which overthrows the natural Differences
of Good and Evil, and makes Idolatry to be a mere Arbitrary thing. And I take
it for granted, that in Matters of Religion, Moral Difficulties are more to be
regarded than Intellectual; because Religion was far more designed for a Rule
of our Actions, than for the Satisfaction of our Curiosity. And upon due
Examination we shall find that there is no such frightfull Appearances of
Difficulties in the M^stery of the Incarnation, as there is in giving Divine
Worship to a Creature.

And it ought to be observed, that those very Places which are supposed to
exclude Christ from being the true God; must, if they have any force, exclude
S. Joh. 17. 3.
him from Divine Worship. For they are 1 Cor. 6. 6
spoken of God as the Object of our Worship; but if he be not excluded from
Divine Worship, then neither is he from being the true God; which they grant
Socin. ad Eutrop. p. 96. c. Wick. c. 11. Catech. Racov. p. 65.
he is by Office but not by Nature.

But a God by Office who is not so by Nature is a new and incomprehensible
Mystery. A Mystery hidden from Ages and Generations as to the Church of God;
but not made known by the Gospel of his Son.

This is such a kind of Mystery as the Heathen Priests had, who had Gods many
and Lords many, as the Apostle says, i. e. many by Office although but one by
1 Cor ^ ^.
Nature. But if the Christian Religion had owned one God by Nature and only one
by Office, the Heathens had been to blame chiefly in the Number of their Gods
by Office, and not in the Divine Worship which they gave to them. But St. Paul
blames the Heathens for doing Service to them which by Nature are no Gal. 4. 8.
Gods; not for doing it without Divine Authority, nor for mistaking the Person
who was God by Office, but in giving Divine Worship to them who by Nature were
no Gods; which he would never have said, if by the Christian Doctrine, Divine
Worship were to be given to one who was not God by Nature.

But these are indeed incomprehensible Mysteries how a Man by Nature can be a
God really and truly by Office; how the incommunicable Perfections of the
Divine Nature can be communicated to a Creature; how God should give his Glory
to another, and by his own Command require that to be given to a Creature,
which himself had absolutely forbidden to be given to any besides himself. It
is said by a famous Jesui^ (I will not say how agrecably to their own Doctrines
and Practices about Divine Worship) that the Command of God Smiglec. de Divin.
Verb. Incarn. Not. p. 45.
cannot make him worthy of Divine Worship, who without such a Command is not
worthy of it. And it is very absurd to say, that he that is unworthy of it
without a Command, ^an become worthy by it; for it makes God to command Divine
Honor to be given to one who cannot deserve it. (For no mere Man can des^rve
to be Nova Monstra, etc. p. 42.
made God.) But it is more agreeable to the Divine Nature and Will not to give
his Honor to a Creature.

(3.) But after all the Invectives of these Enemies to Mysteries, we do not
make that which we say is Incomprehensible to be a Necessary Article of Faith
as it is Incomprehensible; but we do assert that what is Incomprehensible as to
the Manner, may be a Necessary Article as far as it is plainly revealed. As in
the Instances I have already mentioned of the Creation and Resurrection of the
Dead; would they in earnest have Men turn Infidels as to these things till they
are able to comprehend all the Difficulties which relate to them? If not, why
should this suggestion be allowed as to the Mysteries which relate to our
Redemption by Jesus Christ? If it be said, the Case is not alike for those are
clearly revealed and these are not; this brings it to the true and proper Issue
of this Matte^, and if we do not prove a clear Revelation, we do not assert
their being Necessary Articles of Faith; but my present business was only to
take off this Objection that the M^steries were incomprehensible and therefore
not to be received by us.

II. And so I come to the second Way, by which, we are to examine the several
Senses of Christ Jesus coming to save Sinners: Which of them tends more to the
Benefit and Advantage of Mankind; or which is more worthy of all Acceptance.

And that will appear by considering these things;

(1.) Which tends most to the raising our Esteem and Love of Christ Jesus.

(2.) Which tends most to the begetting in us a greater Hatred of Sin.

(3.) Which tends most to the strengthening our Hope of Salvation by Jesus
Christ.

(1.) As to the raising in us a greater Esteem and Love of Christ. We are
certain that the Infinite Love and Cond^^cension of Christ Jesus in undertaking
such a Work as the saving of Sinners makes it most worthy of all Acceptance.
Some Men may please themselves in thinking that by taking away all Mysteries
they have made their Faith more easy, but I am certain they have extremely
lessened the Argument for our Love, viz. the Apprehensions of the wonderful
Love and Condescension of Christ in coming into the World to save Sinners. And
yet this is the great Argument of the New Testament to persuade Mankind to the
Love of God and of his Son: God so loved the World that Joh. 3. 16.
he gave his only begotten Son, etc. This is indeed a mighty Argument of Love,
if by the only begotten Son be meant the Eternal Son of God, who came down from
Heaven, as St. John speaks just before; v. 13.
but if no more be meant but only that God made a mere Man to be h^s Son, and
after he had preached a while here on Earth and was ill used and crucified by
his own People, he exalted him to be God and gave him Divine Attributes and
Hon^urs; this were an Argument of great Love to the Person of Christ, but not
to the rest of Mankind. But God's Love in Scripture is magnified with respect
to the World in the sending of his Son. In this was manifested, 1 John 4. 9.
says the Apostle, the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the World that we should live through him. Herein is love, v.
10.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
Propitiation for our Sins. The great Love we still see is toward us, i. e.
toward Mankind, but according to the other Sense it must have been, herein was
the Love of God manifested to his Son, that for his Sufferings he exalted him
above all Creatures. He that spared not his own Son, Romans 8. 32.
says St. Paul, but delivered him up for us all. If he were the Eternal Son of
God who came to suffer for us, there is a mighty Force and Emphasis in this
Expression, and very apt to raise our Admiration and our Love; but what not
sparing his own Son is there, if nothing were meant but that he designed by
Sufferings to exalt him? For not sparing him supposes an Antecedent Relation of
the highest Kindness, but the other is only designing extraordinary Kindness
for the sake of his Sufferings. Therefore, the Argument for the Love of God is
taken from what his Son was, when he delivered him up for us all; he was his
own Son; not by Adoption as others are; St John calls him his only John 1. 14.
chapter 3. v. 16.
begotten Son; and God himself, his beloved Luke 3. 22.
Son in the Voice from Heaven; and this before his Sufferings, immediately
after his Baptism, when as yet, there was nothing extraordinary done by him, as
to the great Design of his coming. Which shows, that there was an Antecedent
Relation between him and the Father; and that therein the Love of God and of
Christ was manifested, that being the only begotten Son of the Father, he
should take our Nature upon him, and for our sakes do and suffer what he did.
This is indeed an Argument great enough to raise our Admiration, to excite our
Devotion, to inflame our Affections; but how flat and low does it appear, when
it comes to no more than this, that there was a Man, whom, after his
Sufferings, God raised from the Dead and made him a God by Office? Does this
carry any such Argument in it for our Esteem and Love and Devotion to him as
the other does upon the most serious Consideration of it?

(2.) Which tends most to beget in us a greater Hatred of Sin. For that is so
contrary to the Way of our Salvation by Jesus Christ, that what tends most to
our Hatred of it, must conduce most to our Happiness; and therefore be most
worthy of all Acceptance. It is agreed on all hands, that Christ did suffer
very much both in his Mind and in his Body. In his Mind, when it is said, that
he was troubled in Spirit; that Joh. 13. 21. Matthew. 26. 37, 38.
he began to be sorrowful and very heavy; and soon after, My Soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death. St. Luke says, that he was in an Agony; wherein
Mark 14. 33, 34. Luke 22. 44.
he not only prayed more earnestly, but his sweat was as it were great Drops of
Blood falling to the Ground. What made this Amazement, and dreadful Agony in
the Mind of the most innocent Person in the World? Was it merely the Fear of
the Pains of Death which he was to undergo? That is impossible, considering the
Assurance which he had of so glorious a Reward so soon following after; when so
many Martyrs endured such exquisite Torments for his sake without any such
Disturbance or Co^sternation. But the Apostles give us another Account of it.
St. Peter, says he was to bear our Sins in his own 1 Pet. 2. 24.
body on the tree; that Christ suffered for 3. 18.
Sins, the just for the unjust. St. Paul, 2 Cor 5. 21.
that God made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. Hereby we understand how so innocent a Person came
to suffer; he stood in our stead; he was made Sin for us; and therefore was to
be treated as a Sinner; and to suffer that on our Account, which he could not
deserve on his own. If he suffered on his own Account, this were the way to
fill our Minds with perplexity concerning the Justice of Providence with
respect to his dealings with the most innocent and holy Persons in this World;
if he suffered on our Account, then we have the Benefit of his Sufferings, and
therein we see how displeasing to God sin is, when even his own Son suffered so
much by taking the guilt of our Sins upon him. And what can tend more to the
begetting in us a due hatred of sin, than to consider, what Christ himself
suffered on the Account of it? What can make us have more dreadful thoughts of
it, than that the great and merciful God, when he designed to save Sinners,
yet would have his own Son to become a Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind?
And unless we allow this, we must put force upon the plainest Expressions of
Scripture; and make Christ to suffer merely to show God's Power over a most
innocent Person, and his Will and Pleasure to inflict the most severe
Punishment without any Respect to Guilt. And surely such a Notion of God,
cannot be worthy of all Acceptance.

(3.) Which tends most to strengthen our Hope of Salvation by Christ Jesus. If
we believe that he suffered for our Sins, then we have great Reason to hope for
the Forgiveness of them; although they have been many and great, if we
sincerely repent; because the most prevailing Argument for Despair will be
removed; which is taken from the Justice of God, and his declared Hatred of Sin
and Displeasure against Sinners. If God be so much in earnest displeased with
the Sins of Mankind, and his Justice be concerned in the Punishment of Sinners,
how can they ever hope to escape, unless there be a way for his Displeasure to
be removed, and his Justice to be satisfied? And this the Scripture tells us is
done by Christ, who died that he might be a Sacrifice of Atonement Romans 510. 1
Cor. 5. 19. Heb. 9. 15.
to reconcile us to God by his Death; as St. Paul expressly affirms. And by this
means, we may have strong Consolation from the Hopes of Forgiveness of our
Sins. Whereas, if this be taken away, either Men must believe that God was not
in earnest displeased with the Sins of Mankind; which must exceedingly lessen
our Esteem of the Holiness and Justice of God; or if he were so displeased,
that he laid aside this Displeasure, without any Atonement or Sacrifice of
Expiation. And so, as many as look on God's Justice and Holiness as necessary
and essential Attributes of God, will be in danger of sinking into the Depths
of Despair, as often as they reflect seriously on the Guilt of their Sins. But
on the other side, if we believe that while we were Enemies, we were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son; then we may have Peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ; and have Reason to believe that there will be no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus by a lively Faith and sincere
Repentance; then they may with Comfort look up to God as a reconciled Father,
through Jesus Christ our Mediator; then they may with inward Satisfaction look
beyond the Grave, and steadfastly hope for that Salvation which Christ purchased
on Earth and will at last bestow on all such as love and obey him. To which God
of his Infinite Mercy bring us all through Jesus Christ. For, This is a
faithful Saying and worthy of all Acceptance, that he came into the World to
save Sinners.

SERMON VII. Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, March the 1st. 1690/1.
S. Luke VI. 46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
say?
THese few Words contain in them a smart and ^erious Expost^lation of our
Blessed Savior, with such who pro^essed great Kindness to him in their Wor^s,
but showed no Regard to his Commands. They owned him to be the Messiah, and
depended upon him for their Happiness, and were willing enough to be known to
be his Disciples and Followers, but yet his Doctrine made little Impression on
their Minds, and scarce any Alteration in the Course of their Lives. They loved
to be where Christ was, to hear his Doctrine, to see his Miracles, to observe
his Conversation, to admire what he did and said; but herein lay the whole of
their Religion; for although they named the name of Christ, and it may be
rejoiced and gloried in it, yet they did not depart from iniquity. Now,
considering the Circumstances of that time, this seems to have been an
unaccountable kind of Hypocrisy. For their calling Christ Lord, Lord, spoiled
their Interest in this World; and not doing what he said, debarred them from
the hopes of Happiness by him in another. For, if they owned him to be their
Lord, they were bound to believe him in what he declared; and there is nothing
he does more expressly warn men of, than hoping to be saved by him without
obeying his Commands. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he Matt. 7. 21.
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Which is shorter
expressed, but to the same purpose here by S. Luke; And why call ye me Lord,
Lord, and do not the things which I say? As though he had said to them, It is
in vain to think to please and flatter me with your Words, when your Actions
are disagreeable to them. To call me Lord, Lord, is to own my Authority in
commanding you; but to do this, and yet wilfully to disobey me, is to show your
Hypocrisy and Folly together.

Which Expostulation of Christ was not confined to that time, no more than his
Commands were; but it has always the same Force, where Persons are guilty of
the same Folly. For although now none can plead for themselves, as they did, We
have eaten and Luke 13. 26.
drank in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets; yet we may build
as presumptuous hopes upon Privileges of another kind, which may be as
ineffectual to our Salvation, as these were when Christ said to those very
Persons, Depart from me all ye workers of v. 27.
iniquity. We all bear the Name of Christ, and own his Doctrine, and partake of
his Sacraments; and in one of them profess to eat and drink in his Presence,
and at his Table, and renew our solemn Baptismal Vow and Covenant with him as
our Lord and Savior; and so we pray to him and profess to depend upon him for
our Salvation; and therefore we are as deeply concerned in the Scope and Design
of these Words, as ever the Jews were to whom our Savior spoke them.

But that I may the better Apply them to the Consciences of all those who hear
me this Day, and to make my Discourse more useful and Practical, I shall
single out some of the most Remarkable Instances of those Duties, which Christ
has enjoined to his Disciples of all Ages and Nations; and then show how just
and reasonable it is that all who call Christ Lord, Lord, should do what he
says about them; and yet that the Generality of those who do so, do very
little Mind or Regard them.

The main part of those Duties which Christ requires from all his Disciples may
be reduced to these three Heads:

I. Such as relate to the Government of our Passions.

II. To the Government of our Speech.

III. To the Government of our Actions; so, as that we lead a Sober, Righteous
and Godly Life.

I. As to the Government of our Passions. And that may be considered three ways.

1. As to the things which are apt to Provoke us.

2. As to the things which are apt to Tempt us.

3. As to the things which Concern us, in respect of our Condition in this
World.

(1.) As to the things which are apt to Provoke us. Such is the frame of human
Nature, that we are very tender and sensible not only of any real Hurt or
Injury which may be done to our Bodies or Estates, but of any thing we
apprehend may do so, or that touches upon our Reputation. And where the Injury
is real, yet that which often touches most to the quick, is the Contempt which
is expressed in it. For, if the same thing be done by one, we are satisfied did
it not out of any Unkindness or Ill Will, the matter is easily passed over, and
makes no breach or difference between them. But, if it be intended for an
Affront, although it be never so little, then the brisker men's Spirits are, and
the higher Opinion they have of themselves, so much deeper Impression is
presently made in the Mind; and that inflames the Heart and puts the Blood and
Spirits into a quicker Motion in order to the returning the Affront on him that
gave it. But there is a considerable difference in Men's Tempers to be observed;
some are very quick and hasty, others are slower in the beginning, but more
violent afterward; the Passions of the former are like a Flash of Gunpowder,
which begins suddenly, makes a great Noise and is soon over; but the other are
like a burning Fever, which is lower at first, but rises by degrees, till the
whole Body be in a Flame. The one is more troublesome, but the other more
dangerous; the Care of the one must be in the beginning; of the other in the
Continuance of Passion, lest it turn into Hatred, Malice and Revenge. But what
through the Natural Heat of Temper in some, the Jealousy and Suspicion in
others, the crossing each others Designs and Inclinations, the misconstruction
of Words and Actions, the Carelessness of some and the Frowardness and
Peevishness of others, Mankind are apt to lead very uneasy Lives with respect
to one another; and must do so unless they look after the Government of
themselves as to real or imaginary Provocations.

There are two Things I shall therefore speak to,

(1.) That it is Reasonable that a Restraint should be laid on Men's violent
Passions.

(2.) That Christ has laid no unreasonable restraint upon them.

(1.) That it is Reasonable that a Restraint should be laid on men's violent
Passions. And that on a twofold Account.

(1.) With Respect to the common Tranquillity of humane Life.

(2.) To the particular Tranquillity of our own Minds.

(1.) To the common Tranquillity of human Life. The great Comfort and Pleasure
of it depends on the mutual benefit Men have from Society with one another.
This cannot be enjoyed without particular Persons abridging themselves of some
natural Rights for a common Benefit. If we could suppose no such thing as
Government or Society among men, we must suppose nothing but Disorder and
Confusion; every one being his own Judge and Executioner too in case of any
apprehended Wrong or Injury done to him. Which condition of Life having all
imaginable Uneasiness attending it, by perpetual Fears and Jealousies and
Mistrusts of one another Powers, there was a Necessity that they must come to
some common Terms of Agreement with each other; so as to fix their Rights and
to establish a just Measure of Proceeding in case of Wrong. For every Man's
Revenging his own Injury according to his own Judgment, was one of those great
Inconveniences, which was to be remedied by Society, Laws and Government. And
Mankinds entering into Society for this End, does suppose it possible for them
to keep under their violent Passions; and to submit their private Injuries to
the equal Arbitration of Laws; or else they are made to no purpose, unless it
be to punish men for what they cannot avoid. For many of those Crimes which all
the Laws of Mankind do punish, as wilful Murder, may be committed through the
force of a violent Passion; and if that be irresistible, then the Laws which
punish it are not founded on Reason and Justice. But if such Laws are very Just
and Reasonable, as no doubt they are, then all Mankind are agreed that men's
violent Passions may and ought to be Restrained in some Cases. The only Dispute
then remaining is, whether it may not be as fitting to restrain our Passions in
such Cases, which the Law takes no notice of. For, there is a Superior Law,
viz. that of Reason whereby we are to be Governed; and the Public Laws do not
forbid or punish Offenses because they are unreasonable, but because they are
dangerous and hurtful to human Society. And And if it be allowed to be fitting
and necessary for men to keep their Passions within the Compass of Laws, why
not within the Conduct of Reason? Especially, when a great deal of Disorder may
happen, and disturbance of the Peace and Quiet of human Society, by the
Violence of Passions, which may be out of the Reach of human Laws. And every
man is bound by virtue of his being in Society, to preserve the Tranquillity of
it as much as he can.

(2.) The Tranquillity of our own Minds depends upon it. And certainly, that is
a very reasonable Motive for the Government of our Passions, since those are
the Occasions of all the Storms and Tempests within our Breasts. For the
Government of Reason is calm, even and ser^ne, full of Peace and all the
Blessings which ^ollow it; but the Government of Passion is tyrannical and
boisterous, uncertain and troublesome; never free from doing Mischief to it
self or others. The greate^t Pleasure of Passion is Revenge; and yet that is so
unnatural, so sul^ of anxiety and fear of the Consequents of it, that he who
can subdue this unruly Passion has more real Pleasure and Satisfaction in his
mind, than he who seeks to gratify it most. For, if he be disappointed, then
he must be uneasy by failing of his end; if he be not, then he is tormented
with the Apprehensions of what may follow it. So that there is nothing which
conduces more to the greatest Blessing of Life, the Tranquillity of our Minds,
than the Government of our Passions does.

(2.) Let us now see, whether our Savior has laid any Unreasonable Restraint
upon our Passions.

There are Three things he particularly requires in order to the Government of
them.

(1.) Meekness. (2.) Patience. (3.) Love of Enemies. And I hope to make it
appear, that there is nothing unreasonable in any of these.

(1.) Meekness. Which is such a Gentleness of Temper, as makes a man not easy
to be provoked. There is a great deal of difference between Meekness and
Stupidity; the one arises from a natural Dullness and Insensibility; the other
from a fixed, calm and composed Temper of Mind; and is founded on two, which
are both wise things, especially when they go together; and those are,
Consideration and Resolution. For, nothing tends to the abating the heat and
violence of Passion so much, as Consideration does, and Resolution makes it
effectual. If it were nothing but the time it gives, that is of great force for
letting out the inward Fermentation, which will spend it self in great measure,
if Vent be given to it. Whereas, if it be kept in and suffered to work upon it
self, it turns from a hasty Passion to Malice and Revenge. But Consideration is
of greater Use, as it suggests Arguments from Reason to quell and allay the
sudden heat of Passions; as, That, it exposes the Weakness of our Minds, in not
being able to keep under that which they ought to Govern and have Power to
Command; That, it is a great Folly to disorder our selves, at the Pleasure of
our Enemies; or, at such Accidents, which we can neither prevent, nor remove;
That, the wisest thing we can do, is not to betray our Folly to others, if we
cannot wholly suppress it in our selves; That, we weaken the Reins of the
Government of our selves, by not holding them with a stricter hand; and make
our Passions more seditious and turbulent by letting them alone; That, the more
we try to command our selves the easier we shall do it; That our most
rebellious Passions will submit, if they find we are in earnest; That it is the
way to make that a real Injury by being disturbed, which would lose its force
by being neglected; That, while we are true to our selves, we are out of the
reach of our Enemies, and then we are most under their Power, when we are least
under our own; That, the great work of Religion lies within us; and that we are
in a very ill condition if neither Reason no Religion can keep us in order. By
such Considerations as these, men are brought to a more calm and composed
Temper, which is that Meekness which our Savior requires. And to this he seems
to appropriate the Happiness of this Life. Blessed are the Mat^. 5. 5.
Meek for they shall inherit the earth. What does our Blessed Savior mean by
Inheriting the Earth? Is there any thing like Blessedness to be expected in
this troublesome and sinful World? Not Absolutely; but Comparatively there
may; and if there be any thing like it to be had here, the meek may put in for
the largest share of it. For they have more Friends and fewer Enemies than the
rest of the World; they enjoy themselves with more quietness and satisfaction,
and are less disturbed at the Noise and tumultuous Passions of the rest of
mankind. O happy Temper! To be calm and easy in good humor, in the midst of
Disorders and Provocations; To enjoy the Peace and Serenity of the Regions
above, in the midst of the Storms and Tempests here below; To raise the Mind
above the power of Detraction; and thereby to suffer the Venom of malicious
Tongues to scatter and disperse it self in the open Air, if it does not return
to the Breasts of those from whom it came. S. James might therefore well call
it the Meekness James 3. 13.
of Wisdom, not only because Wisdom directs it, but that it consists very much
in the Exercise of it.

2. Patience. For let Persons be endued with the Spirit of Meekness, yet the
World is so froward and hand to be pleased, so captious and ill-natured, so
ready to apprehend an Injury and to revenge it, that there is great need of
Patience, not only in bearing the Troubles of Life, but in sorbearing to return
evil for evil. And this is that which our Savior particularly requires of his
Disciples. He strictly forbids all Causeless Anger, all Contumelious and
Reproachful Matthew. 5. 22.
Words; and when Injuries are done us, he commands us that we v. 39.
resist not evil; but if one smite us on the right Cheek, to turn to him the
other also. And if any man will sue thee at the v. 40.
Law and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also. And whosoever will v.
41.
compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Now here lies a real Difficulty;
for this seems to go beyond the bounds of humane Patience: To pass by Affronts
without taking notice of them; not to resent the Injuries of those whom no
Kindness can oblige, seems to be a great degree of Virtue; and it is so; but to
bind hand and foot when we receive them, to invite them to do more, and to
offer our selves to double the proportion, seems wholly unaccountable to
Reason, and inconsistent with the Wisdom of Christianity.

The true Account of the meaning of these Commands is this; Our Savior takes
it for granted, that all considerable matters of Right and Wrong were
determined by Laws; as the most equal Measures between Parties; and these he
meddled not with; For, says he, to one that desired him to interpose in such a
matter; Who made me a Judge or a Luke 12. 14.
Divider among you? Therefore he does not abridge his Followers from making use
of these Laws and Courts of Jud^cature, which are established for matters of
common Justice and Equity; but all the Laws in the World cannot alter the
Temper of some men's minds, who are peevish and quarrelsome, who are provoked on
any slight Occasion, and it may be are provoked if you gave them none. Like the
Roman Orator, Seneca mentions, who was angry with De Ira, l. 3. c. 8.
every one that came near him; and when a Client sought to humor him in every
thing, he was at last angry with him, because he did not provoke him. There are
some Tempers so easily provoked, and yet so hard to be reconciled, as if their
Original Sin did not lie in Concupiscence but in Ill Nature. And yet, even that
is a kind of Concupiscence; for the Stoics defined Anger by Libido; and said
it was a Lust of Tasc. 3. 9.
Revenge; and so far, seemed more unreasonable than that of Intemperance;
because this aims only at Pleasure, in things which are apt to produce it,
(however mean and unreasonable) but the other is an extravagant and unnatural
Pleasure, which arises from another Pain; and dissers from the other, as the
Pleasures of evil Spirits do from those of Brutes.

But if we happen to converse among such who take Pleasure in doing us Injuries
upon every slight Occasion, by some personal Affronts, or litigious Suits, or
unjust Exactions in ordinary Cases; what are we to do? May we not right our
selves by retaliating the Injury upon them? Since the Law of Moses did allow of
Retaliation in case of real Injuries, an Eye for an Eye; a Tooth Exodus 21. 24.
Levit. 24. 20. Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
for a Tooth; and so by an equitable Construction of the Law, it may extend to
personal Affronts. Thus the Jews indeed understood it; but if our Savior had
allowed their Interpretation, he would never have said, But I say unto you,
that ye resist not evil. There was a Spirit of Revenge in them, so as they
would pass by no kind of Injuries, although they were such, which the Law had
made no provision for; and this our Savior condemns. But here comes a hard
Case to be resolved; not so in it self, but the Custom of the World has made
it so; for when a mistaken Notion of Honor and Conscience come in Competition,
it is not an easy thing to forgo Honor for Conscience sake. The Case is,
concerning Contumelious Words and Personal Affronts, which are given to Men of
Honor. Is it unlawful for them to right themselves according to the receiv^d
Customs among them, when the Law takes no notice of such Injuries, and so seems
to leave it to them? This is the Case; and I have put it as fair as the thing
will bear. I might say in general that our Savior makes no distinction of Men's
Honor and Quality in his Commands; and that for all that I can see, such must
be saved on the same Terms with others; That Honor is but an imaginary thing
when it slands in Competition with the Rule of Conscience; and that no Custom
is to be observed against Reason and Religion: But here lies the insuperable
Difficulty; how the exposing one another Lives for the sake of Reproachful
Words or Personal Affronts, can be reconciled to this Command of Christ? For my
part, I cannot see how it is possible to do it; since in this Case, there is a
studied and premeditated Design of Revenge in the Case of such Injuries which
are here mentioned; and that of the highest Nature, and beyond any Proportion
between the Offense and the Punishment, which all men out of Passion, think, in
common Justice ought to be considered. I know some Casuists in the Church of
Rome, allow it to be lawful to take away the Lives of any who give them
Contume^ious Words; but these have been condemned as very loose Casuists; and
they have found out a subtle way of directing the Intention, whereby to keep
from breaking the Laws of Christ; but this is too subtle to be reconciled with
the Plainness of his Laws; and they all deny it to be lawful by way of
Revenge. Others say much better, that although Nature may seem to give an
injured Person a Right to vindicate himself by the best means he can; yet that
Right Gr. de J B. and P. l. 2, 1. 10.
is so restrained and limited by Christ's Commands in this case, that it is by
no means lawful for Christians to use it; and to pretend to do it for a
Reparation of Honor, a ratione and pietate valde alienam videtur, is repugnant
both to Reason and Religion; says one, who very well understood the Rules of
both.

But all the pretended Right of Nature is taken away by Laws, and where those
declare it to be Wilful Murder to take away the Life of another on such
Accounts as these, there is no color left for natural Right, which supposes no
determination by Laws.

I consess it requires a more than ordinary Degree of Christian Fortitude as
well as Patience, to be able to despise such a prevailing Custom. But if Men
hope to be saved by Christ, they must observe his Commands; and if they ence
declare, that they are resolved to do so in this particular, (if they do the
same in all others) it will be then thought to be Conscience and not Cowardice
for them to decline a Challenge; and that upon good Grounds they decline such a
Custom, which no good man could ever approve, nor any wise man defend.

3. Love of Enemies. This seems to be harder yet. Is it not enough to bear
them; but must we love them too? Yes, Christ has strictly required it.

But I say unto you, Love your Enemies; Luke 6. 27, 35.
and again in this very Chapter, But love your Enemies. If he had bid Men love
their Friends and take heed of their Enemies, there are some Ages of the World,
wherein this had been no impertinent Advice. But how can those be supposed to
love their Enemies, who hardly love any thing but themselves? Self-Opinion,
Self-Will, Self-Interest prevail over the far-greatest part of Mankind; I wish
I could not say, even among those who call Christ Lord, Lord. But Self-Love as
natural as it is, must be artificially disguised; for, if it appears too
openly, it meets with so much Self-Love in others, that it will not be easily
born. Therefore the most crafty Lovers of themselves, if they design to have
the Love of others, must conceal their inward Passion. For, he that appears to
set up himself, is certain to make the rest of Mankind his Enemies; for, even
those who would do the same, will be the most displeased with those who do it.
Therefore the most certain way to Honor and universal Esteem, is to mind the
Good of others more than our own; to be Just and Charitable and Kind to all;
and to oblige as many as we can, without Partiality or Prejudice. And this, I
say, is that Love of Enemies which our Savior requires, which does not suppose
the same kind of Affection to them which we have to our Friends, for that is
grounded an mutual Love and Good Will to each other; which, if we suppose in
Enemies, we suppose a Contradiction; for that is to suppose them not to be
Enemies, but Friends. What then is it which our Savior means? It is certainly
an Universal Charity, or a Readiness of Mind to do good to all, although they
have personally provoked, or injured us. And so Christ himself Luke 6. 27. 33.
35.
explains it, by doing good to our Enemies, praying for them and relieving them
in their Necessities; and he proposes the best Example in the World for our
imitation; and that of God himself, who makes his Sun to rise on the evil and
the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. But none can suppose
that the righteous and holy God, can have the same Love or Kindness for the
Evil, which he has for the Good, or for the Unjust, which he has for the
Just. So that this Precept, which being misunderstood, seems to be
irreconcilable to human Nature, contains in it, nothing but what all Mankind
approve in others, as unwilling as they are to practice it themselves.

And now it is time to make a stand, and to look about us, for, I have gone
through our Savior's Commands with respect to the things which are apt to
provoke us. And where are those Christians to be found, who do what Christ has
said herein, who do yet every day call him Lord, Lord? If Peevishness and
Frowardness, perpetual Uneasiness and Discontent; If Rancor and Bitterness,
Strife and Envying, Faction and Animosity; if Impatience of apprehended
Injuries, and the making of Enemies, instead of loving them, were the Marks of
good Christians, we should find Number enough, even among those who pretend to
Reformation. We profess to thank God for a late great Deliverance from the
hands of our Enemies, I mean as to our Religion; (and truly there appears more
and more Reason for it, since it is so much more evident that the Design was no
less than a total Subversion of our Religion.)

But what a sad Requital is this, for so great Mercies, to break out into
Factions and Parties, instead of pursuing the common Interest of our Religion;
Instead of laying aside Differences about Religion, to increase them; nay to
make Religion it self not only the Subject of their Quarrels, but of their
Scorn and Contempt? What can be said or hoped for, as to such a froward,
unthankful, atheistical Generation of Men? Thanks be to God, there are not
wanting some extraordinary Examples of true Piety and Goodness among us; and of
Meekness, Patience and Universal Charity; and truly there needs a great deal,
to bear up against the daring and insolent Profaneness and Irreligion of
others. When I once see a true Spirit of Reformation prevail among us, not
merely as to Doctrines, but as to Men's Lives and Tempers; when I see them more
zealous for God and Religion, than for the Interest of particular Parties; when
I see them really promoting Peace and Unity, and not making a Pretense of it to
serve private Ends, I may then hope for a lasting Settlement of the true
Religion among us. But till then --

(2.) I proceed to the second Head of our Savior's Commands, and that is as to
such things which Tempt us. S. James says, Every man is tempted, when he is
J^m. 1. 14.
drawn aside of his own Lust and enticed. Lust is the ungoverned Desire of
Sensual Pleasure. Now, as to this, Christ has laid so strict a Command, as
seems very hard for humane Nature to observe. For he not only forbids the Act
of Adultery, but the Tendencies to it; viz. the Impurity of the inward Desires,
and of Looks and Glances, and makes these to be Adultery in the Heart. What is
Matt. 5. 28.
that; For Adultery is an outward deliberate Act, and has Injustice as well as
Uncleanness in it. But Desires and Looks are sudden and transient things, which
may leave no permanent Effect behind them. However, our Savior, to show how
much God abhors Impurity, (who sees into the secret Thoughts and Intentions of
the Heart,) declares that the unmortified Desires and inward Lusts are very
displeasing to God; and therefore that those who hope to see God, must be Pure
in Heart. Which Matt. 5. 8.
as it implies a sincere Endeavor to suppress all inward Motions which are
contrary to it, is both a reasonable and necessary Duty.

But the hardest part of Christ's Commands in this matter, is that which
requires us to pluck out our right eyes, and Matt. 5. 29, 30.
to cut off right hands: Must the blind and the lame only go to Heaven? But he
speaks of such sinsull Inclinations in us, which seem as delightful and
useful to us as to the Pleasures of Life, as a right Eye or a right Hand; yet
we must part with them, if we ever hope to get to H^aven. Not, by any one
single Act like the cutting off a Hand, or plucking out an Eye, but by a
serious, constant and sincere Endeavor to mortify and subdue them. And if
this be thought hard, the Consideration of future Happiness and Misery ought to
reconcile us to it; and surely it is reasonable we should part with something
which is pleasant to us here, for the sake of an infinitely greater Pleasure in
another World; since this is only a sensual Pleasure, which cannot be pursued
without disturbance of the Mind, and can be enjoyed but for a little time; and
the other is no less than Eternal Felicity of Soul and Body together.

(3.) As to the things which Concern us, as to our Condition in this World.
There is no Precept of Christ which seems more inconsistent with the Wisdom of
this World, than this does. For, as that lies in taking great care for the
future; so our Savior on the contrary seems to allow none at all. Therefore I
say unto you, Take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall Matt. 6. 15.
drink, nor yet, for your Body, what ye Luke 12. 22.
shall put on. What does our Savior mean by this? Would he have all Christians
live like the young Ravens, merely Luke 12. 24. Job 38 41. psalm. 147 9
upon Providence? Or, as the Lilies of the Field, which grow and flourish and
yet neither Toil nor Spin? But Man is an intelligent Creature, and apt to
forecast and contrive things for his future advantage, and God seems to have
left things very much to his own Care and Providence; and generally speaking,
Men's Condition in this World is according to it. What then; Does our Savior
indulge Men in a careless, easy, unthinking Life? Or, require that his
Disciples thoughts ought to be wholly taken up with matters of Religion? Not,
if S. Paul knew his meaning; for 1 Timothy 5. 8.
he says, Those who provide not for their own, have denied the Faith and are
worse than Infidels. But this only seems to make the Difficulty greater.
Therefore to clear it, we must attend to our Savior's Scope and Design; which
was, to persuade his Disciples to lay up their Treasure in Heaven, to seek the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness in the first place; and then represents
this World and another as two opposite Interests, so that one cannot serve two
Masters; which implies a Contradiction to each other. So that what follows must
be understood in such a Sense, as is inconsistent with the main Duty, of
looking after Heaven as our Happiness; and therefore ought not to be understood
of a prudent, necessary Care, but of an anxious, solicitous, distrustful Care,
which implies that we place our Happiness too much here. And therefore S. Luke
subjoyns these Commands to the Parable of the Rich Man, whose heart was in his
Barns and Storehouses, and took Luke 12. 18, 19.
great care to lay in Provision enough for a sensual and voluptuous Life: But
to show the unspeakable Folly of such vain Contrivances, it was said to him,
This night shall thy Soul be required of v. 20.
thee; and then whose shall these things be which thou have provided?

II. I come now to our Savior's Commands with respect to the Government of our
Speech. And he seems to be very severe as to this, when he says, That every
Matt. 12. 36.
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the Day of
Judgment. What a heavy Account then, are those to make, whose time is so much
taken up with idle and impertinent talk; and who can hardly forbear it, when
they should be most serious? Is it unlawful then to speak any more than is
just necessary to express our Minds? May we not employ our Speech sometimes for
our innocent Diversion and Entertainment if we keep within the bounds of
Prudence and Religion? I do not see that our Savior forbids it. For the idle
Words he speaks of there, are profane, false, abusive, malicious Reproaches of
Religion and the means to confirm it; as appears by his bringing it just after
the mention of the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. So that all such Abuses of
Speech which entrench v. 31.
on Piety and Good Manners, or Truth and Sincerity, are certainly forbidden by
him. But there is one particular Vice of Conversation, which he has with most
force of Argument forbidden; Matt. 5. 34* 37.
and yet (which is a great shame to any that would be called Christians) none
more common among some who would pretend to understand the Methods of
Conversation and the best Modes of Speaking; and that is the profane Custom of
Swearing. I take it for granted, that all are Christians among us, ti^l they
disown it themselves; and however men may act, they are not willing to renounce
all hopes of Salvation by Christ: I beseech them then to consider, what a
Contempt of his Authority is implied in this, too fashionable sort of
Profaneness? The other Duties I have mentioned, have a great Difficulty in
them, as to our Tempers and Inclinations; but nothing of that Nature can be so
much as pretended as to this. For no man could ever say, that he had a Swearing
Constitution, or that it was an Infirmity of his Nature. There is nothing in it
but the Tyranny of a very bad Custom; which every Prudent Man, as well as Good
Christian, will see Cause to break. But what a Reproach is it, to the very
Profession of Christianity among us, for so plain, so easy a Command of Christ
to be broken so commonly, so unconcernedly, so impertinently, as is every day
done; and yet they call Christ Lord, Lord? In all Ages, there were some
pretended Christians, who did not sincerely obey the Commands of our Savior;
but their Hypocrisy was of a finer and more Artificial make; this is gross and
rude, without the common Respect which is due to the Religion we all profess to
be that, or hope to be saved by. Some say, a Custom in it self is no Sin,
because it is no Act; but certainly a customary breach of a plain Command is so
much greater a Sin, as it implies a greater Contempt of him that made it; and
when Custom has taken away the Sense of the Fault, it is so much more
aggravated by it. It is really a matter to be wondered at, that among Persons
professing a better sort of Breeding, as well as Christianity; a vicious
Custom, so untempting in it self, so unbecoming the Decency of Conversation, so
Affronting to the Divine Majesty, so directly contrary to the Commands of
Christ, should get so deep a rooting in ordinary Conversation, that it seems
almost impossible to be reformed. But till men do think of breaking off such a
Practice as this, I despair of ever seeing them reform other things which have
a deeper root in their natural Inclinations, and have greater Advantages as to
this World.

III. The Commands of Christ extend to the whole Course of our Actions; so, as
that we lead a sober, righteous and godly Life.

1 As to Sobriety. Take heed to your selves, says Christ, lest at any time
your Luke 21. 24.
hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness. These are somewhat hard
words for that which our Age has learnt to express in much softer terms of
Eating and Drinking well. Luxury seems a thing quite forgotten to be a Sin,
among those who are most quilty of it; and Intemperance thought so uncertain a
thing, as though it were impossible to tell when Persons are guilty of it. It Is
true, that Temperance may vary as to the Degrees and Limits of it; and we do
not pretend to define it by Grains and Scruples. But still there ought to be a
Governing our Appetites according to Reason, and that is Temperance. But what
is Reason in this Case? Some send us to the Brutes to find out what Reason is;
and they tell us, it lies in a plain simple Diet, such as the Beasts use,
without provoking or raising the Appetite. But I know not where God has
forbidden the use of Art, as to our Eating and Drinking; and if this were so,
we must practice Temperance only in the use of Water and Acorns. If mere
Satisfaction of Nature were the exact Rule of Temperance, then eating or
drinking any thing beyond it were a Sin; which would fill the Minds of those
who are afraid to sin, with infinite Scruples; and make all Feasting unlawful.
Yet our Savior was present at one in Cana ^f Galilee; and did a Miracle
relating to it. But we need not run into Niceties in this matter; for,
Intemperance is either an over-charging of Nature, so as to make it sink or
totter under the load; or it is a wanton humouring and pleasing the Appetite,
not, for the service of Nature, but for the Pleasure of Eating and Drinking;
Or, it is as S. Paul calls it, making a God of their belly, Phil. 3. 19.
by Sacrificing their Time, their Study, their Estates in order to the filling
and pleasing of it. Any of these ways, it is no Difficulty to understand what
Intemperance is; I wish it were as easy to avoid it.

2. As to Righteousness. Our Savior has given one admirable Rule; which all
Persons agree to be of excellent use in all Contracts and Transactions of men
with one another; v. 31. And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also
to them likewise. Which is an universal Rule of Justice and Equity, if it be
understood of what we would have others to do to us according to Reason, and
not according to the Partial Affection we are apt to have to our selves. For
this Rule is founded upon the second great Commandment, as our Savior calls
it, Thou shall love Matthew. 22. 39.
thy neighbor as thy self.

3. As to Godliness. He lays the Foundation of that upon the first and great
Commandment, Thou shall love Matthew. 22. 37.
the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart and with all thy Soul and with all thy
Strength. We need not to question, but wherever there is such a Love of God,
as is here required, there will be true Godliness in all the parts of it. And
where this is wanting, all external shows of Devotion want the true Life and
Spirit of it. For it is the Love of God which makes all our weak and imperfect
Services to be acceptable to him; and without it all our Prayers and our
Fastings, and all other appearances of Devotion, are empty and infipid
Formalities. Not, but that the Acts themselves are commendable; but, they are
like a Body without a Soul, dull and heavy; or like the leaves of a Tree in
Autumn, which make a great noise in the Wind, but are dry, sapless and soon
fall to the Ground. But where the Love of God prevails, it keeps up the Life
and Order and Vigor of Devotion; and preserves it from being tainted by
hypocrisy, or choked by the love of this World, or decaying from want of
Constancy and Resolution.

Thus I have set before you some of the most remarkable Duties of Christianity;
not such as depend on the Opinions and Fancies of men; but such as our Blessed
Savior, the great Lawgiver of his Church, has made the necessary Conditions
of our Salvation by him.

And what now can we say for our selves? We do call Christ Lord, Lord; or else
we renounce our Baptismal Vow, and all hopes of Salvation by him. But can we
say that we love God, when we love what he hates, viz. Sin? Can we say, we love
him with all our Heart and Soul, when our Hearts are so much divided between
him and the Vanities of this World? Can we say, we love him with all our Might,
when our Love to God is apt to grow cold and remiss upon any apprehension of
Difficulties? Can we say, that we love our Neighbor as our Selves, when we
despise and scorn him, or overreach and defraud him, or oppress and ruin him?
If it go not so far, are we as tender of his Reputation as of our own; as
unwilling to see him injured, as ready to help him in his Necessities, as we
should desire it from others, if we were in the same Circumstances? If strict
Sobriety and Temperance be the Duties of Christians, where are those Virtues to
be generally found? I do not speak of particular Persons; but I am afraid,
there is hardly such a thing left as a Sober Party among us. What profane,
customary Swearing is everywhere to be met with? What Complaints are daily made
of the Abounding of all sorts of Wickedness, even to an open Scorn and
Contempt, not barely of Christianity, but of any kind of Religion? For, many
who have long denied the Power, seem to be grown weary of the very Form of
Godliness; unless it serves some particular End and Design. So that, if we look
abroad in the World, we find little Regard showed to the Precepts of Christ;
and yet those who commit these things call Christ Lord, Lord. What is the
meaning of all this gross Hypocrisy? Nothing would have been thought more
Absurd or Ridiculous, than for one who used no kind of Abstinence, to be
thought a Pythagorean; or one that indulged his Passions a Stoic; or one who
eats Flesh and drinks Wine a Brachman, or Banian. It is really as much for any
one to break the known and particular Precepts of Christ, and yet desire to be
thought a Christian. For, a loose, profane and debauched Christian, is a
Contradiction in Morality; it is to be a Christian against Christ, to call him
Lord, Lord, and yet to defy his Laws and Authority. A Star without Light, a
Guide without Eyes, a Man without Reason, a Sun with nothing but Spots, are not
more absurd Suppositions, than a Christian without any Grace or Virtue.

But let us say what we will, there are and will be such, who will own Christ
and call him Lord, Lord, and yet will not part with their sins for him. There
were multitudes of such formerly who would lay down their Lives for the Ground
he trod on, and yet would not mortify one Sin for his sake. The Reason is
still the same which our Savior mentions, they hope that calling him Lord,
Lord, will make amends for all; and yet it is not possible that fairer warning
should be given to any, than he has given in this Case, that let them pretend
what they will, he will say to them at ^he great Day, Depart from me all ye
workers of Mat. 7. 25. Luke 13. 27.
Iniquity. O dreadful Sentence! Not, to be mentioned without Horror, not to be
thought upon without Astonishment. How miserable, for ever miserable, must
their condition be, whom Christ at that day shall bid to Depart from him! What
is this, some will be apt to say, but to put all Christians into utter Despair?
For, who is there that can say, that he has done all that Christ has said?
Truly we have a sufficient Ground for deep Humility and serious Repentance, and
timely Reformation. But there is a great difference between the Failing of our
Duty and the Works of Iniquity; between the Infirmities of those who sincerely
endeavor to do his Will, and the Presumptuous Sins of those who despise it;
between Sins committed and heartily repented of; and Sins habitually practiced
and continued in, without any Marks of Amendment. Such must go out of this
World in a State of Sin, and therefore can expect nothing but that dreadful
Sentence, which I tremble at the very thoughts of Repeating.

But there are others, who in the sincerity of their Hearts have endeavored to
do his Will; and whose Sincerity will be so far accepted by him, that he will
say to them at that Day, Come ye Ma^^ 25. 34.
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World.

To which God of his infinite Mercy bring us through the Mediation of Christ
Jesus our Lord.

SERMON VIII. Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, March the 13th, 1691/2;.
Romans VIII. 6. For, to be carnally minded is Death; but to be spiritually
minded is Life and Peace.
IN th^se Words is implied a Distribution of Mankind into those who are
carnally and spiritually minded; which Distinction is so large and
comprehensive, as to take in all sorts and conditions of Men; and of so great
Moment and Importance, that their Life or Death, Happiness or Misery depend
upon it. But, considering the Mixture of Good and Evil in Mankind, it is not an
easy matter to set the Bounds of the carnal and spiritual Mind; and
considering the frequent Impunity and Security of bad Men, and the Fears and
Troubles, which the best are not exempted from, it seems next to impossible to
make out (at least as to this Life) that to be carnally minded is Death, but to
be spiritually minded is Life and Peace. Yet, our Apostle does not seem to
confine the Consequences here mentioned to another World, (although the full
Accomplishment of them be only there to be expected;) but if we attend to his
Scope and Design in the End of the foregoing Chapter, and the Beginning of
this, we shall find that even in this Life the result of a carnal Mind is a
sort of a Spiritual Death; and of a Spiritual Mind is Life and Peace: For, when
St. Paul in the 7^h Chapter had represented himself as carnal and sold under
Sin, although there were Romans 7. 14
great strugglings between the Convictions of his Conscience, and the strength
of carnal Inclinations; yet, as long as the latter prevailed so that he could
not do the things that his Mind and Reason told him he ought to do; but did
those things which he was convinced be ought not to have done; The more he
reflected 19, 20.
upon himself, the more sad and miserable he found his Condition to be, as
appears by that Emphatical expression which followed upon it, O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me ^. 24.
from the Body of this Death? But he no sooner finds hopes of Delivery and
Escape out of that Estate, but he breaks forth into Transport of Joy and inward
Satisfaction. Thanks be to God who has 25.
given us the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Not merely a Victory over
Death, but over Sin too: And so he begins this Chapter after a triumphant
manner; There is therefore no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus;
^. 1.
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. For the Lord of the Spirit
of Life which was in Christ Jesus has ^.
made me ^^ee from the Law of Sin and Death: He that groaned under his
Captivity before to the Law of Sin, does now rejoice in his Deliverance from it
by the Grace of the Gospel. For, what could not be done by natural Freedom, by
the Power of the Law and the Force of Reason, is brought to pass by the
Assistance of Divine Grace given to the Souls of Men by Jesus Christ. For what
the Law could not do in that it was weak 3.
through the Flesh: What was that which the Law could not do? It could awaken,
convince, terrify and confound the Consciences of Sinners under the Sense and
Apprehension of their Sins; but it could neither satisfy the Justice of God,
nor the Minds of Men; it could not remove the Guilt, nor take away the Force
and Power of Sin. But God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the Flesh; i. e. Jesus Christ becoming an
expiatory Sacrifice for Sin, took off the damning Power of Sin; and by the
prevailing Efficacy of his Grace subdued the strength and force of it to such a
degree, That the Righteousness of the 4.
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit. How could this be, if St. Paul still considered himself in the same
Condition he did in the foregoing Chapter? For if he were still in Captivity to
the Law of Sin in his Members, how was it possible that the Righteousness of
the Law should be fulfilled in him? How could he walk not after the Flesh but
after the Spirit, if the Good which he would he did not, and the Evil which he
would not that he did? For these things are so repugnant to each other, that
when they are spoken of the same Person, it must be under different
Considerations; the one of him, as merely under the Power of the Law; the
other, as under the Grace and Influence of the Gospel. The one was like rough
and a churlish sort of Physic, which searches into every Part, and puts all
the ill Humors of the Body into Motion, and makes a general Disturbance and
Uneasiness within, but yet lets them remain where they were; the other is like
a gentle but more effecutal Remedy, which carries off the Strength and Power of
inward Corruptions, and alters the Habit and Temper, and puts quite another
Disposition into us, which produces very different Effects upon us. For,
instead of Horror and Despair, and inward Anguish and Confusion, there will
follow a new Life of Joy and Peace here, and Eternal Happiness hereafter.

And this is what the Apostle means in the Words of the Text; To be carnally
minded, etc. Wherein are two things, which very much deserve our Consideration.

I. The different Tempers of Men's Minds; some are carnally and others
spiritually minded.

II. The different Consequences which follow them: To be carnally minded is
Death; but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace.

I. The different Tempers of Men's Minds. The different Denominations are taken
from the Flesh and the Spirit; which are here represented as two Principles so
different from each other, that the same Person cannot be supposed to be acted
by both of them. For, as the Apostle says in the foregoing Words, They that
are after the Flesh do mind the Ver. 5.
things of the Flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the
Spirit. Where the Flesh, in a Moral sense, takes in all our sensual
Inclinations which are sinful either in their Nature or Degree. The Spirit is
that Divine Principle, which possesses the Mind with the Love and Esteem of
Spiritual things, and keeps our natural Inclinations within the Compass of
God's Law. To be carnally minded, is to be under the Influence of carnal
things, so as to make the Pursuit of them our chief Design: To be spiritually
minded is to have so deep and just a Sense of God and his Law upon our Minds,
as to make it our business to please him, and therefore to subdue all such
Inclinations which are repugnant to his Will.

But here lies the main Difficulty; how to judge concerning this matter so, as
to be able to determine whether we our selves be carnally or spiritually
minded. Which is a thing of so great Consequence for us to know, that the Peace
of our Minds, the true Comfort of our Lives, our due Preparation for Death, and
a happy Eternity, do all depend upon. And yet that this is a real Difficulty
will appear from these Considerations.

(1.) It requires a greater Knowledge of our selves (as to our spiritual
Condition) than most Persons in the World can pretend to. For it is not a
slight and superficial View of our selves, not a transient, sudden Reflection,
nor a partial Inquiry into our inward Passions, and the Course of our Actions,
which can make us capable of passing a true Judgment upon the Temper of our
Minds; but there must be a true Light, a serious and diligent Search, frequent
Recollection, free and deliberate Thoughts, long Observation and due Comparison
of our selves with our selves and with the Law of God, before we can form a
just Opinion as to the prevailing Temper and Disposition of our Minds.

It Is true, this is not necessary in all Persons; for some (and I am afraid too
many) are so carnally minded, that the least Reflection or Consideration would
make them see how bad their condition is. For, they have no true Sense of God
or Religion at all; they have no serious thoughts or apprehensions of Divine
and Spiritual things; this World they pretend to know something of, and have
too great an Esteem of the Vanities and Pleasures of it; for these wholly take
up their Hearts and Time; and they have a savor and relish for any thing that
tends to their Greatness or Honor or Entertainment of their Appetites or
Fancies here; bu^ if we speak to them of another World, of God and Heaven and a
Spiritual Disposition of Soul; either they look on us with Amazement, as if
they were insensible of such things; or else with Scorn and Contempt, as if we
went about to deceive them. Alas! They are too wise to be imposed upon by us;
and they have other things to mind (I am sure not greater or weightier) which
take up all their Time; and so what through the Business and the Impertinencies
of this World, their Time passes away as a Table that is told; and as though
it were a pleasant Tale, they are troubled only to think it will be so soon at
an End. But these are not the Persons, who require any such Care to pass a
right Judgment upon them; for they can pretend to nothing that is spiritual, as
to the Tempers and Dispositions of their Minds; and therefore such as these
must be set aside, for it is too apparent that they are only sensual and
carnally minded.

But as the Papists distinguish of the Body of Christ, so may we of the carnal
Mind; there is a gross and Capernaitical Sense; and there is a more refined and
(if I may use the Expression) a more Spiritual Sense of it. For although it be a
great Absurdity in them to suppose that a mere Body can be after the Manner of
a Spirit; yet it is not so to suppose a Carnal Mind to have a Mixture of some
Spiritual Qualities and Dispositions in it. And this makes the difference so
much harder to be perceived between the carnally and spiritually minded; since
there are the same Faculties of Perception, Reasoning, and Application in both;
and the same common Principles of Religion may be owned by both; which may in
Reason be supposed to make some Impression on the Minds of the more ingenuous
Part of Mankind, who are not given over to such a Reprobate Sense as the former
were. Now, how to distinguish between frequent good Impressions on the Mind,
and an habitual Temper and Disposition, is not so easy to all who are
concerned to distinguish them. And yet a Person may be thoroughly convinced of
his Sins, and tremble at the Apprehension of the Justice and Severity of God
against them; he may have many Checks and Reluctancies of Conscience while he
goes on to commit them; he may sigh and groan and lament under the wretchedness
of his Condition by his Love of Sin; and yet may love his Sins all the while
more than God or Heaven, or any thing in Competition with them. The difference
does not lie in the Nature or Number of the Impressions from without, but in
the inward Principle of Action. A Cistern may be full of Water falling down
from Heaven, which may run as long as that holds which fell into it; but a
Spring has it rising up within, and so continues running when the other is
spent. A carnal Mind may have many Spiritual Convictions, and good Motions and
Inclinations; but after a time they wear off and leave no lasting Effect behind
them; but where there is a Spring in the Soul, there is a fresh and continual
Supply of such Inclinations, as keep up a constant Course of a Spiritual Life;
which our Savior calls Rivers of living Water. Joh. 7. 38.


I confess it is hard to determine what a Habit or Principle abiding in our
Minds is; yet the Scripture does evidently suppose such a thing, when it speaks
of the New Birth, and the New Joh. 33. 6.
Life, and the New Creature, and the 1. 13.
Children of God; all which are very insignificant Terms, if there be not under
them something answerable to the First Principles of Life; and if there Romans 8.
8, 9. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 John 3. 9, 10.
be not a Divine Spirit dwelling and acting in the Souls of good Men, and
raising them up above carnal and sensual Objects to things Divine and
Spiritual, and carrying them through the Passage of this World so as to prepare
them for a better. But yet there may be many things which carry some
Resemblance to this Principle within, which come not up to it. There may be
such Principles of Education and good Manners, such Awakenings of Conscience,
such a Strength of Natural Reason and common Ingenuity, as may carry one on to
do some very good things, and yet he may fall short of having a true Principle
of Spiritual Life in him. But then, there must be another Principle within,
which contradicts this, and prevails over it, and carries him on to the Love of
Sin, which proves too strong for the Love of God and the due Regard to
Spiritual things.

The Result of this Discourse is, since the Carnal Mind is not to be taken
merely for such a one which stands out in opposition to the Gospel, nor for
such a one which is insensible of Spiritual things; but such as may consist
with a common Profession of Religion, and have the same Convictions and good
Impressions which others have; it does require a more than ordinary
Acquaintance with our selves to be able to judge aright, whether the Temper of
our Minds be Carnal or Spiritual.

2. But this is not all; for, since there is so great a Mixture of Good and
Evil in the better sort of Mankind, there is required not barely Knowledge of
our selves, but a good Judgment too to adjust the Proportions of Good and Evil
in particular Persons, so as to be able to judge whether we are carnally or
spiritually minded. For, as those who are Carnal, while they follow their
carnal Inclinations, may have many inward Strugglings by spiritual Convictions;
so those who are spiritually minded may meet with many Combats from the Flesh,
which may be troublesome, where it cannot prevail. But there is a great
difference between the Spirit struggling against the Flesh in the carnally
minded, and the Flesh struggling against the Spirit in those who are
spiritually minded. For, where there is no perfect Victory, there will be some
Opposition; and the best have so many Failings to complain of in this World; so
many Infirmities and Defects in their good Actions; so many Passions not
brought into their due Order; so many Omissions of Personal and Relative
Duties; such Variety of Tempers and Weakness of Resolution; such Coldness in
Devotion and unreasonable Dejections of Mind; so many unaccountable Fears, and
such dreadful Apprehensions of Death and the Consequences of it; that these
things must make great Abatements as to such as are truly spiritually minded.

But by all these things the Difficulty still increases, and therefore it is
time to come to the Resolution of it; and that will be by showing that the
Difference between the carnal and spiritual Mind lies in these three Things.

1. In the deliberate Judgment and Choice.

2. In the prevailing Interest.

3. In the constant Rule and Measure of Actions.

1. In the deliberate Judgment and Choice. For the main difference as to the
carnal and spiritual Mind, lies in the different End which is aimed at by them.
Where the chief End is the pleasing our selves, and the enjoying of any thing
as our Happiness under the Supreme Good, whatever Thoughts and Intentions we
may at some times have, to repent of our Sins, and turn our Souls from the Love
of Sin to the Love of God, as long as we continue pursuing a wrong End, we have
too great Reason to conclude our Minds to be yet carnal and sold under sin, For
while the Apostle represents himself so, he tells us he had his Conscience
thoroughly awakened with the Sense of his Sins, even of those which the World
is least apt to be sensible of, inward and secret Sins; he was not only
convinced Romans 7. 7, 8. 9. 12. 14. 22.
of the Excellency and Purity of the Law, but had some Pleasure and
Satisfaction in it; he had some hearty desires to be rid of his beloved Sins;
but yet they were too hard for him, he sighed and lamented under his deplorable
Condition; but till the Grace of God came to set him free, he was in a
miserable and hopeless State.

But how is it, that the Grace of God thus refines and purifies the Minds of
Men, so as of Carnal to make them Spiritual, when the same Passions and
Inclinations remain? A Change there must be, and that real and spiritual, and
therefore in our best Faculties, viz. our Understandings and our Wills; not by
a Revelation of New Objects to the Mind, nor by offering any Force upon the
Will; but by fixing the Judgment of the Mind and the Choice of the Will upon
the best and most desirable Objects, which is God himself, as the Supreme Good.
The Turn of the Soul which makes one spiritually minded, must not be only from
gross and sensual Inclinations, but from every other kind of Good, which stands
in Competition with the Supreme. A truly spiritual Mind is one that is
possessed with the Love of God above all, and that values other things, as they
tend to the Enjoyment of Him. God must be the only Center of his Hopes and
Designs; for in him alone his true Happiness consists: As the Psalmist
expresses it; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Ps. 73. 25.
and there is none upon Earth I desire besides thee. Whatever falls short of
this, may agree to a carnal Mind; but a carnal Mind can never love God as he
ought to be loved; not with a Supreme transcendent Degree of Love, which is
alone proper and suitable to him. All other kind of Love is beneath his
Infinite Goodness and Perfections; and to love him as we do his Creatures, is
to do him the greatest Dishonor, for it levels their Perfections, and supposes
them to deserve the same Degree of Affection from us.

But there may be many spiritual Notions in Men's minds about God and Religion;
about mystical Unions, and the Participations of Divine Love; many seeming
Spiritual Raptures and Ecstasies, and yet there may not be this spiritual Mind.
For the Heats of Enthusiasm may seem to be very Spiritual, but are of another
kind; they are Spiritual, as they are the Effects of a great heating of the
Spirits by the Force of a vehement Imagination; which has been often
accompanied with as vehement an Inclination to sensual Pleasures; which shows
the plain Difference between an exalted Fancy and a spiritual Mind.

A Spiritual Mind is such a one as is not only thoroughly convinced of the
Reality of Spiritual things; but of their Excellency and Desirableness, above
any others that can be offered to our Choice. It sees through all the
glittering Vanities of this World; and soars above the most tempting and
bewitching Follies of Mankind here: It frequently retires from the Noise and
Confusion, the Hurry and Vexation of Worldly Affairs, that it may converse more
freely with invisible Objects; not merely by way of Contemplation, but by
raising the Affections of the Soul toward them, as the things which it has
chosen for its Happiness.

And this makes a wonderful Alteration in the thoughts that these different
Tempers have concerning the same things. I do not deny but those who have
carnal Minds may have some raised and spiritual Thoughts, but they are too cold
and speculative; they may have noble and refined Speculations about the
invisible World; may be fully convinced that the things which are seen, could
not be what they are, were it not for the things which are not seen; and that
the things which are not seen, are of incomparably greater value than those
which are so much more admired, because they are seen. But we must not
conclude, that because Men do really believe Spiritual things, therefore they
are spiritually minded, (for that were to suppose all to be Saints who are not
Atheists;) but there must be such a due Preference in our Minds, of that
Invisible and Eternal State, above all that is accounted great and desirable
here, as gives a just Denomination to one that he is spiritually minded; i. e.
that his Mind and Soul is fixed upon another World as his proper Happiness, and
other things are regarded and valued in subserviency to it.

2. A Spiritual Mind is discerned by the Prevailing Interest. For, as long as
we are made up of Flesh and Spirit, there will and must be a Combat between
them: For the Flesh lusts against Gal. 5. 17.
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary the one
to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would: And yet the same
Apostle soon after adds, They that are 14.
Christ's have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts; the Meaning
is, that, in some particular Instances and less remarkable Cases, the Flesh may
sometimes be too hard for the Spirit; but in all notorious Instances of the
Lusts of the Flesh, which he reckons up; and in the main Issue of all lesser
Combats the Spirit will be too hard for the Flesh in those who are spiritually
minded; as the Flesh will be too hard for the Spirit at last in those who are
carnally minded. If we look on them in the time of the Combat, it will be hard
to judge which is most likely to prevail; but those may have the better in some
particular Skirmishes, who may lose very much in the State of the War; a good
Man may be foiled by Surprise or under some disadvantage, but he will recover
himself, and, it may be, gain Ground by his Falls; and a bad Man may in some
fits of Devotion seem so spiritually minded, that one might be apt to think he
were quite changed, till he returns to his former Practices. If we had been to
judge of Ahab in the time of his Humiliation; and of David in the time of his
Impenitency after his Sins of Adultery and Murder, we should have thought in
common Justice and Charity, the latter had been the carnal, and the former the
spiritual minded Man. But it was quite otherwise; which shows that we are not
to judge of Men's spiritual Condition by sudden and violent Motions whether
good or bad; but by that Interest which prevails with them in the whole Course
of their Lives: To give a general Character of a Man from some violent Passion
against the Tenor of his Life, would be like drawing the Picture of a Man in a
Fit of an Epilepsy, or a convulsive Motion of his Face. And to believe a Man to
be a good Man, because he has some good Moods and passionate Fits of Devotion,
is, as if we should take a piece of rotten Wood for a true Phosphorus, because
it shines sometimes; or suppose Judas to be a Saint, because he was so much in
our Savior's Company. The inward Habits and Dispositions of Men's minds may be
covered over and disguised a great while; but a tempting Occasion lays them
open; as no doubt Judas did not get his Habit of Covetousness of a sudden, but
it was still growing and ripening under a fair Appearance; and when the proper
Season came, the secret Malignity brake forth; and the Temptation of Thirty
Pieces of Silver discovered the Baseness and Hypocrisy of his Heart. Sometimes
the Vein of Hypocrisy lies deep, and is covered over with such a fair
outside, that no one can have Reason to mistrust it, till it discovers it
self, and then the Corruption is found so loathsome, as to render ordinary
Sincerity suspicious. But this is a common Fault, either to be too easily
deceived, or too unreasonably mistrustfull; there is no certainty in a
Deduction from particulars, but where the Causes are equal and necessary. It is
as absurd an Inference that there is no such thing as a spiritul Mind, because
some who have pretended to it have been found Carnal; as that there is no such
thing as common Honesty among Men, because some who have long born the Name of
honest Men have been found great Cheats and Impostors. But when a predominant
Habit does discover it self, the Person must bear that Title and Denomination
which it gives him.

3. A Spiritual Mind is known by the general Conformity of Actions to a Divine
and Spiritual Rule; and so a carnal Mind by following the Bent and Inclinations
of the Flesh. And there lies a great Part of the Difference; for such who lay
no Restraint upon their Natural Inclinations must needs be carnally minded;
because the Flesh, as St. Chrysostom observes, is not taken, by St. Paul,
Chrysostom. in Gal. 5. 17.
merely for the Body, but for the corrupt Part of our selves, as consisting of
Soul and Body. It is observed by Cicero 3. Aug. c. Julian. l. 4. c. 12.
de Rep. That Mankind came into the World in a very ill Condition, with a Body
naked, frail and infirm, with a Mind subject to Troubles, dejected with Fears,
impatient of Labor, prone to Lust; but in the midst of all this, there is a
certain Divine Flame of Wit and Understanding, which lies as it were buried and
overwhelmed; but with great Care and Industry may be so preserved and improved,
as to command our Appetites and governor Passions. But alas! How little does
the Reason of Mankind signify to the greatest Part of them? It helps them to
see their Folly, and like a Sea-light to a sinking Ship in a dark Night, makes
those who are aboard, to behold their Misery, without helping them out of it.
If the Frame of human Nature be considered in it self, and by way of
Speculation, we have no Cause to complain of it; for as God has given us
inferior Faculties suitable to the Constitution of our Bodies, so he has
likewise Superior, which are capable of controlling and covering them. But
when Habit and Custom is joined with a vicious Inclination, how little does
human Reason signify? All the Considerations of Natural Order, and Decency,
and Regularity, and good Example, are easily overborn by the strong
Propensities of a corrupt Inclination; which hurries Men on to satisfy first
their brutal Appetites, and leaves Consideration till afterward. So that
Reason seems by such an After-game, rather given to torment, than to reform
them.

Therefore the wise God has superadded his own Law to enforce that of Reason
by a greater Authority; that Men may think themselves more concerned to take
care of their Actions, when they must give an Account of them to one infinitely
above them. But what can Mankind do in such a wretched Condition? For the Law
of it self is but like a Toil to a wild Beast; the more he struggles, the more
he is entangled; so that he sees his Misery by it, but not his Remedy.

But such is the Goodness and Mercy of God toward Mankind, that he has never
refused to accept those, who have sincerely endeavored to do his Will
according to the Measure of that Assistance which he has given them. Thus we
find Characters of Men in all Ages, who were said to be Righteous before God,
just and upright and perfect Genesis 6. 9. 17. 1. Job 1. 1, 2, 3. Ps. 37. 37.
Men; and yet some of the most eminent of these had remarkable failings, as
Noah, Abraham and Job; yet they had extraordinary Testimonies of God's
approving their Integrity and passing by those Faults which were contrary to
the general Design and Tenor of their Lives.

I confess we meet with two Instances to the contrary in Scripture, which
deserve our Consideration; and those were of extraordinary Persons too, eminent
for their long and faithful Service of God; and yet upon single Faults
committed by them, he was very severe with them. Which may seem to take much
off from this Lenity and Goodness of God toward such who have a general
Sincerity of Mind toward him. But, if we more strictly consider these two
Cases, we shall find there was something very provoking in the Circumstances of
them, which made God so much more displeased with the committing them. For,
they were Sins committed by them, in their public Capacities, and about such
things wherein the Honor of God was more particularly concerned.

The first is the Case of Moses, who was a great Pattern of Wisdom and Meekness
and Faithfulness, for forty Years together, in the Conduct of a very froward
People in the Wilderness; yet at last he happened to fail in some Part of his
Duty, and God was so angry with him, that he would not hear his Deuteronomy. 3. 24, 25.
Prayer for going into Canaan, but he cut him off in the Wilderness at last, as
he did the People for their Unbelief, But what was this Sin of Moses which made
God so highly displeased with him? If we read the Passage as it is related in
the History of the Fact, it is not so easy to find it out. The People murmured
for want of Water, God upon Moses Numb. 20, 2, 3.
his Prayer commands him, to take his Rod, and in the Assembly of the People, 6.
to speak to the Rock and the Water should issue out. Moses assembles the 8.
People, expostulates the matter with them, strikes the Rock twice and the
Waters came. Where is the great Sin of 10.
Moses all this while? Yet, he often repeats it, that God was angry with him
Deuteronomy. 1. 37.
for something done at that time. God himself says, Moses and Aaron rebelled
4. 21.
against him; and that they did not sanctify Number. 27. 14.
him before the People: the Psalmist says, they provoked his Spirit, so Ps.
106. 33.
that he spoke unadvised with his Lips. After all, the Sin of Moses was a
Mixture of Anger and some kind of Infidelity: For, the Psalmist says, he was
highly provoked; and God himself says, Number. 20. 12.
they believed him not, to sanctify him in the Eye of the Children of Israel.
The Fault then seems to lie in this, that they were more concerned for their
own Honor than God's, and did not so clearly attribute the Power of the
Miracle to God, but that the People might think they assumed it to themselves,
as appears by their Words to the People, Hear now, ye Rebels, must we fetch
ver. 10.
you Water out of the Rock? Which Expression does not give God the Glory he
expected from them; and he is so tender in matters of his own Honor, that he
would suffer none to encroach upon it, no not his faithful Servants; but he
made them smart for attempting it.

The other case is that of David's Numbering the People; and he was a Man after
God's own Heart, of great Sincerity and Courage and Constancy in his Service.
Yet of a sudden he took up a Resolution that he would have all the People
numbered, without any apparent Reason for it. And although he was discouraged
from the Attempt by those about him, yet he would be obeyed. And what came of
it? Truly, before the thing was completed he grew very uneasy at what he had
done, for it is said, His heart smote him after that he had numbered the 1 Samuel
24. 9.
People; and David said to the Lord, I have sinned greatly in what I have done.
And yet in the Book of Chronicles it is said, that he finished it not, because
Wrath 1 Chr. 27. 24.
fell for it against Israel. What was the Cause of all this Severity against
David? Was it such an unpardonable Sin for a King to understand the Number of
his People? Suppose it a Failing, yet why should God be so angry for one such
failing in him that had served God so sincerely as David had done? There must
be something extraordinary in this Case; for, God sometimes supposes the People
to be Numbered; Exodus 30. 11. 38. 25. Number. 1. 2. 19. 26. 4. 1 Samuel 11. 8. 2 Samuel 18. 1.
and in some Cases he requires or allows it; why then is he so d^spleased now
at the doing it? The best Account I know of it, is this; It was not a mere
Piece of Vanity and Ostentation in David, (although that be displeasing to
God,) but it was a thing (as designed by him) which was generally looked on as
inconsistent with the Fundamental Promise made to Abraham; and so it is
mentioned in the Chronicles, why the Numbering was not exactly taken, because
the Lord had said He would increase Israel like the Stars of 1 Chr. 27. 23.
the Heavens. Which seems to imply that there was a general Notion received
among the People, that since God promised to increase them beyond Number, no
one ought to go about to take the exact Number of them. For, this must seem to
savor of Infidelity, and a Contempt or Mistrust of God's fundamental Promise.
But however upon such Occasions God might use two of his most faithful
Servants thus, yet we have no Reason to question his Readiness to pardon these
and other their Failings upon a sincere Repentance, and to accept of their
general Care and Endeavor to please him instead of a perfect Obedience.

But I have something farther to offer, for the clearing these two difficult
Cases, viz. that there is a Difference to be observed between the Rule of God's
Proceedings with particular Persons, as to the general Sincerity of their
Actings; and the Measure of God's political Justice as to Persons in public
Capacities. The Reason is, because in the latter Cases, God may justly have a
Regard, not merely to the Actions themselves, but to the Circumstances of the
People they are related to. Thus Moses, mentions it three several times, The
Lord was angry with me for your Deuteronomy. 1. (...) 3. 26.
sakes; and again, the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes and would not hear
me; and the Lord said unto me, Let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this
matter. It seems he was so much concerned as to pray to God, and that
earnestly, that he would give him leave to conduct the People into Canaan: but
God would not grant his Request. But he tells the People that it was for their
sakes that he was denied. Furthermore, the Lord was angry with me for 4. 2^
your sakes, and swear that I should not go over Jordan, etc. So that the Blow
which was given to the Head was for the sake of the whole Body.

And it is remarkable in the Case of David, that before he fell into the Sin of
Numbering the People, The Anger 2 Samuel 24. 1.
of the Lord was kindled against Israel; and he moved David against them to
say, Go Number Israel and Judah. From whence it is evident, that the Sins of a
People may provoke God to let Princes fall into such Sins, which may give just
occasion to God to punish both together. But this is a very different Case from
the Method of God's dealings with particular Persons with regard to their
Integrity, according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. Which is
established on such Foundations, that we need not give way to Despondencies for
the sake of such particular Acts of Severity.

II. I am now to consider the different Consequences of these two, To be
carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace;
which, in short, is, that the Advantage is far greater which comes to Mankind
by one than by the other.

And that will appear by comparing them together,

(1.) As under equal Circumstances.

(2.) As under unequal Circumstances.

1. As under equal Circumstances. And here we have two sorts of Persons to
consider.

1. Those who have Convictions of Conscience going along with a carnal Mind.
Such who look on the Conditions of Men in this World at a Distance, and judge
only by Appearance, would be apt to think that those who do allow themselves
all the Liberties which a carnal Mind does incline them to, have very much the
Advantage of those who are under the Restraints of a spiritual Mind; for they
are bound to severe Rules of Virtue and Mortification, to deny all Ungodliness
and Worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously and godly in this
present World; and these are thought to be very hard things; whereas such who
are not under these Difficulties, seem to lead the most pleasant and easy
Lives, enjoying themselves and being full of Noise and Confidence, and appear
to be all Mi^th and good Humor. But there is another Account to be taken of
these things: If Men could look within and see all the secret Misgivings, the
inward Horrors of Conscience, the Impatience and Dissatisfaction they have,
when they seriously reflect on their evil Courses, it would quite alter their
Apprehensions of these things, and make them conclude with the Roman Orator,
That one Day spent according to the Rules of Virtue were to be preferred Est
autem unus dies ^ine and e^ praeceptis tuis actus peccanti immortalitati
anteserendus. Cic^r. Tusc, Qu. l. 5. c. 3,
before everlasting Debaucheries. And he was no Foo^ no Pedant, no mean and
contemptible Person, who said this, but a Man of Wit and Sense, of Quality and
Experience, who had Opportunities and Means enough to have pursued the most
sensual and voluptuous Course of Li^e; which yet we see out of Judgment and
Choice he despised, and preferred a far shorter Life according to the Rules of
Virtue, before a vicious Immortality. And yet, how short were the
Encouragements to a good Life, and the Dissuasives from Sin among the best of
them, in Comparison of what we all ^now now by the Gospel of Christ? They went
no farther than mere Natural Reason and the common Sense of Mankind carried
them; but we profess to believe the Wrath of God revealed from Heaven against
all unrighteousness Romans 1. 18. 2. 5, 6. 16. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 15. 10, 11.
and ungodliness of Men; and that there will be a great and terrible Day,
wherein Men must receive according to their Works, whether they be Good or Evil.

And will not this dreadful Consideration awaken the drowsy and secure
Sinner, and make him look about him betimes, while there is yet any hopes of
Mercy? Will he not become so wise at least, as to enter into the Consideration
of his Ways, and to look back on the former Course of his Life, to examine and
compare that with the Law of God by which he must be judged? And if we have but
Patience to do this, he will have no farther Patience with himself, for being
guilty of such unspeakable Folly. He will abhor himself for all his sensual
and sinful Delights; which will turn into the greatest Bitterness and Anguish
to his Soul; He will lament his Folly and Wickedness with the deepest Sorrow;
and take up sincere and firm Resolutions to return no more to the Practice of
them And if this be the Result, as it ought to be, of all the distinguishing
sinful Pleasures of a carnal Mind, I leave it to the most impartial Mind to
resolve whether there will be the least Advantage by pursuing them.

2. But we have too great Reason to suppose that Men may harden themselves to
such a Degree of Wickedness, as to be insensible of the Folly of it, and to
mock at those who go about to reprove them for it. Such as these are at ease,
because they have no Sense of their Condition; but so are those in a Lethargy:
Is their Case therefore to be envied; or compared with those in Health although
more sensible of Pain and Danger? Who seem to be better pleased at sometimes,
and transported with their own Imaginations than Men in a Frenzy? And yet no
Man thinks their Condition happier for it. There is a sort of Moral Frenzy
which possesses some part of Mankind, who, are not only extravagant in their
Actions, but assume such a Degree of Confidence in committing them, as though
the wise Men of all Ages had been the only remarkable Fools in it. But it is no
such easy Matter to run down the Principles of Virtue and Religion, they have
stood the Shock of all the Sarcasms and Reproaches of former Times; and there
is still nothing at the Bottom of all the Scorn and Contempt that is cast upon
them, but a carnal and profane Temper of Mind; which may bear them up for a
while, but it will be sure to end in everlasting Confusion; and then they will
find what they were so unwilling to believe, That to be carnally minded is
Death. Not a mere State of Insensibility, but the worst kind of Death; A Death
of perpetual Horror and Torment; A Death without the Power of Dying, and yet
with a perpetual Desire of it; A Death whose Sting can never be taken out; and
whose Terror is said to be as everlasting as the Joys of Heaven. And shall not
the Apprehension of such a Death, as this, so dreadful, so unavoidable, so
insupportable, make the greatest Sinners to tremble, and be confounded at the
Apprehension of it? And, if once such Thoughts break into their Minds, farewell
then to all the imaginary Pleasure and Satisfaction of a carnal Mind; for it
must sink it into the Confusion if not the Despair of Hell.

(2.) But I have hitherto represented the Disadvantages of one side; but are
there not such on the other too? Some are too apt to think a spiritual Mind to
be nothing but a disordered Fancy, and melancholy Imaginations of invisible
things. If this were all, it were so far from being Life and Peace, that there
could be no real Satisfaction about it. But a spiritual Mind is truly the most
desirable thing we a^e capable of in this World. For, it is the best
Improvement of our Minds, which are Spiritual. It is, the purging and refining
them from the Dross and Corruption which debased them. It is, the advancing
them toward the Divine Nature, by a gradual Participation of it. It is, the
raising them above the carnal Delights, and the sollicitous Cares and
perplexing Fears of this World; and fitting them for a perpetual Conversation
with Divine and Spiritual Objects.

And what then can be more agreeable to the best Part of our selves here, than
to have a Mind so disengaged from this World and so fit for a better? So that
we may be content to take a view of the Worst which can be supposed as to
Disadvantage here, which is, that good Men may be under uneequal Circumstances
as to their Condition in this Life; that is, when the regarding another World
more than this, may make their outward Condition mo^e uneasy here, than it
might have been, if they had followed only the Dictates of a carnal Mind.

There are two sorts of Troubles we are to expect in this World, (1.) Such as
we bring upon our selves by our own Acts: (2.) Such as are common to all
Mankind: In both these the spiritual Mind has the Advantage.

(1.) As to such which Men bring upon themselves. Let this be supposed; as it
ought to be, when God pleases among Christians, who are to follow Christ in
taking up his Cross: Is there any thing in this, which overthrows the Advantage
of a spiritual Mind above a carnal? Can a carnal Mind secure Men from Pains and
Diseases, from Losses and Disappointments? Nay does not the Pursuit of carnal
Pleasures bring more Troubles upon Men in this Life, than the Case of
Persecution does upon the best Christians? If the loathsome Diseases, the
reproachful and untimely Deaths, which of all things ought to be most avoided,
by such who believe no Life after this, be compared with the Pains and
Martyrdoms of those who have suffered for their Religion, these will appear to
be far more eligible than the other, because the Mind has far greater
Satisfaction under them, and a certain Expectation of an infinite Reward to
follow upon them. Whereas the other can have no Comfort in looking back on what
they have done, or forward in what they are to expect. For they have destroyed
their own Happiness and hastened that upon themselves which they account their
only Misery.

(2.) As to the common Calamities of Life, which none can prevent or avoid, the
spiritual Mind has very much the Advantage of the carnal; for the one ^ills
them with inward Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, which of all things carry Men
best through the Troubles of Life; being joined with Patience, Humility,
Self-denial, and Submission to the Will of God; which are all the genuine
Effects of a spiritual Mind; but a carnal Mind is froward and impatient,
uneasy to it self and to all about it, and this makes every Pain and Trouble
to be much greater than it would have been; like the Ass in the Fable: Which
lay down in the Water with his Burden of Wool and so made it heavier than
before.

There were two things the philosophical Men of Pleasure sought to comfort
themselves by, under the unavoidable Troubles of Life; which the spiritual Mind
has far greater Advantages than any of them had, as to both of them; and these
are Reflection and Expectation.

(1.) Reflection. When Epicurus was in his last Agonies under the Stone, what a
miserable way was it for him to go about to comfort himself, by reflecting upon
his Atoms and his Maxims, his imaginary Notion of the Happiness Epicurus
Hermacho. V.
of Life consisting in Pleasure, when his Life was so near being ended by
excessive Pain? But a good Man that has sincerely Ciceron. de Finibus, l. 2.
c. 30.
endeavored to serve God in his Generation, and to do all the good he could,
and to promote the Interests of Religion and Virtue in the World, may in the
Midst of many Failings and Infirmities, look back with comfort on the Course of
his former Life, and by the Peace of a good Conscience may enjoy inward
Satisfaction under such Pains and Distempers, which make Life uneasy and Death
more welcome, as it is a Passage to a far better State. And that is the next
thing.

(2.) Expectation. It was a sorrowful Expectation which Epicurus supported
himself with, when he was in the Prospect of Death; which was no more, than
that the subtle Atoms which made up his Soul, would soon be scattered and
dispersed, he knew not where, and then he should be, as if he had never been.
But what Comfort is there in such a Dissolution? Men that have deserved it, may
heartily wish it; but they have deserved something worse, and that they must
expect. For, the just and holy God, will certainly call them to an Account for
all their Vices and Follies; and it is a fearful thing to Heb. 10. 31.
fall into the hands of the living God; and what a miserable Case are those in,
who have nothing to look for but Judgment 27.
and fiery Indignation, which shall consume the Adversaries of God and Religion?

But, O the blessed Hope and joyful Expectation that attends a spiritual Mind!
Especially when it is enlivened and assisted by the powerful Influences of
Divine Grace. For without that, even good Men may be liable to some Dejections
and Fears as to another World, from the Vastness of the Change, the Sense of
their Failings, the Weakness of their Minds, and Mistrust of their own Fitness
for Heaven; but so great is the Goodness and Mercy of God toward them that
sincerely love and fear him, that he always makes their Passage safe, though it
be not so triumphant. And although the Valley of the Shadow of Death may seem
gloomy and uncomfortable at a Distance; yet when God is pleased to conduct his
Servants through it, he makes it a happy Passage into a State of a glorious
Immortality and everlasting Life and Peace. To which God, etc.

SERMON IX. Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, ON
Christmass-Day, 1693.
St. John III. 17. For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the
World; but that the World through him might be saved.
THese words are part of the Gospel written by St. John, wherein he does not
only fill up the History of our Savior with many particular Discourses omitted
by the other Evangelists, but the whole seems to be penned in another Strain
and with some different Purpose and Design. It Is true, that they all agree in
the same general End of Writing which St. John mentions, viz. That we might
believe that Jesus chapter 20. 31.
is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing we might have life through
his Name; but they make use of several Methods, as most agreeable to the
Circumstances of the Time and Place and Occasion of their Writing. St. Matthew
wrote his Gospel for the sake of the Jews; and therefore he begins with the
Genealogy of Jesus Christ from Abraham, and shows that the Prophecies were
accomplished in him, and how he came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it,
and that his Miracles and Doctrine were sufficient to convince them that he was
the promised Messiah. St. Mark wrote only a summary Account of the most
material Passages relating to the Person and Doctrine of Christ for the sake of
the Gentiles. St. Luke takes a larger Compass, and puts things into an exacter
Order of Time, as himself tells chapter 1. 3.
us, and adds many Circumstances relating to the Birth of Christ, and the
general Advantage to Mankind by his coming; that he was to be a Light to 2. 32.
lighten the Gentiles, as well as the Glory of his People Israel. St. John
succeeding the rest, found two great things which gave him occasion of writing
his Gospel;

1. The perverting the Doctrine of Christ by the Ebionites and Cerinthians, who
pretended to give great Honor to Christ as an excellent Person both for Wisdom
and Holiness, but yet so that he was but a mere Man, to whom God, upon his
Baptism, had given extraordinary Gifts and Assistances of his Holy Spirit.

2. The other was, that the Gospel which was designed for the Universal good of
the World met with such cold Reception and Entertainment from it. He was in the
World, and the World was chapter 1. 11.
made by him, and the World knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. 12.


What could be more uneasy to so true a lover of Christ as St. John was, than
that he lived to see his Doctrine perverted, and his Design in so great a
Measure rendered ineffectual? And therefore in the writing of this Gospel.

1. He begins after another manner; and in a very short, significant and lofty
Style, he sets forth his Eternal Being and Godhead. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. And as the Eternal Power
and Godhead were understood by the things that were made, as St. Paul says, so
he adds, that all things were made by him, and without him was Romans ^. 20. ver.
3.
not any thing made that was made. Which is as certain an Argument of the
Divinity of Christ, as there is of the Being of God from the Creation of the
World.

2. As to the other Point; it was indeed a sad and amazing Consideration, that
the wonderful Love of God in sending his Son into the World should have so
little Effect upon the Generality of those to whom he was sent and his Doctrine
preached; but the Apostle contents himself with these two Accounts of it;

1. That it was far from being God's Intention or Design in sending his Son to
make Men's condition worfe and more desperate; For God sent not his Son into
the World to condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved.

2. But it might be presently objected, That if this were God's Intention, the
World would not have received so little Benefit by it, but according to the
Terms of Salvation proposed by the Gospel so few will have advantage by it;
therefore the Evangelist adds, that if Men did perish they must thank
themselves for it; For, this is the Condemnation that light is come into the
World, and Men loved darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil,
v. 19.

So that there are two things which deserve our Consideration.

I. The wonderful Condescension and gracious Intention of God in sending his
Son into the World.

II. The true Reason why so many miscarry, as to their Salvation
notwithstanding; viz. their own Wickedness and Folly.

1. The former of these, is that, which upon this Day we have particular Reason
to take notice of; not in a slight superficial Manner, (as though an Annual
Commemoration of it were all that God expected from us,) but our Minds and
Souls ought to be possessed with a deep and humble Sense of so great, so
undeserved, so astonishing a Condescension of God to Mankind. And the more we
think and consider of it, the more amazing and surprising it must appear to us:
For when the Psalmist thought but of God's Providence toward Mankind, he could
not but break out into that Expression, Lord, what is Man, that thou art
mindful of Psalm. 8. 4.
him, and the Son of Man, that thou so regardest him! What is Man indeed! a
144. 3.
Mass of Vanity and Disorder; weak in his Judgment, wilful in his Passions;
uncertain in his best Resolutions, violent in his worst Inclinations; strangely
bent upon what tends to his Ruin, and hardly brought to understand and pursue
his truest Interest! What is such a Creature as this, that a God infinitely
Wise and Powerful, far above our Thoughts as well as our Services, should
concern himself about the low and trifling Affairs of Mankind! But such is the
Goodness and Condescension of God, that he humbles himself so far, as not only
to behold, but to govern the things that are done upon Earth.

But what is Man that he should visit him! Not with the mere common
Demonstrations of his Kindness, which he affords to other Creatures; but that
when Mankind had so far degenerated and fallen off from God by their Sins, that
they deserved to be for ever cast off and forgotten by him; that then God
should visit him by sending his Son into the World that the World through him
might be saved; this is so far above our Imaginations as well as Deserts, that
it seems to be the most colorable Pretense for Infidelity, that it is too
great a thing for Mankind to believe.

But I am sensible, that in this skeptical and unbelieving Age, there is such a
Humor of caviling against Matters of Revelation, especially this fundamental
Article of it, that it would seem as if we were afraid to look their Objections
in the Face, if we take no notice of them; and on the other side, to insist too
much upon them, were to make them appear much more considerable than they are.
Therefore I shall pass over all the trifling and impertinent Talk of such Men
(which is not whispered in Corners, but I am afraid is become a Matter of too
common and public Discourse) and I shall single out that which seems to have
the greatest Weight in it; viz. Suppose God should have an Intention to offer
Terms of Salvation to Mankind, yet what need was there that the Son of God
should come into the World for that End? Had not God easier Methods of doing it
than by the Incarnation and Crucifixion of his Son? Is it not more credible,
that God should forgive Sins without any Atonement, than that he should send
his Son to be a Sacrifice of Propitiation to himself? Is it not enough for us
to believe all the Principles of Natural Religion to be true; for we own a God,
and Providence, and a Life to come, and Rewards and Punishments of Mankind
according to the Nature of their Actions; but why should our Faith be cramped
by such incredible Mysteries as these, concerning the Son of God's coming into
the World; in such a Manner as the Evangelists describe it: This is so far from
being a kindness to the World, that it makes the Condition of Salvation so much
harder, if we must believe things which seem so impossible to us, and so hard
to be reconciled to the Natural Principles of Reason and Religion.

I shall not dispute it with such Men whether these late Pretenders to Natural
Religion have at the bottom any real Kindness for the Principles of it, or not;
I am willing to hope the best, and that it is a mere Dissatisfaction in them as
to our revealed Religion; and that this pretended Zeal for Natural Religion is
little more than a mere Sham and Disguise to avoid a more odious Imputation.
But let it be as great and real as they pretend, what I at present undertake,
is to make it appear, That none who do embrace the Principles of Natural
Religion can have any Reason to reject the Christian, even as to this Article
of God's sending his Son into the World, which they seem most to stumble at.

I shall not go about to show, how the Christian Religion not only supposes,
but improves, refines, establishes and enforces the most noted and allowed
Principles of Natural Religion, as to the Being of God and Providence; the most
agreeable way of Worship; the Nature and Kinds of Moral Duties, the Rewards and
Punishments of another World, since no one of common Sense can deny that the
Christian Religion is very exact and particular in these things above any other
Institution in the World.

And therefore I cannot, but in passing, take notice, that I do not remember
any one Institution in the World with respect to Religion, except that which we
have by Revelation, which has not some notorious Blunders in it, as to the
Principles of Natural Religion and Virtue; and therefore they have far less
Reason to quarrel with Christianity than any other Religion (if their quarrel
were not really against all, as I fear it is;) Let them look abroad over the
Unchristian World; and they will find such foolish Notions, such vain
Superstitions, such incoherent Fables, such immoral Practices allowed by their
several Religions, as would make a considering Man wonder how the Notion of
Religion could be so debased among Men. Let them look backward upon the
Passages of elder Times, and they shall find either they set up false Gods with
the true, or the false Worship of the true God; or a Worship disagreeable to
the Divine Nature by mean Representations, or uncouth Sacrifices, or impure
Rites; or else there were some horrible Flaws, as to the common Principles of
Morality, as to conjugal Society, or the Rights of Property, or the due Regard
to the Preservation of Mankind; or they give such a pitiful Representation of
the Rewards and Punishments of another Life; as if they had a Mind to have them
looked on as Fables, or despised as unworthy our regarding them above the
present Pleasures of Life. But I dare challenge the most cavilling Sceptick to
find any just Fault with the Duties of Christianity; for the Worship of God
required therein, is pure, holy, spiritual, very agreeable to the Divine Nature
and the common Reason of Mankind. The Moral Precepts of it are clear, weighty
and comprehensive. And those who have delivered them to us, neither commend any
Vice, nor sink the Reputation of any Virtue; they never lessen our Duties to
God, or to one another; all the just Complaint is, that the Precepts are too
strict and severe, too good and too hard for Mankind to practice them. But is
this an Objection against our Religion, or against Mankind? If they think that,
let our Religion require what it will, the generality of the World will still
live and act like Brutes, and go against all Reason and Religion; how can we
help it? But we hope the blame is not to be laid on Reason or Religion, that so
great a part of Mankind are either Fools or Madmen; i. e. either want Sense to
understand their Duty, or are resolved not to practice it. Especially
considering, that the Rewards and Punishments of another Life, are set forth in
the Gospel, with that Clearness, that Force, that Authority, that if any thing
of that Nature would work upon Mankind, these must.

But all these things I pass over, and come to that which I proposed as my
chief Design, which is to prove, That none who truly believe the Principles of
Natural Religion, can have any Reason to reject this fundamental Article of it,
as to God's sending his Son into the World. And that upon two Accounts.

I. That the Principles of Natural Religion make this Design appear very
credible, or fit to be believed by Men of Sense and Understanding.

II. That the Principles on which this fundamental Article of our Revealed
Religion stands, afford sufficient Evidence to prove it true; and therefore
that we are bound to believe it.

As to the former, the Grounds or Principles which I go upon, are these:

I. That the great End of Christ's coming into the World, viz. the Salvation of
Mankind, is most agreeable to the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God. No one
who believes a God, can deny him to be of infinite Wisdom and Goodness; for the
very same Reasons which move Men to believe a God, do convince them that he
must be of infinite Wisdom and Goodness, seeing the strongest Evidences to
prove his Being are from the Instances of them in the World.

These being then supposed, as essential and inseparable Attributes of the
Divine Nature; we are to consider what End with respect to Mankind is most
agreeable to these to carry on; and we must suppose Mankind to be made up of
Soul and Body, which are capable of Pleasures and Sati^faction, both in this
World and another: But our Souls are of an immortal Nature, that will subsist
in Happiness or Misery after this Life, otherwise the Rewards and Punishments
of another World signify nothing; the Question then is (if it can be made a
Question) Whether it be more agreeable to the infinite Goodness and Wisdom of
God to provide for the Well-being of Mankind in such a low and gloomy Region,
as this Earth is, or to advance them into a far better Place, and better
Company, and more Noble and Divine Delights, and those not depending on a
fading, drooping, dying Life, but on the perpetual Enjoyment of a complete
Happiness both of Soul and Body. No one that ever dares to think or consider of
these things, can believe there is any Comparison between them; so that the
Salvation tendered by the Gospel, is the most agreeable End which the Wisdom and
Goodness of God could carry on for the Benefit of Mankind.

But why should Mankind flatter themselves with the Hopes or Expectation of a
Happiness so far above what they can pretend to deserve?

There were some Grounds for such an Objection as this; if we supposed the
Rewards of another Life to come from any other Fountain than the infinite
Goodness of God toward those who sincerely love him and endeavor to please
him; although with many Failings and Imperfections. But this is the only
Hypothesis, which we maintain to be the Christian Doctrine: And what is there
in it, which is repugnant to the Wisdom and Goodness of God? What was it but
infinite Goodness which gave a Being to the World at first, and has preserved
it ever since, and made it so useful and beneficial to Mankind? What is it,
but infinite Goodness that suffers us to live and enjoy so may Comforts of
Life, after so many great and continual Provocations? If we were to argue from
our Deserts, it were impossible for us to justify the wonderful Patience and
Long-suffering of God toward the sinful Race of Mankind; for we are certain,
that they have long since deserved to be cut off from the Face of the Earth? If
we consider the Justice and Holiness of God, whereby he is daily provoked to
punish Offenders, and the Power he has to execute his Justice in a Moment,
without any opposite Power to control or resist him; we have Reason to be
astonished at the wonderful Patience and Forbearance of God, of which we every
day see so large Experience. But this is not all; he does not only suffer them
to live, but often makes their Condition easy and prosperous as to this World,
having Health, Riches and Honor, and the Hopes of their Posterity, enjoying
the same things after them. Now these to such, who do not believe or value
another Life, are the greatest things God can do to their Satisfaction. But if
they can allow so much Goodness in God toward those who continually offend
him; why should they question greater Instances of it toward those that
endeavor to please him? I do not mean as to this World, but as to another
which they value far before it; for if they do not, they have no Reason to
expect any Happiness in it: Why then should it be thought more unreasonable for
God to bestow the Happiness of another Life, on those who esteem and choose it,
than to give the good things of this Life to those who love and admire it? I do
not say, the Wisdom is equal in the Choice; but the Goodness of God is
wonderful in both. And there can be no imaginable Groun^ to suspect, that God
should be really less kind to those who love him best. It is a vain thing to
talk of those being saved by Christ's coming into the World, who do not
heartily love God and keep his Commandments; for the whole Design of the Gospel
is to persuade us to one in order to the other; and therefore it is not a
well-grounded Hope, but a fond Imagination for any to expect Salvation by
Christ on any other Terms. If we then take in the whole Hypothesis or true
Scheme of Christianity together, it is no other than that God sent his Son into
the World, that the World through him might be saved; not by continuing in the
sinful Practices of this World, which St. John calls the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of 1 John 1. 16.
the Eye, and the Pride of Life; but by subduing and mortifying all disorderly
Passions do prepare themselves for a better State. Now, if there be in our
Minds a firm Persuasion of the infinite Goodness of God, of which we are
convinced by mere Natural Reason; why should it be thought hard to believe,
that God should take care of so great and good an End, as the Eternal Salvation
of those who truly love and obey him.

II. The next Principle agreeable to Natural Reason and Religion is, That no
such thing as Salvation or Happiness in a future State can be expected without
the particular Favor of God. For, all who do own Natural Religion, must agree
that the Soul of Man is an immortal thinking Being; and therefore its Happiness
must consist in such a sort of thinking, as carries the greatest Pleasure and
Satisfaction along with it. Let us think with our selves what a Soul separate
from the Body can do, to make it self happy: Here it was entangled, corrupted,
and therefore apt to be deceived by the false Appearances of things, which
glide through the Senses and leave too lasting Impressions on the Mind; and
thereby it comes to mistake Shows for Substance, and mere Colors for
Realities. But this is a Mistake so common and so fatal to Mankind, that very
few are thoroughly undeceived in this World; for one way or other they are apt
to flatter themselves with some pleasing Mistakes and delightful Errors of
Life. But as soon as the Soul is dislodged from this cloudy Mansion in the Body,
all things will then appear, not as by an uncertain Sky light in a dark Room,
but in an open and distinct View, and then it will be impossible to be any
longer deceived by false Representations of things. What then can be conceived
sufficient to entertain and please the Mind? Will it be the Reflection on the
past Pleasures of the Body? No certainly; for those cannot bear a severe
Reflection now; and the very thoughts of them make Men's minds very uneasy;
for the most tempting Pleasures of Sin leave no grateful Relish behind them.
How then should the Mind bear up it self in another State, when its Reflections
must be far more constant and severe? What then? Can the Mind lay it self
asleep, and put it self into a State of unthinking? That were all one, as a
kind of Self-annihilation if it be of a thinking Nature. There is a State of
unthinking in this World, which is too common; when the Mind is as it were
overwhelmed and stifled with Feathers; I mean is so taken up with trifling and
vain Imaginations, as hardly give way to one serious Thought. But this is
impossible in another State; and therefore nothing but what will bear a most
strict and severe Scrutiny can give any Support or Comfort to the Mind then. It
must be true and real good to create any Satisfaction; it must be durable and
lasting to keep it up; it must be complete and perfect to answer all the just
and reasonable Desires of an immortal Soul. And what can this be less than God
himself? And therefore the Christian Religion speaks most agreeably to Natural
Reason, when it still supposes the Happiness of another World to consist in the
Presence and Enjoyment of God. For those must have all that is desirable, who
enjoy the Favor of him who commands all things, and knows how to suit them to
the greatest Advantage to those to whom he designs to show his Favor.

And this Prospect of another State, or of the Salvation of Mankind by Christ s
coming into the World, is that which lets us into another View of all that
relates to the Son of God's coming into the World: For if our Minds be
possessed with great Apprehensions of the Power and Greatness of the World; all
that the Gospel represents as to the manner of God's sending his Son into the
World, his being born of an obscure Virgin, being laid in the common Manger,
being bred up in a private Place, having so mean Followers, meeting with so
cold a Reception from his own People, and at last, being exposed to an
ignominious Death by them, looks very reproachful and contemptible. But on the
other side, if we could raise our Minds to such Idea's of things here, as the
glorious Spirits above have; and see how all things are esteemed by them
according to the Ends and Purposes they are designed for, we should then
perceive how admirably all these things were fitted for his great End; which
was to wean Men's hearts from the Pomp and Vanities of this World and to
prepare them for a better; and we should then have quite another Opinion of
these things: For as there is a certain Greatness, which is above all the
formal Shows and affected Appearances of it, so when a great and noble Design
is to be carried on, the true Measure of Decorum in that Case, is that which is
most serviceable to the principal End. If a great Person had a Design to rescue
some near Relations out of Slavery, he would never go with a splendid Equipage
and a long Train of Attendance, which would but make his Person more gazed at
and his Design less effectual. If he had intended to have rescued them by force
out of Captivity, it had been necessary to have had Power and Strength
proportionable to his Design; but if it were only by Persuasion, then he must
accommodate himself to such Methods as were most likely to prevail.

The great End of the coming of Christ was to deliver the Souls of Men from a
much worse Captivity, viz. of their own sinful Passions and the Devil's
Tyranny by their means; but he did not come in a way of Violence to break open
the Prison-doors and in an instant to knock off their Fetters and bid them be
free; but he makes use of all the gentle and effectual Methods of Persuasion,
not only by his Words but by his own Example; that they might learn by him to
despise this World, who had so little in it, and to prepare for that from
whence he came, where their Happiness should be unconceivable and without End.

III. The third Principle is, That no such particular Favor of God is to be
expected, as long as his Displeasure is so just against Mankind for Sin, and no
effectual Means used to remove it. The truth is, the whole Scheme of the Gospel
turns upon this Point, whether God be really displeased with Mankind for their
Sins, so as to need a Reconciliation: For, if all that the Scripture so often
expresses concerning the Wrath and Displeasure of God against Mankind for Sin,
be only figurative and hyperbolical Expressions, then the whole Design of the
Gospel must be given up as a mere Scheme; for, if God be not really displeased,
there is no need of Reconciliation; if no need of that, then there can be no
need of Christ's coming to reconcile us to God; and if he did not come for that
End, we have no Reason to believe the Scripture, which affirms it over and
over. And I do not think any stronger Argument can be brought to prove a thing,
than that the most emphatical Expressions are so often applied to that purpose,
by such Persons who used all Sincerity and Plainness. So that this matter as to
the Scripture is clear, if any thing can be made so; and if nothing can, I
cannot see how it is possible to have a written Rule of Faith; since all
Writings are capable by Ambiguity of Words and Phrases, by the different Use of
Particles and Transposition of Letters and Syllables, of very different
Interpretations.

But this is not my present Business, which is rather to consider the Natural
Sense and Reason of Mankind as to this matter. We cannot in Reason suppose any
such Passion in an infinitely perfect being, as that which we call Wrath and
Anger in Men. For that is a violent Perturbation arising from Surprise and
Indignation; but there can be no Disorder or Surprise in a Being of infinite
Wisdom. Therefore Wrath in God must suppose two Things.

1. A just Cause of Displeasure given by us.

2. Such a just Displeasure following upon it as will end in the severe
Punishment of Offenders if it be not removed.

Now, whether there be a just Cause of Displeasure or not, must depend upon the
Natural Differences of Good and Evil. And it is impossible that any one who
exercises his Reason, can judge amiss in this Matter. Not, that all the
Differences of Good and Evil are equally clear, for all Propositions in
Mathematics are not so; but it is sufficient to our Purpose, that the general
Principles are so; and the greater Instances; so that no Man can think that he
acts as much according to Reason in one as the other. And, can any one of
common Sense imagine God to be as well pleased with him who blasphemes his
Name, and despises his Service, and hates Religion, as with one that fears and
Honors him, and endeavors to please him? Can he be as well pleased with him,
that assassines his Parents, as with him that obeys them? With him that robs
and defrauds his Neighbor, as with him that relieves him in his Necessities?
With him who subdues his disorderly Passions, as with him that gives way to
them? With him who is cruel, inhuman and persidious, as with him that is
faithful and just and compassionate? These are but some of the Instances of
the Differences of Good and Evil, but they are so plain and notorious, that a
Man must renounce the common Principles of Humanity, who does not own them. And
to say there are no such Differences, because there have been Mistakes and
Disputes about some things accounted Good and Evil, is as absurd, as to say,
there is no Difference between Day and Night, because in the Twilight it is
hard to distinguish them. But if there be such a real Difference in the Nature
of Humane Actions, and God be a strict observer of them, he being a God of
infinite Holiness and Justice, cannot but be offended with Mankind's wilful
Omission of what they know to be good, and Commission of what they know to be
evil.

But here we must distinguish between God's Displeasure against the Actions and
against the Persons who commit them. The former is a necessary Consequent upon
the Evil of Sin, and can never be removed, for God is irreconcilable to Sin.
But those who commit Sin are his Creatures; and therefore capable of Mercy and
Forgiveness. There is always a Desert of Punishment following upon Sin; but
there is no inseparable Connection between the Sin and the Punishment; for the
great and wise Governor of the World acts not by Necessity of Nature in
punishing Sinners, but by the Methods of Wisdom and Justice. And if the saving
of Sinners upon their Repentance can be made agreeable to these, such is the
Mercy and Goodness of God to his Creatures, that there is great Reason to hope
for a Reconciliation. For, although God be displeased, he is not implacable;
although he be justly provoked to punish Sinners, yet there is no absolute
Necessity that he should; nor any irreversible Decree that he will do it; and
therefore notwithstanding this Displeasure of God, there is a way still left
open for Reconciliation which leads to the next.

IV. The fourth Principle is, That if God be thus displeased with the Sins of
Mankind, and yet there is a Possibility of Reconciliation between God and them,
he alone is the most proper and competent Judge, on what Terms this
Reconciliation may be obtained. For being both the offended Party and the
supreme Governor, he has the sole Right on both Accounts of fixing those
Terms and Conditions, upon which he will forgive Sins, and receive the
Offenders into Favor. It is a vain thing for any to argue from one Attribute
of God against another. Some are apt to flatter themselves that God will easily
forgive Sins, because he is merciful, but they ought to consider that he is
just and holy as well as merciful; and there is as much ground to fear that he
will not forgive because he is just; as there can be to hope that he will
because he is merciful. And thus it is impossible for a considering Man to
satisfy his own Mind as to God's forgiving his Sins; unless he be some way
assured from himself that he will do it. And therefore a particular Revelation
in this Case must be made, if God designs to bring Men to Repentance by the
Hopes of Forgiveness. But mere Repentance can never make any satisfaction to
God for the Breach of his Laws. Suppose a Sinner come to himself and is
heartily sorry that he has offended God so many ways, and with such
aggravating Circumstances as he has done; and now resolves in the Anguish of
his Soul never more to return to the Practice of them; This no doubt, is far
more pleasing to God, than going on to offend still; but all this is no more
than a Man in justice to God and to himself is bound to do; for he is bound to
vindicate the Honor of God's Laws, and to condemn himself for his own Folly,
and to return no more to the Practice of it. But what amends is made by all
this, for the infinite Dishonor which has been done to God and his Laws by
the Violation of them? The Courts of Justice among Men take no Notice of the
Malefactor's Repentance; however he be affected, the Law must be observed, and
Offenders punished. How then can any Persons be assured from mere Natural
Reason, that God will not be as tender of the Honor and Justice of his Laws,
as Mankind are allowed to be without any Imputation of Cruelty or Injustice?

If God should be exact in punishing Offenders, who could complain? For who can
plead Not Guilty before his Maker? And when a Man's own Conscience condemns him
that he has deserved Punishment, what Reason can he have from himself not to
expect it? And if he does justly expect to be punished, what reason can he have
to hope for Forgiveness? Since he knows that he deserves to be punished, and
therefore can never deserve to be forgiven. It must be therefore a free Act of
Grace and Mercy in God to forgive even penitent Sinners; and upon what Terms
and in what Manner he will do it depends wholly upon his own Goodwill. He may
forgive Sins if he pleases, and it is agreeable to his Natute to do it, if
Sinners do repent and forsake their Sins; but whether God has actually made
known to us the way of Reconciliation cannot be known by any Principles of
Nature; because it is a Matter of Fact and must have such Proof as a thing of
that Nature is capable of.

II. Having thus showed, how strongly the Principles of Natural Religion do
make way for entertaining this Point of the Christian Doctrine, as to God's
sending his Son into the World in order to our Reconciliation with him and our
Salvation by him; it remains now to show how justly God does require the Belief
of it from us as true; for the next words tells us, That he that believes on
him is not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, v. 18.

This, some may say, is very hard Doctrine; for they believe as much as they
can; and if they can believe no more it is no fault; for no Man can be bound to
believe more than he can. I do not question but Nicodemus (to whom these words
are generally supposed to be spoken by our Savior) thought he had gone a great
way, when he used those words to Christ, v. 2. Rabbi we know that thou art a
Teacher come from God, for no Man can do these Miracles that thou do except
God be with him. i. e. He was willing to believe him some great Prophet whom
God had sent; and this was a fair step for a Ruler among the Jews, who were
generally very unreasonable Unbelievers. But Christ tells him plainly this
would not do; for unless he believed him to be the only begotten Son of God, he
could not be saved. And this is the great Point, That God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have everlasting life, v. 16. Not, as though mere believing this
were sufficient (for this carries a great many other things along with it) but
that since God had sent his only begotten Son into the World upon such a
Message, he did expect that he should be received and entertained as such upon
their utmost Peril.

But can we believe farther than we have Reason to believe? No; God does not
expect it from us, provided that with sincere and impartial Minds we set our
selves to consider and weigh the Evidence and with great Humility beg the
Assistance of Divine Grace, without which God may justly leave us to our
Unbelief.

It would be too large a Subject now to lay open the several Arguments to prove
that it is as evident, as a Matter of Fact can be made to us, that God did send
his Son that the World through him might be saved; Therefore I shall only
mention these two things.

1. That if the Matters of Fact are true concerning the History of Christ's
coming, as related by the Evangelists, there can be no Reason to doubt his
being the Son of God. For he that was the most exact Pattern of Humility and
Self-denial, not only frequently assumes this Title to himself, and his most
intimate Disciples affirm it of him; but God himself gave the most ample and
convincing Testimony to it; by his miraculous Birth; and a Voice from Heaven to
that Purpose at his Baptism; by a long Train and Series of public and useful
Miracles to attest the Truth of his Doctrine; by his Resurrection from the Dead
and Ascension into Heaven, and wonderful Effusion of the Holy Ghost, with the
strange Effects which followed it; so that no one who does believe these things
to be true can have any ground to say that he cannot believe Christ to be the
Son of God.

2. That if these Matters of Fact are not to be believed as true we cannot be
bound to believe any thing but what we see our selves. For the Distance of Time
and Place are equal in this Case; and no other Matters of Fact are so well
attested as these are. And so, as the Apostle says of Christ's Resurrection,
If he be not risen our Faith is vain; so in this Case I say if there be not
Reason to believe these things all Faith is vain. For no other Matters of Fact,
which we should be accounted Fools for not believing, have had such a sort of
Testimony which these have had. For these things were not conveyed by a silent
Tradition for some time till the chief Parties were dead who could either prove
or disprove them; but they were public and exposed to all Manner of
Examination; They were not delivered by one or two, who were trusted with a
Secret, but openly avowed by a great Number of competent Witnesses, who were
present; and none of them could be brought by the greatest Sufferings to deny,
or falsify, or conceal any Part of their Evidence; that when these things had
been thus delivered by those who saw them, who were most remarkable for their
Innocence and Integrity, in the next Ages they were examined and enquired into
by Men of Sagacity and Learning, who upon the strictest Search found no Reason
to suspect their Testimony; and therefore heartily embraced and defended the
Christian Faith. And from thence they have been conveyed down to us; not by an
uncertain Oral Tradition, which can hardly hold the same from one End of the
Town to another; but by unquestionable Writings; of such Authority, that the
Christians would rather die than deliver up their Books. And in these are all
those Circumstances contained, which we are bound to believe as Christians;
among which this is one of the Chief, that God sent his Son into the World for
the Salvation of Mankind.

To sum up all; I desire those who after all this pretend that they are
willing to believe as much as they can, and those who are liable to any
Suggestions of Infidelity, to consider seriously with themselves, whether there
can be a greater and more noble Design, more becoming the Wisdom, Power and
Goodness of God to carry on, than that of rescuing Mankind out of a miserable
State, and putting them into a certain way of Eternal Happiness? Whether such a
Design must not be discovered in some particular Age of the World, with all the
Circumstances relating to it? Whether that Age were not the fittest of all
others, wherein the most remarkable Prophecies were to be accomplished, as to
the Coming of the M^ssias, while the second Temple was standing? Whether the
Difficulties as to humane Testimonies be not equal to all Ages and Things?
Whether because it is possible for all Men to deceive, it be reasonable to
infer that all Men are deceived; and that there is nothing but Illusion and
Imposture in the World; and that all Men lie and deceive for the sake of lying
and deceiving? But if there be a Difference to be made between Men and between
Testimonies; then we are to examine the different Characters of Truth and
Falsehood and give our Assent according to them. And if after the severest
Examination we do not find sufficient Reason to believe that God sent his Son
into the World for the Salvation of Mankind, upon such Testimonies as are given
of it, we must conclude all Mankind to be made up of Fraud and Imposture; and
that there is no such thing as Sincerity and Honesty in the World; or that if
there be, it is not possible for others to discern it. Which are such fatal
Reproaches upon humane Nature, that no one who pretends to any Regard to it can
be guilty of. For if they be Universally true, they must condemn themselves; if
not, we must see some very particular Reason why we should not rather think
them deceived, than fix such an indelible Blot upon the Reputation of Mankind.
And surely it is a great Advantage to the Truth of Religion to find, that it
cannot be overthrown but by such Methods, as equally overturn all Truth and
Certainty, and that the Faith of Christianity stands not only upon the same
Bottom with the common Faith of Mankind. But if we reject such Assurance as is
offered us for the Faith of the Gospel, our Infidelity cannot be the Effect of
Reason and Argument, but of a causeless Suspicion and unreasonable Mistrust of
the best Part of Mankind. Who have most firmly believed the Truth of these
things, and have led the most holy and exemplary Lives in hopes of a Blessed
Immortality. And if the Testimony of any Persons deserves to be taken before
others, it must be of such who could have no Design upon this World, but were
resolved by Faith and Patience to prepare for a better.

To conclude. For us who believe and own the Truth of this great and
fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, we have something else to do than
merely to vindicate and assert it. This at some times is more necessary than at
others; and I heartily wish this were none of them. I am willing to hope the
best of all who in such an Age of Infidelity have the Courage and Zeal to own
the Faith of this Day; viz. That God sent his Son into the World in order to
the making us for ever happy. And I hope none who profess themselves Christians
this Day will ever be discouraged by the Mocks and Flouts of Infidels, so as to
let go the Anchor of their Hope, or mistrust the Foundation of their Faith. It
is as great a Piece of Wisdom to know when to believe, as when not to believe;
and it is as certain an Argument of a weak Mind to be always doubting, as to be
overforward in believing: For the Soil must be very bad that can bear no
Foundation. But withal let us not flatter our selves only that we have a
better Faith than others. For how miserable will our Case be, if we have
nothing but a superficial Faith; and a sort of Anniversary Devotion. We can
never thank God too much for the Blessing of this Day; but God expects
something more from us, than merely the giving him solemn Thanks once a Year
for sending his Son into the World. We must endeavor to answer the End of
God's sending him, i. e. to save us first from our Sins, and then from the
wrath to come. This is the Method which God himself has appointed, not barely
from his own Will and Pleasure, but from the necessary Order and Reason of
Things. For, otherwise a Man might be rewarded for doing amiss, and punished
for performing his Duty. If we therefore ever hope for any Benefit by this
coming of Christ into the World, we must apply our Minds to consider seriously
on what Conditions we may reasonably hope for Salvation by him. Can they think
that Christ came to so little Purpose as to save Men in their Sins? If that
were to be hoped, there had been no need of his coming; but it is a hard Work
indeed to save us from them. The Guilt must be expiated, and the Power subdued;
the former Christ has done; but he expects, and with great Reason, that we
should deny ungodly and worldly Lusts, and work out our own Salvation with Fear
and Trembling.

SERMON X. CONCERNING Sins of Omission, Preached before the King and Queen AT
WHITE HALL, ON March 18th, 1693/4; being Midlent-Sunday.
St. James IV. 17. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not,
to him it is Sin.
ALthough our Apostle in this Epistle calls the Gospel the Law of Liberty, yet
to prevent any Misconstruction thereof, as though it allowed a Liberty ^. 1^.
to sin, we no where find more strict and severe Passages against it, than in
this Epistle, both with respect to Sins of Commission, and Sins of Omission. As
to Sins of Commission, his Expression seems hardly consistent with the Grace of
the Gospel; For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one 2. 10.
Point, he is guilty of all. Has the Law of Moses any thing more apt to
terrify the Consciences of Men, if not to drive them into despair, than this?
It is not, If one breaks the whole Law; then it had been no wonder if he were
guilty of all, even under the Gospel, which does not take away the force of the
Moral Law. But, If he keep the whole Law; and yet offend in one Point; he is
guilty of all. How is this agreeable with the Equity of the Gospel, to make a
Breach of one Part to be a violation of the whole Law? Since he cannot keep the
Law, and break it at the same time; and so far as he did keep it, he could not
be guilty of the Breach of it; but, if he offended but in one Point, he must
keep all the rest. It is not enough to say, that the Chain of the whole is
broken, and the Authority of the Lawgiver contemned; for there is a great
difference between breaking a Chain, and breaking it all to Pieces; there is no
such Contempt in the Breach of one Command, as of all; and he that keeps all
the rest, seems to show more regard to his Authority in keeping the other Parts
of the Law, than Contempt in that wherein he offends. What then is the
Apostle's meaning? It is, that the Gospel does not allow any wilful Breach of
the Law of God in any one kind or sort whatsoever; as appears by the following
words, For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not kill; now if
thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of
the Law. What is before said, that he is guilty of all, is here explained, that
he is a Transgressor of the Law. This cannot therefore be understood of any
sudden Act of Passion and Surprise, nor of any Failings as to the Manner of our
Duties, but of a wilful, deliberate Practice of some one known Sin, although
the Person may be careful to avoid many others; because this is not consistent
with that Integrity of Mind, and that sincere Regard to God and his Laws, which
every good Christian ought to have; and so being guilty of the whole Law, is to
be understood with respect to the Favor of God; which can no more be expected
where there is a wilful persisting in any one known Transgression of the Law
than if he were guilty of all.

As to Sins of Omission; the words of the Text taken in their full Extent, have
a very mortifying Consideration in them. For it is much easier to know to do
good, than to practice it. It is hard for Men under the plain Precepts of the
Gospel, not to know how to do good; but who is there that can say, he does all
the good he knows? We all know, we ought to love God with all our heart and
soul and strength, and our Neighbor as our selves; yet who can pretend to do
it in the utmost latitude and extent of our Duty? So that what St. Paul says
of the Law, is true of the Text, that it concludes all under Sin. Gal. 3. 22.
For, as our Apostle says, in many things ^h. 3. 2.
we offend all. And the more we know, the more we offend, as he tells us in
these words, To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is fin.

What Advantage then have we by the Gospel, since the more we know of our Duty,
the worse our Condition is, if we do not practice it? and we know so much more
to be our Duty than we can hope to practice; that this Expression seems to
leave Mankind in a more deplorable Condition under the Light of the Gospel,
than if we had never heard of it. For, if the Sin be aggravated by knowing our
Duty, and not doing it, it must proportionably be lessened by having no
Opportunities to know it.

Therefore, for the clearing the Sense of the Apostle in these words, and for
the right understanding the just Measures of our Duty, and the due Aggravation
of our Sins, it will be necessary to state and clear the Nature and Extent of
Sins of Omission: Or to show how far this Rule of the Apostle holds, To him
that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin.

To do good here, does not barely imply something that is lawful and
commendable, which it is some way in our Power to do; but that to which we are
under some Obligation, so that it becomes our Duty to do it. Omissio non est
nisi boni debiti ad quod aliquis te^etur, Aqu. 2. 3. 79. 3. and 1. 2. 6. 3.
Reginald. Prox. l. 15. c. 2. n. 10.
For a Sin of Omission must suppose an Obligation; since every Sin must be a
Transgression of the Law. But there are several sorts of things that are good;
and there are different kinds of Obligation; and from hence arises the
Difficulty of stating the Nature of Sins of Omission; which some are too little
sensible of, and some too much.

But it is in it self a Subject of so important a Nature, and so seldom spoken
to, that I shall at this time endeavor to clear it. And in order thereto we
must enquire,

I. Into that Good which we are obliged to do.

II. The Nature of the Obligation we are under to do it.

I. As to the Good which we are obliged to do; that may be considered two ways.

1. With respect to God, and so it implies the Duty we owe, on the Account of
the Relation we stand in to him.

2. With respect to one another; and so it implies not mere Duty but something
beneficial and advantageous to others, which we are in a Capacity to do.

1. Our Duty with respect to God, is either

1. That of our Minds, which lie in internal Acts, which we are bound to
perform toward him.

2. That which consists in external Acts of Duty and Service to him.

1. The Duty which we owe to God in our Minds; which is, not barely to know
him, but frequently to consider and think of him, as our Maker and Benefactor.
It is a strange Incogitancy in Mankind to live, as without God in the World; to
suffer the Cares and Thoughts and Business of this World to justle God out of
our Minds; whom we ought in the first Place to regard. If we could free our
Minds from that Disorder and Confusion they are under by the strong Impressions
of sensible Objects, and the false Idea's of Imagination, they would think of
nothing so freely, so frequently, so delightfully as the Divine Perfections.
For God being the most perfect Mind; other Minds that are created by him, do
naturally tend toward him as their Center, and are uneasy and restless, like
the Needle touched with the Lodestone, till they are fixed toward him. We
meet with too many things which divert and draw them another way; but it is
certainly one of the most necessary Duties lying upon us, to call back our
Thoughts from too busy and eager a Pursuit of Earthly things; and to fix them
in the serious Thoughts of God and another World.

It is the Opinion of Aquinas and the 1. 2. Q. 89. 6. Victor. Rel. 13. Navarr,
Man. c. 11. n. 7. Tolet. Sum. l. 4. c. 9. Azor. T. 1. l. 9. c. 4. Gr. de Val^^
To. 2. Disp. 6. Qu. 19. T^. 3. Dis. 3. Qu. 19.
older Casuists, that as soon as ever any Person is come to the use of his
Reason, he is not only bound to think of God, but to love him as his chief
Good; and that it is the most dangerous Sin of Omission not to do it.

The latter Casuists, who think this Doctrine too severe, as to the first use
of Reason; yet cannot deny it to hold, as soon as any come to the Knowledge of
God; if the want of knowing him be not through their own Fault. As Soon as they
know God, they confess, that they are bound to love him; but are they not bound
to know him as soon as they are capable? What allowance may be made in the Cases
of gross Ignorance, or natural Stupidity we are not concerhed to enquire; but
we now speak of those who have all Advantages and Opportunities of knowing God
betimes; and as to such their Ignorance is so far from being an Excuse, that it
is their Sin. And that can never excuse from a Fault, but when it is no Fault
to be ignorant.

But, Not to know God when Persons know so many other things in the World
besides him, is so much greater a Fault; because all those other things lead
them to the Knowledge of him. So that I take it for granted, that no Man of
Understanding can avoid the Knowledge of God, without shutting his Eye against
the clearest Light; without darkening his Understanding by unreasonable
Prejudices; without Confusion of Thought, and Perplexity of Mind; without
groundless Imaginations, and ridiculous Suppositions; and most commonly not
without very disorderly Passions and vicious Habits, which make the very
Thoughts of God uneasy to his Mind.

But suppose we do own and believe a God, are we bound always to be thinking of
him? Must we spend our time in Contemplation of him, and neglect all our
Affairs here? If not, what are the bounds of our Duty which we may not omit
without Sin?

There are two things which are necessary for us to do with respect to God in
our Minds.

1. To have frequent and serious Thoughts of him; without which it will be
impossile to keep our Minds in that Temper which they ought to be in. For the
Thoughts of God keep up a vigorous Sense of Religion, inflame our Devotion,
calm our Passions, and are the most powerful Check against the Force of
Temptations. And therefore we ought to allow our selves fit Times of Retirement
for Recollection and Consideration; wherein we draw in our Thoughts from the
Business and Impertinencies of this Life (and even these go a great way in that
which looks like Business) that we may converse with God and our own Minds. And
those who do not sometimes withdraw from the Noise and Hurry, the Dust and
Confusion of this World, must be great Strangers both to God and themselves;
and mind any thing rather than their chiefest Interest. But I am afraid there
are too many among us, of whom the Psalmist's words are too true, God is not in
all their thoughts; I Psalm. 10. 4.
wish there were not some who would make good another Reading of those words,
viz. All their thoughts are there is no God. But I think not so much their
deliberate Thoughts, as their Wishes and Desires. But those can never alter the
Nature of things; and therefore the wisest thing they can do, is to make the
Thoughts of God desirable to them; and that can be only by reconciling
themselves to him by a hearty and sincere Repentance.

2. We are always bound to have an habitual Temper and Disposition of Mind
toward God. This is that which is commonly called the Love of God; and is
opposed to the Love of Sin. Which does not consist in sudden and transient Acts
of Complacency and Delight in him; but in a firm Purpose and Resolution of Mind
to obey him. The Jews think that the fundamental Precept of the Law as to the
Love of God Deuteronomy. 6. 5. 10. 12.
with all their heart and soul and strength, goes no farther than that they
should do that which the Law requires as to the Worship and Service of God. But
certainly the Love of God must go deeper, and rise higher, or else it will
never come up to the great Design of Religion; which is, not only to do those
outward Acts of Service which he commands and expects from us; but to bring our
Souls nearer to him, to make him our chief End; and to direct the Course of our
Lives and the Acts of our Obedience in order to it.

Now this is a Duty toward God so necessary to our Happiness, that we must be
always obliged to it, and at all times; although it be an Affirmative Precept.
For the true Reason of the Difference of Obligation is from the Nature of the
Commands, and not from the Manner of Expressing them either Negatively or
Affirmatively. The Reason of the perpetual Obligation of Negative Precepts is,
that it can never be lawful to do what God forbids; but it may be sometimes
lawful to omit what he requires; because the Circumstances may make it not to
be a Duty at that time. But when an Affirmative Precept is of that Nature that
no Circumstances can alter the Obligation of it, then it binds as much as a
Negative. And so it is as to the Command of true Repentance, and turning from
the Love of Sin, to the Love of God; for no Man can be in such Circumstances
wherein he is not bound to do it.

But as to particular Acts of Repentance and of the Love of God, supposing that
habitual Temper, the Obligation of them is according to the proper Seasons and
Occasions of them. When a Sinner is conscious to himself of fresh Acts of Sin,
he is bound to renew his Repentance, and the Omission of it adds to his Guilt;
and when God calls Men to Repentance in a more than ordinary Manner, by strong
Convictions of Conscience; or some awakening Providence; or by some solemn
Times of Fasting; he is guilty of a farther Aggravation of his Sin, if he
neglects those Seasons of performing the proper Acts of Repentance.

But suppose we do know God, and have this habitual Love to him as our chief
End, does this come up to all that Mankind owes to God? Do we know him and love
him and serve him as we ought to do? Do we not fail in the Manner and Degree of
those very Duties which we in some Measure perform? And are not these Failings
Omissions? And will not these Omissions be charged upon us as Sins? How then
can Mankind hope to escape the Wrath of God against those who continue in the
Practice of Sin?

To answer this, we must distinguish between Omission as a Defect and as a
Wilful Sin. We must say, as St. James does, In many things we offend all; and
in all things, I am afraid, we offend James 3. 2.
some way or other; if God would be exact to mark what is done amiss. But here
lies the main Point as to this Matter, how far God will charge those things
upon us as Omissions, which in us come rather from want of Power than of Will
to do them? I do not mean of Natural Faculties, for those we have entire, but
of Moral Power, i. e. of such a Measure of Divine Grace as will enable us to do
things beyond the Imperfection and Infirmity of our present State; which, in
this fallen Condition, is like that of a Man under a Dead-Palsie, who has all
the Parts of a Man, but not the Power of moving them. And where God by his
Grace does recover Mankind to a new Life, yet there are such Remainders of the
former Deadness upon us, as makes us unable to do that which we most desire to
do; and do fail in the Manner of Performance, where we are sincere as to our
Purpose and Design. But will God lay these moral Defects, or Infirmities of our
corrupt Nature on us as wilful Sins now under the Gospel? God forbid. I do not
question God's Right to command us all that which is just in it self, and he
has given us Faculties to do; but I consider him as a gracious Lord toward a
decayed Tenant, of whom, if he be willing to pay what he is able, he will not
exact the uttermost Farthing; As a compassionate Commander to a wounded
Soldier, who is willing to accept what Service he is able to do, although he
fails in many Points of his Duty; As the good Samaritan, which poured in Wine
and Oil into the Wounds which he had not made; and diseharged the Debt which he
had not contracted. If God were not infinitely gracious and merciful, there
were little hopes for us to avoid Punishment; but since he is pleased to deal
with us upon the Terms of a new Covenant, we have reason to hope that he will
not charge Involuntary Neglects and Moral Disabilities upon us, as Sins of
Omission.

2. There are Duties of External Worship and Service owing to God; and how
shall we know when the Omission of these becomes a Sin to us? For these are not
always necessary, and sometimes we may be hindered from them.

To answer this, I lay down these Rules;

I. A constant or habitual Neglect of those Duties which God has appointed for
his Worship and Service, cannot be without a Sin of Omission; because, that
must arise from an evil Temper and Disposition of Mind. When it comes from a
Contempt of God and his Service, it must be a Sin, because the Reason of it is
a very great one. When it comes barely from a careless, indifferent, slothful
Temper, which is glad of any Excuses for the Neglect or Omission of them; it
argues very little Sense of Religion, or Regard to God and his Service, when
they are so ready to find an Excuse for their Fault.

But some are ready to justify themselves in such a Neglect, as though all the
outward Worship of God were mere Ceremony, and only a decent way of
entertaining the People with some outward Pomp and Show of Devotion toward a
Divine Majesty.

I am afraid, such hardly mention a Divine Majesty, but in a Complement;
however, we are willing to believe that they do own such a Being, but they
think it a vain thing to serve him; as though he could be moved by our Prayers
to him, or Praises of him. We do not deny that God is infinitely above all our
Services: But is that a Reason why we should not serve him in the way he
requires it from us? He does not want our Services, but we want his Favor and
Blessings; and can we expect them, when we slight that little Service, in
comparison of the time he allows for other Employments, which he expects from
us? If we had nothing but the Light of Nature to direct us, we should conclude
it very reasonable that Mankind should own their Creator, by some outward, and
public, and stated Ways and Times of Worship. For this is no more than natural
Justice to own our Maker and Benefactor; and can it become less necessary, when
he has declared himself pleased with the Performance of them, and made great
Promises to those who call upon him?

But this, say they, is the greatest Difficulty of all, to understand what
Effect our Prayers can have upon the Eternal Counsels of Heaven; since they are
already fixed and cannot be reversed by our Prayers.

As great as this Difficulty is, the true Point of it is only this; Whether we
are to believe and trust the frequent and repeated Promises of God, although we
are not able to comprehend, how the Efficacy of our Prayers is taken in, as a
necessary Condition toward the Execution of God's Eternal Purposes. For, if
they are Conditions, as the Scripture often tells us; then we may easily
understand what is meant by the Efficacy of Prayers; and as to the manner of
reconciling such contingent Conditions with God's Eternal Purposes; it is a
Difficulty which will afford perpetual Matter of Dispute, but ought no more to
hinder us from plain Duties, than a Man should be from going a necessary
Journey, till he be satisfied whether the Earth moves about the Sun, or the Sun
about the Earth.

II. Whether the Omission of such publ^ck Duties of Divine Worship be a Sin or
not, depends very much on the Reason and Occasion of it. For if it be a wilful
Neglect, it does imply a Degree of Contempt, and that cannot be without Sin.
And that is a wilful Neglect, when nothing but an Act of a Man's own Will
hinders him from serving God in public: I do not mean only at the very time,
but if he has by some former Act of his Will brought an Incapacity upon
himself, that want of Power does not excuse, when the Impotency arises from a
voluntary Act of his own. If it be intended on purpose to hinder, it is as
wilful in its Cause, as if there were no such Impediment. For, although the
actual Impediment be the immediate Cause of the Omission; yet it is the Design
and Purpose which makes it wilful. But if Persons by an Act of Providence
without their own Fault be hindered from the Worship of God as by long Sickness;
no one can say, that this Omission is wilful, and therefore cannot be
accounted a Sin. But if a Person by his Intemperance and Debauchery has
brought himself into an Incapacity of attending on the Service of God; we
cannot say that the actual Omission was wilful; but we may justly say, that
the original Cause was so; and that it cannot excuse the Omission.

II. But besides the Duties which we owe to God, there are such which we owe to
one another, which cannot be omitted without Sin. But here the stating of the
Case seems yet more difficult, since there is not so plain an Authority to
oblige, nor such a Relation to each other, as we stand in to God. And besides
the Circumstances of humane Affairs are oftentimes so intricate and perplexed,
that it is very hard for Persons to know their Duties, and much more to
practice them.

But there are certainly such Duties, which we owe both to the Public and to
one another; and it may be of some Use to us to understand the force of the
Obligation, and what those are which cannot be Omitted without Sin.

1. As to the Public; and concerning that, we may take Notice of two Rules;

1. Those Duties cannot be omitted without Sin, which cannot be omitted without
Prejudice to the public Good. By which I do not mean any fancifull Notions, or
Pretenses to it, but the true and real public Interest of the Nation; which
consists in the Preservation of our Religion and Laws. The main Duty of this
kind, which I shall insist upon, is the laying aside all Heats and Animosities
and Distinctions of Parties, and minding and carrying on that which is the
undoubted common Interest of us all. What is the Meaning of all those
Jealousies and Suspicions which are among us, when we all profess to own the
same Religion, the same Laws, and the same Government?

This is a very melancholy Subject to speak of; for this unseasonable
Difference of Parties among our selves, is like a flaming Meteor in the Air, we
can hardly keep our selves from looking upon it; and yet cannot behold it
without some kind of Terror and Amazement. It is disputed among the Casuists,
whether if a Man sees two Men fighting with each other* he be bound to part
them to his own Hazard; and the general Resolution is, that if he be in a
private Capacity he is not, but in a public he is. I hope the public
Capacity, I appear in here at this time, will excuse my interposing to allay
such Heats and Animosities as are not only of dangerous Consequence, but great
Sins. And therefore, unless I would be guilty of omitting a Duty my self, I
must (and will) lay open the Mischief of such divided Interests as the
Difference of Parties carries along with them.

When God had given Children to Rebekah, while they were yet unborn, and in
their Mother's Womb, she found them struggling within her to such a Degree as
made her in a Consternation to cry out, If it be so, why am I thus? i. e. If
God has given me these Children for Blessings, What is the meaning of this
struggling between them? And it is said, her Concernment was so great, that she
went to enquire of the Lord. Genesis 25. 22.
Some think that Melchisedek was still living at Salem, and that she went to
him, to consult about the Consequence of it; and he was a very proper Person
for it; for he was King of Righteousness and King of Peace. And those are the
best Antidotes against the Strugglings and Animosities of those who have the
same common Interest and Obligations. We need not to consult any Oracle in this
Case; for St. Paul has told us that, if we bite and devour one another; Gal.
5. 15.
not like Canibals, but like different Parties, living in Hatred and Malice and
Animosity to each other; take heed, says he, that ye be not consumed one of
another. As if he had said, Things cannot always continue at this pass, the
inward Fires, if not suppressed, will break out at last, and in Probability end
in your mutual Destruction.

Nothing has more puzzled the Wits of Men in this inquisitive Age, than to
give an Account of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; but a great Man Lord
Bacon Impetus Phil.
of our Nation has told us, that we need not run to the Moon, or other remoter
Causes; for the true Reason of it is nothing else but the clashing of the
Waters of two mighty Seas crossing each other; and therefore, where there are
no such contrary Motions, there is no such Ebbing and Flowing. We have too much
of this Ebbing and Flowing upon Land, both as to our Condition and Expectation.
But whence comes it? Is it not from two Parties among us crossing and striving
to overtop and overpower each other? And till we unite and join in the same
common Current, we have little Cause to hope for a State of Peace and
Tranquillity. Our Savior tells us, a Kingdom divided Mat. 12. 25.
against it self cannot stand. I need not tell you of what Kingdom he speaks;
but it was such a one, where there would be no Subtilty or Diligence wanting in
the several Parties as to carrying on their Designs; but he looks on an united
common Interest so necessary to the Preservation of Government, that he
declares, that no kind of Society can be supported without it. If we then
regard the Interest of our Nation or of our Religion; if we would avoid the
Shame and Reproach of destroying by our Divisions, what we pretended to value
above our Lives; we must lay aside our mutual Jealousies and Suspicions; we
must abate our Heats and Animosities; we must unite and join in the things that
belong to our Peace. But if they be hid from our eyes; then I am afraid what
St. Paul said of the Gospel may be too truly applied to the things of our
Peace; If they be hid, they are hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of
this World has blinded their eyes. For it is too apparent, that the true
Ground of the Contention of the several Parties, is not Matter of Conscience or
Religion, or the common Interest of the Nation, but about Power and Superiority
over each other; which, if it be carried on, in humane Probability can end in
nothing but mutual Destruction. Which God of his Mercy prevent.

II. Men cannot without Sin omit the doing those Duties which their Places do
require from them. For those are intended for a public Benefit.

Those who study to be quiet, and to 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
do their own business, are not only the best Christians, but the best
Instruments of the public Good. Whereas, Men of turbulent, restless and
ambitious Minds, who make abundance of Noise and Clamor, are like Wasps,
always flying and buzzing about, and very angry and peevish and discontented;
but are nothing so useful as the more silent and industrious Bees; which make
the best of every thing, and serve the common Interest by it.

Every Society of Men is a Body made up of Head and Members knit and compacted
together by Joints and Bands; but all have their several Uses and Functions,
and while these are duly performed, the whole is preserved; but if the Feet
should mutiny against the other Parts, because they bear the Burden of the
whole; or the Stomach, that it is loaded and oppressed with what serves for the
Nourishment of all; or the Head, that it must direct and contrive and manage
all; what would the Effect be of such Complaints and Discontents at their own
Share, but that the whole Body must suffer by them. While all the Materials of
a Building are kept in their due Place and Order, the whole is strengthened and
supported; but if they start out of their Places and tumble one upon another,
the whole must fall.

There are always some who love to carry on their own Ends under public
Pretenses; and if those be not attained, they matter not what becomes of all
other Interests, although their own must suffer with the rest. These are like
the Ivy to a flourishing Tree, which seems to embrace it and stick close to it,
but it is for its own Advantage; but at the same time, it weakens it and
hinders its Growth, and if it falls, it must perish together with it.

But there are others, who by the very Duties of their Places are bound to
regard the Public and the Good of others; and when they do it not, they are
certainly guilty of Sins of Omission in a high Degree. For every such Place is
a Trust from God, of which an Account must be given; and a Sacred and Solemn
Obligation goes along with them; so that there can be no Sins of Omission in
such Cases, without Sins of Commission of as high a Nature as Breach of Trust,
and of the most solemn Obligations. The truth is, the World is so humoursome
and fantastical a thing, that it will hardly endure to be made better; so that
those who have the greatest Zeal and Resolution to do good, are extremely
discouraged in it, when they find so many Objections and Difficulties; such
Frowardness and Perverseness in some, such Remisness and Coldness in others,
such an Universal Lassitude and Indifferency, that it is enough to check the
best Inclinations that way, and to make them leave the World to be managed as
it will. And there are some Seasons wherein it is much harder to do good than
in others. Such I mean, when Wickedness and Vice have corrupted the very
Principles of Men's minds; when they account it a Piece of Wit to be profane,
and a higher sort of Breeding to despise Religion and Virtue; when some are
ready to pervert the best Designs, and mix such mean and sinister Ends of their
own with them, and thereby blast them, that they come to nothing; when others
will not endure that good may be done, unless they may have the sole doing of
it, and endeavor to lessen the Reputation of all who are not altogether such
as themselves; When all imaginable Arts are used to make Government
contemptible; and the best Purposes ineffectual; Lastly, when any who are bound
to carry on the public Good, account it Wisdom to do little or nothing in
their Places, and take all possible Care to disoblige no Body by doing their
Duties, for fear of evil Consequences; I say, when such Seasons d^ happen,
there is a very melancholy Prospect of Affairs, and little Hopes of doing or of
seeing Good.

II. I now proceed to the Good which we are to do with respect to others of the
same Nature and in a worse Condition than our selves; and therefore need our
Help and Assistance. This is so remarkable a Sense of doing Good, that it has
almost appropriated the Name to it self; as Good Works are generally taken for
Works of Charity. These are such, as all agree, that they cannot be wholly
omitted without Sin; but the Difficulty lies in stating the Measure and Seasons
of the Obligation to them. Concerning which, these Rules may be observed:

1. That the Measures of Duty in this Case are very different, according to the
different Circumstances and Conditions of Persons. For, although the standing
general Rules of our Duty are fixed and unalterable; yet the particular
Obligations depend upon great ^ariety of Circumstances, as to those who are to
do and to receive Good. If the Easiness of Persons Conditions in the World will
afford their laying by a constant Stock of Charity, it will be always in
readiness for such Occasions, when we would be more willing to do good if it
were in our Power; but it is hardly possible to make such Rules which may not
give Occasions for trouble to scrupulous Minds, when they do not strictly
observe them. But we are all so far bound to do good to those in want, that the
not doing it according to our Abilities and Opportunities, is such a Sin of
Omission as is inconsistent with true Christianity; but of those, every Person
is ^eft to judge; but so, as he must give an Account of it at the Great Day.
For, it is observable, that our Savior speaking of the Proceedings then,
particularly mentions the Sins of Omission with Matt. 25. 42.
respect to the doing good to others.

2. There are particular Seasons, when a greater Measure of doing good is
required than at others: i. e. When Persons suffer for Religion and a good
Conscience; When the Necessities of People are more general and pressing; When
great Objects of Charity are certainly known to our selves and concealed from
others; When a present Relief puts them into a way of doing good for
themselves; When God has done good to us after a more remarkable Manner than
he has to others; When we do the more Good, because we have done so much Evil;
and thereby manifest the Sincerity of our Repentance, by bringing forth such
Fruits worthy of Amendment of Life; When our Calling and Profession is to do
good; and we are bound to give the best Examples to others according to our
Abilities: When our Religion suffers by not doing good, and our Faith is
questioned for want of good Works; Lastly, When there are no such Natural
Drains of Charity, as Children and near Relations which need our Assistance; in
these and many other Instances of a like Nature, there is so much greater
Obligation to the doing good, that it cannot be omitted without Sin.

II. I now come in the last Place, to consider the Nature of the Obligation we
lie under to do the Good we know. And the Reason of considering this, is from
the Comparison of several Duties with one another; for we may be bound to
several things at the same time, but we cannot perform them together; and the
Difficulty then is to understand, which of these Duties we may omit without Sin.

And the Comparison may be threefold;

1. As to the Nature of the Duties.

2. As to the Authority which enjoins them.

3. As to the particular Obligation we are under to do them.

1. As to the Nature of our Duties. For there are several kinds of things that
are good; and we are to have a different Regard to them. Some things are good
because they are commanded; and some things are commanded, because they are
good; and even God himself allows us to make a Difference between these, when
himself says, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; although Hos. 6. 6.
he required both; but if it happens that both cannot be done, then he prefers
the former, although his own Honor seems more concerned in the latter. Our
Savior extends this Rule to Mercy on the Souls of Men; and to Mercy on our
Bodies, even out of the Matt. 9. 13.
Case of urgent or extreme Necessity, which cannot be pleaded in the Apostle's
Case of plucking the Ears of Corn 12. 7.
on the Sabbath day. But from hence we have ground to infer, that when two
Duties interfere with one another, we are bound to prefer the greater and more
substantial Duty, and then the Omission of the lesser is no Sin.

2. As to the Authority which requires them. There is no question, but when the
Authority of God and Man do contradict each other, God is to be obeyed rather
than Man. But the Authority of God's Command is not equally clear in all Cases;
for some things are required plainly and directly, and some things by
consequence and parity of Reason; some things are declared and enforced by the
Gospel, others left to our own Deductions and Inferences; some things are made
positive Commands for all Ages, others are reported by way of Example, but that
Example understood by the Church to have the force of a Command; now, in all
these and other like Cases, we ought to have the greatest regard to plain,
positive, moral and perpetual Commands; but withal, to have a due regard to
consequential and useful Duties, especially where the Church of God has
always so understood them, which is the best Interpreter of such doubtful
Cases, where the Sense of it is truly delivered to us.

3. As to the Obligation we are under; and that is threefold. 1. That of
Nature, which is, to act according to Reason; and none can question that, but
those who question, whether there be any such Principle as Reason in Mankind;
and whosoever do so, have Reason to begin at home. 2. Of Christianity, which
supposes and enforces that of Nature, and superadds many other Duties which we
are bound to perform as Christians. 3. Of our several Relations, and particular
Employments. As to the former, we are under great Obligations from God and
Nature and Christianity, to do the Duties which belong to us in them. As to the
latter, they commonly require a stricter Obligation by Oath, to do those things
which otherwise we are not bound to do. But being entered into it by a
voluntary Act of our own, we cannot omit such Duties without Sin, but where the
Circumstances of things do supersede the Obligation.

Thus I have gone through, as clearly and distinctly as I could, the most
useful Cases relating to Sins of Omission; it remains now, that I make some
Application to our selves.

When we reflect on our Lives and Actions, our Sins of Commission are apt to
terrify our Consciences, and make us very apprehensive of the Wrath of God;
but how few are any ways concerned for their Sins of Omission, viz. For not
discharging the Duties of their Places, for not doing the Good they might and
ought to have done, for not serving God with Diligence and exemplary Devotion,
for not having their Minds so fixed and intent upon him as they ought to have
on their Creator and Preserver and Redeemer? In a very corrupt Age not to be
remarkable for doing Evil is a kind of Saintship; but how few are remarkable
for doing Good? And yet that is one of the best Characters of Saintship. How
much time is squandred away in Vanity and Folly? And yet, how is that grudged
which is spent in the Worship of God? O what a burden it is to serve God, and
spend any time in Devotion! How many Excuses and Pretenses of Business will
such make rather than attend upon religious Duties, which themselves would
judge very frivolous in other Matters! And will God and Conscience be satisfied
with such unequal Dealing, such notorious Partiality? Let us deal faithfully
and sincerely with our selves; Are we as ready to serve God as to serve our
Lusts and Pleasures? Have we the same regard to his Worship that we have to any
thing we really love and esteem?

If not, there must be something very much amiss in the Temper and Disposition
of the Mind; and we are highly concerned to look into it. I do not speak now of
casual and accidental Omissions of some particular Duties at some times; but of
a general Unconcernedness about Matters of Religion, as though they were either
too high in the Speculation, or too mean and low in the Practice of them; or at
least, that it is no great Matter one way or other, whether they mind them or
not. This, I am afraid, is too much the Temper of the Age we live in; which
seems to be sinking into a strange Indifferency about Religion. It is possible
for Persons to have a Zeal against some corrupt Opinions and Practices in
Religion; and yet to have no true Zeal or Concernment for Religion it self. For
they may so much hate being imposed upon by false Pretenders, that carry on an
Interest and Faction, under the Show of Religion, as from thence to suspect all
Religion to be nothing else; which is as unreasonable, as for a Man to
conclude, that all Merchants and Jewellers are Cheats, and that there are no
such things (nor can be) as true Diamonds in the World, because he has fallen
into the hands of such as would have cheated him with those which were
counterfeit. And it is common with such who design to deceive, that what they
want in Sincerity, they make up with Confidence. This is a good Argument for
caution and looking about us; but it is none at all for our indifferency about
Matters of Religion. For it is not here, as in Jewels, which are fine things to
look upon; but the Happiness of Life does not depend upon them. But would any
one let alone things necessary to the Support of Life, because Poison may be
put into them? We may take care to prevent it; but we must have the Necessaries
of Life; and it would be great Folly to die for want of Sustenance, for fear of
being poisoned.

If we have no true Love to God and Religion, we must perish; for there is no
hopes of Salvation without it. And if we go on in a careless Indifferency about
God and his Service; If we do not do our Endeavors for suppressing Wickedness
and Vice; if we do not mind Religion our selves, nor are encouraging it in
others, it will show that we have not that Love of God and Religion which we
ought to have.

Therefore, if we regard the Honor of God, our own Salvation; the Duties of
our Places, the Interest of the Nation, and the Satisfaction of all that are
wise and good, we must shake off all this Coldness and Indifferency about
Religion, and apply our selves heartily and sincerely to promote the great Ends
of it; which are, to make Persons good in this World, and happy in another.

Which God of his Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON XI. Preached at WHITE HALL: Before the Princess of Denmark, February
the 11th. 1686/7;.
St. Matthew. XXVI. 41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation; the
Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.
THESE words were spoken by our Savior, to his Disciples, at a critical time,
when they were just entering into Temptation, but they were very little
apprehensive of it, and of their Inability to withstand it. Like Jonas, they
were fallen asleep when the Storm was gathering about them, and did not imagine
they were so near being cast into a rough and tempestuous Sea. It was but a
little before, Ver. 26. that Christ had entertained them at the proper Banquet
of the Messiah, (which the Jews speak so much of) but not such a one as they
fansied, made up of the greatest Delicacies and Varieties of Meats and Drinks;
but at a Supper of his own appointing, where ordinary Bread and Wine were made
use of to set forth the most unvaluable Kindness, which was ever manifested to
the world, in his now approaching Agonies, and suffering on the Cross for the
Expiation of the Sins of it.

One would have thought, the very mention of the shedding of his Blood, Ver.
28. should have startled and amazed, and confounded the Spirits of his few,
weak, and concerned Disciples, who placed all their Happiness and Comfort in
the Presence and Safety of their beloved Lord. Especially, when he took his
solemn leave of them after this Supper, in that admirable Discourse related by
S. John, which he concludes Chapter 14. 15, 16.
with that most Divine Prayer, Chap. 17. But all this made no great Impression
upon them at that time; not through any natural dullness or stupidity; but they
were so possessed with an Opinion of his Power and Wisdom to free himself from
Danger and Suffering, and they had seen so many Experiments of it, that they
could not believe it till they saw him actually betrayed and carried away. For
when he told them, as they were going up to Jerusalem, that he should be
betrayed, condemned, mocked and Luke 18. 31, 32.
scourged and crucified; the Evangelist says, They understood none of these
things; Ver. 34.
i. e. they took all that relates to the greatness of his Sufferings, and his
Departure from them, to be some deep Mystery and Allegory, which their
Capacities could not comprehend, and that because of his Figurative and
Parabolical way of speaking; as when he said, He would not henceforth drink of
Matthew. 26. 29.
the fruit of the Vine, until he drank it new with them in the Kingdom of
Heaven. They could not tell; but the shedding his Blood might be as Figurative
an Expression as this was.

Our Savior perceiving them to be still so secure and inapprehensive, after
the usual Hymn at the end of the Passover, he takes them out to accompany him
to a Garden near the Mount of Olives, whither as S. John says, He often
resorted with his Disciples. As Joh. 18. 2.
they were going along our Savior tells them more plainly, that very night
such a wonderful Alteration would happen among them, that they who now seemed
to value him above all the World, and to rejoice in nothing but his Presence,
would shamefully forsake him and disown him, All ye shall be offended Ver. 31.
because of me this night; S. Peter had so little mistrust of himself, that he
boldly answered, Though all men should be offended Ver. 33.
because of thee, yet will I never be offended. Our Savior pitied him for his
Weakness and Presumption; and withal tells him, though he thought so well of
himself then, he would fall the first and the foulest of any; Jesus said unto
him, Verily I say unto thee, that Ver. 34.
this night before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. Yet such was S.
Peter's Confidence of himself by reason of his present warmth and resolution,
that he Replies, with great assurance, Though I Ver. 35.
should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. It was bravely said, and no
doubt at that time he meant as he spoke. But this Resolution was not peculiar
to him; for the rest of the Disciples expressed the same. Likewise also said
all the Disciples. Never did Persons seem better resolved than these; there was
no Hypocrisy, or False-heatedness, no Artifice or Design in all this; they
verily believed themselves, and did not in the least question, but they could
as readily die for Christ at that time, as they could live with him. But our
Blessed Lord was more sensible of their Weakness, than they were themselves; he
knew what a sudden change his Apprehension and Arraignment would cause in their
Minds; how their Passions would be too strong for their Resolutions; and they
who so lately had declared they would die with Christ, could not have the heart
to stand by him: Therefore, although his own Sufferings came on very fast upon
him, and seized first upon his Mind, when he said, My Soul is exceeding
sorrowful Ver. 38.
even unto death; and prayed in that passionate manner to be delivered, when he
fell on his Face and said, O my Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass 39.
from me, etc. yet he was so concerned for his poor Disciples that were so
little apprehensive of their Danger that they were fallen asleep in the Garden;
that in the midst of his own Agonies 40.
he rouzes them up, and gently awakes them, for their unseasonable Drousiness,
What, could ye not watch with me one hour? and immediately subjoyns this short
Exhortation,

Watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation. From which words, we may
consider,

(1.) The Insufficiency of mere present Resolutions without Watchfulness and
Prayer.

(2.) The Reason of that Insufficiency from the weakness of the Flesh, joined
with the weakness of the Spirit.

(3.) The necessity arising from hence of Watchfulness and Prayer.

But before I come to these Particulars, it will be necessary to give some
account of what is meant by entering into Temptation here; which implies one of
these two things: Either,

(1.) That they might be kept from extraordinary Trials, which seems to be
meant in the Lords Prayer, when we say, lead us not into Temptation. For to
Tempt in general is no more than to Try; and a state of Temptation is a state
of Trial; to pray therefore that we may not be put into a state of Temptation,
is to pray our selves out of this World, which was designed by Almighty God for
a state of Trial in order to another World. Therefore when we pray not to be
led into Temptation, the meaning is, that God by his wise Providence would keep
us from such Trials, which according to the ordinary measures of Grace we
should hardly be able to withstand. For, although it be possible for those to
whom God gives extraordinary Assistance, not only to resist the Temptation but
to triumph over it, and to shake off Temptations as St. Paul did the Viper from
his hand; on which account St. James says to such Heroic Christians, My
brethren count it all joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations. Jam. 1. 2
And, Blessed is the Man which endures 12.
Temptation, etc. Yet, considering the frailty of humane Nature, and that God
is not obliged to give extraordinary Assistance in difficult Cases, it is a
Wise and becoming Petition for us to our heavenly Father, that he would not
lead us in this manner into Temptation, or as our Savior here expresses it, To
pray that we enter not into Temptation.

(2.) But because our Savior very well knew that his Disciples were so
suddenly to enter into Temptation in the former Sense; and because it is not
fit for us to set Bounds to Gods infinite Wisdom with respect to our Condition,
therefore there is a farther meaning in this Expression, viz. That if it seems
fitting to him who has the Power and Right to dispose of us, to single us out
for great Temptations, or more than ordinary Trials of our Constancy or
Resolution, that then he would give such supplies of his Grace and Holy Spirit
as may enable us to withstand the force of the Temptation, so, as we be not
overcome by it.

And these two take in the whole sense of this Expression, That ye enter not
into Temptation. We are allowed to pray to be kept out of it; but we are bound
to pray and to watch too, least we fall by the Power of Temptation, which is
then done when the Motives proper to this World prevail over those which relate
to another. The Motives of another world are those of a future and eternal
Happiness; the Motives of this World are those of present Pleasure, Honor and
Riches; and when these come to be inconsistent with our Duty, or apt to draw us
from it, they are said to be Temptations to us. For no Sin of it self is a
Temptation, but something else to be enjoyed by the Commission of Sin; or which
cannot be enjoyed without it. As in the Case here mentioned by our Savior of
St. Peter's denying his Master, there was no Temptation in the Sin it self; for
what was there in an Act so mean, so shameful, so ungrateful to tempt him to
commit it, but it was the desire of his present Safety, and the fear of running
into the same Danger, in which he saw his Lord, which was the Temptation to
him. The Sins of Luxury and Intemperance, that of Riot and Drunkenness, of
Chambring and Wantonness, Romans 13. 1^.
are not Temptations in themselves; but the sensual Pleasure which accompanies
them, though it be forbidden, is apt to draw the Lovers of it from the strict
Rules of Sobriety and Chastity. It is the love of this World, i. e. of the
Riches and Honors of it, which make the sins of Ambition and Covetousness so
plausible and prevailing among those who profess to believe another world.
Their Souls are like a piece of Iron between two Load-stones of an unequal
magnitude and distance; the one is far greater, and has more force in it self
to attract, but it is placed at a far greater distance; the other is much less
but very near, and therefore may more powerfully draw, than that which is more
forcible but farther off. I do not think, that all those who commit Sin by the
Power of Temptation are presently Infidels and dis-believe another world; but,
although they do believe the Happiness of another Life, yet it is at a
distance, it is out of their view and beyond their apprehension; and therefore
does not work so effectually, as present, visible, sensible Delights do; which
have all the advantage of suitableness to our present State, of Familiarity,
Nearness, and Insinuation. It is the great Excellency and Usefulness of Faith,
that by it we not only believe the things of another world, but that it makes
things future to be to us, as if they were present, and things invisible to
have such an influence, as if they were visible; and therefore, the Apostle
calls it, The substance of things hoped for, and Heb. 11. 1.
the evidence of things not seen. Invisible things must have a real Being,
before they can be believed; and there must be evidence to the Mind before
there can be true Faith; how then can Faith be the Substance and Evidence of
things future and possible. I answer, That (...) does not merely signify a
real Being in opposition to Fancies and Chimera's; but a firm, solid and
permanent Being; therefore things which are passing, even as Time and Motion,
are said to be (...) things that had no Consistence or Hypostasis; and being
applied to the Mind, it signifies a firm and unshaken Confidence, an inward
With respect to another world.
satisfaction of the Truth of Divine Revelation, an assured Expectation of what
God has promised; and from hence arises that influence which Faith has on the
Minds of Men, in resisting the Temptations of this World. Therefore the two
great Principles which govern Mankind, are Faith and Sense; while they are
acted by the former, they are said to resist Temptation; when they are swayed
by Sense as it is opposed to Faith, and includes in it the Motives of this
World, then they are said to give way to Temptation, or to be overcome by it.
And so I come to consider,

(1.) The Insufficiency of present Resolution, to keep us from the Power of
Temptation without Watchfulness and Prayer. It is hard to imagine a greater
Instance of a firm present Resolution, than there was in St. Peter and the rest
of the Apostles; nor a sadder example of the Insufficiency of it; which ought
to make us hear and fear, and not be too presumptuous.

Resolution is certainly one of the best means in the World to withstand
Temptations to sin, for it has these Advantages,

(1.) It keeps the Mind steady and fixed, and therefore prepared to resist a
Temptation when it comes. Whereas an irresolved Mind leaves a Man open to the
first Assault. It is like disputing in a Garrison who shall Command, when the
Enemy is at the Gates. A fixed and settled Mind in Religion is of mighty
consequence against all Temptations; for then every thing is in order for
resisting when Reason governs the Mind, and the Mind determines the Will, and
the Will stands bent and resolved upon that, which upon due Consideration
appears to conduce most to our eternal Happiness.

(2.) It takes off the false Colors and Appearances of things; for every thing
may be represented plausibly to an irresolute Mind. Temptations to Sin would
never be called so, if there were not something tempting in them; and whatever
is tempting must have a free appearance in one respect or other; and while a
Person is irresolved, he suffers all the force of Temptation to come upon him.
But a resolved Mind keeps it at a distance, and so breaks the Power of it;
whereas he who lets go his Resolution and treats with a Temptation, is like one
who plays with a Tarantula and is bitten before he is aware of it.

But there are two sorts of Resolutions.

(1.) Some that are sudden and made in a heat and passion; without due
Consideration and weighing of things; and such as these are of no great force
or continuance. And it is often seen that the same heat which caused the
Resolution to be made proves the occasion of breaking it, when it is carried
another way. The inconstancy of their Temper makes them resolve, hoping thereby
to bind up themselves the faster, but Nature and Temptations soon grow too hard
for such Resolutions, which are made only by a sudden Passion.

(2.) There are others which are made about Matters of plain Duty, and against
known Temptations to Sin; after a due sense of our own Folly and Weakness, and
a firm Purpose never more to return to the practice of Sin. And these are Wise
and Pious, as well as serious and deliberate Resolutions; such no doubt the
Disciples of Christ had, when they left all and followed Christ; besides this
sudden Resolution they took up, that they would rather die with Christ than
deny him. Yet taking altogether our Savior tells them, They ought to watch and
pray that they enter not into Temptation; and he gives the Reason for it in the
following words, The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

(2.) In which words he gives an account of the reason of the Inconstancy, and
Insufficiency of good Resolutions, viz. that although the Spirit be willing,
yet there is something we carry about us, which weakens our best Resolutions,
and betrays us into Temptations; our Flesh is weak which being so near us, as
to be a part of our selves, makes our Case more dangerous, and enforces the
necessity of Watchfulness and Prayer.

But here arises one of the most useful, necessary and important Cases that
relates to practical Christianity; which I shall first set down in its full
Force, and then endeavor to clear it.

The Case is this; how far, and in what Circumstances the weakness of the Flesh
does lessen the guilt of Sin, which is committed by it?

If it be not an Extenuation of the Sin, why does our Savior mention it in
such a manner? And if it be, then these Inconveniences follow;

(1.) It seems to abate the necessity of our Care and Watchfulness, if the Sin
be lessened through the weakness of the Flesh, which is unavoidable in this
imperfect State.

(2.) It seems to be a fair Plea and Excuse for the greatest part of the Sins
of Mankind. For,

(1.) The Original inclination to Sin in Mankind, comes from the weakness of
the Flesh; the very frame of humane Nature being such as exposes them to
continual Temptations. There is a natural Combat between the Flesh and the
Spirit; for the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, as the Apostle speaks; and
all Mankind find it too true: Now Gal. 5. 17.
wherever the Flesh is, there are Inclinations agreeable to it, and these being
contrary to the Dictates of the Mind, all the Sins of the Flesh will appear to
come from the weakness of the Flesh.

(2.) The frequent Commission of the same Sins will be laid upon the weakness
of the Flesh. For the generality of Mankind do not sin out of defiance to God
or his Laws, or with an obstinate Resolution to sin; for, they know their Duty,
and wish they could perform it; but alas! The Flesh is too hard for the Spirit
in them. They have many Convictions in their Minds, many good Purposes, and
serious Resolutions at some times; and if they do sin it is not with their
whole Wills, for they have great strugglings and checks of Conscience within,
even while they commit those Sins. And therefore what can their continuing in
sin be so properly attributed to, as to the weakness of the Flesh.

(3.) Relapses into the same sin after Repentance, seems to proceed from the
weakness of the Flesh. For he that has once smarted severely for his Sins, and
suffered under the Agonies of Conscience for them; he that has gone so far, as
not merely to lament his Folly, and to abhor his Wickedness, but to make solemn
Vows and Promises, and Resolutions never more to return to the Practice of
them; it is hard to conceive, that such a one should fall into his Sins again
with his whole Mind and Soul; for the Light of Conscience when it is once
thoroughly kindled, is not easily put out; it is a secret Fire which burns
inward, and can hardly be extinguished; and all those who sin against
Conscience, the Dictates of their Minds are right while they commit their Sins;
and therefore even these Sins seem to be excused by the weakness of the Flesh.

But on the other side, the Scripture is plain and express, that Sins which do
come from the Flesh, do exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven. The works of the
Flesh are manifest, says St. Paul, Gal. 5. 19, 20.
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, etc. Drunkenness,
Revelling and such like, which are properly Sins of the Flesh. Of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit 21.
the Kingdom of God. And in another place, For this ye know, that no
Whoremonger, Ephesians. 5. 5.
nor unclean Person, nor Covetous Man, who is an Idolater has any Inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words;
for because of these things comet^ 6.
the wrath of God on the Children of Disobedience. Would God be so severe,
under the Dispensation of his Mercy to punish Mankind, with utter exclusion
from Heaven, and eternal Misery for Sins, which came merely from the weakness
of the Flesh? Then indeed there were just cause to bewail the sad Condition of
Humanity, born under one Law to another bound, created Sick, commanded to be
Sound. But God will vindicate his Justice at the great Day, and Mankind shall
be fully satisfied, that none shall be damned for the mere weakness of the
Flesh, but for the Sins of their Will and Choice; That, as they had evil
Inclinations from the Flesh, so they had good Inclinations from the Grace of
God; and the Law of their Minds, ought to have governed and kept under the Law
of their Members; that others by the same Assistance which was offered to them,
have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Gal. 5. 24.
Lusts thereof; That the Grace of God does enable them to deny ungodliness and
Tit. 2. 12.
worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World; That, if Men do fail of the Grace of God, it is through their own fault;
that Heb. 12. 15.
those who relapse into sin after Repentance, and escaping the pollutions of 2
Pet. 2. 20.
the World, Their latter end is worse than the beginning; and in short, If Men
Romans 8. ^3.
do live after the Flesh they shall die, but if through the Spirit they do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, they shall live. All which shows, That there is
so great a Possibility of fubduing the Inclinations of the Flesh, that if Men
neglect it, and give way to the fulfilling of them, this very thing will be
imputed to them, as a wilful and damning Sin.

But here the Difficulty still rises; for Christ supposes that his own
Disciples even the most forward, and the best resolved might fall through the
infirmity of the Flesh, and they did so, upon no great Temptation; as appears
by St. Peter's denying his Master in so dreadful a manner, upon so slight a
Provocation as the Damsels saying to him, Thou also wast w^^h Jesus of Galilee.
Matt. 26. 69.
What a mean, low and timorous Spirit had possessed St. Peter at that time? Was
this he, who but a few hours before said, That though he should die with him,
he would not deny him? Lord? what is Man? Verily, in his best Estate he is
altogether Vanity. What? St. Peter deny his Lord, who made that Confession of
him which Christ owned was not revealed to him by Flesh and Blood, but by his
Father in Heaven, viz. That he was the Christ the Son of the living God? St.
Peter? who when other Matt. 16. 16, 17.
Disciples went back, said to Christ, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have Joh.
6. 68, 69.
the words of eternal Life. And we believe and are sure, that thou art the
Christ the Son of the living God. St. Peter, who was so forward to defend our
Savior, That he drew his Sword and cut of Malchus his Ear! For him in so
little 18. 10.
a time after to deny his Lord, not only once but twice, nay a third time, and
that with Execrations upon himself! This seems to be a Sin so wilful, Matt. 26.
74.
so deliberate, so presumptuous, that if this may be excused through the
weakness of the Flesh, what may not? What then shall we say? Does God put such
a difference between Persons, that those Sins are mere Infirmities in his
account in some, which would be accounted presumptuous Sins in others? No
certainly, God is a righteous Judge; and he is no respecter of Persons, for by
him Actions are weighed; he judges things as they are here, and will judge Men
according to them hereafter.

Was it, that he repented presently, Ver. 7^. ^
and wept bitterly? This was a very good Symptom, when he came t^ himself so
soon, that the Disease was not deeply rooted in him; and that it was rather a
sudden Passion which overcame him, than a deliberate and wilful Action; which
he showed most effectually by returning to his Duty, and being more active and
exemplary in it. Whereas Judas his Agonies of Conscience, ended in Despair and
Self-murder.

But by what certain Rules may we proceed to judge what Sins are Wilful and
Presumptuous, and what are Sins of Infirmity, or such as come from the weakness
of the Flesh.

We have two ways to judge by,

(1.) From the Nature of Moral Actions.

(2.) From the Scriptures, declaring what Sins are inconsistent with the State
of Salvation. For there are two sorts of Infirmities.

(1.) Such as belong to particular Actions.

(2.) Such as belong to our State and Condition.

(1.) As to the Infirmities of particular Actions.

There are three things which do very much alter and discriminate the Nature of
Moral Actions.

(1.) The Choice and Consent of the Will.

(2.) The Truce and Deliberation about it.

(3.) The Manner of Committing it.

(1.) As to the Choice and Consent of the Will. Here we are to observe two
Rules,

(1.) Whatever lessens the Freedom of the Will before the Act of sin does
lessen the Guilt of it. So that, whether it be ignorance or want of
Consideration, or some sudden and violent Passion, as much as it abates the
Freedom of Choice or Consent of the Will, so much it takes away from the
greatness of its Guilt. But here we must suppose, that which takes away the
Freedom of the Will, not to be in it self a sin; for then original Corruption
would be an excuse for all other Sins which flow from it. And those who have
sinned themselves into a necessity of sinning, would be able to sin no longer;
and thus the Devils themselves, and the worst of Men would be the least of
Sinners. But setting this aside, the Rule holds good, that so far as our Choice
and Consent is taken away, so far the Guilt is extenuated. And from hence
sudden and violent Passions, Melancholy vapors, and a disturbed Imagination do
lessen the guilt of those Sins which are committed through the Power of them; and
would not have been committed if the Person had been himself; i. e. capable of
judging and considering as at other times.

(2.) The Case is much harder, as to what takes off from the Freedom of Consent
in the very Act of Sin. It is true there is not a Fullness of Consent, where
there is a Reluctance of Conscience in the Commission of sin: But here is an
antecedent Choice, and that after Convictions of Conscience, and the worst part
prevails, only the other is not quite silent, but gives secret Checks, and
complains of its hard usage when it cannot overcome. Now in this Case a Sinner
is awakened, and if he sins it is against clear Light and strong Convictions,
and so the Act of Sin is the more aggravated; though there may be more hopes,
that the Person may repent, because Conscience is awake in him; as there is of
one that is sensible of his Disease, rather than of him who does not apprehend
the danger he is in. Aristotle declares, That all those who are vicious against
their Judgments are in a ^th. l. 7. c. 78.
State of Infirmity; such are not wicked out of Choice, as the rest are; nor so
good, as to overcome their bad Inclinations; but they are in a State of War
with themselves; sometimes Reason and Conscience prevail, and sometimes vicious
Inclinations; and in this Case, the event of the War must declare which is the
most prevailing side. But in the mean time, the Case of such Persons is not
desperate but very dangerous; and their Sins only show that Conscience is alive
in them but very weak, and gives faint and dying Groans though it be not dead.

(2.) As to time and deliberation about the Act of Sin. If there be a real
surprise, i. e. that the Person is not aware, or has not time to consider what
he is to do, he that has a Mind well resolved, may be betrayed into what he
would never have done, if he had time to deliberate about it. And, this was one
great Extenuation of St. Peter's Fall; for, from the time of Christ's
Arraignment he was in a disturbance, and confusion of thoughts; he was
surprised to see Christ carried away in such a manner to the Highpriests Hall;
thither he follows afar off; but still remembering whose Servants Ear he had
lately cut off. While he was in this confusion and disorder, the Damsels
Question so startled and affrighted him, that he denied his Master; and the
Fear continuing he repeated that Denial, and added Imprecations to it. But the
great Aggravation of the sin of Judas was, that it was not only a deliberate
Act and designed Wickedness. And in this respect, David's Adultery had greater
Extenuation than his Murder; because many more thoughts went to the Commission
of one than of the other; the one being committed of a sudden, the other after
great Deliberation, and with much Art and Contrivance. Thus deliberate Acts of
Fraud and Injustice, of Perjury and Rebellion, have a greater Aggravation than
Sins committed by the force of a sudden and violent Passion. And those Passions
which do most hinder Deliberation, do proportionably lessen the wilfulness of
the Sin; as sudden Fear, rash Anger and the like. For, Fear betrays the
succors which Reason offers; and Anger intercepts them; which storms at the
first Assault, and making its impression before Reason takes the Alarm. The
Philosopher determines, that it is a worse thing for a Man to be swayed by his
Lust than Ethic. 1. 6. c. 8.
by his Anger; because Anger seems to be governed by Reason, but is only too
hasty in its Execution; but Lust has no regard to the Dictates of Reason: and
there is less of time and Deliberation, and Contrivance in the one than in the
other. But when Anger goes inward instead of breaking forth, when it gets to
the Heart, it then degenerates into Malice and Revenge, and then it has the
greatest Aggravations going along with it.

(3.) As to the manner of Committing. If it be committed Presumptuously, it is
so much the more aggravated. And that consists in these things;

(1.) The lowest degree of Presumption is, when a Sin is committed of set
Purpose; not only with Deliberation but with Contrivance, Design and
Resolution. Thus by the Law a Man was said to kill his Neighbor
Presumptuously, when he lay in wait to do it. Exodus 21. 14.
Thus the Psalmist opposes presumptuous Sins, to those which are committed
through Ignorance or Inadvertency. And where there is a Will bent and set Psalm.
19. 12, 13.
to commit Sin, there must be an inward and secret Contempt of God and his
Laws; as Nehemiah expresses the presumptuous sinning of their Forefathers, Neh.
9. 16, 17.
They dealt proudly and hardened their Necks, and hearkend not to the
Commandments, and refused to obey. So that where there is obstinacy and wilful
Continuance in Sin, there Men are said to sin Presumptuously.

If it be done with open Contempt and Defiance to God and his Law. This the
Scripture calls sinning with a high Hand; and such who do, are said Numb. 15.
30.
to reproach the Lord, and to despise the word of the Lord. This, says
Maimonides, More Nevoc. p. 3. c. 41.
is beyond sinning out of Inclination, or from the Power of evil Habits or
Custom; but it is with a malicious Design, to bring the Law of God into
Contempt and Dishonor. And this in respect of the Gospel, is the sinning
wilfully, which the Author to the Heb. 10. 26.
Hebrews speaks of: whereby they tread under foot the Son of God, and count the
Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace:
Which implies a malicious Design to reproach the Gospel.

(2.) As to Infirmities, with respect to our present State; the meaning is,
what those failings are, which are consistent with a State of Grace and
Salvation now under the Gospel? To resolve this, we have but one certain Rule,
that is, whatever failings are consistent with the Terms of Salvation, are
allowed for Infirmities by the Gospel: And so Infirmities are opposed to such
Sins, as put those who commit them out of the State of Grace and Salvation. If
God were so strict under the Covenant of Grace, as to require perfect and
unsinning Obedience, there could be no allowance for Infirmities, because even
those are a breach of the Law of God, and a Deviation from a perfect Rule: And
if God should be exact to mark all Irregularities; or whatever is done amiss,
Psalm. 130. 3.
who can stand before his Tribunal? The best Men in the world have reason to
pray with the Psalmist, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy
143. 2.
sight shall no Man living be justified. For if God were so severe to make no
Abatements for Failings and Imperfections, it were impossible for Mankind to be
saved. But what then does the Gospel mean with all its Promises of Salvation,
and the hopes it gives of eternal Life? If Christ's own Disciples were in a
State of Salvation, there must be an allowance made for Infirmities and
Imperfections, which we find them often charged with in the History of our
Savior. What meant their vain and eager Disputes about Superiority and
Pre-eminence, and that at the most unseasonable time when they were at Table
with him, just before his Suffering. Lord? what a time was this, for them to
contend, who should be accounted Luke 2^. 2^.
the greatest! What meant that passionate Zeal in James and John, to call for
Fire from Heaven to consume the Luke 95. 4.
Samaritans, when they knew it was not a particular dis-respect to our Savior,
which made them so rude, but the common Quarrel between the Samaritans and the
Jews? How many Errors and Mistakes were they liable to, even while our Savior
taught them, and those about very weighty Points, as the Nature of his Kingdom,
the necessity of his Death and Resurrection? What Fears and Dejections, and
disorders were they all under upon our Savior's apprehension, though but a
little before they had all resolved to die with him, rather than forsake him?

What was there now under all these Infirmities, which made these Disciples to
be in a State of Salvation? Nothing certainly, but their hearty and sincere
Love to Christ, which they manifested before by their constant adhering to him;
and afterward by continuing to serve him. So that our Rule in this Case is,
That whatever is consistent with the Love of Christ, and with a sincere and
constant endeavor to do his Will, will be allowed for Infirmities under the
Gospel; i. e. for such Irregularities which are consistent with a State of
Salvation.

To make this Rule more useful, we must consider,

1. What Failings are not consistent with it.

2. What sort of Failings are consistent.

(1.) What Failings are not consistent. And those are of three kinds.

(1.) Such as come from an habitual Carelessness; or a general Neglect of our
Duty, with respect to God and another World. When Persons do not regard what
Duties they omit, or what Sins they Practice, it is impossible they. should
have any true Love to God, or to their own Souls. For the first thing which
springs from thence is a Care to please God, without which there is no
Salvation.

But there are too many in the world, who regard no more than how to live
easily and pleasantly in it, a fair Estate and Reputation, and therefore avoid
great and scandalous Sins, and the gross Neglect of God's public Worship; but
never mind inward and secret Sins, such as evil Habits, the violence of
Passions, the vanity of their Minds; being carried away with the pleasing
Temptations of a deceitful World, without serious considering, or looking into
their own Temper and Disposition; which may be very vain and sensual, and
therefore unfit for Heaven, though they be not remarkable for Profaneness, or
any gross Impiety: But the Gospel requires a spiritual Temper, and Disposition
of Soul to qualify Persons for Heaven; and where ever that is, there will be a
constant Care to avoid being overcome by the Temptations of an alluring and
sinful World.

(2.) The habitual Practice of any known Sins, such I mean as the Scripture
says, Those who commit them shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And as to
these, St. James his Rule is, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one Point he is guilty of all. Jam. 2. 10.


This seems to be very severe Doctrine now under the Covenant of Mercy; but we
are to consider, that by one Point he does not mean any one Act of sin; for he
says afterward, That in Jam. 2.
many things we offend all; but he means any one sort, or kind of known Sins.
It was a common Doctrine among the Jews, that if a Person were remarkable for
keeping any one Precept of the Law, especially such as respected God and his
Worship, that would make amends for all the rest; and this was the true Reason,
why the Pharisees made long Prayers, and yet devoured Widows Luke 20. 47.
Houses; for they thought the Duties of the first Table would excuse the
neglect of the other. But S. James says, If a Man keep all the rest of the
Law, and yet allows himself in the wilful breach of any one Point, that implies
such a Contempt of the Lawgiver, as renders him as obnoxious to Divine Justice,
as if he had broken the whole. But here, a great difference is to be made
between a single Act committed through the Power of Temptation, against a
contrary habit of Virtue, and the habitual Practice of known Sins. It is
possible for a sober Man to be surprised into an Act of Intemperance, and to be
overcome by the strength of Wine; but see the difference between such a one,
and one that has a habit of Intemperance. The one goes on in his Course, and
has lost the very Sense of his Sin, and the Power of resisting it, and by
degrees thinks he cannot live without it; the other looks with Indignation upon
himself for his Folly; he repents presently, and resolves to avoid all
occasions of being guilty of the like Folly. And the same holds as to other
Sins; if Persons do love God and their Souls, and be overcome with Temptations,
they presently repent with great Sincerity, and return no more to the Practice
of it.

(3.) All Acts of known Sins presumptuously committed, are inconsistent with a
constant and sincere Endeavor to please God. Where there is true Friendship
among Men, it is not presently broke by every Neglect, or sudden Heat and
Passion; but if a Man sets himself with Study and Deliberation to affront
another, that is a reasonable Cause to break off any Pretense of Friendship,
because such an Action was not consistent with the love of a Friend; so it is
with notorious Sins committed wilfully and deliberately, notwithstanding all
the Motions to the contrary from God's Honor, and Justice and Sovereignty; and
from the Commands and Threatenings of the Gospel; these are inconsistent with
being in a State of Friendship with God, which is all one with a State of
Salvation. Not, that all who commit them, must immediately or necessarily be
damned for them; but though hereby they renounce any Title to Friendship with
God, and all their hopes, as long as they continue in such a State without true
and hearty Repentance, are vain and groundless. And to entertain such hopes
notwithstanding such sins, is properly the Sin of Presumption: which is
Confidence of another Favor without any Reason for it.

(2.) By these, we may now easily understand what those Failings are, which the
Gospel allows for Infirmities; viz. such which are unavoidable by us in this
imperfect State, notwithstanding a constant and sincere Endeavor to please God
by doing his Will, God knows our frame and remembers that we are but dust.
Psalm. 103. 14.
Not mere Dust, for then, it were to no purpose to take Care to save our Souls;
but a Mixture and Composition of dull, heavy, lumpish, Matter, and a sprightly,
vigorous, active Soul, which grows uneasy by being fettred and clogged, and
distracted in its best and freest Motions by it. The Soul can hardly raise it
self above this Region of Darkness and Temptation, and attempt a Flight toward
the State of Serenity, and Happiness above, but it is pulled down by that
weight which hangs upon it, and diverted by the various and restless
Impertinency of wandering Imaginations. The most watchful Mind cannot prevent
all the disorders of a roving Fancy in the midst of our more serious Devotions.
If we set our selves to fix our Minds upon the best Objects, and to prevent any
wandering thoughts, the Success seldom answers our Design, and our thoughts are
gone before we are aware of it. Our Minds are like a Ship tossed upon the
rolling Waves; but although we cannot hinder their unequal Motion, we may steer
their Course to the Port we aim at. But beside the Extravagancies of
Imagination, our Desires are hard to be kept within their due Bounds; there are
many Failings in our best Duties great Coldness and Lukewarmness at least in
our Devotions, and yet too great Proneness to think well of our selves for
them, though God knows our Omissions and Neglects are so many, and those we do
perform are so mean, and slight, that we have more cause to pray to God to
forgive, than to hope he will accept our mean Performances. But yet I do not
say our best Actions are Sins; for there is a real difference between Actions
imperfectly good, and morally evil; in these, the Substance is bad, but in the
other, the Acts themselves are good, but only lessened by the manner of doing
them. And to these Failings in our best Actions, we must add the great
unevenness in our Tempers; the Inconstancy of our Resolutions; the uneasiness
of our Minds, under the Troubles of Life arising from want of due Resignation,
and Submission to the Will of God; the many secret lurking Passions within us,
which are called the Motions to sin; and S. James styles, The lust which
conceives and brings forth sin; and St. Paul, Jam. 1. 1^. Romans 7. 23.
The Law in our Members warring against the Law in our Minds, which may give a
great deal of disturbance where it cannot prevail. It is a sad thing to read
the Complaints of such Persons, as Greg. Nazian deCal. vit. Bar. A. 389. n. 13.
St. Gregory Nazianzen, and St. Jerome about the inward Motions to sin, after an
Age spent in Mortifications; and when their Bodies were withered with Age, and
broken with Diseases and hard Usage. But there is a greater Instance than these
of St. Paul himself, who after all his Perils by Land and by Sea, after all his
Watchfulness and Fastings, and Prayers, yet he was forced to keep under his
Body, and to bring it in Subjection; lest that by any means, says he' 1 Cor.
9. 17.
when I have preached to others, I my self become a castaway. But still there
is a great difference between pursuing the things of the Spirit, with the
Reluctance of the Flesh, and pursuing the things of the Flesh, with the
reluctance of the Spirit; the former shows only the Motions of the Flesh, which
being subdued are but Infirmities; but the latter do not cease to be wilful
Sins, though there be inward struggling in the Commission of them; and the
prevailing Party ought to give the Denomination Romans 8. 5.
to the Person, whether carnal or spiritual. For, They that are after the Flesh
do mind the things of the Flesh, but they that are after the Spirit, do mind
the things of the Spirit. And according to the great Design and Tenor of our
Lives and Actions will be our Character in this World, and recompense in
another. Nothing now remains, but to conclude with recommending to you the
Duties of Watch^ulness and Prayer.

(1.) Watchfulness; which is a constant Care of our selves and Actions. We walk
as it were upon Precipices, and therefore had need to look to our standing,
when we see Persons falling on every side. There is no force indeed in our
Case, because we are in a State of Trial; but we live in the midst of Snares
and Temptations, and Sins which do so easily beset us, that we cannot walk one
step in our way without Danger; and therefore there is continual Reason for
Watchfulness. But that is not enough: For,

(2.) We must add Prayer to our Watchfulness. Otherwise, our Presumption of our
own strength may make us fall, God will have us owe our standing to his
Assistance, which he has promised to give upon our earnest Prayer to him for
it. No Duty more proper for us in this State of Temptation; no Duty more
effectual for obtaining suitable Supplies for our present Necessities; where a
Man falls by Temptation, Matt. 7. 7, 8, 21, 22. Mark 11. 24. Joh. 16. 24. Jam.
5. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 12. 1 John 3. 2^, 5. 14. Jam. 1. 12.
St. Chrysostom says, it is because he knew not how to Pray. For Prayer, when
duly performed, not only diverts, and raises and composes the Mind, and so
breaks the force of a present Temptation; but when a close Siege is laid, it
keeps the Passage open for Supplies from Heaven, and brings down those Supports
which may enable us so to endure Temptation, that when we are tried we may
receive the Crown of Life, which God has promised to them that love him.

SERMON XII. Preached at HAMPTON COURT: Before the King and Queen. August the
7th. 1689.
Acts XXVI. 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the Dead?
THESE words are part of the Excellent Defense, which S. Paul made for himself
before King Agrippa, and the Roman Governor for embracing the Christian
Religion. And if it were so desirable a thing to have heard S. Paul Preach, (as
one of the Fathers of the Church thought it, when he paralleled it with seeing
Christ in the Flesh) it was especially at that time, when before so great an
Audience, and upon so Solemn an occasion, he was to give an account of himself
touching all the things, whereof he was accused of the Jews, Ver. 2. There had
been a long and implacable Hatred both in the Rulers, and People of the Jews
against him, above any other Apostle, having had greater advantages of
Education among them, and being more remarkably zealous for preaching up that
Doctrine, which himself had furiously opposed, and that upon a Principle of
Conscience, as he says, Ver. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to
do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. And such a
Conscientious Persecutor would not do that which he accounted the work of the
Lord, negligently, as he shows Ver. 10, 11. But that the same Person should on
a sudden quit all his Hopes and Expectations among the Jews; and not only
betake himself to a Sect so much hated and despised, as that of Christianity
was; but, to be so active in all places for the promoting it, was a thing which
did both surprise and enrage them. Insomuch, that when he came up to Jerusalem,
a popular Tumult was soon raised against him, which had like 21. 27, 30.
to have cost him his Life, if the Roman Officers, had not rescued him from
their Fury. But after he had made several Defenses of himself, to the People,
22. 1. 23. 1.
to the Council, to the Roman Governor, and found their Rage and Malice 24. 1.
against him to continue still, when Festus would have sent him to Jerusalem
25. 9, 10.
to be tried, He appeals to Coesar; and during this Appeal, when Agrippa came
to visit Festus, hearing of this remarkable Cause, and the vehement Prosecution
of it, he had a Desire to hear what S. Paul had to plead for himself.

But before I come to the particular Matter of his Plea, in these words, there
are 2 things observable concerning him.

1. That although he knew he could not suffer in a better Cause, and had a
Prospect of his Sufferings before he went to Jerusalem, and went thither with a
Resolution to undergo any thing for the sake of Christ, yet he quitted no
advantages which the Law gave him. 20. 23, 24.
For, when the Officer would have scourged him, he pleaded his Freedom as a
Roman Citizen; and all such were 22. 25, 28.
exempted from Scourging by the Porcian and Sempronian Laws. And when he found
the Design was laid to carry him back to Jerusalem, and there to make him a
Sacrifice to the Rage of the Jews; he makes use of the Privilege of the Roman
Laws, and before Sentence made his Appeal to Coesar. So little did he think it
inconsistent with the Christian Doctrine, of Suffering to make use of Legal
Privileges for his own Defense, against unjust Violence.

2. That in all his Defenses he insisted on the Resurrection as the main Point.
For although the true Ground of the violent Hatred and Malice of the Jews
against him, was his constant and zealous Preaching Jesus and the Resurrection,
Acts 17. 18.
as he did at Athens and other places; yet those who persecute Men for the sake
of Truth, always pretend some other Reason for it; and nothing is more common
and plausible than that of breaking the Laws. And the Jews now thought they had
this Advantage against S. Paul; for they charged him with profaning the Temple
by carrying ^1. 28.
a Gentile into it; but the Matter of Fact was mistaken; however, this served
for a popular Pretense against him, and that was all they sought for, (Malice
working most mischief under a Disguise.) And this took presently, and spread so
suddenly, That it is said, All the 30.
City was moved, and the People ran together, and they took Paul and drew him
out of the Temple. When Tertullus pleaded against him, he faintly urged his
going about to profane the Temple; but the main of his Accusation, was, That he
24* 6.
was a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens; 5.
therefore S. Paul in his Answer in short, says to the other things objected,
That they could not prove them; 13.
but as to the Way which they c^lled Heresy, i. e. owning the Doctrine of
Christ, he was so far from denying it, 14.
that he professed it before them all. And as he declared his Faith freely, so
he did his Hope too. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow, that there shall be a Resurrection 15.
of the dead, both of the just and unjust. This was the Point S. Paul reduced
all to. Touching the Resurrection of the 21.
dead, I am called in question by you this day. And so here to Agrippa, And now
I stand and am judged for the hope of the Promise made of God unto our Fathers;
unto which Promise our twelve Tribes 16. 6.
instantly serving God day and night hope 7.
to come, for which Hopes sake, King Agrippa I am accused of the Jews. And then
immediately follow the words of the Text, Why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?

Wherein we have the Strength of the Apostles Argument, to prove the Truth of
this Mysterious Doctrine of the Resurrection; although artificially couched by
way^ of Insinuation and Address.

(1.) It is not a vain thing to suppose it, because God had Promised it. For no
Tradition of Fathers, no Conjectures of Philosophers, no Power of Nature could
be a sufficient Foundation to build such an Article of Faith upon; nothing
short of the Promise made of God.

(2.) It is not a new thing started by him, to disturb and perplex the Minds of
Men; it was a Promise made to our Fathers, i. e. it was involved and implied in
the great Promise of the Messiah, and the Happiness to come by him; which was
not with Respect to this World, but the World to come; the full and complete
Enjoyment whereof must suppose a Resurrection of the dead.

(3.) It is not an unreasonable thing; which appears by S. Paul's putting it to
them in such a manner, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you,
that God should raise the dead?

Wherein the Apostle has showed us the true Method of asserting and defending
the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, viz. not to undertake to demonstrate
things by natural Reason, which are incapable of it; but first to prove them to
be of Divine Revelation; and then to show that there is no Objection from
Reason, which can make that Revelation incredible.

And this I shall endeavor to make out, as to the Subject here mentioned; and
that

(1.) In General, with respect to the Doctrine of the Resurrection.

(2.) More particularly, (1.) As to the Resurrection of Christ, (2.) As to the
Resurrection of the Dead at the great Day.

(1.) In General; as to the Doctrine of the Resurrection.

It is no unreasonable Method of proceeding with Mankind, to suppose some
general Principles agreed on, before we undertake to prove particular
Doctrines. For when we go about to reason at all, we must suppose the
Foundations of certainty; without which it is to no purpose to undertake to
convince any Man of any thing. When we prove that there is a God, we must
suppose something that is without our selves, in the Frame of this visible
World; and from the order of Causes, the variety of Effects, the nature of
successive Beings we justly infer, that it could not be always just as it is;
and therefore, it will be produced by a Being Superior to it, whose Power must
be Infinite, as giving Being to that which had none, and disposing things in
such a manner as we see them. For as nothing can be without a Cause, so it is
most unreasonable to suppose, that which once was not, should put it self into
Being; or a blind and unactive Cause should produce such admirable Effects.

An infinite Power being then necessarily supposed, as to the Production of the
World, it cannot be unreasonable to apply it to a particular Effect, although
above the power of natural Causes, if it be such a one as is agreeable to the
infinite Wisdom of God. It is an unreasonable thing, to suppose any absurd
Doctrine to be true, because God's Power is infinite. For he does not employ
his Power, but in a way most agreeable to his Wisdom; and his Wisdom is
discovered in the suitableness of the End, and the clearness of Divine
Revelation.

It is as possible for God now to raise the Dead, as at the great Day; but we
have no reason to believe it, because it does not now answer the great End of
the Resurrection, which is in order to an eternal State. Therefore although there
be an equal Possibility in the thing, yet there is not an equal Credibility;
because this does by no means come up to the declared Purpose of God's raising
the Dead; which is of very great moment for Mankind to believe and expect.

If I could believe it possible, for the Body of Christ to be in ten thousand
places at the same time, (which I cannot) yet if it were not to attain some
great and spiritual End, which cannot be carried on another way, I have the
same reason to think it incredible, as I have to believe that God will not
employ his infinite Power, as often as a Priest shall think fit, by repeating
the words of Consecration. And we never find in the whole History of Scripture
the infinite and miraculous Power of God, tied to a certain Form of words; and
that to no spiritual End, viz. either for the Conviction, Conversion, or
Sanctification of Mankind; to which other means more proper and agreeable are
appointed.

But in the Case of the Resurrection of the Dead, our Savior has sufficiently
declared the End and Design of it to be such, that we may justly suppose, that
if God will employ his infinite Power, it would be for such a Purpose: The hour
is coming, says Christ, in which all that are in the Graves shall Joh. 5. 28,
29.
hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good unto the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of
Damnation.

Can we imagine the Power of God to be employed for a more suitable End, to the
Design of his Providence than this? It is not to make them capable of acting
over again all that Folly, and Vanity and Vice, which they live in now; it is
not merely to show his Power over all the scattered Atoms of our Bodies; and
that he can when he pleases fetch them of their secret Repositories, and
dispose and unite them so, as to make the same Bodies; it is not to convince
then the unbelieving part of Mankind, when they see that effected, which they
before thought incredible; for, they who will not believe now, upon the
Evidence which God has given, so as to prepare themselves for that great Day,
shall then be forced both to believe and tremble.

Although then we do own, that without God's infinite Power we look on the
Resurrection as impossible, yet this ought to be no disparagement to the
Doctrine, since the End of it is such, as does so fully agree with the Wisdom
and Design of Providence.

It Is true, the ancient Fathers who discoursed much to the Heathens, upon the
Argument of the Resurrection, which they thought one of the most incredible
Parts of the Christian Doctrine, do make use of many comparisons and
Similitudes from natural Causes and Effects. But we are not to look on them as
strict Proofs, but as handsome Illustrations, being designed to take off the
Scorn and Derision, with which the Heathens entertained the Doctrine.

Thus they speak of a Diurnal Resurrection, viz. Of the Day dying into Night,
and being buried in Darkness; and in the Morning springing out of its Grave of
Obscurity and Silence, with a fresh Glory and Splendor; of an Annual
Resurrection; when the Trees begin to have a new Life in them; and the precious
Liquor which shoots up into the withered Body and Branches, and so brings forth
new Leaves and Flowers, and Fruit. But after all, we know, that such a
Revolution of Days and Nights, and the several Seasons of the Year, depends
upon certain and natural Causes, viz. the Diurnal and Annual Course of the Sea.
All that can be proved hence is, that things may not always remain in the same
State of Darkness and Inactivity; but that the same God, who has appointed the
Times and Seasons for other things, may if he please restore Mankind, after a
long Night, and cold Winter in the Grave, to a State of Life and Vigor, Clem.
ad Cor. p. 34. Tertul. de Res. c. 13. Ambr. Her. l. 5. Cyril. Catal. 18. etc.
Herod. l. 2.
at the Day of Resurrection.

The Story of the Phoenix so often mentioned by the Ancients, holds well enough
against the Authors of it (for the Christians had it from the Heathens,) viz.
to prove there is no Absurdity in believing the Possibility, that Life may Sen.
Ep. 42. Plin. l: 10. c. 2. Tacit. An. l. 6.
be restored after the Corruption of the Body; and that they had no reason to
deride Christianity for a Doctrine, which themselves owned in their famous
Tradition of the Phoenix.

But when they argued strictly about Athen. p. 43. Tertul. Ap. c. 48. De Res.
c. 11. Justin. Apol. 2. Lact. 7. c. 23. Ambr. de Fide Res. c. 11. Prudent.
inSyr. l. 2. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 7. 22. c. 10. 21. In Psalm. 62. 139.
this Matter, they resolved it into the same infinite Power of God, whereby he
made the World. And according to the due order of our Creed, we must first
believe in God the Father, Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth, before we are to
believe the Resurrection of the Body.

And although the Matters of Faith be not capable of strict Demonstrations; yet
we have this strong Evidence to convince Mankind of the Credibility of it, viz.
If they do believe that God made the World, and the Bodies of Mankind at first,
they can have no reason to question his Power to new make them; if they do not,
they must believe something far more absurd than the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, viz. that this World should make it self, and that all things
should fall into that admirable Order they are in, without the Power and
Management of an infinitely Wise Creator. And setting aside the Consideration
of infinite Power, such Persons ought not to find fault with asserting the
Possibility of the Resurrection; for why may not the same Particles of Matter
in a long Tract of time hit together again, to make up the same Body, as well,
as such are at first supposed to have made up not only the visible World, but
the wonderful Fabric of any single Body of Mankind? Why should it be more
incredible, that a dead Body should be raised out of its Grave, than that the
Body of a Man should spring out of the Earth at first from a mere Fermentation
of Matter? So that the most Atheistical Persons have no reason to reject the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, as a thing incredible to them.

But yet there are some Difficulties, which deserve to be cleared, to remove
any Temptations to Infidelity; and those relate,

(1.) To the quantity of the Matter to make up such a number of Bodies.

(2.) To the sorting and Distribution of it for the making so many distinct
Bodies, as were before.

(1.) As to the quantity of Matter; not as to the main Body of the Earth (out
of the dust whereof Man's Body was framed at first) but as to that which makes
up the Bodies of Men as now they are. And I think one Observation is sufficient
to clear the Difficulties which relate to this: that what passes away from us
by insensible Transpiration, was once as really a part of our Body, as that is
most visible and discernible in us now, or will be when our Bodies corrupt in
the Grave, and are turned into Dust. I need not run to the Statick Experiments
to prove the vast quantity of Matter belonging to our Bodies, which passes
continually away from us; for there is one thing which sufficiently proves it,
and no Body can doubt of; and that is; we find all Persons grow and shoot up
till they come to such a Stature; and when they are attained to it, all the Art
and Contrivance, and Nourishment they can use, cannot make any addition to it.
To what a prodigious height would Mankind grow, if every seven years they
should shoot up in Proportion to the first Seven? And if those parts which
receive Nourishment did not spend themselves, all Men, when they cease growing
upwards must have a vast Bulk. For they take in greater Nourishment, than when
they shot up so fast. But we find it otherwise in Mankind, and therefore those
which were once the real parts of the Body do insensibly go off and spend
themselves, and others come in their room. And those which were the substantial
Parts of the same Body, are scattered up and down in our Atmosphere, being
wholly indiscernable by us, but yet they are not annihilated, nor lost to
infinite Wisdom; who ranges and disposes those minute Particles of our Bodies
in such order, that he can command them together, as he pleases, and so make up
the same Body again. But this carries me to the second Difficulty.

(2.) As to the sorting and distribution of these dispersed Particles, into so
many distinct Bodies again. It is but a mean Representation of the Possibility
of this, which the Chemists boast off, viz. that they can reduce some Metalline
Bodies to their own shapes, and natural appearances from those wonderful
Disguises they can put them into. But from thence we may infer, that the
infinitely Wise God knows all the secret passages of Nature, and every small
part of a Body, and can trace it through all its Changes and Shapes, and bring
it back again to unite, with the other parts of the same Body. The truth is, we
are mighty Strangers to the invisible Kingdom of Nature; we make a shift to
talk and reason a little about the Frame and Contexture of gross and visible
Bodies; but for those innumerable Parts which are out of the reach of our
Senses, we know they must be, and are somewhere, but in what Order and Variety
we know not. But this we know, that the most minute parts we can discern by the
help of Glasses, although they appear rough and deformed to our naked Eyes, as
the Moss which grows upon the Earth, yet when it is more narrowly searched into
by the help of Glasses, is found to have in it admirable Beauty and Curiosity.
And it is very observable that the more we look into the Works of Art, the less
we admire them; but the more we search into, what we account the most
disorderly and confused parts of Nature, even the least and most contemptible,
the more we are surprised with admiration. Which shows the infinite Wisdom of
the Maker of all things, who has all those things in due Order, which seem to
us impossible to be sorted or numbered. And since God has declared it to be his
Design to raise the Bodies of the Dead, we have no reason to question, but that
he disposes the several parts of them so, as none shall be either lost or
mislaid. The Psalmist speaks of a Book in God's keeping, wherein all our
Members are written, which in continuance were Psalm 139. 16.
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. And he has a Book too, wherein
all the scattered parts of the Body are entered, which he knows exactly, and so
can easily bring them together. We all know, that if the leaves of a Book are
scattered up and down through many hands, and carried to the most distant places;
if the Author of it knows where they are, although they were bound up in other
Books, yet he can easily find out the several parts of it, and put them
together again, so, as to make the same entire Book which they were before. If
therefore, God certainly knows and disposes the several parts of our Bodies
(for although they are under many Disguises to us, they are under none, to him)
he can much more easily gather them and join them together, as his Wisdom and
Power is infinitely greater than ours. But Suppose the parts of one Body be
turned into the Substance of another, as in those who eat Man's Flesh, how is
it possible there should be distinct Bodies, when the Substance of one goes
into the Substance of another?

This has been thought by some a terrible Objection, against the Possibility
of the Resurrection; but, according to the Principles I have already laid down,
it will admit of a clear and distinct Answer. For,

(1.) The Difficulty would appear much greater, if there were any such
Cannibals in the World, as lived wholly upon Man's Flesh. It cannot be denied,
that there are Instances of People so rude and barbarous, as to account it a
piece of Gallantry to devour their Enemies, whom they have taken in Battle; and
of others, who by extremity of Famine have been driven to it. But such
extraordinary Instances have no force against a general Doctrine; unless it be
proved to be impossible by them; for, against extraordinary Cases,
extraordinary Care may be set to make up the parts of those Bodies. But,

(2.) It is but a very inconsiderable part of one Body, which in such Cases
goes into the Substance of another. That which may stop a ravenous Appetite,
may go but a little way toward increasing the Substance of the Body. How
little of what we take into our Stomachs, is united to the solid parts of the
Body. The Flesh is dissolved into a spirituous Liquor, which at last turns to a
Nourishment; but after many Passages and refinings in the several Vessels for
that purpose, the grosser part, and far greater quantity going off. So that
according to the most received Doctrine of Nutrition, suppose the Body of a Man
were eaten by Cannibals, a very small part of it, would pass into the Substance
of their Bodies.

(3.) Suppose there were more, yet there cannot be so much as is already gone
off from the Body of the same Man. If a Man lives to thirty or forty years, his
Body has undergone many new Repairs in that time, and all the old Materials
were as true and real parts of the Body, as the new ones; and yet it is the
same Body, in the sense of all Mankind. Why should it not be then the same Body
at the Day of Resurrection, if some of the parts before consumed, be taken to
make it up, as well as those very individual parts which a Man had at the time
of his Death. Suppose a corpulent Man to fall into lingering Diseases, or a
gradual Consumption of all the parts of his Body, must this Man at the Day of
Resurrection, have no more as belonging to his Body, than he had left upon him
at the hour of his Death? Would it not be the same Body, if it were made up of
the parts he had at the beginning of his Consumption? If it be, then the same
Reason will hold as to other times of his Life; and so this mighty Objection
from the Cannibals devouring those parts of the Body, which a Man had at the
time of his Death can be of no force to overthrow the Possibility of the
Resurrection.

(2.) Having thus endeavor to clear the Notion of the Resurrection in general;
I come to the particular Consideration of it,

(1.) With respect to the Resurrection of Christ; which St. Paul had here a
regard to; that being the chief Point contested at that time between the Jews
and the Apostles; as the Foundation both of the Faith and Hope of Christians. 1
Cor. 15. 14.
For, says St. Paul, If Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching vain, and
your Faith is also vain. And St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
That they are begotten again to a Romans 1. 4.
lively Hope through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. It was by
Act. 5. 31.
this, says St. Paul, That he was declared to be the Son of God with Power: It
was by this, says St. Peter, that God exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior
to give Repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. And therefore the Apostles
after the pouring out of the Holy Ghost upon them, insist chiefly upon this
Point; and that not in distant places at first, where Circumstances could not
be known or examined; but at Jerusalem, while all things were fresh in their
Memories, and all Matters of Fact might be strictly examined. Thus St. Peter on
the Day of Pentecost, standing up with the eleven said, Ye Men of Judea, and
all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, Act. 2. (...). 14.
hearken unto my words. And then follows his Charge upon them for the Death of
Christ; Jesus of Nazareth a 22.
Man approved of God, him have ye taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. And what then? Whom God has 23.
raised up. This might seem incredible to them at first hearing; but St. Peter
24.
goes on, and having proved it foretold by David he says again, This Jesus 32.
has God raised up: But how does this appear? Whereof, says he, we all are
witnesses, i. e. We that stand here before you, and are ready to undergo any
Trial of our Sincerity in the Matter; we do not tell you of Witnesses that live
at a great distance, but we whom you see and hear, testify what we have seen
and heard. If you are unsatisfied go and search the Monument, where his Body
was laid; examine the Soldiers that were to guard it; go to the Council and let
them search into the bottom of it; here we stand and are ready to give our
utmost Testimony to the Truth of it. Not long after, as Peter and John were
going into the Temple, and a great number of People were gathered together upon
a Miracle wrought by them, St. Peter again tells them, That they had killed the
Prince of Life, whom God has raised up from the Dead, whereof we are
Witnesses. This extremely 3. 15.
galled the Priests and Sadduces present, as 4. 1, 2.
appears afterward, and they seized upon them, and the next day a solemn 5.
Council was called to examine them. But do they flinch from their Testimony
then? No; so far from it, that St. Peter speaks more boldly to them; Ye Rulers
of the People, and Elders of Israel: be it known unto you all, and to 8.
all the People of Israel, that by the Name 10.
of Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye crucified whom God raised from the Dead, even by
him does this Man stand here before you whole. Could any thing be spoken, with
more Freedom and Plainness than this? The Person whom ye crucified God, has
raised from the Dead; and thereby has demonstrated your Wickedness and Folly;
he whom ye slighted and killed, even now he works Miracles among you; for by
him does this Man stand here before you whole. Could any thing be more
provoking to them than this? Why was not the Matter at first examined. And if
there had been any occasion to suspect them, never were men more concerned to
lay open an Imposture than these were. Why were not other Witnesses produced
against them, and the whole Contrivance then laid open to prevent any farther
mischief? But like guilty Men they durst not go farther into it; only they
endeavored to stop their mouths, and charged them not to speak at all, or
teach in the name of Jesus. 8.


But this would not do their Business; for they answered, They could not but 20.
speak the things which they had seen and heard. After this, we find them
brought 5. 27.
before the Council again; and then they severely rebuked them for breaking
their command, to which the Apostles answered with great Temper and Constancy,
28.
We ought to obey God rather than Man, and immediately tell them the same 30.
things, The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a
32.
tree. And we are his Witnesses of these things. No wonder that it follows, 33.
that when they heard it, they were cut to the heart; for nothing is so cutting
as a true Charge of Guilt; when Persons cannot answer it, nothing can be more
uneasy than to be told of it. And instead of examining the Matter farther,
they take Gameliel's Counsel, and let them alone.

This I the rather insist upon, because the Matters were then fresh, the
Persons were alive, who were most concerned to disprove them, and the Apostles
urged them before that Council, which had not long before contrived and
porcured the Death of Christ, and took great Care to prevent the taking away of
the Body when it was in the Monument.

And now, Why should it be thought by any, a thing incredible that God should
raise the Dead? When there were such early, and such constant Witnesses of it;
who offered the Proof of it to all sorts, and wrought Miracles to confirm their
Credibility. What can the most incredulous Mind suggest toward the taking away
the force of their Testimony? There are but two ways to do it,

(1.) To suppose them honest and well meaning Men, who were deceived by their
own Fancies.

(2.) To suppose them, cunning and designing Men, who went about to deceive the
World, with what they did not believe themselves.

(1.) To suppose them deceived themselves. All that has been suggested in this
Cavilling and Skeptical B. S. Ep. 23. 25.
Age to this Purpose, is that the Scripture it self owns, that some good Men
have been deceived in the same manner; as Abraham and Lot taking the Genesis 18.
6. 19. 3.
Angels for Men, and believing that they did eat. But I will make it plain,
that there was a vast Disparity in the Case. For,

(1.) Here was a true and real Body without Dispute, for it is not denied that
Christ did really suffer on the Cross, and was dead and buried. But what became
of the true Body of Christ? In the other Cases, either there was no real Body
at all; but the Angels assumed such Matter for the time, which had all the
appearances of Humane Bodies in speaking, walking, and eating; or if the Bodies
were real, yet we read nothing as to any such Circumstances, of dying and being
buried, as there are about Christ's Body. And there are some remarkable
Circumstances as to the Body of Christ, which ought to be observed.

1. That there was infallible Proof, that he was really dead; by the Testimony
St. John gives of his seeing the Soldier pierce the Pericardium with his Joh.
19. 34.
Lance; which all agree to be a mortal and incurable Wound, if there had been
Life before, and he adds it because there were then some, who denied that he
really died on the Cross.

2. That his Body was laid in a new Sepulcher, cut out of a Rock; which is
taken notice of by three Evangelists; Matthew. 27. 60. Mark 15. 46. Luke 23. 51.
because it was not liable to any suspicion of Practices by his Disciples, as
to the conveying away of the Body by any other way, than by the mouth of the
Sepulcher.

3. That the mouth of the Sepulcher was closed up with a Stone; which Matthew.
27. 66.
was Sealed* and had a Watch set to Guard it, so that here was all imaginable
Care taken to prevent any taking away the Body out of the Sepulcher.

(2.) The Proofs as to the Truth of Christ's individual Body, after the
Resurrection are quite of another Nature from those of the Angels appearing to
eat with Abraham and Lot, for this was a sudden Action of theirs, and not the
main thing intended by them: It was only to introduce the Message they had to
declare; but in the Case of our Savior, the great business was to assure them
of the Truth of his Resurrection. Therefore it is said, That he showed himself
Act. 1. 3.
alive after his Passion by many infallible Proofs, being seen of them forty
days. Among these Proofs St. John Joh. 20. 20.
insists upon his showing them, his Hands and his Side; but this would not
satisfy Thomas, but he must thrust 27.
his Hand into his Side. Could there be greater Proof of the same Body than
this? So that either we must give over all Evidences and Proof of the same
Body; or we must allow that it was given in the Case of Christ's Body. And
nothing but obstinate Infidelity can make any objection against the way of
Proof, supposing the Matter of Fact to be true, as the Evangelists relate it.

(2.) But if that be not allowed, then they must be charged with a Design to
deceive and abuse the World, To which I shall only say at present these two
things:

1. That endless Sufpicion is a very unreasonable thing; where there is no
Foundation for it; as none can be assigned as to the Apostles, either as to
this World or another; since they declare no hopes of recompense hereafter, and
no Compensation to be expected here.

2. That some Proof of Sincerity must be allowed; and they offered the fairest;
and that is the true. Reason why Christ appeared to them, and not to his
Enemies.

(1.) The Disciples themselves were asraid of being deceived this way; and Luke
24. 37.
therefore could not be convinced, till by many infallible Proofs as St. Luke
Act. 1. 3.
calls them, they were satisfied it was the real Body of Christ. If it had been
only a sudden and transient Appearance, there might have been some cause to
have suspected it; but this was so far from it, that he conversed among them
forty days at several times; he showed them his hands and his feet, his Luke
24. 39. Joh. 20. 20, 27.
flesh and bones, and the very holes in his side which the Spear had made. And
what Proof can be given of the Truth of a Body greater than this? If they had
pretended, that after his Resurrection, his Body was present, but after the
manner of a Spirit, i. e. after an invisible, impalpable, unintelligible
manner, the World would have despised their Testimony, and there had been no
need to have said more for rejecting it, than that if Body and Spirit be to be
known asunder, it must be by the different Properties; and therefore to
confound them, is to confound our knowledge of them.

(2.) It was necessary that there should be such Witnesses, who would attest
what they saw; which his Enemies and Murderers would not have done, if he had
appeared to them. Can we imagine, that the High Priests and Elders, and his
other implacable Enemies, who had Blasphemously attributed his other Miracles
to the Power of the Devil, would immediately have been convinced upon the sight
of his Body after the Resurrection? No doubt, by the same Reason they would
have concluded it to have been an Apparition of the Devil.

(3.) There must be some Proof of the Honesty, and Sincerity of Mankind
allowed; and the Apostles gave the greatest that ever Men did; by their
Self-denial, Unanimity, Courage, Patience, Constancy and Perseverance. They
almost all laid down their Laws to attest this Truth, and all underwent great
Persecutions for it, when the Discovery of the least Fraud would not only have
set them at ease, but gained them a plentiful Reward. And therefore, Why should
it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise his Son from
the Dead?

(2.) We must consider this, with Respect to the general Resurrection of the
Dead. What Reason can we have to think, that incredible, when God has already
given such an Evidence of the Possibility of the thing by the Resurrection of
Christ? He that can raise up one Body, can raise the rest, since the difficulty
lies not in the number of Bodies, but in the Nature of the thing. Some have
ridiculously questioned, whether the Surface of the Earth would be large enough
to hold all the Bodies of Mankind upon it at the Day of Resurrection. But an
ingenious Person Sir W. Petty 's Essay in Political Arithmetic. Postscript.
has demonstrated the Folly of such an Imagination.

And it cannot be thought a needless Exercise of Divine Power, when it is in
order to the general Judgment, and the Resurrection of Christ was intended as a
Pledge and Assurance to the World, not only of that day to come, but that
Christ is appointed to be the Judge. Because he has appointed a day in which
he will judge the World in righteousness, by that Man whom he has Act 17. 31.
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised
him from the Dead.

What remains then, but for us to think it our greatest Concernment to live as
becomes those, that believe we must not only die, but be raised from the Dead,
by the mighty Power of God; and that in order to our appearing before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that we may receive according to to things done in the
Body, whether good or bad. What manner of Persons ought 2 Cor. 5 10.
we then to be in all boly Conversation 2 Pet. 3. 11.
and Godliness? What fruit had ye then, says St. Paul, in those things whereof
ye Romans 6. 21.
are now ashamed? As though the bare Reflection of a Man's own Conscience were
enough to make him sensible of the Folly of Sin. But what then is it to
consider, That those things which will not bear a severe Reflection at home,
shall be laid open before the Judgment Seat of Christ? We are now to palliate
and disguise, and conceal our Follies, and Weaknesses here, as much as we can
from our selves, as well as others; we would fain keep upon good Terms with our
selves, and use too many Arts to blind and deceive our own Consciences. But
alas! How vain and foolish a thing is it, for us to deceive our selves to our
own Destruction? If the Judge at the great Day would judge just as we do, it
would be the best Argument in the World ^or deceiving our selves. But he will
judge the World in Righteousness. Act. 17. 31.
Not according to the vain Opinions Men have of themselves, not according to
the rash Censures, or indiscreet Flatteries of others, who cannot be able to
judge of us, as we may do of our selves. And this is a Matter of the greatest
Importance to us; since God is pleased to leave it so much to our own Judgment,
That if we judge 1 Cor. 11. 31.
our selves, we shall not be judged. Let us not therefore do it carelessly,
partially and ineffectually; but deal fait^fully, and sincerely with our
selves; searching for our most secret and beloved Sins, and proceed against
them in such a manner, as we shall wish we had done when we appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ. Think with your selves then, how shall we then abhor
those Sins of the Body, which will expose both Soul and Body, to the eternal
Vengeance of God? How shall we be ashamed to have yielded so much, and so
easily to the Inclinations of it, against the Convictions of Reason, the Checks
of Conscience, and the plain Commands of Scripture? And therefore, the thoughts
of that day should have the most powerful Influence on us, to keep our Bodies
in subjection to our Minds, and to subdue the irregular Appetites that come
from them. For these Bodies of ours now, are not so much Companions, as
Traitors to our Souls; holding a Correspondence with their greatest Enemies,
suggesting Counsels which tend to their Destruction; and the Temptations which
arise from them, are so many and so bewitching, that without a constant Care,
our Bodies may prove the ruin of our Souls. And those who have the greatest
Command over them, have enough to do, to keep under the Passions that arise
from them; which may grow troublesome when they cannot Govern; and like
discontented Persons be very uneasy when they are not gratified to their own
Desire.

It is therefore, a great satisfaction to the Minds of good Men, to think,
there is a Day of Resurrection coming, when their Bodies shall no longer be an
^ncumbrance, or a Temptation to their Minds; they shall neither hinder their
Happiness, nor draw them from it. Thus all the dark Temptations, and cloudy
Vapors, and disturbing Passions, which arise from our Bodies now, shall be
scattered and dispersed; and there shall be nothing but Purity, Serenity and
Clearness in that State. For, Then the righteous shall shine forth Matt. 13. 43.
like the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father; when the glorious Light within
shall break through the Passages of the Body, and cause as great a Splendor in
it, as the Sun it self would have within so narrow a Compass. Thus it is said
of our Savior upon his Transfiguration, That his ^ace did shine as the S^^;
and yet his Body then, had the Matt. 17. 2.
same Qualities that our's have now. But after the Resurrection, the glorified
Bodies shall be so purified and refined, by a Divine Spirit and Power, that
they shall become as Spiritual as Bodies 1 Cor. 15. 42.
can be; i. e. without corruption and decay; without Weariness and Pain;
without any of those Infirmities, which make Life so uneasy here. Sometimes
here the Mind has such a load upon it, that makes the Body sink under its
weight; but there the perfect Ease and Tranquillity of the Mind, will give a new
Life and Vigor to the Body. Here the most refined Pleasures of Life, are such
which arise from a brisk and uniform Motion of the Animal Spirits; but then the
Spirit and Joy of another World, will afford such Delights as infinitely exceed
our present Imagination. Such Delights which shall be pure and constant,
without Interruption, and without End. For in that glorious Presence of God,
there is fullness of Joy; and ^sal. 16. (...).
at his right hand are Pleasures for evermore.

SERMON XIII. Preached at WORCESTER August the 17th. 1690.
Eccles. VII. 16. Be not Righteous overmuch, neither make thy self ^over wise:
Why should thou destroy thy self?
BE not Righteous overmuch. Can there be the least Danger of that, in such a
corrupt and degenerate Age as we live in? And if our Preaching ought to be
about the most seasonable Duties, and the most dangerous Sins; one would think
this should be, one of the last Texts in Scripture, we should have occasion to
Preach upon. But such an Imagination arises from not understanding the Scope
and Design of these words. For if Righteousness were to be taken here, for that
which Solomon calls so, viz. The true fear of God, it would be hard to
reconcile him to himself; and these Expressions with the main Design of this
Book. For, after all the Representations he has made of the Good and Evil of
this Life, he concludes thus, Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter,
fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man. And he
gives a most weighty Reason for it; 12. 13, 14.
for God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil. But then, how can any Man fear God and keep
his Commandments too much? And the wise Man says, The Fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom; and the knowledge of the Holy is understanding. But how
Prove. 9. 10.
can any be over wise in the knowledge of God, and doing his Will? And the
righteous Man is generally taken by Solomon, for a truly good Man; so Ver. 15.
There is a just Man that perishes in his Righteousness, and there is a wicked
Man that prolongeth his Life in his Wickedness; where the Opposition is plain
between a righteous and a wicked Man. How then, can any one be righteous
overmuch? And, if not; what is the meaning of these words?

Some think that they are spoken in the Person of an Epicurean, who despised
all Religion, and thought it useful for nothing, but to make Men's Lives
uncomfortable to them, and so to shorten their days; and that the next Verses
are an answer to them, by showing that Wickedness does much rather do it. There
is a Truth, and that very considerable in this Sense, viz. that Wickedness does
Men more mischief as to this World, than the most strict and severe Piety;
which, although it seems uneasy to the Body, yet it is far from being so
destructive to it, as Wickedness is, and rather tends to support it, by taking
off all such Extravagancies which are so apt to shorten and destroy Men's Lives,
by their procuring Peace and Satisfaction. But I cannot see how this comes in,
as spoken by another Person; and the only Reason of it is, the Supposition,
that taking them otherwise, they are not capable of a true and proper Sense.
But there may be several Accounts given of them, if we take them as spoken by
Solomon, in his own Name,

(1.) With respect to Providence. (2.) To Religion. (3.) To moral Righteousness
and Wisdom.

(1.) They must seem to refer to the Method of God's dealing with good and bad
Men in this World; of which he spoke, Verse 15. Be not too strict and severe in
passing Judgment on God's Providence; be not more righteous and wise than God
is; do not think you could govern the World better than he does; pry not too
far into those Mysteries, which are too deep for you; why should thou
confound thy self? So some interpret the latter words.

(2.) They may refer to Religion; but then they are not to be understood of
what is truly and really so; but of what passes in the World for it; and Men
may esteem themselves very much for the sake of it. For although Men cannot
exceed in the main and fundamental Duties of Religion, in the Belief and Fear,
and Love of God; yet they may, and often do mistake in the Nature, and
Measures, and Bounds of what they account Duties of Religion.

(3.) They may be taken in a moral Sense for that Righteousness which Men are
to show toward each other, both in Judgment and Practice; and for that Wisdom,
which Mankind is capable of, as a moral Virtue; and in both these, there are
extremes to be avoided; and so they are not to be righteous overmuch; nor to
make themselves over wise.

There are Three things therefore to be spoken to, for clearing the Sense of
these words,

(1.) How we may exceed our Bounds concerning the Righteousness and Wisdom of
Providence.

(2.) How, with respect to Religion.

(3.) How, with respect to moral Righteousness and Wisdom.

(1.) With respect to Providence: The great Difficulty lies in what the 9. 1, 2.
wise Man says, afterward, That the righteous and the wise, and their Works
are in the hand of God; no Man knows Love or Hatred by all that is before
him. All things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous, and to
the wicked, etc. Now this seems hard to reconcile to the Justice, and Wisdom of
Providence. But we have sufficient Reason to forbear censuring and prying too
far, into these Matters, from these Considerations;

(1.) God is not accountable to us for what he does. The Psalmist tells Psalm.
36. 6.
us, God's Judgments are a great deep; and therefore, it is a vain thing for us
to pretend to go to the bottom of them. St. Paul, who had great Advantages
above others Cries out, How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past
finding out? We ought rather Romans 11. 33.
to admire, than to search into what he declares unsearchable; and to sit down
patient under our Ignorance, when he says, his Ways are past^ finding out. The
wise and righteous God has Reasons and Methods of Acting far above our reach;
and we do but show our own Folly, when we pretend to give an account of them.

(2.) We have reason to be satisfied, that his Providence is Righteous and
Wise, although we cannot comprehend it. For, as Abraham said in this Case,
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Genesis 18. 25.
right? He who is the great and wise God, who loves Righteousness and hates
Iniquity, cannot Act otherwise, but in a way agreeable to infinite Wisdom and
Righteousness. If these were not the Perfections of his Nature, he could not be
God; and if they be, he can never do any thing repugnant to them. And as long
as we own him to be God, we must allow his Wisdom and Righteousness in all he
does.

(3.) He has declared, That he will give satisfaction to all Mankind,
concerning the Secrets of his Providence. But not in this World; and therefore,
we ought with Patience to wait, for the day of the Revelation of the righteous
judgment of God. It is then great Romans 2. 5.
Boldness and Presumption in us to censure his Proceedings, before that day
comes. And so I pass to the second Sense.

(2.) These words may be taken with respect to Religion; and here it is
necessary to show, in what Sense this is to be understood. For, those who have
no love to Religion, think a little too much, and are glad to find such
Expressions as these to justify their gross Neglect and Contempt of it. But to
prevent Mistakes, I shall endeavor these things: To fhew, that if Religion be
rightly understood, there is no fear of Men's doing too much in it.

(2.) That by reason of Men's Mistakes and false Notions about it, they may
easily exceed their due Bounds.

(1.) That if Religion be rightly understood, there is no Danger of exceeding
the Bounds of it.

That I may speak more distinctly; we are to consider Religion in general, as
comprehending all the Duties we owe to God; which are of a different Nature.

(1.) There are some Duties which are fundamental and necessary in our Minds,
without which we can have no Religion; such are the owning God for our Creator,
and Governor, and depending upon him for our Happiness.

(2.) Some are External and Occasional; which being positive Duties, are
capable of different Obligations, according to the Circumstances of Persons.
And according to these we may lay down two Rules.

(1.) None can do too much, as to inward and fundamental Duties of Religion.

(2.) None can do too much, as to the external and positive Duties, while they
keep to that Obligation, which God has laid upon them, or they have justly
laid on themselves.

(1.) As to internal and fundamental Duties; as owning God and our Dependence
upon him for our Happiness; as being the Supreme Good, and therefore only
capable of making us Happy. And there is so great a Necessity of this in order
to our Welfare, that we cannot exceed in it; since we are his Creatures, and
are utterly unable to make our selves in the least Happy without him. And if we
take this Dependence upon God in all the parts of it, we shall find we cannot
go beyond our Duty in it. For, it implies these things,

(1.) A clear and strong Conviction of our Minds, that God alone can make us
Happy. And this we can never be too much convinced of; yea all the Arguments in
the World are few enough, to settle our Minds about it. Which appears by the
great Pains, the wise Man takes in this Book to convince Mankind, that there is
nothing but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit to be found here. This he delivers
upon Eccle^ 1. 14.
his own Experience, after all the Searches, and Pain, and Care, and
Contrivances he had used about it. And 2. 11.
after that, he gives an account of the several Conditions of Life, and shows
that there is no Satisfaction to be had in any of them; and he puts the utmost
can be supposed, that a Man enjoy a long and prosperous Life, yet that is so
inconsiderable to the future State, that it bears no Proportion, and therefore
11. 8.
we ought to look above, and beyond this State, if we would be Happy.

(2.) A due Sense of God upon our Minds; which he calls remembering our Creator.
For, although there be sufficient 18. ^.
Evidence of his Being, yet we are too apt to forget him, there being so many
other things to put him out of our Minds; and therefore, at all times we need
to be called upon, to remember our Creator; but especially in the time of
Youth, when the Vanities and Pleasures, and Temptations of the World, have the
greatest relish with us; and when the things of Religion are most apt to be
despised; yet even then we cannot be too much put in mind of our Duty, with
respect to God. Because an early Sense of God will prevent a deal of Evil; and
lay a Foundation for the greatest Peace of our Minds, and the best Conduct of
our Peace.

(3.) A constant regard to God, in the Course of our Actions. Not merely, that
we ought to be concerned for his Honor, on whom we depend; but we must
consider, what he has commanded, and what he has forbidden, and upon what
Terms: For, God ought to prescribe to us the Conditions of our Happiness; and
it is a vain thing to expect it in any other way. Therefore we can never be too
solicitous about such things, which our eternal Happiness depends upon. Because
a miscarriage herein is the most fatal. We cannot be too much concerned about
the Sincerity of our Repentance, and Faith, and Obedience to Christ, because
these are the plain and necessary Conditions of our Salvation; and we cannot
watch our selves too much, against the Temptations to Sin; which is the
greatest Enemy to our Happiness, and yet we are in continual Danger of falling
into it, and of continuing it. And when the Danger is so great, so near, so
constant, we can never exceed in the Watchfulness and Care of our selves.

(4.) Inward Love and Affection to God; without which there can be no Happiness
in him. For that must suppose Union and mutual Satisfaction. But how can we
possibly exceed in this, when God deserves so much more than we can give him?
And he requires no less from us, than our whole Heart, and Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
Soul, and Strength? Which does not only imply Integrity, but Vigor in our
Affection toward him. And to content our selves with a mean degree of Love, is
to show, that we neither know, nor esteem him, as we ought; for the more we
known him, we must love him the more. So that in the great and fundamental
Duties of Religion we can never do too much.

(5.) Patient Submission to the Will of God, under all the Accidents of Life.
The utmost Care we can use, cannot alter the common Methods of Providence; and
here all things happen alike to all. Therefore we cannot too much wean our
selves from the uncertain Comforts of this Life; nor too much resign our selves
up to God's disposal. We have always Passions enough within us to keep us in
Exercise; and Trials enough without us to put us upon subduing those Passions,
which are too apt upon every Cross and Disappointment to fly out, and to grow
uneasy. Here is therefore work enough for us to do; and is like to be so, as
long as our Bodies and Souls are together in this State. And he that thinks he
can do too much in this Work, never yet understood what the Government of his
Passions meant.

(6.) A sincere Endeavor to please God, in the Duties of his Worship and
Service. For, since God has appointed such Duties, no Man can pretend to
depend upon him for his Happiness, who is not sincerely willing to please him,
in doing what he has appointed for his Service; and that in such a manner, as
himself has required. Under the Law, God was very punctual and particular in
his Institutions; and that as to all the Circumstances of them, and then he
expected to be obeyed according to his ow^ Appointments, and added a severe
Sanction to his Law; Cursed is every one, that continues Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3.
10. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
not in every thing written in the Law to do it. And he required great
Diligence and Care in the keeping all his Commandments; so that then they could
not be righteous over much, with respect to the Law of God; for all their Care
was little enough to perform it. Under the Gospel, God that has taken away the
rigorous Dispensation, and instead thereof, he requires a reasonable Service;
which does not only consist in the Acts of our Minds; but in the most
reasonable Duties of Religion; in Prayers and Praises, and Sacraments; which
ought to be performed by us, with that Diligence and Devotion, as requires our
greatest Care; and in that, we cannot exceed.

(2.) And this leads me to consider the Rules and Measures we are to go by in
external and positive Duties.

There are three sorts of Measures to be observed,

(1.) Of strict Obligation? and that depends upon a clear and express
Declaration of God's Will; that it is a Duty incumbent on us to perform; as
Creatures, or as Christians; as Prayer for one, and celebrating and receiving
the Lords Supper for the other.

As to these, such Rules of Conscience are to be observed,

(1.) They must be done so, as to be consistent with other Duties of Piety,
Charity, Justice, Regard to Health, Families and Public Good.

(2.) They must be done so, as to show our Fear, and our Love of God in the
doing them; i. e. So, as not to live in an habitual Neglect of them; nor to
perform them so, as if we had no regard to him that appointed them.

(2.) There are other Measures of Zeal and Devotion; which exceed the strict
Obligation of Conscience.

I do not now speak of an accidental Obligation of Conscience by particular
Engagements of Oaths, or Promises, or Vows; but of what is Free and Chosen. As
to which these Rules may be observed.

(1.) The more Persons are freed from Encumbrances of the World, the more time
they are to set apart for the Worship, and Service of God.

(2.) The more Love any have to God and Religion, the more frequent they will
be in the voluntary Service of God, and the greater Delight they will take in
it. And thus much may serve to clear the Measures of true Religion.

(2.) But there are many Mistakes, and false Notions of Religion in the World;
and by reason of these, Men are very prone to exceed their due Bounds.

And here I shall set down some of the most common and popular, which are most
apt to deceive.

(1.) That God is pleased with such kind of Service, as does most please our
own Fancies. This is the Foundation of what the Scripture calls Will Worship;
Colos. 2. 23.
i. e. when Men are not contented with what God has appointed; but set up
their own Fancies, and imagine that God will be as much pleased with them, as
with any thing himself has required. Such as the Worshipping of Angels, and
abstaining from Meats there mentioned. If these had been any necessary parts of
Religion, no doubt Christ and his Apostles would have recommended them to the
Christian Church; but they are far from it; and St. Paul very much dislikes the
introducing such things, although they had some plausible Pretenses for them;
which he calls a show of Wisdom. But it came at last to this, that such a
Severity in Diet, such Humility in making use of the Mediation of Angels,
seemed very agreeable to the Fancies of Men; and the distance between God and
us. And from hence they came to the Invocation of Saints, as appears from them;
for their Fancies still ran upon the manner of Earthly Courts, and thought
things were managed in Heaven accordingly. From hence came all the gross
Superstitions, the frequent Addresses, the tedious Pilgrimages in the Church of
Rome only to procure the Favors of some particular Saints, to intercede with
Christ, that he might intercede with God for them. Whereas the Scripture shows
us the plain and direct way of making our Applications to the Father, by the
Mediation and Intercession of his Son, whom he has appointed the Mediator
between him and us.

So gain, in the Worship of Images, as directly forbidden, as Adultery and
Murder are in the ten Commandments; yet because Men show respect to one
another, in keeping and kissing their Pictures, therefore God cannot be
displeased with worshipping Images, though against his Commandments, because they
intend it for his Honor.

This among others, because the heats of Fancy, and Variety of Expressions, is
pleasing to themselves in Prayer, they conclude it is so to God too. Whereas
the Wise Man takes notice of the multiplying words in Prayer, as one of the
Vanities of Mankind. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not they heart be
hasty to utter any thing before Eccles. 5. 2.
God; for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth; therefore let thy words be few.

Some place too much of their Religion in a Zeal for or against some external
Ceremonies of Worship, and both think what they do, is very pleasing to God.
Whereas at the bottom, there may be nothing but Temper and Prejudice, and
Education in both sorts. Some have a natural Averseness, confirmed by their
manner of breeding, to all kind of Ceremonies; and others as great an
Inclination to them. But still God must be pleased with what they are. As the
warlike People of old worshipped their God's in Armor; and the rest according
to the peculiar Dresses and Habits of their Country.

(2.) That God is pleased with what does most cross and displease our
Inclinations. This is another Fountain of Superstition; and seems contrary to
the former; only they think God is more averse to our Inclinations, than to our
Fancies. It is true, our Inclinations are too much bent to what is morally
Evil; and that God abhors. But that is not the thing I am speaking of; but of
such Inclinations which have no real Evil in them; but are merely natural, as
to a Freedom from Pain and uneasiness. And the Point is whether God be pleased
with seeing us, to vex and Torment our selves; and whether that be any
acceptable Service to God? As to deny our selves natural rest, to avoid eating
a thing because our Appetite is pleased with it; to kneel upon bare Stones; to
cut our Flesh; to whip our Bodies, etc. for they are all of the same kind. Can
we think that God is pleased merely with the torment we put our selves to? What
Conceptions must we have of God then? I do not deny, but reason teaches us to
moderate our Appetites, and not to endanger our sensual Inclinations to Rest
and Ease too much, because of ill Consequences. But there is a great deal of
difference, between a moral Government of our selves, and making those things a
part of Religion, and imagining that God is pleased with our mere doing them.
Which was the Principle, which carried the Idolaters of old to Sacrifice their
Children to Molochi because God would be best pleased with that, which was the
most against their natural Inclination to do.

(3.) That God is more pleased with Duties of Worship than with moral Duties.
From hence they think to make amends for the Miscarriages of their Lives by
diligence in Religious Duties. This was the Foundation of Pharisaism, i. e. of
Hypocrisy, among the Jews. Their Principle was, That God valued nothing so
much as his own immediate Service; and therefore, they took great Care about
that, and what related to it; but for Justice and Mercy, and Charity they
seemed to have very little regard to them; and thought God was so pleased with
their Zeal for his Service, that he would easily pass by other Faults. And no
doubt, one of their great Quarrels against our Savior, was delivering the
contrary Doctrine, that God preferred Mercy before Sacrifice; and that Men
ought to be reconciled to their Brother, before they offered their Gift at the
Altar. But still Men are prone to go on in the same way, and to hope that some
more than ordinary Devotion will make amends for their Sins; and then it is no
wonder to see such over devout at some times, who are very loose and careless
at others.

(4.) That God takes more notice of the Duties we perform, than of our manner
of doing them. As though he rather numbered than weighed them. And no wonder,
if such be more frequent and diligent than others in them; they think they can
never exceed therein, though they neglect some necessary Duties, as to
themselves or Families the mean time. The Service of God ought not to be
neglected; for that argues a contempt of Religion; but neither ought we to
neglect the Duties of our Calling, for that argues a misunderstanding
Religion; as though we did not Serve God when we did our Duties therein. It is
no hard Matter to allot the several proportions of time to both, if Men
consider their several Obligations. For, as the Pretense of worldly Business
ought not to excuse Men in their neglect of God's Worship; so neither ought the
Pretense of God's Service, to justify Men in the neglect of their Callings.
God did not require of the Jews to be constant in his Temple from all parts;
for then they could never have subsisted; but at the solemn Feasts he strictly
required it, and every Week, wherever they were, they were to keep Holy the
Sabbath day. Persons that were more at leisure, and had greater Conveniences
spent more time in their Devotion than others. Thus Anna departed not from Luke
2. 37.
the Temple, but served God therein night and day. But this was not a Matter of
strict Obligation to others, although it showed an excellent Temper of Mind in
her. But in Case of such frequent returns of Devotion, there must be great Care
least that abate the Fervency, and what was first taken up for Devotion come to
be a mere Custom, and we flatter our selves that God will accept the bare
Duties without the Life and Spirit of them.

(3.) These words may be taken in a Moral Sense for that Righteousness, which
respects other Men; and that is twofold. (1.) Of Judgment. (2.) Of Practice.

(1.) Of Judgment, concerning the Actions and Designs of others; i. e. be not
too ready to censure, and condemn them; why should thou destroy thy self. i.
e. Why should thou bring the same Severity upon thy self, which thou usest
toward others; according to that of our Savior, Judge not that ye be not
judged, etc. Matthew. 7. 1, 2.


Two things to be spoken to, for clearing this Point;

(1.) How Men are too Righteous in this Matter?

(2.) What Mischief this brings upon them.

(1.) How Men are Righteous overmuch in this Matter?

(1.) Not in passing a true Judgment upon the Actions of others. For to do
otherwise proceeds from want of Judgment, and Righteousness. Of Judgment, if we
do not see the difference of Good and Evil: Of Righteousness, if we will not.
As far as we are concerned, we are not to suffer our Passions to blind our
Judgments; not to think that to be a Virtue in one, which we should account a
Vice in another; nor to call that an Infirmity in one, which we should judge to
be Wilfulness, and Presumption in another.

(2.) Not in keeping our selves from being deceived by the false Pretenses of
others. It is possible for Men to make use of this very Saying, to abuse the
Credulity of well meaning Persons; and to account the discerning of Spirits, as
far as it lies within our reach, to be assuming too great a Power of Judging.
But our Savior thought it not inconsistent with his Precept of not Judging, to
expose the Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees; but then, he certainly knew
it to be Hypocrisy in them. And as far, as we are certain by the Rules which
he has given us, we may do the same thing.

But wherein then lies being Righteous overmuch?

(1.) In not making allowance for the common Infirmities of Mankind; which do
not only consist in the Imperfections of good Actions, but in such Failings,
which human Nature is subject to in this State; notwithstanding our greatest
Care to avoid them. If Persons will be severe upon others, for such things as
these are, and condemn all Religion as mere Show and Hypocrisy in them on that
account; this is being Righteous overmuch. For, they do not make the same
allowance which God does; and without which it were a vain thing to hope for
Salvation. For, if God should be so exact to mark what is done amiss by us, who
can stand before him? And if we expect such an allowance to be made to our
selves, what reason have we not to make it to others? At least so far, as not
to condemn them for want of Sincerity in the main, because of some such
Infirmities. How can we righteously judge them, whom God will not judge? We
must in judging others make allowance for the Weakness of Judgment and Strength
of Passion, which we find often accompanied with a real Tenderness of
Conscience. I confess it is very hard to believe, where we see a great
appearance of Spiritual Pride, a neglect of moral Duties, Censoriousness
toward others, Impatience of Contradiction, etc. that there is a real
Tenderness of Conscience joined with them. But yet some have stronger
Convictions of some Duties than they have of others, and if they did Act
against their Consciences in those Matters, they should resist that which they
account the clearest light they have; and in so doing they must cast off the
immediate Guidance of their Consciences, which might have very bad Effects, as
to the Force and Power of Concience in other things. I am afraid many do not
impartially weigh and consider things as they ought; but when, or where did the
Generality of Mankind do so? he thinks such Scruples are weak, and ought to be
laid aside; but they say, they cannot overcome them; and they have prayed and
searched, and used the best means and cannot be satisfied; and what can they
now do?

Conscience is really a nice and tender thing, and ought not to be handled
roughly and severely; considering how unaccountable sometimes to others, the
real Scruples of some Consciences are. Although Conscience be a Man's Judgment
in order to Practice, yet there may be a great strictness of Conscience, where
there is no strictness of Judgment; and Conscience in some Cases is more nice
for want of Judgment. But what then? must we condemn all those who labor under
that Distemper? And that you count want of Judgment in him, he may look on as
want of Sincerity in you.

We have been so long censuring and condemning each other for such things, that
God seems by his wife Providence, to bring the Plea of Scruples of Conscience
round, that we may learn more Tenderness to each other. By which we see that
some may really scruple that which others wonder at, and that Men's Consciences
are not to be measured by the same Light; for that is a Matter of Admiration to
one, which is of Scruple to another.

The best use we can make of this, is, to pity the Infirmities of Mankind, and
of those most, who are under the Conduct of a mis-guided Conscience, because
whatever the Action be their Design and Intention is honest and good.

(2.) In putting the worst Construction upon Men's Actions, which is directly
contrary to that Charity St. Paul so much commends; for that not only bears the
worst, and hopes for the best, but where a thing is capable of being made
better by a favorable Sense, it is ready to give it. Now, there are many
things Men do, which are accounted good or evil, according to the Intention 1
Cor. 13. 4, 5, etc.
of the doer of them. I do not say, That alters the Nature of the Action in it
self; for what God commands is Good, and what he forbids is Evil, whatever Men's
Intentions be; but although a good Intention cannot make a bad Action good; yet
a bad Intention may make a good Action evil; not in it self, but to him that
does it.

And so there are two ways Men may exceed in judging;

(1.) In making no Abatement in an evil Action as to the Person, for the
goodness of his Intention. For, although the Action be not good by it, yet it is
so much less evil; and in doubtful Cases it takes much from the Guilt, although
not where the Command is plain; as in the Case of Saul.

(2.) In charging Persons with a bad Intention in a good Action, where there is
no plain Evidence; for then, it is but Suspicion, and an uncharitable Judgment.
Our Savior might justly charge the Pharisees with this, as to their Alms and
Prayers, because he knew their Hearts. They laid them open enough to others, by
their Asfectation; and where that is gross and notorious, it were weakness, and
not charity to judge otherwise. But where we have no ground for it, to judge
Men to Act upon bad Principles, is being Righteous overmuch, or rather being
unrighteous and uncharitable.

(3.) In judging Men's Condition toward God; from some particular Actions,
although contrary to the general Course of them. Think with your selves, what
strange and mistaken Judgments you should have past upon David and Ahab; if you
had been privy to the Adultery, and Murder of the one, and had seen the
Humiliation of the other. If you had seen Ahab in his Mortification, when he
fasted and put on Sackcloth and humbled himself, you 1 Kin. 21. 27.
would have thought him a Saint; for he seemed to have been in good earnest for
the time. And if you had judged of David by those particular Actions, you must
have concluded him a very bad Man; but both these Conclusions had been false;
because taken up upon too slight, and narrow an Inspection. The same Case had
been as to St. Peter's denial, and the Repentance of Judas. We must not form
our Judgments of others, by single and sudden Actions, which Persons may fall
into by Surprise, or sudden Accidents, and conclude all the rest to be like;
but we are to suspend our thoughts for the present, and to weigh and compare
the Course of a Man's Actions together. For, so God will judge Mankind; and so
ought we to judge of one another.

(4.) In judging of Men's spiritual Estate from outward Afflictions, which
befall them. Thus Job's Friends were righteous overmuch, when they charged him
so deep with Hypocrisy, because his Calamities were extraordinary. It is
natural for such, who believe Providence to interpret God's Actions toward
Men, are either as Marks of his Approbation or Displeasure. But God has no
where declared so much, and we have no Reason to pass such a Judgment on Men;
since the wise Man says, No Man can know Love or Hatred, by the things which
are before him. And there is a just Man who perishes in Chapter 9. 1, 7, 15.
his Righteousness, and a wicked Man, that prolongeth his Life in his
Wickedness. If such had seen a just Man suffering to such a Degree, they must
have inferred, that he was Guilty of some secret Wickedness, which made God
deal so hardly with him; but the wise Man says, this was to be Righteous
overmuch; for God is not to Act according to our Measures. He knows what is
best, and fittest for Men to undergo; and he never Acts so, as they shall have
Cause to complain at last. There is a just Man to whom it happens, according
to the work of the Wicked; and there is a wicked Man, unto whom it happens,
according to the work of the Righteous. Therefore 8. 14.
it is very unrighteous for us to pronounce any wicked, merely because they
undergo greater Sufferings, and more pinching Calamities than others. There is
no judging a Child to be out of his Fathers Love, because he corrects him for
his Faults; as long as there is hopes of Amendment he will do it; and when
there is none, he lets him alone to take his Course, but he is then more
displeased than ever.

(5.) In judging too easily concerning the Faults and Mis-carriages of others.
Men show their severity to others, and partiality to themselves this way; they
think themselves hardly dealt with, to be censured upon vain and idle Reports;
and yet they are too apt to do the same thing by others. There is a Justice, we
ought to show to the Reputation of others; which lies here in doing as we think
reasonable, as others should do by us. Some cannot think so well of themselves,
unless they think amiss of others; and such are very prying into the Faults of
other Men, and are pleased with hearing them; because hereby they bring them on
the same Level with themselves. What a Satisfaction does it seem to profane
Men, to find out the Miscarriages of such, who pretend to Religion? But are
they the better, or Religion the worse for them? To be a Scandal to Religion,
is a great Aggravation of a Fault; but still Religion is not to blame; for it
was the want of it, which made them commit those Faults; but where there is a
desire to hear the Miscarriages of other Men, and a Pleasure in relating them;
no doubt there is an ill Temper of Mind, from whence this proceeds.

(6.) In not using the same Measures, in judging the good and the evil of other
Men. The one they presently and easily believe; but the other they make many
Difficulties about. If any evil Action be reported of a Neighbor, that is
presently entertained and spread abroad to his mighty disadvantage; although it
be at first taken up from a malicious, or ill grounded Report. But if a good
Action be told, they find out all possible ways, either to lessen the Credit of
the Reporter, or the Nature of the Action, or to find out Circumstances to
exasperate it. So much Malice and ill Will does appear, in the ordinary
Considerations of Mankind, and the Judgments they pass upon one another.

(7.) In pronouncing concerning Men's final State in another World. Which is
wholly out of our reach and Capacity. For that depends upon such things, which
it is impossible for us to know, as

(1.) The Nature and Aggravation of Men's Sins; which depend upon Circumstances
we cannot know, but God does. What measure of Knowledge they had; what
Temptations they were under; what means of Resistance; what Degrees of
Wilfulness and Presumption there were in them.

(2.) The Sincerity of their Repentance for those Sins. We know, it may be, the
Sins they have committed; but we cannot know, how much they have smarted for
those Sins in secret; what Agonies of Mind they have undergone for them; how
earnestly they have prayed for Forgiveness, and Strength against them; what an
inward Abhorrence and Detestation they have of them; what a real Change has
been made in their Souls, as to what they have loved and delighted in.

(3.) What Failings are consistent with a general Sincerity. We know a perfect
Obedience is impossible; therefore we must allow some, or else we must send all
to Hell. But then, how to fix the nature and number of such Failings, so, as to
say, So far he may fail, and yet be sincere is impossible for us to do; since
we must take in those Circumstances, which it is impossible for us to know.

(4.) What things are absolutely necessary to Salvation, of particular Persons.
Bold and presumptuous Men are very positive and daring in such Cases; but such
as are modest and humble dare not go farther than God has declared. Some
unreasonably restrain the Possibility of Salvation, to the Bounds of their own
Communion; but I should sooner question the Possibility of their Salvation, who
thus censure and condemn the rest of Mankind. Which is not consistent with that
Charity, which the Scripture makes more necessary to Salvation, than any one
Communion.

(5.) The Bounds of God's Mercy. The usual Terms of it are expressed in
Scripture: But even that has acquainted us, that God has not tied up himself
from some extraordinary Instances of it. As in the Case of the Thief on the
Cross. This is no ground for Encouragement to any to put off their Repentance,
but it is a sufficient ground to keep us from censuring any, as to their final
Condition in another World.

(2.) The Mischief they bring upon themselves, by being thus severe toward
others.

(1.) This provokes the Malice of others against them; who are sure to be
revenged, if possible, on such who are so ready to condemn others; and to lay
open their Faults, thereby to expose their Weakness or Hypocrisy. Whereas
Candor and Fairness, makes Men willing to use the same toward those who use
it to others.

(2.) It provokes God to be severe to such as show no Mercy toward others. And
so our Savior understands it: Matthew. 7. 1, 2. Nothing we have so much Cause to
dread, as the Severity of God's Judgment upon us; and nothing should make us
more willing to show Kindness and Good Will to others, than to consider that
God will have a regard to it in his dealing with us. Especially, if it appear
in our Actions, as well as our Words. Which is the next thing to be considered,

(2.) We may be Righteous overmuch in the moral Practice of Righteousness
toward others.

(1.) That Men may exceed herein.

(2.) That this proves mischievous to themselves.

(1.) That Men may exceed in Righteousness in their dealings with other Men.

In the Matter of right and wrong, between Party and Party, Men may be
Righteous overmuch, viz. When Men take all the advantages which the Law gives
them against others, without Consideration of their Condition and
Circumstances. It has been long since observed, That Summum jus summa injuria;
the Reason whereof is, That the Law being made for a whole Community cannot be
so framed, but it may pinch hard upon some particular Persons if it be severely
pursued; whose Circumstan^es are such, as the Law never intended. The
Foundations of Justice, says Cicero, are that no innocent Person suffer, and
that the Off. l. 10.
common Good be maintained. Where the Circumstances of Persons deserve Pity; it
is not Justice, but Inhumanity to pursue their own Right to the ruin of others.
No certain Rules can be set down, because Circumstances vary so much, but it
does not become a good Man, to insist upon a bare Right to the utter ruin of
another; if they are such as deserve Commiseration, i. e. Poor, helpless and
willing to do what they are able for Satisfaction. Aristotle says, That a ^th.
l. 5. 10.
good Man does not pursue the (...), the exactness of Law; but abates of his
Right, although he is sure he has the Law of his side.

Is it then unbecoming a good Man to pursue his Right? No. But he ought so to
manage it, as to show he has a regard to Equity as well as Justice.

But there are several ways of Men's being Righteous overmuch.

(1.) When they mind Justice without Mercy. The truth is, such Persons are not
so much as moral Heathens; so far are they from being good Christians. Which so
earnestly recommends Charity and Kindness to our greatest Enemies. So that even
our Justice ought to have a mixture of Mercy in it.

(2.) When they make the Law the Instrument of their Revenge; when they are
glad they have taken their Enemies at such an advantage. We may here apply St.
Paul's words, We 1 Timothy 1. ^
know the Law is good, if a Man use it lawfully. But there may be a very
unlawful use of it, when it is made to serve Men's Passions against each other.

(3.) When they seek for no Accommodation of their Differences in a fair and
amicable manner. The Necessities of some Cases are such, That they are fit to
be referred to such Wise Arbitration as the Law provides; but if Men are
restless and litigious, who love Differences, and delight in vexing their
Neighbors with Law Suits, it is certain they have not the Spirit and Temper of
Christians, who are to live peaceably with all Men.

(2.) How this proves so mischievous to Men.

(1.) It makes such Men's lives very unquiet, and troublesome to themselves and
others. For it is impossible for some to disturb others, but they must expect a
Retaliation. Many Men would have their Passions lie more quiet, if they were
not rouzed up and awakened by others; but when they are, they know not how to
lay them asleep again. And so they exasperate and provoke each other, and take
away all the Peace and Contentment of one another Lives. And what Care and
Solitude, what Vexation and Trouble does attend those, who are thus Righteous
overmuch, that they will always be endeavoring to right themselves, till they
bring the greatest mischief upon themselves?

(2.) It provokes God to shorten their days out of pity to the rest of the
World. For the greatest Blessings of this World, are promised to the meek and
patient, and charitable, and merciful Persons; and therefore, others have no
reason to expect any other but a Curse upon them.

To conclude all by way of Advice, as to the general Sense of these words;

(1.) Not to think every thing too much, in Religion and Virtue, because some
are here said to be Righteous overmuch. The far greatest Part of Mankind err
the other way. They care not how little of Religion they have; and they desire
no more than just to carry them to Heaven. Which shows, they neither know, what
Heaven or Religion means; for then they would be convinced, their Minds could
never be too much prepared for it.

(2.) To understand the difference between true Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
that which is not. For, upon that depends the just Measure of them both. We
cannot be too Wise in that which is real Wisdom, but we may be too easily
conceited of our Wisdom, and cry up that for Righteousness which is not, but a
sort of busy Impertinency about little Matters in Religion, and making a great
noise about them, which signify very little as to true Wisdom.

(3.) Be not too curious in searching, nor too hard in censuring the F^ults of
others. It is a very unpleasant Curiosity to find out the Faults of others;
like that of some Creatures, which delight in Dunghils; and those who consider
the Frailties of human Nature, will not be too severe upon the Miscarriages of
others.

(4.) Live as easily with others as you can, for that tends much to the
sweetning and prolonging Life. It is not possible to live without Injuries;
take as little notice of them as may be; and that may be the smartest Revenge.
If you are forced to right your selves, do it with that Gentleness and
Fairness, that they may see you delight not in it.

(5.) Avoid a needless Scrupulosity of Conscience, as a thing which keeps our
Minds always uneasy. A Scrupulous Man is always in the dark, and therefore
full of Fears and Melancholy apprehensions; he that gives way to Scruples, is
the greatest Enemy to his own Peace. But then let not the fear of Scrupulosity
make you afraid, of keeping a good Conscience; for that is the wisest, and
best, and safest Companion in the World.

FINIS.
Books written by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edw. L. Bishop of
Worcester, and sold by H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion; being a
Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference,
etc. from the pretended Answer of T. C. 2d. Edit. Fol.

Origines Britannicae, or the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a
Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in
Vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph. Folio.

Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds. Quarto.

Origines Sacrae, Or a Rational account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Script and the matters therein
contained. 4 to.

A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it. Octavo.

An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled, A
Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it; Part I. Octavo.

A Second Discourse in Vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against
the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the Guide in
Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason and Religion;
or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into the
Miracles of the Roman Church. Octavo

An Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching
his Vindication of Dr Stillingfleet. Octavo.

A Defense of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome, in answer to a Book entitled, Catholics no Idolaters: Octavo.

Several Conferences between a Roman Priest, a Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine
of the Church of England; being a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G
Octavo.

The Unreasonableness of Separation, or and Impartialaccount of the History,
Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A ^ourse concerning the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction; or the true Reasons
of his Sufferings; with an Answer to the Socinian Objections. To which is
added, a Sermon concerning the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, Preached April
7. 1691. With a Preface concerning the true state of the Controversy about
Christ's Satisfaction. The 2d. Edit. Octavo.

Sermons preached upon several Occasions, in 3 Volumes. Octavo.

A Discourse in Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity: with an Answer to
the late Socinian Objections against it, from Scripture, Antiquity and Reason.
And a Preface concerning the different Explications of the Trinity, and the
Tendency of the present Socinian Controversy. The 2d. Edit. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Lock's Letter concerning some Passages relating to his Essay
of Humane Understanding, mentioned in the late Discourse in Vindication of the
Trininity. With a Postscript in Answer to some Reflections made on that
Treatise in a late Socinian Pamphlet.

An Answer to Mr. Lock's Second Letter, wherein his Notion of Ideas is proved
to be inconsistent with it self, and with the Articles of the Christian Faith.
8 to.

Ecclesiastical Cases, Relating to the Duties and Rights of the Parochial
Clergy, stated and resolved according to the Principles of Conscience and Law.

The Rule of Faith: Or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. S. entitled,
Sure-footing, etc. by John Tillotson, D. D. to which is adjoined, a Reply to
Mr. S's 3d. Appendix, etc. by E^^. Stillingfleet, D. D.

A Letter to Mr. G giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of P's.

A Second Letter to Mr. G in answer to two Letters lately published concerning
the Conference at the D. of P's.

A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in
answer to J. S. his Catholic Letters.

The Effigies of the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of
Worcester, Engraven on a Coopper-plate by Robert White. Price 6 d.


