THE WAYS and Methods of Romes Advancement;

OR Whereby the Pope and his Agents have endeavored to Propagate their
Doctrines.

Discovered in two Sermons Preached on 5 Novem: 1671.

By JOSHUA STOPFORD, B. D. Rector of All Saints in the City of York.

Printed in the Year 1672.

To Thomas Rokeby, and John Brook of the City of York, Esquires.
IT has been none of the Devils meanest or unluckiest Arts to infuse
prejudices into men's minds against Christian practice, by representing it in
the most frightfull and averting forms. He changes shapes with it, and as he
transforms himself into an Angel of light, so he does this into one of
darkness, and makes it appear a State of the most dismal sadness and
horror. And how much more ready men are to take the Devil at his word, than
Christ at his, who professes his Yoke easy, and his Burden light; who says,
that the ways of holiness are ways of pleasantness, appears too fully in
the strong and general antipathie those have against Virtue, who never so much
as tried it, but take up implicit and confused prejudices against it, and
retain those as fast, as if they were the products of many years costly
experiences. And it is too evident, that these have taken the deepest root in the
richest Soil: they seem no where more to flourish, than among the Gentry, and
persons of Quality. It is the business of their lives to pursue pleasures; and
yet when those of the most refined and exquisite sort would run into their
embraces, they grow coy, and cannot be courted to receive them.

If one of a narrow fortune and mean extract attempt to convict them of this
foul mistake, by the most convincing arguments drawn from his own experience,
they either think it inconsistent with their honor to lend him an ear, or (if
they so far degrade themselves as to hear him speak) they presently except
against his Testimony, as being an incompetent Judge.

And if we Clergymen tell them, that a holy life is so far from implying any
thing of real trouble or uneasynesse, that its only an Art of refining and
sublimating their pleasures, rendering them more gustfull and exquisite: That
the duties of Religion are not Toils but Refreshments, not Yokes but Crowns,
such as differ only in size from those Celestial ones to which they tend: That
the pleasures of piety are so ravishing and attractive, that nothing but a
perfect ignorance of them can be Amulet sufficient against their Charms; I
say, though we tell them all this, and a great deal more; yet they quickly
reply, that out of interest and policy we can say no less.

The Testimonies of these persons being rejected, and their endeavors
unsuccesfull, I cannot divine what other Medium remains to work this
Conviction, except the testimony of such as are in equal degree with
themselves, who out of their own experience can tell them, that there are no
such pleasures on this side heaven, as are to be found in conversing with God,
and walking in his ways. Here they would have no cause to wave their wonted
Privilege of being* tried by their Peers, or to except against their judgment
in the Case, who being placed in equal circumstances with themselves, must be
supposed to understand their utmost Temptations to vice, from whence alone all
the seeming difficulties and uneasinesses of virtue do arise.

Could I bring the Controversy to this issue, I should think of no other
Persons (worthy Sirs) than your selves, who out of your own experiences are
able to give such pregnant proof, such clear evidence of the sweetness of
virtue, and pleasantness of piety, as would even force this sorrowful
Confession from them, O how sadly have we been gulled and Cheated by the mortal
Enemy of Mankind.

So great and prodigious are your parts, so deep and profound your judgments,
so extense and comprehensive your knowledge, as would prevent all suspicion of
a mistake. And so sweet and pleasant are your tempers, so prudent and innocent
your deportments, so winning and obliging your conversations as would remove
all prejudices, which too often cause great truths to be slighted, and strong
convictions to become abortive.

Your works of Charity, acts of piety etc. are a pleasant subject, which I
could with singular delight expatiate upon; but I know your modesty will not
allow it and that great Opinion, which all men have conceived of you, renders
it needless.

When I have begged your Pardon for the rudeness of this Address, I shall
conclude with this hearty wish.

That God would bless you with increase of grace, length of days, and at last
with fullness of glory; which is, and shall be the fervent Prayer of

Sir* Your much obliged Friend, and Servant in all Christian Offices. Joshua
Stopford.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THe following Discourse appears in Public upon a just and honest design viz:
to vindicate it self and the Author of it from the unjust aspersions, and
false accusations cast upon them by a generation of men, who make Lies and
Calumnies a Constituent part of their Religion. I confess, if carnal interest,
or a pious design to advance error and profaneness, were able to change the
nature of things, to make vice virtue, an immoral act lawful, they might, nay
they must be excused. For, though they made shipwreck of truth and Conscience
together, yet they are not so far devoid of reason, nor can dis-believe their
senses, as to imagine that others, who are Friends to truth, must be Enemies to
morality; and consequently that the Principles, and Practices of their Church,
truly represented, can be grateful and acceptable to them. Their Doctrines are
so contradictory to those of the Gospel, and their Lives so palpably repugnant
to the sanctity which they profess, that a perfect discovery of them is the
most powerful argument against Popery, and enough to render all their attempts,
to gain Proselytes, unsuccesful. All their hopes and strength lie in the
ignorance and credulity of the Persons they deal with; for if they meet with
any, who have taken some pains to inform themselves of the true state of their
Church, and cannot be satisfied with an implicit faith, or take things upon
trust, they presently give these over as untractable.

Hence it is that a true representation of that which they call the Catholic
Religion, is most frightful to them; as being the most effectual way to make
that abhorred by men, which is so loathsome in the sight of God. This I have
attempted in the following discourse: at which they grin and snarle, nay (to
use David's phrase concerning his Enemies) they make a noise like Dogs, and go
round about the City, yea and Country too. They belch out Lies and Calumnies
with their mouths, and swords are in their lips.

If their boiling passions were once cooled, and the storm laid, I would
mildly and soberly ask them, what is it they take so much offense at? Is it
because I have spoken the truth? This is the true reason, but they are (I
cannot say ashamed,) but afraid to confess it; least hereby their design
should be defeated, And therefore (the things being so gross which I justly
charge upon them) they are obliged to deny the charge, and reward me with their
usual titles of Liar, Calumniator etc.

That this false accusation might not gain credit with Ingenious and
Intelligent Persons, I have not only produced the testimonies of their own
great Doctors (which no Romanist beyond Seas dare except against: though
perhaps here they will, if their Cause and Credit require) and named the
Chapter and Page; but also mentioned the several Editions of those Authors (to
remove all appearance or suspicion of a cheat) which I have made use of. And I
challenge any Romanist (who shall think that I have wronged their Doctors, and
intends something, which must be called a Confutation) to give me the meeting
in an amicable way; and if upon the Perusal of these Authors (which shall be in
readiness) it appear to any Judicious Person, that I have departed from the
literal sense of their words, or express scope of the place: I do by these
presents solemnly engage my self to supersede his pains of an Answer by a
Public Recantation.

One thing (Gentle Reader) I have yet to acquaint thee with, that as time would
not permit me to deliver much of what I have here published, so neither the
place to mention some passages in it.

A Catalogue of the principal Authors produced in the following Discourse, with
the Place where, and Time when they were Printed.
Azorius Institutiones Morales. Paris: 1601. Bellarmine de Scriptor: Eccles:
Colon: 1613. Bellarm: disput: Ingolst: 1588. Baronius Annal: Antu: 1591. Colon:
1603. Cyprian. 1593. Espenceus in 1 Timothy: Lutet: 1561. Coccius Thesaurus
Catholicus. Colon: 1600. Cambdens Elizab: London. 1630 Chamier Panstrat:
Cathol: Gen: 1606. Driedo de Script: Eccles: Lovan: 1543. Claudius Espenceus in
Tit: Paris: 1567. Expurgatory Index of Spain. S^lm. 1601. Escobar Theologia
Moralis Lugd: 1659. Estius in 4 Libr: Sentent: Paris: 1638. Fevardencius in
Esth: Colon: Agrip* 1595. Filliucius Quaestiones Morales Colon* Agrip: 1629.
Jacobus Gretserus de Jure et more prohibend: Lib: mal: Ingolst: Goldastus
Imper: Rom: Francof. 1613. Gregor: de Ualentia Ingolst: 1595. Judices librorum
prohibit: et expurgat^ Hispan: et Roman: Madriti 1667. King James his Works.
Land: 1616* Leonardus Lessius de Justitia et jure Lovan: 1605. Layman Theologia
Moralis Antu. 1634. Longus Sum: Conciliorum. Paris: 1645. Morneys Mystery of
Iniquity. London 1612. Pet. du Moulin de Monarchia Temporali Pontifieis Romani
Land: 1614. Possevin. Appar: S: Uenet. Tom. 1* 1603. Tom: 2. 1606. Martinus
Polonns Chron: Antu: 157^ Ribera in Apocal: Antu: 1593. Rivet. Cathol: Orthod:
Lugd: Batau: 1630. Spondanus Epitome Baronii. Mogunt. 1614. Sr. Edw: Sands
Europae Speculum. Land: 1632. Stow. London 1631. Eman: Sa. Aphor: Paris: 1600.
Sixtus Senensis Biblotheca. S. Colon: Editio 3. Sanderus de Uisibili Monar:
Antu: 1578. Suarez defensio. Fidei Cathol: Colon: Agrip: 1614. Tolet de
Instruct: Sacerd: Romae. 1601. Tertullian Antu: 1584. Iacobus August: Thuanus
Hyster: Gen: 1620. Viegas in Apocal: Colon: Agrip: 1603. B P. Usher Ans: to a
Jesuit. Land: 1631. Johannes Wolfius Lect: Memor: Lavingae. 1600.
Errata
page: line 9 l. 2. read commanded 12 l. 3. read Arts. l. 26 read propagate. So
p. 13. l. 3. 8. p. 17. l. 19. p. 32. l. 4. 13 l. 22. read frequently. 16 l. 14
read transubstantiation. 20 l. 1. read It is. l. 5. read Scholia's. 23 l. ult
read gestatam. 24 l. 2. r. circumgestation. marg: r. 370 29 l. 4. read and so
30 l. 9 read affirm. 42 l. 15. read unparallel. 43 l. 3. read Pilot, 47 l. 13.
read intensionem. l. ult: after receive, insert these words* some signal mercy,
when we are 55 l. 18. read positively. 88 l. 14. read Espenc^^s. 89. l. 8. read
d^ Moulin. l. 19. read Calendars. 95, l. 8. read Wonder. 103. l. 19. read
frequently.

8 Rev. 23. 24. And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee,
and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all
in thee: for thy Merchants were the great men of the earth: for by thy
sorceries were all Nations deceived. And in her was found the blood of
Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.
CHAP. I. The Introduction wherein an account is given of this day's Eminent
deliverance which must be carefully recorded, and thankfully acknowledged by us.
AS amongst the judgments which God executes upon the earth there is a great
and wide difference: some be such as neither Fathers, nor fathers fathers have
seen since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day, 10 Ezod: 7:
Some be such, as the very hearing of them shall make both the ears to tingle 2
Kings 21. 12: Some be such, as are without the least mixture and allay of mercy
14 Rev. 10 So amongst the mercies and salvations of God there is a difference;
they are not all of one and the same size. Some be such as resemble the stars
of the first magnitude; others such as are like the stars of the second and
third magnitude. Some are superlative and matchless; far above others in
their luster and eminency. These mercies are to be diligently observed, and
exactly numbered by us: Of such we are to keep as true a Register as David did
an Inventory of the Gold and Silver that he prepared for the Temple. 1 Chronicles.
22: 14, The Iron and the Brass, which was without weight he numbered not: but
the gold and silver he weighs, and sets down the just number of the Talents. So
though we cannot reckon every blessing that comes from heaven, in regard they
are without number, and without measure: yet ought we to be exact in recording
the golden and silver mercies of God vouchsafed to us. And as we are to
commemorate signal mercies and deliverances, so to transmit the memory of them
to succeeding generations. See this both required and practiced,

1. Required 17 Exodus: 13, 14. Joshua discomfitted Amalek, and his people with
the edge of the sword. And the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a memorial
in a book. 78. Psa: 5. For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a
law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers: that they should make them
known to their children. And what is that? read v: 4. his strength and his
wonderful works. Once more 102. Psalm: 16. 18. When the Lord shall build up
Zion, he shall appear in his glory. This shall be written for the generation to
come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

2, Practiced and that several ways. 1. Sometimes by appointing yearly Feasts
of remembrance 9 Esth: 21, 22. To establish this among them that they should
keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same
yearly: As the day wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month
which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good
day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy. in commemoration of
that signal deliverance which God had wrought for them. 2 By making
Eucharistical Songs, which they taught their children: as in 15 Exodus: for the
overthrow of Pharaoh: in 5 Judg^ for the defeat of Jabin and Sisera; in 1 Samuel:
8. for the slaughter of Goliath. 3 By their significant names which were
sometimes imposed upon persons, and sometimes upon places. 1. Upon persons.
This course Joseph took to perpetuate the memory of signal mercies conferred on
him in Egypt 41 Gen: 51, 52. He called the name of his first born Manass^h; for
God (said he) has made me forget all my toil, and all my Fathers house: And
the name of the second called he Ephraim; for God has caused me to be fruitful
in the land of my affliction.

The like was done afterward by Moses in reference unto what befell him in
Midian 18 Exodus: 3, 4. 2 Sometimes upon places. Thus Abraham, when his son Isaac
had escaped, and a ram been accepted in stead of him, called the name of that
place Jeh^vahjireh, as it is said to this day, in the mount of the Lord it
shall be seen. 22 Gen: 13, 14. The like did Jacob when he saw the Angel of God
32 Gen: 2.

And if eminent mercies and deliverances are to be recorded, and the memory of
them transmitted to posterity: surely then the superlative and transcendent
deliverance and salvation, which was given by God unto the whole Kingdom; as
on this day from the Gunpowder Plot, may justly challeng^ place in that
Chronicle and Catalogue ^ mercies. This is a deliverance (says one) upon the
head of which may be truly written; such as the present age may admire; such as
posterity will scarce believe; such as History cannot parrallel. What the
Historian says of that day wherein Scipio and Hanniball disputed that long
depending cause between Rome and Carthage in open field vizt; that the Roman
Empire had not seen a greater day: The same may we say of this days salva^ion;
England never received a greater deliverance. And therefore ought the memory of
it be dear unto every one, that would not so far gratify the Papists, as by
the forgetting of Gods goodness to silence and bury th^s their wickedness,
which should stand upon record to their eternal infamy. Let us look a little
into the blackness of the Conspiracy which wants a name to express it,
unless we call it (as one does) a Catholic V^llany and you shall hereby best
discern the trascendency of the deliverance. Was there ever any wickedness in
all the Ages that are past, which by the help of History we may come to the
knowledge of, that did equal this? This was a Plot wherein the flower of our
Gentry, our whole Nobility, the Lords anointed, the royal seed, nay Protestant
Religion were all devoted to one stroke of destruction. And observe what
instruments of cruelty they had prepared for this slaughter; such as that not
one of that Assembly could have fled from the fury of, though they had had the
wings of Eagles: nor resisted the force of, though their flesh had been as
brass or their strength as stones vizt: 36 Barrels of Gunpowder. These were
the instruments of their cruelty; such as were never found in the habitations
of Simeon and Levi. Let us further observe with what secrecy and success this
bloody Plot was carried on. With what secrecy; none could be admitted to
consultation about the thing but those that would by vows and oaths, and
Sacraments, and all that is sacred, bind themselves more then once neither
directly, nor indirectly, neither plainly nor by circumstance to discover the
Plot. And with what success was this bloody design carried on! How did God for
a time seem to smile upon their project and facilitate their work, when
providence offered them the con^eniency of a Cellar; whereas they thought that
by strength of hand, they must have dug a Vault to lay their powder in! God
himself seemed to take their part: and they who in 88 had sworn that God was
turned Lutheran, began now to hope that he was become a good Catholic again.
These particulars discover the eminency of this deliverance which we
commemorate this day.

CHAP. II. The cohaerence of the words with a brief explication of them.
GOd who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son. 1
Heb: 1, 2. by whom not only the Gospel of salvation is communicated unto us;
but also the revelation of future events in this last age of the world. 1. Rev:
1. That many things in this Book are (...) hard to be understood is
acknowledged by all; and therefore much revelation is necessary to understand
this Book of revelation. But though some things be dark and mysterious, yet
other things are plain and obvious, even to the meanest capacity; particularly
this prophecy concerning Romes total and eternal destruction. That by Babylon,
mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter, Rome is understood, we have the
suffrage of Antiquity. Babylon was as a first Rome, and Rome is as a second
Babylon says St. Austin de Civit. dei Lib: 18. cap. 2. And in the same Book
cap. 22. he says that Rome is built as another Babylon, and daughter of the
former Babylon. And Tertullian says Tertull: advers: Marcion: lib: 3. cap: 13.
Babylon in St. John is the figure of Rome, as being like that, a great City,
proud of its dominion, and a destroyer of the Saints of God. The Romanists say
that Babylon here is to be taken figuratively not properly: so that it is not
the old Chaldean, but the new mystical Babylon that is here spoken of. Nay
further they say, that by Babylon in this Chapter and else where in this
prophecy Rome is to be understood: so A Lapide, Ribera, Viega etc. Nay
Bellarmin de Rom: pont: lib: 2. cap: 2. p: 718.
produces several Scriptures and Fathers to prove it: But then they add, this
was true of Rome when Ethnical, and not now when Papal; of Rome under the
persecuting Emperor, not of Rome under the Christian Pope. That this is false
appears. 1. St. John writes a prophecy not a Hystory; he tells us what
should be, not what then was; therefore if St. John spoke of Rome (which they
confess) it must necessarily follow that he spoke of Rome as now it is, Not of
Rome as then it was; of Rome Christian, not of Rome Pagan. 2. Antichrist is to
be in the Temple of God, which was not true of the heathen Emperors, 3. Its
such a Babylon that for a while they were lawfully in her; but when her
corruptions did increase, then they were commanded to depart. 4. That St. John
speaks of Rome after the coming of Antichist is most clear from several
passages both in this and the precedent chapters. But Antichrist was not to
come (say our Adversaries) while Rome was Pagan, but after the dissolution of
the Roman Empire. 2 These: 2. 8, And then shall that wicked be revealed. And
when is that? When he that lets shall be taken out of the way v: 7. And who
is this, but the Emperors of Rome according to the judgment of Antiquity? Who
shall be taken out of the way (says De resurrect: carn: cap: 24. page: 688.
Tertullian) but the Roman State? the division of which among ten Kings shall
bring in Antichrist. After the decay of the Roman Empire Paul says that
Antichrist shall appear. Ambrose. To these I might add St. Chrysostom:
Theophilact. etc. in 2 These: 2. The In. 17. Rev:
Rhemists call the Roman Emperors the figure of Antichrist. And the Ancients
give this reason for it; So long as the Roman Empire flourished, Antithrist
could not appear: for there could not be two principal Rulers of the same place
at the same time.

By which we may judge what was the opinion of the Fathers touching Antichrists
seat. That Rome shall be the principal seat of Antichrist is confessed by many
of their own Doctors: so the Rhemists in 17 Rev: 5. Again they say that the
scariet whore, and Beast, and Antichrist are one and the same. in 13 Rev: 1.
But Rome in the judgment of their great Bellarm: is the seat of the scarlet
whore; therefore it must needs be the seat of Antichrist. That Babylon which
St. John describes in the Revelat: is the seat and City * de visib: Monar:
demonst; de Antichr: 38 p: 758.
of Antichrist, says Sanders.

I might to these arguments subjoin the confession of their two great Jesuits,
Ribera and Viega. This must be understood of Rome, Ribera: in: 14. Rev: number:
42. and 57.
not only such as she was under the Emperors, but also such as she shall be in
the latter days. That the name of Babylon must be referred to her, and not
only to that Rome which served * Viega: in: cap: 17. com: 1. sect: 3.
Idols, before she received the faith of Christ, but also to that Rome, which
shall be in the days of Antichrist.

In these words then we have a prophecy of the dismal and final destruction of
Rome Antichristian with the causes thereof, which are three. 1. Their Avarice
and Luxury. 2. Their heretical and damnable doctrines. 3. Their bloody cruelty.

1. Their Avarice and Luxury; For thy Merchants were the great men of the
earth. This cannot be understood literally; for it were a weak reason, because
thy Merchants are great men, therefore thou shall be destroyed: By Merchants
therefore we must understand Romes Factors, the Popes Indulgencers, and other
Off^cers of his Exchequer. These sell cursed spiritual Wares, Pardons, Masses,
Diriges, Trentals etc. and make merchandise of men's souls, and flourish by this
traffic like the Nobles and Peers of the earth. Theod: Nie^. tells us de
Schismate Papist: lib: 1. cap: 68.
that out of one Country, and Province Pope Boniface 9. received above an
hundred thousand Florens. His Officers went out poorly habited, and meanly
mounted, but they returned (says he) with their stately horses and in great
Pomp. And what vast sums of money did Tecelius, and his fellow Indulgencers
rake together in Pope Leo 10. time, All things are set to sale at Rome, the
Temple, the Priests, the Altars, yea heaven and God himself; as their Mantuan
speaks.

Venalia nobis Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, Coronae, Ignes, thura,
preces, Caelum est venale, deusque

2. Their heretical and damnable doctrines, which are often compared to
enticing and intoxicating Wines: by thy sorceries were all Nations deceived.

The Original word translated, Sorceries, properly signifies poisoning: but
here (and in many other places of sacred Writ) it is to be taken in a larger
sense, and denotes the craft and subtilty, the methods and Acts of insinuation,
by which the Pope and his Agents seduce the Nations to their damnable
principles, and abominable practices.

3. Their bloody cruelty: And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth. But how can this be, since
so many thousands have been slain in other parts and places of the world? I
answer, either because the doctrine which caused their blood to be shed, was
from Rome; or because she gave commission to slay the Saints and Servants of
God who were barbarously murdered and massacred in other Kingdoms and
Countries, as England, Scotland, France etc. God plagues Rome as the Original
cause of all this cruelty. But more of this afterward* The two latter causes
of Romes destruction I intend to insist upon; Hence we may note.

Obser: That the ways and methods which Rome Papal has used to advance he^
self, and propogate her doctrines will bring inevitable ruin and destruction
upon her. In the prosecution of this doctrinal proposition I w^ll 1. Give you
a^ account of those ways and method^ which Rome Papal, that is the Pope and
Agents have used to greaten themselves, and propogate their doctrines. 2.
Confirm the truth of this Proposition. 3. Proceed to some practical Inferences.

First, I shall give you an account of those ways and Methods, which the Pope
and his Agents have used to propogate their doctrines. And here I will mention
five or six.

CHAP. III. Of Romish Forgeries.
1. LEt us begin with their Forgeries, which are most notorious. How have they
adopted false into the number, right, and authority of true Fathers? Our worthy
Dr. James has produced about 187 Treatises (to which I could add above an
hundred more) which are not only suspected, but plainly convicted of forgery by
the Papists themselves: and yet these very Treatises are frequently urged by
them to confirm their monstrous Opinions. To make good this assertion, I will
give you a few Instances: and here I shall confine my self to their great
Bellar: and Coccius whose writings are so highly prized by all Papists.

1. Linus Bishop of Rome his two Book^ of the Passion of the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, are adjudged spurious by Baron: Tom: ^. p: 785.
Baroniu^ and Possev: Appar: tom: 2. p: ^45.
Possevin. And though Bellarmin gran^ that Linus w^it the Acts of Peter and
Paul^ yet he says they are now lost.

2. Clements eight Books of Apostolica^ Constitutions are censured by Bellar:
de: script: Eccles: p: ^6.
Baronius, Tom: 1. p: 145.
Bellarmin and de script: Eccles: p: 58. 59.
Possevin.

3. Clements Epistles to St. James and others are rejected by Apper: tom: ^. p:
328.
Bellarmin and de script: Eccles: p: 56. 57.
Possevin.

4. Dionysius the Areopagites Books of the Ecclesiastical and Celestial
Hierarchy cannon be his; for the Author of these Books (a^ appears by several
passages in them) live^ Apparat: tom: 1. p: 331. 336.
after the Nicaene Council.

5. Origens Homilies upon Job are rejected as supposititious by de script.
Eccles: p: 84.
Bellar: Appar: tom: 2. p: 526.
Possevin, and Biblioth: lib: 4. p: 285.
Sixtus Senensis.

6. Origens Treatises upon the 36, 37, 38* Psalm: are questioned by Bellar: and
rejected by Appar: tom: 2. p: 527.
Possevin.

7. St. Cyprians 12 Treatises de Cardinalibus de script: Eccles: 84.
Christi operibus are censured by de script: Eccles: p: 93.
Bellar* and he gives several invincible reasons for it.

8. Zeno's Sermons are accounted spurious by Biblioth: lib: ^. p: ^13
Senensis, and Cardinal Bellar: de script: Eccles: p: 99.


9. Arnobius his Commentaries upon the Psalms are rejected by Bellar: and
Sixtus De script: Eccles: p: 102.
Senensis.

10. Marcus Bishop of Rome his Epistle unto Athanasius is censured by Biblioth:
lib: 4. p: ^05
Baronius. to^. ^. p: 396.


11. Athanasius his Book de Imagine Passionis Christi is rejected by Card:
Bellar: De script: Eccles: p: 116.


12. Athanasius his Questions to Antiochus De script: Eccles: p: ^ 114.
are absolutely condemned by Bellarm:

13. Dorotheus his Synop: de vita Prophet: and Descipul: Christi is rejected by
Bellarm: as spurious and fabulou^.

14. Ambrose his Commentaries upon the Epistle. of St. Paul are censured by
Card: de script: Eccles: p: 143.
Bellar: for which he gives four reasons. de script: Eccle^s: p: 153. Appar:
tom: 1. p: 77.


15. Amphilochius his book of the life of St. Basil is condemned by Card: Tom:
1. p: 41^.
Bellar: and de script: Eccles: p: 165.
Possevin.

16. Athanasius de Annuntiatione is rejected by Cardinal Baronius.

17. St. Hieromes Commentaries on the Epistles are censured by Bellarm: (who
makes Pelagius the Heretic the Author of them) by Biblioth: lib: 4. p: 251.
Sixtus Senensis, and Possevin. Appor: tom: 2. p: ^^


18. St. Austines Questiones Veteris and Novi Testam: are rejected by De
script: Eccles: p: 187.
Bellarmin as written by some Heretic.

19. St. Chrysostomes Opus imperfectum in Mat: was written by some Arrian says
De script: Eccles: p: 176.
Bellarmin.

20. Cornelius his Epistle de translation^ Corporum P^tri and Pauli. is
rejected as spurious by De script: Eccles: p: 89.
Bellarmin.

I might add some hundreds more if time would permit: And yet these very
Treatises are confidently urged by Bellarm: and Coccius to prove Peter's
Supremacy (and consequently the Popes) Trasubstantiation: Communion in one
kind; Purgatory; Invocation of Saints etc.

I have observed above an hundred Treatises, which pass under the names of
several Fathers (who lived within 500 years after Christ) Censuredas
supposititious by Cardinal Bellar: de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis; and yet all
or most of them are urged by him in his Controversies against the Protestants.
This is such a piece of knavery, as none but a Frontlesse Romanist can be
guilty of. Forgery is a notorious Crime, and even in matters of lesser
consequence severely punished by the Laws of this Nation. If any person shall
by false conspiracy, subtilty, and ^^^lt: ^. Eliz: cap: 1^.
falsity, forge any deed, ^harter, or writing or shall procure, publish, and
show forth in Evidence any such false and forged deed, or Writing as true,
knowing the same to be false and forged, and shall be thereof convicted, he
shall be set upon the Pillory in some open Market Town; and there to have both
his ears cut off, and also his Nostrils to b^ s^it, and cut, and seared with
an hot Iron, so as they may remain for a perpetual note or mark of his
falsehood. Were this good and wholesome Law executed upon our Adversaries of
Rome (the moral equity of which extends unto them) they would have as few Ears
as now they have true Fathers on their side. And so much concerning the first
way and Method which the Pope and his Agents use to propogate their doctrines,
by which multitudes have been seduced.

CHAP. IIII. Wherein is declared how the Papists h^ve corrupted the true
Fathers, and ancient Writers.
^. LEt us now consider their fra^^^lency in corrupting the true Fathers, and
primitive Writers. There being many passages in the Fathers and other Ancient
Writers frequently produced by Protestants against them, to which they were not
able to make any rational reply; and finding that their nice distinctions, and
subtle evasions could not satisfy their Adversaries, nor without difficulty
retain their Friends: they resolved to ease themselves of that Wit-labour for
the future, and take some other course that might secure their deluded
Profelytes, and convince (or at least silence) their professed Enemies. And
what course more effectual to accomplish their design, than by purging and
blotting these offensive passages out of the Fathers and other Primitive
Writers? In order to this great undertaking the Pope appointed certain
Cardinals with the Master of the sacred Palace general Inquisitors at Rome;
and to them gave he power to constitute particular Inquisitors in every
Diocese. Hereupon they fell to work, and carefully compiled, and I say
privately as appears by that clause of secrecy in the King of S^ains'
Commission to the Inquisitors. This Diploma or Commission is Printed both in
Dutch and Latin and pre^ixt before the Expurgatory Index of Belg: and Madrid:
in which the King affirms that he caused the Belgic Index to be printed by his
own chief printer, at his own charge not to be sold publicly but privately
distributed to such as should be employed in the work for their direction. And
a little after giving faculty to the Prelates to choose one or more Assistants,
he adds that they should keep the Expurgetory Index privately, and not import a
Copy of it to any man.
privately Printed several Expurgatory Indices at Rome, Madrid, Naples, Lisbon
etc. wherein are expressed these scandalous passages (yet not the hundredth part
of what they have expunged) in the Writings of the Ancients, which are to be
left out, when reprinted, which must be with all possible speed. And to make
all more sure, they got as many of the former Editions of the Fathers Works, as
they could into their hands, not fearing their Adversaries would reprint them,
who wanted means to vent an Impression, being prohibited to be sold in all
Catholic Countries.

By this purgation they hoped that the mouth of Antiquity would be shut from
uttering one syllable against them; and by inserting words (for this they have
also done) where necessity required, and by drawing into the Text of the
Fathers the Marginal Notes, and Glosses of their Monks and Friars, the mouth of
Antiquity would be opened for them.

This villainy is so notorious, that they endeavor to free themselves from the
imputation of it by a confident (or rather impudent) denial of the fact.

Obj: It it true (say they) that Inquis^tors were appointed to purge Author^
but they meddled not with the Text of the Fathers, but only with the
Observations, Annotations, or Scholies that are made upon them by late Authors.

Ans: The insufficiency of this plea will appear by demonstrating these three
particulars. 1. That they have commanded several sentences in the Text of the
Fathers to be expunged, and blotted out. 2. That they defend the justice and
equity of that Command. 3. That their practice has corresponded with it.

1. That they have commanded several words and sentences in the Text of the
Fathers, and other Primitive Writers to be expunged and blotted out. This is
clear from their Expurgatory Indices printed at Madrid, Rome, and other places.
I will give you a few Instances, and so pass on to the next particular. In the
Spanish Index these words are commanded to be thrust out of the Text of St.
Cyrills Commentaries upon Isaiah. cap: 47. Delea^tur ^^ T^rtu illa verba: ^^
vero (...). and
Thou have proceeded so far in impiety, that now there is left unto thee no
place for salvation: for equal punishment will always follow grievous
offenses. And upon 51 chap: these words: Delea^tur ex Tertu illa verb^ Sed vbi
non ha^erent and. p: 62.
But when they cast away all fear of God, and would not receive Jesus Christ by
faith, as it is written.

Hillary in his Enarration upon 118 Ps: must have these words dashed out: Span:
Index: p: 1^0.
Non ex meritis salus, salvation is not of merit; with many other passages in
his Works. I might instance in several other Fathers, which have many
expressions against Idolatry, Satisfactions, Peter's Supremacy etc. commanded to
be blotted out in their Expurgatory Indices: but these are sufficient to
evidence the truth of this first particular viz: That they have commanded
several words, and sentences in the Text of the Fathers to be expunged and
blotted out.

Obj: Its true (say they) some words and sentences are commanded to be expunged
out of the Text of the Fathers, but they are only such as crept in either by
the Printers negligence, or the fraud of Heretics, that is, of Protestants.
Council: Trid: In Indice Lib: prohib: de Correct;

Ans: 1. The corruptions we charge them with cannot be attributed to the
oversight of the Printer, or Corrector; for they are of a larger size: whole
sentence^ are Commanded to be blotted out.

2. Nor could they be foisted in by the fraud of Heretics; for in those days
none of the Fathers had been printed by Protestants. Again, peruse the places
which we produce as razed and corrupted, and it will appear whether ^ide, Papal
or Protestant, were more likely to have an hand in it. The nature of most of
the corruptions will discover the guilty person.

2. That they defend the justice and equity of that Command. Though their
Gretser deny this purgation of the Fathers. lib. 2. de jure and more prohib:
lib: mal: cap: 9. p: 313 -- (where he charge Junius against whom he writes
with a lie) and (lib: 2. cap: 7. page: 298) calls upon our Dr. James to name but
one Father purged, and corrupted by them: Yet he asserts the Popes Authority to
do it, and and calls the exercise of it a work of mercy. lib. 2. cap: 9. p:
321. And that he may not seem to contradict himself in this and the precedent
Chapters, he makes use of this subtle distinction: the Fathers may be
considered either qua Fathers, or qua Fathers in law. The Fathers of the
Church, as they are Fathers feed their Children with sound and wholesome
doctrine, and are not to be purged: But as they are Fathers in law, that is,
deliver any other doctrine than their Father the Pope, or Mother the Church
does or shall maintain, then they may, nay they must be corrected. lib. 2. cap:
10. p: 328.

3. That their practice has corresponded with that command. So much is
acknowledged by Sixtus Senensis in his Epistle to Pope Pius 5. in which amongst
his many and famous Acts, he recounts this for one of the greatest. That he
caused the Writings of all Catholic Authors, but especially those of the
Ancient Fathers, to be purged. Manutius employed by the Pope to print several
of the Fathers at Rome, says, In praefat: ad Piu^ ^ in lib: Cardinali^ Poli de
Concilio*
that care was taken to have them so corrected, that there should be no spot
which might infect the minds of the simple with the show or l^keness of false
doctrine.

To make this yet more clear I will subjoyn a few Instances. St. Cyprian de
bone patientiae tells us post gustatam Eucharistiam etc. After the eating of
the Eucharist the hands are not, or ought not to be defiled with blood: But in
their Cyprian printed at Colen, they have changed the words, and read it, post
g^stat^m Eucharistiam: and so urge this place for the circumgestation of the
Sacrament. Thus much is confessed by Annot: in lib: de bone patient: p: 270.
Pamelius. That notorious corruption of St. Cyprian de Unitate Ecelesiae has
been often mentioned by our Divines. The Ancient Cyprian says, The rest of the
Ap^stles were equal to Peter both in honor and power. The Paris Cyprian has
added these words. The Primacy is given to Peter; he has appointed one Chair;
Peter's Chair. He who forsakes Peter's Chair in which the Church was founded,
does he trust himself to be in the Church? Prefat: in I^^: ^^p^rg: Belg:
Franciscus Ju^ius as an eye witness tells us that being at Lions, and
intimately acquainted with Ludovicus Saurius Corrector of the Press, and going
to visit him he found him revising St. Ambrose's Works, which Frelonius was
then printing. After some discourse Saurius showed him some printed leaves
cancellated and ^a^ed, saying, this is the first impression which we printed
according to the best C^pies; but two Franciscans by command have blotted out
those passages, and put these in their place (praeter omnem nostrorum librorum
fidem) to the great loss and trouble of Frelonius. And not only particular
Fathers, but also general Councels have been corrected and corrupted by them.
The Council of Laodic^a. Can: 35. says; It is not lawful for Christians to
forsake the Church of God, and nominate or invocate Angelos, Angels: they have
made it Angulos, Angles; that is, they must not forsake the Church and pray in
Corners. The Council of Agatha Can: 3^. says, Let no Clergy man presume to sue
any man in a temporal Court without the leave of his Bishop: But they read, Let
no man presume to sue a Clerk before a temporal Judge without the Bishop^
leave. I might also instance in the Council of Chalcedon, and many others: but
these few may serve in stead of multitudes, which might be brought, of their
corrupting the witnesses and ra^ing the Records of Antiquity, by which their
Errors, and Novelties might be condemned.

Many hundred, nay thousand places in the Fathers, and Ancient Writers are
purged, of which no mention is made in their Expurgatory Indices: so that now
it is hard to find the Fathers in the Fathers.

And our Adversaries of Rome have not only corrected and corrupted the printed
Volumes, but also the Manuscript Copies of the Fathers. I remember Dr. James of
the Fathers in his Appendix to the Reader, tells us that in the Vatican Library
there are certain men maintained only to write out the Acts of the Counsels
and Copies of the Fathers Works, who are brought up to imitate the ancient
Letters: and thus Manuscripts themselves are purged by the Romanists. This
information he received from an eye witness. And this Story we have confirmed
in the Proposition presented to the Noble Prince Henry to advance that glorious
design which he had of erecting a Royal Library with all sorts of Books, and
Editions, in these words: The Pope gathers up all the Manuscripts he can into
his Library the Vatican, and there uses them at his pleasure. One of their
tricks is notorious: they have men that can counterfeit any hand, and write the
old hands that were written 500, and 1000 years ago: then they have an
artificial Ink, which within three days after the writing, looks as if it had
been written 500 years before. Thus having altered, and taken out all that
made for us, and against them, they suppress the old true Copies, and produce
these now ones, as the Authentical all Books. And doubtless these are the
ancient Manuscripts, which Manutius and others follow in their late Editions of
the Primitive Fathers.

Neither have our Romanists contented themselves in corrupting the Fathers
whether printed, or written, but they have proceeded to corrupt the holy
Scriptures; which is a degree of wickedness beyond all degrees of comparison.
I will instance in a few places.

3 Gen: 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head -- The Vulgar Latin Ipsa centeret,
She shall bruise thy head, that is the Virgin Mary, ^s their Doctors expound
i^. But the Hebr: Septuag: Chald: Paraph: Targ: Onkel: Hebr: Samarit: Syriack,
and Per^ick Versions, read it either Ipse, or Ips^m. And what use do they make
of this cor^uption? To extol the praises of the Virgin Mary, and prove her
patronage and protection.

4 Gen: 13. And Cain said unto the Lord, ^^y punishment is greater then I can
bear. The Vulgar Latin reads it, mine iniquity ^ greater, quam ut veniam
m^^ear. then I an merit pardon; contrary to the Hebr ^eptu^g: Targ: Onkel:
Syria: Arab: and Pers: Versions. And this is done to countenance their doctrine
of merit de congruo.

Psalm: 99: 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: for he
is holy. The Vulgar Latin reads it Adorate seabellum pedum ejus, quia sanctum
est, adore his footstool because it is holy: Contrary to the Heb: Septuag:
Chaldee paraphrase etc. And this place is urged by Bellar: for adoration of
Saints De Sanct: Beatitud. lib: 1, cap: 13.

Joh 14: 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom tbe Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. The Vulgar Latin reads it,
Spiritus sanctus suggeret vobis o^nia quaec^^nque dixere: the holy Spirit will
suggest to you all things whatsoever I shall say unto you. contrary to the
Greek, Sir: Pers: and Arab: Versions. And what use do they make of this
corruption? To prove that whatsoever is defined in Counsels, is to be received
as the Oracles of God.

Ephesians: 5: 32. This is a great mystery (speaking of Marriage) The Vulgar Latin
reads it, Sacramentum hoc magnum, this is a great Sacrament; Contrary to the
Original word (...), which is never used in Scripture for that which we
properly call a Sacrament; and to the Sir: Arab: and Aethiop: Verse: And this
place thus corrupted they urge to prove that Matrimony is a Sacrament.

Heb: 11: 21. Jacob worshipped upon the top of his staff. The Vulgar Latin
reads it, adoravit fastigium virgae ejus, he adored the top of his staff.
Contrary to the Original, the Syn: Arab: and Aethiop: Verse. And this place they
urge for Image worship.

Heb: 13: 16. With such Sacrifices God is well pleased. The Vulgar Latin reads
it, talibus hostiis promeretur Deuteronomy, by such sacrifices we merit of God:
Contrary to the Original the Sir: Arab: and Aethiop: Verse: And this place is
urged to prove works of Charity to be Meritorious.

Many more places both in the Old and New Testament might be produced, but
these are sufficient to convict the Vulgar Latin of notorious corruptions. Nay
many of their own Doctors confess as much.

I^stit: Mo^ lib: 8. cap: 3. p: 1155.
Azorius the Jesuit says, that many of their Writers since the Council of
Trent, Viega, Canus, Payna, and Lindanus, have noted many Errors in the Vulgar
Latin, not only by the fault of the Printer, but by the ignorance of the
Interpreter.

And Isidore, Clarius, Brixianus ( This Preface is commanded to be expunged by
the Council of Treat. Index lib: prehibit: reg: 3
Praef: in Bibl:) affirms that the Vulgar Latin is corrupted in 8000 places.
And yet the Council of Trent has Constituted this the only Authentic Edition
by which all Controversies must be determined. Co^c: ^r^de^t: Sessio: 4. Ca^:
21.
In all public Lectures, Disputations, Sermons, and Expositions this Edition
must be used as Authentic, and let no man dare to reject it upon any pretext
whatsoever.

Obj: This Translation is St. Jeromes, who lived in the fourth Century; and
therefore not corrupted by Papists to maintain their Novel Doctrines.

Ans: Many Papists deny this to be St. Jeromes, and produce invincible
Arguments. Others say it is partly not wholly Jeromes: so Driedo. Some affirm
(says he) that this Latin Translation De Eccles Scriptur: ^^b: 2. p: 40.
is neither Jeromes, nor in all things consonant to the Original. And
afterward in his first Proposition he says, that this Latin Interpretation
is neither altogether different from St. Jeromes, nor in all things agreeable
to it. I will conclude this with the testimony of their great De verbo dei lib:
2. cap: 11. p* 120.
Bellarmin: The Vulgar Edition has not one Author, but some things from
Jerome, and some things from Lucian, and some things from Theodotion, and some
things from another unknown Interpreter.

And so much concerning Romish Forgeries, and Corruptions; which give us just
cause to suspect the Antiquity of their Doctrines. For if the Ancient Fathers
vote for them (as they would persuade the world) why do they produce so many
counterfeit Treatises, and corrupted passages, as lawful witnesses against us?
May we not well question that man's title, who in Court produces a forged, or
corrupted Deed, when he knows his Adversary is able to prove the Forgery?

CHAP: V. Of Romish Treasons and bloody Cruelties.
3. WE now proceed to the third Method which the Pope and his Factors have
used to propogate their Doctrines vizt. their horrid Treasons, and bloody
Cruelties. The Romish Doctors lay down these propolitions as undeniable Maxims.

1. That the Pope has power and authority to depose Kings and to dispose of
their Kingdoms. For this they urge 1 Jer: 10. I have this day set thee over
the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroys and to throw down to build, and to plant: which (say they) was
prophetically spoken of the Pope. And thus Pope Pius 5. in his Bull against
Queen Elizabeth expounds it. Epist: ad Micbael: Imp: Constable: Baron: Tom: 10, p:
560.
Nicolus 1. proves his Papal power, because it was said to Peter, Kill and
eat, and because to him alone was granted that power to draw a Net full of
fishes to Land. And Extravag: Tit: 8,: p 853.
Boniface the 8. proves his Soveraignity, because it is written, that in the
beginning God creaeed Heaven and Earth. But how weak, and ridiculous soever
their proofs are, yet this doctrine is un animously received, and zealously
defended by them. I could here produce a cloud of witnesses, Salmeron, Molina,
Seulckenius, Coquam, Lessius etc. These with many others, tell us, that the
Pope has power to punish Kings by deposing them, and giving their Kingdoms to
others: That this is the opinion of all Divines both Ancient and Modern, of all
Catholic Lawyers, of Occumenical Councels, and Popes: That in this there is no
disagreement amongsi them: That he cannot be held a Catholic, no nor
Christian, that is against it: That Christ had not been careful enough of the
Church, and salvation of souls, if he had not left the Pope a power over Kings
etc. And that this is the judgment of our English Romanists is most evident
from their numerous Pamphlets; to which I might add the Answers of several
Seminary Priests (when Prisoners in the Tower) unto certain Articles ministered
unto them in the Year 158^.

Nay they teach that not only the Pope but the people! also, may depose their
Kings. And here let two of their great Doctors speak for the rest viz:
Bellarmine and Estius. The first says, Bellar: de Council: lib: 2 c: 19. p: 139
That if the King turn Tyrant, the people may depose him, and choose another.
And he gives this reason for it; Bellar: de ^^icis: lib: ^3 c: 6.
It is the Consent of the people that constitutes Kings, or other Ruler^ over
them; and therefore if cause be given, they may turn the Kingdom into an
Aristocracy, Democracy etc. And ^^ 4. lib: S^^te^t: lib: 2. p: 444.
Estius speaks to the same purpose; The Nobles and people by the Authority
residing in them, may defend themselves from Tyranny and not only choose
themselves a lawful Prince, but also, cause being given, may dethrone him again

And they mention several cases, in which it is lawful to depose Kings. As
^evardentius mentions: 12. Con: in Est: p. 90 and.
1. If they be Prodigal of the public Revenues. 2. If violato^s of the Public
faith. 3. If they be he guilty of Sacrilege. 4. If they be Tyrants. 5. If they
be negligent, or insufficient, or effeminate. 6. If they be Heretics. In
these, and many other cases, say their great Doctors, and some of their
Councels, the Pope, and people may deprive King; and Princes of all Rule and
government.

2. That the Pope can absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and
their Obedience due to their respective Princes. Aquin: 2^ Quaest: 1^. Art: 2.
Their Angelical Doctor tells us, that when any Prince is declared
excommunicate for Apostasy, his Subjects are ipso facto freed from his
government, and their oath of fealty. And Franciscus Suarez affirms, that the
Pope can absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Deseas: Fidei Cath: lib: 3. cap:
23. n: 21. lib ^. c: 2. ^: 7. cap: 5. ^2. 3
Allegiance; that to affirm the contrary is to act against the custom of the
Church, the use and approbation of General Councels, the Consent of Catholic
Doctors, and against reason, and is plainly Heretical. And what was the
judgment of Cardinal Perron is clear from his speech to the third Estate of
France (for which several Bishops highly commended him, and the Pope gave him
thanks) in which he says, that subjects may be absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance made to their Kings. That all parties of the Catholic Church did
hold it, and so did the French Church ever since divinity was taught in
Schools, till the coming of Calvin. Against this Speech our Learned King James
writ his Remonstrance for the Right of Kings, and the Independency of their
Crowns.

3. That Kings excommunicated, and deposed may be lawfully killed by their own
Subjects; because then they cease to be Kings. Lessius (...): C^th: lib: 6.
cap: 4. ^. 18. 14.
tells us, that the people, Parliament, or any other having ^e J^stit: (...) 2.
cap: (...): 4, (...) 12. ^e J^stit: lib. 5. Quaest: 1. Art: 3.
Authority, may depose a tyrannical Prince, and declare him an Enemy; whereby
any thing may be attempted against his person, because he then cease to be a
King. Dominicus Soto says, that when once a decree is g^ne out against a King,
then any one may be the Executioner. And Suarez affirms no less then three
times in one Paragraph, that Kings may be murdered by their own Subjects; and
he gives this weighty reason: When a King is deposed, he is no lawful King, and
therefore may be be killed by any private man. And that this is not the private
Opinion of Suarez, but unanimously received by all Romanists, is clear from the
high censures of approbation in the beginning of his Book. Alpho^so a Castello
Branco Bishop of Conimbria declare: that he has read it exactly over, and
f^^d^ all things in it agreeable to the holy Scriptures, Apostolical Tradition,
General Councels, and Papal decrees. Fer^ando M^rtin: Masca^^gnus Bishop of
Sylvis says, that he has also read it over, and find^ nothing in it, but what
is Orthodox. And M^rte Alph^^s^ a Mello Bishop of Lamego says also, that he
has read it over, and thinks it worthy to be published for the public good of
Christendom. Nor is this all, but (to pass over the Inquisition, and others,
who allow it the same privileges) the University of C^mplut: after a serious
view, and consideration of it, declare that there is nothing in it contrary to
the Roman Catholic ^ith: that every thing i^ worthy of praise and commendation.

Nay this King-killing is not only lawful, * (...) lib: 96. p: 454. etc.
but highly commended, and rewarded with eternal glory. They encouraged Friar
Climent to murder Henry 3. Ant: Coly^et* p: 403 etc.
of France, with these promises. That he shall be well recompensed for the
fact; if he dye he shall surely fly to heaven as a Saint, an^ ^^e ^^r^ll'd
amongst the Roman Martyrs on Earth. And this horrid fact was highly commended
by the Pope in a full Consistory at Rome. How did Pope Baron: tom: 10. p. 4^^.
Adrian 2. extol and magnify Basilius for murdering Michael Emperor of
Constantinople? Party was confirmed in his resolutions to kill o^r Q: Elizabeth
by a Letter from Cardinal C^^^o, in which we have these expressions: His
Holiness grants unto you his blessing, Plenary Indulgence, and remission of
all your sins according to your desire. And how was Barriere encouraged to
murder Henry 4. of France with these words, that he should gain by that Act,
both great glory and Paradise. I could instance in many others, but these are
sufficient.

Thus you see what traiterous positions, and destructive of all Government, are
laid down, and defended by our Romanists. Our King James therefore had good
reason to say that none of those that truly know, and Speech in Parliment 1605.
believe the whole grounds, and School Conclusions of their doctrines, can
either prove good Christians, or good Subjects.

We have heard what treasc^able Doctrines are delivered and defended by our
Adversaries of Rome, and that their practices have been conformable to them all
Hystories declare. How many treasons have the Popes of Rome Committed,
Commanded, and Commended? Morneys Mist: Iniquit: who ci^^s several Hyst^ri^^s.
Pope Gregory 4. and his Bishops promoted the Rebellion of the three Sons of
Ludovicus Pius; and Gregory 7. raised a rebellion Henry 4. Emperor of Germany:
Gold ast^ Imperii Rom Mon, p: 561.
Boniface 8. stirred up the people of France to rebel against Philip 4.
surnamed le Bell. When Henry Bullenbrook Duke of Hereford and Lancaster landed
in Yorkshire, most Stow: p. 320.
of the Bishops flocked to him, traitorously owning him for their Sovereign;
and Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury Preached against Richard 2. then
King, and produced a Bull from Rome promising remission of sins to all those
who should aid the said Henry against King Richard, who was afterward murdered
in Pontefract Castle. How were the Irish encouraged to rebel by Pope Gregory
13. his Breve, promising to grant them as plenary a pardon of all their sins,
as was formerly given to those, who fought against the Turks? and was not the
Spanish Invasion Cambden p. 128 etc.
promoted by the Pope, and our English Romanists? And that our late Wars here
in England were raised and fostered by the arts of the Court of Rome, is more
than probable. Vindication of Prot: Relig: p: 58 etc.
The Roman Priest and Confessor is known (says Dr. De Moulin) who when he saw
the fatal stroke given to our late gracious King, flourished with his sword,
and said, Now the greatest Enemy we have in the world is gone. When the News
of that horrible execution came to Roan (says the same Author) a Protestant
Gentleman of Good Credit was present in a great Company of Jesuited Persons:
where after great expressions of joy, the gravest of the company, to whom all
gave ear, spoke much after this sort. The King of A notorious ye
England at his Marriage had promised the re-establishing of the Catholic
Religion: and when he delayed to fulfill his promise, we summoned him from time
to time to perform it? We came so far as to tell him, that if he would not
do it, we should be forced to take those courses which would bring him to his
destruction. We have given him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve,
we have kept our word to him, since he would not keep his word to us.

That grave Rabbis sentence agrees with this certain intelligence which shall
be justified whenever Authority shall require it: That the year before the
Kings death, a select number of Jesuits were sent from their whole party in
England; first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sor^en; to whom they
put this Question in writing: That being the State of England was in likely
posture to change Government, whether it was lawful for the Catholics to work
that change, for the advancing and securing of the Catholic cause in England,
by making away the King, whom there was no likelihood to turn from his h^resy?
Which was answered affirmatively. After this the same persons went to Rome,
where the same Question being propounded and debated, it was concluded by the
Pope and his Council, that it was both lawful and expedient for the Catholics
to promote that alteration of State. And what followed is known to all the
world. Much more to this purpose you may read in the following pages.

Time would fail me should I recount all the Treasons which the Pope and his
Agents have been the Authors and f^menters of. And yet these men (who make
rebellion an Article of their faith) have the impudenc^ to speak and write of
their Loyalty to temporal Kings and Princes. Out ^^gli^h Romanists drew up a
supplication to King J^^es, and (...) Parliament, in which they do not a
little vaunt and brag of the Loyalty of their Religion in these words: The
Catholic Subject is (if any other) the glory, page: 7.
strength, and perpetuity of the Kingdom, because he principally seeks
Heaven in this world (and will not for the world be diverted) cannot be
treacherous, or disloyal, or undutifull to your Highness, but in every service
and distress occurring, valiant, resolute, and most faithful. And all these
fair words were to the same King and Parliament, whose destruction they
intended, and had at that time contrived. O unparrallel Hypocrisy!

And Philanax Anglicus (a late Pamphleter) tells us, that the Romanists are
page: 104.
to fight only with prayers; Arms against Princes have no warrant. Who is
Judge if the King transgresses the Conditions of his Kingdom? only God.
Navar, Cunerus, and all the Catholic Doctors that ever I have seen, Surely
then he never saw Aquinas, Saurez, Lessius etc,
agree perfectly in this same sentence. And so much concerning their traiterous
Doctrines, and rebellious practices, by which the Pope and his Agents have
endeavored to propogate their Religion.

Let us now take a survey of their bloody cruelties. And here I must lead you
into Golgotha, a field very ample and large, like that to which God brought the
Prophet Ezekiel 37. We may boldly affirm that the ten persecutions of the
Emperors of Rome, never put to death so many, nor with that cruelty, as the
power of the Bishop of Rome. Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.
To speak of the Murders Massacres and cruelties of the Papists is so large a
field, that entering into it. I know not where to begin, nor where to end. I
could show you a Sea of blood flowing from the Sea of Rome: like to that which
Ezekiel speaks of 47 chapt: 3, 4, 5. which was at the first to the Ancles,
then to the knees, then to the Loins, deeper and deeper. I could entertain you
with a lamentable Story (which would make you abhor the very name of Popery) of
their barbarous cruelties exercised upon the Albigenses, and Waldenses: and
their Parisian Massacre take briefly thus. Charles 9. King of France, under the
pretense of the grand Solemnities of the King of Navar's Marriage with his
Sister, invited all the Grandees of the Hugonots of France, with Leicester and
Burghley out of England, and the Sons of the Palatine Elector out of Germany;
intending by this means to * Thuanus lib: 52. 53.
ruin the Protestant Religion. The French obeyed, and appear to, where they
Camdent Eliz: p: 50.
were entertained with all manner of Gayeties and Triumphs: but the conclusion
was tragical; for within a few hours many thousands were most barbarously
massacred. This cruelty was celebrated by the Romanists in France, as one of
the most glorious actions the world has been acquainted with: great rejoycings
at Court for it, and public thanks given unto God. But the greatest joy was at
Rome: Cardinal Lorain gave the Messenger that brought the News of it, a
thousand Crowns: the Letter was read in the Conclave; public thanks were
given in their Churches, the Cannons discharged, Bonefires made, a Jubilee
published throughout all Christendom: And a grand Procession was made to the
Church of St. Lewis, where was the Nobility, Bishops, Cardinals, several
Ambassadors, and the Pope under a Canopy. And the better to perpetuate the
memory of this Massacre, the Pope caused it to be painted about his great Hall
in the Lateran, and there recorded in Marble.

I will not be your Pilat to w^ft you into the Indies, where the Christian
Romanists have killed more Pagans, then ever Pagans killed Christians; nor yet
speak of their butcheries in the late Irish Rebellion. One observes that nine
hundred thousand Protestants were murdered in Christendom in a few years. And
so much for the third particular.

CHAP. VI.
Sect: I. Wherein is declared the suitableness of Popish doctrines to men's
carnal inclinations.
4. We come now to discourse of the fourth Method which the Pope and his
Agents have used to propogate their Religion, and that is, by accommodating
their Doctrines to men's several humors and carnal inclinations. And of all
their Wiles and Stratagems I look upon this as the most effectual: by their
other Methods they have gained their thousands, but by this their ten
thousands, This brings whole shoall^ of silly souls into their Net. Their
Doctrines, and the reasons of which they make use to support them are so many
means and expedients proper to authorize Vice, to support sin, to excuse the
most criminal actions, and to encourage loosnesse and disorders in all sorts of
professions. What St. Austin says of the whole Scripture viz: that it is
Charity, and relates thereto, as to its end: we may say of Popish Doctrines,
they are nothing but debauchery, and relate thereto as unto their end. There
are few Commands, either affirmative or negative, which their great Casuists
(the Guides of consciences) do not free men from the obligation of, either
wholly or in part, by the propositions they lay down as undeniable Maxims. The
truth of this will appear by an Induction of particulars.

1. God commands us to love him with all our hearts and souls, sincerely and
superlatively. 22 Mat: 37. But from the rigor and severity of this Law we are
freed by the Maxims of their Casuists, the truth of which we must not
question. Theol: Moral: Tom: 2. tract: 22. cap: ^. p: 48.
Filliutius explicating how we are obliged to love God, says, that this ought
not to be extended in such a manner, as that we must have in our hearts a more
intense degree of love for God than for the creatures: and observe his reason,
by this way (says he) we better provide for the peace and comfort of pious
persons, who without this would be always in doubt of their love to God, if it
ought to be in an higher degree than the love of any Creature whatsoever. And
he brings in Aquiras, Valentia, and Azorius voting with him. And to the same
purpose speaks Instr: Sacerd: lib: 4. p: 544.
Card: Tolet: We are not obliged (says he) to love God above all things
quantum ad intentionem, but only quantum ad appretiationem; appretiatively (by
way of valuation) that is, if we think God more worthy and excellent than all
created Beings. How easy have these infallible Doctors made this most
difficult precept? And yet this is not all; for propounding this Question, *
Filliuc: Tom: 2. trat: 22. c: 9. p: 49.
when are we engaged to love God? They answer Not above three or four moments
in our lives viz: when we begin to have the use Escob: Theo Mor: Tract: 5. p:
600.
of reason, at the point of death, and from 5 years to 5 years during life.
Others I confess are more liberal and add five moments more viz: When Baptism
is received by an adult person, when contrition is necessary, when we receive
some are to suffer Martyrdom, when the honor of God is to be defended, and
when we are obliged to love our Neighbor; but these are rejected by Filliucius
as superfluous.

2. God commands us to worship him in spir^t and in truth. 4 Joh^ 24. with all
the powers and faculties of the soul. But if this seem too painful and
laborious their Casuists will give you case, and tell you that the Opus
operatum is sufficient. They teach that it is not necessary to the essence of
prayer, that he who praye^ should think de ipsa locutione, of the speaking it
self. When its said, we must say our prayers attently, reverently. devoutly.
We must know (says Cardinal * Instruct: Sacerd: lib: 2. cap: 13. p: 422.
Tolet) that attention or Advertency to our prayers is manifold. 1. That we
attend to to the words, so as not to speak them too fast, or to begin the next
verse, before be that recites with us has done the former: and this attention
is necessary. 2. There is an attention which is by understanding the sense of
the words: and that is not necessary: For if it were very few would do their
duty, because very few understand what they say. 3. There is an attention
relating to the end of prayer; when he that praye^ considers that he i^ in the
presenc^ of God, and speak^ to him; and this is profitable but not necessary.
And in the next page he affirms, that the precept of hearing Mass is no^ to
attend the w^rds, but to be present at the Sacrifice though the words be not so
much as heard; and they who think otherw^se, think so without any probable
reason. And Tract: 1. p: 174.
Escobar asserteth Theol. Mor tract: Exam: 11. cap: 4. p. 183.
that if the external deportment of the body be devout its sufficient. Nay this
presence and posture of the body is sufficient (says Escobar and Filliucius)
though the mind be entertained with thoughts of lust. Theol: Mor tom: 1 tract:
5. p. 70.
and vanity. Thus a man may serve God and Satan at the same time.

3. God commands us to give alms of such things as we have. 11 Luk: 41. A
severe Command (faith the covetous Worldling) must I give away my Estate, that
has cost me so dear, unto I know not whom? I cannot embrace a Religion that's
so chargeable. O come over to us (says the Romanist) and our infallible Guides
of conscience will ease you of your pain and trouble. Escobar handling this
Question, ^ Theol: Mor tom: 5. cap: 4. p: 608.
When this precept of giving alms obliges? Answers, that in extreme necessity
we are obliged to give alms of such things as are not necessary unto life,
though they be needful to support us in our condition; because the life of our
Neighbor (for by extreme necessity he understands that on which the life of
man depends) ought to be preferred to the decency of our condition. And
afterward propounding this Question, Whether he that has more then he needs
to live according to his Condition, page: 609.
be obliged to supply the common necessities of others? He answers negatively:
and observe his doughty reason; because otherwise very few rich men would be
saved. That is, though a man has a very plentiful estate, more than sufficient
to supply his own necessities, and those of his Family, yet he is not obliged
in a public Famine to give unto the poor, except it be to save his life. And
De sept: peccat: Mort: cap: ^5. ^: 1001.
Cardinal Tolet tells us that this is the common Opinion. Yea diverse, Casuists
have found out a way to exempt even the richest persons from this obligation of
giving alms, by interpreting the word superfluous. And this is done by the
learned Vasquez in this manner: What ever men lay up, out of a design to raise
their De Eleem: cap: 4.
o^n fortunes, or those of their Relations, is not called superfluous. For
which reason it will be hard to find among those that are worldly minded, that
have ought superfluous, no not even among Kings. Thus you see that, according
to the Rules of these Casuists, rich men are rarely, if ever obliged to works
of Charity.

Obj: But who are more frequent in works of charity than Roman Catholics?

Ans: What men give for the redemption of their souls from the pains of
Purgatory, or the prevention of them, cannot properly be called a work of
Charity. He that gives 50 or 100 l. to the poor to avoid the disgrace of
public Penance, or expiate some notorious Crime, cannot hence be denominated a
charitable man.

4. God commands Women to be modest in their habit and attire 1 Pet: 3: 3: and
they must not conform to the corrupt customs and fashions of the world. 12
Rom: 2. If this displease our Gallants, Lessius will tell them, that these * De
Just. ^ jure lib: 4. cap: d: 14. ^ 114 p: 7^^
and such like Scriptures were precepts directed only to the women of that
time, that by their modesty they might give such examples as should be for the
edification of the Heathen.

And their famous Escobar (whose * Theol: Mor tract: 1. Exam: 8. p. 135.
judgment we must not question) positively affi^ms that when a woman adorns
her self without any wicked design (that is, to tempt others to lewdness) by
a natural inclination which she has unto pride, it is but a venial sin, and
sometimes no sin at all. Nay Layman says, that for men to wear Women's, and
Women Men's apparel is no sin. Theol: Mor lib: 2. p. 242


5. God commands us to speak the truth 4 Ephesians: 25. and not to swear falsely. 4
Jer: 2. But alas (may some say) without lying and false swearing we cannot
manage our Trades, secure our Concerns, and accomplish our designs. The strict
observation of these precepts would expose us to a thousand inconveniences. For
the ease of such men's Consciences their excellent Casuists have invented three
ways viz: Equivocation, mental reservation, and directing the intention: by
the help of these you may say and swear what you please. In swearing it is *
Theol: Mortrast: ^. Exam: 3. c. 4. ^. 69.
lawful (says Escobar) to use ambiguous terms, which the hearer may take in
another sense than he does from whom they proceed. Cap: 7. p. 73.
And propounding this Question, Is it lawful for him that swears in a just
cause to use equivocal words, which he understands in a sense (which he
concealeth) different from that in which those persons take it before whom the
oath is made? He answers affirmatively with Sanchez. And to make this more
clear, he subjoyns several Instances, which are taken out of their most famous
Casuists, Lessius, Sanchez etc. A man being interrogated by a Judge upon oath,
whether he killed S. T. If he killed him in his own defense, he may deny it;
waking this mental reservation, that he did not wickedly murder him. If it be
a probable Opinion, that such an Imposition upon goods is unjust, which
enforces the Merchant to usefalse weights and measures: if he be asked
afterward by a Judge, whether he used false weights and measures, he man deny
it upon oath; making this reservation in his mind, that he did nothing
unjustly. A Priest being interrogated concerning such a sin, which he heard in
Confession, may answer, yea and (if need require) swear, that no such thing was
confessed to him, meaning as a private man. Some necessary Goods thou hidest,
left they should be swept away by thy Creditors, and thou compelled to beg,
being asked before a Judge, thou may swear that none are concealed by thee:
making this mental reservation; which thou art obliged to discover. An
Adulteress being demanded of her Husband, whether she has committed
adultery; may swear negatively: conceiving in her mind another day than that on
which she did commit it. One coming from a place falsely supposed to be infected
with the plague, being asked, whether he came thence, may swear that he did
not; making this mental reservation, as from a pestilential place. If a man
borrow a sum of money of another, and return it, but takes no receipt under
his hand, and be brought to his oath before a Judge whether he borrowed any
money of him, he may lawfully swear, that he never received any money of him;
understanding within himself, not so as to owe it, or that he is obliged to
confess it. says Filliucius. And in the same Quaest: Mor:
Question he lays down this general rule: He that has externally promised
something * Tom: 2. tr: 25. cap. 11. p. 107.
without an intention of promising, if he be asked, whether he promised, may
upon oath deny it; making this mental reservation not with a promise that
obliges him. And Quest: 4. he propounds another way to avoid lying and
perjury, much more secure than the former. And that is, when a man having said
aloud, I swear that I have not do^e such a thing, he adds, whispering to
himself, this day.

And if any be too thick skull'd to learn this art of making these mental
reservations, they have invented a more easy way viz: ordering and directing
the intention aright. Theol: Mor tract: 3. Exam: 3. p. 369.
Escobar lays down this general rule: Promises oblige not when a man has no
intention to engage himself when he makes them. If a man falling into the
hands of Thieves cannot be dismissed without an oath that he will give them ten
Crown, he is not obliged, except he did intend it at the time of swearing,
says Instruct: Sacerd: lib: 4. cap. 22 p: 191.
Tolet. And Aphor: p. 98. Tom: 2. tract: cap: 11. p. 107.
Emanuel Sa potively affirms: that he who swears to do this o^ that, is not
obliged, if he did not intend by that oath to oblige himself. And Filliutius
gives this reason for it because it is the the intention that regulates the
quality of the action.

These Methods their Casuists unanimously propound, by which all lies and
perjuries may be justified. How destructive they are of all commerce, and
humane Society is most evident.

6. God commands us to make restitution of such Goods as we have unjusty taken,
or detained from others 19. Luk: 8. And the Ancients say, that without
restitution there can be no remission. But their Casuists have found out many
expedients to dispense with this important duty. Medina, Lessius, and
Filliucius mention twelve causes which excuse from restitution; to which many
more are added by other Casuists. I will mention, * Theol: Mor tract: 3. Exam:
2. cap: 2. p: 337.
and but mention, a few of them. 1. If a man has done thee wrong without any
ill intention, he is ^^ wise obliged to make restitution, says Escobar. 2.
Ignorance of what kind soeven, either of the factor Tract 3. Exam: 2. c: 4. p:
24.
of the Law is a suffic^ent excuse. says the same Casuist. And though after
same enquiry he find it more probable, that the goods whereof he is possessed
belong to another, yet he may lawfully keep them, says Palaus Cited by
Escobar. And he gives this reason; because possession p. 350.
praeponderates all contrary reasons which are not demonstrative. Nay though
^he be fully convinced: that they are another man's Goods, yet, if they be
moveable after three years enjoyment, and if i^^^^able, after ten years
possession, he is (...) obliged to make restitution, says Filliucius. 3. When
another man's Goods are mingled * Tom: 2: tract: 32. c: 5. p: 242.
with his own: so Lessius. A Merchant (says Escobar) who has received another
man's money, and mingled it with his own, De Just: lib: 2. p: 172 Theol: Mor:
tract: 3. Exam: 2. p: 350.
if he to whom the money appertained, demand it back again, he is not obliged
to restore it according to Vasquez. 4. Impossibility of doing it without
lessening a man's retinue, and loss of honor and Tract: 3. Exam: 2. (...) 341.
and 356
reputation: so Escobar, and Sa who cites So^^, Arag: and Tolet. And Layman
lib: * Aphor: p. 143.
3. t^ract* 2. p. 305. Navar: Manual: Confess: cap: 17. p. 320. who gives
several reasons for it. Filliucius Tom: ^. tract: 32. cap. 5. p. 243. 5. When
it is a greater disadvantage to the person, that restores, than an advantage to
the person wronged, Page: 356.
says Escobar (who cites Tolet) S^. and Layman. 6. When his Confessor does not
enjoin it. Escobar. tract: 3. Exam: ^. p. 339. 7. When a man renounceth his
Tract: 3. Exam: 2. p, 359.
Estate. Apher: p. 143. lib: 3. p. 305.
Escobar putting this Question, whether a man that renounceth his Estate, may
with a good conscience retain so much as is necessary for himself and Family
to live in honor, or according to his quality? Answers with Lessius that he
may do it. Now if we admit these excuses as just and lawful (which none must
question) its most clear that few, if any, will be liable to make restitution
of those goods which they are most unjustly possessed of.

7. God commands us to be sober 2 Tit: 12. and to avoid intemperance in eating
and drinking 21 Luk: 34. But their great Tract: 2. Exam: ^, cap: 8. p: 294.
Escobar, who speaks according to the sentiments of four and twenty of their
most eminent Casuists, is more indulgent: for propounding this Question,
Whether it be lawful to eat and drink ones fill without necessity for pleasure
only? Answers positively with Sanctius, that it is no sin at all, except the
health of the body be impaired by that excess. And he gives this invincible
reason; because the natural appetite may be permitted to move according to its
own inclinations, and enjoy the pleasure it finds therein. And discoursing of
intemperance in drinking, he starts this Question: One drinks to excess, not
so far as to be drunk, but in such manner that his head aches, or the wine
disturbs him in such sort, that he knows not very well what he does; but yet he
has reason enough to know that he has drunk too much. Layman, Filliucias etc,
give this definition of drunkenness: It is an excess in drinking for pleasure
only till the use of reason be utterly lost.
What kind of sin is this? He answers, it is a venial sin. And observe his
reason; because he has not wholly lost the use of reason.

But perhaps some may say, though intemperance in drinking be in it self but a
venial sin, or none at all; yet the consequences of that excess viz: swearing,
whoring etc. doubtless a man must be accountable for. This scruple is removed
by their omnipotent Doctors. Tract: 2. Exam: 2. cap: 5. p. 290.
Escobar says, that a man is not responsible for the excesses and disorders
which he commits at such a time, if he did not foresee them before he began to
drink. Cardinal Instruct: Sacer: lib: 5. cap: 10. p. 647.
Tolet affirms, that if a man be drunk, and then commit fornication or murder,
that fornication or murder is no sin. And Theol: Mor lib: 1. p: 18.
Layman says, that Murder committed by a man when drunk is no sin abstractly
considered: and he gives this reason, because it is no way voluntary and moral
in it self.

Aristotle says, that drunkards deserve double punishment. 1. For their
drunkenness. Eth: lib: cap. 5.
2. For the sins committed in and by their drunkenness. But what ever Aristotle
or Plato, or Seneca, or any other Heathen (who had only the light of nature to
direct them) shall affirm to the contrary; yet we must not entertain a
disbelieving thought of the truth of these positions* which are the efforts of
an infallible Spirit.

8. God Commands us not to take his name in vain 20 Exodus: 7. But may some say,
we have got a habit of using Gods name irreverently upon all occasions, and
when transported with passion, to utter blasphemous expressions. Be not
troubled, your infallible Guides speak very comfortably to your particular
cases, Lar^^^^ treating of voluntary actions, after he had premised certain
Conclusions, makes this Inference: It follows from what I have said, that be
who from the impression of an inveterate custom is induced to do evil, and to
utter words of blasphemy etc. sin^ not at all, nor does properly blaspheme;
because sin cannot be committed without a deliberate act of the understanding.
And he confirms this Assertion by the testimony of their great Schoolmen and
Casuists, Sco^us, Suarez, Sanchez etc. And the like they say of blasphemies
uttered in passion; and Filliucius gives this reason, because passion as well
as an evil habit takes away the actual use of reason, without which sin cannot
be committed, according to their Maxims:

9. God Commands us not to render evil for evil. 1 These: 5: 15. But their
Casuists teach that a man may repay even the smallest injury with the greatest
loss, that is, of life it self. In several cases (they say) it is lawful to
murder our Neighbor: I will mention but two, which very frequently occur. 1.
In defense of our honor. The honor of a person * Tom: 2. tr: 29. c: 3. p: 188.
may be invaded (says Filliucius) several ways. 1. When one strikes him with
a Cudgel, or gives him a box on the ear. And Lessius mentions 4. or 5. Wates.
2. When he is reproached by words or gestures. 3. When he is accused of
feigned Crimes before persons in Authority, or of true, if they be secret,
whereby he may suffer in his person or estate. When the honor of a person is
impair^d by another any of these ways, its lawful to * De Just: lib: 2. p. 89.
etc.
kill him, says Filliutius. And to confirm this opinion Lessius produces
Sot: Navar. Sylvester, Lopez, Gomez, and Julius Clarius,

Escobar (who is spokesman for twenty Tract: 1. Exam: 7: ^. 3. p. 120.
four learned and ancient Divines) propounding this Question, Whether it be
lawful for an honorable person to kill him, who has given him evil language,
or the lie? Answers that according to Badel it is lawful, in case he cannot
otherwise be repressed. If a Noble man be assaulted, and may save himself by
flight, yet he is not obliged, but may kill the assailant, if otherwise his
honor cannot be preserved, says Instruct: Sacerd: lib: 5. c. 6. p: 633.
Cardinal Tolet. It is lawful according to Barnes (says Tract: 1. Exam: 7. p:
118.
Escobar) to kill that man who intends to accuse me of some capital crime,
which is secret, whereupon I may suffer death, or a considerable loss in mine
Estate, if I can by no means divert him. Cited by Auth: of Jes: Mor:
Amicus and Caramuel affirm that a Monk may kill a Woman with whom he has
committed fornication, if he fear she will divulge it. These Instances do
plainly evidence the lawfulness of Murder (according to the sentiments of
their infallible Doctors) in defense of a man's honor and reputation. But here
this one rule must be observed viz: That we do not kill with a formal
intention to revenge Lessius de Just: lib: 2. p: 89.
our selves, but to preserve our honor.

2. In defense of our Goods. So much is affirmed by Layman, and he cites Anton:
lib: 3. p. 354
Major, Sylvesier, Cajetan, Soto, Navar: Covarr: Clarus, Medina, Moliua etc.
And Lessius gives this reason for it; because temporal goods are necessary to
preserve * Lib: 2. p: 85. and 88.
life, and by consequence it is lawful to preserve them in the same manner as
life it self. Nay he affirms that its lawful to ibid:
kill a person, that has taken an Apple from us, if it would be a disgrace
unto us not to take it out of the Thieves hands. But Molina (and Escobar seems
to concur Tract: 1. Exam 7. p: 119.
with him) thinks that ordinarily it is not lawful to kill for less than a
Crown or the value of it. And if these Instances be not sufficient, Escobar
lays down this general * Tract: 1. Exam: 7. p: 112.
Rule, that will justify most Murders in the world: We may kill those that do
us wrong, as those that rob by night or by day, and all others that offend us,
though we be assured that they shall be damned, dying in that condition.

10. God says thou shall not steal. 20 Exodus: 15. But their Casuists teach that
in several cases thest is lawful, or at the most but a venial sin; whereby poor
men, Children, Servants etc. are encouraged to commit rapes and robberies. To
make this clear and evident I will produce a few Instances out of these
miraculous Doctors. If a man be in necessity, not only extreme, but such as is
ha^^ to be endured, its lawful for him to steal for his more comfortable
subsistence. Lessius lib: 2. cap. 12. number: 71. p. 132. Filliucius Tom: 2.
tract: 32. cap. 5. p. 243.

If a Father deny his Child employed in his Call^ng, as much for his Salary, as
he would give unto a Stranger, he may privately take what is proportionable to
his labor and in lustry; when he has deducted what his Father laid out in his
Education. Escobar tract: 1. Exam: 9. cap. 4. p. 158.

If Servants judge their wages too small, they may advance them of themselves
by filching and purloyning as much from their Masters, as they imagine
necessary to make their wages answerable to their services. Layman lib: 3.
tract: 3. p. 313. and he confirms this Opinion by the testimony of Navar:
Lopez, Licent: Diez, Lessius, Molina. I remember the Author of the Mystery of
Jesuitisme tells us a pleasant Story of one Jo^n D' Albae in the year 1647, who
being a Servant to the Fathers of the College of Clermont, and thinking his
wages too low, stole something to make it up. Hereupon they put him in prison,
and charged him with Felony. This poor fellow being arraigned, confessed that ^e
had taken away certain pewter Pla^es from them: but pleaded that he was not
guilty of felony for so doing: and urged for his justification this Position of
their Casuists, which he presented to the Judges. And if they judge their Diet
too course and scanty, these comfortable Casuists will tell them, that Lessius
lib: 2. p: 130.
what thefts they commit in meats and drinks are not mortal sins, though
insensibly they * Escobar: tr: 1. Exam: 9. p. 157.
amount to a great quantity, if they steal them to eat and drink, and not to
sell.

If that which is stolen be something the Owner makes small account of, or for
which he would not have the Robber put into a state of damnation (and who can
be so cruel as to desire the eternal misery of his fellow Creature) the theft
is at the most but a venial sin. Lessius lib. 2. cap. 41. dub. ^. number: 80. p.
537. And if a Tailor, who is commissioned by a Gentleman to buy stuff or silk
to make his Clothes, go commonly to one Mercer or Merchant, who for this reason
sell: him a good pennyworth, or returns something back: he may retain to himself
the benefit of his good market, or what is so returned. Escobar tract. 3. Exam:
6. cap, 5. p. 406.

To these Instances many more might be added, which do countenance and justify
most thefts and robberies committed in this licentious age.

By this Induction of particulars (for its needless to mention more) you may
see how far they dispense with Divine Commands. They that would see more upon
this Subject, let them peruse the Jesuits Morals, of which I have made very
little use, no not so much as an hand to direct me to the places and passages
which I have produced.

Sect. II.
Obj:

THese are the Opinions of some particular Casuists, which perhaps have been
consured by his Holiness as Erroneous, and Heretical.

Ans: 1. I do not hear that any of these Doctors (except Baunies Summarie of
sins, which I have made no use of) are censured at Rome, nor find any passages
in them, which their Inquisitors command to be blotted out in any of their
Expurgatory Indices. And therefore (since they are so severe in prohibiting
Books which they judge erroneous, and expunging all offensive passages) we may
rationally conclude that these Casuists have written nothing contrary to the
sentiments of their infallible Lord and Master. If they deliver any thing which
is not consonant to their Canons and Constitutions, why are they not put into
their Index of prohibited Books?

2. The Doctors I have mentioned are no pitiful, obscure Fellows, but persons
of great note and eminency, and their Books printed cum Privilegio, and highly
prized by all Catholics.

3. That where I have Cited but one or two Casuists, ten or twenty might be
produced, which I have passed over for brevity sake.

4. The Doctrine of probability (which is unanimously received by their great
Doctors, at least the Jesuits which are the most prevailing party in the
Church of Rome, and the Popes principal Factors) will remove all doubts and
scruples. Here they lay down with much confidence, and defend with great zeal
these following propositions.

1. That we may safely follow a probable Opinion. In this there is a perfect
agreement amongst them: and Layman Lib 1^: p: 5.
gives this reason for it; because in Morals we cannot easily obtain a certain
knowledge of the truth of things.

2. That is a probable Opinion, which (having no certainty) is supported by
great Authority, or some reason of Moment. p: 5.
So Layman defines a probable Opinion. And in the explication of this
definition he tells us that by (great Authority) we are to understand the
judgment at least of one learned and honest man, that has not embraced an
Opinion rashly and inconsiderately, but after he has well weighed and examined
the reasons which are brought for the contrary Opinion. Escobar says that one
grave Theol: Mor: p. 25.
Doctor is able to make an Opinion probable; because a man eminently learned
will not espouse an Opinion without sufficient reason. Emanuel Sa speaks more
freely, affirming Aphor: p. p. 41.
that the judgment of one grave Doctor, or the example of good men is enough
to make an Opinion probable. And to the same purpose speak Sylvest: Navar.
Vasquez, and Sanchez cited by Layman. Filliucius declares himself to be of the
same judgment Tom: 2. tr: 21. cap. 4. p. 9.

3 That of two probable Opinions its lawful to follow that which is more
favorable though less safe and probable. This Theol: Mor: Lib: 1. p. 5.
proposition is defended by Layman, who brings Navar. Medina, Arrag: Lopez,
Suarez, Azorius etc. concurring with him. And if the testimony of these learned
Doctors be not sufficient, he gives you this convincing reason: In moral
actions it is not necessary to follow that which is best and safest; but
sufficient that we follow what is good and safe.

And Escobar propounding this Question, If two probable Opinions occur, is a p.
27.
man obliged to follow that which is more probable? He answers no; because he
cannot be reprehended as rash and imprudent, who adhaeres to reason or
authority of moment: and it would be an intolerable burden, if every
unlearned man should be obliged to Instit: Mor: lib: 2. p. 202
find out the more probable Opinions. But Azorius ascends one step higher, and
says that a man may lawfully follow the probable Opinion of other men, though
it be against his own proper Opinion.

Thus a man may commit any sin (to which interest, or corrupt nature shall
incline him) against his own Conscience, if he can but find out one grave
Doctor that allows it: and that's no difficult task.

4. That a Confessor is obliged to absolve his Penitent, who follows a
probable Opinion, though contrary to his own Lib: 2. p. 205.
judgment. Azorius handling this Question, Whether a Priest who hears
Confessions, may reasonably submit to the Opinion of his Penitent, when it is
contrary to his own? After he has propounded the distinctions and limitations
of several Doctors, affirms that in every case, without exception or
distinction, every Confessor, as well ordinary as delegate, may and ought to
submit to the judgment of his Penitent. As for example, suppose the Confessor
is fully convinced that his Penitent is obliged to make restitution of goods
unjustly detained, and hereupon scruples to absolve him; yet if the Penitent
will not submit unto his judgment he may do it. And observe his reason;
because he who hears the confessions of Penitents is obliged to provide for
their salvation.

Layman affirms the same thing, and Lib: 1. p. 6.
tells us that Sot: Victor: Navar. Medina, Sanchez, and Vasquez are of this
persuasion. And he gives this weighty reason for it: The Confessor, confession
being made, cannot deny absolution to his Penitent that is rightly disposed:
but in following a probable Opinion, the Penitent does not sin, and so, as to
this, is rightly disposed.

And Escobar propounding the same Question, returns the same answer, and gives
the same reason. Nay he adds, that the Confessor, who denies absolution upon
this account, is guilty of mortal sin, when the sins confessed are mortal;
because he forces his Penitent to discover those sins to another Confessor,
which is a grievous burden. Theol: Mor: p. 28. To these I could add the
testimony of Filliucius, Tom: p: 113.
Cardinal Tolet, and many others.

Now what wickedness may be committed Lib: 3. 51^
under the protection of this Doctrine is obvious to an ordinary understanding.
How does it favor loose and licentious persons, and indulge them in their
immoralities; for what Crime can be committed, but some one or other of their
Doctors does allow and justify it?

Can thou not keep what thou art possessed of, nor recover what is unjustly
detained from thee without the assistance of a Knight of the Post, that is,
without s^borning a person to swear falsely? do not boggle at it; for
Filliucius (a grave and learned Doctor, yea the Popes Penitentiarie) Tom: 2. p:
108.
teaches that in this case its very lawful. Only he subjoynes this caution:
That something of value be in question, and that there be some just cause to
require this oath, as necessity or profit; otherwise it would be against
charity.

Have thou weakened thy body in Brothel-houses, or by the sin of uncleanesse,
and can not without great prejudice to thy health observe an approaching
Lent, or time of fasting according to the Canons of the Church? Be not
troubled; for in this very case (says Escobar a Doctor of great note and
eminency) thou art excused. Theol: Mor: tr: 1. Exam: 13. cap. 2. p. 198. Yea
though thou did it on purpose to be dispensed withal from fasting. p. 202.

Have thou the offer of a good Benefice, but upon condition that thou will give
so much money unto the Incumbent to resign, or Patron to present; which thou
art willing to do, but a thing they call Simony, is as a Lion in the way,
deters thee from it. Be not troubled, Valentia * Tom: 3: p. ^039.
(one of their chiefest Schoolmen and Casuists) will help thee to conjure down
this tormenting Spirit. If a man (says he) give a temporal good for a
spiritual (that is, money for a Benefice) and that a man give money as the
price of the Benefice, it is apparent Simony. But if he gives it as the motive
inclining the will of the Incumbent to resign his interest, it is no Sim^ni^.
Thus do but direct thine intention so, as to give thy money as a motive
inclining the Patron, or Incumbent, and not as the price of the Benefice, and
thou art safe enough.

Thus might we instance in most sins, and produce one or more of their
indulgent Doctors that allow them: and so (according to this Doctrine of
Probability) they may be commttied without sin. Our Savior says that norrow
is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. 7 Math: 14:
but these infallible Doctors make it broad, and according to their Positions
few can miss of it: it is not only easy to be saved, but almost imposible to
be damned.

Obj: But do we not meet with some great Schoolmen and Casuists that do not
allow of these irregularities?

Ans: Yes; but they are few, and very rarely made use of. It being their design
to bring the whole world into the bosom of the Roman Church by complying with
the various humors and inclinations of men, its necessary they should have
such: And because the Maxims of Evangelical severity are more convenient for
the government of some, they make use of them upon such occasions as contribute
to the promoting of this design. I say, being to deal with all sorts of
persons, and those of several conditions, and different Nations, its requisite
they should have Casuists suitable to this diversity. If they had not any but
these licentious Doctors, their main design (which is to deceive the world)
would be frustrated; since those who have any sense of good and evil, any
tenderness of conscience, and care of their souls put themselves under a surer
conduct: But as there are not many of this scrupulous humor, so need they but
few severe Directors to guide them. Few sheep need fewer Shepherds; whereas the
swarm of remiss Casuists are employed to satisfy those who seek after carnal
liberty. It is by this obliging and complying Conduct that so many are
deluded. If one come to them who is resolved to make restitution of goods
unjustly gotten, they will not divert him, but have a Casuist ready to confirm
him in so holy a resolution: But let another come that would be absolved
without restitution, and it shall go very hard, but they will contrive a way to
dismiss him with satisfaction. Thus do they preserve their Friends by
indulging their particular lusts, and make their party good against all
Enemies, when charged with remissness, by bringing (as necessity requires)
these austere Directors upon the stage.

Sect: 3.
BUt if there be any sins which cannot be excused, and whereof the only remedy
is Confession, yet there is no reason why any one should be troubled; for this by
their Doctrines they have made most easy: so that crimes are with greater
facility expiated, than many times committed. Whereas there are many things in
Confession, that cannot be performed without some difficulty, as shame to
confess some certain sins, resolution not to fall into the like again, remorse
for them, and Penance; yet they have made most easy and comfortable provisions
against them. This main part of their Religion, which has the appearance of
severity, is become of all other most remiss and pleasant, and of greatest
content even to the dissolutest minds. This, as they have ordered it, is so
far from deterring men from sin, that it is the most powerful incentive to
impiety. I have known (says Sands) those that seem very devout Europae:
Specul: p. 11
persons, who by their own report, to excuse their acquaintance in matters
criminal, have wittingly perjured themselves in judgment; only presuming upon
this present and easy remedy of confession: and others of more then ordinary
note amongst them, who when their time of confessing was at hand, would then
venture on those actions, which before they trembled at; as presuming to
surfeit by reason of Neighbor hood with the Physician.

Against the first thing in confession viz: shame, they have made full
provision. Their Casuists teach that a man to preserve his reputation with his
ordinary Confessor, may take another, to whom he may confess his gross sins.
Emanuel Sa Aphor: p. 25. Escobar tr: 7. Exam: 4. p. 788. Filliutius Tom: 1. tr:
7. cap. 4. p. 94. But if this way be too troublesome and costly, Escobar
directs you to make a general Confession. When one says to his Confessor, that
he will make a general confession, he is not obliged to mention his mortal
sins, Escob: p. 785. And what Filliucius says of the second and third viz:
resolution, and remorse, is very comfortable Tom: 1. tr: 7. c. 12. p. 112.
both to Confessors and Penitents. The Confessor (says be) must not propound
many difficulties in avoiding sin, whence the Penitent may be in danger of not
having an effectual purpose for the future. And then afterward he adds, it
is not necessary that the Confessor be assured, or probably think, that his
Penitent will abstain from sin: its sufficient if he conceive that at the time
of absolution he has a general purpose, though he will presently alter it. And
this is the common Opinion. And concerning remorse he writes, That if the
Penitent discover not sufficient expressions of sorrow, the Confessor has no
more to do than to ask him, whether he do not in his soul detest sin; and if
he say Yes, he may, nay he must believe him. And Escobar speaks much to the
same purpose. Tract: 7. Exam: 4. p. 773. It has been an Opinion long received
in the Schools, that the Sacraments of the New Law differed from those of the
Old in this, that the efficacy of those of the old Law in conferring grace, did
depend upon what they called opus operantis, that is, the faith and devotion of
the receiver of them: but that the Sacraments of the new Law did confer grace
ex opere operato, that is, Vid: Bellar: De Sacram: Council: Trident: Sess: 7.
Can: 8.
by the thing it self without any dependence therein upon the internal motion
or preparation of mind in him that did partake of them. Now this with the
Papists is a Sacrament.

And touching the last viz: Penance they are not less favorable and
indulgent. This consists ordinarily in a few Ave Mary's, and Pater Nosters,
and hearing so many Masses, with some easy alms to them that are able, and
some little fasting to them that are willing. I have known (says Sands) when
p. 12.
the Penance for horrible and often blasphemy, besides much other lewdness,
has been no other than the bare saying of their beads thrice over; a matter of
some hours muttering, and which in Italy they dispatch also as they go in the
streets, or dispatch business at home; making no other of it, than as it is,
two lips and one fingers work. We will make this more clear by the testimony of
their famous Casuists. Sometimes a Priest may impose this for Penance upon his
Confitent viz: That before he sleeps at night, and when he awakes in the
morning, he entertain some pious meditations, that he think of God, and death,
and judgment etc. Layman lib: 5. p. 909. If the Penitent has but a probable
cause to complain of his Penance, as too grievous, the Confessor must moderate
it, or enjoin some other, more easy, Layman ibid: And a little after he gives
this caution to the Confessor: Let him take heed that he do not impose
incongruous and unsuitable Penances, as long pilgrimages to Women, many prayers
to them that have much business etc. in short, not any thing that is tedious
and troublesome. A Confessor (says the same Casuist) is obliged ibid:
to absolve his Penitent, though he refuse to perform the penance enjoined
him. And he tells us this is the Opinion of Cajetan, Sylvester, Medina, and
Navar. And gives this reason; because no man is bound to satisfy for his sins
in this life. A Confessor may sometimes impose Penance by way of Counsel only
(says Filliutius) Tom: 1. p. 125.
and not of precept. Nay be may absolve without any Penance at all says the
same Doctor.

Escobar propounds this Question, Is p. 795.
it lawful for a Confessor to leave it wholly to the will of the Penitent to
do what Penance he pleases? And answers with Suarez, that it is not always
necessary to command him any particular work, and especially to spiritual
persons: but its sufficient to say, I impose on you for Penance all the good
you shall do, or evil that you shall suffer this day, or this week. And
Filliucius confirms it by the testimony of Aquinas, and Navar. Tom: 1. p. 125.
And he commends it as a thing both pious and pleasant. And the same Escobar
tells us that a Confessor may give for Penance something formerly commanded; so
that Penance ibid:
for sins may be accomplshed by doing that which we should have done though we
had not sinned, and which the most innocent are obliged to. And herein he has
the concurrence of Sa, Aphor: p. 147. Tom: 1. p. 125.
and Filliutius. And again, asking the Question, Whether may my penance be
performed by another. He answers that this is the Opinion of Suarez (yea and he
might say of Sa and Filliucius) provided I have my Confessors leave, or there
be some just reason for it: And that will never be wanting. Thus easy and
acceptable have these tender and indulgent Fathers, made this most difficult
part of Confession.

I know they make a great cry and clamor; and tell us of their frequent
fastings, of their often watchings, of their bloody whippings, of their long
pilgrimages, their rigorous discipline, and a great deal more: But what are the
practices of some few sad and phlegmatic persons, to the professed principles
of their great Doctors and Casuists?

Sect: 4.
BUt suppose the Penance which the Priest enjoins be never so sharp and severe
yet let none be discouraged or deterred from their beloved lusts; for though it
be their misfortune to fall into the hands of a truel Confessor, yet they have
a merciful Father (to whom they may appeal in such cases) who by his gracious
Indulgences is ready to dispense with these severities.

These Pardons and Indulgences are very full, and numerous: few Churches in
Rome, which have not one or more annexed to them: so that if you will but
trudge thither, you cannot miss of Absolution. And so kind they have been at
Rome, as to publish a Catalogue of them in several Books. And though this was
put forth in our own language several years ago by Mr. Crashaw, yet (because
the Book is hard to be got, and perhaps few have seen it) a few Instances take
as follows.

In the Church of St. John the Lateran there is an inexhaustable stock of
Indulgences granted by Pope Silvester at the request of Constantine the
Emperor. Whoever comes to this Church on the 9th of November may obtain
remission of all his sins both a poena and culpa.

In the same Church there is a Chapel called Sancta Sanctorum, in which every
day is to be had full remission of all sins. And not far from this Chapel
there is an ascent of three and thirty steps, and how often soever any man shall
devoutly ascend up that ladder, for every step he has a thousand years of
pardon. But who will take so much pains when a plenary pardon may be had upon
easier terms?

In the Church of St. Peter in the Vatican there is full remission of all sins
upon the Feast of St. Martin: and at other times many thousand years pardon.

In the Church of St. Paul without the walls of Rome in the Octaves of the
Feast day of St. Martin (being the day on which it was dedicated by Pope
Silvester) there is to be obtained full remission of all sins.

In the Church of St. Mary on the day of Annunciation of the blessed Virgin
Mary there is full pardon of all sins to be had, granted by Pope Boniface.

In the Church of St Sebastian there is to be got true remission of all sins,
brightness and light everlasting, joy and gladness without end. And this
Indulgence was merited by that Saint and Martyr to this Church, and confirmed
by Pope Gregory.

In the Church of St. Cross there is a Chapel called Jerusalem, wherein upon
St. Benets day we may obtain full remission of all sins. And upon every Lords
day and Wednesday there are Pardons for many thousand years granted by Pope
Silvester.

In the Church of St. Praxade there is a Chapel called the Garden of Paradise,
in which lie the bodies of above two thousand Martyrs, and the third part of
that Pillar at which our Lord Jesus Christ was whipped in Pilates house, there
is every day to be had full remission of all sins.

Neither has the charity of his Holiness been confined to the Churches of
Rome, but enlarged and extended to many other Churches of note in Italy, and
other Countries.

In the Eremitane at Padova, their Europae Speculum p. 13. etc.
Preachers very solemnly (says Sands) publish a grant of plenatie Indulgence
from Baptism to the last Confession, with twenty eight years over for the time
ensuing.

At the Sepulcher of Christ in Venice, wherein is written, Hic situm est corpus
p. 14.
Domini nostri Jesu Christi; there is hanging in a printed table a Prayer of
St. Austin, with Indulgence for fourscore and two thousand years, granted by
Boniface 8. and confirmed by Benedict 11, unto every one that shall say it, and
that for every day toties quoties.

Pope Gregory 13 has granted to the Carmine at Padova, unto every one p. 15.
that shall say 7 Aves and 7 Pater-Nosters before one of their Altars on the
anniversarie Wednesday in Easter-week, or else kiss the ground before the
Altar of the blessed Sacrament with the usual Prayers for exaltation of the
Church, extirpation of Heresy, and Unity of Christian Princes, both plenary
Indulgence for himself, and the delivery of what Friends soul out of Purgatory
he pleases.

All Altars of Station (which are in very great number) have their perpetual
Indulgences for all times.

Sundry Crosses engraven on the pavements of their Churches have Indulgence
annexed for every time they are kissed, which is done so often by the devouter
sex, that the hard Marble is wo^^ with it.

By these few Instances (which are not the fortieth part of what might be
produced) you may see what an indulgent Father his Holiness is; to whom
Confitents may appeal when their Penances are too severe, and what comfortable
provision he has made for them.

Sect: 5.
NEither is their condition hopeless and helpless, who live in England,
Scotland, Ireland, or any other remote Countries, and either cannot, or will
not trudge to Rome to be made partakers of these plenarie Indulgences: His
Holiness has made ample provision for these also, and extended his bounty to
them. If it be their mis-hap to fall into the hands of an ill-natured Confessor
(which very few do) that enjoins them Penances too tedious and troublesome, yet
they have their relief and remedy viz: the Popes pardon at an easy rate. And
so kind has this holy Father been to his Children, as to put forth a Book
called Taxa S. Cancellaria Apostolicae (that they may know before they act any
Villainy what an absolution will cost) wherein a price is set upon most sins; of
which take this following Taste.

An Absolution for a Bishop, Abbot, or the General of any Order who has killed
a man is rated at about -- 100 Grossos

If a Layman kill an Abbot, a Monk, * A Grosso is sometimes valued at two
pence, sometimes at 4 pence farthing of our English money.
a Clerk, or other Priest less than a Bishop, he must pay for his Absolution
according to the Quality of the person -- 7, 8, or 9. Gr:

If a Layman kill a Layman he shall pay but -- 6 Gros:

If a Woman be with Child and on purpose destroys the Infant within her,
shall have an Absolution for -- 5 Gros:

If a man kill his Father, Mother, or Brother, he must pay for his Absolution
-- 1 Ducat and 5 Carlins. A Carli^ it often the same with a Grosso.


And if a man kill his Wife, he must not have a farthing abated of the
aforesaid sum.

An Absolution for him who lies with a Woman in the Church is valued at -- 6
Gros:

Every Priest that keeps a Concubine must pay for his Absolution -- 7 Gros:

But if he be a Layman he must pay -- 8 Gros:

An Absolution for him that deflowers a Vitgin, is dog cheap at -- 6 Gros:

If a Nu^ne commit fornication either within the Monastery or without, she
cannot expect an Absolution under -- 9 Duc: 30 Gr:

If a man carnally lie with his Mother, Sister or other Kinswoman, or
God-mother, he shall have his Absolution at a very easy rate -- 5 Gros:

If a Layman commit Sacrilege by taking holy things out of holy places, let
him not complain, if he pay for his Absolution no more than -- 7 Gros:

Every one that has broken his Vow of perpetual Chastity, must pay for his
Absolution -- 2 Duc: 20 Gros

If a Priest commit Simony, he shall have his Absolution upon very easy terms,
paying -- 7 Gros:

And if a person be guilty of that horrid sin of perjury, he may obtain an
Absolution for -- 6 Gros:

That there is such a Book, is no fiction but a real truth, and most clear from
the pregnant testimonies of their own Writers, which no Romanist can object
against.

This Book was set forth by Pope L^o In Titum: p. 67. etc.
10. and thus censured by Claudi^^ Ep^^c^us a famous Doctor of Sorbon: Let a^
this be held feigned, and falsely charged upon us by the Lutherans, were it not
that the Book it self being come from Rome, is openly set to sale. A Book
wher^in thou may^st learn more wickedness, then w^^ ever y^^ discovered in all
the Summists and Summaries of (...), that are extant in all the world. A
shameful Book, a very I^d^^ pointing men the way to the most foul* and hateful
sins. So that I am persuaded there was never set out in Germany, Hel^eria, nor
among any of our enemies that are fallen from us, any Book that bred more
scandal, or did more hurt to the Roman Church. But* least these passages should
discredit their Wares and spoil their Markets, they have, commanded them to be
blotted out in their p: 60.
Spanish Exp^rgatory Index.

Doctor Peter de M^^liu says that this * De Monar: Temporal: Pon^: Rom: p. 355.
Book was reprinted at Paris by To^^a^us Dionysins in St. James his street at
the Wooden Cross* the Kings privilege, and the Popes Bull being annexed to
it. And the Lord M^rrey has th^se words: The Books of the Taxes of the Apost
d^eal Chaunc^ry, and Pe^^ (...), which yet ^ Mist: Iniq: p. 656.
are sold^^ Ro^^^ pr^nted at this very ti^^ in Paris, at the ^ign of the Golden
Su^ i^ St. Jaques Street; and these Books are no les^e commonly use^^ m^^^ his
^orkans, then Cal^nders with (...), or the Book of Customs and E^t^ies among
(...): * Lection: Memorab:
And W^lfir^ gives us a large account of it*

Mr. Henry* Fouli^ who had the benefit * Tom: 2: p. 825. etc.
of the public Library in Oxford) ^lls ^^ that when that (...) Collect ^^,
called Tract at us (...) was printed by the King of France his privilege a^
Ly^ns (...) Tax^ was then published amongst them. And afterward when those
aforesaid Tractatus Illustrium were by the Command of Pope Gregory 13.
augmented, and by the care of Franciscus Zilettus published at Venice 1584,
this Taxa was also reprinted, and with the rest dedicated and presented to the
said Pope. And it is worthy our observation, that though the Inquisitors of
Rome have placed the Taxa Cancel: Apost: in their Expurgatory Index, yet they
except nothing against the Book printed by the Romanists, but that only which
was lately put forth with Banks his Annotations, or which have been corrupted
by Heretics: though it would puzzle the wisest of them to prove any such
corruptions.

Now can any Romanist, after such full proof, have the impudence to deny that
such a Book ever had a being in the World? But what will not a Papist affirm or
deny in his own defense, and to promote the Interest of his holy Mother the
Church?

Nay the Popes of Rome have granted Indulgences not only for sins past, but
also for sins to come. Our King James protests that he had seen two
Authentical Bulls with his own eyes: one when he was very young in Scotland,
and it was taken from a Scottish Priest; and the other he saw here in England,
taken from an Medit: upon the L: prayer p: 584.
Irishman, and both of them contained a full pardon of all sins both past and
to come. And this brings to my remembrance a pleasant Story, which I have often
met with: In the time of Pope Leo 10 Tecelius, or Tetzelius was sent into
Germany with a great number of Pardons to advance money for his Holiness. This
Pactor highly commended his Ware wherever he came, and affirmed that he could
pardon all sins both past and to come; whereupon a German Gentleman bought such
an one of him, and afterward robbed the Pardoner. Tetzolius was highly
offended, and threatened him with Bell, Book, and Candle, but the Gentleman
answered, that he bad bought his Pardon for it, declaring that was the sin he
determined to commit, when he made that purchase: to which the poor Dominican
could not reply.

Sect: 6.
BUt perhaps some, either through Poverty or Covetousness, may grudge and
grumble to purchase their Absolution at so dear a rate: therefore his
Holiness, to prevent all discontent in his children, has out of his abundant
Charity and fullness of Authority, provided for them pardon and salvation at as
easy, and lazy a rate as heart can wish or desire. A few Instances will make
this evident. By grant from Pope John 20 every bowing of the head (says Sands)
at the naming of Jesus, gets twenty years Pardon. And to grace that Ceremony
the more I have heard (says he) sundry of their famous Divines teach in
Pulpit, that Christ himself on the Cross bowed his head on the right side, to
reverence his own name which was written over it. Eur: Spec: p. 14.


The saying of the Beads over with a Medal or other trinket of the Popes
benediction appendant gets a plenary Indulgence, and delivers what soul out of
Purgatory one pleases. All the Members of the Arch-Confraternity Vid:
Heavenopened. p. 15. etc. 3
of the Sacred Rosary (and any one may be admitted into it without a penny
cost) are made partaker^ of Plenary Indulgences upon easy terms. 1. Upon the
day that any one i^ received into this Confraternity having confessed and
communicated, and recited a third part of the Rosary, (all which may be done in
a very short time) he gains a plenary Indulgence, and remission of all his
sins. This was granted by Pope Pius 5. Sept: 27. 1559. 2. Any Member of the
Rosary in the Article of death. 1. Being confessed, and communicated a plenary
Indulgence, granted by the same Pope Sept: 27. 1559. 2. Or saying (with mouth,
or in heart) Jesus Maria, a plenary Indulgence. 3. Or calling thrice (either by
mouth or in heart) upon the holy name of Jesus, a plenary Indulgence, granted
by Pius 5. Gregory 13. Clement 8. 4. Or having a blessed Candle of the
Confraternity in their hand, in honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary, at the time
of their departure, a plenary Indulgence, granted by Adrian 6. and confirmed by
Clement 7. Same Auth: p. 95.


The Members of the Arch-Confraternity of St. Francis, called the Cord of the
Passion, are made partakers of the like Privileges. Every one of this
Brotherhood for saying the Crown of our Savior, or the Crown of our Lady,
containing 72 Paters and Aves, with a Pater, and Ave for his Holiness, obtains
a plenary Indulgence, and remission of all his sins. Who would desire pardon
and salvation upon easier terms? I forbear to mention many other Fraternities,
upon which the Popes of Rome have conferred the like Indulgences.

Bernardine de Bust: tells us (as I find Answer to Jes. Chall: p: 489.
him cited by our most learned Primate of Ireland) that Pope Sixtus 4. granted
an Indulgence of twelve thousand years for every time that a man in the state
of grace (that is, having confessed and communicated) should repeat this short
Orizon or salutation of the Virgin: Hail most holy Mary the Mother of God, the
Queen of heaven, the gate of Paradise, the Lady of the world. Thou art a
singular and pure Virgin: thou did conceive Christ without sin: thou did
bear the Creator and Savior of the world, in whom I do not doubt. Deliver me
from all evil, and pray for my sins. Amen.

And in the Book of the hours of the Blessed Virgin secundum usum Sarum, we
have several Prayers, to which are annexed Indulgences for several thousand
years.

To all them that before this Image of pity devoutly say 5 Pater Nosters, and 5
Aves, and a Credo, pitiously beholding the Arms of Christ's Passion, are
granted thirty two thousand seven hundred and fifty years of pardon.

They that desire to see more (and cannot get the Book) let them peruse Dr.
Stillingfleet (Papistarum Malleus and Wonders o^ his Age,) his discourse
concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome.

And thus I have showed you how indulgent and complying the Principles and
practices of the Roman Church are to men's several humors, and carnal
inclinations.

He that understands the natural consequence of these things, cannot wonder
that the Church of Rome should have a numerous company of Proselytes, made up
of (such as David's Army were) 1 Samuel: 22. 2.
Swearers, Drunkards etc. loose and licentious persons. Nay he may rather
wonder that all wicked men in the world run not into the Romish Church; where
they may live so merrily, and dye so securely. Sir Walter Raleigh knew what he
said, and he spoke truth when he said it, that were he to choose a Religion for
licentious liberty, he would choose the Popish Religion. Certainly there is no
Religion under Heaven so consonant and congruous to corrupted nature, to flesh
and blood, as the Religion of the Church of Rome. And thus we have dispatched
the fourth way or Method of Romes advancement.

CHAP: VII. Of Popish Signs, and Wonders, and lying Miracles.
5. We come now to discourse of their feigned Miracles, by which they have
endeavored (and with great successR) to propagate their Doctrines. That this
should be one of Antichrists Methods to deceive the Nations, and enlarge his
Kingdom, is clear from the Apostles words 2 These: 2: 8, 9. And then shall that
wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his month,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: Even him, whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders.
Where we may observe. 1. The time of Antichrist^ coming (for the Papists
confess that the Apostle here speaks of Antichrist*) this was before
explicated. 2. The manner of his coming, which is after the working of Satan
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders; o^ (as it is in the Original)
Wonders of falsehood; not only in respect of their end, because they tend to
confirm error; but in respect of their form too: wanting that which is an
essential part of Miracles, properly so called.

And that the Pope of Rome (the Antichrist) and his Factors have used this wile
and St^atagem to propagate their Doctrines, is most notorious. As they
confidently urge these feigned Miracles to prove the Roman Church to be a true
Church, so to confirm and establish their new coined Doctrines, viz: Veneration
of Images and sacred Relics, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, Papal Indulgences, Prayers for the dead etc.

The second Nicent Council, which decreed that Images should be worshipped,
brings pretty Stories to confirm this Constitution. Take one briefly thus: A
certain Long: ^um: Council: p: 389.
Christian leaving an Image of Christ behind him in the house, from which he
re^^^ved; and a Je^ succeeding him, having invited other Jews to dinner, one of
them espied the Images which the other Jew affirmed he had not (...) before:
they ran with great fury and violence upon it, and pierced it in the side, out
of which issued such a stream of blood, that they filled a great Water pot with
it. Then they resolved (that they might see whether it had any virtue) to
sprinkle sick persons therewith; this was done and they presently recovered.
And in the life of Damascene we read, that his hand being cut off by the
Saracens for his profession of the Christian faith, he praying before the Image
of the Virgin Mary, and showing his hand cut off, fell asleep, and awaking,
found his hand restored.

Antony of Padua, proved Transubstantiation (to one that denied it) by the
miraculous testimony of his hungry Beast, before which having set Corn and a
consecrated Host, in the name and power of * Chamier Panstr: Tom 2. 678.
thy Creator (says Antony) whom I now hold in my hands, I command thee that
thou come presently in an humble manner, and give this host due reverence. He
had no sooner spoken the words, but this devout Beast left the Corn, came to
Antony, bowed the head, and bended the knee. And lest one Miracle be not
sufficient to confirm you in the belief of such a fundamen^al Article, take one
more, in short thus: A Woman's Bees not thriving, by the advice of a Neig^bour,
she steals a consecrated Wafer, and places it in one of her Hives, hoping it
would drive away the disease, and bless their undertakings. The devout Bees,
in honor of such a Guest, fall to work, and with their honey-Combs make a
pretty little Church with windows, a do^r, a Belfrey, yea and an Altar too,
upon which they laid the Host, and paid great reverence to it. A notable
Argument for Transubstantiation.

If they meet with any that scruple their Doctrine concerning Invocation of
Saints, they w^ll rubb up their memories and tell them some miraculous Stories,
to prove Martinus Polonus lib: 4. p. 241.
it both lawful and profitable. Leo 1. Bishop of Rome, being under a strong
temptation, and putting forth his hand to kiss a Woman, cut it off afterward.
Hereupon being unable to celebrate Mass, which the people then expected (for
it was about Easter) he became an humble Suppliant to the Virgin Mary: Hereupon
she presently appeared, b^ought his hand and restored it: and so all was well
again. And if this miracle be not sufficient to gain your assent to this
Doctrine, they have others more miraculous. They tell us (and we must not
question the truth of it) that a little Bird being seized on by a greater,
cried but out Ave Maria, and presently the great ravenous Bird fell down dead.
And that a Parrat sporting her self out of a Cage, and being almost seizd on
by an Hawk, did but call upon St. Thomas a Becket, and the Hawk dyed
immediately.

If any question the power and virtue of the Sign of the Cross, they have
innumerable Miracles, some of which they will produce for his satisfaction.
Friar Theobald (as they tell us) by virtue of the sign of the Cross, walked
upon the water over Tyber. Friar Andreas de Anania, who having some little
Birds roasted at his own desire to stay his Appetite, yet upon better
consideration, it went against his stomach todevour them: and being thus
resolved, he makes but the Sign of the Cross, and presently they revived, and
flew ^way. And St. Antony by the Sign of the Cross, turned an ugly Todd into a
fat roasted Capon piping hot.

If any doubt of the wonderful power * Spond: Epit: Anno. 1172. p. 1054.
of the Popes Excommunication; Spondanus will tell them, that Dogs (though
never so hungry) would not take bread from those four Knights that murdered
Tho^as a Becket, so long as they were under the Popes Anathema.

And that the Relics of Saints are to ^old: L^g: cited. by Cha^: tom: 2. p.
679.
be honored, they prove by many Miracles. A certain Abbat desiring of the
Abbess of Col^n the body of one of the eleven thousand Virgins, promised to
put it in a golden Box: But not performing his promise, when they were at their
Mattins (many being present, beholding, and admiring) the Body of that Virgin
came out of the Wooden Box (judging it too mean a lodging place) descended from
the Altar, passed through the Quire, and returned to her Companions at Colen.

If you doubt of the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary they will tell
you that Thomas Aquinas, who took much pains to clear up that point, was
commended by her in these words Be^e de (...) scripsisti Thoma.

I will not mention any more of their New-coyn'd Doctrines, in confirmation of
which many Miracles are produced. Thus do they endeavor to establish their
Novel Doctrines by lying Wonder^ and Miracles: and great numbers of ignorant
and superstitious persons have been deluded by this Method.

Johannes Valentinus a Dominican by his Impostures in this kind obtained (Says
Cath: Orthod: Tom: 1. p. 374.
Rivet) a great name in Bononia and so deluded the Magistrates and people, that
they looked upon him as come down from Heaven: they thought themselves happy if
they could but touch the hemme of his Garment. His Confederates by agreement
swore that he had raised 18. persons from the dead, that he could cure all
diseases, and cast out Devils etc. And by these Arts, before the cheat was
discovered, he had got in one year twenty thousand pounds. And Tyrrel the
Priest in his Confession, which he drew up in writing, said, that within the
compass of half a year in Queen Elizabeth's Reign (when all attempts against
her sacred Person were defeated) by their cheating Exorcisms they prevailed
upon 500, some say 5000 persons to embrace the the Roman Religion.

That these Miracles, which they so much boast of, are not true, is most
evident; because the Doctrines which they would confirm by them, are false: but
God never puts forth his divine power in working Miracles to establish
erroneous Doctrines; he never sets his Seal to a false Deed.

That Story of the Lives of their Saints, which they call Legenda aurea, the
golden Legend, is made up of lying prodigies, and prodigious Lies: So much is
confessed by their own Doctors. Ludovicus Vives speaking of it says, How
unworthy both God and men is the Story of the Saints, I see no reason why it
should be called the Golden Legend, being written by one that De corrupt:
Art^^: lib. 2.
had an Iron face and leaden heart. And Chamier confirms it by the testimony of
Canus: I do not excuse the Author of that Book entitled Speculum Exemplorum:
nor of this History, which is called the golden Legend. In that thou may
read monsters of Miracles more frequent than true miracles; and this was
written by one that had neither prudence nor honesty. Panstrat: Cathol: Tom: 2.
p. 677. And Espencaeus says, that no Stable is so full of dung, as their
Legends are full of Fables. In 1. Tim: digress: lib: 1. p: 224.


Consider (as an Antidote against this tempation) that things may be done
(which may seem to be real miracles in the judgment of the wisest man on
earth) by men of corrupt hearts 7 Math: 22, 23. and of corrupt heads 24 Math:
24: and therefore we must not judge by the Miracles what Doctrine is true, but
by the Doctrine what Miracles are true. 13 Deuteronomy: 1 -- 3.

CHAP: VIII. Of Popish Lies and Slanders.
6. I Now proceed to the last way or method of Romes advancement, or which the
Pope and his Agents use to propagate their Religion viz: impudent lies and
slanders against their Adversaries, or who refuse to submit to the Conduct and
government of the Roman Church. This Method Rome Pagan used for the extirpation
of Christianity: and this Method Rome Christian has used for the propagation
of Popery.

That Rome Heathen took this course to suppress the the growth, yea the being
of Christianity, is very clear from Ecclesiastical Hystory. When Nero that
monster of men, had set Rome on fire, which burned nine days, to transfer the
Odium of that impious act upon the Christians, he gave out that they had done
it out of malice and revenge. And after wards the Heathen raised many malicious
slanders against them, and laid to their charge most horrid crimes; as that
they lived in incest: that in their night meetings, putting out the Candles,
they mixed together in a filthy manner: that they killed their Children, and
fed upon man's flesh: that they kept the Feasts of Thyestes, and committed the
incest of Oedipus: that they were guilty of Sacr^ledge and Sedition, and
Rebellion, and worshipped the head of an Ass. In Athens there was a Conjurer
which made an Image of Jupiter, that uttered these words, Jupiter commands the
Christians to be banished out of this City, because they are enemies to him.
Harlots also were suborned to swear that formerly they had been Christians, and
so were privy to the wickedness and impiety which they committed amongst
themselves at their Sabbath-meetings. Vid: Tertul: Apol: c. 7. 9. etc.
These and many more such like calumnies we meet with in Eusebius, and other
Ecclesi^stical Hystorians; by which the hearts of the Common people were set
against Christianity, and the Emperors and other inferior Governors incensed
against the Professors of it. The truth of this appears by an Epistle which
the Christians in France writ to the Brethren in Asia, and Phrygia recorded by
Eusebius: They feigned against us (speaking of the Heathen) and reported that
we used feastings Eccles: Hyst lib: 5. cap. 1
of Thyestes, and the in^est of Oedipus, with many other Crimes, which may
neither with piety be thought upon, nor with modesty be uttered, nor without
impiety believed: And these things being bruited abroad, every body was moved
and incensed against us. Then was that saying of our Saviors fulfilled viz:
The time will come, when as every one that slays you, shall think that
therein he does God good Service. Then suffered the holy Martyrs such torments
as no tongue can express. Great was the rage both of people and Presidents
against us etc. To this I could add many more proofs out of Eusebius: but that
is needless.

And that the Pope of Rome and his Factors have observed the same Method to
propagate their Doctrines, is most notorious. How have they laden with
Calumnies and false accusations the Enemies of their Church, especially those
of the reformed Religion. They charge us Protestants with infidelity, cruelty,
impiety, and what not.

1. With infidelity; that we dis-believe the Existence of God, the Divinity and
Humanity of Christ, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead,
and all the Articles of the Christian Religion.

2. With cruelty. How have they aggravated Sands: p. 98.
our proceedings here in England against their rebellious Priests, and
Accomplices in Queen Elizabeth's time, to the height of Nero's, and Dioclesians
Perfecutions, and the Sufferers of their side in merits of cause, in extremity
of torments; and in patience and constancy to the renowned Martyrs of that
hercical age. Of this Subject they have published a great Volume compiled with
great industry (many passages being illustrated with pictures) and approved by
Authority; in short, there is nothing wanting but truth and honesty.

3. With impiety; that all manner of Crimes are committed and countenanced
amongst us. Bellarmine says that there are many wicked men among the Roman
Catholics, but not one good man among the Lutheran Heretics. Their Friars
raised and published many foul slanders against the Waldenses, as that they
were Sorcerers Buggerers etc. that when they assembled together in the
nightime, their Pastors commanded the light^ to be put out, saying, Qui
potest capere, capiat, whereupon they committed abominable Incests, the Son
with his Mother, the Brother with his Sister, the Father with his daughter etc.
They tell the people both in Pulpit and private Conferences, (says Sands) that
the Lutherans and Calvinists are blasphemers of God and p. 118. etc.
all his Saints, that they abolish the Sacraments; that they raze or rob
Churches, and convert them into Stables; that there is no kind of villainy which
is not current among them; that in England they have neither Churches, nor form
of Religion, nor serve God any way; that the English since their apostasy from
the Roman Church are become so barbarous, that their Soldiers are very
Cannibals, and eat young Children. But upon Geneva they are most severe,
affirming that it is a professed Sanctuary of all impiety, giving entertainment
to all the Rogues, Traitors, and Rebels of other Countries. This was so
confidently reported in Italy (says the forecited Author) that some Friars,
having robbed their Converts of their Church-plate, and Repositonies, they
brought them in triumph to Geneva: but contrary to their expectation they were
forthwith advanced to the Gibbet for their labor; which usage caused them to
complain of their false information. And in Spain also was this report so
firmly believed, that a Spanish Gallant, who carried a mint about him, repaired
thither to have sta^ps made him for the coining of Pistolets. Being
apprehended, his defense was, that he understood their City was free, and gave
receipt to all offenders. It was answe^ed, that they received all offe^ders,
but punished their offenses. A distinction which the grave Done had not heard
of before, and the learning of it then cost him no less than his life.

And that these calumnies might with more ease be credited by the Vulgar, they
confidently report the great Promoters of the Reformation (as we Heretics call
it) viz: Luther, Calvin, Beza etc. to be men of loose principles and licentious
practices.

Bellarmine affirms of Luther, that he justifies the Arrians, and says, they
did very well in expelling the word (Homousion) being a word that his soul
hated. Praefat: disp: de Christo. Again, That faith except it be without (even
the least) good works, does not justify, and is not faith. Bellar: de Justific:
lib: 1. cap. 12. Luther averreth that the ten Commandments belong not to us;
for God did not lead us, but the Jews out of Egypt. And how can a man prepare
himself to good; seeing it is not in his power to make his ways evil. For God
works the wicked work of the wicked. Marquess of Worcester. And concerning
his death Thyraeus the Jesuit tells us this Story: That the same day that
Luther dyed, there was at Gheola a Town in Brabant many persons possessed of
devils, that waited on their St. Dimna for deliverance, and were all that day
delivered; but the next day they were all possessed again: whereupon the
Exorcist asked the devils where they had been the day before; and they
answered, that they were commanded by their Prince to be at the funeral of
their fellow Labourer Luther. And for proof of this, Luthers own Servant that
was with him at his death, looking out at the window, did more then once to his
great terror, see a company of ugly sp^rits leaping and dancing without etc. De
Daemonaicis cap. 8. page: 16.

And Calvin they charge with these blasphemous passages: That God is the Author
of all the evil that's done in the world: That in the death of Christ occurs a
spectacle full of desperation. Marq: That Christ despaired upon the Cross, and
was damned. Bellar: de Christi Anima lib: 4. c. 8. And de Notis Eccles: lib: 4.
cap: 17. he says, that Calvin was eaten up of worms, even as Antiochus, Herod,
and Maximinus. And then adds, that he dyed cursing and blaspheming.

Of Beza they write that a little before Sands. p. 101.
his death, he had in full Senate at Geneva recanted his Religion, exhorting
them, if they had any care to save their souls, to seek reconciliation with the
Roman Church, and to send for some Jesuits to instruct them.

Zuinglius affirms (says the Marquess) that these sayings, and such like, if
thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments etc. are superfluous, and
Hyperbolical: That when we commit adultery, or murder it is the work of God,
being the mover, the author or inciter etc. God moves the Thief to kill -- he
is forced to sin etc.

Some of these, and many more of the like nature (which I have not time to
mention) you may find in the Marquess of Worcesters papers to King Charles 1.
all which are fully detected by our learned Mr. Cartwright in the second part
of his Cer^am^n Religiosum. And thus we have dispatched the first thing
propounded; showed you by what Arts and Polic^es the Whore of Babylon has
advanced her self, and deluded the Nations. And who ever considers the nature
of them, how contrariant they are to all Laws both Divine and humane, and what
dreadful menaces are annexed to them in sacred Writ,, cannot doubt of the truth
of this Proposition (which was the second thing propounded) viz: That the ways
and methods which Rome Papal has used to advance her self, and propagate her
Doctrines, will bring inevitable ruin, and destruction upon her.

CHAP. IX. Some practical Inferences from the foregoing Discourse.
ARe these the Ways and Methods which the Pope and his Factors have used to
propagate their doctrines?

1. Here then we may see how it comes to pass that the Church of Rome has
such a numerous company of Proselytes. There was never Government framed by the
wit of man more powerful to attain it^ designed ends, than that of Rome; never
any either more wisely contrived, ^^ more diligently observed; insomuch that
but for the natural weakness of falsehood and dishonesty, their external means
were sufficient to prevail upon the whole world to submit unto it. Whatsoever
either wealth can sway with the lovers, or voluntary poverty with the despisers
of the world; what honor with the ambitious, or obedience with the humble;
what great employments with active spirits, or perpetual quiet with restive
bodies; what satisfaction the pleasant nature can take in sports and pastimes,
or the austere mind in discipline and rigor; what love either Chastity can
raise in the pure, or voluptuousness in the dissolute; what change of vow;
with the rash, or of Estate with the inconstant; what pardons with the guilty,
or supplies with the indigent; what Miracles with the Credulous, and Visions
with the Fantastical; what glorious shows with the Vulgar, and multitude of
Ceremonies with the superstitious; in short, whatsoever is congruent and
complacential to the various tempers and dispositions of men, is to be found in
the Church of Rome.

To conclude, never was there a Polity or Government in the world so strangely
compacted of infinite contrarieties, all tending to entertain and gratify the
several humors of men; and by Consequence more powerful to attain the ends of
its institution.

2. Let us then thankfully acknowledge the infinite goodness and mercy of God
in our signal deliverances from their Plots and Conspiracies, especially that
of this day. I know the Anniversarie rememb^ance of this eminent Deliverance
troubles our Adversaries of Rome: they love not to hear of their impious
designs, when not crowned with success. Some Romanists would gladly have the
world believe it to be a m^er cheat, only a Trick of Salisbury, then Secretary
of State; and for proof they very gravely tell us this Story, That one
lurking under the Council Table (and upon what jealousy came he there?)
concealed by the long Carpet, heard much of the Contrivance. A Tal^ so
ridiculous, that to endeavor its confutation, would argue one more
impertinent, than the Tale-teller. If this were a Cheat, and known so to be,
would no^ Father Parsons, and others have vapoured with ^t all the world over?
Would they have concealed such a thing, that would have cleared up their
innocence, and cast so much filth and dirt upon us? No man (who ha^h seen their
Writings) can imagine that they were such Friends to us, and such Enemies to
their own C^use and Credit.

That there really was such a Plot, cannot be denied till all Hystories be
purged.

And that it was approved and promoted not only by a few inconsiderable persons
(as others suggest) is not less evident. Sir William Stanley, Sir Edmund
Bainham, Father Parsons Rector of the English College in Rome, William B^ldwin
the Leg^er Jesuit in Flanders, Arhur Crefwell Legier for their cause in Spain,
Hugh Owen with many others beyond the Seas were acquainted with this bloody
design, and highly commended it. Nay some of these solicited the King of Spain
to have an Army in readynesse at the waterside to waft over into England,
when notice should be given of that fatal blow.

In May 1605. (the Romanists having made an Insurrection in Wales) Father
Garnet writ a letter to the Pope, that a command might come from his Holiness,
or from Aquavica General of the Jesuits, to prevent all commotions of the
Catholics here in England, that we might be lulled asleep by their dissembled
quietness and conformity. This request was granted; though his other viz: to
have it enjoined upon Censures, was denied, least it might be an impediment to
that grand design. Peruse the Relation of the whole proceedings against those
barbarous Traitors, where you will find all this, and much more confessed by
them.

Again, that the Pope was privy to this ^. Andrews Respons: ad Apol: Bellarm:
c. 5. p. 11^.
Plot, and approved of it, is clear from the voluntary Confession of a Jesuit,
who affirmed, that three Bulls were sent from Rome upon this occasion; and
should have been published in three of the chiefest places of England, had
their design succeeded: but that failing, they were suppressed.

That the remembrance of this great deliverance may more affect us, let us
consider it with all its adjuncts and circumstances. We say that in Morals, the
Circumstance is more then the substance: So many times in deliverances, the
adjuncts may be more than the matter. The cutting of a Stone may be more
precious than the stone it self; and the stamp and workmanship of more value
than the Metal. I cannot say so here; but doubtless these two Adjuncts viz:
freeness and fullness, do add much to the glory of it.

1. Observe how freely we were delivered from the bloody complotments of our
Roman Adversaries. Many signal deliverances has God wrought for his Church in
former Ages, but was there ever any so free as this? God delivered his Church
from the barbarous conspiracy of Haman: but what prayers, and tears, and
fastings did it cost Esther, and Mordecai, and the Jews ere they could obtain
it? 4 Esth: 16. But this deliverance came not upon the wings of our prayers,
but Gods free mercy; we were ignorant of our danger, and therefore could not
make Deliverance the Subject of our prayers. Masses were said in Rome for the
good success of the Catholic Design, but no prayers were made in England for
our deliverance from it: and yet delivered. In a word, we were delivered,
before we sought deliverance.

2. Observe how fully we were delivered. The Plot was laid for a full
destruction, to cut off the King, Queen, and their hopeful Issue, our
honorable Nobility, our reverend Clergies, our grave and learned Judges, the
flower of our Gentry, yea the Protestant Religion. No Country, nor Age ever
brought forth such a Monster of Treason; says Thuanus, speaking of the
Powder Plot. Histor: lib: 135. p. 1215. No stroke so mortal as that of a
Thunderbolt, no hatred so cruel as that which fetches its pretenses from
Heaven. The loss of a particular person is oft-times, but like the putting out
of a Candle, which brings only darkness to a room: but the ruin of a State,
is like the Eclipse of the Sun, which brings a detriment to the whole
Hemisphere.

And observe how fully God defeated their bloody design: there was not the
least hurt done. This deliverance was like that of the three Children in the
fiery furnace 3 Dan: 27, There was not so much as an hair of their head singed,
neither were their ^oats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them. Or
like that of Jerusalem from the fury of Sen^cherib, who coming up against that
City full of pride and rage, intended nothing less than the utter ruin and
destruction of it: but faith God, he shall not shoot an arrow there. Even thus
were we delivered.

O let us be for ever thankful for this free and full, this eminent and
glorious deliverance! not only verbally, but really; with our lips, and in our
lives. It is observable that the Israelites gracious deliverance out of Egypt
is made the Preface to the ten Commandments. Holiness of life is the life of
thankfulness.

How apt we are to fail in the performance of this duty is too evident both
from sacred Writ* and daily experience. How did Gods own people abuse signal
and transcendent mercies? not only by entertaining low and mean thoughts of
them, but even by sinning against the Author of them. Can there be a greater
wickedness, than for a Pensioner of the Court who receives an ample Stipend
from the King, to lay it out in buying poison to destroy him, or in raising,
rebellion to dethrone him? And what is it that such men do less, who abuse
the mercies of God to the service of their lusts: and turn them, as Israel did
the Jewels of the Egyptians, which God had given them, into a cursed Idol,
before which bowed and worshipped?

Such a foul sin it is, that it were to be wished, that no example could ever
be produced of it; or that it had been confined to the generations that are
long since past: that Jesurun had been the last, that waxed fat and kicked. 32
Deuteronomy. 15. or that the Prophet had made the last complaint, that Gods Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, and Silver, and Gold were employed in the Service of Baal. His:
2. 8. But alas its a sin that lives to this day; a sin that England is deeply
guilty of. If we compare this Land with other Nations and Churches, we shall
find our Portion to be like that of the First born, double to what any of our
Brethren in other Kingdoms have enjoyed. What blessing is it, that deserves to
be styled matchless, transcendent, glorious, which God has not conferred upon
us? If Peace be it, we have had it; if Plenty, we have had it; if Victory, we
have had it; if the Gospel, we have have had it. Our implacable Enemies of Rome
have attempted all ways, that wit or malice could invent, to deprive us of
what is, and ought to be most dear unto us, and bring upon us the heavy Yoke of
Popish Tyranny and Superstitions, which neither we, nor our Fathers were able
to bear.

If cursing could have done it, what a miserable and forlorn People had we been
at this day? How often has Balack sent to Balaam, come curse Israel, come defy
England? and how often has that Balaam cursed our Israel. We have heard of his
Anniversarie Anathema's, wherein this Church and State have been struck with
the thunder and lightning of his Papal curse. But the curse causlesse (says
Solomon) shall not come. And we may say to England, as Moses did to Israel
concerning Balaams curse. Deuteronomy: 23. 5. Nevertheless, the Lord thy God would
not hearken unto Balaam: but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing
unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved thee.

And if power and policy could have done it, we had been a wretched and ruined
people long ago; witness the Spanish Armado, and the Gun-powder-Plot. These
Archers of Rome have sorely grieved us, and shot at us, and hated us. But our
Bow has abode in strength, and the arms of our hands have been made strong, by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Gen: 49: 23, 24.

O but how sadly have we abused these signal mercies and deliverances! How is
that mercy of mercies slighted by us, nay a burden to us, which should be
prized above all the endearments of this world, I mean, the Gospel of
salvation? How have we wasted these mercies, as the Prodigal did his Portion,
upon our lusts and filthiness? we have strengthened our hands by them in
rebellion against the Author of them. Not only the banks of Religion, but
Cavility too are broken down. Whereas it is usually said, that ill manners
produce good laws, we have reverst the Aphorism, and the good precepts of our
Religion have introduced the most corrupt manners. Our holy Faith which, like a
foundation should support good works, has like a Gulf swallowed them up. And
so universal a depravation is there amongst us, that we have scorce any thing
left to distinguish us from the most barbarous people, but a better ^ame and
worse vices. How many give no other demonstration of their belief of a Deity,
than their Oaths and blasphemies? and in stead of calling unto mercy to save
them, their ordinary prayer is, God damn them. How many think it a ^iece of
gallantry to scoff at Religion, ^^oll upon God, and make sport with his laws?
In aword, how many think it an argument of judgment to be above the follies of
Conscience, and the height of courage to defy Heaven, and outdare the Almighty?
O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of A^kelon, that a people,
whom God has so signally owned, and miraculously delivered, should thus
requite the Lord.

How justly may we expect some remarkable judgments as the product of these
monstrous impieties? and that if we consider, that sins against mercy are
committed against a darling attribute of God, which of all others he most
delights to reveal, and make known to the Sons of men, Now the more any sin is
injurious to this attribute of mercy, the more black it must needs be. No
darkness is more formidable, than that of an Eclipse, which assaults the very
Vessels of light; no taste more unsavory, than that of sweet things, when
corrupted: even so no sin more hideous, than that which would darken the
brightness of Gods love, and corrupt the sweetness of his mercy; and
therefore none more provoking to wrath and jealousy.

To conclude, let us not frantickly defy that omnipotency, which we are not
able to resist, nor despise that goodness which is our only refuge: but since
it has pleased God in wrath to remember mercy, let us transcribe his Copy, and
be as kind to our selves, as he has been to us. O that we may take pattern
from Niniveh, cry, and cry mightily unto God, join humiliation to our prayers,
and reformation to both. And could we be persuaded to do this with the same
sincerity and universality, we might hope with the same success. Would all who
have brought their firebrands, bring also their tears, it might secure us such
a tranquillity here, as may calmly convoy us to that impassible state, where all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes. And so much for the second Inference.

3. Think not then of an accommodation with the Church of Rome. It has been
the desire of many, and the endeavor of some to work a reconciliation betwixt
our Church and that of Rome: these have attempted an impossibility. No
communion between light and darkness, truth and falsehood, Christ and
Antichrist. The North and South Poles may sooner meet, than an accommodation
with the Church of Rome be effected. Come out of Babylon is the voice from
Heaven; come out in affection, and come out in person: separate far from them.
Say with Jacob Gen: 49. 6, 7. O my soul come not thou into their secret: unto
their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united. Cursed be their Principles for
they are Damnable, and their Practices for they are cruel.

4. Much less then think of returning to Rome. Stand fast in that truly
Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, which you have received. This
Exhortation cannot be adjudg'd unnecessarie, if we consider that Romes Factors,
the great Whores Panders are crafty and subtle to seduce men to their
Religion. See how the Spirit of God describes them, 9 Rev: 1, 2. etc. The
Papists confess that here by the Star fallen from heaven is meant the Master
of some error and heresy, and by the Locusts that arise out of the earth, the
Teachers of these heresies.

This Star (says our learned King James in his Paraphrase on Revel:) is the
Pope of Rome: and the Locusts that infect the air, are Monks, Friars, Jesuits
etc. They have Crowns of gold, the the faces of men, and hair like Women: all
alluring, enticing, and tempting. And that you may stand fast in the truth, and
not be seduced to Popery, I wi^^ commend to you (passing by many others) these
two directions.

1. Do not nourish any known sin. The Jewel of faith can never be kept in a
cracked Cabinet, a crazy Conscience He who puts away a good conscience,
concerning faith will soon make shipwreck. 1 Timothy: 1. 19. P^ophane Gospellers
become a prey to those that go abirding for souls with their corrupt
Doctrines. 2 These: 2. 10, 11. The Apostle here describes the persons that shall
be seduced by Antichrist: they are such as walk after their lusts, and will not
receive the love of the truth. These like the out-setting Deer are shot, while
they within the Pale are safe.

2. Read the Scriptures carefully and constantly. It was the Speech of a dying
Archbishop of this place to his Chaplain, that in all the word of God, he
could not find the least ground for Popery. And so much, ^^y more is confessed
by certain Bishops in Bononia in their Letter of Advice to the Pope concerning
the establishment of the page: 6.
Roman Church: Lastly (which amongst the counsels and directions given to your
Holiness at this time, is chiefest and most weighty) the greatest care and
diligence must be used, that as little of the Gospel as may be (especially in
the Vulgar Tongue) be read in these Cities which are within your Dominions. Let
that little suffice, which is wont to be read in the Mass: and more than that
let no mortal be allowed to read. For so long as men were content with that
little, your affairs succeeded according to desire; but quite otherways since
so much of the Scriptures was publicly read. In short this is the Book, which
above all others, has raised these storms and tempests. And truly, if any one
read that Book viz: the Scriptures, and observe the customs and pract^ses of
our Church, will see that there is no agreement betwixt them, and that the
Doctrine which we preach is altogether different from, and sometimes contrary
to that contained in the Bible.

This Letter or Epistle was first discovered by Vergerius, after the death of
Pope Paulus 3. says Crashaw: and Wolfius gives us a large account of it,
Lection: Memorab: Tom: 2. p. 549.

Carefully and conscientiously observe these directions, and I doubt not but
you will be preserved from, or enabled to overcome all temptations to Popery. I
will conclude with one of the Collects appointed for this day.

O LORD, Who did this day discover the snares of death that were said for us,
and did wonderfully deliver us from the same; Be thou still our mighty
Protector, and scatter our Enemies that delight in blood. Infatuate and defeat
their counsels, abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound their
devices. Strengthen the hands of our gracious King Charles, and all that are
put in authority under him, with judgment and justice, to cut off all such
workers of iniquity, as turn religion into rebellion, and faith into faction;
that then may never prevail against us, or triumph in the ruin of thy Church
among us: But that our gracious Sovereign and his Realms, being preserved in
thy true Religion, and by thy merciful goodness protected in the same, we may
all duly serve thee, and give thee thanks in thy holy Congregation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

