A SCRIPTURAL Catechism: Useful for all Sorts of Persons, Both such as desire
to Teach their FAMILIES, And such as desire to Learn the Principles of the
Christian Religion Out of the HOLY SCRIPTURES.

By Owen Stockton, Minister of the Gospel.

2 Timothy 3.15. From a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.
MDCLXXII.

TO THE READER.
ALl Scripture being given by Inspiration of God, is profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, and for Instruction in Righteousness. And
therefore the whole Word of God is to be read with diligence, and to be
embraced with the same faith, love, reverence and obedience, with which we
would receive it, if we heard the Lord himself speak those things with an
audible voice, which we find written in the Scriptures. Yet in regard there are
some things in the Scriptures which are hard to be understood, and the memories
of children are not capable to retain all things that are written therein, The
most edifying way of teaching our children the Holy Scriptures, is (as I humbly
conceive) to select such portions of Scripture as may be useful to bring them
to the knowledge of the Principles, and to direct and persuade them to the
practice of the duties of the Christian Religion, which is designed in this
ensuing Scriptural Catechism. Which may be of great use to such as are young,
for the grounding them in the knowledge and belief of the Truth, and teaching
them to lead holy and godly lives, whereby they may glorify and enjoy God,
become serviceable in their generation, and obtain the eternal Salvation of
their Souls.

If any say, There are many good Catechisms already extant, and therefore there
is no need of this;

I answer, 1. There are not many of this nature, which contain both the
Articles of our Faith, and directions for an holy life, all the Answers to the
Questions being nothing else but express words of Scripture. 2. This is not
intended as an hinderance to any other Catechism which any persons find useful
for themselves or Families, but it may be conjoined with or follow after the
learning of any other Catechism, provided it be such as contains nothing in it
contrary to sound Doctrine. 3. There is a singular advantage in learning a
Scriptural Catechism above others, because no Instructions are so powerful for
enlightening the Understanding, creating Faith, awing the Conscience, persuading
to Holiness, supporting the weak, administering comfort, and guiding those that
are instructed in the way to Eternal Life, as those which are drawn out of the
holy Scriptures.


It may be some will say, This Catechism is too large, our Children and
Servants will never be able to retain it all in their memories.

To such I answer, 1. It contains nothing but the Scripture, which is often
preached to us, and which we are commanded to read and meditate on night and
day, and to talk thereof when we lie down, and when we rise up, when we sit in
our houses, and when we walk abroad. And therefore by reason of our frequent
converse with the Scriptures, this may be more easily attained and retained
then Catechisms of another nature. 2. These Scriptures are but a very small
portion compared with the many choice Instructions, heavenly Counsels, divine
Precepts, and precious Promises, which do abound both in the Old and New
Testament. 3. Children and Servants of ordinary capacities, committing but one
or two of these Scriptures to their memory every day (which is no hard task)
may in a competent time retain the whole, which may be a great help to make and
keep them sound in the Faith, and direct them how to order their Conversations
aright, whereby they shall come to see the Salvation of God. 4. It will be
easy redressing this complaint. For if it be judged needful, I can soon
contract this, and frame one consisting of sewer and shorter Texts of Scripture
for the use of such whose age or weakness of parts, will not permit them to get
or keep in memory so large a Catechism as this is. Or Parents may choose out of
this, the shortest Scriptures, and such as suit best their childrens state and
condition, and teach them those shorter Scriptures, omitting the others, till
they come to a greater maturity of age and understanding.


It may be some on the other hand will say, This Catechism is too short, That
there are material things omitted, which might have been inserted.

To such I answer, 1. The main and Fundamental Articles of our Faith, and the
most weighty duties relating to practice, such as Faith, Repentance, the love
of God and our Neighbor, glorifying God, Self-denial, forsaking all for
Christ, Contentment, etc. are briefly handled in this Catechism. 2. I was the
shorter in this, because I had thoughts of composing a larger for persons of
riper years; which if I should not do, it will be easy for such as are well
versed in the Word of God, to add any other portions of Scripture which they
judge meet for instructing their Families, besides what are contained in this
Catechism, either according to this method, or what way else they shall see
good.


I shall not need to show here the great benefit of teaching our Children the
holy Scriptures, nor give any directions how this work may be managed with
success, because this is already done in the Treatise of Family Instruction,
whither I refer the Reader.

A Scriptural Catechism.
Q. WHat will it profit a man to know God, and his Son Jesus Christ.

A. John 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Q. What is God, and how will God be worshipped?

A. Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit, and in truth.

Q. How many Gods are there, and how many Mediators between God and men?

A. 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man
Christ Jesus.

Q. How do you prove that there are three Persons in the Godhead, and that
these three Persons are one and the same God.

A. 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Q. Can no man please God without faith?

A. Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please him --

Q. What must every one believe concerning God, that comes to him?

A. Heb. 11.6 -- He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Q. Will the Lord have no mercy upon such people as live and die without
understanding?

A. Isa. 27.11. -- It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made
them, will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no
favor.

Q. What shall become of those that do not know God, at the day of judgment,
seeing the Lord will have no mercy on them.

A. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. -- The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with
his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vegeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power.

Q. Seeing the case of ignorant persons is thus dangerous, does it not greatly
concern us to get wisdom and understanding?

A. Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with
all thy gettings, get understanding.

Q. What must we do to get wisdom?

A. Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

Q. Will not the knowledge of the holy Scriptures make us wise to salvation?
And should not this cause us from our childhood to give our minds to learn the
Scriptures?

A. 2 Timothy 3.15. From a child thou haste known the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Q. Did God inspire all those things which are written in the holy Scriptures,
into their minds, who wrote the Scriptures.

A. 2 Timothy 3.16. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.

Q. How do you prove the Lord to be an eternal God?

A. Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth or ever thou had
formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God.

Q. Is not the Lord an unchangeable God?

A. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I charge not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

Q. Is not the Lord an Almighty God?

A. Genesis 17.1. -- I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect.

Q. Is not Lord a faithful God?

A. 2 These. 3.3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from evil.

Q. Is not the Lord a merciful and gracious God?

A. Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy.

Q. Is not the Lord an holy God?

A. Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

Q. Are not the eyes of God upon all men in every place?

A. Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place; beholding the evil and
the good.

Q. Does God know all our thoughts, and hear all our words, and is he
acquainted with all our ways.

A. Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4. Thou know my downsitting, and mine up-rising, thou
understandest my thought afar off. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down,
and art acquainted with all my ways; For there is not a word in my tongue, but
lo, o Lord, thou know it altogether.

Q. Does God see what we do in the dark, as well as what we do in the ligt?

A. Psalm. 139.12. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines
as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike to the.

Q. Does not the Lord fill heaven and earth with his presence?

A. Jor. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him,
says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord?

Q. Is not the Lord at all times round about his people?

A. Psalm. 125.2. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about his people from henceforth even for ever.

Q. Seeing God is continually round about us, ought we not to set the Lord
always before us, and walk as in his sight?

A. Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved.

Q. Is not the Lord a just God, without iniquity?

A. Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is the rock, for all his ways are judgment, a God of truth,
and without iniquity, just, and right is he.

Q. Seeing the Lord is an holy God, without iniquity, do not they wrong God who
say or think that he is the author of sin?

A. Jam. 1.13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man.

Q. Do not they conceive amiss of God, who think the Godhead is like unto Gold
or Silver, or any other thing which is graven by the art of man?

A. Acts 17.29. For as much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not
to think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or stone graven by art
and man's device.

Q. Cannot we live, or move, or subsist in our being, without God?

A. Acts 17.28. In him we live and move, and have our being --

A. Whence comes every good and perfect gift?

Q. Jam. 1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of light, with whom is no variableness neither
shadow of turning.

Q. Will God give all good things to them that seek him?

A. Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek
the Lord shall not want any good thing.

Q. What shall be done for the man that serves God and his Son Jesus Christ?

A. Job 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there
shall also my servant be. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

Q. What must we do that we may serve God acceptably.

A. Heb. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear.

Q. How do you prove that God made and preserves Heaven and Earth and the Sea
and all things that are therein?

A. Neh. 9.6. Thou even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven
of Heavens with all their host, the Earth and all things that are therein the
Seas and all that is therein and thou preservest them all, and the host of
Heaven worshipeth thee.

Q. Is not Gods making Heaven and Eearth an evident proof that nothing is to
hard for him?

A. Jer. 32.17, Ah Lord God, behold thou have made the Heaven and the Earth by
thy great power and streched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee.

Q. Why did the Lord make all things?

A. Prove. 16.7. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked
for the day of evil.

Q. Who created man, and how was he created?

A. Genesis 1.27. God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him, male and female created he them.

Q. Did not the Image of God in which man was created consist in knowledge?

A. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new Man, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the Image of him that created him.

Q. Did not the Image of God in which man was created consist in Righteousness
and Holiness, as well as Knowledge?

A. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

Q. When must we begin to remember our creator?

A. Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.

Q. Whom must we get for the guide of our youth?

A. Jer. 3.4. Will thou not from this time cry unto me, My Father, Thou art the
guide of my youth.

Q. By what means may a young man cleanse his ways?

A. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith all shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking
heed thereto according to thy word.

Q. What council did David give his son Solomon while he was young?

A. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts,
if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever.

Q. When did David begin to hope and trust in God?

A. Psalm. 71.5. Thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my trust from my youth.

Q. Did not David who began in his youth to trust and hope in God, prove so
eminent for godliness, that he is called a man after Gods own heart?

A. Acts 13.22. -- I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own
heart, which shall fulfill all my will.

Q. Shall not they that seek the Lord early be sure to find him?

A. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall
find me.

Q. Did not Josiah begin to seek early after God? And was not that the great
reason why he proved so eminent and constant in the ways of God?

A. 2 Chronicles. 34.2, 3. He did that Which was right in the sight of the Lord, and
walked in the ways of David his Father, and declined neither to the right hand
nor to the left: for in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young,
he began to seek after the God of David his Father. --

Q. Was not Josiah who began early to seek after God, so eminent for godliness
that there was no king like him either before or after him?

A. 2 Kings 23.25. And like unto him was there no King before him, that turned
to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might,
according to all the law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him.

Q. What council does the apostle Paul give to those that are young?

A. 2. Tim. 2.22. Flee also youthful lusts, but follow Righteousness, Faith,
Charity, Peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.

Q. Do not all things come to pass by the providence of God?

A. Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be
glory for ever amen.

Q. Are those things which seem most casual unto us ordered and disposed off
wholely and only by the providence of God?

A. Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof
is of the Lord.

Q. Is God so careful of us that there is not the least thing befalls us, not so
much as an hair falls off from our heads but by his providence?

A. Matthew. 10.30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

Q. Seeing God is thus careful of us, should not this encourage us in all our
straits and distresses to cast all our care upon the Lord?

A. 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

Q. How do you prove that after God had made man upright, he did of himself
fall from God?

A. Eccl. 7.29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright, but
they have sought out many inventions.

Q. How do you prove that we are born in sin?

A. Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity and in sin did my mother
conceive me.

Q. Seeing we are born in sin, is it not absolutely necessary that we should be
born again before we can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?

A. John 3.3. Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily I say unto thee,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kindom of God.

Q. Will nothing that any man has or does, avail him to salvation unless he be
a new creature?

A. Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision but a new creature.

Q. By what means are we born again? Is it not usually by the hearing the Word
of God?

A. James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we
should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.

Q. What is sin?

A. 1 John 3.4. -- Sin is the transgression of the Law.

Q. What is the wages of sin, and which way do we come by eternal life?

A. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Q. Is the death of the body all the wages that is due to sin, or shall the
soul of the sinner die also?

A. Ezekiel. 18.4. -- The soul that sineth it shall die.

Q. What is the second death, and who are they that shall die this death?

A. Rev. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers,
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolators, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

Q. Do we not sin when we neglect that good which God commands, as well as
when we commit that evil which he forbideth?

A. James 4.17. To him that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is
sin.

Q. Does not God know all our secret sins?

A. Psalm 90.8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance.

Q. Will our sins find us out wherever we go, So as we shall not be able to
escape the punishment due to them, unless we repent of them?

A. Numb. 32.23. If ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord,
and be sure your sin will find you out.

Q. How may we come to be convinced of our sins? Will not comparing of our
hearts and lives with the Law of God bring us to the knowledge of our fins?

A. Romans 3.20. -- By the law is the knowledge of sin.

Q. When we are convinced of our sins, whither must we look to have our sins
taken away? must we not look into Christ?

A. John 1.29. -- Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
World.

Q. Is not the heart of man before God works a change in him desperately wicked?

A. Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
who can know it.

Q. Seeing the heart is thus wicked, must not they that would escape eternal
death get new hearts and new spirits?

A. Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will you die,
O house of Israel.

Q. What promise have you that God will give you a new heart and a new spirit?

A. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh.

Q. What are we by nature?

A. Ephesians. 2.3. -- We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.

Q. Do we not abide under the wrath of God as long as we abide in unbelief?

A. John 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Q. What course shall we take to make our peace with God; must not it be by
taking hold on Christ who is the power and strength of God. (1 Cor. 1.24.)

A. Isah 27.5. Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with
me, and he shall make peace with me.

Q. Has not God passed the judgment of condemnation upon all men for Adam 's
sin?

A. Romans 5.18. -- By the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation. --

Q. What must we do to escape this condemnation?

A. John 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and
beliveth on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.

Q. Is there no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus? And what manner
of persons are they that are in Christ Jesus?

A. Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Q. Can we do nothing toward the helping of our selves out of our sinful and
miserable condition, without the assistance of Gods grace?

A. John 15.5. -- Without me ye can do nothing.

Q. Is there not help in God for such as have destroyed and undone themselves?

A. Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.

Q. For what end did Jesus Christ come into the world?

A. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

Q. Were not those sinners whom Jesus Christ came to save in a lost undone
condition?

A. Luk 19.10. The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

Q. Did not Jesus Christ testify of himself, that he was the promised Messiah
that was to come into the world?

A. John 4.25, 26. The woman says unto him I know that Messiah comes which is
called Christ; when he is come he will tell us all things. Jesus says unto
her, I that speak unto thee, am he.

Q. What other proof have you that Jesus of Nazareth is the promised Messiah
besides his own testimony! Do not all things that are written of the Messiah by
Moses and the Porphets agree to Jesus of Nazareth?

A. John 1.41, 45. We have found the Messiah which is, being interpreted, the
Christ, we have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did write,
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

Q. What other proof have you, that Jesus of Nazareth is the promised Messiah
besides Moses and the Prophets? Did not the works which he did in his Fathers
name bear witness of him, that he was the Christ?

A. John 10.24, 25. Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, how
long do thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ tell us plainly. Jesus
answered them, I told you, and ye believed not, the works that I do in my
Fathers name, they bear witness of me.

Q. What other proof have you that Jesus of Nazareth is the promised Messiah
besides his works? Did not God the Father bear witness by a voice from Heaven
that he was his beloved Son?

A. Matthew. 3.17, Lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.

Q. Is it not enough to believe that there is a Messiah, but is it necessary to
salvation to believe that Jesus of Nazareth, is the Christ that was to come
into world?

Q. John 8.24. -- If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

Q. How do you prove that Jesus Christ is God?

A. John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God.

Q. How do you prove that Jesus Christ being God, became man, and dwelt amongst
the sons of men?

A. John 1.14. The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth:

Q. Was the body of Christ of the same nature with ours, consisting of flesh
and blood as our bodies do?

A. Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil.

Q. How do you prove that Jesus Christ was born of a Virgin.

A. Matthew. 1.23. Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a
Son, and they shall call his name Emmannuel, which being interpreted, is God
with us.

Q. What was the Virgins name that conceived and brought forth Jesus Christ?

A. Luk 1.27. -- The Virgins name was Mary: 30.31. The Angel said unto her,
Fear not Mary, for thou have found favor with God, and behold, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus.

Q. When the Virgin Mary asked the Angel how it could be that she which had not
known a man should have a Son, what did he say to her?

A. Luk 1.35. The Angel answered and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall over shadow thee, therefore also
that holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

Q. How do you prove that there was neither original nor actual sin in Christ?

A. 1 John 3.5. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and
in him there is no sin.

Q. Why did Jesus Christ undergo such great sufferings when he was in the
world, seeing he never sinned against God?

A. Isah 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquitis, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.

Q. How do you prove that Jesus Christ died for our sins, and was buried, and
rose again the third day?

A. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received, how that Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, and
that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures.

Q. How do you prove that after Christ was risen from the dead, he asended into
heaven?

A. John 20.17. -- Go to my brethren and say unto them I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, unto my God, and your God.

Q. Was it not expedient for us that Jesus Christ should leave the world and
ascend into heaven, in order to his sending the comforter to us?

A. John 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that
I go away, for if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto you, but if I
depart I will send him unto you.

Q. Who is the Comforter that Jesus Christ has promised to send to us, and to
whom shall he be sent and how long shall he continue with us?

A. John 14.15, 16, 17. If you love me keep my commandments, and I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter that he may abide with you
for ever, even the spirit of Truth. --

Q. Does not Jesus Christ who is ascended into Heaven, sit there at Gods right
hand, having the Angels and all creatures made subject to him?

A. 1 Pet. 3.22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God,
Angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.

Q. What Does Christ do for us in Heaven? Does he not appear before God, as our
advocate and intercossour to plead our cause for us?

A. Heb. 9.24. Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figure of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us.

Q. Shall not the same Jesus that ascended into heaven come again from Heaven?

A. Acts 1.11. Ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing up into Heaven, this same
Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven shall so come, in like manner as
ye have have seen him go into Heaven.

Q. For what end will Jesus Christ come again, is it not to judge the quick and
the dead, and to setch all his servants into the Kingdom of Heaven?

A. 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom.

John 14.3. If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive
you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also.

Q. May not the death, resurrection, ascension and intercession of Jesus Christ
give great assurance to all the people of God, that they shall never come into
condemnation?

A. Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died, yea rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.

Q. Who are they for whom Christ makes intercession? Does he not intercede for
them that come to God by him, and is he not able to save to the uttermost all
that come to him?

A. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

Q Who are they that are invited to come to Christ?

A. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.

Q. May all that thirst after Christ and are willing to have Christ, come to
him?

A. Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, come, and let him that hears,
say, come, and let him that is athirst, come, And whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely.

Q. May such as have no money, that is, Such as are poor worthless creatures
come to Christ, if they thirst after him?

A. Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money
and without price.

Q. Will Jesus Christ cast out none that come to him?

A. John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Q. Can no man come to Christ except the Father draw him?

A. John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him.

Q. Seeing we cannot come to Christ of our selves, must we not pray that we may
be drawn to him, and after we are drawn to Christ, must we not remember Gods
love which he bath shown in bringing us to Christ, and love, rejoice in, and be
thankful to him for drawing us to Christ?

A. Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee. The King has brought into his
chambers. We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
then wine, the upright love thee.

Q. What does Jesus Christ require of those that come to him?

A. Mat. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn, of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Q. What benefits have we by Jesus Christ?

A. 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption.

Q. Has not God blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus?

A. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.

Q. Is Salvation to be had no other way but by Jesus Christ?

A. Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is none other
name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

Q. Shall they and none but they that have Christ have eternal life?

A. 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son
of God, has not life.

Q. What is the misery of those that are without Christ? Are they not without
God, without hope, without an interest in the promises, and cut off from all
the privileges, that belong to the people of God?

A. Ephesians. 2.12. At the time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world.

Q. Is there not such an excellency in Christ, as that we should willingly
suffer the loss of all things so that we may win Christ?

A. Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ.

Q. What must we do that we may be partakers of Christ?

A. Heb. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end.

Q. How shall we know whether we be in Christ?

A. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things are
past away, behold, all things are become new.

Q. Are they none of Christ's, that have not his Spirit?

A. Romans 8.9 -- Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Q. Must we not love Christ above our nearest and dearest relations?

A. Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of
me, and he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

Q. Are they not under a curse, and shall they not remain so till the Lord
comes, who do not love Jesus Christ?

A. 1 Cor 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathemae, Maranatha.

Q. Who is it that loves Christ; aed what shall we gain by loving him?

A. John 14.21. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest my self to him.

Q. Must not they that would be Christ's Disciples deny themselves, take up
their cross and follow him?

A. Mark 8.34. When he had called the people unto him, with his Disciples also,
he said unto them, whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross, and follow me.

Q. Must we not forsake all we have for Christ's sake when God calls us to it?

A. Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he bath, he
cannot be my Disciple.

Q. What shall be given to them that forsake any thing for Christ?

A. Mat. 19.29. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Q. What is the Covenant that God has made with his people in the days of the
Gospel?

A. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind and
write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor and every man his
brother, saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least to the
greatest. For I will be merciful to their unrighteosness, and their sins and
their iniquities will I remember no more.

Q. Does not this Covenant contain all that we can desire, and all that is
necessary for our Salvation?

A. 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

Q. How do you prove that God will take those into this Covenant, which come to
close with Jesus Christ the Mediator of the covenant?

A. Isa 55.3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your souls shall
live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David.

Q. When once God has taken us into Covenant with himself, shall his Covenant
never be removed from us?

A. Isah 54.10. The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee.

Q. Who are they to whom God has promised to reveal his Covenant?

A. Psalm 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant.

Q. What promise have you that God will bring you into the bond of his Covenant?

A. Ezekiel. 20.37. I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you
into the bond of the Covenant.

Q For what end has God given us such great and precious promises, as are
contained in the Covenant of grace?

A. 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having
escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

Q. Do not the promises belong to all that are effectually called?

A. Acts 2.39. The promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Q. What must we do that we may inherit the promises?

A. Heb. 6.12. That ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through
faith and patience inherit the promises.

Q. Do we not need patience to wait for the promises, when we have done what we
can to obtain them?

A. Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience, that after you have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise.

Q. Are not the promises powerful arguments to excite us to cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit?

A. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God,

Q. Is it not the command of God that we should believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ?

A. 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment.

Q. Has not God promised eternal life to every one that believes in his Son
Jesus Christ?

A. John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Q. Must not they that would be saved by Christ obey him as well as believe in
him?

A. Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal Salvation
unto all them that obey him.

Q. How shall we know that we believe in Christ? Is not prizing Christ an
evidence of faith?

A. 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you which believe, he is precious --

Q Must not they that believe in Christ be careful to maintain good works?

A. Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to
maintain good works, these things are good and profitable unto men.

Q. Shall not all unbelievers go to Hell?

A. Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
believes not, shall be damned.

Q. Seeing such as believe not shall be damned, does it not concern every man
to take heed of the sin of unbelief as well as other sins?

A. Heb. 3.12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living God.

Q. How shall a man come by faith? must it not be by the gift of God?

A. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved, through faith and that not of your selves,
it is the gift of God.

Q. Which way does God work faith? Is it not most usually by hearing the word?

A. Romans 10.17. So then, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God.

Q. Is not true faith accompanied with repentance?

A. Acts 11.21 -- A great number believed, and turned unto the Lord.

Q. Who are they whom God commands to repent?

A. Acts 17.30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands
all men every where to repent.

Q. Wherein lies the nature of repentance? Is it not in turning from all our
transgressions?

A. Ezekiel. 18.30. I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to
his ways, says the Lord God; Repent and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

Q. Does not repentance include our turning to God and doing good works as well
as forsaking our sinful ways?

A. Acts 26.20. -- That they should repent, and turn to God and do works meet
for repentance.

Q. Do not penitent persons sorrow for their sins in a godly sort as well
forsake them?

A. Psalm 38.18. I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin.

Q. What shall become of all those that do not repent?

A. Luke 13.3. I tell you, nay, but except you repent, ye shall all likewise
perish.

Q. Is it not an hard matter for those that have gotten a custom of sinning to
repent of their sins?

A. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin or the Leopard his spots;
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.

Q. Did not God send his Son Jesus Christ to turn us from our sins?

A. Acts 3.26. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

Q. Was not Jesus Christ exalted to give repentance to those that cannot repent
of themselves?

A. Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

Q. When we find our inability to repent must we not bemoan it before the Lord,
and pray to him to turn us?

A. Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God.

Q. When the Lord heard Ephraim bemoaning his sins, and praying to be turned
from them, what did he say to Ephraim?

A. Verse 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Q. Will not God save all penitent persons from the pit of Hell and give them
eternal life?

A. Job 33.27, 28. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, he will deliver his
soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

Q. What shall become of those who being often reproved, do harden their hearts
and go on still in their sins?

A. Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

Q Is not repentance of such great excellency, that the Angels of Heaven
rejoice, when any one sinner is brought to repentance?

A. Luke 15.10. Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God, over one sinner that repents.

Q. What promise have you that God will cause you to return to him with your
whole heart?

A. Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me
with their whole heart.

Q. What promise have you, that God will keep you that you shall not turn away
from him, after you are returned to him?

A. Jer. 3.19 -- Thou shall call me, My Father, and shall not turn away from me.

Q Shall not they that repent obtain forgiveness of their sins?

A. Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord.

Q. Is there not sufficient virtue in the blood of Christ to cleanse us from
all sorts of sin?

A. 1 John 1.7 -- The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

Q. Do not all the Prophets assure us that whosoever believes in Christ shall
receive remission of sins.

A. Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness that through his name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

Q. Shall not all that believe be justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the law of Moses?

A. Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that
through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, And by him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses?

Q. Will not God as sure as he is just and faithful forgive us our sins, and
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, if we confess our sins to him?

A. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Q. Suppose a man has been a very wicked man, and has committed abundance of
sin, is there hope for such a man that God will have mercy on him and pardon
his sins, if he forsake his evil ways and return to the Lord?

A. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Q. Suppose a man's sins be of a deep die, crimson and scarlet sins, heinous
transgressions, is there hope that God will pardon him upon his repentance?

A. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow,
come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they
shall be, as wool.

Q. Is there hope for such as have rebelled against God, that the Lord will
pardon them upon their repentance?

A. Dan. 9.9. To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we
have rebelled against him.

Q. Is there hope for such as have continued a long time in their sins, even
till they have wearied the Lord, that the Lord will pardon them upon their
repentance?

A. Isa. 43.24, 25 -- Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities, I, even I, am he, that bloteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

Q. If a man backslide from God after he has obtained mercy is there hope that
God will pardon his backslidings, if he return again to the Lord?

A. Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings: behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

Q. Must not such as believe in Christ be careful that they do not sin against
God? And when they do fall into sin, is not Christ their advocate to plead with
his father that their sins may not be imputed to them?

A. 1 John 2.1, 2. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye
sin not, and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world.

Q How are we justified? By faith or by the works of the law?

A. Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without
the deeds of the law.

Q. Should not Gods mercy in forgiving our sins, cause us to forgive one
another?

A. Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Q. Has not God promised to subdue our sins as well as to pardon them?

A. Mic. 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities: and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the Sea.

Q. Seeing God has promised to pardon and subdue our sins, ought we not to
hope in God that he will purge away our transgressions, even at such times as
we feel iniquity prevailing against us?

A. Psalm 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me; as for our transgressions, thou
shall purge them away.

Q. Must we not trust in the Lord at all times?

A. Psalm 62.8. Trust in him at all times ye people, pour out your heart before
him, God is a refuge for us.

Q Why must we trust in the Lord for ever?

A. Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength.

Q. Will not the Lord keep that man in perfect peace that trusts in him?

A. Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee.

Q. May such as walk in darkness and see no light trust in the Lord?

A. Isa. 50.10. Who it among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice
of his Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light; let him trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

Q. Suppose a man be brought so low that he almost despaireth of ever seeing
God, ought such an one to trust in the Lord?

A. Job 35.14. Although thou say thou shall not see him, yet judgment is
before him, therefore trust thou in him.

Q. Must we trust in God, when he kills us?

A. Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him --

Q. What promise have you that God will enable you to trust in Christ?

A. Romans 15.12. There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign
over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

Q. What promise have you that God will help you to trust in him in your
greatest afflictions?

A. Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people,
and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.

Q. What promise have you that God will cause you to trust in him in truth?

A. Isa. 10.20. And it shall come to pass in that day that the remnant of
Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay
upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the Lord, the holy one of Israel
in truth.

Q. How must we love God?

A. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy might.

Q. What promise have you that God will help you thus to love him?

A. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of
thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
that thou may live.

Q. What has God prepared in Heaven for those that love him?

A. 1 Cor. 2.9 -- Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Q. Shall not all things work together for good to them that love God?

A. Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good, to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.

Q. How may we know whether we love God?

A. 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous.

Q. Must not he that loves God, love his brother also?

A. 1 John 4.21. This commandment have we from him, that he who loves God,
love his brother also.

Q. How must we love our neighbor?

A. Mat. 22.39 -- Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Q. Must we not love one another as Christ has loved us?

A. John 15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have
loved you.

Q. Do not they dwell in God and God dwell in them, who dwell in love?

A. 1 John 4.16 -- God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him.

Q. Is it not an evident token that we are the Disciples of Christ, when we
love one another?

A. John 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

Q. Will not love keep us from doing any kind of evil to any man?

A. Romans 13.10. Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law.

Q. Ought we not from a principle of love to be as ready to do all the good we
can for every man, as we would be if we were his servant?

A. Gal. 5.13 -- By love serve one another.

Q. What is the sum and substance of all the direction that Moses in the Law,
and the Prophets have given us to direct us how to carry our selves toward our
neighbor?

A. Mat. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do
ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Q. Must not we love and do good to our worst enemies that we have in the
world, even to such as hate, persecute, and use us despitefully?

A. Mat. 5.44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you and persecute you.

Q. Is it not good for a man to hope in God and quietly to wait for his
salvation?

A. Lam. 3.26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord.

Q. Does not God take pleasure in such as hope in his mercy?

A. Psalm 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mercy.

Q. Will not God redeem us from all our iniquities if we hope in him?

A. Psalm 130.7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption, and he shall redeem Israel
from all his iniquities.

Q. Ought we not to keep up our hope in God when we find our souls much
disquieted and cast down?

A. Psalm 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me, hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of
my countenance, and my God.

Q. Were not the Scriptures written for this very end to encourage us in all
our troubles and distresses to hope in God?

A. Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

Q. What promise have you, that God will enable you to hope in him in times of
greatest distress?

A. Joel 3.15, 16. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened and the Stars shall
withdraw their shining, the Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his
voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord
will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the Children of Israel.

Q. Does not God straightly charge us to wait upon him?

A. Psalm 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thy heart, wait, I say, on the Lord.

Q. How long must we wait on the Lord?

A. Hos. 12.6. Turn thou to thy God, keep mercy and judgment and wait on thy
God continually.

Q. What has God prepared for them that wait for him?

A. Isa. 64.4. Since the beginning of the world, men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him.

Q. Shall not they that wait upon the Lord renew their strength?

A. Isa. 40.31. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they
shall walk and not faint.

Q. What will God give the man that delights in him?

A. Psalm 37.4. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the
desires of thine heart.

Q. Is not delight in God, an evidence that God is our God, and that he has
put his Law into our hearts?

A. Psalm 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy Law is within my
heart.

Q. What promise have you that God will help you to delight in him?

A. Job 22.23, 26. If thou return to the Almighty -- Then shall thou have thy
delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto God.

Q. Must we not rejoice always in God?

A. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice.

Q. Ought we not to rejoice in God, at such times as we are stripped of all
worldly comforts?

A. Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield
no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd
in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I will joy in the God of of my
salvation.

Q. What promise have you that God will enable you to rejoice in him, even when
you are brought into a poor and low condition?

A. Isa. 29.19. The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor
among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel.

Q. Who are they that are called upon to fear the Lord?

A. Psalm 33.8. Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the
world stand in aw of him.

Q. Will God fulfill the desires of them that fear him?

A. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will
hear their cry, and will save them.

Q. Will not the Lord be for a Sanctuary in time of trouble to them that fear
him?

A. Isa. 8.13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your
fear and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary --

Q. Shall not the Sun of righteousness arise with healing under his wings upon
them that fear God?

A. Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise
with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the
stall.

Q. Ought we not to fear God above all the men in the world?

A. Luke 12.4, 5. I say unto you, my friends, be not afraid of them that kill
the body and after that have no more that they can do, but I will forwarn you
whom you shall fear, Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast
into Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him.

Q. Has not God laid up wonderful blessings in store for them that fear him?

A. Psalm 31.19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the
sons of men.

Q. Wherein consists the fear of God? Does it not consist in hating and
departing from sin?

A. Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil -- Prove. 16.6. By mercy
and truth iniquity is purged, and by the fear of the Lord, men depart from evil.

Q. What promise have you that God will put his fear into your heart?

A. Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasing Covenant with them, that I will not
turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me.

Q. When we eat or drink, or do any other action, must not all that we do, be
done to the glory of God?

A. 1 Cor 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.

Q. Must we not glorify God with our bodies and spirits?

A. 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
body and in your spirit, which are Gods.

Q. Must we not honor God with our substance?

A. Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of
all thine increase.

Q. Is it not our duty to glorify God before all sorts of people?

A. Lev. 10.3 -- I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all
the people I will be glorified --

Q. Do we not glorify God when we praise him?

A. Psalm. 50.23. Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that
orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

Q. Do we not glorify God when we are fruitful in good works?

A. John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall
ye be my Disciples.

Q. Do we not give glory to God when we rely upon his promises?

A. Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in faith, giving glory to God.

Q. Do we not glorify God when we lead righteous lives?

A. Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be all righteous -- that I may be glorified.

Q. What promise have you that God will enable you to glorify him?

A. Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.

Q. Will not God honor those that honor him?

A. 1 Samuel 2.30 -- Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed.

Q. To whom and for what must we pray?

A. Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.

Q. If we follow this council of the Apostle, in making known our requests to
God in every thing by prayer, will not this bring us great peace?

A. Verse 7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

Q. May not all flesh take encouragement to call upon God, upon this account
that he is a God hearing prayers?

A. Psalm 65.2. O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

Q. May we give religious worship to Saints and Angels, or must we worship and
serve God only?

A. Mat. 4.10 -- Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

Q. Can we have access to God no other way but by Jesus Christ?

A. John 14.6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life, no
man comes unto the Father but me.

Q. Will God give us every thing that we ask of him in the name of Jesus Christ?

A. John 16.23. Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you.

Q. Must we not avoid rashness in prayer?

A. Eccl. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God, for God is in Heaven, and thou upon earth,
therefore let thy words be few.

Q. Must we ask nothing in prayer but what is according to the will of God? And
when we ask what is according to his will may we be confident he will hear us?

A. 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us.

Q. What place should we choose to pray in? Is not a secret place best for
prayer?

A. Math. 6.6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when
thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father
which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

Q. Whose prayers avail much with God?

A. James 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed. The effectual fervant prayer of a righteous man avails
much.

Q. Will not God hear the prayers of impenitent sinners?

A. John 9.31. We know that God hears not sinners, but if any man be a
worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears.

Q. Suppose a man be not an open sinner, yet if he regard iniquity in his
heart, will not this hinder his prayers from being accepted with God?

A. Psalm 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Q. If we abide in Christ and his word abide in us, may we have of God
whatsoever we will ask in prayer?

A. John 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what
ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

Q. Is faith in prayer of such efficacy that we shall receive all things
whatsoever we ask in prayer believing?

A. Matthew. 21.22. All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing ye
shall receive.

Q. Will not God pour out his wrath upon those persons and families, that do
not call upon him?

A. Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy name --

Q. Can we not pray as we ought unless the spirit help our infirmities?

A. Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes
intercessions for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.

Q. What promise have you that God will pour out the spirit of grace and
supplications upon you?

A. Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns
for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his first born.

Q. When we cannot express our wants with words, are not our desires and
groansknown to God?

A. Psalm 38.9. Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid
from thee.

Q. When we have prayed to God, must we not observe what answers God gives to
our prayers?

A. Psalm 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak
peace unto his people, and to his Saints, but let them not turn again to folly.

Q. When we find God answering our prayers, should not this make us love God
and call upon him as long as we live?

A. Psalm 116.1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications, because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live.

Q. If we do not find God answering us, must we not continue in prayers?

A. Col. 4.2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

Q. If we continue to pray and wait upon God, will he not in due time hear and
answer our prayers?

A. Psalm 40.1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry.

Q. Is it not the will of God, that in every thing we should give thanks?

A. 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you.

Q. Does not the sacrifice of praise please God more then all the sacrifices
under the law?

A. Psalm 69.30, 31. I will praise the name of God with a song, and will
magnify him with thanksgiving; This also shall please the Lord better then an
Ox or Bullock that has horns and hoofs.

A. Must we not bless God every morning for the mercies of the night, and every
night for the mercies of the day?

A. Psalm 92.1, 2. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing
praises unto thy name, O most high, to show forth thy loving kindness in the
morning, and thy faithfulness every night.

Q. Ought we not to continue this course of blessing and praising God morning
and evening, every day as long as we live?

A. Psalm 145.2. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for
ever and ever.

Q. How must we bless and praise God; must it not be done with our souls, as
well as with our lips?

A. Psalm 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless
his holy name, bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Q. Must not our praises as well as our prayers be offered up to God by Jesus
Christ?

A. Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.

Q. What promise have you that God will enable you to praise him?

A. Isa. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my
praise.

Q. Is not singing of Psalms an ordinance of Christ? And when we use this
ordinance, must we not sing in a gracious manner?

A. Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord.

Q. Where else are we commanded to sing psalms?

A. James 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him
sing psalms.

Q. When we sing psalms, must we not sing with our spirits and understandings
as well as with our voices?

A. 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with the
understanding also, I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also.

Q. How did Job esteem Gods word?

A. Job 23.12 -- I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my necessary
food.

Q. How did David esteem the word of God?

A. Psalm 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands of
gold and silver.

Q. Ought we not to rejoice in the word and ways of God as much as in all
riches?

A. Psalm. 119.14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as much as in
all riches.

Q. Must we not take all opportunities to hear the word of God when it is
preached?

A. James 1.19. Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.

Q. Has not God promised to bless such as are diligent hearers of his word?
And are not such persons in the ready way to find Christ, life, and the favor
of God?

A. Prove. 8.34, 35. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my
gates, waiting at the posts of my doors, for whosoever finds me, finds life,
and shall obtain favor of the Lord.

Q. Must we not mingle the word with faith, if we would profit by it, when we
hear it preached?

A. Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them, but the
word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it.

Q. Must we not labor to keep in memory what we hear?

A. Heb. 2.1. We ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip.

Q. Must we not be very attentive to the word when it is preached?

A. Luke 19.48 -- All the people were very attentive to hear him.

Q. What judgment did God show upon Eutychus for sleeping when the Apostle Paul
was preaching? Did he not fall down dead?

A. Acts 20.9. There sat in a window a certain young man, named Eutychus, being
fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with
sleep, and fell down from the third loft and was taken up dead.

Q. If we would so hear the word as to be saved by it, must we not leave our
sins, receive the word with meekness, hide it in our hearts and practice it in
our lives?

A. James 1.21, 22. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to
save your souls; but be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own selves.

Q. Has not Christ as great a respect for those that hear the word of God and
do it, as he had for his Mother and brethren?

A. Luke 8.21 -- My mother and my brethren are these, which hear the word of
God, and do it.

Q. It was a great blessing to bear Christ in the womb and to give him suck,
but does not Christ say, it is more blessed to hear and keep the word of God?

A. Luke 11.27, 28. And it came to pass as he spoke these things, a certain
woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb
that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. But he said, Yea, rather
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

Q. May we hear all doctrines, and all preachers, such as teach errors as well
as truth? Or must we take heed what we hear?

A. Mark. 4.24. And he said unto them, take heed what ye hear --

Where are we forbidden hearing such as teach errors and herefies?

A. Prove. 19.27. Cease, my Son, to hear the instruction, that causes to err
from the words of knowledge.

Q. Are not they in danger to be drawn from the faith of Christ to embrace the
doctrine of Devils, who give heed to seducers?

A. 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of
Devils.

Q. How shall we know what is true and what is false doctrine? May we not know
this by examining and trying all doctrines by the word of truth?

A. Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Q. If they that preach should bring any Doctrine contrary to the Gospel, must
we reject it, though they that deliver the Doctrine should for their gifts and
holiness seem to be like the Apostles, and more like Angels then men?

A. Gal. 1.8. Though we or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel to
you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Q. Must we not only reject the Doctrine, but the company also of false
teachers?

A. 2 John 10, 11. If there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that bids
him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Q. Can we have no enjoyment of God unless we abide in the Doctrine of Christ?

A. 2. John 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ, has not God. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ he has both
the Father and the Son.

Q. Must we not get Bibles and keep them and give our selves to the reading of
the Scriptures all the days of our lives?

A. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19 -- He shall write him a copy of this Law in a book, out of
that which is before the Priests the Levites, and it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord
his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them,

Q. Is not a daily and diligent searching of the Scriptures a great means to
beget faith?

A. Acts 17.11, 12 -- They searched the Scriptures daily -- therefore many of
them believed --

Q. Will not meditation on what we read and hear, help us to profit greatly by
reading and hearing?

A. 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that
thy profitting may appear unto all.

Q. How will God bless that man that delights and meditates in his word night
and day? Shall he not bring forth his fruit in season, and prosper in all that
he does?

A. Psalm 1.2, 3. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of
water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, his leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.

Q. Will not feeding on the word by meditation, make it the joy and rejoicing
of our hearts?

A. Jer. 15.16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto
me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart --

Q. How did David improve the word, to keep himself from sinning against God?

A. Psalm 119.11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin
against thee.

Q. Is it not enough to get the knowledge of the word, but must we practice it
also if we would be happy?

A. Joh. 13.17. If you know these things, happy are ye if you do them.

Q. Must we not teach our children Gods Word, and take all occasions to speak
of the Scriptures both when we are at home in our own families, and when we are
abroad with others?

A. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down and when thou risest up.

Q. Is not Baptizing persons in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, by
such as are sent to preach the word, an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, which he
will have continued, and with which he will afford his presence to the end of
the world?

A. Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world Amen.

Q Do not such as are Baptized in Christ's name, put on Christ?

A. Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.

Q. Does not Baptism seal up to us our interest in the death of Christ; and
ought not such as are baptized to walk in newness of life?

A. Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death; therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

Q. Is not Baptism a seal of eternal life to such as believe in Jesus Christ?

A. Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved --

Q. Is not Baptism to be administered to all to whom the Promises belong, and so
consequently to the Children of Believers, seeing they are heirs of the
Promises?

A. Acts 2.38, 39. Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of
you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, For the Promise is unto you and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call.

Q. When was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper instituted? and by whom? and
what does the breaking and giving of the Bread fignifie? Is it not a sign and
seal that the Body of Christ was broken for us?

A. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered
unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took
bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is
my Body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.

Q. What does the Wine signify which we drink in the Lords Supper? Is it not a
sign and seal of the new Covenant which is ratified in the Blood of Christ?

A. Ver. 25. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped,
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, this do ye, as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me.

Q. Are not the Bread and Wine which we receive in the Lords Supper, signs and
seals of our communion with the Body and Blood of Christ?

A. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, Is it not the Communion
of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, Is it not the Communion of
the Body of Christ?

Q. Must not all that receive the Lords Supper, drink of the Cup, as well as
eat the Bread that is given in that Ordinance?

A. Matthew. 26.27. And he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it.

Q. Is not the Lords Supper to be received often, and to be continued in the
Church till the coming of Christ to Judgment?

A. 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show
the Lords death till he come.

Q. Are not they guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ that receive the Lords
Supper unworthily?

A. 1 Cor. 11.27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord --

Q. Do not they eat and drink their own damnation, that receive the Lords
Supper unworthily?

A. 1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.

Q. Seeing it is such a great and dangerous sin to receive the Lords Supper
unworthily, Is it not needful that we should examine our selves about our right
to and fitness for that Ordinance before we come to the Lords Table?

A. 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup.

Q. Is not the Church of Christ so firmly built and established, that all the
power and policy of all the Devils in Hell shall never be able to destroy it?

A. Matthew. 16.18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

Q. Is not Christ the Head of the Church, and the Church the Body of Christ?

A. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
the Head over all things to the Church which is his Body, the fullness of him
that fills all in all.

Q. Is not the true Church which is the Household of God, known by imbrasing and
professing the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and being built upon
Jesus Christ?

A. Ephesians. 2.19, 20. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but
fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone.

Q. Why must we follow holiness?

A. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

Q. Does not the Lord require that we should be holy in all manner of
conversation?

A. 1 Pet. 1.15. As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation.

Q. How does the grace of God teach us to live in this present world?

A. Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to
all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Q. Is it not the duty and care of godly men to labor to have always a
Conscience void of offense both toward God and men?

A. Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward Men.

Q. What profit is there in godliness?

A. 1 Timothy 4.8. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come.

Q. Are not the ways of God full of peace and pleasantness?

A. Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

Q. Must not such as would live godly in Christ Jesus expect to meet with
Persecution?

A. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer Persecution.

Q. Are not they blessed that are persecuted for righteousness sake? and shall
they not enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven?

A. Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. Are not righteous men more excellent then any other men that are in the
whole world?

A. Prove. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, but the
way of the wicked seduceth him.

Q. Are not they blessed that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, as well as
they that have obtained Righteousness?

A. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled.

Q. Who is a godly man's portion?

A. Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him.

Q. Is there no portion in Heaven or Earth like to this, to have God for our
portion?

A. Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart and my portion for ever.

Q. Are not they the most happy men in the whole world that have the Lord for
their God?

A. Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case, yea, happy is
that people, whose God is the Lord.

Q. When once the Lord is become our God, will he not be our God for ever and
ever?

A. Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide
even unto death.

Q. Why will not the Lord forsake us, after it has pleased the Lord to make us
his people?

A. 1 Samuel 12.22. The Lord will not forsake his people, for his great Names
sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people.

Q. If we give up our selves unto the Lord to be his servants, and obey his
voice, will he not become our God, and own us for his people?

A. Jer. 7.23. -- Obey my voice and I will be your God, and ye shall be my
people, and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be
well unto you.

Q. Is it not wonderful and amazing love, that the great and holy God, should
own such poor and sinful creatures as we are for his children?

A. 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the Sons of God: therefore the world knows us not,
because it knew him not.

Q. Who are they upon whom God bestows this great favor and privilege to be
his sons?

A. Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.

Q. Are all that have faith in Christ the Children of God?

A. Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

Q. Are not all Gods Children, heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ?

A. Romans 8.17. And if Children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also-glorified
together.

Q. Is it not the duty of Gods Children to imitate and follow their Father?

A. Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear Children.

Q. Does not the Lord love righteous men?

A. Psalm. 146.8. The Lord opens the eyes of the blind, the Lord raises them
that are bowed down, the Lord loves the righteous.

Q. What kind of love is it which Jesus Christ bears to us?

A. John 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in
my love.

Q. Shall no creature be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ
Jesus?

A. Romans 8.38, 39. I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Q. How has God manifested his great love to us?

A. 1 John 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

Q. Was not this love of God expressed toward us before we had any love for
him?

A. 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us,
and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins.

Q. Is it not the great Commendation of Gods love, in that he gave his Son to
dye for us while we were yet sinners?

A. Romans 5.8. God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us.

Q. Is not Prayer a means to obtain the favor of God, and to gain the
knowledge of his love?

A. Job 33.26. He shall pray unto God, and he shall be favorable unto him, and
he shall see his face with joy --

Q. How should we express our love to God for giving his Son to die for our
sins? Should we not do it by our hatred of sin that was the cause of the death
of his Son?

A. Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil, he preserves the souls of
his Saints, he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.

Q. How else should we express our love to God for his great love to us?

A. John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.

Q. Ought not Gods love to us make us love him?

A. 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us.

Q. Should not Gods love to us, cause us to love one another?

A. 1 John 4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

Q. Should not Gods love in giving Christ to die for us, encourage us to trust
in him, that he will freely give us all things?

A. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things.

Q. What is the whole duty of man?

A. Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God,
and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

Q. How many Commandments did God deliver to Moses written in two Tables of
Stone?

A. Deuteronomy. 4.13. And he declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you
to perform, even ten Commandments, and he wrote them upon two Tables of Stone.

Q. What is the Preface to the Ten Commandments which God spoke to the People,
when he gave them his Commandments?

A. Exodus 20.1, 2. God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God,
which have brought thee out of the Land Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

Q. Which are the Ten Commandments? Rehearse them in order, as they are
recorded in the 20th Chapter of Exodus, from the 3d to the 18th verse.

A. 1. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

2. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor any likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in
the Water under the Earth, thou shall not bow down thy self unto them, nor
serve them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
Commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy, six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall not kill.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any that is thy neighbors.

Q. Has God commanded nothing in his Law, but what is holy, just, and good?

A. Romans 7.12. The Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just and good.

Q. Is not the Law spiritual, requiring spiritual duties, and forbidding
spiritual sins? And may we not thereby discern our selves to be carnal?

A. Romans 7.14. We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under
sin.

Q. Was the Law given us for this end, that we might be justified by the deeds
of it? or, Was it given to drive us to Christ, that we might seek for
justification in Christ through Faith?

A. Gal. 3.24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ,
that we might be justified by faith.

Q. Would there have been no need of the death of Christ, if we could have
obtained such a righteousness as might have justified us in the sight of God,
by our observing the Law?

A. Gal. 2.21. I do not frustrate the grace of God, for if righteousness came
by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain.

Q. Is not Jesus Christ the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes?

A. Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes.

Q. Though we cannot obtain Righteousness by the Law, yet must we not be very
careful to keep the Commandments of God?

A. Psalm. 119.4. Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts diligently.

Q. What Promise have you that God will enable you to keep his Commandments?

A. Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them.

Q. Has not God promised under the New Testament, to write his Laws in our
hearts, which in the times of the Old Testament were written in Tables of Stone?

A. Heb. 10.16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds
will I write them.

Q. Is there no man upon the face of the earth that keeps all the
Commandments of God at all times without breaking any of them?

A. Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins
not.

Q. If we have respect to all the Commandments of God, and endeavor with
sincere hearts to obey them, Will not God accept us through Christ Jesus,
although we come short of what the Law requires?

A. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments.

Q. Must we not obey the Commandments of God from a principle of faith and
love, and with a pure heart?

A. 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the Commandment is charity, out of a pure heart,
and of a good Conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

Q. Are not Christians under the New Testament freed from Circumcision, and so
consequently from the Precepts of the Ceremonial Law?

A. Gal. 5.23. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing: For I testify again unto every man that is
circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law.

Q. Though Christians are freed from the Ceremonial Law, yet are they not
obliged to observe and keep the Moral Law?

A. James 2.8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well.

Q. Why must we keep our hearts with all diligence?

A. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues
of life.

Q. Does not God require us to give him our hearts?

A. Prove. 23.26. My son give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.

Q. Are not foolish thoughts sins?

A. Prove. 24.9. The thought of foolishness is sin, and the scorner is an
abomination to men.

Q. When vain thoughts come into our minds, must we not cast them out, and not
suffer them to lodge within us?

A. Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee.

Q. What evil is there in being carnally minded, and what benefit in being
spiritually minded?

A. Romans 8.6. To be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is
life and peace.

Q. Does not God take such pleasure in our good thoughts and our good words, as
that he writes them down in a Book of remembrance?

A. Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and
the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of remembrance was written before
him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name.

Q. Will not committing our ways unto the Lord, be a means of establishing our
thoughts?

A. Prove. 16.3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established.

Q. Is not that man's Religion vain, that bridleth not his tongue?

A. James 1.26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain.

Q. Must we not refrain from much speaking?

A. Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that
refraineth his lips is wise.

Q. Must we not refrain from pride and arrogance in our speeches?

A. 1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come out
of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed.

Q. Must we not shun vain as well profane bablings?

A. 2 Timothy 2.16. Shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase unto
more ungodliness.

Q. Is it not unbecoming a wise man, to spend his time in unprofitable talk?

A. Job 15.2, 3. Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly
with the East wind? Should he reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches,
wherewith he can do no good?

Q. Is not a flattering tongue odious to God?

A. Job 32.22. I know not to give flattering titles, in so doing my Maker would
soon take me away.

Q. Must we not avoid all corrupt communication, and see that our discourse be
edifying and gracious?

A. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but
that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the
hearers.

Q. Must our discourse always be gracious and savoury?

A. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt, that ye
may know how ye ought to answer every man.

Q. Ought we not to speak lovingly and discreetly to all persons?

A. Prove. 31.26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the
law of kindness.

Q. Ought not our Conversations to be such as become the Gospel?

A. Phil. 1.27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ --

Q. Is not the Word of God the rule by which we must order our lives and
conversations?

A. Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.

Q. What promises have you that God will guide and direct you, when you are
doubtful about your way, and know not which way you ought to go?

A. Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose.

Psalm. 32.8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall
go, I will guide thee with mine eye.

Q. Must we not do all our works in the Name of Christ?

A. Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in Word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks unto God and the Father by him.

Q. What Promise have you that God will enable you to do all your works in his
Name?

A. Zech. 10.12. I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and
down in his Name, says the Lord.

Q. What judgments hang over the heads of wicked men?

A. Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and
an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.

Q. Does not God hate the workers of iniquity?

A. Psalm. 5.5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all
workers of iniquity.

Q. Shall no wicked men be received into Heaven, though they be such as have
been hearers of the Word, and have received the Saeraments?

A. Luke 13.26, 27. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets; but he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

Q. If none of the wicked shall be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven, What
will Jesus Christ do with them at the day of Judgment?

A. Matthew. 13.41, 42. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they
shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth.

Q. Does not God require that such as profess themselves to be his servants,
should serve him in truth and sincerity?

A. 1 Samuel 12.24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your
heart; for consider how great things he has done for you.

Q. Is not truth in the inward parts required by God from all such as make a
profession of Religion?

A. Psalm. 51.6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the
hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom.

Q. Do such as are hypocrites in heart heap up wrath?

A. Job 36.13. The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they cry not when he
binds them.

Q. What will God do for that man that walks uprightly?

A. Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give grace and
glory, no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Q. What promise have you that God will make you sincere?

A. Isa. 61.8. I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering, and
I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them.

Q. Must we not be content with such things as we have, although our condition
be low and mean?

A. Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with such things as ye have, for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee.

Q. If we should be so low in the world as that we should have nothing but food
and raiment, must we be content with such a condition?

A. 1 Timothy 6.8. Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

Q. What promise have you that God will enable you to abide satisfied and
contented in all conditions?

A. Prove. 19.23. The fear of the Lord tends to life, and he that has it
shall abide satisfied, he shall not be visited with evil.

Q. Is not every one that is proud in heart an abomination unto the Lord?

A. Prove. 16.5. Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination unto the
Lord; though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

Q. Is it not the duty of Christians to be clothed with humility?

A. 1 Pet. 5.5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the elder, yea,
all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility, for God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Q. Has not God promised to dwell with such as are of an humble spirit?

A. Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity,
whose Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones.

Q. Has not God promised to hear the Prayers of humble persons?

A. Psalm. 10.17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will
prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

Q. Is not a froward heart an abomination to the Lord?

A. Prove. 11.20. They that are of a froward heart, are abomination to the Lord,
but such as are upright in their way, are his delight.

Q. Does not a froward heart bereave a man of all good?

A. Prove. 17.20. He that has a froward heart, finds no good, and he that
has a perverse tongue falls into mischief.

Q. Is not a meek and a quiet spirit an ornament of great price in the sight of
God, beyond Gold or costly Apparel, or any other such thing?

A. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of
plaiting the hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of apparel, but let
it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price.

Q. Must not the people of God put on bowels of mercy, with other graces of the
Spirit also?

A. Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved)
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

Q. Shall not they that are merciful obtain mercy?

A. Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Q. Do not such as pity and relieve the poor, lend unto the Lord?

A. Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and
that which he has given, will he pay him again.

Q. Does not a great part of our Religion lie in visiting the fatherless and
the widow, and keeping our selves unspotted from the world?

A. James 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled, before God and the Father, is
this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world.

Q. Will not God satiate their souls with spiritual blessings that refresh the
bowels of the poor?

A. Isa. 58.10, 11. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as
the noonday, and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul
in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered Garden,
and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

Q. Are such persons void of the love of God, who see their brethren in want,
and are able to relieve them, and yet do shut up the bowels of compassion from
them?

A. 1 John 3.17. Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him?

Q. Must we not put away all bitterness, wrath, clamor, evil speaking and
malice?

A. Ephesians. 4.31. Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking be put away from you, with all malice.

Q. Should we not be slow to anger? and when our anger is kindled, should we
not quickly lay it aside again?

A. Eccles. 7.9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry; for anger rests in
the bosom of fools.

Q. What does Christ say of such as are angry without a cause, and of such as
call others by any reproachful names, as fool, or the like?

A. Matthew. 5.22. I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, and whosoever shall say to
his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the counsel; but whosoever shall say,
thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire.

Q. Are not they that hate others guilty of murder in Gods account?

A. 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that
no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

Q. Is it not the will of God that we should abstain from fornication?

A. 1 These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication.

Q. Must we not abstain from fleshly lusts, as well as from the works of the
flesh?

A. 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.

Q. What will keep us from fulfilling the lusts of the flesh?

A. Gal. 5.16. This I say then, Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh.

Q. Is not lusting after a woman adultery in Gods account?

A. Matthew. 5.28. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Q. Shall no whore-monger, or unclean person, or covetous man go to Heaven?

A. Ephesians. 5.5. This ye know, that no whoremonger nor unclean person, nor
covetous man who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ,
and of God.

Q. Shall they die eternally who live after the flesh, and shall they live that
mortify the lusts and deeds of the flesh?

A. Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye through the
spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

Q. Are not they spiritually dead, whilst they live a natural life, who live in
pleasure?

A. 1 Timothy 5.6. She that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives.

Q. Will not following our pleasures bring us to poverty?

A. Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man, he that loves
Wine and Oil shall not (...)

Q. Do not the pleasures as well as the cares of this life, choke the Word of
God and make it unfruitful?

A. Luke 8.14. That which fell among thorns, are they, which when they have
heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches, and pleasures of this
life, and bring no fruit to perfection.

Q. Are not such as tell lies an abomination to the Lord?

A. Prove. 12.22. Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal
truly are his delight.

Q. Shall not all liars be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven?

A. Rev. 22.15. Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

Q. Shall all such as tell lies not only be shut out of Heaven, but also be
cast into Hell fire?

A. Rev. 21.8. -- All liars shall have their part in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Q. Are not they in danger of eternal damnation that are given to swearing?

A. James 5.12. Above all things, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay,
lest ye fall into condemnation.

Q. What rules must we observe in taking a lawful Oath? Must we not swear by
the living God, not by Idols or any of the creatures? In truth and not to any
falsehood? in judgment, weighing and understanding what we swear, and in
righteousness?

A. Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness --

Q. Shall no thieves, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor any other unrighteous
persons inherit the Kingdom of God?

A. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God.

Q. Must we not hononr all men, especially Kings, and such as are in authority?

A. 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men, love the brotherhood, fear God, honor the
King.

Q. Ought we not to honor and reverence aged persons?

A. Lev. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face
of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord.

Q. Must we not be subject to such as are in authority, obey Magistrates, be
ready to every good work, avoid speaking evil of any man, and brawling; and be
gentle and meek toward all men?

A. Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man,
to be no brawelers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men.

Q. Is it not a greater wrong to our neighbor to take away his good name by
backbiting and speaking evil of him, then to take away his Estate by theft or
oppression?

A. Prove. 22.1. A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and
loving favor rather than silver and gold.

Q. Must not such as expect to live with God in Heaven, be careful that they
neither speak evil of, nor do evil to their neighbor, as well as to carry
themselves piously and righteously toward God?

A. Psalm. 15.1, 2, 3. Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell
in thy holy Hill? He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and
speaks the truth in his heart, he that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor
does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

Q. How must we demean our selves in our callings, and how in the service of
God?

A. Romans 12.11. Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

Q. When we are serving the Lord, should we not be careful to keep our minds
free from distraction; and will not this be for our own prefit as well as Gods
glory?

A. 1 Cor. 7.35. This I speak for your own profit, -- that you may attend upon
the Lord without distraction.

Q. Must not every man abide with God in his calling?

A. 1 Cor. 7.24. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide
with God.

Q. What advantage comes by diligence in our Callings, and what evil arises
from slothfulness?

A. Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the hand
of the diligent makes rich.

Q. Is not diligence in our employments, the way to rise to great preserment?

A. Prove. 22.29. See thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand
before Kings he shall not stand before mean men.

Q. Was not idleness one of the sins for which God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah?

A. Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom; Pride,
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters,
neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy, and they were
haughty, and committed abomination before me, wherefore I took them away as I
saw good.

Q. Seeing idleness is such a great sin, does it not concern us to be wise and
circumspect to redeem time?

A. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

Q. How must we spend our time every day? Must we not make it our constant
practice every morning as soon as we awake to have our hearts and thoughts upon
God?

A. Psalm. 139.18. When I awake, I am still with thee.

Q. Must we not every morning as soon as we rise, give our selves unto Prayer,
and observe all the day how God answers our Prayers?

A. Psalm, 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning
will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.

Q. Must we not be in the fear of the Lord all the day long?

A. Prove. 23.17. Let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of
the Lord all the day long.

Q. Must not our speeches and carriages all the day long be such as may tend to
the honor and glory of God?

A. Psalm. 71.8. Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all
the day.

Q. Must we not receive every days mercies as coming from the hand of God, and
be thankful for them?

A. Psalm. 68.19. Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even
the God of our Salvation.

Q. Must we not bear every days crosses with patience, and continue to follow
Christ notwithstanding we meet with troubles in the ways of God?

A. Luke 9.23. And he said unto them all, If any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

Q. Must we not do all the good we can for all men every day, according as God
puts opportunities into our hands?

A. Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

Q. Must we not meditate all the day long upon the Wora of God, that we may
know how to order every days business according to the Word?

A. Psalm. 119.97. O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day.

Q. Must we not end as well as begin the day with Prayer?

A. Psalm. 88.1. O Lord God of my Salvation, I have cried day and night before
thee.

Q When we go to bed at night, must we not commune with our hearts to see how
we have spent the day past?

A. Psalm. 4.4. Stand in aw, and sin not, commune with your own heart upon your
bed, and be still.

Q. When we lie down to sleep and awake in the nigh season, must not our
thoughts be upon God and the thing of God?

A. Psalm. 119, 55. I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the night, and have
kept thy Law.

Q. Whom must we make choice of for our companions?

A. Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that
keep thy Precepts.

Q. What benefit comes by keeping company with good men, and what hurt by being
a companion of evil men?

A. Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wisemen, shall be wise, but a companion
of fools shall be destroyed.

Q. Do not they deceive themselves that think they may keep company with evil
men, and yet not be corrupted by them?

A. 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil communications corrupt good manners.

Q. Can no man walk in the ways of God, and obtain life, unless he forsake evil
company?

A. Prove. 9.6. Forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way of understanding.

Q. Do not all afflictions come from God?

A. Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create
evil: I the Lord do all these things.

Q. Must we not bear every affliction patiently, of what nature soever it be,
beause it comes from God?

A. Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

Q. Have we no cause to complain of God, as long as he spares our lives and
does not cast us into Hell, although he punish us very sorely for our sins.

A. Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sins?

Q. Must we neither despise the chastenings of the Lord when they are small and
continue but a little time, nor faint when they are heavy and lie long upon us?

A. Heb. 12.5. My son despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor faint
when thou art rebuked of him.

Q. When God chastneth us, is it not that he may do us good, and make us
partakers of his holiness?

A. Heb. 12.10. They verily for a few days, chastned us after their own
pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

Q. Do not Gods rebukes come out of love, and when he chastens us is it not to
lead us to repentance?

A. Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore
and repent.

Q. If lesser afflictions do not lead us to repentance, will not God send
greater upon us?

A. Lev. 26.23, 24. And if ye will not be reformed by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish
you yet seven times for your sins.

Q. What promise have you that God will sanctify your afflictions for the
purging away your sins?

A. Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit, to take away his sin. --

Q. What promise have you that God will be with you in your troubles, and in
due time grant you deliverance out of them?

A. Psalm 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be with
him in trouble, I will deliver him and honor him.

Q. Is not God wont to give his people great comforts after they have been
exercised with great troubles?

A. Psalm. 71.20, 21. Thou which have showed me great and fore troubles, shall
quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth.
Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.

Q. Has not God promised to comfort his people, not only after their troubles,
but even whilst they walk in the midst of trouble?

A. Psalm. 138.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me,
thou shall stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy
right hand shall save me.

Micah 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy; when I fall, I shall arise,
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

Q. Has not God promised that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what
we are able to bear?

A. 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to
man, but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it.

Q. Is not that man blessed that endures temptation?

A. James 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them
that love him.

Q. What must we do when Gods judgments are abroad! Must we not give our selves
unto Prayer and learn Righteousness?

A. Isa. 26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my
spirit within me, will I seek thee early; for when thy judgments are in the
earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn righteousness.

Q. What is our strong hold whither we must run for safety in time of trouble?

A. Prove. 18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs
into it, and is safe.

Q. What shall we do that we may be hid in the day of the Lords anger?

A. Zeph. 2.3. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought
his judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in
the day of the Lords anger.

Q. What promise have you that God will deliver you from the Pestilence?

A. Psalm. 91.2, 3. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress, my
God, in him will I trust. Surely, he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, and from the noysom Pestilence.

Q. What promise have you that God will preserve you in a time of Famine, and
in a time of War?

A. Job 5.19, 20. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven there
shall no evil touch thee, In Famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in War
from the power of the Sword.

Q. Has not God promised to preserve his people at all times and in all
places, at home and alroad, going out and coming in?

A. Psalm. 121.8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in, from
this time forth and even for evermore.

Q. What must you do at such times as you are afraid?

A. Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.

Q. Is not Prayer as well as Faith an effectual means to obtain deliverance
from our fears?

A. Psalm. 34.4. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all
my fears.

Q. What did God say to Abraham to encourage him against his fears?

A. Genesis 15.1. After these things the Word of the Lord came unto Abram in a
Vision, saying, Fear not Abram, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward.

Q. Has not God given his Angels a charge concerning us to keep us in all our
ways?

A. Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot
against a stone.

Q. What promises have you, that may encourage you to hope in God, that he will
feed you, and supply all your needs, and not suffer you to want?

A. Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land,
and verily thou shall be fed.

Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in
glory, by Christ Jesus.

Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

Q. What did Jacob say to Joseph when he was dying, to comfort him when he and
the rest of his Brethren should be left fatherless?

A. Genesis 48.21. And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold I die, but God shall be
with you --

Q. What was David' s hope when he was left father less and motherless?

A. Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will
take me up.

Q. Has not God an especial care of fatherless Children?

A. Hos. 14.3. -- In thee the fatherless finds mercy.

Q. When godly men die, and know not the state or condition of their Children,
and can mind them no more, Will not God be in the stead of a Father to their
Children?

A. Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer,
thy Name is from everlasting.

Q. What must we do that we may not enter into temptation?

A. Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into tempration. The Spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Q. Seeing the Devil lays snares for us in all places and in all things, Is it
not needful that we should watch in all things?

A. 2 Timothy 4.5. But watch thou in all things --

Q. If we resist the Devil, will not he flee from us?

A. James 4.7. Submit your selves therefore to God, resist the Devil and he
will flee from you.

Q. What promise have you, that God will tread Satan under your feet?

A. Romans 16.20. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Q. Is not a wounded spirit a very heavy burden?

A. Prove. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear?

Q. Whether must we go for healing when our spirits are wounded?

A. Hos. 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he
will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

Q. Will not God soon heal those whom he has wounded, if they return to him?

A. Hos. 6.2. After two days will he revive us, and the third day he will raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight.

Q. What means should we use to obtain light when we find our solves in a dark
condition? Must we not look to Christ who is the light of the world?

A. John 8.12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the
World, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life.

Q. Unto whom has God promised that there shall arise light in darkness?

A. Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness --

Q. What promise have you that God will lead you when you are to go in unknown
ways, such as you have not walked in before?

A. Isa. 42.16. I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, I will lead
them in paths that they have not known, I will make darkness light before them,
and crooked things straight; these things will I do unto them, and not forsake
them.

Q. What promises have you to look unto when you are under deadness?

A. Psalm. 69.32 -- Your heart shall live that seek God.

John 10.10 -- I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it
more abundantly.

John 11.25. Jesus says unto her, I am the Resurrection and the life, he that
believes in me, though he were dead yet shall he live.

Q. What promises have you to look to, when you are sensible of your weak and
strengthless condition?

A. Isai. 40.29. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might
he increases strength.

Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy
God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness.

Q. Does not God sometimes hide himself from his people?

A. Psalm. 88.14. Lord, why castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face
from me?

Q. When God hides himself, must we not look and wait for him?

A. Isa. 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the House of
Jacob, and I will look for him.

Q. Must we not cleave to God, and believe him to be our God, and cry after
him, when he seems to forsake us, and to disregard our Prayers?

A. Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me, why art thou so
far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the
day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season, and am not silent.

Q. Though we should look and wait so long upon God before he returns to us, as
that we should verily think God has cast us out of his sight, Must we continue
still to look to him and wait upon him?

A. Jonas 2.4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again
toward thy holy Temple.

Q. If we continue to follow after the Lord, will he certainly come to us?

A. Hosea 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, his going
forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the
latter and former rain unto the earth.

Q. What is it which causes God to withdraw himself from us?

A. Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

Q. When God is gone from us, If we return unto him, will not he return unto us?

A. Zech. 1.3 -- Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto
you, says the Lord of Hosts.

2 Chronicles. 30.9 -- The Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn
away his face from you, if ye return unto him.

Q. Is there hope for such as have gone away from God along time, that if they
return unto God, God will return unto them?

A. Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers ye have gone away from mine
Ordinances, and have not kept them, Return unto me, and I will return unto you,
says the Lord of Hosts.

Q. Is not the love of God to his people, beyond the love of the most
tenderhearted Mother toward her child, even at such times as they think, he
has forsaken and forgotten them?

A. Isa. 49.14, 15. Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee.

Q. What will God give to him that is athirst?

A. Revel. 21.6 -- I will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the
water of life freely.

Q. When God suffers such as are athirst to seek him a long time, and they can
get nothing, in so much that their tongue fails for thirst, must they not
look on themselves as forsaken of God, but hope that God will hear them and
give them an abundant supply of all their wants?

A. Isa. 41.17, 18. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and
their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them; I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the
midst of the Valleys; I will make the Wilderness a Pool of water, and the dry
Land springs of water.

Q. What must we do that we may live comfortable lives, and see good days?

A. 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. He that will love life and see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile, let him eschew
evil and do good, let him seek peace and ensue it.

Q. What courses will undo men, and bring them to poverty and beggary?

A. Prove. 23.21. The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and
drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.

Prove. 28.19. He that tilleth his land, shall have plenty of bread, but he that
follows after vain persons, shall have poverty enough.

Prove. 6.26. By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread,
and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.

Q. Are not many undone by being surety for others, and should not this make us
hate suretiship?

A. Prove. 11.15. He that is surety for a ftranger, shall smart for it, and he
that hates suretiship is sure.

Q. Is it not an argument of folly to be surety for others, seeing many are
undone by suretiship.

A. Prove. 17.18. A man void of understanding strikes hands and becomes surety
in the presence of his friend.

Q. Must we not take heed of overcharging our selves at any time with
drunkenness, surfeiting, or the cares of this life, lest we be surprised at
unawares by death or judgment?

A. Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be over
charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that
day come upon you unawares.

Q. Is it not lawful to eat of any of Gods creatures; and when we do receive
any of them, must we not do it with thanksgiving?

A. 1 Timothy 4.4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it
be received with thanksgiving.

Q. When Jesus Christ did eat bread, was he not wont to give Gods thanks?

A. John 6.11. Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to the Disciples --

Q. Did not the Apostles also use to give thanks when they did eat bread?

A. Acts 27.35 -- He took bread, and gave thanks to God in the presence of them
all, and when he had broken it, he began to eat.

Q. What promise have you that God will cause you to eat in plenty, and give
you satisfaction with your food and make you thankful for what he gives you.

A. Joel 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Name of
the Lord your God, that has dealt wondrously with you, and my people shall
never be ashamed.

Q. Must not Children obey and honor their Parents, and has not God promised
to bless those children that do so, with a long life and good days?

A. Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is
right. Honor thy Father and Mother (which is the first commandment with
promise) That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.

Q. Is not God well-pleased when Children obey all the lawful Commands of their
Parents?

A. Col. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is
well-pleasing unto the Lord.

Q. Is it not the duty of Children to fear and stand in aw of their Parents?

A. Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my
Sabbaths. I am the Lord your God.

Q. Is it not a sin to despise our Parents, though they have the infirmities of
old age upon them?

A. Prove. 23.22. Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy
mother when she is old.

Q. Are not such Children as set light by their Father or Mother under the
curse of God?

A. Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets light by his father or his mother,
and all the people shall say Amen.

Q. What shall become of those Children, that mock, despise, or refuse to obey
their Parents?

A. Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his
mother, the Ravens of the Valleys shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall
eat it.

Q. Was not Jesus Christ while he was a Child subject to his Parents?

A. Luke 2.51. He went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject
unto them --

Q. Is it not a sign that God intends to destroy those Children to whom he does
not give an heart to follow the good counsel, that is given them by their
Parents?

A. 1 Samuel 2.25 -- Notwithstanding they hear kened not unto the voice of their
father, because the Lord would slay them.

Q. Did not God command under the Law that such as cursed either their father
or mother should be put to death?

A. Lev. 20.9. Every one that curses his father or his mother, shall be surely
put to death; he has cursed his father or his mother, his blood shall be upon
him.

Q. Is it not a sin for children to steal from their Parents as well as from
other persons?

A. Prove. 28.24. Whosoever robs his father or his mother, and says it is no
transgression, the same is a companion of a destroyer.

Q. Is it not the duty of Parents to train up their children in the knowledge
and fear of God?

A. Ephesians. 6.4. Ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Q. How must Masters carry themselves toward their Servants?

A. Col. 4.1. Masters give unto your servants that which is just and equal,
knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven.

Q. What duties must Servants be exhorted to?

A. Tit. 2.9, 10. Exhort Servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to
please them well in all things, not answering again, not purloining, but
showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior
in all things.

Q. Must not Servants count their Masters worthy of all honor?

A. 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many Servants as are under the yoke, count their own
Masters worthy of all honor, that the Name of God, and his Doctrine be not
blasphemed.

Q. Must not Servants obey their Masters with fear and trembling, and
singleness of heart, shunning eyeservice, and do their work with a good will,
as if they were serving the Lord?

A. Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters
according to the flesh with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as
unto Christ, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with good will doing service, as
to the Lord, and not to men.

Q. When Servants are sent abroad, must they not return home without making any
delay, though they should be much importuned to stay a longer time?

A. Genesis 24.56. He said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord has
prospered my way, send me away, that I may go to my Master.

Q. When Jacob was servant to Laban, did he not serve him with all his might,
though he were his near Kinsman?

A. Genesis 31.6. Ye know that with all my power, I have served your father.

Q. Must not servants come when they are called, go whither they are sent, and
do what they are hidden?

A. Matthew. 8.9. I am a man under authority, having Soldiers under me, and I say
to this man, go, and he goes, and to another come, and he comes, and to my
servant do this, and he does it.

Q. Must not servants do their work without murmuring either at the meanness or
the difficulty of their work?

A. Phil. 2.14. Do all things without murmurings and disputings.

Q. What example have we of the frugality of Christ in commanding the broken
pieces of Barley bread to be gathered up, which may teach servants and all
others to make no waste of any thing under their charge?

A. John 6.12. When they were filled, he said unto his Disciples, Gather up the
fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

Q. How must we, our children and servants sanctify the Sabbath? Must we not
abstain from pleasures and recveations, and from the works of our callings, and
from speaking our own words, and maintain an honorable esteem of the
Sabbath Day, and spend it in holy and religious exercises, and take delight
therein, and do all the duties of the day to the honor of God: and what will
God do for those that thus sanctify the Sabbath Day?

A. Isa. 58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: Then shall thou delight thy self in
the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and
feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

Q Is not the soul of a man of such great excellency, that the gaining of the
whole world will not countervail the loss of one soul?

A. Mark 8.36. What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?

Q. Seeing the Soul is of such great value, ought we not to do all that in us
lies to save our Souls?

A. Phil. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling.

Q Seeing our souls cannot be saved without the grace of God, Does it not
concern us to look diligently that we fail not of grace?

A. Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest
any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.

Q. Has not God promised to give the Holy Spirit, which is the Fountain of all
grace, to them that ask it?

A. Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him.

Q. What are the fruits that the Spirit of Grace produces when it is given to
us?

A. Gal. 5.22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no law.

Q. After we have gotten grace, must we not labor to grow in grace?

A. 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.

Q. Is growth in grace so necessary, that besides our endeavors to get grace,
we must give diligence, yea all diligence to grow in grace?

A. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your
faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to
temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly
kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity.

Q. Will not a right use of the Word of God, help us to grow in grace?

A. 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby.

Q. What promise have you that God will enable you to grow in grace?

A. Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly,
and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

Q. Must not they that would be saved, persevere in the ways and grace of God?

A. Matthew. 24.13. He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

Q. Has God no pleasure in such as draw back from walking with him?

A. Heb. 10.38. Now the just shall live by faith, but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Q. Is it not a dreadful sin for a man to forsake God?

A. Jer. 2.12, 13. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly
afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord; for my people have committed two
evils, they have forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out
Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water.

Q. What promise have you that God will cause you to persevere in his ways?

A. Job 17.9. The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger.

Q. Have we not great assurance from the Intercession of Christ, that our faith
shall not fail, though we be assaulted with many temptations?

A. Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired
to have you, that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

Q. After God has given us faith, Will he not keep us by his Almighty Power,
till he has brought us to salvation?

A. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation
--

Q. Is there not a warfare in Christians between the flesh and the spirit; And
are they not in this warfare sometimes led captive by their sins?

A. Romans 7.23. I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members.

Q. Though good men may fall, yet will not God so far uphold them that they
shall not be utterly cast down?

A. Psalm. 37.23, 24. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he
delights in his way: though he fail, he shall not be utterly cast down; for
the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.

Q. What shall that man inherit that overcomes his spiritual adversaries?

A. Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his
God, and he shall be my son.

Q. By what means do we get the victory over the world?

A. 1 John 5.4. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

Q. How did the Saints in former times overcome Satan?

A. Rev. 12.11. They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

Q. Is it not appointed for all men that they shall die, and after death go to
be judged for what they did whilst they lived?

A. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for men once to die, but after this the judgment.

Q. Is not our life upon the earth very short and uncertain, so that we have no
assurance one day, that we shall live unto another?

A. James 4.14. Ye know not what shall be on the morrow, for what is your life?
It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

Q. Seeing we know not how suddenly God may come and take us away by death,
ought we not every day, yea, every hour to be prepared to die?

A. Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of Man comes at an
hour when ye think not.

Q. Should we not live every day as though it were our last day, and continue
this course till our change come?

A. Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change
come.

Q. Is not death gain to those that serve and glorify Christ?

A. Phil. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.

Q. Is not the sting of death taken away by the death of Christ, so that
Christians may triumph over death; and what is the sting of death?

A. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy
victory? the sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. But
thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. Are not all they that die in the Lord in a blessed condition?

A. Rev. 14.13. I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

Q. Will not Gods presence with us take away the fears of death?

A. Psalm. 23.4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

Q. Seeing we are going apace to our graves, and there is no work to be done
when we come there, should not this make us do, whatever our hand finds to
do, with all our might?

A. Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might,
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go.

Q. When we die, do not our souls depart from our bodies?

A. Genesis 35.18. And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, for she
died. --

Q. When a man dies, what becomes of his body, and whither goeeth his soul?

A. Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return unto the earth, as it was, and the
spirit shall return unto God who gave it.

Q. Shall there not be a general Resurrection of the dead, both of good and
evil men?

A. John 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that
have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil
unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

Q. Shall they that have lien in their graves, till their reins are consumed,
and they are eaten up of the worms, rise again with the same bodies that they
had, whilst they lived in this world?

A. Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand
at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin, worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold and not another, though my reins be consumed within me.

Q. Though our bodies shall be the same for substance at the Resurrection, as
they are now, yet shall not their qualities be changed?

A. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. So also is the Resurrection of the dead, it is sown
in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there
is a spiritual body.

Q. Shall our bodies that are now vile, be made like unto the glorious body of
Jesus Christ?

A. Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself.

Q. Shall not her world and all things that are therein be consumed with fire?

A. 2 Pet. 3.10. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat; the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up.

Q. What should this teach us, that the world and all things that are therein
shall be dissolved?

A. 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved; what
manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness.

Q. Has not God appointed a day wherein he will judge the world by Jesus
Christ?

A. Acts 17.31. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

Q. Can no man, or any of the Angels, tell when the day of Judgment will be?

A. Matthew. 24.36. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of
Heaven, but my Father only.

Q. Seeing we know not the time of the Day of Judgment, Should we not watch
for the coming of Christ, and pray that we may be prepared for it?

A. Mark 13.33. Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is.

Q. When the Day of Judgment is come, who are they must appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, and for what end must we appear there?

A. 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.

Q. Shall all the dead be brought to Judgment as well as the living?

A. Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the
books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of life; and
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the Books,
according to their works.

Q. Many have died at Sea, some have been burnt to ashes, and their ashes have
been cast into the waters, Shall these and all others that have died in any
places of the world, and they that are in hell also, come to Judgment?

A. Rev. 20.13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it, and Death and
Hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to their works.

Q. Will God bring young as well as old men into Judgment, for all that they
have done in the time of their youth?

A. Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee
into judgment.

Q. Shall all our works both good and evil, though done never so secretly, be
brought to judgment?

A. Eccl. 12, 14. God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret
thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil.

Q. Must we give account for all our words, even for our idle words at the Day
of Judgment?

A. Matthew. 12.36, 37. I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof in the Day of Judgment. For by thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Q. Shall our thoughts and the secrets of our hearts be brought into judgment?

A. Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel.

Q. What should this teach us, that all our words and all our works must be
brought into judgment?

A. James 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law
of liberty.

Q. What will Jesus Christ say to the righteous at the Day of Judgment, whom
he will place at his right hand?

A. Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation
of the world.

Q. What will Jesus Christ say to the wicked at the Day of Judgment, whom he
will place on his left hand?

A. Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he also say unto them on his left hand, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

Q. What shall become of the righteous and the wicked, after Jesus Christ has
pronounced the forementioned sentences upon them?

A. Matthew. 25.46. These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal.

Q. Is it not such a dreadful thing to lie burning in Hell for ever, that the
very thoughts of it, may cause the stoutest and hardest hearted sinners to fear
and tremble?

A. Isa. 33.14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites, Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

Q. What will be the aggravation of men's condemnation at the day of Judgment?

A. John 3.19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.

Q. Should we not choose to suffer the greatest pains, and part with our
greatest comforts in this world, rather then do any thing which should cause
God, to cast us into Hell fire?

A. Mark 9.47, 48. If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, it is better for
thee to enter into the Kingdom of God with one eye, then having two eyes to be
cast into Hell fire, where their worm dies nor, and the fire is not quenched.

Q. Is it not a hard matter to get to Heaven?

A. Matthew. 7.14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.

Q. Seeing it is an hard matter to get to Heaven, must we not strive all that we
can to get thither?

A. Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say unto
you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Q. Is it not our wisdom all our life long to make it our business to get to
Heaven, and to escape Hell?

A. Prove. 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from
Hell beneath.

Q. Shall not such as have served the Lord faithfully whilst they lived, enter
into their Masters joy when they die?

A. Matthew. 25.21. Well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord.

Q. Shall not the righteous when they come to Heaven shine like the Sun in the
Firmament?

A. Matthew. 13.43. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the
Kingdom of their Father --

Q. Shall we not be made perfect in holiness when we come to Heaven?

A. Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.

Q. Shall not the Saints in Heaven be made equal to the Angels?

A. Luke 20.35, 36. They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world,
and the Resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
neither can they die any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the
children of God, being the children of the Resurrection.

Q. May such as are poor in spirit hope that God will give them the Kingdom of
Heaven?

A. Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Q. Shall such as are poor and have none of the worlds goods inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven as well as the rich, if they believe in Jesus Christ?

A. James 2.5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, Has not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to
them that love him.

Q. What effects does the hope of eternal life produce in those that have it?

A. 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, purisieth himself, even
as he is pure.

Q. Should we not labor more to get Heaven, then ever we did for any thing in
this world?

A. John 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which
endures to everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for him
has God the Father sealed.

Q. If we seek the Kingdom of God above all other things, Will not God add to
us all things necessary to this life?

A. Matthew. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.

Q. (...) ^eing it is no easy matter to find the way to Heaven, What promise
have you, that God will show you the path of life?

A. Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness
of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore^.

Q. When you are afraid that you shall fall short of the Kingdom of Heaven,
either because of your unworthiness, or the difficulties you meet with in the
way to Heaven, or on any other account, What promise have you that may dispel
your fears of missing Heaven?

A. Luke 12.32. Fear not, little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom.

Q. When we come to Heaven, Shall we not ever be with the Lord? and should not
this comfort us under all the troubles of the world?

A. 1 These. 4.17, 18. -- And so shall we ever be with the Lord; wherefore
comfort one another with these words.

FINIS.

