THE VOICE OF THE ROD, OR, GOD'S Controversy pleaded with MAN. BEING A Plain
and Brief Discourse on MICH. 6.9.

By SAMVEL STODDON Minister of God's Word.

Vexatio dat Intellectum. The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom,

Prove. 29.15. etc. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Robert
Boulter, at the sign of the Turks-head in Bishopsgate-street, near Gresham
College. 1668.

THE DEDICATION. TO THE finite, Eternal, and All wise God, Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, L. N. His unworthy Servant and Steward of the Sacred Mysteries of
his Everla^^ing Gospel, humbly devoteth these First-fruit^ of his Small things.
Most Glorious, and Dread Sovereign,
WHo, or what am I, whom thou have chosen to plead ^hy Controversy, and ^o go,
as an Herald of War, before the Lord of ^osts? Alas! I am a Child; Jer. 1.6.
and the Work i^ too great for me. But Lord, if thy poor Stripling must go;
provid^ both the sling and the stone, the Word, and the Spirit; that this
uncircumcised Goliath of Si^ which has defied the God of the Armies of Israe^
may fall before it. Out ^ the Mouths of Babes a^^ Sucklings, Psalm. 8.4.
have thou ordaine^ strength; Even so, Father for so it seemed good in t^^
sight. Match. 11.26.
O, let it be according to thy Word! Lord thou know, Thou ha^ put me on
hard, yet happy work; Thou have ^et me in the place of Dragons; Lions are in my
way; they are a stiff-necked (though thy own) People, unto whom thou have sent
me; Will they believe, or hearken o thy Voice! And now, Exodus 4.1.
Lord, what will thou do or thy poor Servant, that is willing to adventure to
the utmost for thee? Thou know my In. ^ufficiency, and where ^^y strength
lies; O, withdraw not thy hand, even thy Right Hand, but deliver me out of the
great waters, Psalm. 144.7, 8
from the hand of strang^^ children, whose mouth speaket^ vanity, and their
right hand ^^ a right hand of falsehood; the^ will I sing a new song un^^
thee, O God. Be thou ^^ Mouth unto me, and ^^ will be a Mouth for the^ Prepare
my heart, guid^ my pen, open my understanding; settle, sanctifi^^ and enlarge
my judgment; inspire my Sou^^ and set every Power of ^ in tune; Fill my
Quive^ guide my eye, and prosper my hand! Lord, I have none to help me, none to
protect me, no Mecoenas, but thy blessed Self, to fly for Patronage, and Refuge
to; The Work is thine, wilt not thou own it? the Message is thine, wilt not
thou bear me out in it? Thou have sent me; O send thine Angel, thy Spirit, thy
Presence with me! I do solemnly choose thee this day, for my all sufficient
Portion and Companion, and the Shield of thy Grace, for my defense; Accept both
the person, and the offering of thy Servant; Suffer me to imbovver it under
that golden Wing, from whence I desire to pluck my Quill. O let Him defend it,
that at first inspired it, and who alone can, and will pardon the many faults
of it; and then the Glory of all, which is his peculiar Deodand, shall be
humbly presented Him, on the broken Censer of my Heart. Prosper thy Work in my
hands; let me not return with my Net broken and empty; let me go forth weeping,
bearing precious seed, so that I may come again rejoicing, bringing my Sheaves
with me. The happy success of my labor and travel, is all the wages I look
for, in this world; If thy Name may be glorified, thy People awakened and
reformed, thy ends accomplished; I have what I aim at. O let me hit that mark,
though I break my bow! let thy Pills work, though thou burn the paper they were
wrapped in! Lord! whatever become of me, let it go well with thy Name, thy
Interest, thy Church in the Earth!

Thou have sent me, as once thou sentest Jonas to Nineveh; to proclaim the
Lords War, and to plead with thy People; put words into my mouth, and cause
the Inhabitants of the Land to hear. Thou have stricken us, Jer. 5.3.
but we have not grieved, thou have consumed us, but we have refused to receive
correction. Lam. 1.4.
The ways of Sion do mourn; Her Adversaries are the chief, her enemies
prosper; for the Lord has afflicted her. Jerusalem has grievously sinned,
therefore is she removed; all that honored her, despise her. Her filthiness is
in her skirts, she remembers not her last end, therefore she came down
wonderfully. All her People sigh, they seek bread, they have given their
pleasant things, for meat to relieve the Soul. Sion spreads forth her hands,
and there is none to comfort her: the Lord has commanded concerning Jacob,
that his Adversaries should be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous
woman among them. For these things I vveep, mine eye, mine eye runs down
with water. -- When shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged? Isa. 27.9.
and this be all the fruit, to take away sin; Is. 10.12.
When will the Lord have performed his whole work upon mount Zion? Turn again
our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the South. O suffer thy poor children
to wrestle with thee! Say not unto us, Let me alone: We cannot, we dare not, we
will not let thee thus alone. Our hearts are breaking for thee; we know not
what to do: we can do no less, we can do no more, than cry unto thee. O,
remember thy Covenant, and what there has past, and been mutually sworn and
sealed to, between thy blessed Self and us, in the day of our Espousals. Were
we thine then, and are we not thine still? Have thou repented of thy Choice?
Did thou not know what we were, and whence we were, and how we would prove?
Lord, have we deceived thee? and is the Relation void, unto which thou had
adopted us in Christ Jesus? The Lord forbid! O suffer thy poor children to hold
thee to thy word, which thou can not, thou will not break. Let us call thee
Father still!, whatever be either our Offense, or our Affliction. Hic ure,
tunde, seca, modo in aeternum parcas. Bern.
Chastise us, so that thou vvilt but love us: let Enemies rise without, so
that Enemies may fall within. Righteous Father, we complain not of thee,
though we thus complain to thee. Thou have nourished, Isa. 1.2.
and brought us up, but we have rebelled against thee. We are reaping our own
harvest; and drinking the wine of our own mingling. Time was, that we had the
Bridegroom with us, and then we knew not what Weeping meant: We have been
visited with our day, a day of Peace; but we knew not the things of our Peace,
in the day of our Visitation. We heard thy Voice, thy sweet, thy pleasant
Voice; but then we had other things to do; The Flesh, the World, the Devil,
outcryed thee; the bonds of Iniquity, the chains of the strong man were upon
us: But when thou gave thy parting knocks, and turn dst the Key upon us, our
hearts melted like wax, and our Souls were filled with the Odours of thy
sweet smelling Myrrh. On this Scent, Lord, we follovv hard after thee; while
our enemies, Cant. 5.5, 7.
(the Watchmen that go about the City) pursue. O, how long! how ^ong! will thou hide thy self in thy displeasure? until we acknowledge our offense, Hos.
5.15.
and seek thy face? Lord, thou know, we freely acknowledge all that thou
have pleased to convince us of; we seek thy face. And now, what does the Lord
require of us? O, Why is his chariot so long a coming? Judge. 5.28.
why tarry the wheels of his chariots? Psalm. 68 13.
How long shall thy Beloved lie among the Pots? and thy children cry in vain? O
what is the Cloud that covers thee? Surely it is no little cloud that can hide
so great a Presence; no small offense, that can provoke so patient, so
indulgent a Father Thou will not, thou can not be angry, for trifles. Who,
where i^ he, that has been the Makebate between us ^ Come, Jon. 1.7.
and let us cast lots that we may know, for whos^ cause this evil is come upon
^s: Be it our Benjamin, ^ right hand, or a right ^ye, let it die, and ^et us be
the Lord's Bondmen. This is the business, that is before thy servants: we are
come to cast lots on ^ur Selves, this day; that we may know, who, and what it
is, that has troubled the Camp. Give a perfect lot, make a convincing
Evidence: though it be a Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.39.
he shall surely dye: be it a pleasant Daughter, an only child, that has been
wont to court us with Timbrels and dances, Judge. 11.34, 35.
it shall be as the Daughter of Jephthah; For we have opened our Mouth unto the
Lord, and we wall not go back. Lord, Will thou make a Covenant this day with
thy Servants, that are unfeignedly willing to renew their broken Covenant
with the Lord their God? Shall it once more be said, that the Lord delights
in England? Will thou once more betroth us to thy self for ^ver? yea, Hos. 2.19.
betroth us unto ^hee, in righteousness, and in judgment, and in
loving kindness, and in mercies, and in faithfulness; Prune us, lop us, dig us,
dress us, and then try us once more. O, what a Garden? what a Husbandry? what
a Workmanship, may thou make of us? what a Temple? what a Tower, may thou
build to thy great Name, in the midst of us! how Fair! how Beautiful may
thou make us! Dear God! Once more ^ once more, try what thou can do with,
and for, poor England! O ^ let us once more look from the top of Amana, Cant.
4.8.
and Shenir, and Hermon, from the Lions dens from the Mountains of the
Leopards, and stay thy rough vvind, Isa. 27.8.
in this the day of the East Wind

And now, that thy wrath is gone out, and thy Plague begun among thy people;
Numb. 16.46, 47, 48.
Suffer thy poor servant to take his Censer; ^et thy Spirit put on ^^e from the
Altar, and ^hy dear Son, my dear^st Savior, put on In^ense, and so let him be
one of those that stand between the dead and the li^ing; to turn away thy
wrath from Israel. Accept of his pleading with Thee, and give success to his
pleading with Man; That thy Rod may not leave us in our Ruins, nor in our Sins.
Lord, thou have us now on the wheel, may thou not now fashion us on what
mould thou vvilt! Thou have us in the Furnace, may thou not make of us what
thou please? Thou have us in the Nets, may thou not bind us to what thou will? Thou have found us in our Month, vvilt thou now take the advantage on us
and bring us to thine own terms? O Lord, Isa. 62.3, 4.
Spare Jerusalem! and see it a quiet habitation. Say unto England, Thou shall
be a Crown of Glory, in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand
of thy God; thou shall no more be termed, Forsaken; neither shall thy Land any
more be termed, Desolate; but thou shall be called Hephzibah, and thy Land
Beulah: For the Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married. Look
down from Heaven, and behold, Isa. 63.15, 16, 17.
from the Habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory: Where is thy zeal, and
thy strength; the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy Mercies toward me, are
they restrained? Doubtless, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledge us not: Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer,
thy name is from everlasting. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy
from thy ways? and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return, for thy Servants
sake, the Tribes of thine Inheritance, for thy Mercies sake for thy great
Name's sake, for thy Covenant's sake, for thy Christ's sake, return, return.
Even so Lord! Amen! Amen!

TO THE READERS.
Brethren,
MY hearts desire, Romans 80.1.
and Prayer to God, for Israel, is, that it might be saved. Ier. 4.14.
In order whereunto, I have cast in this my Mite; as so much Nitre, to wash
your hearts from wickedness. -- For the Voice declares from Dan, and
publishes Affliction from Mount Ephraim. Will the Lord sanctify it, and
separate it unto this end! I have been mending my broken Nets, and now this
once more, I come to Shoot Scene; the Lord bless the Venture. I intend not to
hold you here; my Message to you is in that which follows. If you seek for my
Apology, 1 Cor. 9.6. you may find it. For Necessity is laid upon me; yea, Woe is
unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. The style indeed is plain, and unpolisht;
Fancies and Flourishes become not our mourning Weeds. If thou art a Mourner in
Zion, thou can not take it amiss, to see a Text clothed in Sackcloth. I have
nothing here to stay your eyes, for my Errand is to your Hearts; at these doors
I am come to knock, the Word knocks, the Rod knocks, the Spirit knocks; Cant.
5.2.
Open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled, for my head is filled
with the dew, and my Locks with the drops of the Night. 'Twas the Rich man's
vain Request, Luke 16.27. That one might be sent from the Dead, to vvarn his
brethren; and 'twas denied him; but (in a sense) granted you: God has sent you
a Messenger from the Dead; a Dry Bone, to plead with you; O, Let the Dead
praise the Lord on your account, so shall our dry bones live; 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.
For now ^^e live, if ye stand fast ^n the Lord. Remember! He that now calls
you, will short^y arraign you, when Hills and Mountains shall not hold you, Luk
23.30.
nor hide you; He that how entreats you, shall ^hortly Judge you, when these
things shall be recognized, and more fully, and convincingly debated. 2 Cor.
5.11.
Knovving therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. And, O Sirs! be
persuaded. God's twenty thousands, Luke 14.31.
will be too hard for your te^ thousands: The Armie^ of His Judgments ar^ up;
His Bloody Colors are in the Field and the Cruel, Unhappy Battle is begun; yet
you may have Quarter, yet you may have you Lives, your Liberties, your Peace,
and that on honorable terms. The Lord move you! turn you! save you! So prays,
and so will pray,

The Unworthiest of those that serve you, Or suffer for you in the Faith, L. N.
Ab Eremis meis, Aug. 28. 1666.
The Synopsis, or (...) of the whole Ensuing Discourse.
Parts, The Warning of the Rod. The Author of the Rod.

From the Scope.

Doct. THat when a People, or Person, are come to a formal resting in the
external part of Ordinances, it is time for God to take up his Rod.

From the leading words of the Text, Doct. 1. That the Lord is not wont to
steal a Rod on his People, but gives them fair, and loud warning. Doct. 2. That
the Voice of Gods Messengers, is Gods own Voice.


From the words themselves.

Doct. 1. That the People of God ought to be sensible, not only of the Rod it
self, but of the fore-warnings of an approaching Rod. Doct. 2. That the
Afflictions wherewith God exercises his People, are but Rods. Doct. 3. That
there is no Affliction can light on the People of God, without his Divine
permission and appointment. Doct. 4. That the Lords Rod is no dumb Rod. 1.
Doct. 1. Proved from Scripture. 2. The Symptoms of an approaching Rod.

1. Drawn from God.

1. The packing up of his Jewels. 2. The withdrawing his presence. 3. His
crossing the course of Nature. 4. A gradual beginning of Judgment. 5. The
joint-cryes of the Prophets.
2. Drawn from Man.

1. When Sin is on the thriving hand. 2. When Gods Worship is profaned. 3.
When Professors lose their zeal. 4. When Charity among brethren is dying. 5.
When solemn Covenant Breaking lies unrepented of. 6. When those sins, for which
God has taken up the Controversy, are not removed.
3. How far we our selves are under the Symtoms, or strokes of this Rod.
Examined by the forementioned Symptoms.

Doct. 1. proved by Argument.

1. It Is the best way to prevent the coming of the Rod. 2. It will arm thee for
the coming of the Rod. 3. It will argue thy care to please God.
Use 1. This reproves,

1. Such as will not acknowledge God in the Rod.

God is to be acknowledged, 1. In his Providence. 2. In his Sovereignty, 3. In
his Justice. 4. In his ends.


(...). Such as will believe no further than they feel.

(...). Such as slight any thing whereby God manifests his displeasure.

^^e. 2. This exhorts, To sit down and count what it may cost to get to Heaven.

Motives.

1. Within a few moments more, all the merry days of the wicked, and all the
sad hours of the righteous, shall be over. 2. The persevering Christian, is the
only blessed Christian. 3. As tall Cedars as thou art, have fallen, and are
daily falling. 4. Is there not enough in Hell, to sour all thy present
Comforts? and enough in Heaven, to sweeten all thy present Crosses?
Directions.

1. Take heed of over prizing the World. 2. Clear up thy assurance of Gods
goodwill to thee. 3. Examine and prove the strength of thy Graces.
Doct. 2. proved, That they are Rods, and but Rods.

1. They are so called in Scripture. 2. God uses them to no other end. 3. God
deals with the Instruments, as with Rods.
Demonstrated what Rods they are.

1. In themselves; they may be, 1. Sharp rods. 2. Long rods. 3. Strong rods.
2. With Relation to our Sins; they are, 1. Short rods. 2. Light rods.
3. With respect to Gods ends in them, the are, 1. Teaching rods. 2.
Establishing rods. 3. Comforting rods. 4. Feeding rods. 5. Improving rods.

Use 1. This informs, The wicked are dec^^ved.

1. In themselves. 2. In the people of God.
U^e 2. This exhorts; Let the people of G^^ then, 1. Bear the rod. 2. Kiss the
rod. 3. Improve the rod.


Use 3. This comforts the Afflicted children God.

1. It proves their Adoption. 2. It seals no their Portion. 3. It works for
their Good.
Doct. 3. etc.

Doct. 4. The (...) proved from the Text.

1. God calls for Audience to his Rod. 2. It is the rod of Gods own designment.
(...) proved.

1. To glorify his Attributes. 2. To reach his Ends.
For the understanding this Voice, is premised, 1. When God speaks to us by his
Rod; he speaks as to rational Creatures. 2. We must examine Conscience by the
word of God. 3. Though the Rod may be general, yet the Voice is particular. 4.
We must go to God to interpret it to us.


The Voice of the Rod in general.

1. It calls on us to awake, and consider, 1. Our Spiritual Estate and
Relation. 2. Our ways and carriage toward God. 1. Our Sins, with their
Aggravations. 1. Sins of Nature. 2. Sins of Omission. 3. Sins of Commission.
2. Our Duties. 1. The Principle of them. 2. The Rule of them. 3. The Ends of
them.
3. Our Graces. 1. The truth of them. 2. The growth of them.

3. Gods ways, and carriage toward us. 4. What he aims at in us, and expects
from us.
2. It calls for an universal Reformation. 1. Of the Subject. 2. of the Object.
3. It calls us to humiliation. 4. To stir up our selves to lay hold on God. 5.
To renew our Covenant with God. 6. For something extraordinary.
The Voice of this Rod in special.

1. To the Church, and People of God, and therein, 1. To the Angels, or
Ministers of it. 2. To the particular Societies of it. 1. What engaged you in
such a Society? 2. What has been your carriage under such a Relation. 1.
Toward your Teachers and Rulers. 2. Toward one another. 3. Toward them that
are without.

3. To the Individual Members of this church. 1. How have you improved your
Talents? 1. Have you considered what they are? 2. Whose they are? 3. Why
entrusted with you? 4. What has been your esteem of them? 5. What has been
your care about them? 6. What has been the increase of them?
1. Your Time, which is the more precious, because, 1. It Is borrowed time. 2.
It Is short. 3. It Is uncertain. 4. It Is the time of Gods Patience. 5. It Is the
time of our Visitation. 6. It Is a determined, set time.
2. Your Parts and Gifts. 1. How low are they of what they might have been? 2.
How little has God had of them?
3. Your Graces, 4. Your Duties. 5. Your Company. 6. Your Privileges. 1.
Temporal. 1. Health. 2. Peace. 3. Plenty.
2. Spiritual; and these are, 1. External. 1. Our Ministry. 2. The Sacraments.
3. Good Books.
2. Internal. 1. Convictions. 2. Resolutions. 3. Vows. 4. Comforts.


7. Your Afflictions. 8. Your Relations.



2. How have you kept your Watch?

In a good Watchman there must be, 1. Discretion. 2. Courage. 3. Vigilance. 4.
Faithfulness.


What we are to watch for.

1. For Gods Glory. 2. For our own Salvation.
And in order to both these, 1. For the Word of God. 2. For the Spirit of God.
1. The Teachings of it. 2. The Quicknings of it.
3. For all opportunities of doing, or receiving good.


What we are to watch against.

1. Against Sin. 1. In the Fountain of it. 2. In the Acts of it. 3. In the
Temptations to it. 4. In the occasions of temptations.
2. Against Satan. 3. Against Self. 1. Self-application. 2. Self-relyance. 3.
Self-attribution.
4. Against the world. 1. The Fears of the world. 2. The Flatteries of the
World. 3. The hopes of the world. 4. The Scorns of the World. 5. The
Persecutions of the world. 6. The Cares of the world.
5. Against Death.
Reasons.

1. Because they are Enemies. 2. Mortal Enemies. 3. Spiritual Enemies. 4.
Constant Enemies. 5. Mighty Enemies.
2. To the Enemies of God.

1. It assures them, that they are mistaken in God. 1. In his Holiness. 2. In
his Justice. 3. In his Mercy. 4. In his Patience. 5. In his delight in, and
care of, his People. 6. In his glorious Title of Hearing Prayer. 7. In his Ends
and designs.
2. It calls on them, to consider; and, on consideration, to repent. 3. It
tells them, that the Dregs of the Cup are like to come to their share. 4. It
assures them, that God will be too hard for them. 5. It fore-warns them, that
God is making short work with them.
Rules to discover the particular meaning of this or that particular Rod.

Motives to the Duty.

1. It Is an excellent way to gain by the Rod. 2. It Is a notable course to make
the yoke easy. 3. It Is a special means to improve Experience. 4. It Is the only
way to have the Affliction removed, with ad-advantage.
The Rules.

1. Consider, what were thy last miscarriages? 2. What are the eructations of
Conscience? 3. Sometimes the punishment bears some resemblance to the Sin. 4.
It may be, God afflicts for prevention. 5. What is thy patience under the rod?
6. It may be God is but trying of thee. 7. Go, and ask it of God by Prayer.
Use. 1. This informs of a threefold Mistake.

1. Such as question Gods Providence. 2. Such as transferr the Cause of the Rod
from themselves. 3. Such as apply themselves to indirect means.
Use 2. of Exhort.

Motiv. 1. If you will not have the Rod, you shall feel the Rod. 2. If you will
thus hear it, you shall be sure of strength to bear it.

Use 3. of Exam.

1. Your ends in desiring the removal the Rod. 2. What good the Rod has
wrought on you.
Use 4. Lament.

1. That we should thus provoke God. 2. That we are no more sensible of it. 3.
Lament your poor posterities.
THE VOICE OF THE ROD, OR God's Controversy, pleaded with Man: BEING A Plain
and Brief Discourse on
MICH. 6.9. Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.


I Shall not hold you here with any troublesome speculations by way of
Introduction; only so far, as I humbly conceive necessary to help your
Understandings in so plain and important a Concern.

It seems that God had then a great Controver^e with his People, which he
stirrs up the Prophet to plead in his name and behalf, verse. 1. Arise, contend
thou before the Mountains, and let the Hills hear thy voice; ver. 2. For the
Lord has a Controversy with his People, and will plead with Israel. ver. 3. O
my People! What have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee?
Testify against me. With what melting Compassions does God begin with them!
how does his bowels yearn upon them! O my People! Though they be a sinful
people, yet they are my people.

And this is one distinguishing Privilege, Observe.
and singular Comfort of the people of God; Though he do correct them, yet he
will not cast them off, though he may distress them, yet he will not divorce
them: What have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify
against me. O the wonderful condescension of the great God! how pathetically,
familiarly, convincingly does he expostulate with his children? What have I
done unto thee? wherein have I wearied thee? What iniquity have your Fathers
found in me? Jer. 2.5, 31.
have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? what can you charge
me with? let us hear it: testify against me. Ver. 4. I brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants, and I sent
before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. And is this the wrong you complain of?
has my patience, my goodness, my mercy, my wisdom, my power, (which have ever
stood engaged for you) abused you? ver. 5. O my people! remember now what
Balaac King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him
from Shittim unto Gilgal, Numb. 22.
that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord. Remember how I trod down your
enemies before you, and brake all their snares for you, and owned you still in
all your streights, in all your wants, in all your fears, and under all your
provoking unkindness and unthankfulness: And is this my unrighteousness now?
and that wherein I have wearied you?

God having thus justified himself, their own conscience and experience being
witness; In the next place we have their strange Reply: ver. 6. Wherewith shall
I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? See the
frowardness and foolishness of their answer; much like the language of that
wicked and slothful servant, Matthew. 25.24. I knew thee that thou art an hard
man, reaping where thou have not sown. q. d. Why, we know not how to please
thee, thou art always ^hiding, always finding fault, and seeking occasions
against us, every thing is naught that we do, our very Incense is an
abomination. Why, Isa. 1.13.
what will thou have of us? ver. 7. Will the Lord ^e pleased with thousands of
rams? or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the ^n of my soul? a flat impossibility
on the one ^and, and a foul impiety on the other; Could they ever imagine that
this should be a probable way to atone him? The truth is, it looks like an
horrible imputation on the Just and Holy God; but that Charity suggests, it was
not their professed, but their interpretative language, not of their ^ps, but
of their lives. And hence we may observe, Observe. 1.
That it is the course and the character of an hypocritical People or Person,
to think to make up that with the labor, which is wanting of the life of
Religion. And farther, That it is the subtilty and ambition of the Devil, to
mix his own Immolations and super-erogations with Gods Institutions. But I must
not insist here.

See now how mildly God replies again, v. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what
is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? These words contain both the Tables of
Moral duty: and therefore he says, he has showed thee what is good, what is
simply, per se, (...), or morally, good. It Is true, Sacrifice and Ceremonies
were good intra suam sphaeram, if observed and performed according to their
divine Institutions; good, pro tempore, and virtute mandati: Matthew. 23.23.
but not virtute propriae naturae. These things ye ought to have done, and not
to leave the other undone; Therefore, the Lords voice cries unto the City, --
Hear ye the Rod, etc. God has these two great, standing, visible Ordinances,
to reclaim his people, his Word, and his Rod: and when one of these will not
do, the other must. Such is the care of our heavenly Father, that he will not
lose a hoof or a hair of his children, what ever it cost him or them; if the
gentle gales will not send us to shore, his rougher storms shall.

The Lords voice cries unto the City. -- But why to the City? 1. The City is
the representative head of the whole Political body, therefore the voice is
directed to the City; as in our common discourse, the voice is directed from
face to face. 2. The City is the Countrie's admired Sampler or Copy, in respect
of manners and practice; as the City is, so, for the most part is the Country
about i^, and by this means first or most ^n the transgression. 3. The City
has usually the ^airest advantages and encouragements to serve and worship
God, and to promote the beauty and power of godliness. 4. Cities are apt ^o
look big upon their own strength, riches, and fortifications; therefore the
City is alarmed ^y name, that they may know that their fig. leaves will not
hide their guilt, nor secure their peace against the strokes and strength of
the Lords Rod.

And the man of wisdom shall see thy Name. (...) need not, I shall not acquaint
you with all the Versions of this Phrase; And thy name shall see that it is,
say some Translations, (nam quod res ^st videt nomen tuum. Beza.) (...).
Septuag. The scruple deserves ^ot many words: among many varying translations,
the sense comes near to one. Thy Name; ^is is spoken by a Metonymia Adjuncti,
for the ^ing or person named, a very common and usual ^rope in Scripture; and
it has relation by a Autatio personae, unto the Person expressed in the
^recedent clause, The Lords voice cries, -- And ^^e man of wisdom shall see,
(...). The ^an of wisdom. The word signifies, as the Learned observe,
substantial wisdom; therefore Beza, quod res est: The truly, substantially
wise, the ^odly man, shall see, submit to, and tremble at ^y great Name; (...).
So that you ^ay take the words, either as a Precept, or as a Promise: As a
Precept, to see and acknowledge God in all his Ordinances, and in all his
Providence, with this argument, that it is the only wise course, and both the
property and character of a truly wise man. As a Promise, that there should be
some on whom this spirit of wisdom should rest; and for whose sakes, by
consequence, God would shorten and make up the controversy.

Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. These words are the sum and
tenor of the Lords voice to the City: wherein you have, 1. The Warning of the
Rod. 2. The Author of the Rod.


In the warning you have a duty, Hear: which in Scripture is taken for
acknowledging, submitting, or obeying: With the Author you have the
authoritative decree, or determination; who has appointed it?

From this Analysis we may observe,

First, from the Scope;

That when a People or Person are come to resting in the external and
ceremonious part of duties (...) ordinances, it is time for God to take up his
rod. This was the case here. Wherewith shall I co^^ before the Lord, and how my
self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings with
calves of a year old? which argues the^ resting here, and that their Religion
had no higher principle nor aim than these beggarly elements therefore hear ye
the rod.

The Lords voice cries unto the City, Observe,

That the Lord is not wont to steal on a rod (...) on his people, but gives
them fair and loud warning of it.

That the voice of Gods Messengers is the Lords own voice.

Hear ye the Rod, etc. observe;

That the people of God ought to be sensible, not only of the rod it self, but
of the forewarnings of an approaching rod.

That the afflictions wherewith God exercises his people are but rods.

That there is no affliction can light on the people of God, without his divine
permission and appointment.

That the Lords rod is no dumb rod.

We shall begin with the first, from the words, That the people of God ought to
be sensible, etc.

This I shall first prove from Scripture. 2. Shall show you some tokens of an
approaching rod. 3. How far we our selves are under the symptoms and strokes
of the rod. 4. Shall evince the duty by Arguments. 5. Apply it briefly.

1. For Scriptures, see Jer. 3.7, 8, 10. What a sad complaint does God take up
over. Judah on this very account? when for all the causes whereby backsliding
Israel committed Adultery, I had ^ut her away, and given her a bill of divorce,
yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot
also. Though God had threatened them, not with words only, but with blows, and
had set the legible and bloody characters of their own doom before their eyes;
yet all was too little to convince them of their own approaching misery. Ezekiel.
33.4, 5. Then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not
warning, if the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own
head; he heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning, his blood shall
be upon him; but he that takes warning shall deliver his soul. Pro. 22.3. The
prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, but the simple pass on and
are punished. I need not heap up witnesses to evidence so rational and
undeniable a truth. 2. But you will ask me, How shall we know when a rod is
coming?
I shall answer in these two generals.

1. Something may be gathered from God. 2. Something from Man.
From God; as,

1. The packing up of his Jewels is a sign of some storm approaching. The
righteous is taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1. When God is packing
up his Jewels, inbarquing his Noah's, and shouldring away his Lots, it is a sad
Omen, that the day of some dreadful visitation is at hand. Heb. 2.27.
It Is true, as we are all mortal, It is appointed to all men once to dye: but
when God seems to catch them up in haste, and to gather them by whole Clusters,
and that in the midst of their strength and service; this is an ordinary
Prognostic of approaching Judgment.

Gods withdrawing his presence is another sign that he has a rod a making.
When he has shut himself up, and will not be spoken with; I will go, and
return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face; in
their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5.15. This was the case with the
Spouse, Cant. 5.6, 7. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn
himself: and what then? The watchmen that went about the City found me, they
smote me, they wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me,
etc. When God says to his Moses, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them, Exodus 32.10. Pray not thou for this
people, neither lift up a cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to
me, for I will not hear thee. Jer. 7.16. And what this did presage, you may
see, Jer. 11.14. Pray not thou for this people, etc. for I will not hear them
in the time that they cry unto me for their trouble; And chap. 14.11. Pray not
for this people for their good: when they fast I will not hear their cry, etc.
but I will consume them by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence;
Then said I, Ah, Lord God! the Prophets say unto them, ye shall not see the
sword, etc. Then the Lord said unto me, both the Prophets and the people that
believe them, shall know that my word shall stand: both the Flatterers and the
Flattered shall perish together. O England, know, it must not be as thy
Prophets, but as thy God will.

3. Gods crossing the course of Nature, is another sign that Judgment is
hastening: Numb. 17.8. we read that Aarons Rod budded and blossomed, and bare
almonds: and what? was this a dumb sign? No: verse 10, And the Lord said unto
Moses, Bring Aarons Rod again before the Testimony, to be kept for a token
against the rebels, etc. What did all those prodigious signs which God wrought
in Egypt, portend? I need not tell you: What did the handwriting on
Belshazzars wall point at? Dan. 5. Our Savior himself argues a necessary
connection between signs in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and upon earth
distress with perplexity. Luke 21.25. And that which was here particularly
intended, was afterward fully accomplished by Titus Vespasian on Jerusalem;
that Abomination of Desolation being ushered in by a multitude of signs and
wonders, as Christ had foretold, and credible History does abundantly certify.

4. A gradual beginning of Judgment is another presage that the full blow is
coming. God does usually send some drops, as the Harbingers of the storm of his
wrath, and lays not on with his full might at once, lest he should crush us to
pieces; but he chides before he strikes, and begins with gentler strokes, and
every stroke calls louder and louder for repentance; as being loath to strike
harder than needs he must. First, he removes from the Cherub to the threshold,
Ezekiel. 9.3. and there turns again, and reasons the case, and takes notice of
every weeping eye, and every sad heart. Set a mark upon the foreheads of the
men that sigh. Then from the threshold to the cherubims, chap. 10.18. and then
falls a threatening and a promising; Yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary
in the Countries where they shall come. At last from the Cherubims he departed
to the Mountains, chap. 11.23. and thence he uses the utmost importunity, if
at length by any means he might reclaim and spare them; Chap. 12.3.
Therefore thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing, and remove by day
in their sight, -- It may be they will consider, though they be a rebellious
house. Many shall come in my name, says Christ, saying, I am Christ, and shall
deceive many, and ye shall hear of wars, etc. Nation shall arise against
nation; these are the beginning of sorrows, Matthew. 24.5. to 8. Now the
beginning argues both the middle and the end to succeed.

5. The joint cries and warnings of the Prophets is another symptom of
approaching misery; These are called Gods Watchmen, and his Seer; Son of man, I
have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, therefore hear the word at
my mouth, and give them warning from me, Ezekiel. 3.17. I will stand upon my
watch, and set me upon the tower, to see what he will say unto me, and what I
shall answer, etc. Hab. 2.1. God does usually reveal his purpose first to them,
that they may publish it unto whom it does concern; and therefore he adds verse.
2. Write the vision, and make it plain, that he may run that reads it. We are
his Ambassadors and Heralds; he is wont to send out his Summons, and bid
battle by us. When those Turtles which were wont to bring you the Olive Branch
of peace, the glad tidings of the Gospel, come with a sword in their mouths, be
confident there is war preparing in heaven.

2. Other grounds of Conjecture are drawn from man, as, 1. When sin is on the
thriving hand; God has a double harvest; a harvest of wheat, and a harvest of
tares; and he will have both ripe before he cut them down; the harvest of his
Grace must be ripe before he will send in his Sickle. Grace must have its full
growth. Job 5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock
of corn comes in his season: And the harvest of his wrath must be ripe too;
Put ye in the Sickle, for the harvest is ripe, the press is full, their
wickedness is great, Joel. 3.13. So that we may conclude according to Christ's
Parable of the Figtree, Matthew. 24.32. When his branch is yet tender and puts
forth leaves, ye know that Summer is nigh. 'Twas sin that first opened the womb
of misery, and it is sin that ripens and hastens Judgment; Sin and suffering
have the measures of their growth proportionable; as the one ripens, so does
the other too. Now consider this, ye that forget God; your treasuring up of
sin, is a treasuring up of wrath unto your selves against the day of Gods
wrath, Romans 2.5. O that blind sinners could but see what they are doing! Tophet
is ordained of old, the pile thereof is fire and much wood. -- Isa. 30.33.
Every sin brings its faggot to this pile. Little did Perillus think what he was
a doing when he was forging the Tyrant Phalaris his curious Instrument of
Cruelty: ^^th. 12.36.^.4.24.^.4.17.
Every idle word, every vain thought, every neglect of a known duty, like so
many Infernal Locusts, are daily flying from the dead carcass of thy heart,
where they breed, unto the hive of a sad eternity, crura veneno plena; and thou
shall shortly taste and see when Gods vintage and Burning-time is come, what
this honey is which now seems so sweet in thy mouth. 2. When Gods worship, which
he is ever most tender of, is profaned or idolized. God calls his Church his
Spouse, Cant. 5.1. and is married to her, Jer. 3.14. His Worship and
Institutions are his Coition with his Church, whereby he begets children unto
himself; and therefore the abuse of his worship he justly calls Adultery, and
spiritual Fornication; a violation of Covenants, and a breach of Conjugal
union: This was commonly one principal cause of Gods Controversy with his
first Wife, his ancient Spouse, and that which he has mostly manifested his
furious Jealousy about. Several Instances might be produced, but examples of
this nature are obvious and occurrent almost every where in the old Testament.
Again, Gods Church is his Garden, Cant. 4.12. and a garden enclosed too; he
keeps it under lock, it is his own Peculiar, he will allow no plants here, but
those of his own setting; Humane Inventions and Traditions of men, unscriptural
Ceremonies and significant signs farr-fetcht by the under-keepers of this
Garden, are weeds which God will root up; he will not have his Garden new
modeled, nor adulterated with man's bastard ornaments; the wrongs that are done
here, are sacrilegious wrongs. 3. When Professors lose their zeal for God, and
the pure and strict ways of God. Because Iniquity shall abound, and the love
of many shall wax cold, Matthew. 24.12. And then shall many be offended, and
shall betray one another, and shall hate one another, ver. 10. This was spoken
as a presage of that dreadful Destruction which Christ there foretold, And
that day, says the Apostle, [that great and terrible day of the Lord] shall
not come, except there come a falling away first. A general Apostasy is a
certain Omen of approaching Misery. This was part of Gods accusation against
Ephesus, Rev. 2.4. Thou have left thy first love; and what then? ver, 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. Was not this the cause why God put away
his own chosen Israel, and gave her a bill of divorce? Jer. 3.6, 8. What
complaints has God taken up on this very account? Why is this People slidden
back by a perpetual backsliding? Jer. 8.5. And my people are bent to
backsliding from me, Hos. 11.7. How tenderly does God seem to take it!
Therefore, if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb.
10.38. And the more gross and general this Apostasy is, the more dreadful, the
more universal, the more speedy execution of wrath it does portend. 4. When
charity among brethren is dying. But if ye bite and devour one another, take
heed ye be not consumed one of another, Dulce nomen pacis! Cicer.
Gal. 5.15. Discord has a more natural tendency unto ruin than almost any
other sin; A house divided cannot stand, says Christ, and therefore this is
one principal scope of the Commands of the Gospel, to beget and quicken love
and charity among brethren. You shall scarce find any one thing in the new
Testament so much pressed as this: For this is the message that ye heard from the
beginning, that we should love one another, 1 John 3.11. But when God sends a
spirit of division among his children, and dashes child against child, it is
sufficient evidence of his high displeasure. 5. When Covenant Breaking lies
unrepented of. What was it that overturned Zedekiah and his people? Jer. 34.8.
After they had entered into sacred bonds in the house of God, to release all
their servants, that were of the Jewish seed, and had for a time performed it;
but afterward dealt deceitfully with them, and brake their Covenant, ver. 11.
Therefore from ver. 17. to the end, you may see the issue, Behold, I will
proclaim Liberty for you, says the Lord, to the Sword, to the Pestilence, and
to the Famine. Other known Instances to this purpose might be given; but I
forbear. 6. When those sins for which God has taken up a controversy are not
removed. Sufferings, as I have said, are the direct and proper effects of sin;
the only successful course to heal the effect, is to antidote the cause. Israel
cannot prosper, Josh. 7.
nor stand before his enemies, until Achan be executed; There Is no sailing,
Ion. 1.4.
while guilty Jonas lies aboard, but death and ruin on every hand. When God is
shaking his rod against a People, and they regard it not, warning them by his
Prophets, and, as it were, planting his Ordnance, and setting his battle in
array against them, and they tremble not at it; what is this but a bold
challenging of the Almighty, and even a daring him to go on, and to do his
worst; now what can be expected in such a case, but that God should arise in
the fierceness of his hottest wrath, and avenge him of his enemies! Isa. 1.24.



3. We come in the next place to consider, How far, or in what respects we our
selves are under the symptoms, or the strokes of the Rod; And in order
hereunto, we will weigh our present estate by the forementioned Prognostics.

1. Has not God been packing up his Jewels? How many has he taken away of the
eminent bearing-Pillars both of Church and State? whose lamented funerals have
set a sable Astracism on their sad Elegies? God has seemed to begin his
harvest among them, and to fill his hands with ripe Fruit: nay, may I not say,
in a sense, to strike down thousands at one blow, even of those that were
giving suck, without compassion either to Nurse or Babe: but I will not insist
here, Res ipsa loquitur. 2. Has not God seemed to withdraw his presence? at
least in some respects; Blessed be God for any tokens of his quickening presence
among us; that there is yet so much of the life of God in us, as to carry us
out in an unwearied search after him, yet 'twas so with the Spouse, when her
Beloved had withdrawn himself, Cant. 5.6. I sought him, but I could not find
him; I called him, but he gave me no answer. And is not this our very case? How
long have we cried to God for bread? and as yet we have stones instead of
bread; or if bread, we have it, but as God threatened Jerusalem in another
sense, by weight, and by measure, (...) 15.
by crummes, and by drops; yet blessed be God for the crumms that fall from his
^^able. Has not God seemed to defeat the ^^rayers, and frustrate the hopes of
his people, (...) that they lie as the slain in the streets, at ^he feet of the
lusts and wills of all that ^ass by. 3. Has not God been crossing the course
of Nature, by strange Signs and Prodigies, such, and so many, as no age in
England could ever parallel? I need not be large here, yet I would ^ot that
these things should be lightly past over, ^or easily forgotten, for doubtless
God has ^igh and glorious ends in them; his signs are ^ot without their
significations. He that has ^ot set the Rainbow in the clouds for naught, ^or
one Star or Comet to appear in vain; but ^ath ordained them for signs and for
seasons; Genesis 1.14. Matthew. 10, 29, 30.
^o, not so much as a sparrow, or an hair of our ^eads shall fall to the ground
without a Providence; can we imagine that ever he would thus ^ill heaven and
earth with his strange works of wonder, on no higher design, than to be mere
^azing-stocks and table-talk with unconcerned ^an? nay, be confident the days
are at hand, and now are, that God will interpret his own meaning, and clearly
unriddle all these his Papables to us. 4. Is not Judgment already begun at the
^ouse of God? I hope, I need not run out into particulars here, to tell you
your own sorrows, ^o pull those groans from your hearts, and to bump those
tears from your eyes; I hope that every corner in your houses, and every Angel
in heaven can bear witness with your consciences, that you are some of those
whose foreheads God has marked for such as sigh, Ezekiel 9.4.
and cry for all the abominations, miseries, and calamities of our poor Sion.
Lom. 2.1.
How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud, in his anger, and
cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not
his footstool in the day of his anger. 5. Has not this been the joint-cry, and
unbelieved report of the Prophets and Watch men for several years together? And
now our Prophecy is accomplished, both we, and you all know and feel what the
voice meant, and are sma^ing under the burden of the vision; but when, ^ how
it shall be removed, we know not: only the far in general we know, When the Rod
hat reached its ends, either of obduration, or rui^ or (which the Lord grant)
of thorough. Reformation; Ier. 24.
When the Figgs are picked and separated, when the harvest is ripe, and the Lord
people fit for the Mercies they look and lo^^ for; when the Lords time, even
the (...) time, is come; then, and not till then, (...) shall be. 6. When was
all manner of sin in a (...) thriving way than now? Drunkenness, an Whoredom,
and Oppression, and Deceit, Swealing and Lying, Debauchery and Prophanen^ of
all sorts and sizes, is growing ripe apa^ being established by the dormient
connivant of wholesome Laws; Mos. 4.1.2, 3.
The Lord has a cont^ versie with the Inhabitants of the Land, becau^^ there
is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. By swearing, and
lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and
blood touches blood. Therefore shall the Land mourn. -- What Is become of
Sabbaths, and Sabbath-duties, Institutions and Celebrations? the beauty and
power of them? Are we not like Ezekiels pot, Ezekiel. 24.6.
whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it? Nay, if we look
home on our selves, we may find the Leprosy on our own walls: how can we
justify our Pride and Worldliness, our Wantonness, our Censoriousness and
self-endedness, our Unbelief and Impatience? Don't these things testify
against us? 7. Is not the worship of God abused; and that both practically and
doctrinally? But I must be silent here. Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes
stupent. 8. Is there not a great declining, and losing of zeal for God? How sad
and general has been the Apostasy of worldly-minded and worldly-ended Demas's?
Who would have thought that ever such hearts had been enkennel'd under such
tongues? 2 Cor. 11.14.
that such Angels of light had been no other than transformed Devils? John 6.70.
Who would have thought that Judas the Disciple had been the Traitor? May not
Christ show the wounds with which he has been wounded in the house of his
friends? Nay, Zech. 13.6.
let me ask you, whose whose hearts and minds have been savingly enlightened and
warmed with the quickening Beams of the Sun of Righteousness, How have you
flourished with your water and pulse? Dan. 1.12.
Are not your Graces and Hopes shivering within you? what is become of those
divine sparks that have been begotten in you? are they as quick and lively, as
forcible and serviceable, as they were wont to be? 9. Is not charity among
brethren dying? partly from the jarring of worldly Interests, and partly from
the disagreement of Judgment and Opinion? How few are there, that, like
brethren, dwell together in unity? Psalm. 133.1
This has been a disease of a long time lamented, and yet lamentations of this
nature are as seasonable as ever: Oh! when will God cure the wounds among
brethren! we have been licking our selves whole indeed, but alas! it has been
with a cankered tongue, so that the Leprosy has spread and gotten strength by
the means of its Cure. 10. Does not Covenant Breaking yet lie unrepented of?
How many Oaths, Protestations, Leagues and Solemn Covenants, have there been
imposed and taken, whereof the one has necessarily and manifestly employed the
violation of the other? O! the miserable and cursed prostitutions of
Conscience! Those that make so light of Oaths, will not make so light of the
Vengeance of that God unto whom they have sworn: no Covenant has, on all
sides, been so faithfully kept, as that with Satan and Self: This is a
lamentation, and let it be for a lamentation. Besides, how many private,
personal, and occasional vows and promises have there past between God and your
own souls, on several forlorn straits and emergencies? and have they not all
been as easily broken as they have been made? Oh! let me lay up these things in
the closets of your Consciences, and, when you are alone, seriously a d sadly
conne them over. 11. Are those sins for which God has taken up the
Controversy removed? Have we heard the rod, and him who has appointed it?
Have we answered Gods demands? nay, have we duly debated the business, and
examined the ground of the Quarrel? Have we been in Parley with God, and
executed his Writs of Inquiry, by the Commission-Office of Conscience,
throughout the Liberties and Precincts both of the outer and inner man? If not,
how can we rationally expect a comfortable issue? Can a rotten Liver produce
sound blood? Matthew. 7, 16. Gal. 6.7.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? nay, Whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap; as long as sin is the seed, the harvest will
be wrath; if we sow the wind, we must expect to reap the whirlwind. Hos. 8.9.
Can you dry up the streams, as long as the fountain is always sending out
fresh supplies? though you may seem to bay it back a while, yet, sinner,
believe it, the vengeance of God is all the while pending against thee, and thy
Bay will not hold long; but when it bursts, look for a sweeping Judgment. Now
lay all these things together, and by these, and the like, judge how far we
are under both the symptoms and the strokes of the Lords Rod.
2. In the next place, I am to prove the Doctrine, and to evince the duty; That
you ought to be sensible, not only of the rod it self, but of the symptoms of
an approaching Rod.

I hope I need not spend much time here; Is it not pity that words and
threatenings should not prevail with rational creatures, without blows? why,
consider; should God show his skill to hit, he might strike thee in the secret
parts unawares, and come upon thee in the dark; 1 Samuel 24.4. Judge. 4.21
how easily might he find thee, as David found his enemy, and serve thee as
Jael served Sisera. He is not bound to sound his Trumpet, before he takes up
his sword; Gods threatenings are in mercy; he threatens, that he may spare; the
Ambassadors of his Judgments, are conditionally Ambassadors of Peace; every
Warning offers you reconciliation upon Gods terms, the Motto of his sword is,
Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Now I shall knit up the Argument of this
Assertion in this threefold Motive.

1. It Is the best way to prevent the coming of the rod. What sworn witnesses
might I produce you from Scripture-Records? Ah! my brethren, shall the men of
Nineveh rise in Judgment against us? shall we justify Sodom and Gomorrah, and
Jerusalem, whom the just vengeance of God has pursued to their utter ruin,
and set up for warnings unto us? See Joel 2.12. Turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent
your hearts, and not your garments. God had threatened to rent them with his
Judgments. Blow ye the Trumpet ^n Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain,
let all the Inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord comes,
for it is ^igh at hand. A day of darkness, and of gloominess, etc. yet, turn
unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful -- Who knows if he
will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him? Observe Gods method
and carriage in the course of his Judgments; he threatens that he may not
correct, he corrects that he may not destroy; if less ado will compass his
ends, he sits down, and proceeds no farther; he will spare every blow that may
be spared, and will not add one grain more than ^s of necessity.

2. It will arm thee for the coming of the rod, if it do come. The prudent man
foreseeth the evil, and hides himself. Prove. 22.3. Though thy foreseeing of
it, and humbling thy self under it, may not prevent the coming of it, yet it
will be a hiding place for thee when it does come. It Is true, the storm may
fall on the fields of thy profits, on the gardens of thy delights, on the house
of thy rest and peace; but it cannot reach thy soul, as long as thy life is hid
with Christ in God. Indeed Jonas cries out, that the waters compassed him
about, even to the soul, Jonah 2.5. And David complains, that his soul was
among lions. Psalm. 57.4. Bus this may be spoken in an Hyperbolical phrase, and
may be true of the animal part of the soul, their lives, and the support and
comfort of their lives being in extreme hazard. Nay, and it is true too, that
the dearest of Gods servants have been sometimes guilty of Dilapidations, and
by their neglects have let it rain in upon them, to the despoiling the present
state of their spiritual comforts; and yet the foundation which is of God has
stood sure. Thus oftentimes i^ comes to pass through her own weakness, or
unwatchfulness, that the poor Soul is forced to scrabble to shore, like Paul's
companions, on the Planks of broken peace and shattered comforts. 'Twas the
blessed temper of a holy man now in rest, under all the tortures wherewith his
body was rackt, that he could truly and cheerfully bear witness for God; Not
one dr^^ of wrath in all this. Though thy losses b^ great, and thy sufferings
great, though thy Credit be gone, thy Ease, thy Plenty, thy Liberty thy
Friends, thy Hopes, and all be gone, the are but gone a gathering, as Bees from
their hives; anon thou shall see them come flocking home as heavy laden with
the blessed gains and overplus as ever they can fly. Thy Credit with man, has
brought thee home credit and favor with God; thy Broken name is returned (...)
New name, Rev. 2.17.
a title of honor, and royal dignity; and no bare title neither, as that was
thou had lost: 2 Cor. 1, 22.
but the Crown it self is come, and the Seal of the Inheritance. Thy painful,
unconstant ease is not come halting, but dancing, like David before the Ark: 2 Samuel 6.16. Psalm. 24.13. Luke 12.19.
from henceforth thy soul shall dwell at ease: other manner of ease than what
the Fool in the Gospel could boast of, or any other the world can produce: Thy
spoiled Plenty is come home with a spring tide of richest increase. Oh! who
could ever have hoped for such Advantage? Lord, if thou had given me leave to
ask, I had never asked half so much! 'Twas but a handful of dust thou
adventured'st, and behold, 1 Timothy 4.8.
heaven and earth is now little enough to hold the Increase. Thy Liberty which
went Captive away, is come Triumphing home: to what a height is Joseph the poor
bartered Lad advanced? See what a Repeal is endorsed by the Parliament of
Heaven, on the backside of thy Mittimus, or Proscription! He that is called in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.22.
[though a servant, though a bondman, though an exile, yet] is the Lords
Freeman. Ioh. 8.36.
And if the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. Ephesians. 2.19.
Now therefore thou art no more a stranger and a forreiner, but a
fellow-citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God. Act. 21.39.
A Citizen of no mean City, (says Paul.) Are thy Friends gone? lift up now
thine eyes, Genesis 13.14.
and look from the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and
Eastward, and Westward. Thousands, and ten thousands of Friends for one, and
never a one but a Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26.
whose love is wonderful, passing the love of women, and whose power comes not
short of their love. A whole heaven of friends above thee, a whole volume of
friends before thee, and a thousand witnessing Friends within thee. Are thy
hopes down? why, pluck up thy spirits; the wagons are come, Genesis 45.27.
richly laden, and full fraught with highest satisfaction. O, blessed
Adventure! O happy Merchandise! O, Christian! if this it be to sow, never
bethink thy Seed; if this be the harvest, never bethink thy Patience.

It Is threatened as the plague of the wicked, that their miseries shall come
upon them, as pangs upon a woman in travel, 1 These. 5.7. irresistibly, and
unexpectedly. In a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is
not aware of, Matthew. 24.50. Yet not for want of warning: God scorns to steal
upon them; he comes openly, and blows his Trumpet before him: but it is, for not
taking warning: and hence it is, Job. 5.14.
that they meet with darkness in the day time, and grope, and stumble, and
fall, in the noonday as in the night.

3. It will argue thy care to please God, and that thou stand in some holy
fear, and filial awe of him. It Is a token of an Ingenuous spirit in a child, to
observe the looks and carriage of his Father toward him; when a look or a nod
is enough to intimate the parents mind, and to cause the dutiful child to obey,
or submit and humble himself. As the eyes of servants look unto the hands of
their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so
our eyes wait upon the Lord our God. Psalm. 123.2. O my brethren! If it be not
all one with you whether God be pleased or displeased, whether you stand or
fall before him; if you ^ould be hid in the day of his wrath; take notice of
his frowns, and of his smiles, and which ^ay his rod leans when his hand is
lifted up. Walk with him, and follow after him, in the ^aths of his Providence:
walk with him, I say, ^ut take heed of stepping before him, or parting from
him, and humble your selves under ^he tokens of his fatherly displeasure. O how
^indly would God take this at your hands! and how soon would he lead you
through ^nese thickets and briars, into more open and ^leasant walks?

Thus far for the Doctrinal part, I shall speak ^ut briefly in the application
of it, that I may ^asten to what principally I intended in the ^hoice of this
subject.

This truth then argues three sorts of people under just reprehension.

Such as will not acknowledge God in, and under, the Rod: That cry out under
the smart of it, but are blind as to the real Ends and Designs of it: and
herein the best are very guilty, if we thoroughly consider these four things,
wherein God is to be acknowledged in his Rod.

1. In his Providence, as he is the Author of it. Shall there be evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? Am. 3.6. It is the Lord, said Eli, let him
do what seems him good: 1 Samuel 3.18. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away. Job 1.21. not the Sabeans, nor the Chaldeans, here was no quarrelling
with second causes, nor falling out with Instruments: O suffer me, Christian,
now to deal a little plainly and faithfully with thee. 'Dost thou acknowledge
God in his Providence? are thou really persuaded, that he is the Author of
every stroke thou suffer? Have thine Enemies a Commission from heaven, even
the ^road seal, for what they do? (though they act not intentionally in
prosecution of any such Commission). O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc. I
will send him (not only suffer him) against an hypocritical nation, and
against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and
to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the streets, Isa.
10.5, 6. Are Instruments but the Charriot-wheels whereon God is riding out to
correct, and to chastize? what means then this snarling at the stone? this
contending with the rod, as if that were in all the fault. If it be God that
strikes thee, as thou acknowledgest, how dare thou oppose thy self against
thy Maker? What is it that your complaints are ordinarily so full of, when,
like Turtles, you are bemoaning your selves together? But, the cruelty and
oppression of Enemies, exclaiming on the subtilty and unfaithfulness of one, or
on the malice, revenge, or self-seeking of another; this argues your
half-acknowledging of God. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, says David,
because thou did it. Psalm. 39, 9. He observes the hand as well as the rod;
God had to do with him, and he has to do with God again, in the affliction:
here lies the Quarrel, and therefore he has naught to say ^o Instruments, he
dares not once to open his mouth. 2. God is to be acknowledged in his
Sovereignty. His authority is absolute and unlimited: Heaven and Earth, and all
created beings, Souls and Bodies, and whatsoever we are or ^ave, are peculiarly
his. Shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why have thou made me
thus? has not the Potter power ^ver the clay? Romans 9.20, 21. Now
acknowledging, implies a submitting to, an acquiescing and resting under, some
clear and full persuasion. It is not only an act of the lip, or of the
^udgment, but is comprehensive of the whole man, the heart and life, the assent
and content: When a Question is granted, the dispute (...) ended: if Gods
Sovereignty in the Latitude and universal fullness of it, be thoroughly
acknowledged, we have nothing then to gainsay ^im in his arbitrary execution of
it; if he ^^ke our health, or our wealth, or peace, or friends, or lives from
us, we are thus far satisfied, that he takes but his own, he does but ^etch in
what he had lent out; and we do no more than we are bound to do in honoring
him, though with the expense of all those borrowed enjoyments. Woe unto him that
striveth ^ith his Maker; let the Potsheards strive with ^he Potsheards of the
earth; shall the clay say to ^im that fashioneth it, What make thou? or by
work, He has no hands? Isa. 45.9. 3. God will be acknowledged in his Justice
Will thou condemn him that is most just? say^^ Elihu to Job: Surely God will
not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment, Job 34.17. and 12.
It Is true, men may be unjust: If thou see the Oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of Judgment and Justice in a province, marvel not at the
matter^ Eccles. 5.8. It Is no strange thing to find u^righteousness among men,
nay, too often among the best of men; but to impeach God of injustice, or to
charge him with hard measure, (...) most nesarious Blasphemy. Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Nay, after all thi^ that is
come upon us for our evil deeds, and f^^ our great trespass, seeing that thou,
O God, have puni^hed us less than our iniquities deserve. Ezr. 9.13. Yet who is
there that will not acknowledge that God is just, even in his severest
providence? But alas, my brethren! it is one thing to say that God is just,
another thing to sit down fully satisfied under the clea^ conviction of the
Equity and Reasonableness of it. 4. God must be acknowledged in his ends. Now
his Ends are either secret or revealed. A^ for those secrets of God, those
Arcana Imperii, they are infinitely above us, locked up in the Cabinet of divine
Counsel: all that is visible in God are his back parts; his works are in the
dark, a part post; we can see no further than is revealed. And in this sense
is God to be acknowledged in his Ends: and what those revealed Ends are, with
reference to his Rod, both in general and in special, the ensuing discourse may
more at large discover: at present I shall only show you what it is to
acknovvledge God in his revealed ends, which imports, as I conceive, these
two things.
1. To ask Counsel of God. God has given you his Oracles, his Vrim and
Thummim, the Law and the Testimony; and hither you are to have recourse. Search
the Scriptures. Acknowledging presupposes knowledge, as every rational act of
the will implies the precedent act of the understanding.

2. To join issue with God, to drive on the same End, and to manage the same
design with God. Lord, what will thou have me to do? Act. 9.6.
says St. Paul, thy Will shall be my will, and thy Interest my interest.
Matthew. 26.42.
If this Cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done. Is
it thy Will that I should bear this Cross? so it shall be mine too. Is this thy
way to humble and reform me, to make me perfect through sufferings? blessed be
thy Wisdom^ blessed be thy care! If this may be the fruit, to take away my sin,
spare me not: let the Flesh say what it will, let the World advise how it
will, I will not ask counsel at those stocks: O my soul! come not thou into
their secret; unto their Assembly, be not thou united. Lord, take thine own
course, abate me not one grain that may be for my good. If poverty, if shame,
if banishment, if death be the way, Thy will be done. Lord, take me at my
word, and let it appear that thou have honored me, Psalm. 119.75.
and that thou in faithfulness (according to thy Promise and Covenant) have
afflicted me.

2. This reproves those that will believe no more than they feel, but like that
Horse that Job speaks of, Job 39.21, 22. -- Rejoices in his strength, he goes
on to meet the armed man, (nay, the armed God); he mocketh at fear, and is not
affrighted, neither turns he back from the sword. Of this generation are
those Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise
of his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the Creation. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Well sinner! Whether
thou will believe, or whether thou will not believe, this shall stand on record
within thee for ever, that thou have been warned. The days are at hand, and
the effect of every vision; when God shall make this Proverb to cease, The
days are prolonged, and every vision fails. Ezekiel. 12.22, 23. The time is
coming, when God shall be as good as his word with thee; and if Faith can have
no entrance at thy Hearing, it shall by thy other sense of Feeling. Though Hell
be the portion and place of unbelievers, yet there thou shall, as the Devils,
and the rest of thy cursed brethren do, believe and tremble. It Is true, God
does sometimes drive the nail with his axe, when the hammer will not do: but
know this too, that the nail that turns at the hammer, is wont to break under
the axe.

3. It reproves such as slight any thing whereby God manifests his displeasure.
You have heard in eleven particulars, what Gods ordinary course is in
predicting his displeasure, with a people or person; and, to slight the
threatenings of God, is to despise both the person and authority threatening. He
therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, 1 These. 4.8. And these
warnings and threatenings of God are despised these two ways: 1. Privately, and
that in these three respects. 1. In the want of Faith to believe them, either
in the Reality of them, or in the Ends and meaning of them. Though I would not
you should prostitute your Faith and Credence, and set open these doors to
every Bastard-Page of ^ying Fame, yet neither should you obstinately nail up
your doors against all strangers; as it is storied of the Amyclaei, who being
often terrified and wearied with false reports, at length by Law condemned all
Reports, and then quickly became their enemies prey. But in this surmising,
inquiring, credulous, and yet unbelieving Age, this is all I shall add at
present, as to this case; Those things that are inevident, and improbable in
the Fable, may yet be certain, and seasonable in the Moral: therefore what will
not serve for a staff to support thee, may yet, one way or other, serve for
fuel to warm thee. But how disputable soever God's warnings may sometimes, and
to some persons, seem to be, We have a sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed. 2 Pet. 1.19. Yet, alas! who has believed this report,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Though the Watchmen cry from the
Tower, and blow the Trumpet from the Walls; yet, Where are the so^ls that take
themselves to be so deeply concerned in the business? Sinner! thou shall
shortly know which way the malign and fatal Aspects of those fiery Comets of
Divine threatenings look, when God shall bring thee out with Agag, and tell
thee, as Nathan told David, Thou art the man, the very person I aimed at; and
though thou would not hear thy case pleaded, thou shall both see and suffer
the sentence executed. 2. In the want of fear, to reverence and stand in awe of
them, as the Majesty of God, and the importance of the issue require. Hear now
this, O foolish people, and without understanding! which have eyes and see not,
which have ears and hear not. Fear ye not me? says the Lord: will ye not
tremble at my presence? Jer. 5.21, 22. Forasmuch as there is none like unto
thee, O Lord, thou art great, and thy name is great in might; who would not
fear thee? O King of Nations! Jer. 10.6, 7. O the strang^ stupidity! the
atheistical madness of an unbelieving heart! Surely, if any created Being be
worse than the Devil, it is this unbelieving Heart. The Devils believe and
tremble. O how is it, that the miserable Proselyte has so far out-stript his
cursed T^tour! 3. In the want of Repentance to submit. When either through the
stoutness of the heart men scorn to stoop; or through the blindness of their
minds know not how to do it, farther than the bare Ceremony and externity of
it; unto whom God seems, as Lot to his sons in law, but as one that mocks with
them. Yet suffer God to speak, nay, he will speak, and, after that he has
spoken, (as Job said to his friends, and performed his word) mock on, Job 21.3.
But unto this man will I look, (with an eye of mercy and salvation) even to him
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word, Isa. 66.2.
2. Positively; and thus likewise these three ways: 1. By belying them. Thus
the Sorcerers and Magicians of Egypt endeavored to belie God, to the hardening
and ruining of Pharaoh and his People. Are there none of these Politic Magi
to be found among us? who (beyond the Impudence of the Chaldean Astrology) will
undertake to interpret the handwriting, pro lubitu suo. These are some of
Isreal's Prophets, of whom God speaks, Jer. 14.15. The Prophets that prophecy
in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in
this Land; by Sword and Famine shall those Prophets be consumed. These sons of
Chenaanah, that with their horns of iron will push the Syrians, until they
have consumed them, will at Ramoth be of another mind, 1 Kin. 22.11. If God
threatens, it is in vain for us to flatter our selves: you may call evil good;
and the (...), the evident prints of the Finger of God, Fortune Chance or
Casualty; the threatenings of Scripture, old Antiquated Riddles; the
plain-dealing of Michaia, a spirit of ill will, and disloyal affection; but you
will not call Hell Heaven, nor everlasting Burnings the Blessedness you
promised your selves. 2. By deriding them. When Israel was rotten-ripe for
Judgment, and God was sending his harvest-men to make a smooth field of them,
it is recorded, to their shame, but for our warning, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. The
Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes,
and sending: because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dewlling place; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused his Prophets; until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
till there was no remedy. Which way went the spirit of the Lord from me, said
Zedekiah, to speak to thee? 1 Kin. 22.24.
The day is coming, that thou shall know by what spirit we are acted; that we
speak not of our selves, nor run, like Ahimaaz, on a feigned, or begged errand.
And if we must be mocked, and derided, and smitten on the cheek for our labor:
yet, for our own sakes we rejoice; but for our sacred authorities sake, and for
your own souls sake, we cannot but tremble, and weep both over it and you. 3.
By taking a wrong course to evade them. These were some of Readiness practical
Politics. God had threatened to rent the Kingdom from him, and to give it to a
neighbor of his that was better then he, 1 Samuel 15.28. and now the wisest
course he can advise on to secure his Kingdom, is, to destroy the man (were it
possible) whom God had chosen to succeed him. So when God withdrew his presence
from him at Gilboa; and answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor
by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28.6. which is one ordinary symptom, (as I have shown you)
of some Judgment at hand; away he runs to forbidden means, (nay, by his own law
forbidden and condemned) and sues to the Devil for counsel in his desperate
case. I might enlarge my self here: but what might farther be added, I shall
reserve for another place.



You have heard your duty, Brethren: but, Sceptick Age. Duties are obligatory
on the Conscience and Conversation; O take heed of breaking Gods bonds, and
casting his cords from you. We have heard, nay, in some measure, we feel, both
the symptoms and strokes of the Lords Rod: Sit down now, and begin to count the
cost. There is a Wilderness, and a Jordan, and, it may be, a Red Sea yet before
us; gird up the loins of your minds now, and be strong in the Lord. Watch and
be sober. Watch for the word of command, and resolvedly stick to your choice
and holy profession, whatever come o^^t. And for your awakening and
encouragement, consider; 1. Within a few moments more, all the merry days of
the wicked, and all the sad hours of the righteous, shall be at an end for
ever; the Field shall be tried, and the Battle shall be over, and the old
Quarrel never to be revived more between the seed of the woman, and the seed of
the Serpent; The pleasures of sin are but for a moment, Heb. 11.25. and, How
are they brought down into desolation, as in a moment^ Psalm. 73.19. He seems to
be ravished at the conceit of it. Those Vipers, that even now, were threatening
thy destruction, and greedily thirsting for thy blood; see! with the turn of a
hand, they are gone, and are now crawling in the fire. O wonderful and glorious
change! For when they shall say, Peace and Safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape,
1 These. 5.3. O Sinner! One moment more, and then succeeds thy woeful Eternity.
One game more, and then turns up thy undoing Card. One hour's pastime more, and
then farewell to all thy pleasures for ever; not one song, not one dance, not
one pot, not one glimpse of joy, not one merry thought nor word more then. On
this one Cast lies thy whole Estate^ Spend out this, as thou art doing, and
thou ha^^ never a farthing more to spend, nor to save, i^ this world, nor in
the world to come. So on the other hand, the troubles of the righteous are
under the same Date and determination; the one^s hell is altogether as short as
the others heaven: For as the one Bucket goes down, the other comes up. His
anger endures but a moment, Psalm. 30.5. Our light affliction which is but for
a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy Redeemer. Isa. 54.7, 8. Pluck up thy spirits then, O Christian! and turn to
thy strong hold, thou Prisoner of hope. Zech. 9.12. Cant. 2^8.
Behold! yonder comes thy Redeemer, leaping upon the mountains, and skipping
upon the hills. See what haste he makes! he is come! he is come! Behold, he
stands behind our wall, he looks forth at the window! He is nearer than
thou art aware. Arise, O drooping Soul ^ view the heavens, it is all clear and
serene above us: In portu navigas. Are not these the gates of thy Father's
Kingdom? Is not the smell of the Country already in thy Nostrils? Are not the
golden Instruments of Joy a tuning, to welcome ^ome the lost Son? O hold out
Faith and Patience! Luke 15.25.
one League farther, one Tide more, and then thou art safe for ever. Reason
thus with thy self; Were This my Portion, and all that I were ever like to see
or hope for; were my whole Venture in this Leaking bottom; Had I no settled
Inheritance another where, I were miserable indeed, yea, of all men the most
miserable; but, blessed be the freeness of rich Grace, ^ Sam. 23.5.
the case is otherwise; The Covenant is ordered in all things, and sure. This
has been my Trading time, my sowing season, my years of Service; and now the
Jubilee is at hand, and the Fields look white to the harvest. Awake then, O
North wind, and come thou South, fill my Sails, and drive me once to shore. 2.
Remember, The persevering Christian is the only blessed Christian. Ye shall be
hated of all men for my names sake, but he that shall endure unto the end, the
same shall be saved, Mar. 13.13. All is well that ends well. O that I could
drive a nail here, that might hold! There Is no Fruit fit for Gods hoard, but
that which hangs till Gathering-time; that which falls before, is lost, or sent
to the Mill to be beaten to pieces. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Heb. 10.38. If any man, whatever he be, whatever he has been,
or seemed to be, whatever he intends to be in fairer weather and better
leisure, (...), says the Original; if the Righteous, or Just man, he that
should live by Faith, (...), if he draw back, si se subduxerit, if he shall
slink away; the word signifies aliqua ex part dissimulare, to desire to be
excused under some fair, it may be religious yet falso, Pretense, to run away
behind one's back, a^ a Coward or Traitor from his Colors: if any man thus
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: Here is a Liptote; under this
calm Negative lies a Taboroh, Number. 11.3.
even the fire of the Lords Jealousy. q. d. It is the highest affront and
displeasure that can be offered unto my very soul, (speaking after the manner
of men) and so I take it, and shall record it unto the Judgment of the Great
Day. No man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of God. Luke 9.62. (...). looking on those things which are behind
(the Fish, and the Cucumbers, and the Melons of Egypt:) or which tend to a
sinful Retrogradation, for so much the words Grammatically import; therefore,
says Christ, Remember Lot's wife, Luke 17.32. This one thing I do, Hoc ago,
says the Apostle, forgetting (...), those things which are behind, and
reaching forth to those things which are before, I press toward the mark, Phil.
3.13, 14. O my brethren! if ever you intend to press forward, take heed of
looking backward; as ever you hope to reach the mark, take heed you fall not by
the way. Remember Christian! thou art under bonds and Covenants with God for
thy faithful and constant service, during the whole and full term of thy life:
Thou art under List with him as thy lawful Captain and commander; Thou have his
Presse-mony and his Livery, and he has thy Name, and thy Hand and Seal too,
for thy loyal and impartial obedience: be sure, God will find thee out among
the trees of the Garden, and woe be to thee, when he begins to manage such a
Trial against thee, either he will whip thee home by weeping Cross, the highest
favor thou art capable of in such a case; or else, (which is more to be
feared) will let thee alone till thy measure be full, and then reckon with thee
for all together. O remember! Gifts are nothing, Duties are nothing, all
external Privileges are nothing; Truth and Perseverance is that which crowns
all. 3. Consider, As tall Cedars in Gods Lebanon as thou or I, have fallen, and
are daily falling. In the later days some shall depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy
4.1. Under the sixth Seal the Stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a
Fig Tree casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken with a mighty wind, Rev.
6.13. Is not God now opening this seal, and shaking the fig tree? What year,
what age, had the Devil gotten such windfalls as of late he has gotten? The
third part, nay more than the third part of the stars are smitten, (If it were
possible) they shall deceive the very elect, Matthew. 24.24. But, blessed be God,
who has made it impossible; Who are kept by the power of God through Faith
unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept, but not by our own power. We live, yet
not we, but Christ lives in us, Gal. 2.20. O take heed how you adventure away
on your own feet. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Many. nay, most of those that fall, never rise more, but
are of them who draw back unto perdition. It Is true, A Peter may fall, a Noah,
a Lot, a David, a Solomon may fall (...) the Devil may lay snares and stumbling
blocks in their path, and get them down; But, though he fall, he shall not be
utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand, Psalm. 37.24.
Though he fall, yet he shall rise again; and observe, though he rise, yet not
by his own power, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. O take heed then!
if you fall, there you must lie, nay, there you must dye; unless that Grace
which you have abused help you up: thou may rise, but thy losses will almost
undo thee. Peter got up again, with good help, but he wept bitterly for it.
Gods choicest children have fallen, but it cost them dear to rise, yet 'twas
well they did rise; nay, and it may be well that it cost them so dear. O, let
these be your warnings! even those thousands that stumble at, and fall, and
break their necks over the Cross, which they should, and might have taken up,
and carried on, both with ease and honor; and those hundreds that thus fall,
and break their peace. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1
Cor. 10.11. O take warning by others, that others may not hereafter take
warning by you! 4. Let me ask thee, Is there not enough in Hell to sour all
thy present comforts? and enough in Heaven to sweeten all thy present crosses?
Tell me, Christian, if thou art not ashamed to tell, What is it thou art at a
stand about, whether thou may go forward or backward? Is it that which is
not common to Man? Has God made thee no way to escape with it, unless thou
take one of the Devils blind ways to escape from it? What Lions are these,
that it should seem impossible to pass them? Are the pleasant looks of the
World so fair, so ravishing, so real, so beatifying, that the eternal frowns of
the Almighty God cannot daunt nor change them? Have thou gotten a heaven on this
side Heaven, and entailed it on the other World too? Have thou procured an Act
of Repeal on all those Scriptures, and unalterable Statutes of Heaven, which
have provided the Contrary? As, Job 3.21. Eccles. 5.15. 1 Timothy 6.7. Psalm.
49.17. etc. Oh! how soon will all these Dreams and Apparitions vanish, when
once the dawning of Eternity is broken upon thee! When once that light shall
appear, every thing will look like it self; Sin will then be Sin, and Heaven
will be Heaven; this old Hag, the World, shall then be stripped of her Harlots
Vail, and shall deceive no more: Hell will be Hell indeed, and Christ will then
be Christ. When thine eyes be once opened, thou will see that thou art naked.
And is there not enough in Heaven to make thee amends at last? Will not the End
defray the charge of the Means? Can thou think it will never quit cost to be
a Christian in all places and in all cases? If Heaven be not worth this, I
would never persuade thee to adventure for it: Alas, Christian! were thy heart
as big as thy head, did thou but believe thy own Confessions, all these If's
and And's would be laid aside; thou would stand no longer a choosing; the
Question would be no more a Question with thee. What the World has, and what
the World can do, we know; we know the utmost of it; we can see both ends of it
at once, and wrap up all it is arrows in one Syllable, Death, which, at worst,
is but an Anticipation of Nature. Alas, alas! I am almost ashamed to disparage
that infinite Glory above, by so vile, and disproportionable a Comparison; Well
might the Apostle reckon, That the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.8.
What this glory is, I cannot yet tell you; He that had seen farther than ever I
yet saw, knew not how to express his ravishing sight, and unspeakable works;
(...), 2 Cor. 12.4.
neither shall I here begin to tell you that little that I might, only I say
it is Heaven. And, as it is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. And now, if thou art resolved to stand fast in the
Lord, if thou will own thy professed Choice, unto the death; take with thee
this threefold Cord, and gird up the ^oyns of thy mind with it; bind it upon
thy heart, and let it be thy Cable in the Storm.


1. Take heed of over-prizing the World. Rate it not higher than thou art sure
to make ^on't. If God be come to deal with thee for it, be sure, take him at
his first Offer. Don't outask, nor out-sit thy Market; convince thy self of the
real value of it. And, in order hereunto, consider it, 1. In its self. 2. In
the price offered for it. In its self, Wherein is it to be esteemed farther
than the bare use of it? and as for the use of it, this concerns the Body only
directly, the Soul indirectly; necessary it is, as to thy natural Being, but
not as to thy future happiness; an old decaying Post, that may stand a while;
and for no higher use than to prop up thy Working-house, I had almost said thy
Prisonhouse: nay, it sits as a Nail in the door, to keep thee out of thy
Dwelling-ho^se. Lo! this is the Palladium, the Pearl of such great worth!
Consider it again, in the price offered for it, Matthew. 19.29. And every one
that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit everlasting life. Here Is a Trade for wise Merchants, that are
complaining they know not wherein to deal to get a penny; here is an Ensuring
Office, that shall secure thee an hundred pounds for the adventure of one. With
whom can thou deal else in all the world, at such an advantage^ And if this
be not enough, there is thy Lif^ settled on an Everlasting inheritance. Nay,
believe it, Brethren, Christ makes the least on't^ Give me but thy self, says
God, and I will give thee my self; give me all thou have, and I will give thee
all I have; let me command thee and thine, (which yet is but my own, and my
proper right, and ever under my absolute dispose) and thou shall command both
me and mine; Isa. 45.11.
let me have this Earth at my use, and thou shall have both it and Heaven too,
at thy use and service for ever. On this account it was, that St. Paul cries
out, Phil. 3.8. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. O my
brethren! are you like to lose by such a bargain? O, whence is it then that
every Shop is full but God's? that every other trade is ambitiously sued, or
patiently served for, and this only goes a begging? None but the worlds fools
have wit enough to adventure this way.

Ay, but your worldly hearts would say, Ob.
might they but speak out; We may look long enough for this: A little in hand
is better than a great deal more at such a distance.

This I shall answer briefly,

1. Though it be future, yet it is sure. Thou have the word of a God for it,
who is truth it self, and cannot lie. Nay, thou have his Hand and Seal for it;
his Word, his Covenant, and all ^he Promises and Privileges of them ratified
and sealed with his own Seal of Divine Inspiration and Institution, and that in
the blood of the Lamb, in whom all the promises are ^ea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
What thou have not yet in thy hand, is certainly forthcoming.

2. Thou art sure to have it into hand as thou have real need on it. It is not
for the credit of a Father to let his children go naked and famisht, unless it
be in order to some greater good; though I might interpose, by the way, that
God seldom or never turns out any stark naked. Nemo tam pauper vivit quam
natus est. The Covenant of Grace has provided as well for this life, as for
the life to come. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread, Psalm. 37.23. He has given meat
to them that fear him, he will ever be mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.5.

But we often see the dearest of Gods children in lack,

Let God be true, and every man a liar. Men are not held to be competent Judges
in their own case. Thy Parum, may be Satis in God's Translation. Though they be
sometimes without conveniences, yet it is improper, I had almost said, false,
to say they want them, for there is no want to them that fear him, Psalm. 34.9.
This Scripture is the word of God, and therefore true. If there be any want,
it is from within, not from above; mistake not, Christian, it is the Ship moves,
not the Shore. I hope you confess that that is not necessary that God does not
see necessary: Well then, can it possibly consist with his glorious Attributes,
to see any thing really necessary pro hic and nunc, and yet deny it to such as
are in Covenant with him, when he has plainly asserted, and faithfully engaged
the contrary?

3. Nay, let me add, This hundredfold increase thou have already; and that not
only in the promise and title, but in the possession. Mar. 10.29, 30. Here you
have a large Edition of the forecited Text: Verily, I say unto you, Here Is the
Oath, there is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospel's, but he
shall receive an hundred fold: now in this time, houses, and sisters, etc. with
persecutions; that is, He that shall leave Lands, or Relations, etc. for my
sake, shall find as good again another where. Strangers shall be to him as
Father and Mother, etc. as tender, as careful, as friendly, as those Relations
he left. Their houses shall be his houses, and their lands his lands. These ^re
your persecution-Fathers, and your persecution-Brethren, the Relations begotten
in, and ^^y your bonds, the lands and houses purchased ^^y your poverty and
want's as God dealt with Joseph, Genesis 39.4. And Joseph found grace (...) his
sight. Here Joseph found the Father and Brethren which he had lost: Thus in the
same ^ind; and yet if this be not enough, or if it be ^ot always made up this
way, yet be sure it shall in that better part: if thou be not paid in ^ounters,
thou shall in Gold. Godliness with contentment, Godliness in all its
Consequences, or Appurtenances; Persecutions with contentment is great gain.
That little, that never-so-little that a righteous man has, is better than the
riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. Better is a dinner of herbs, where love is,
than a stalled Ox^^ and hatred therewith, Prove. 15.17. I might (...) forth the
vastness of the overplus of this advantage, both in respect of the Nature, and
the Measure of it; but I must not Digress too far^.

2. Clear up thy Assurance of Gods good-wi^^ to thee. 'Twill be a hard matter
to suffer long, (...) to suffer much, for One, of whose special love you are
not well, and convincingly persuaded. Herein stands the superlative Excellency
and commendation of the love of Christ, that he dyed (...) Eremies, Rom, 5.8.
But 'twill be hard for you to drink of this Cup. I am not of their mind, who
own no such thing as the Doctrine of Assurance but would cut God's Standard,
and reduce it unto Antichrist's Peck. Neither am I of their Persuasion; who
make Assurance the Genus of Justifying Faith; These are the Scylla and
Chary^dis, which have slain their thousands, nay, the^ ten thousands. Nor shall
I digress so far, as (...) insist on the confutation of either: only this
(...) say, Give diligence to make your calling and Election sure; as the
Apostle exhorts, 2 Pet. 1.1^. For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.
Ma^^ your Calling and Election, (...), firm and st^ble. Not, Objective; For,
the Foundation of G^^ stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. Election is Election, and
Calling is Calling, whether we know it or no; neither is it founded on opera
praevisa, or peracta. But Subjective, That ye may believe, and besure; (...),
as St. John speaks, Joh. 6.69. that ye may certainly know, and fully testify
your Calling and Election. And that this is the truth of this Scripture;
Observe, first, his Inversion; ^ot Election and Calling, in their natural
Order, but Calling and Election, q. d. Make evidence of your Election by your
Calling; and then give diligenceto make it sure. (...) [(...) as Steph. Diverse.
lect.]: for if ye ^o these things, (before advised and enjoined, ^er. 5, 6, 7.
you shall never fall; not only from ^our Elected and Justified Estate, but not
from any proportionable and comfortable sense of it: Keep ^he Clouds of sin
from interposing; keep the lower Regians clear, and the Sun shall cast thy
shade (...) the way wherein thou art walking. As ever ^hou hopest to find that
Cordial at the Bottom, and (...) hold out with Courage and Patience till the
^oyls shall come to be divided; get some infallible Evidences, that thy
Captain's heart is ^^ith thee. Alas I Christian, thou art little a ware, (...)
what use Love will be in hard service. Now thou love, but considerest not
what standing ^edges and Reciprocations thy love has gotten ^^om above; only
thou have thy ease, thy health, ^^y liberty: God has made a hedge about thee,
^^d thou art not serving him for naught; thou ^^st thy Privileges, and
Spiritual Advantages in ^^mmon with others; the same Sun that is shining (...)
the wicked, shines on thee too. These are to thee some tokens of Fatherly Love
and care, on the account of Covenant Interest and Relation; Ay, but when thy
Goshen is become a Wilderness, and these tokens cease, what infallible
Evidence^ have thou then, on which thou can boldly cast thy Body, and Soul,
and Hopes and all! If eve^ you fall, it is like to be under your burden, or over
some Rock of offense: and now that your old Staff is broken, what have you to
trust to? O^ keep in with God; give diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure, and so, Y^^ shall not, not at any time fall, (...).

3. Examine, and prove the strergth of thy Graces. Have thou nothing to try thy
Faith and Patience with? no smaller Burdens to begin with (...) no broken
Papers to try thy Pen upon? Taur^^ feret, qui Vitulum tulit. Take on thy whole
Armor, and prove it; thou art called to fight (...) thy life; this is it must
defend thee, or thou m^dye for it. Thine Armor is invulnerable, (...) thou
know how to use it. Young Soldiers, th^^ have only the Theorio of Arms,
will find themselves miserably to seek, when they come (...) Practice. Have
thou no Personal troubles, (...) Family-Crosses, no Scorns nor Contempt, no^
that Wrong thee, or Speak Evil of thee, no Pai^, no Disease, no Fear art thou
in, no trouble (...) other men? If thou have no burden considerable of thy own;
have thou no assisting work offer^^ Are there none of thy poor brethren
overladen (...) thee, whose burden thou art commanded to bea^^ Gal. 6.2. Try
now what thy Faith and Pa^^ence, thy Humility and Self-denial, thy H^^ and
Charity will do, in these common and lesser cases. It may be thou art hoping to
hold out well enough at last, and in greater Trials to stand thy ground with
the best. O consider! how sadly thou will befool thy self? First, He that will
not serve in his own File, whereunto he is called, may look to be disbanded,
and cast out of the Service for ever, like one of Gideon's supernumerary
Cowards; and what then? He that is not with me, is against me. Secondly, It
argues thy mercenary hopes, as well as thy slavish fear; and what thou do at
last (should^st thou make good thy glorying) would appear to proceed from no
Love or Loyalty to thy Captain or to thy Cause; out a servile, and base fear,
of losing the glory, or advantage of the Victory: and how little art thou like
to be thankt for such service? Lastly, It seems very irrational, nay, somewhat
impossible, to ^ring thy boasting to pass. For, If thou have run with the
Footmen, and they have wearied thee, ^hen how can thou contend with horses?
Jer. (...) 2.5. How can thou think to bear blows, that ^^t not able to stand
under a frown? Is the great^r more tolerable than the less? Sure, if a minori
^^d majus be true arguing, thou will be deceived. Thou art commanded to lay
aside every weight (...) that hinders thee) and run with Patience, Heb. (...)
2.1. and do thou think to tugg it along, till ^^y back break under it, and
the Prize be won? What will running avail thee when the Race (...) over? Once
behind hand, and ever behind and. When thy Vessel is sull, and begins to sink,
then 'twill be time to shuffle thy undoing wares overboard.

That the Afflictions wherewith God Exercises his People, are but Rods.

I have gone beyond my purpose on the first Doctrine, therefore shall be the
more succinct here; where I have but these three things to do: 1. I shall show
you that they are Rods, and but Rods. 2. What Rods they are. 3. Apply it.

That they are Rods, and but Rods, appears; 1. Because they are so called in
Scripture Psalm. 89.32. Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and
their iniquity with stripe^^ and Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not
rest on the lot of the righteous ^^ and Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian! the Rod of mi^^
Anger, etc. 2. God uses them to no other end about his people, but as Rods.
Solomon tells us what the end and use of the Rod is, Prove. 22.15. Foolishness
is bound in the heart of a child, but the r^^ of correction shall drive it from
him. This is the very design of the Rod in Question. Zion sh^^ be plowed like a
field -- Jer. 26.18. You know what Plowing means, though it be to lay the fir^^
fallow a while, yet it is in order to a Crop. The Plow is an Instrument of
Husbandry; where (...) see God's Plow, we may conclude he intends bo^^ the Seed
and the Harvest in their Season. I know there is a vast odds between (...) and
(...) amending and avenging; curing and cursing o^ Person or People; but we are
speaking of such afflictions as are common to the people of God, as such,
whether personal or natural: of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.10, 11. For
they verily, for a few days, chastened us after their own pleasure; but he,
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness: for no chastening
for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness. 3. God deals with the
Instruments as with Rods. When the Child is sufficiently beaten, the Rod is
burnt, or laid aside. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. This was the end of the
Egyptian rod, as you may read at large, Exodus 14. So God dealt with the
Assyrian, the rod of his Anger, Isa. 10.27. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder; and his yoke
from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.
When Gods areing time is over, he will burn the yoke, that sat too heavy, and
galled the necks of his children: when the long Furrows are turned, and the
seed is in, and covered; he will drive off the Beasts, and they shall oppress
no more, but be fed for the day of slaughter.


2. The second thing proposed, was, to show you what Rods these are; This I
shall do under these three heads.

1. In themselves. 2. With relation to our sins. 3. In respect of Gods ends in
them.
In themselves, they may be, 1. Sharp rods. No chastening for the present, or
in its self, seems joyous, but grievous. Affliction is the burden and
distress of Nature. Every Cross has its nails with it, according to its kind
and degree: yet God has some greater and sharper than others, that will not
only scratch the skin, but tear the flesh, and break the bones. All his rods
are not of a size; that he may proportion himself to the strength of the
Offendent, and the height of the Offense. God may set a Bramble over thee, and
hedge thee about with Thorns. Wonder not, Christian, if the Rod smart, that is
dipped in the Guilt of sin, and Divine displeasure. 2. Long Rods. Such as may
reach over all thy comforts, all thy hopes, all thy contentments. Such was
Job's case, trouble on every hand, within door and without. God may lay thee
out in such a storm, as shall swill thee from head to foot, and leave thee
never a dry thread; nay, he may wrap up thy spiritual peace in the same plight
too, and make thee cry out with David, All thy waves and thy billows are gone
over me, Psalm. 42.7. The Cloud may overspread thy whole Horizon, in all the
parts and dimensions of it. Sometimes God cuts his Rod so long, that it shall
reach from thy Cradle to thy Grave ^^ nay, he has a rod that is as long as
Eterning it self; which is the rod he has laid up for his Enemies. 3. Strong
rods. Such as thou can neither stand against, nor stand under: that will make
thee yield and stoop to them. Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop,
Pro. 12.25. God may bring such an evil upon thee, and lay his Siege so close at
thee, that thou shall not be able to escape; as he threatened Jerem. 11.11. The
weakness of God is stronger than men, 1 Cor. 1.25. Who can contend with the
Almighty, or quench the flames of Consuming fire? He is wise in heart, and
mighty in strength; Who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered?
Job 9.4. God will draw his arrow so deep, that it shall be sure to ^each home,
and strike its mark: though ten thousands stand in his way; though Earth and
Hell conspite with their utmost skill and power, yet there is no resisting of
his absolute will and purpose; nor turning him from his designed end or means.
Both his work and his way are irresistible.


2. With relation to our sins; they are, 1. Short rods. Sin is of an infinite
extent: had not God set its bounds, it would run parallel with ^ternity. Nay,
in some respect, it is actually as ^ndless as eternity it self. For, though
there be no sinning in Hell, as sin has reference to the Law, ^t being Gods
Goal, and therefore exempt from ^he Law: Romans 5.13.
And Sin is not imputed where there is ^o Law. But, as sin is the depraved
habit of ^he mind, and the (...) of the whole Soul, ^t accumulates in that
estate of eternal separation from God, and rises to its highest Zenith; so that
those that were bad before, are now unconceivably worse. Let him that is
filthy, be ^^lthy still. The Covetous never so greedy, as ^^ow; The unclean
never burned, as now; The envious never gnasht the teeth as now: and yet the
Objects of those lusts at an unaccessible distance: the gulf is fixed, which
doubtless is no small part of their torment. I should speak more fully here,
but that it is plainly out of my way. That which I aim at, is, to measure the
Rod with Sin, the Sire and Progenitor of it; and we find that the Giant has
begotten a Dwarf. Sin has seized on every faculty, and lies in every joint:
but the Rod hits but in one, or some few parts at once. The yoke lies but on
the neck. The Disease is universal, yet the Vein is opened but in puncto. Nay,
Sin is a complicated evil, a Bundle of different Species; some, in the seeds
only; others, both in the root and branch. But the Rod is won^ to come single:
God does not heap up misery, as we heap up iniquity; He punishes, in this
world, seven times, nay, seven thousand times less than our iniquities do
deserve. 2. Light Rods. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, etc. 2
Cor. 4.17. God may lay more upon thee, than thou art willing to bear; but not
more than thou art enabled to bear. More than thou bear with Patience: but
not more than Patienee would bear. Thou have no reason to shrink from, or sink
under thy burden, till God lay on the burden of thy sin, either in the Guilt,
or in the full demerit of it. This indeed is a weight, which none but he that
was God as well as Man could ever bear. Nay, see how i^ stretched the very Cords
of his Soul, as it were to stand up under it. Hear, how God himself complains
of it, Amos 2.13. Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is
full of sheaves. O my brethren! never complain that God has laid on you his
little-finger, when he might have crushed you with his Loins. 3. In respect of
God's ends in them; they are, 1. Teaching Rods. The rod and reproof give
Wisdom, Prove. 29.15. The rod is Gods pen wherewith he writes his Law, and our
duty, on the fleshy Tables of our hearts. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes, Psalm. 119.71. It is good; the
Affliction is over, but the Good remains. The good that is in other things,
dies with them; Health, Wealth, Peace, Friends, and all those things that
contribute to the sweetness of a natural life, are good but while they are
enjoyed, unless that good be sanctified by a faithful and successful
improvement of them to their spiritual uses and ends. There are thousands in
Hell, that are cursing the day that ever they were born to such Estates, and
arrived to such Honors, and lived at such Ease: these things were once taken
to be good, nay, the only good; but now that the other side is turned up, and
upon deliberate review, they are not like the things they were. Thus the Devil
cheats poor Souls, with a fair Image on the one side, but plain Brass on the
other. But it is good for me that I have been afflicted; The Cross lay
uppermost, but the Crown was under; and true Gold on both sides; Golden
afflictions, and Golden glory. That I might learn thy Statutes. These are
Mysteries that the Worlds-Disciples are ignorant of. Indeed, they pretend to
great Matters, great Learning, and high Parts, men of vast Reading, and
piercing Wits; and yet they dye Fools at last, and their Wits pierce
themselves. But, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach
him out of thy Law. Psalm. 94.12. 2. Establishing rods. Before I was afflicted,
I went astray; but now have I kept thy word. Psalm. 119.67. The shaking of the
tree strengthens the root. When I lived at ease, and every thing was, as, I
thought, I would have it: when I selt no pain, and saw no trouble: I was
wandering and gadding after every temptation, my foot was in every snare, and
one swallowed-Bait engaged me for another. I was beating up and down the
streets like a truant child, that had no Guardian nor Governor, but his own
Will. But now, since thou have fetched me in with thy whip; since thou have been
dealing with me by such or such an affliction or cross: since I have smarted
under thy rod, the case has been happily altered with me: I have kept thy
word. O Christian! thou can not think how much thou art indebted unto God for
his Rod. 3. Comforting Rods. This is a Mystery to the poor blind World. What!
Affliction the way to Comfort? Trouble the way to Peace? Liberty the fruit of
Banishment? Meat out of the Eater, and Sweetness out of the Strong? This is a
Riddle, how can these things be? Alas, they are people of another Climate, that
cannot live by such herbs; no, nor yet by Faith. What can comfort them, when the
heart of their comfort is broken? What, or who can bless them, when their Gods
are spoiled? Ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I more? Judge. 18.24. If
these fail, they are undone. This is their Main chance, their Portion, their
All. In and by this Element they live. It Is true, they have some other things
to discourse of now and then, but it is that they cannot live on. When they saw
the boldness of Peter and John, -- they marvelled, Act. 4.13. It Is a wonder to
them to see the Bush in a flame, and yet not burnt: to see men in the fire, and
yet not consumed: among Lions, and yet not devoured. But, says David, Thy rod,
and thy staff, they comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. No Comforts like to
Affliction-comforts: This is the Sword of Goliath the Philistim, 1 Samuel 1.9.
wrapped in a cloth behind the Ephod; there is none like it. The highest wages
are reserved for the hardest service. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so oun consolation also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. The Vessel never
rides better than on Spring-tides, when the waters are highest. O how sweet are
Prison-Cordials! how pleasant are his looks, when darted through the blackest
Cloud! Oh what light is there in the flaming furnace, when God is there too!
What a smell is there in his Distilling-house; how sweet are the Roses when the
fire is under! But I cannot stay here; I must hasten. 4. Feeding Rods. Gods
children never begin to prove, till they fall on Pulse and Water: Feed thy
people with thy rod, Mich. 7.14. And in this sense we may call it, the Bread of
adversity, and the Water of affliction, Isa. 30.20. which are as absolutely
necessary (though not per se, but per accidens, and as the case stands) unto
our spiritual life and growth, as bread and water are to our natural. Alas,
Christian I Thou can not live without sufferings. You say, It Is pity that
fair weather should ever hurt. But it is certain, a continual Summer would
wither thee, branch and root; the Winter must succeed in its course, or thou
must dye. This necessity proceeds not from the Arbitrariness of Gods Sovereign
dispose, but from thy own temper and constitution. God is not like those
Physicians that covet to in^ich themselves by their Customers, and will physic
them right or wrong, that they may live upon them, though their poor Patients
dye under them. Oh, it is well for us, that we have to do with a God, that knows
how to chastise us in Judgment, and immeasure, and will correct the poisonous
Ingredients of the Fury and Envy of unreasonable men ^^ that will pare his rod,
lest it should fall too heavy, or too many ways at once. Surely, the wrath of
man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain, Psalm. 76.10.
5. Improving rod. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away:
and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth
more fruit, Joh. 15.2. God does not only lopp off the dry boughs, but pares^p
the green; and this is the way to make a fruitful tree more fruitful. That tree
only is in good case, that is full of fruit, let the husbandry be what it
will. Affliction is the watring of Gods Garden; though the drops may fall so.
heavy and thick, that they may beat all flat to the ground, as if it should
never rise more; yet it quickly recovers, and with the fresher vigor and
beauty. What an odor does there result from every odoriferous herb, in its
nature and kind, after a soaking shower? Every Grace thrives under a sanctified
Rod. Stellae nocte splendent quae die non videntur. Bern.
Humility never looked like its self till now. Heavenly-mindedness had never
such a face, as now that it is washed in its own tears, from the filth and
polluting scum of this Earth. Faith was never so active and clear-sighted:
Patience never so strong at the Ancles: Charity was never so heart-whole as
now, that God has dieted them with his rod. The Judgment never so settled; The
Will never so deliberately resolved; The Conscience never so tender and clear;
The Affections never in such a posture and temper; The Temple of the heart
never so kept as now, that God has made a scourge of small cords, and driven
out all those Merchants that held their Exchange there. Ioh. 2.12.




Hitherto for the Doctrinal part: Let me apply it now, for Information.
Exhortation. Consolation.


A word to each of these, and so I proceed.

If this be so, Then the wicked are sadly deceived; 1. In themselves. Howbeit,
he means not so, neither does his heart think so -- For he says, are not my
Princes altogether Kings? Isa. 10.7, 8. With our tongues we will prevail. Our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. Alas, Sinner! this is thy
day, and it is but a day. Mistake not, thou art but a Rod, though it has
pleased the Father to set thee on high in his house, for the terror of his
children; thy use is no longer than while the child is under age, when once the
Heir is of years, this penal Discipline shall cease for ever; and then all
thine arrows shall return on thine own head, tipped with that vengeance that thy
Pride and Cruelty has deserved. 2. In the people of God. They are not the
persons thou take, and accusest them for: the Fools, the Hypocrites, the
Troublers of Israel. The World knows us not -- Now we are the so^ of God, and
it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him, 1 John 3.1, 2. Oh Sinners^ what will ye say, when ye
shall see those, whom now ye hate and persecute, and brand with hypocrisy and
sedition, coming in the Clouds, and in the Glory and Power of their Father, to
pas^ Sentence and Judgment upon you? Do ye unknow, that the Saints shall judge
the World ^^ 1 Cor. 6.2. Go on then, arraign, condemn execute; But know thou,
that for all these thing God will bring thee into Judgment, Eccles. 11.9. For a
good work, say they, we stone thee not; b^^ for Blasphemy, etc. Joh. 10.33. But
wilt tho^ adventure thy soul on^t, that thou art not mistaken? Was not Saul
once of thy mind, before God from Heaven convinced him what he was doing? He
little thought it had been Christ he was persecuting. Oh! don't thy Conscience
sometimes tell thee, when thy Interest and Malice ^s at an Ebb; that the
Question deserves thy better consideration, whether it be Dagon or the Ark,
thou art fighting against? the Fox or the Lamb, thou art hunting and smiting?
Yea, the ^ime comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service, Joh. 16.2. ^Twere very strange indeed, if any one should ^hink to do
Christ a service, in destroying his Members, eo nomine: but, under other
notions and accusations. Well Sinner! if thou will not ^ebate the case now, God
himself shall shortly ^ebate it with thee, and shall judge uprightly between us.


Now to the people of God. 1. To bear the rod. Nay, you must bear it: ^he yoke
is pinn'd-on, that it cannot be shaken ^^. But that you may not lose your
labor, and ^^pes, bear it, 1. With Faith: the affiance, confidence, and
^^quiescence of Faith. 2. With Patience. 3. With Resolution. 4. With Joy. 5.
With Perseverance. Matthew. 16.24. Then ^^d Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man
will ^^e after me, let him deny himself, and take up (...) Cross, and follow
me. If you will be Christians, you must bear the Cross; and for your help and
encouragement consider, 1. It Is the Cross of Christ. He has born it before
you; He has born it for you; He bea^^ it in you; He lays it on you: And in
his time, He, and he alone, can and will take it from you. 2. It Is thy Cross.
The burden that is weighed out for thee. The rod appointed thee: there is a
necessity, and praecepti, and medii; and thou (...) bear it. 3. It Is a gainful,
though a painful Cross like Aesop's Load; the burden that threatens the death,
is the bread that maintains thy life. 4. It Is an honorable, though a
dishonored Cross, The Vexillum and Insignia Christi. I b^^ in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus, G^^ 6.17. The wounds and scars of a Soldier, an^ the
visible witnesses of his valor: and his v^^lour the Crown of his honor. 5.
It Is a Victorious Cross. In this War the conquered conquers, Patiendo non
resistendo, Aug. Eusebius. l 4. Hist. c. 13.
and patience only wins the field. Christianos victores evadere, dum m^^ malunt
pro sua Religione qudm Imperatorum (...) ctis parere. That the Christians
became Co^^ querours, while they chose to dye for their (...) ligion, rather
than to obey the Edicts of (...) Emperors; Anton. Imp.
was confessed by an Heathen E^^ perour himself.

2. To kiss the rod. Kiss the son, lest he be angry, Psalm. 2.12. Kissing
imports Salutation, (...) welcome entertaining of a person, or thing; ^^luntary
submission to it; and a full and free (...) conciliation with it. Can you? will
you, the kiss the rod, not only in the Author, or Efficient, but in the
Instruments, or second Causes of it? It is not sufficient, that the child kiss
his Father that corrects him, but he must kiss the rod too. But to prevent an
Objection or a Mistake here. I must add, That God does not expect, nay, he will
not, that his children should kiss the rod, on any other account, but as they
are rods in their Fathers hands: Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, nor with the workers themselves, farther than the Law of God and
Nature do allow, or the Christian duty toward their Souls requires. Take heed
of striking hands with the Gibeonites; of complying, or compounding with the
rod. 3. To improve the Rod. To this end, walk with God under it, and wait upon
God in it. When the Streams run foul below, draw up to the Fountain, and dwell
there. If the Floods be upon the Earth, repair, with the Dove, to the Ark,
where thou may be at rest; Walk with God in his way, and by his Rule, when he
is not pleased to walk with thee in thy way, and by thy rule; Then is the rod
improved, when it touches with God's design. You have heard, they are Teaching
Rods; oh, learn by them! Establishing Rods; oh, take root under them!
Comforting Rods; oh, suck out the marrow of these bones! Feeding Rods; oh, shut
not the mouth too fast against them! Let them in, and set them down, and digest
them, when God offers them; and so your growth and improvement shall abundantly
appear. I am fain to post over these things, that I may not be prevented in
what I chiefly aim at.


If it be but a Rod,

1. It proves thy Adoption. And in nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which
is to them an evident token of Perdition; but to you of Salvation; and that of
God, Phil. 1.28. If ye endure chastning, God deals with you, as with sons:
for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? Heb. 12.7.

But Solomon tells us, Ob. Eccles. 9.1.
that no man knows love or hatred, by all that is before him. How then shall
I know, what, or when afflictions are conclusive of Adoption?

It Is true, Blanks; but where Adoption is, this is one Seal or Evidence of it.
No man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before him; if he has
nothing else to know it by, this is no adaequate, but an assistant, or
completive Evidence.

These Evidences are not so discernable Coming, Going. When David had gotten
through, he looks back, and concludes; It is good for me, that I have been
afflicted. We may judge something from the Cause, for which, and the
Instruments by which, we suffer: but most safely, from the work, and operation
o^ them; the manner, nature, and fruit of their working. Then does the Physic
promise a Recovery, when it kindly works upon, and forcibly works off the Cause
of the Disease. The teaching, establishing, comforting, feeding, improving, and
improved Rod, is the restoring, and sealing Rod. But when it works the
contrary, as, on too many it does, and, like the Troubled Sea, casts up mire
and dirt: or but at halves; when it stirs the Pool, and causes sin to come in
remembrance, and makes the Soul, it may be, stomach-sick, but carries it not
off; in this case, in this sad case, it seals too; but, as to thine
Adversaries, It is an evident token of perdition.

2. It seals to thy Portion. It is a faithful saying, For if we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee, says Peter,
what shall we have therefore? Verily, I say unto you, says Christ, that ye
which have followed me in the Regeneration, in the work, the duties, and
difficulties of Regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the throne of
his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, Matthew. 19.27, 28. This is the day of thy labor, and every stroke thou
strikest in it, is in earnest of thy Rest. As sure as thou see the Sun
shining in the Heavens, the Evening is at hand, which shall crown thy days
work. For God is not unrighteous, to forget your work, and labor of love,
which ye have showed toward his name, Heb. 6.10. Bear up your spirits then; He
that has espoused you, will shortly marry you, and celebrate your blessed and
glorious Nuptials, in the house, and kingdom of his Father, for ever. O the
ravishing Songs! the joyful Epithalamiums that shall then be sung! He that has
hired you, will surely and fully reward you; when you shall know what is the
hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the
Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. Though thou art sweating, toyling, suffering, sighing,
weeping now; by this thou may know, that thy rest remains.

3. It works for thy good. And we know that all things work together for good
to them that love God, to them who are called according to his purpose, Romans
8.28. All these things which seem to be against thee, are directly making for
thee. God is now emptying thee from vessel to vessel, that thou may not
settle on thy lees: that thy (old) taste may not remain in thee: that thy scent
may be changed, and thou may be prepared for the Cup, and Table of his
Glory. He would never thus winnow and grind thee, but that he might have thee
nearer to him; and make of thee, Savoury meat, such as he loves, and feast
himself with thee to all eternity. Nay, it makes for thy present good; The
tried Silver is now Current Coin; and they that scrupled at it before, that
called it Brass, base, and counterfeit Metal; that scoured it, cut it, and
cursed it, and blasphemed the sacred Stamp, and Coiner of it; are now ashamed of
themselves, and glad would they be, Math. 25.8.
like the Foolish Virgins, of some of your oil. I might here tell you mose at
large, how the Lords rod, and every branch of it, as all the Occurrences of his
Providence, are working together for the good of them that love him, both in
respect of the design and event. But this has been the happy labor of a far
abler Pen already, whereunto I refer you, Mr. R.A.
and shall add no more here.

That there is no affliction can light on the people of God, without his divine
permission and appointment.

But I intend not to insist here, only give me leave to make good what I have
said; which I shall do in the mouth of these two Witnesses: Matthew. 10.29, 30.
Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? and not one of them shall fall to the
ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your heads are all numbered.
And then he concludes, a majore, Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more worth
than many Sparrows. If a Sparrow, which, in buying and selling, is valued but
at half a Farthing; nay, if a hair of our heads, which is but an
excrementitious Appendix to the body, cannot be any way disposed of, without the
all-commanding Counsel of Heaven; doubt not, Christian, but that thy higher
affairs, thy greater concernments either of Body or Soul, are under special
appointment and designation. Has he such care of Sparrows? and will he forget
his Doves? Cant. 6.9. Isa. 62.3.
Will he not lose a hair of thy head? and will he be prodigal of the precious
Jewels of his royal Crown and Diadem? Surely, he that guides thy hairs to the
ground, will not suffer the Rod to fall, without special License and
ordination, on thy back, Isa. 10.23. The Consumption decreed, shall overflow
with righteousness. For the Lord God of hosts shall make a Consumption, even
determined in the midst of all the Land. Whoever, or whatever be the
Instruments, they must work by Gods rule, and in Gods determined, though they
cross his prescribed way.

Proceed we now to the last Doctrine, yet that which was the first in our eye.

That the Lords Rod is no dumb rod.

This we shall 1. Prove. 2. Interpret (as God shall enable) the Voice of it. 1.
In General. 2. In Special. 3. We shall apply all very briefly.

Here are two Arguments coucht in the Text it self, to illustrate the (...) of
this truth.

1. The Lord cries for Audience. He has now sent his Rod to plead his Quarrel,
seeing his Prophets could not be heard; and now commands their attention to
this his severer Messenger: Hear ye the rod. Which clearly implies, that it
has a Voice; nay, an intelligible, though in it self, an inarticulate Voice.
His Rod, and his Word, are sometimes Synonyma in Scripture; as Isa. 11.4. He
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips shall he slay the wicked. God does sometimes speak Rods, his Words do
wound, and kill. When he rides forth, as St. John describes it, Rev. 19.12, 13,
14, 15. Clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and out of his mouth goes a
sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron, etc. And as he speaks rods, so his rod speaks and pleads
with those unto whom it is sent. 2. The Text tells us, that it is the Rod of
divine and special appointment; which argues the End and design of it; it is a
designed, and a designing Rod. God does not shoot his arrows at Random, without
mark or aim; but he has a Wherefore for every particular of his Providence.
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, 1 Cor.
11.30. This is one main use God makes of his Rod, to point at his meaning by
it, and to give us the sensible and visible Characters and Emblems of his mind.
God spoke in diverse manners in time past, unto the Fathers, by the Prophets,
says the Apostle, Heb. 1.1. But has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son. And now, may I say, in diverse manners too. Sometimes by his Word, in plain
Scripture; sometimes by the explaining, or awakening Ministry of it; and that
either in Doctrine or Reproof and Threatening; or in Promise and Encouragement;
Sometimes by his Spirit, in the secret workings and whispers of it, in, and on
the Conscience; and sometimes by his Rod; when our stupid Dullness, or perverse
Carelessness is grown to such a pass, that other means and ways are
ineffectual; then he takes up his rod, and points more plainly and convincingly
at our duty, and engages us in it, with the more fixed, and solemn resolution.
Thus far the Text it self confirms its own truth: And let this serve at present
to prove the (...) of it.
I shall add but a word or two more, for the Demonstration of the (...): and so
proceed to the Interpretation of the voice.

For Demonstration, or why the Lords Rod should have a Voice.

1. For the glory of his Attributes. Gods Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy, are
highly concerned in it. To think that Divine Dispensations are steered by a
blind Instinct Necessity, or Casualty, without some gloriously designed, and
determined End, is Atheistically to blaspheme his heavenly Wisdom. Affliction
comes not forth of the dust, Job 5.6. God has a Wheel within the wheel; a
wheel of infinite Counsel and Wisdom, which moves within the wheel of external
Providence. Deus and Natura nihil frustra agunt. Nay, it would greatly derogate
from the glory of his Justice, to exercise his Rod, without some proportionable
End: For, (to speak with holy reverence) God is, as it were, bound in all his
Divine Actions, to aim at his own Glory, because there is no higher End, for
all Humane, Angelical, or Divine Motions to terminate in. And wherein is he
glorified more than in the high Exploits, and blessed Fruit of his Rod? This
is, as it were, the Scepter, the Fasces of his Kingdom, the Coercive Laws of
his Government, and the great visible Pillars of his Jurisdiction over the sons
of men, Now it is certain, that on the account of his absolute, and supreme
Sovereignty, he may, without any violation of his Justice, dispose both of Us
and Ours, as he pleases; neither is he bound to give us an Account of his
ways, any more than we are bound to give the Worms we tread on an account of
ours. He might deal with us with dumb blows, and never stand to reason the case
with us. He once gave us both to know, to Will and Obey; and dare we think to
enjoin him to look up, or repair what we have lost or spoi'd? Though we have
plucked out the eyes he gave us to see with, and stopped the ears he gave us to
hear with, may he not in Justice require it at our hands? and that, not only by
a Precept, but a Penal Law? Yet, such is the blessed Commendation, and
condescension of his Grace and Mercy, that he will plead with us before he
strikes; nay, and his very Rod shall speak, and that in such a Dialect, as our
poor, broken capacities may in some certain and saving manner apprehend. 2. To
reach his Ends. God's End is not barely to manifest the greatness of his
Almighty Power, nor the severity of his Supreme Justice, in crushing in pieces
the poor Potsheards of the earth; but to reduce his degenerate, fallen
Creatures, to a nearer Resemblance, and fuller participation of that Blessed
Image of his own, which he had at first enstamped on them. Man was the Epitome
of Gods six days work, the Microcosm, the little World, the Crown of his
Creation: Therefore, when Man fell, this little World was ruined, and became a
Chaos, a confused, and dark heap of all manner of hellish, and rebellious
Principles and Practices: so that ever since, God has been on a
New-Creation-work in the World, Ephesians. 2.10. and 2 Cor. 5.17. compared with Joh.
5.17. And in this his new work he observes his old method; First, he creates
Light to work in, though not to work by: Light for his creature's sake, but not
for his own. God is now working on rational creatures, which must, in some
measure, and in some sense, cooperate, or work with him; what will serve again
of the old ruins, must stand, as for the matter and substance of it: the old
Faculties and Powers, New-wrought and Sanctified unto a new, yet its primitive,
Order and Service. Now, I say, the case being thus, it would not seem so
conducible to his End, to leave his creatures utterly in the dark, as to his
mind and pleasure, in and by such Providence; for his Rod is as his Axe or
Saw, to lessen, or shorten, or shape us in any manner, for the place and use he
has decreed, and called us unto, and under these, we are not to be merely
passive, but active also. Let this suffice now to have been spoken, by way of
confirmation of so plain and evident a Truth.
2. Well, this, we hope, is sufficiently manifest, both from the light of
Reason, Scripture, and Conscience, that the Lords Rod has a Voice. But what
this Voice is, or how to give the true and infallible Interpretation, is the
Question: and were this Question as earnestly, impartially, and practically
debated and resolved, as the Mint and Rue, the lesser Circumstantials and
Punctilios of the Law, or of private and worldly Interest; there were some
probable hope, nay, more than probable, that God might yet at last obtain the
Glory he is contending, and we the happy peace and salvation, we are looking
and longing for. And for your help in this diligent and serious Search, give me
leave to premise these four things.

1. Know therefore, in the first place, That when God speaks to us by his Rod,
he speaks as to Rational creatures, that are capable of drawing Inferences, as
well from his Works, as from his Word. God does not work upon us as upon Stocks
and Stones, that are supposed utterly insensible of the Strokes, and ignorant
of the Workman's design; God has principled us with an intellective Faculty,
that we might conclude concerning his Will from his Works. Hence is that
compassionate wish, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise! that they understood
this! that they would consider their latter end! And that sad complaint, Isa.
1.3. Israel does not know, my people does not consider. Though I should heap
mischiefs upon them, and spend mine arrows upon them; though the sword without,
and terror within, should destroy both the young man, and the virgin, the
suckling also, with the man of gray hairs; yet who would lay it to heart? the
filthy would be filthy still, the wicked and deceivers would grow worse and
worse still; For they are a nation void of Counsel, neither is there any
understanding in them. It Is true, we are sensible enough of the Smart of the
Rod, but not of the End, and Design of it. In other things, that,
comparatively, little or nothing concern us, we can, with an elaborate, and
studied exactness, run through the whole Series and concatenation of propinque
and remote causes, and examine their mutual dependences and products; and yet
how strangely blind and sottish are we in the case between God and our souls?
Oh! whenever there is an evil in the Camp, a Judgment threatened, or inflicted,
on the Church, State, Town, Family, wherein you live, or on your own Persons,
or personal relations; let your next and speedy course be, to make diligent
Inquisition to find out the Achan that has moved the Sedition, and raised the
Controversy between God and you; that he may not upbraid your wretched
stupidity, as he did Isreal's, Isa. 1.2. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth!
and verse 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revole more and more.
And Jer. 6.17. Also I so watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the
Trumpet; but they said, We will not hearken. Here God threatened War, by the
sound of the Trumpet, but all was one to them, we will not hearken. Therefore,
ver. 19. Hear, O Earth Behold, I will bring evil upon this People, ever the
Fruit of their own thoughts, because the have not hearkened unto my words. Oh,
my Brethren! As you desire, and hope to be saved from that Sword and
Pestilence, and all the other evils that are upon you, or impendent over you,
and from the wrath to come; hearken to the sound of Gods Trumpet, to the voice
of Gods Rod: O, don't abandon your reason, and play the mad men in the things
that do so nearly concern you! God is now contending with us for these and
these things, and shall we not give him a sober hearing? nay, we do hear, and
feel too, that our ears do tingle, and our very hearts ache, and shall we not
regard? O that ever this should be said of England! What? what will become of
us? The Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts,
but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his
hands. Therefore my People are gone into captivity, because they have no
knowledge, Isa. 5.12, 13. Let this be the first thing then remembered by the
way, that whenever God does lay his rod on you, he expects you should take
special notice of it, and set your selves with all seriousness, speed, and
impartiality, to inquire into the true, and spiritual Meaning, and End of it.

2. Examine Conscience by the Word of God. How does the Physician understand
the distemper of his Patient, but by comparing and judging the Urine by the
Rules of his Art? Cast the Rod then into a clean Vrinal of Conscience, and
examine what the Word of God will say of it there. Conscience is Gods Deputy
and Register, and if thou have not for the present scratcht out God; writing
there; for the present, I say, for these Characters will never be expunged
those leaves, but by the same Divine hand that ingraved them. If thou have not
substituted the Lies and Impostures of thy own deceived heart, but wilt be
faithful and ingenuous; here thou shall find a true, and plain interpretation
of Providence. We may not expect that God should speak to us immediately from
Heaven, viva voce, or by any miraculous Revelations or Enthusiasms, as some
giddy Brains would pretend unto; this were indeed Phanaticism, nomine and re.
But, The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. The Word
speaks, and the Rod speaks, and Conscience will compare these together, and
from thence draw up a full and perfect Declaration, and both prove, examine,
and answer every Article of it, if it may but be suffered to execute its office
in you. The great reason why we are such strangers to God, is because we are
such strangers to our selves: Nemo is sese tentat descendere, nemo. Pers.
Affliction has a great I fluence, as on the other powers of the Soul, so
especially on the Conscience, either to soften or to fear it: Every stroke on
Pharaoh left him harder and harder. Why will ye be stricken any more? ye will
revolt more and more. But where the rod is intended for good, and works toward
that End, there it softens and quickens the Conscience. What a blessed effect
had that Rout at Ai, on Joshua and his people, Josh. 7. They presently fly to
God, to know the Cause, and as soon as ever the thing was hinted to them, how
industrious and restless were they, till they had found out the very Man, and
executed Gods Law upon him, and so removed the Guilt and the Wrath ^om Israel?
oh, that God would once set our Troubled Camp on the like course, in a like
general, sincere, and effectual manner! Manaseh's Fetters was that softened
Manasseh's Conscience, a Chro. 33.11, 12. 'Twas Ne^uchadnezzar's affliction,
that humbled his ^roud hear, Dan. 4.33, 34. 'Twas the stroke from Heaven that
opened Readiness eyes, Act. 9. (...) Christians! take heed of hardening your ^earts
under the Rod; an affliction is never removed, but it leaves either a curse or
a blessing behind it. Therefore, whenever God takes his rod over you, or lays
it on, upon ^^ou; as you respect the spiritual and eternal ^^ace and welfare of
your poor souls, awake ^our Consciences, and find out the Cause, and ^^e
Meaning of it. It Is not enough to groan, and mourn under the burden; this is
but Na^^re's common course; which (if this be all) is (...) Gods account, but
as the ungrateful howling (...) a Dog, Hos. 7.14. Nay, it is not enough
neither, to bewail any external, though spiritual, ^^ss; for, if this be all
that your care and ^oughts are taken up about; those that sat at ^^e door of
the gate of the Lords house, weeping (...) Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.14. were almost as
^^ligious (...) you. Take this for a second Direction; Set Conscience on work,
and that (...) a lively, impartial, and regular way; acquain^ your selves with
Gods, and know upon what terms he is with you. O, my brethren! the^ is a great
deal of self trying, and self do^ying work before you. But how Conscient is to
be put to it in this duty, I shall show y^^ more at large hereafter.

3. Though the Rod may be general, yet t^^ Voice is particular. Besides those
more private and personal evils, that every Town, Congregation, Trade, Family,
or Person, are conplaining under; there are National and P^^lick miseries,
which are the common Calamites wherein every individual Member is particularly
concerned; and so the voice directs its (...) stinct and particular Items to
every one pa^^cularly; and to every one it suits it self seasonably and
proportionably. It is a voice of Humiliation to my Pride; of Mortification to
t^^ Covetousness; of Self-denial to the Lust and Revenge of another; of
Quickening to t^^ Negligence and Cowardice of another; (...) Establishment to
the Haesitation, and Unresolvedness of another; of Peaceableness and Charity to
the Tumultuousness and Censoriousness of another, etc. And to one it speaks
with more terror and dread; to another, in calmer, and sweeter Dialect,
according to the nature and height of that guilt or corruption (...) aims at.
Therefore reason thus with your selves God has now taken up his Rod, and is
comet plead with me: though the lash fall more (...) verily on others; yet I am
in the same Condemnation, and am as much concerned as ever those were, that are
now lying in heaps at-(...) feet? oh, how shall I, how dare I, think of running
from, or justifying my self before God! hay, a provoked, and an avenging God.
Alas, Christians! mistake not; It Is not so much for the Oaths and Blasphemies,
the Drunkenness and Sodomie, the Sabbath-Breaking and Idolatry, of Gods
enemies, those sons of Belial, that are among us, that God has taken up this
Controversy with us; he has, I will not say, a few, but many things against
us. It Is for my sin, and for your sins, that God has torn up our hedge, and
thrown down our wall, and laid us waste. As Mr. Bradford, that blessed Martyr,
acknowledged in his Prayer; Lord, it was my unthankfulness that brought in
Queen Mary's day; it was my unfruitfulness that caused the untimely death of
King Edward the 6th. And those Christians that were banished, and fled in Queen
Mary's days, professed, wherever they came, that God, for their
unthankfulness, had taken the Gospel from them.

If then you would learn the language of the Rod, and understand the meaning of
it, take this for another Rule with you: Believe it, that God is now speaking
from Heaven to you; to me, and to thee, in particular: oh, what an awe, and
dread should this cast upon us! Suppose you should hear God calling out of
Heaven to you by name; what a dismal astonishment would ^ strike you into? why
Man, what do thou think? Is the Lords Rod a dumbrod? or else, has it nothing
to say to Thee, because possibly, as yet, it has not much to do with thee? or,
is this a feigned Message, an Errand of my own, that I am now come from God
unto thee in? Do thou believe I am forcing thee with a lie? or else, is it
true what I say? Well then, if the aim and level of the Rod, be at thee, and at
me, in particular; is it not time for us to hear and lay it to heart? Shall the
arrows of Gods a venging Fury strike us through the very heart, before we will
be persuaded to look for the sin, or the guilt there? O, my brethren! we stand
Gods Butt this day: and be sure, that either in your Lusts, or your Lives, he
will shortly his you out; it is not the White, (which men shoot at) but the
Black that God levels at; O separate, separate your selves! that you be not
found anon among the slain of Gods Battle. It Is not Covenant Interest shall
excuse you here, nor the Privilege of Adoption that shall defend you; if a
Child stand, nay, though his Natural, and Only Son, between him and his Mark,
he shall surely die.

4. If we would understand the true intent and meaning of the Lords Rod; we
must humbly betake our selves to the Lord of the Rod. It is not safe to trust
our selves in this case; Self bears so strong a hand in us, that it will be
hard, if not impossible, to escape its Distinctions and Fallacies. There will
be some secret Grains of Allowance for this Lust; and a plausible Dispensation
for the other Sin; and a colorable veit spread over the other Abomination; a
thousand ways we are in danger of deceiving our selves, until we go to God,
as the Disciples did to Christ, to unriddle to us his own Parables. This was
Joshurs course, as you may read in the place before-quoted, and this was
David's course, Psalm. 42.9. I will say unto God my Zeck, why have thou
fongotten me? why go I mourning, because of the appression of the Enemy? O Sir!
let this be your peedy course too: Set some time apart, solemnly to enquire of
God, what his will is, and what he would have you to do, as to the hard case he
has set before you; Go into your corners, and commune with God in secret; lay
down your packs at his feet, and spread them all before him; open every Box,
and every Bundle, turn out the very Battom of all in his sight, and tell him;
Lord, I am sonsible of thy Rod, oh, make me as sensible of thy meaning in the
Rod! oh, let me know why my Father is displeased! thy Frowns are death to me;
Lord! I cannot bear them; O, let me but once know my sin, and it shall be
enough! What is my Trespass, what is my sin, that thou art thus pursuing after
me? search all my Stuff, examine every Tent, and set it here before me; bring
out the stolen Images, though the Rachel of my greatest delight should
dissemble them, and plead a Custom, or Natural Infirmity for them. It Is true,
Lord, there is cause enough why thou should not only frown, but dash so
filthy a Potsheard in pieces for ever; But, O let me bear, Lord, what now thou
halt against me! let me not be judged and condemned in a Language I cannot
understand. Is it my Pride that displeases thee? O, break my heart, whatever
it cost me, and make me as humble as thou would have me to be! Is it my
Worldliness, my Uncleanness, my Impatience, thy Remissness in Duties, my want
of zeal, or loss of Love; Lord, I would not spare one of these Amalekies; O let
thy Spirit convince me of Sin! and then gird me with thy Sword, and thy Power,
that, though I cannot stable them through at one thrust, yet I may be ever
hewing them in pieces, till thou have utterly destroyed them for me. Oh, my
brethren! will you engage your selves in this Duty? Would you be hid in the day
of God's wrath? or shall be go on to pour it out upon you? Now reso^^^, or
shortly it will be too late. The Axe is lifted up; shall God strike, or will
you resolve? He is about a strange work among us, and that his Enemies shall
shortly know; Will you be numbered among them that perish? the Lord forbid! Oh,
let us prepare to meet the Lord, while he is yet a little way off, in the way
of his Judgments, before his fierce wrath so light on our Sodom, that it be too
late to escape to the Mountain. Thus I have given you the Key to unlock these
hidden Mysteries, and to open the Oracle to you. Turn it as I have directed
you, and as God shall enable you: Observe the four Wards of it; if you break or
wrest either of these, it will not do. I shall premise no further, but proceed
to the Voice. And first, ^n General.

1. One voice of the Rod in general, is this; God will have his People to
awake, and consider. The Anger of the Lord shall not return, until ^e have
executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart; in the latter
days ye ^all consider it perfectly, Jer. 23.20. When a people have o^t their
Hearing, God will deal with them by that other sense of Feeling. In the ^tter
days ye shall consider it perfectly; though they have made a shift to stop
their Ears at Warnings, Calls, and Threatenings; though ^^y Trumpets, and
Heralds of War, could ^ot awaken them; yet my Sword shall at last ^o it. I
will reprove thee, and set them in ^rder before thine eyes: now consider this,
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and ^here be none to deliver,
Psalm. 50.21, 22. If by words will not do it, my Blows shall; I will ^et Life in
them, or I will take that Life they have from them; if the renting off their
skirt will not rouse them, I will tear them in pieces, and none shall deliver
them. Lord, when thy ^and is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see,
and be ashamed, Isa. 26.11. Thus ^oth God many times make his very Enemies
Consider, and force them to see, and gaze upon their damning guilt, and
inevitable misery: ^hey shall know that God is too hard for them. ^icisti
Galilae, was the cursed speech of that ^ccursed Apostate, Julian: God will
sometimes give them the Praelibamina, the forc-tasts of Hell, and make them to
consider, whether they will or no. This, my brethren, is a dreadfu^ kind of
considering, when God shall cast me^^^ into Hell with their eyes open; like
some departing Souls, scar^d by the hideous outcries (...) those that are
about them, when their eyes a^^ sunk, and the gates of Death seem to be sh^^
upon them; then to stare abroad again, in a ghastly, trembling distracted,
posture; ut sentiant se m^ri, hat they may feel themselves to die: this is the
Judgment and Vengeance of Considering. Bu^ when God comes to deal with his
children, be^ treats them like a Father, though he knock them, yet he will not
kill them; though be may break their heads, yet he will not dash out their
brains; and yet awake they must too, (...) dead as they are, he will not leave
them so; he has a Rod for them; which will break no bones; and with this he
whips them into their spiritual senses, when words will not prevail Awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians.
5.14. And now, Christian Reader, thus fan^ thou have read, but can thou say,
Hitherto (...) am come. Have these, or any other of Gods Calls or Knocks so
much as awakened thee ^^ and art thou sure thou do not dream? a^^ thou fit
for a sober, and rational debate of tha^ Controversy that lies between God and
the Soul? If so, then,

1. Consider, whether thou stand in relation with God, as a Friend, or as an
Enem^ this will be the very first thing that will call for serious thoughts.
Lord, Who art thou? and whose am I? Are these the effects of Love or Hatred?
the rods of a Father, or of a Foe? As ever thou expectest comfort in, or good
from the Rod, get this Question answered. As there is a vast difference between
the iron Rod of Gods hostile wrath, and the gentle Rod of his Fatherly
Correction, in respect of the Measure, and the Divine Attribute from whence it
proceeds; so in respect of the End and Design of it too. The rod of his wrath
is not intended to amend, but to destroy. A rod of Scorpions will not heal, but
poison the soul; if we cannot look upon him as a Father, and on his rod, as the
Fruit and Evidence of his Fatherly love and care, it is never like to reform
us. If a Child be beaten by a stranger, it begets hatred, revenge, or slavish
fear; it is that correction only, that we can, on good grounds, apprehend to
come from real, though abused love; that is like to produce love and obedience
in us. Thou have chastised me, says Ephraim, and I was chaste sed, and because
it was thou, I was turned; I repented; I was instructed; I smote upon my thigh:
Now, what was the relation between God and Ephraim? Is Ephraim my dear son? is
he a pleasant Child? With what undiscoverable, and yet unconcealable
affections, does God fall on the necks of his poor children, that dutifully
submit to the Rod, like Joseph on his Brethren, when the Relation could be no
longer dissembled toward them? Gods Kisses are never sweeter, than when he
kisses off the tears that his own rod had occasioned.

But here I would speak a word or two, very briefly, to a Case, which possibly
may be thy Case. Ob.
The Rod lies very heavy upon me, may some poor soul complain; and I can
apprehend nothing of love in it: I sit in such darkness, that I can see no
light, neither from within, nor from above; I scarce dare to call God Father,
nor can I see any evidencing, or comfortable Fruit of his Rod upon me. And what
shall I do in this Case?

This has ever been a common case with the People of God. Wherefore hidest
thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? says Job. Will thou break a
leaf driven to and fro, and will thou pursue the dry stubble? Job 13.24. He
finds occasions against me, he counts me for his enemy, Job 33.10. So David
was ready to look on himself as a Castaway, Psalm. 51.11. cast me not away from
thy presence. In when a Case was the Spouse? Cant. 5.6, 7. when her Beloved had
withdrawn himself; she fought him, and called him, but could get no answer; the
Watchmen smote her, and wounded her: her estate was very low, and yet she was
the Spouse still. I would not that Affliction should fill you with hard
thoughts of God, or despairing thoughts of your selves. To conclude that the
Sun is set, as soon as it is clouded, is too weak and childish; But more
distinctly to the Question.

1. Can you truly say, that you love God as well correcting as comforting? if
so; Let it be in Argument with you, that your love was not ^laced on the
enjoyment you have lost, but on ^he God you still enjoy. 2. Would you not be
content, and gladly ^huse rather to part with all that is dear to you ^^ the
world, than part with your Adopted Relation unto God? Had you not rather have
God ^^r your Father, than the World with all its ^owry, for your Portion? Let
your highest Choice of God then be an Argument of Gods ^carest Choice of you.
3. Would you not rather have the Affliction ^netified, than removed? Possibly
in some hot ^ssault, or the Paroxysm of some prevailing ^mptation, thou may
not be so well able to ^^dg; but, when thou have space to make and ^clare thy
deliberate Choice, would thou ^hange thy afflicted Case for all the Pomp and
^leasure of those that have the World, and nothing more, for their Portion?
Would you ^use rather to be thus washed from sin, than ^ith more ease or
liberty to be still pollu^^d with sin? If then the perfection of Ho^ness be
your Aim, it shall one day be your ^^own. 4. Do thou find that sin begins to
grow ^^^erer than ever, and resolutions stronger? though the sense of thy
suffering may lie up^rmost, and drown the sense of sin; yet can ^ou not find,
that sin lying at the bottom, is ^at which urges all? Wonder not at the
Struggling then, Twins are in thy womb; continue these throws unto their
appointed Issue, and know that this sickness is not unto death; but a symptom
of better health. 5. Let thy former experiences and evidences be produc'c
against present doubts and jealousies; on this Foundation, Joh. 13.1. Having
loved his own which were in the world, he loved them to the end. If ever he
were thy Father, he will ever be thy Father. For the Gifts and calling of God
are without Repentance, Romans 11.29.
2. Consider what thy ways and carriage toward God have been. Let us search,
and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3.40. This is absolutely
requisite, both to our knowledge of the Offense, and expiation of the Guilt, and
the removal of the Effect of it with a Blessing. How is it possible we should
know what God is displeased at in us, unless we reflect on what we have done?
and consider wherein we have miscarried our selves toward him? Why has God
lighted up his Candle in our Conscience, and unsealed the Word of his mind, and
our duty, to us; but that by these we may come to know wherein he is pleased or
displeased? And when we perceive his anger by the effects of it; don't common
reason tell us, that this is the course? to compare our ways with our Rule,
and to consider what we have done? Is there any probable hope of removing the
Effect, without knowledge of the Cause? Alas, Christians! how can you believe,
how can you hope, how can you pray for deliverance, as long as the Cause of our
Bondage is not acknowledged, nor removed? Ah, I how ^pt are our false hearts to
shuffle, and daub here, ^o pack off the guilt on others! Loath we are to
discover our shame, as long as we can get any Fig Leaves to cover it; but yet
all will not ^erve, the covering will be too narrow; thy ^akedness will not be
hid; there is no licking ^hy self whole; all thy Plea's and distinctions will
not do; the Fallacy will be detected, when ^nce God comes to moderate; it is not
the Wo^an, nor yet the Serpent, shall excuse thee; it is ^ot the Peoples common
vote or violence; 1 Samuel 15.21.
nor ^hy supererogated Devotion, that shall palliate ^hy partial obedience.
Culpae ipsae non transferuntur, nec Criminum quaedam confusio fit. Lipf. de
Constable. l. 2. c. 17.
God will not charge on ^is children, the debts, or the crimes of his ^nemies:
nor is he like those passionate Furies, who, in their rage, know no distinction
be^ween Friends and Enemies. What mean ye, that ye use this Proverb, saying,
The Fathers ^ave eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth ^re set on edge?
Ezekiel. 18.2. The soul that ^neth, it shall dye, ver. 4. Be sure, Yet see ver. 1.
God is not ^riking thee for naught; he sees cause enough, (...) this cup had
never come to thy share. Lo, I ^ave sinned, says David, and I have done
wick^ly: but these sheep, what have they done? ^et thy hand, I pray thee, be
against me, See also Ezekiel. 14.23.
and against my Fathers house, 2 Samuel 24.17. ^ow in this serious reflection on
our ways, we ^ould consider,

1. Our sins, with their aggravations. Pa^don of Sin is the Gate of Mercy;
while S^lyeth at the door, Mercy cannot enter: Pen^tent Confession is the only
Lege-way to P^^don; and certainly a distinct knowledge (...) necessarily precede
such Confession, and a di^gent Search such Knowledge. In this Clime^ there is no
striding two stairs at once; if y^^ fail in one, you are out in all. The
removal (...) an Affliction before the Sin be removed, is the way to a greater,
and more spiritual Judgment and to turn Rods into Scorpions. O my b^^ thren!
for your Souls sake, and for your d^ Posteritie's sake, search, and try your
way^^ pass an impartial review on all the Passages (...) Transactions of your
hearts and lives. The God is displeased, we doubt not; and that (...) is the
cause, we doubt not; but what these (...) are, and when, where, and how this
guilt (...) and has been contracted, is that which no^ the Rod calls on us to
examine. Sinner, w^^ thou be persuaded to set thine heart to (...) work?
Seems it a small thing, that God h^^ imprison^d his own Glory? and has
ming^^ our tears, nay, our blood, with our sacrifices? (...) d^vided, and torn
us, Soul and Body, Church an^ State? And, after all, shall God take up his o^^
Lamentation over us? Jer. 8.4, 5, 6, 7 Thus says the Lord, Shall they fall,
and (...) arise? shall he turn away, and not return? (...) then, is this People
slidden back, by a perpet^^^ backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they ref^^^ to
return; I hearkened, and heard, but the^ spoke not aright; no man repented him
of his wickedness; saying, What have I done? every one turns to his course,
as the horse rusheth into the Battle. Oh! how should our thoughts ^^ry into
every corner, and leave no stone unturned, lest the Leprosy should be in it,
and the last end be worse than the beginning.

1. The sin of our nature will afford us matter of large consideration, and sad
lamentation. That Peccatum agens; that Pregnant Sin; that Root of Bitterness;
the Original of all our Sin and Misery. Now sit down, and seriously ^onsider;
Lord! in what a case was I born! and how long did I lie ignorant of, and
con^ented under that estate! how little have I been ^roubled about it! how
faint and heartless, at ^est, have my endeavors been, to wrestle with (...),
or to escape from it! oh, how full am I still of the old Dregs! like a Cake not
turned, but ^^ttle more than half bak^e; perpetually prone ^o backsliding! If
thou will know from whence (...) is that the Streams run so foul, away to the
^ountain, and there thou shall quickly see how (...) comes to pass, and that it
is more than an ^cquired Pollution; the Fountain, the Foun^^in is unclean! This
was David's course, ^sal. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me. Sin set ^ut with me, the very first step from my
Con^^tion: the Leprosy clave unto me in the very ^it from whence I was dug.
He that never ^^lt the bitterness and weight of Original sin, ^^rther than it
discovered it self in Actual; is yet a stranger to true Repentance. And for the
aggravation of this Plague of our Natures, consider the sinful effects of it.
2. In respect of omission. How has it deadned thee to all kinds of duty;
especially to the most spiritual, and self-denying duties! When we should, and
sometimes, when we would d^ good, evil is present, and too often prevalent,
with us. Brethren! in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, I beseech you, consider how
large an Indictment of this nature, Conscience has on record against us; We
cannot plead ignorance, as some others, it may be, hope to do; We have, or might
have known our Master's Will; He has not left us one Talent only, but all the
Treasures of his House; the unsearchable riches of his Gospel: He has not left
us as some small Legatees, but Heirs and Executors of his whole Will and
Testament; and now, what have we to show for all this? Here we have been
wrangling about Circumstances and Administrations, despising or envying one
another portion, and so have turned the grace of God into lasciviousness. On,
where is the Improvement! where is the Increase! the Advantage that God will
shortly call for! Remember what was Laodicea's temper, and what was Laodicea's
curse Oh, this wretched, this cursed lukewarmness! how dear is it like to cost
us! By that time we have discounted what we have l^^ pass, through invincible,
nay, shall I add, through affected and gross Ignorance; how many gracious
demands have we wickedly repelled, because of some distastful, or
flesh-displeasing difficulty that seemed to attend it? how might God dispatch
his Angels with warrants of Contempt against us! Oh, what can Conscience say!
have not we easily granted the Devil what we have stiffly denied Christ? and
begrutcht God, what we have willingly, and prodigally bestowed on our Lusts?
ah, how should these things pierce our Souls to consider! Again, by that time
we have abstracted all that we have lost of that which we have done, through
sinful miscarriages, in the manner, or in the end; how very little will it be,
that we have been found faithful and diligent in? 3. In respect of Commission;
What black Legions will there meet us here? If we look no further than our
Hearts, what an Abyss of Filth and Deceit shall we find there? Our guilty Eyes
have been, as it were, in covenant with Lust. What endless Catalogues are our
Tongues convicted of? Can we wash our Hands in Innocence? how justly may we
hold them up at Gods Bar? The miserable abuse of our Time; The evil Examples
we have laid, as snares for others; I am numbering now by Thousands and
Millions: Oh, our Pride! our Worldliness! our Self-endedness! our
Censoriousness! our Impatience! these are some of the Generals, under whose
arbitrary Command we have yielded up our selves into subjection. Lord! what sad
work have we made? whither should we wander, were it not for thy Shepherds
Crook? what tears of blood are sufficient to testify a Repentance answerable
to such Guilt? oh, that God would prevail with me, and you, and every one of
his People, to take these things into deeper consideration, than ever yet we
have done! Now that God is not only warning us with his Word, but warming us
with his Rod; how near should it go to our very hearts to think what a strange
and unpleasing work we have put God upon! Oh, methinks we might hear the
sounding of his Bowels within him^ how loath is he to part with us, or to
depar^ from us! How shall I give thee up, Ephram (...) how shall I deliver
thee, Israel? how shall (...) make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together,
Hos. 11.8. What dear engagements of love has God laid upon us? When Israel was
a child, then I loved him; I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by the
arms: But they knew not, that I healed them. The people that will not consider,
are nigh unto Cursing: oh, that God would now awaken us, that we might know the
things that belong to our Peace! When Parents correct their children, they do,
or should reckon with them, and remember them of those old scores which have
been past by with an angry look, o^ a bare threatening. This is that, my
Brethren which God is now insisting on with us; no^ but that the present
Provocations are high enough, to have exhausted a far greater proportion of
wrath; but he will have us to know, that this is not all he has to reckon with
us for; there are old miscarriages behind, which were never yet accounted for;
Exodus 32.34.
a thousand debts and trespasses, which, it may be, were never once entered on
your Books; How many years war, how many years peace? how many years scarcity,
how many years plenty? and how many thousands of Items are there set under
every one of these heads? O! methinks, the very thought of these things, is
enough to amaze us, and strike us dead!
2. We should consider our Duties. This was good Hezekiah's practice, 2 King.
20.3. I beseech thee, O Lord, Remember now how I have walked before thee, in
truth, and with a perfect heart; and have done that which is good in thy sight.
Christian! these are things that require thy exactest examination; and the
rather, because on these thou art apt to lean. When all thy outward comforts
lie at the mercy of thine enemies, hither thou think to fly, and beginnest
to look big on thy Duties; not as to their Merit, but as to their Evidence.
Don't all thy hopes seem to hang on this pin? Besides, by these God has been
more immediately honored, or dishonored: Nothing reflects so much on his
honor, either to the praise or dispraise; as that which participates, or
pretends the nearest Relation to him. Now make the case; Suppose thou should
be mistaken in thy duties, as, it is possible, thou may; what if there should
be a Flaw found in them at last, which will spoil all; in what a case art thou
then? Can thou believe that there are none so mistaken? O Christian! let me
tell thee, Hell is called the place of Hypocrites, even such as were for the
most part thus mistaken. Nay, the best of Saints, may, in a great measure, be
mistaken too; they may overween their duties, and miss of much of that peace
and support they expected in a day of trial; therefore bring thy duties to the
Test, and try them these three waves.

1. By the Principle from which they have proceeded. Can thou truly say with
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, and not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the world.
It Is possible, there may be a carnal rejoicing, in a false supposition; but,
art thou sure thy rejoicing is not in vain? Has Duty proceeded from a
Principle of Love and Obedience, and filial awful Respect unto God? Has his
Sovereign Command, and the conscience of Duty, been the Terminus a quo^ Can you
look back on your duties, and appeal to God, that all this has been done in an
humble obedience to his command? Had Self-love, or Blind Custom, or Slavish
Fear, no^ hand, nor interest in them? Those are questions that God and
Conscience can bes^ answer. 2. By the Rule, by which they have been directed.
Has the Word of God been thy Rule in all thy duties, not only of Solemn
Worship, but of thy Calling and Relation? in all the transactions of thy
Common, and Civil Affairs? And has this Rule had a Casting-Voice against all
the Votes of carnal Reason and Interest? Have thou used the Word of God, as thy
Rule? As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, Gal. 6.16. Has
it been your Walking-staff, a Rule at hand wherever you go? A Carpenter, (you
know) is distinguished much, by the Rule he carries in his hand; which is not
only for his support, but for the measuring and trying of any work he may meet
with in his walk? And shall a dry stick be of more use and service in the hand
of a Carpenter, than this Olive Tree, whose labor never fails, in the hand of
a Christian! But, as for me, my feet were almost gone: my steps had well nigh
slipped, says the Psalmist, until I went into the Sanctuary of God: then
understood I their end, Psalm. 73.2.17. This is a tried staff in such cases;
thou may depend upon it, and trust thy life and soul with it; if it break
under thee, or start aside with thee, or any way deceive thee, without thy
horrible abuse of it, then never believe God more. As for God, his way is
perfect: the Word of the Lord is tried: he is a Buckler to all those that trust
in him, Psalm. 18.30. And again; Is not thy whole life one continued course of
work? Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, ye must do by rule; eat
and drink by rule, and sleep by rule, talk by rule, and work by rule.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto,
according to thy word, Psalm. 119.9. Those that will work for God, must work by
Gods Rule; Ghess-work will never use under a crocked, and blind eye, and in a
crocked, and unhappy hand. Now consider, how have you employed your Rule? the
Tradesman will understand every Figure and Point in his Rule, and the use of
it; have you thus improved your Judgments about it? does the word of Christ
dwell in you richly, in all wisdom? Col. 3.16. Has it been a Commanding, a
Transforming Rule? have you, with open face, beheld your selves in this Glass,
that you are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit
of the Lord? 2 Cor. 3.18. Ha'nt it been a Rule to talk, and to reprove others;
to censure your brethren, and to condemn your enemies, rather than to reform
your selves by? Has it been your only rule? han't your own habituated Lusts,
and Wills, and Customs, been as much your rul as this? Han't the Genius of the
Times, the Examples of Great ones, or thy Byas of thy Interest, been as much
thy Rule, as any thing else? oh, that God would set your Consciences on work,
to search these things out! 3. By the end unto which they have been designed.
The glory of God (I know) and your own Salvation, is the End and Design that
you own: Ay, but may I ask you secretly, Has this been your very end in
earnest? the terminus ad quem, of all your Duties and Endeavors? Can you
appeal to God, who knows all things, that this is true? and dare you venture
you^ souls upon it? Oh, that I could say so too (...) Has not self, or
something else, which thou art not willing to own, sometime stood Captain in
thy Prizes? what else mean these self-attributions? these self-confidences?
this self-seeking, and self-pleasing? han't Gods glory hung like a Curtain by
thee, to cover that which thou art ashamed should appear! Oh, Christian! what
would thou say, if all thy duties should be lost, and all thy hopes lost, and
that which now supports thee, should at last undo thee? The time is at hand,
that God will try what our ends have been; oh, that I could prevail with my
self, and you, to be before hand with God in this great Search!
3. We should consider our Graces; and that, 1. For the truth of them. Thy
Assurance of the truth and reality of thy grace, will be thy best support under
sinking Providence. The time may come, that thou may have nothing in the
world thou can call thine own, but what thou have within, and above; When St.
Peter's advice may be more in season with thee, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence,
to make your Calling and Election sure. Consider, how dreadful a case would it
be, should you be numbered at last among those, that now you would look upon as
God's and Your enemies; if all your distinctions and distances should vanish at
the Grave, and when your veils are gone, your inside should be like some of
theirs? If they upbraid you with hypocrisy now, how justly may they do it
then? with what astonishing shame will thou be coupl'd up with those that now
persecute thee? when that which now thou accountest intolerable slander, shall
appear to be true, and God shall witness to all the world, that thine enemies
were not mistaken in thee? oh, how can we be serious enough, in a business of
so immediate Concernment! let thy case be what it will, 'twill be worth thy
pains to know it. 2. For the growth of them. What increase have we made of our
Master's talents? By the growth, we may guess at the the truth of grace. The
path of the just, is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the
perfect day, Pro. 4.18. Consider, what means and helps you have had: where is
that you have to show for all your Sabbaths, Ordinances, and Duties? a little
growth, it may be, in the head, like children in the Rickets; but, where is that
Humility, that Self-denial, that Heavenly-mindedness, that Patience, Charity,
and universal Obedience; that Inward, and Spiritual growth, that growth at the
Heart, and at the Root, wherein the Life, and Power of Christianity does
consist? Has your growth been proportionable? Proportionable to the means you
have enjoyed? how have your Crops paid the charge of all that Husbandry and
Patience, that has been laid out about you? Proportionable, each part to
other? han't your Zeal ou^-^un your Knowledge? or your Knowledge overgrown your
Love? Gods growing Temple, is a Building fitly framed together. Ephesians. 2.21. Not
like Nebuchadnezzars Image, with his golden head, Dan. 2.32.
but all the other parts of baser Metal. 3. We are to consider, what Gods ways
and carriage toward us have been, and to compare our ways and his together;
which might be one special mean to humble, and shame us; Hear now, O house of
Israel, Are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18. 25. O,
let us sit down now, and consider, where the inequality, the unrighteousness
lies. What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from
me? Jer. 2.5. Have you examined your ways, according to my last direction? and
have you dealt thoroughly, and impartially with your selves in it? if so, let me
ask you, What think ye? Where Is the fault how? If the inequality be on your
part, as I am sure you have found it, if you have found it at ^ll; O then, rest
not here, go on, until you have brought it to some happy issue. Consider, how
^ong has God waited? how many ways has ^e tried? how has he proffered, at
this time, and at that time, and yet has forborne? how ^ften has he drawn his
sword upon us? and ^et has put it up again, and could not, for his Pity,
strike; even as we have proffered to return, and yet we have played fast and
loose with him, like a broken, and deceitful Bow. And ^ow, what a Compass is he
fetching, to humble ^s! Here we are complaining, how ill it is with ^s; oh,
where is our peace, our liberty, our ^lenty, and the glory of God, in his
Worship and Ordinances, become! Who would have thought that ever it would have
come to this? But, alas! we are blind, we cannot see the cloud rising, till it
begin to fall about our ears; Why! these things, nay, and it may be, more than
these, have been foreseen by some, whose eyes were in their heads, and foretold
too; and yet now we are come with our Non putaramus, Who would have thought it?
Why! who would not have thought it? who could ever have hoped that God would
prosper a Building on such a Bottom, and in such Hands? who would wonder to see
a House tumble, when Blood, and Treachery, and Oppression, and Self-seeking,
and Deceit, and Covenant Breaking, lay the Foundation of it? and all this,
though seen by some, yet lamented, as it ought, by few; at least, by those that
knew not how to help it: We may wonder rather, that it is with us as it is. And
now these two years, or more, has God had us on the Hip, like poor Isaac,
bound, and stretched upon the wood; Who, What is it, has prevented hitherto,
that we have not been offered in Sacrifice? Nay, thousands have been sacrificed
to the Plague, and to the Sword.
Can we think that our repentings, our humiliations, our personal, family, or
heart reformations, have done it? oh, that it were so! oh, that it were indeed
so! But that which I chiefly aim at, under this Head, is this: Walk with God,
in the way of his Providence; keep thine eye always upon him; follow him as
far as Faith can trace him; take all these things, as the wise, and righteous,
and merciful issues of his all-disposing Counsel and Governance; look on thy
self as a piece of Clay on Gods Wheel; and let every turn of this flying wheel,
help forward Gods design of grace upon thee. 4. Lastly, we must consider what
it is that God aims at in us, and expects from us; This leads me to the
following part of the Voice, and will be more fully answered, in that which
remains to be spoken on this Subject: Wherefore, I shall add the less to this
Branch. Are we ever like to answer Gods Ends, as long as we cannot, or will
not, consider what his Ends are? Sure, it is in vain to give Laws or Ordinances
to dead men, or mad men; such as are incapable of any serious consideration.
The Aim of the Rod, in general, is this: viz. A Gospel, and Spiritual
conformity to the Image, and revealed Will of God. This is the grand design of
his Word, and of all his Providence and Ordinances; to renew that Image and
Power in us, by the second Adam, which we had lost in the first Adam. He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. That we might grow up into him in all things, which is
the Head, even Christ, ver. 15. Sufferings are part of our conformity to
Christ, who was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.3. and the
means and way of our conformity to him in the perfection of Grace; who was made
perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. Perfect, as to his Office, though not as
to his Nature. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest, ver. 17. He
bare them, as the Condition of our peace; but we, as the punishment of our sin,
and the Medicine of our Souls. Thus you have heard the first Voice of the Rod
in general; It would cause you to awake, and thus to consider. But if you rest
here, and go no farther, you do no more than the Sluggard, whose Field is
cursed with Thorns and Nettles; you may rub up your eyes, and draw aside your
curtains, and let in the light, and tell over the Dreams and Shades that have
disquieted, or beguiled you, through the passages of the night; and yet while
you keep your Beds still, and fold your hands, for another Nap, you do but
aggravate the provocation, and cause God to double his strokes, both for number
and weight. Has God called us to be idle? Rise, let us be going; we are looked
for in the Vineyard; one hour's slumber now, has more shame, and guilt, and
danger, than three at Midnight. Know therefore, in the next place,


2. The Rod calls for universal Reformation. Amend your ways, and your doings,
says God, Jer. 7.3. And thoroughly amend your ways, and your doings: thoroughly
execute Judgment between a man and his neighbor, ver. 5. Sirs (...) God will
make through-work with us, before he leave us; either he will thoroughly reform
us, o^ thoroughly ruin us. He has now stripped us from head to foot, and has
even set us as in the day that we were born; sure, he means not to wash our
feet only, but will now spread his Plaster as large as the Sore. He has
brought us to the Red Sea, where he will baptize us in the Cloud, and
distinguish who are of Egypt, and who are of Israel; nay, who are of Israel,
and who are Israel indeed. Now this Universality respects, The Subject. The
Object.


1. The Subject. Every part, and power of Soul and Body, must pass under the
Fuller's hands. Yield your selves (without any restrictions, or reserves) unto
God, as those that are alive from the dead; and your members, as instruments of
Righteousness, unto God, Romans 6.13. All that was out of Frame, must be set at
rights again. If one Wheel, or the least Pin, be mis-plac'd; if the most
indiscernable motions be impeded, the whole Frame, though other-wayes, never so
glorious or elaborate, is rendered utterly useless and unserviceable. Should I
insift here, on a distinct Comment on the several disorders, weaknesses, and
pollutions of every particular Faculty and Member, I might seem to trespass on
my Text, and abuse my intended brevity. Only, let me tell you, as I pass; The
reformed Creature must be a new Creature; and the new Creature must be
newborn; and the Child newborn has every part and limb alike new; not only a
new Head, or a new Tongue, but a new Heart, a new Eye, a new Will, a new
Conscience, new Affections, new Feet, new hands, new within, and new without.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: old things are past away;
behold, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. The Corruption is universal,
and so must the Restitution be: the dead man is all dead; and so when life
comes, it is universal; tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part. Lord, not my
feet only, says Peter, but my hands, and my head, Joh. 13.9. 2. The Object.
It Is not enough to lopp off a sprout or two of sin, but it must be cleansed up
by the Roots. Cut these Brambles, and you shall have three for one, prune them
above ground, and they grow the stronger at the roots. Ah, my Brethren! is this
all you have done? What though your Church-path, o^ your Market path be free
from those Brambles, that your Neighbors stumble not at them; yet the Field is
overgrown, and God has nothing to sow, at least, to grow there. O, sit down
and consider, what sins have you been particularly and personally convinced of?
Can you name me the Lusts that you have set up for your Mark, the ruin
whereof, you are resol'vd, i^ the strength of God, to seek; and against which,
you will die Fighting or Triumphing (...) Answer me here, and then let me ask
again; What is the sin thou art thus out with? and whence sprung thy strife
with it? Is it some scandalous foul abomination? Drunkenness, i^ may be, or
Adultery, or Theft, or Tale-bearing or any the like things, of evil report
amongst the soberer sort of carnal men? it is true, these things are a grief to
every godly heart, to behold in others; much more, if their own. Now tell me,
Christian, are these the sins thou find thy self most guilty of, and
addicted to; or do thou seem to bear them such a spleen, because they are the
sins of others, and the shame not like to reflect on thy self? If this be it,
Publicans and Harlots may be in a fairer way to Reformation than thou. Have
thou duly searched thy own heart? what have thou found there, that thou can
thus resolve against? have thou marked out the King of Israel, thy accustomed,
and most endeared Lust; and mustered thy strength, and severest charge there?
have thou found Thy Enemy, Thy Iniquity? Can thou go freely to thy heart, and
to all the privy, and subdolous Recesses of it, and pull out thence, that
secret, spiritual, and almost indiscernable Pride, that hidden and painted Idol
of Covetousness, that Jesuited Traitor of Unbelief, those circumcised
Shechemites, that are there, like Toads out of their Holes, and hew them in
pieces before God? Alas, Christian! it is not doing, nor suffering, will save
us, nor yet comfort us long, unless we do, and suffer, according to the full,
and true in^ent and meaning of the Revealed Will of God; To lop off a forward,
scourging Lust here, and ^o go, and graft it again on another stock by, ^s the
propagation of sin, not the reformation of ^e Sinner. Oh, Sirs! I would not for
all the world, you should be mistaken; it is as much as our own Souls, and the
Crown of my rejoicing on your account, in the day of the Lord, comes to. I fear
the mistake is more common than you are aware. O keep them all clean, within,
as well as without, that you may never be ashamed when God shall turn out your
Insides to all the world. 3. God expects that his People should humble
themselves greatly under his mighty hand. Jer. 7.29. Cut off thine hair, O
Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the
Lord has rejected the generation of his wrath. And Jam. 4.10. Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. So, 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time. This is the proper, and direct Voice of the Rod: if
afflictions be doctrinal, as you have heard? what more natural Inferences may
we deduce from it? why has God brought down the outer man, but that he might
humble the inner man? For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one
that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be
brought low, Isa. 2.12. God will cause the stout hearts of the world to stoop,
and make them know it is in vain to magnify themselves against their Maker.
Know therefore, that when ever God has to do with thee in such ways a^ these,
he has a special eye on thy Pride, for he has said, God resists the proud,
Jam. 4.6. Neither is thy forced external humiliation, enough; to be humbled,
and to be humble, are ^f a wide difference. A Pharaoh, an Ahab, may lie under a
Force, and under all their Humiliation, be as proud as ever. It Is not enough to
bear an Affliction, though (it may ^e) with some commendable measure of
pa^ence; it is not the hanging of thy head like (...) Bull-rush, nor thy
resolute contempt of ^he Cross, that will commend thee before God; The iron may
look like Gold while it is in the ^^re, and yet it is but Iron still; as soon as
^^he heat is over, it returns to its old form: oh, ^^y brethren! if you will
learn any thing, if ^^ou will get any thing by the Rod, learn to ^umble your
selves under it. 4. God expects that his People should stir up themselves, to
lay hold of him. Shall we let ^ur Father go, before he has blessed us? ^^oe
unto us when God departs from us, Hos. (...).12. Don't we know and profess,
that all ^^r hopes and happiness are bound up with ^^m? and can we see him
going, and our ^^arts not melt within us? oh, my Soul! shall ^^e lose him thus!
can we see him turning his ^^ck upon us, and taking his last Farewell of (...),
and our Souls not dye for very grief? O England! have thou not a few Names yet,
that ^^nnot, that will not, part with their God so? (...), that I could melt
into a cloud of Tears, and (...) sprinkled on the hearts and eyes of my care^^s
Brethren! O Blind! Blind England! Me^^inks I see Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah written
(...) the doors of thy Sanctuaries, and the abu^^d Sampson of divine Patience
laying hold on the Pillars of it; Lord God, what wilt tho^ do with us? Shall we
fall, and not arise? will thou turn away, and not return? O Father Will thou
not then take thy children with thee with whom will thou leave us and our
little ones? who shall teach us? who shall feed us? who will protect us? who
will care for us? what will become of us? oh! let us dye in thine Arms before
thou go: If thou will not. if thou will not stay with us, let us go when thou
go, and dye, that we may be with thee Crowns nor Kingdoms shall not tempt us
(...) tarty behind thee; thou have our hearts, and our life is hid in thee; if
thou leave us, (...) dye. Oh, Sirs! if there be any thing of the life, or love
of God in you; if ever you did or ever mean to pray more? now pray; (...) you
have any power with God, any relation to him, any interest in him, by Christ?
now plead it, and improve it; if you can do any thing, now try what you can do
to help us Marvel not at my Passion, Brethren; I cannot look up toward Heaven,
and think of a departing God, but that I could even breathe ou^ my very Soul
after him; I cannot think on your poor children, and those yet unborn of you and
what is like to become of them twenty years hence; if the glory of Israel, and
the power of godliness should now depart from us; but is cuts my heart with
pity for them and can you altogether hold your peace at the time? certainly,
it is no such indifferent case (...) the world accounts it. Who will plead with
God in such a time as this, if you will not? Can these Dunghil-Birds set a due
rate on Jewels? What is thy beloved more than another beloved? Cant. 5.9.
they can see no such beauty in him, nor advantage by him, that they should
desire him; their Corn, and Wine, and Lusts, are better to them than all that
is in God or Christ; and are these the persons then that are like to appease a
provoked God, and to hold him with us? You cannot lose a Child, a Wife, a
Husband, a dear Friend, or any outward comfort or enjoyment, without some tears
or trouble; and can you part with God, the fountain of all these, nay, of all
good, with less trouble and care of heart? Gird your selves, and lament, ye
Priests: howl ye Ministers of the Altar: come lie all night in sackcloth, ye
Ministers of my God, Joel. 1.13. Te that make mention of the Lord, hold not
your peace day nor night, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62.6, 7. 5.
God expects we should renew our Covenant with him. See the holy and pious zeal
of Ezra and his people in the like case; after that God had begun to turn the
Captivity of his people under Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, and had
wonderfully restored them with a strange and unhop'd-for deliverance, see chap.
9.1. The Princes came unto Ezra, saying, The people of Israel, and the Priests,
and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands; --
For they have taken of their Daughters for themselves, and for their sons; --
which they were expressly forbidden to do, Deuteronomy. 7.3. On this report, see how
his loyal zeal did burn for God; When I heard this thing, I rent my garment,
and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head, and of my beard, and sat
down astonished, ver. 3. And then having prayed in a most humble, and pathetical
manner, when he had confessed weeping, and casting himself down before the
house of God; nay, the people wept very sore, chap. 10.1. Now therefore, say
they, let us make a Covenant with our God, to put away all the wives, and such
as are born of them, according to the counsel of my Lord, and those that
tremble at the commandment of our God, and let it be done according to the Law,
ver. 3. Here is not only their Consideration, Confession, Repentance,
Reformation; but their Solemn Covenant; for they swear, ver. 5. for the
perpetual remembrance, and confirmation of it. Oh, that there were such a
spirit in the hearts of our Ezra's! and in the hearts of our Israel! Let us
once more make a Covenant with God; if any thing be like to stay him with a
people, it is his Covenant. For he is a God that keeps Covenant and Mercy for
them that love him and observe his Commandments, Neh. 1.5. He never did, nor
ever will, break his Covenant of mercy, with those that keep their Covenant of
love and obedience with him; oh then! Let us vow and pay unto the Lord our God,
Psalm. 76.11. See the blessed effects of Asa's Covenant, when they swear with
all their heart, and with all their soul, 2 Chro. 15.12, 13, 14. Here I might
tell you what the matter of our Covenant should be; but that I Am sure it is not
for want of competent helps, if you are ignorant. That which I have to say at
present, is, only to mind you of what I presume you know; that is, If you have
sworn in faithfulness, nay, though only your Baptismal vow be upon you, you
have engaged for your sincere, willing, and impartial obedience to the whole
revealed Will of God, both in matters of Faith and Practice, with all the
species, and necessary consequences essentially or integrally belonging to this
obedience. Now consider, in what special respects you have broken this
Covenant, and draw it out on the Tables of your hearts; nay, were it in
Writing, to be ever kept for a Memorial and Remembrancer by you, it might
wonderfully advantage your End; and then humbly and solemnly offer it unto the
gracious acceptance of God, in the name of Christ. I might further add, with
what seriousness, faithfulness, consideration, resolution, humility,
self-denial, we should renew our broken Covenant with him: But I intend not to
enlarge. All that I have yet to say to this Branch, is but this; Be convinced
of your gross breach of Covenant, and your extreme, and ^bsolute need of making
up this breach; Sit ^own, and study those dreadful mischiefs, that will
certainly and speedily ensue those broken and forfeited Bonds. When God stands
disengaged, man lies in a desperate case. A Covenant that is not made on due
Convictions, is never like to hold long; if the Bonds be drawn and sealed, and
yet the debt not heartily acknowledged, it is never likely to be honestly paid
by such beggarly and paultry Debtors as we are. 6. God expects something
extraordinary from his people, under extraordinary Providence. We are weighed
in the Balance, and are found wanting: Our False Balance and Scant Measure, is
convicted before God, and now he will no longer be thus served by us; The Whip
is upon us, and the Spur in our sides, and shall we not mend our Pace? The Fire
refines the Gold, and gives it an extraordinary luster, and are we altogether,
as the house of Israel, become Dross? All they are Brass, and Tin, and Iron,
and Lead, in the midst of the Furnace, they are even the dross of silver Ezekiel.
22.18. to 23. Will not the Furnace melt, nor cleanse us? Shall we come forth as
black and as foul as ever? as proud, as covetous, as sensual, as carnal, as
careless, as crooked and deformed as ever? Will any one think we are more than
painted, counterfeit Fire, when the Storms and Bellows will work no change, nor
stir the Flames in us? oh, how should our Faith shine, our Love, our Patience,
our Humility, our Zeal, our Heavenly-mindedness, and every grace, like the
gloriously bespangled Stars in their proper Spheres and Orbs, in this Freezing,
and Winters night! If ever you intend your light shall shine that others may
see it, now let it appear to them that sit in darkness. Well, my Brethren! God
will not now be content with our old, formal, heartless devotions, our lame
zeal, our crippl'd obedience, our lukewarm love, our pur-blind faith, our
tender-skin'd patience, our carnal heavenly-mindedness. He has broken our
peace, to break our pace; and, if this will not do, he will double his blows, or
(which is worse) will leave us by the way, to perish under our burden. God will
have something now more than ordinary.
By way of Resignation; By way of Resolution.
1. By way of Resignation; Double thy Sacrifice; I mean not thy Jewish or
Ceremonial; but thy Evangelical Sacrifice. Let him that has so long woed thee
for thy heart, now have thy whole heart; if he ask thy Coat, let him freely
take thy Cloak also, if it may any way serve him: let this be the language of
thy Soul to God, as Araunah's to David, 2 Samuel 24.21, 22. Wherefore is my Lord
the King come unto his servant? -- Let my Lord the King take, and offer up what
seems good unto him: Behold, here be Oxen, for Burnt-Sacrifice, and
Threshing-Instruments, and other Instruments for Wood; All these things did
Araunah, as a King, give unto the King. Lord, take what thou will, that which
is most for thy advantage, though most to my loss: that which is mest for thy
glory, though most for my present disgrace; if here be any thing for thy turn,
spare it not, but please thy self. Behold, here is Liberty, Health, Peace,
Ease, Friends, Wealth, House, Lands, Life, and whatever else, through thy grace
and mercy, I am, or have. Lord, here I humbly offer thee all, with the
unfeigned consent and joy of my heart, Thy will be done, and let thy pleasure
stand concerning thy Servant. For what thou leave me, I will bless thee; nay,
take all, and my Soul shall bless thee; Spare none of my Lusts, yea, my most
beloved L'sts: I would not They should any longer live, whoever dye for it.
This, my Brethren, would be your honor, as well as your advantage; All these
things did Araunah as a King: nay, less than this will turn but to bad account
another day. 2. By way of Resolution. Go unto God and spread thy Soul at his
feet; tell him, (...) those, Isa. 26.13. O Lord, our God, other Lords besides
thee, (nay before thee) have had dominion over us; but by thee only will w^
make mention of thy name. The world has had dominion, the flesh has
overruled me and Satan has been a sharer with thee: Thou have had but half a
heart, but half love, but half fear, but half obedience; nay, hardly that Lord,
what Patience is thine! how could thou ever put it up from the hands of so
vile, so unworthy a worm as I am? oh! I am ashamed, I am consounded, to think
how thou have been made to serve with my sins; Now, Lord, in thy strength I
solemnly resolve and promise, that from henceforth it shall be so no more; but
I will make mention of thy name, against all other Suits or Claims whatsoever;
In vain shall the world plead President or Prescription: or the flesh,
Relation: or Satan, Possession: Thy Title and Interest shall stand good against
all Corrivals. Amen. Lord, say Amen.
Thus have you heard what the Voice of the Rod is, in general; Proceed we now
to show you in special what the Voice of this Rod is, under which we are now
complaining; And here we may observe the several parts, which are as so many
scourges, or Branches of it: As, 1. The terrible Concussion, and Trembling of
the Ark. 2. That dreadful, and unparalled Beesom of Plague and Pestilence. 3.
The devouring Sword, and the Strength of Battle: a Land-impoverishing, and
desolating Calamity. 4. The miserable Decay of Trade, and Cry of the Poor, and
Complaint of the Husbandman. 5. Those Dismal Flames that have laid the Glory
and Strength of the Kingdom in Ashes. 6. The sad Divisions and grievous
Murmurings among the discontented Vulgar: with all those Miseries and
Mischiefs, the natural Issues and Effects of this, and the forementioned
Judgments. 7. I might add a seventh: The Plentiful Increase, which every year
has hitherto afforded; which (though in it is self a mercy, yet) considered
with the general, and horrible abuse of it, and compared with those other Evils
we lie under, seems to bespeak our case, as Zophar describes the Portion of the
Wicked, Job 20.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits.


Now what the meaning of this complicated Rod should be, as to us, who are
exercised therewith, is the thing in question. And for the more successful
management of this great Quaery, I shall speak to the Persons concerned,
distinctly: but of the Rod its self, somewhat more complexly.

The Persons, I shall consider, under this twofold general notion.

Friends. Enemies.
1. Friends: or the People and Church of God. It Is Gods usual method to cause
Judgment to begin at his own House. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear
what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Rev. 2.11, 17, 29. Not to the
Kingdoms, or Provinces, but to the Churches of Asia. The same method we shall
observe here, and begin first with the Church and People of God; at least,
those that are visioly, and by special Profession such. Therefore, unto the
Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.1, 4, 5.
(of England) write: These things says he, that holds the seven stars in
his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks: -- I
have somewhat (and that not a little) against thee, because thou have left thy
first love. Remember, therefore, from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Loss of Love in Conjugal
Relations, dissolves the Union; at least, the Peace and Comfort of it. (...)
Wanton Church, will provoke a Jealous God. And ^ealousie is the rage of a man,
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance, Prove. 6.24. Slay utterly
young and old, both maids and little children, and women; but come not near any
man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my Sanctuary; than they began at the
ancient men which were before the House, Ezekiel. 9.6. But more particularly; this
Rod has a special errand,

1. To the Heads and Governors of this Church: and these are either Civil, or
Ecclesiastical.

1. Civil, or Magisterial. But I fear what the issue of my Message may be here,
with some, whose Lusts and Interests lead them another way. Isa. 59. (...)
He that departs from evil, marketh himself a prey; to those, I mean, whose
irregular Wills and prejudiced Passions, are their only Rule in their arbitrary
Execution, or Remission of those pious and wholsoth Laws, provided by the
Sacred and Honorable Authority whereby they are Deputed. He that reproves in
the City, though never so seriously, seasonably, meekly, loyally, must by these
be put to silence. Sin must not be spoken against; we may not say that Poison
is Poison, for fear of sowing, or somenting Seditious Principles. God has set
us for Watchmen; but we must not proclaim what we see, for fear of committing a
Riot, and disturbing the common Peace. Oh! how are some men afraid they shall
awake before they come to Hell! Nay, Whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house) yet shall they know, Ezecb.
2.5, 6.
that there has been a Prophet among them. And, O Sirs! Give me leave to
speak, and then mock on. It Is not my own Cause I^plead, but Gods; it is not any
Party or Faction that I pursue, (God knows) I abhor it from my Soul) but the
Interest of the Gospel, and the sure, and settled Peace of these poor,
afflicted Kingdoms; that the true Cause being once thoroughly discovered and
removed, the Effects, which we all groan under, may cease.

Oh then! that God would persuade you to consider, who it is that has put the
Sword into your hands. There is no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are
ordained of God, Romans 13.1. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from
the West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and
sets up another, Psalm. 75.6, 7. Sirs, God has made you his Vicegerents in
the World; Ye are the Gods among men, Psalm. 82.1.6. The Sword ye bear, is God's
Sword; ye are the Stewards of Order and Government, in his Family; the great
Affairs of his House are committed to your trust; the Keys are left with you;
the Common Stock and Provisions of Gods House, are in your hands; ye are our
Nurses, the Bottle and the Bag are in ^our Tents; you are the Cedars of our
Lebanon, amongst the Myrtles and Shrubs; you are the Stewards of the five
Talents; oh, that that you would suffer the humble and loyal addresses of our
hearts to you, that are even ^eady to break for you! May I ask you, (God will
shortly ask you, and Conscience shall make him answer) have you duly considered
the Re^tion ye stand in, both toward God, and toward us? Do you know what a
Burden lies in your Shoulders? The Earth, and all the ^habitants thereof, are
dissolved, says the ^salmist, I bear up the Pillars thereof, Psalm. ^5.3. You
are the Atlas's of the World; ^he Pillars of the Earth are your burden. May
^ask now, Whether has been more admired, more defigned, more desired by you,
the Honor, or the Duty of your Relation? You are Gods Husbandmen, and are to
plow, and to ^^w, for the supply of the whole Family. Sirs, this is your charge
from the God of Heaven and Earth; in this honorable, and burdensome Office,
God has placed you, through what mediation soever your secular Deputations
have been obtained. It is God that puttet^ down one, and raises up another.

2. Consider, I beseech you, for whom it is you bear the Sword; Must not the
Judge proclaim his Commission, in the name of him from whom he received it?
Does not the Fountain return through all the Creeks and passages of its
Circuit, to the Ocean from whence it came forth? this then is both Legal and
Natural; Who dares say, that he rules for himself? who^ but God, can claim an
Independent Government? Heathens indeed may boast themselves after this rate;
Is not this great Babylon, the I have built, by the might of my power, and for
the honor of my Majesty? But far be it from Christians, so to blaspheme the
Authority o^ Heaven. We may take this for granted then^ that it is for God you
profess to bear the Sword; but bear with me now, in this one word more.

3. How have you born the Sword? O Sirs! I humbly beseech you, censure not my
loyal, (...) Cor. 5.11
though familiar, boldness with you Knowing the terror of the Lord, we cannot
but persuade men. The day of Judgment (...) shortly coming, and, methinks, I
should nee^ to say no more. Rulers are not a terror (...) good work, but to
the evil: for he is the minister of God to thee for good, Romans 13.3, 4. Your
Honors are not your own, but God's whose Stewards you are; and, it is required
(...) Stewards, that a man be found faithful. Yo^ five Talents had need be ten
in the day of Account; For unto whom much is given, of him shall be much
required, Luke 12.48. That the Judgments of God are several ways gone forth
against us, I hope is not only felt, but in some measure acknowledged on all
sides: That Sin is the cause of this displeasure, methinks, should not be
doubted: That both High and Low are guilty before God, I hope will not be
denied; For, Nemo sine crimine vivit, There is not a just man upon earth, that
lives, and sins not, Eccles. 7.10. Great men, have great Temptations, and
oftentimes great miscarriages too; the greatness whereof is much augmented by
their personal, or relative greatness, (...), says Aristot. It is a very hard
matter, for poor Mortals, rightly to deport the burdens of their Honor or
Happiness. 'Twas Plato's answer once to the Cyrenians, who had desired him to
write them some Political, and Moral Institutions, for the Settlement of their
decaying Estate; Perdifficile est condere leges tam felicibus, It is a very
hard matter to lay the obligation of a Law on those that are (in their own
account) so happy. Sirs, the Lords Oil is upon you; I may not, I dare not, I
will not, touch the Lords Anointed, nor blaspheme that Authority, under whose
wings I expect Protection. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, 1 Timothy 5.1. Far be it from me, for ever, to speak evil of Dignities; or any way
to kindle, or abett Seditious Principles or Practices, either in my self or
others: Yet give me leave, in all humility; from the Word of God, to assure
you, that the only way to a true, and lasting Peace, is to make Peace with the
God of Peace. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to
be at peace with him, Proverbs 16.7. The only way to have Judgment effectually
removed, is, to remove it in the Cause of it; and in happy order unto this
blessed End, I shall say no more here, but, The Lord awaken, and direct, both
the Rulers and Ruled.

2. To the Ecclesiastical, or Ministerial Heads of the Church; and, 1. To those
in present being. 2. To those that are laid aside.


1. To those in present Being. I dare not pass you by unsaluted; though I have
no Court-Complement for you. I beseech you, duly to consider the Charge of your
holy Office; and your Discharge of it. These things, Sirs, you are better able
to instruct me in, than I you; therefore, let my Silence plead my Modesty,
while I humbly pass by, with the Prayer of the Church for you, That God, at
length, would work that Great Marvel, in sending down upon you, the healthful
Spirit of his grace. So farewell, until I meet you on even ground, at the day of
Judgment. 2. To those that are laid aside. My Reverend Fathers, and Dear
Brethren! Though I am but a Child, yet suffer me to speak as a Child; whose
aftections are great, though his strength and deserts be small. The Message is
sent unto the Angels of the Churches; and these are called the seven stars in
the right hand of God, Rev. 1.20. Now give me leave but to paraphrase on this
Emblem.
1. Stars are heavenly Creatures. It Is true, there are Stars (Meteors, or
Comets rather) who are heavenly, only as to their present Site, or appearance;
These are the Wandering Stars Jude speaks of, Jude v. 13. Exhalations, whose
Composition is Earthy and Unclean; whose Elevation is Ominous, not only to
themselves, out to the places where they Aspect: But these are none of the
Fixed Stars, in the right and of God. Oh, what manner of persons ^ught we to
have been, in all holy, and heavenly conversation! No man that warreth,
^^tangleth himself with the affairs of this ^^fe, that he may please him, who
has chosen him to be a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.4. Our Call from Heaven, our
Employment is Heavenly, our Lord, our Home, our Happiness, our Hopes, our All,
is in Heaven; should not then our Affections have been Heavenly? our Minds and
^ims, Heavenly? our Words, Devotions, and actions, Heavenly? And has it been
indeed (...) with us? I am speaking now (I hope) (...) such as know, how how to
set Conscience on ^ork, in the serious, and penitent Reflection ^n these
things. Oh, Sirs! why may not this (...) one great part of Gods Controversy
with (...) Pride and Covetousness was the great Cry the World has taken up
against us; the Lord knows, it has been too true of too many of us. Have not we
been too thoughtful, and Gentile-like, what to eat, and what to drink, and
wherewithal to be clothed, while we have preach^, and press't the contrary on
our Hearers? Why, Has God broken the Staves in our hands, and stripped us of our
coats and Scrip, without which, we could not trust him in our journey? Was not
our temporizing with the Modes, and Manners of the World, both in our Persons
and Families, become the open, and just scandal of our holy Calling? Where was
that Charity, that Humility, that Self-denial, that Mortification, that
heavenly Hearn and Life, that holy, and strict Godliness, without which, we
were condemning others to the Pit of Hell? Was it not time for God to take down
such foul Vessels, and to scour of that dust and filth they had contracted? No
wonder, if our Dust has brought us to the Dust; that we are fallen among the
Potts, and caused to lick the Dust we were so greedy of Sirs, I hope you will
not censure my plainness and liberty of speech. I have taken upon me to speak
to such, as can far better instruct both themselves and me; and, I confidenth
persuade my self, that these are no strange motions with you, nor Wounds that
wi^ ranckle. 2. Stars are ordained for light. Ye are the Light of the World,
says Christ, Matthew 5.14. And, Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, ver. 16. You are the Lamps of the Sanctuafie, whose
oil was to be pure oyl-olive; Levit. 24.20. Number. 8.4. Rev. 3.18.
and the Candlesticks for Light, which were to be of beaten Gold. We are God's
Apothecaries, whom he has sent with his Eye Salve, to recover a poor, blind,
World. Now, I beseech you, let us consider, what Lights have we been in the
Spears wherein God had placed us? Did we study to enlighten those that sat in
Darkness? To speak to the Capacities and Consciences, in the Convicting
Evidence, and Gospel-simplicity of the Spirit? Have not we (too many at least, and
too often) endeavored to imblazon our own Parts, or Learning? Have not we been
more affected with our own words, than with our Master's Work? and dressed up the
pure, and simple Truth, as an Harlot? Have not we set the Lords Candle under the
Bushel of our private Honor, or Interest? No wonder then, that God has
removed his Candlestick, and caused our Candle to go out. Hive we been
constant, burning, and shining Lights? or too-like, poor, dwindling Tapers, or
the faint Flashes of an Ignis lambens, rather burdensome than useful? Have we
been like Stars indeed, that appear brightest in the most told, and bitter
night? Oh, my Brethren! that we could sit down now, and consider, as we sit by
our Lahai-roi, where thou God see us; Why is my Sun set at Noon? Why have the
black Shades of the Night prevented me? Is not this, much my own doing? Of what
nature or kind was my Light? Had I any other than what I bare in my hand? Of
what use was my Light, either to my self or others? What can my people witness
for me? What can my Family, my Wife, my Children, my Sojourners, my Servants,
say for me? have they, or might they, have walked in my light? nay, have I even
forced them to light their Candles at mine? Has the Word of God dwelt richly
in my Head, in my Heart, in my House, in all wisdom? or, han't my Family been
much like other men's? as Ignorant, as Idle, as Proud, and, it may be, as
Profane, as many others? Han't the Springs of Knowledge been too much confined
to, and locked up in my Pulpit, as if I were a Minister no where but there? And
is not this much of the matter, that God has now locked up the Pulpit from me;
that he has cast me out of his Eden, and planted his Flaming Sword, which
turns every way, to keep the way of this Tree of life (...) Oh, that such
thoughts might pierce our hearts? now that we are sitting with out broken
Pitchers by those Waters of Affliction! 3. Stars are appointed for Influence.
T^^ are the Salt of the Earth, says Christ, Math 5.13. Oh! what a savoury, and
seasoning Influence have we had, on those with whom we have had to do? Salt,
you know, has a virtue to suck out corrupting humors, and to preserve from
putrefaction; Alas! can we say that our Patients have never Gangrenated under
our hands, for lack of proper, savory, and seasonable Preservatives? In Rev.
8.11. We read of a Starr, whose name was Wormwood; which fell from Heaven, as
it were a Lamp, and it fell on the third part of the rivers, and upon the
fountains of waters: and the third part of the waters became wormwood. Now has
our influence been like that of the Tree at the Waters of Marah, Exodus 15.25.
of a ^leansing, healing nature? or, too much like his Star, whose Name, and
Nature was wormwood? Has our Communication and Conversation, both in public,
and in private, ^een so seasoned with Salt, that our very Presence, has
daunted the Impudence of Sin? And our Countenances been a rebuke to a Wanton,
Licentious, Profane World? May (...) be said of us, as of John the Baptist,
that ^erod feared him, and observed him? Has ^he austerity, and holiness of
our lives been ^^ch, as could command respect from an He^d? and fasten
Convictions, with Authorial, on the hearts of the proudest Sinners? Have we
been like the Pleiades, whose sweet ^^fluence has overcome those malign, Job
38.31.
and saturnine Spirits, over which God has made (...) vertical? Or rather,
have not we been like the Moon, whose growing big and full, has ^een fatal to the
sick and weak in our Flocks? And now that we are cast out, as unsavory salt,
to be trodden under foot of men; the Lord ^umble us! pity us! spare us! 4.
Stars are ordained for Direction. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ 1 Cor. 11.1. No Sea in the World is so dangerous, and fatal to Mariners,
as this Sea of the World to Man. So many Rocks and Shoals, and Quicksands, and
Hirricane-Storms, as every Passage and Step is attended with; what need is
there of faithful, and skilful Pilots? 'Twas a sad Voyage for Paul and his
Companions? Act. 27.20. When neither sun, nor Stars, in many days, appeared,
and no small tempest lay on us; all hope that we should be saved, was then
taken away. God has set us for Sea-marks, because the Road is dangerous, that
scarce one of a thousand comes sale to Land. Or as the Star in the East, for
the direction of those that are so wise as to steer by such a Point. Alae! how
many rich Vessel^ of precious Merchandise, have there miscarried irreparably,
and eternally? and, it may be, much through our sinful Neglects; either we have
been obscured, and not to be seen, when we should have appeared for God, in the
desperate hazard of poor souls; or have been so general and uncertain, that
the purblind World could not apprehend us; or else, have been out of the way,
and deviated from our sacred Spears and so led them by an evil Example, either
directly, or accidentally, on the very neck of ruin^ Oh! how should it cut our
hearts, to consider, how many brave, and hopeful Vessels, we have sad cause to
fear, have for ever miscarried under our Conduct, and that in serene, and
Halcion Floods! The Lord convince us! forgive us! and have mercy upon us! 5.
Lastly, The Seven Stars are an united Constellation. Therefore Christ compares
the Breasts of his Church, to two young Roes, that are Twins, Cant. 7.3. And,
to a company of horses in Pharaoh's charriots, Cant. 1.9. Not only for their
Strength and Beauty, but for their Union, and Oneness of Work and Way. And is
not this another, and not the least ground of the breach that God has made
upon us? even our Dissentions and Animosities, our grievous Divisions, both in
Judgment and Heart; our pertinacious insisting on undeterminable, and frivolous
Quiddities, and circumstantial Differences. Besides, those private Grudges, and
supercilious Distances, arising from personal Preferments, or carnal Interests;
And in the mean while, have fed Christ's Babes with Blood instead of Milk, and
Stones instead of Bread. And, while we have, with such violence, been drawing,
every one his own way, have between us, even rent the Chariots of the Church of
Christ in pieces; and for these things has God rent us in pieces. The sins of
Ministers, are Nouns of Multitude; they sin by heaps, and in whole sums; as the
Measures and Weights of the Sanctuary are larger than any others, so are the
Sins of the Sanctuary too.
2. As the Rod speaks to the Heads, and Governors, so also to the particular
Societies of this Church of God: not only to the whole Body of the Church of
Asia, but particularly to Ephesus, and Smyrna, and Laodicea, etc. the several
Members and Congregations of the Asian Church. So, when God had promised to
restore his People, Zech. 12. He promised withal, to pour out upon them, the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication, ver. 10. and the Spirit of Mourning and
Repentance, ver. 11. The whole Land shall mourn, and not only so, but, every
Family apart: the Family of the House of David apart, and their wives apart.
So, the Family of the House of Nathan, and of Levi; both King, Prophet, and
Priest, by their Families apart. Now, as we have any of us stood related as
Members of this, or that Society, or Family, of the Church of God; it concerns
us to consider, what the Voice of the Rod is, by which, he is now calling us to
mourning and supplitation, by our Families apart.

1. Consider, whether the Worm of Selfendedness has not been at the Root of
the Matter. Brethren! for the Lords sake, deal faithfully with your own hearts.
What was i^ that moved you, in the first place, to engage in such, or such a
Society? Was Self wholly laid aside, and utterly disowned, as well in Heart, as
in Word, from any partnership, in you Ends? Oh, that I could fasten these
serious Questions on your Consciences! Were you fully convinced, from the
invincible light of the infallible Rule, that this was the very way of God? and
the Scripture-Discipline that he would have you to yield your obedience to, the
very Pattern that was given in the Mount? No other Burden, than what we have
received by Divine, and Apostolical Authority? And was this your End and Aim in
Earnest? that you might be made more conformable unto Christ, your Head, in
Holiness, and in the life and power of Duty? and walk in nearer, and more
spiritual Communion with him? That you might receive more immediately of his
Fullness, and dwell nearer the Springhead of Grace, as well as of Comfort? Had
you a real Design aganist Sin, not only in others, but especially in your
selves? And is this the very Truth, and Ground of the matter, that did engage
you? Dare you look God and Death in the face, appealing from your Consciences,
unto his All-searching Tribunal, that this is the very truth? Did you join with
this, or that Society, out of no proud, undervaluing, or Schismatical spirit
toward your brethren, or overweening Conceit of your selves, or your own
party? but because you verily apprehended it, the way of clearest
Scripture-certainty and security; and the nearest, and readiest way, to join in
a fuller, and more intimate Communion with Christ? And was it the deep sense of
that wearisom load of Sin and Guilt, that moved you from within, in obedience
to a clear Command, to close with this way? Nay, Were all your Expectations
always from above your enjoyments? Oh, Christians! Can your Consciences comfort
you, concerning all these things? Was there not an itching desire to seem as
Holy as the best, or as a more refined Fraternity of Rechabites, fishing for
Proselytes, to build your selves a Name? or else some mercenary fear, of
incurring the hard thoughts, or disrespects of some, whose good will you
valued? Was it not more to gratify, or to engage Friends, or to promote some
worldly Interest, or to find out some new Discoveries, or to inhance the rate
of your Gifts and Parts, above the Common size? was it not something of this
nature, that prevailed with you, more than any thing else? And, could you ever
expect, that a Building should prosper, on such a Foundation? Not that I
condemn all; but I would that all should condemn themselves. Oh, my brethren!
will you be upright with God, who knows all that is within you; and confess to
him the whole truth? Oh! take heed, that That be not now concealed, which, one
day, you will wish were pardoned. 2. Since you have engaged your selves in a
Choice Society, and Communion of Saints; How have you behaved your selves,
Toward your Teachers and Rulers? Toward one another? Toward them that are
without?

1. Toward your Teachers and Rulers: 1. Have you undervalued neither their
Persons, nor their work? The Apostle seems to beg your Honor; yet not for
our, but for your own sakes, 1 These. 5.13, 14. We beseech you, Brethren, to
know them which labor among you, and are over you, in the Lord, and admonish
you; and esteem them very highly in love, for their works sake. Esteem them
very highly in love. Not with that Secular Adoration, wherewith the world is
wont to court her Darlings; but with your cordial, and unfeigned affection.
Honor them, not so much with Cap and Knee, and the Elogies of praise, and
Hyperbolical Encomium's, which, ordinarily, is but the stinking breath of a
rotten heart. But, esteem them in love, and for their works sake. Not so much,
for their Learning, or Parts, or external Preferments, but for their Work and
Office sake; for their Message, and for their Master's sake. Now begin to
reckon with your own hearts, how guilty have you been here? Han't your Oxen,
that have labored but for your back and belly; your Servants, that have been
your Drudges for the body; your Appendices of honor and pleasure, had more of
your hearts, than those that have been tugging at the Oars, to harbor you and
yours, in the Land of Promise? That have been praying, and studying, and
watching, night and day, for your Souls? Have not you been ready to slander them,
to censure their Doctrine, Elocution, or Method? and to take up hard thoughts
of them, on the least occasion of offense? Have you never been ambitiously
laying hands on the Ark; yea, when it has but seemed to shake? and quarrelling
with Moses, Numb. 1^.3^
as Korah, and his Faction, Are not all the Congregation holy? 2. Have not you, on
the other hand, had their Persons or Gifts in Admiration? have not you so highly
admired such a man's Abilities, or Eloquence; that you have slighted another's
Graces? Every one says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. Is Christ
divided? was Paul crucified for you? 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. Christ has made us your
Watchmen, and your Servants, in the work of your Souls; and has not set us up
for Idols, nor Saviors. The diversity of Streams, should cause us to admire
the fullness, and riches of the Fountain, and not to adore the poor Channel. Oh,
let this be a piece of your Christian Learning, Not to think of men, above that
which is written, as the Apostle advises, 1 Cor. 4.6.
2. Toward one another. 1. Where is that exemplary love, and
brotherly-kindness, that should be between such spiritually near Relations?
With what persuading Motives, and compassionate arguments, does the Apostle
urge his Philippians, chap. 2.1, 2. If there be therefore, any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels
and mercies: fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind. But how apt have we been to think the worst,
and speak the worst, by one another, and to aggravate each others infirmities?
How hard a matter is it to take a rebuke at the hand of a brother, especially
an inferior? or to give a reproof with that seriousness, prudence, meekness,
self-denial, and tender affection, and charitable hopes, and longing desires of
their good, as becomes Christians? Oh, what reason had God to take up his rod
against us, and to let in the Flood upon us, while we have been wandering every
one his own way, and magnifying our own Inventions, envying at, and clashing
with, one another! 2. Can you clear your selves of an affected singularity in
your way? Were you not ready to look on your selves, as some body; and, it may
be, somewhat more than others? Let me tell you, an affected singularity, either
in Judgment or Practice, savours of a proud, and a false heart. Have you never
entertained that in your hearts or lives, which you were never, from the Word
of God, convinced in Conscience, to be a truth, or a duty; only because it
liked you, or by your Teachers was offered you, or that you might seem to be
the Authors of some new Garb in Religion, and such as act by more elevated
Principles? Well! God has now raised a storm, which, I hope, will quench all
the sparks among us, that are not of his own kindling; and let us see the pure
Lamp of the Sanctuary, from all those Bastard Tapers, and stinking Snuffs of
man's invention, or the Devils lighting 3. Has there not been a spirit of
Censoriousness toward all others, that have not been of the same Society, or
Judgment, in, or about some Circumstances; that have been without the bounds of
your own Monopolies? What animosities, and heart-burnings have there been? what
glorying, and magnifying your own way? as if Salvation were not attainable,
without the verge of such a Society. Certainly, this is no other, than a more
spiritual, and refined kind of Popery.
3. Toward them that are without. 1. Has there been that prudent,
inoffensive, winning carriage toward them, that might heap coals on their
heads, and commend your holy Profession to them; at least, to leave them
without excuse, in the great day? Walk in wisdom toward them that are without,
Col. 4.5. The Carnal World cannot judge of Spiritual things, but in a carnal
manner; it is the wisdom therefore, of a Christian, to become himself with their
Capacities, though not with their Corruptions. Those that live by sense, are
led by sense; and judge according to sense, and outward appearance. What is thy
Beloved, more than another beloved? Cant. 5.9. They cannot see that beauty that
lies within the skin, whereby the King's daughter is all glorious within. I
shall not stand to answer all those Quarrels, that occasionally you may have
with them, only thus; You know the Royal Law, and what respect should be had,
both to their poor souls, and to the credit of the Gospel, 'T was the Apostles
complaint, 1 Cor. 6.6. Brother goes to law with brother, and that before the
unbelievers. Should we not rather suffer wrong on our bodies, than offer wrong
to their souls? You know how you pray; Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our
Debtors; and what stress is laid on this Condition? Matthew. 6.14. Mar. 11.26.
Debts are distinguished into Civil and Criminal. The first indeed may be
retained without sin, if it be not exacted without Conscience, and Charity, and
due respect, and compassion to our brethrens Bodies and Souls. But the other is
freely to be remitted, on the account of Christ, and our obedience to him, and
hope in him. O, take heed, that your froward, sullen, and morose carriage and
disposition, do not harden, and justly prejudice those, that might otherwise
have been won, even such, as were once some of you, be they, at present, never
so vile. I could enlarge my self here, and not without need; But, Verbum sat
sapienti; A word to the Wise. A little Armor rightly applied, is sufficient
Panoplie. 2. What affectionate pity has there been shown to their poor Souls?
Certainly, their Souls are formed of the same immaterial substance with ours;
as immortal, as precious, in their own nature and original, as ours; Masses of
the same lump, fashioned on the same wheel of Divine Power and Wisdom; were
once as fair for Election, and had as just a claim to the Kingdom, as we. If
ever we are saved, it must be through the undeserved pity, and merits of
another. And surely, where Christ communicates his merits, he communicates some
proportion of his Spirit too. In this the children of God are manifest, and the
children of the Devil; whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither
he that loves not his brother, 1 John 3.10. Now, we know, that Brother is
taken in Scripture, both in a Natural, Civil, and Spiritual sense; nor can I
think that it is spoken Abstractly as to either, in this place; but rather
Comprehensively of all. For, we know who has said, Love your Enemies, do good
to them which hate you, Luke 6.27. And matthew. 5.24.25. we find, that Brother
and Adversary, are used Exegetically of each other. Nay, the close of that
chapter speaks exactly, and Argumentatively to my purpose. Love your Enemies,
etc. that ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven; for he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good; -- For, if ye love them
which love you, what reward have you? do not even the Publicans the same?
Though we cannot find that love of delight and complacency, as there is with
those spiritual branches, of one and the same stock; yet there is a love of
Benevolence and pity, which is their due from us, their fellow Creatures. O,
pity their poor Souls, instead of cursing, or exclaiming on them! Would you not
pity, and pray for them, should they come with tears in their eyes, to beg
your prayers? pity them, and pray for them, now much more, for that they cannot
pity themselves! Is not a man that is distracted, and ^nows not what he does,
an object of pity, and not of hatred or revenge, though he re^ile, and curse,
nay, though he rent you? Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
(...), Luke 23.34. 3. What serious pains have you taken, to ^nvince, and
persuade them? Would you not ^en hazard your lives, to save a mad man ^om
murdering himself, or your neighbor's ^ouse from burning? Would you not lay
vio^t hands upon them, and suffer abuses from ^em, if you found them sleeping,
in such 2 ^^e? And are their Houses, and Bodies, of ^re worth than their Souls?
Ah! with what ^ter looks and curses, will these poor wretches ^art from you, at
the great Day! who, having ^tained mercy your selves, did show no mer^; that
having the snares broken for you, ^erein you, as well as they, were once bound,
(...) being happily escaped your selves, had ne^ a hand to help a perishing
brother! Cer^nly; our Cruelty toward the Souls of those (...) call our
Enemies, may well be inserted as (...) Item of that Rod that lies upon us. I
may (...) insist here, on all the Cases, and Cavils, (...) might be objected;
only let me caution (...). Take heed of excusing your selves from (...) Duty,
which God will require in the great (...) of Account. And, let me also tell
you, (...), though you cannot do for them, what you ^ld do; yet, were you as
prudent, as hum^ as compassionate, as vigilant, as self-denying, as active, as
you should be, and, as on^ day, you may wish you had been, you might have done
far more, than you have done (...) them.

3. The Rod has also a Voice to the Individual Members of this Church of God.
As every Family, so every Soul of the Family, shall mourn apart. God has not
only Family-offences, Congregation-sins; but Personal Miscarriages, to reckon
with us for. He is calling us out, one by one, as those that accuse^ the woman,
Joh. 8.9. What I have to say here, I shall couch under these two Questions.

How have you bestowed your Talents?

How have you kept your Watch?

1. How have you bestowed your Talents The Kingdom of Heaven is as a man
travellin^ into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto
them his goods; a^ unto one he gave five Talents, to another two, Matthew. 25.14,
15. Our Lord has intrust^ us with his Goods; He has left all the Rich of his
house in our hands; We have receiv^ our Talents, our Measures, and Proportion^
Now let me seriously ask you, and my self, the^ following Questions.

1. Have we weighed our Talents, and considered what they are? You will tell
your Mon^ though it be after your own Father; especially it be but borrowed, or
entrusted Money, wh^ must again be accounted for. Christian! (...) aside, and
tell thy Money from the hands (...) thy Heavenly Father. Take a just account of
that, for which thou must shortly give a just ^ccount. Book down thy Receipts,
both for Number, Nature, and Weight. Thus much ^n Ordinaries, and thus much in
Extraordina^ies; Thus many years Time, Health, Pro^ision, Quiet; Thus many
Offers of Grace ^ath God made me, and thus long waited for ^y return; Thus many
signal Deliverances ^om Enemies, Disasters, and Sicknesses, and ^om unseen
Dangers, God only knows how ^any. What large Inventories might the ^eanest of
us draw, of our external enjoyments, which is but the least part of the Ta^nt
we have received? If we look into the ^ittle-World of the Soul, we shall find
it ful^r of Mercies, than the Heavens are of Stars. ^esides all that Goodness
that God had pre^red to meet us at the very Womb, there has ^en a continual
Accession and Succession of ^ew Mercies, with the gracious preservation of ^e
old. Alas! we may as well number the ^^ops of an hours thickest Rain, as the
Mer^es of an hours Time. Yet take as particular and distinct knowledge of them
as you can; ^r doubtless the Account will be particular: ^od has when, and
where, and what, and ^ow often, in his Book, even to the utmost ^arthing,
Matthew. 5.26. 2. Have we considered whose our Talents ^e? So far the slothful
servant was in the ^ght; Lo, there, thou have that is thine, Matthew. 25.25. But
have not we rather greedily swept Mercies into our Laps, as Thieves, tha^ are
robbing the house; and taking all for ou^ own, as those, that never think to be
responsible; as if we were the absolute Lords of (...) the Mercies we enjoy?
And is not God concerned in such a case, to vindicate his own Interest?
Remember, Christians, it is Gods ground you tread upon, and plant, and build,
and ^ow^ upon; his Creatures you feed on; his Woo^ and Flax, and Silks, you
cloth and deck you^selves with; his Gold and Silver, you an^ hoarding, or
trading with; his Air you brea^ in, and not your own. It Is his Word, hi^
Promises, his Sacraments, his Graces, his Spirit, his Help, and all the hidden
Treasuries o^ his Gospel, the blessed Provisions of your Sou^ they are his, and
not yours. You never made you never purchased, you never repaired any (...)
these, nor can you do it.
But, may you say, Civi^ but no Evangelical Right, to any thing the possess:
But, what, Has the Child no mo^ right than the Servant? Godliness has t^
promise of the life that now is, and of the which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And
God ha^ promised, with Christ, to give us all thing and that freely, Romans 8.32.
So says the Apostle; Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, (...) the World, or
Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours. 1 Co^ 3.23.

The same Apostle also says, The He^ long as he is a child, differs nothing
from (...) servant, though he be Lord of all, Gal. 4.1. ^od has not given us
the Impropriation, but ^e Use of his Goods. The heir has no more ^tual
propriety than the servant, as long as he (...) under age, only here is the
difference; what ^e Child enjoyes, he enjoyes by virtue of his ^elation, and
this Relation is grounded on ^^t Covenant between the Father and Christ, ^d
between Christ and his chosen; by virtue ^ereof, they stand the Adopted
Children of ^d, through Christ; so that what we receive, (...) receive on the
account of this Covenant, ^ich has made us over unto God and Christ, ^d God
and Christ, and all his Promises, over ^o us; the Inheritance of all is ours,
though (...) actual possession be reserved, till we are, ^ough Grace,
capacitated for it; all things ^t are necessary, pro hic, and nunc, unto Life,
(...) Godliness, we have in Hand, the rest in ^^e; yet, both what we have in
Hand, and in ^^e, we hold in Capite, and were never de^^ed for the Absolute
Lords of it. He that ^eived the five Talents, could no more call ^n his own,
than he that received but one; ^^ther could the Improvement alter-the Proper^
but both the Principal, and the Increase, ^re their Lords, Matthew. 25.27. Our
Title ^Evangelical indeed, and therefore not Le^: Legal, as to man, but not as
to God. why ^n do thou glory, as if thou had not received (...) 1 Cor. 4.7.

3. Have you considered, why those Talen^ were entrusted with you? The reason
why wit^ you, rather than with others, is, because yo^ are his (...), own
servants, his houshold-Hinds. You have been brought up at his hand and know his
Work, and his Will; his Expectations are great from you, he seems to have
greater confidence of our Care, and Skill, and Diligence, and Faithfulness,
than of Strangen^ And then the Reasons, why he has, as it were, p^^ it out of
his own hands, and cast it into ours, are Because he will learn us, by these
smaller things to merchandise and trade, with and for Heaven he has adventured
this little stock with us, t^ begin with, and to train us up for higher
Employments. And, that his Goods might not (...) dead, and useless, he has
committed the Factorage to us, that the Returns might be mad^ to his Advantage.
Now this is that should have taken up our thoughts; What a R^^ has God set on
such, or such a Mercy? An^ how shall I manage my Course, to bring the^ up to
Gods price? what a circumspect ca^ should I have, to commerce with honest, an^
sufficient Dealers! The World is a Bro^ Merchant, and its Wares are of no value
in (...) Lord's Country. The Devil is too subtle, (...) dare not trust him; his
design is to decei^ The Flesh will bassle, and my own heart d^^ upon Day, and
is wont to pay with Promi^ and Delays, and Protestations of his go^ Meaning;
How dare I venture my Lords (...) in such hands? My goodness shall extend to t^
Saints, that are in the Earth, and to the Excellent, in whom is all my delight,
Psalm. 16.3. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked
person, Psalm. 101.4. I will have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. Oh, my brethren! how many
thousand Merties have we bestowed on our Lusts? how many Packs of our Master's
Goods have we rid our hands of, which we are never like to see one penny for?
And can we wonder then, that our Lord is come to reckon with us? May not God
justly charge us with Riot and Unfaithfulness, and take the Talents from us?
Certainly, that accursed, slothful servant, that hid his Lord's money, seems far
more excusable than we; for, though he did no good with his Talent, yet he was
accused of no hurt he did with it. Surely, Pride had never so impudently dared
God to his face, had it not been for us. The Flesh had never took such head,
had not we pampered it. The World had never claimed such Corrivalty with God,
had it not been trading with us, in our Faith, Hope, and Love. May not God
charge us, as once he charged his own People? Ezekiel. 16.17, 18, 19. Thou have
also taken thy fair Jewels, of my gold, and of my silver, which I had given
thee, and made to thy self Images of men, and did commit whoredom with
them; And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them; and thou have set
mine oil, and mine incense before them. My meat also, which I gave thee, fine
flower, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou ha^ even set it before
them, for a sweet savour^ and thus it was, says the Lord God. Surely, had our
Master no other stock, but this that is in our hands, we should quickly have
undone both him and our selves. Therefore, I will return, and take away my Corn
in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and I will recover my
Wool, and my Flax, given (...) cover her nakedness, Hos. 2.9. Ah^ wha^ serious
reflections, and thoughts of heart, do^ these things call for! What sad, and
general complaints, are there of bad Trading in the world? God has broken the
staff in the mid^ of us, and hedged us in on every side; the labor of the
Artificer cease, and the Merchan^ begins to mourn: Men of great Engagement
and Dependence, are shattering, like broken Reeds, and the Plagues of God, both
at home, and abroad, have wasted us. Are not these some of your complaints to
God? And may not God retort the same Complaints on us and spread our very
tears, as dung, on o^^ faces? The Plague of our heart is spread to such a
height, that he has even nailed up the Doors of his House against us, that
there is little Trading for Heaven. What has my Beloved to do in my house,
seeing she has wrought lewdness with many? and the holy flesh is passed from
thee, Jer. 11.15. God seems to stand off, and to avoid his own Highway, as if
he were afraid we should come near, to touch his holy things, and pollute them,
as we have done.

4. Shall I ask you, What has your esteem of your Talents been? how have you
valued them? Possibly such as have related to the ^uter man, the present carnal
ease, or advan^age of the Flesh, have been over-rated; yet ^is strange to see
on what base, and low terms, they are parted with. Tell me, Christian, Have
thou never sold thy Ambition a good pennyworth of these things, for a little
honor, or preferment; nay, for the bare promise, or hopes of it, which thou
may now set among thy desperate Debts? Have thou never sold thy Lusts (...)
huge bargain, for a little pleasure, though it were entailed with shame, and
pain enough? Are there none of thy Master's Goods to be redeemed out of the
hands of Revenge, and Injustice? Is there none of thy Lord's Money to be ^ak'd
out of the Draught of thy Gluttony and Drunkenness? Ah, Sirs! Are these things
^ut poor, empty notions, think you? will they ^ome to nothing in the great day
of Account? ^dan't you dealt, in your reposed trust, as the injust Steward,
Luke 16.6, 7. written fifty, ^r three score, for an hundred, on your Master's
Bill? and will Conscience witness for ^ou, that all has been right and just?
though ^ow it lie under your Bribes and Flatteries, or ^ears; certainly, when
God shall examine it upon Oath, it will speak the whole truth: When every Corner
shall be searched, and every ^ill summed up, and every Mite accounted, ^ther
thou, or thy Surety must be responsible. As for our Spiritual Talents, at what
a rate have they been prostituted? Such as have not been for the Common Market
of the World, as the convictions, the humbling, and mortifying Motions of the
Holy Spirit, such as are not for Caesar's turn; no friends to the Flesh; these
have been often sent back, by the hand that brought them, as unprofitable
Druggs, the great burdens that have troubled us. Surely, profane Esau never
profaned his Birthright, as we have profaned ours. Have not we dealt with Gods
most precious Gold, and those rich Jewels, that have been locked up in the
Cabinet of Divine Counsel and Love, from all the Ages of the world, and
reserved for so unworthy, unthankful a generation as we, even those glorious
privileges, and liberties of the Gospel, the price of the precious blood of
Christ; as we deal with the stones and rubble wherewith we mend our Highways;
and made them to pave the way of our Lusts? O Damnable Ingratitude! O cursed
unfaithfulness! O horrible impiety! Is this the way to provide for a day of
Judgment? to consult the comfort of a deathbed; the glory of a Church, or the
Peace of a Nation? The Lord awaken us! the good Lord forgive us!

But,

What I say to you, an conscious to the guilt of this, and far more than I can
express. But, for your further conviction, consider; Have you had such an
esteem of your Talents as you ought? Let me ask you then, On what account, or
reason is it, that you so esteem them? Do you prize them as they are Talents,
and the things wherein your duty and diligence, and the glory of God, is bound
up? Do you esteem your work in them, as well as your enjoyment of them?
Christian! Ask thy heart, in earnest, What is it that thou defirest, or
prizest, thy Time, Health, Peace, Plenty, or any other Privileges or
Enjoyments, for? Can you say, you prize them more for their service, than for
their sweetness? more for Gods sake, than for your own? The Excellency, and
therefore, the desirableness of these things, lies in their End; Now the End of
these things is not in themselves, but they are ordained Means unto a higher
End. To prize Health, for it self, is not to prize it aright; These are the
only riches that a spiritual heart can take true content, and delight in, that
are laid out for God. The Tradesman, that means to thrive, will turn all he can
into stock; a penny here, is of more value with him, than a shilling, that must
lie dead by him. I shall say no more but this; You may judge of your own case,
by your faithful, and practical applying of all these things unto their great
and high End.

5. What has been your care about your Talents? Your care of them, and your
care in them? Han't your Dogs been maintained with the childrens bread? I mean,
the unreasonable, and ravenous desires, and lusts of the Flesh; han't they
lived upon your Parts and Gifts! nay, on the very heart and blood of your
duties and profession? What care have you had of your Master's Goods, to keep
them clean, and spotless, from the pollutions of your own Natures, and
constitutions; and from the abomination of the Times, and Places wherein you
live? O, with what a Hiew do they look? are they such as will credit the Owner
of them? may not you be ashamed to see them? would any one think, that the God
of Glory should be the Author of them? oh! let us sit down, with Mary, and wash
them out in our Tears! What care have you had of them, to keep them repaired?
have not you worn out your Talents, and are ready to cry for new? for New Lights,
to do the works of Darkness by; for new Discoveries, and new ways, and are
weary of the good old way? Plain, and common truths, though never so necessary,
or seasonable, are looked upon as poor, thred-worn rags. Are they not new
things, though never so notional, or circumstantial; nay, though never so
dubious and dangerous; that do most affect you? Are there not many among us,
that have worn out Repentance, and all Duty and Obedience, and cast them aside,
for abolished Legal Rags? And Christ, who was obedient unto Death, even the
death of the Cross, must be their Sumpter, to carry their old shoes, and
moldy bread after them. O sensual Impiety! O hellish Pride! O horrible
Ingratitude! Can those Gibeonites think thus to deceive God? Again, What care
have you had in your Talents? Have you been trading for God, and your Souls,
with that wariness and diligence, with that watchfulness and unweariedness,
with that life and activity, as you have traded for, and with, the World? Have
you been careful to basket up all those Fragments at your Master's Table, all
those odd Ends of Time, Truths, and Experiences, that nothing be lost? or han't
the world devoured the main Feast, and the Flesh and the Devil had the rest?
Have you dealt wisely, and sparingly, with those that have dealt deceitfully
with you? Ah, my Brethren! can you say it was for want of no care in you, that
you fell into such, or such a temptation? that you miscarried in such, or such
a duty or design? Why has God made us to eat our bread with carefulness, and
drink our water with astonishment, and threatened to make our Land desolate, of
all that is therein? as he threatened Israel, Ezekiel. 12.19. but to convince us of
our sinful carelessness? I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell
carelessly in the Isles, Ezekiel. 39.6. How little has it troubled us, which End
has gone forward, so that our own Ends have been accomplished? how little has
the Glory of God been set by, when our own Concernments have stood in
Competition with it?

6. What has been the Increase of your Talents? What have you gained? where
arenthe other five you have multiplied? what have you gotten by Sabbaths and
Sacraments? where is that Love, that Faith, that Patience, that Humility, that
Heavenly-mindedness, that Prudenct, and Zeal, and Brotherly-kindness, that you
have been trading with, and trading for? Where are the slain, and the spoils of
your spiritual Battles? the lusts you have subdued, the temptations you have
conquered? where are your experiences, and yoursongs of deliverance? Ah, my
Brethren! Where are the returns of your Prayers, and the victorious Trophies of
your Faith? what have you gotten from God, and for God? where is the Fruit you
have so long stood in Gods Garden for? where is the smell of your Spices, and
that ripe Fruit you have to present your Lord, your Beloved with, now that he
is come down into his Vineyard? Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the
field: let us lodge in the villages. Let us get up early to the vineyards, let
us see if the Vine flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the
pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee my loves. And can you assure
him, The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruit, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved? Cant. 7.11,
12, 13. Can you look back, and say, This I have gotten by this weeks mercies
and duties; this I have gain^d by this day's opportunities^ this fruit, this
blessed crop, I have to show for this years husbandry and patience? Or, are you
not walking in a Round of Duties and Mercies, and returning to the same point
still? going from Flower to Flower, and returning as empty home, as you went
out? O that I could persuade my self, and you, to spend more serious hours in
our Counting House, to retire our selves with God, that we might prove our
selves entire at last, and wanting nothing.

Now take up your Talents, one by one, and weigh them in these Scales.

1. Your Time, What has been your Esteem, your Care, your Improvement, of this
Talent? Suppose, that God were now calling you to an account for your Time;
What can you say? Thus many years you have enjoyed it, it may be, twenty,
thirty, or forty years; divide this into days, and hours, and how few can you
pick put, that have been faithfully employed, in the serious work of God, and
your own Souls? how little will there redound to the comfort of your account?
Was not the most, or a great part of your Time, spent in an unregenerate
^state? Every hour of that time is lost: and, since God has opened your eyes,
how much of your time have you slept away, beyond what would have refreshed
Nature? How much has the world, carnal pleasures, needless visits,
unprofitable discourses, and unnecessarie recreations eaten up? That little
time, that you have ^n any measure improved; with what faintness, inconstancy,
and lukewarm in differencie, has ^t been done? Oh, Christians! Look back on
^he many hours you have loiter'd away, and sported, and jested, and sinned
away; are you ready to answer the Just God for all this? Have you never been,
even burdened with your time, that you have invented such things as Pastimes,
to rid your hands of it? as if God had not allotted you work enough for your
day: Nay, have you never begrutcht him, and your own Souls, any of that time
which has been their unquestionable due? Have Sabbaths and Duties, has Prayer
and Fasting, never been a weariness to you? Let Conscience speak now, and judge
uprightly between God and us. And can we think, that God has taken this well
at our hands? Are not all these things written on that bloody Sword that is
drawn out against us? What Talent have we more precious than our Time? it is
that, wherein all the rest are wrapped up. Were the day of Grace over, all the
offers of Grace, and means of Grace, and hopes of Grace, should be over too.
Ah! could you but hear those heart-melting groans, and fruitless wishes of the
Damned, for one of your idle hours; how would it affect you? and, should God at
last send us thither, to learn the worth of Time; how sadly should we repent
it, and rue it to all eternity! Oh! methinks it should strike a terror into
our very souls, whenever we see the Sun set, to consider, Now there is a day
more gone, and I am not sure to see the dawning of another; can I tell, whether
God has said of me, Thou Fool, this night shall thy soul be required; and an
exact account required too? ^ know, I am one day older; I cannot say, I ^m one
jot better, than I was this morning: ^ut, it may be, have no small cause to
fear, that I ^m some degrees worse. Do such thoughts as ^^ese never lie down
with you, and keep you ^aking, when others are asleep? God is now ^ome forth
against us, with his Glass in one ^^e hand, and his Sword in the other, to
mea^re our Time, and to cut it off. The Glass runs pace; nay, some of the last
sands seem to be reparing for a fatal motion; and when once ^is out, who knows,
whether ever he will turn ^^ up for us more? God is now reckoning with ^^r
neighbors, for their time; and, for ought ^e know, may call at our doors, on
the very ^^me Errand, before he return to his Place. Be ^re; he will shortly
come, and make all ^ven with you; and are your Accounts ready?

There are these five or six things e^ecially, that set up the rate, and price
of ^^me.

1. It Is the more precious, because it is bor^wed time. Did you never hear
Consci^ce crying out to you, for the loss of your ^me, as the man did to
Elisha, for the loss of ^s Axe-bead, 1 Kin. 6.5. Alas! for it was ^rrowed. The
Candle, you loiter, and play way, is but borrowed Light, The Time you
^profusely spend, is but the time of your Re^ival. The Sentence of Death is
past upon ^. Romans 5.12. So death pass^^ upon all men, (...) that all have
sinned. A^^ a condemned ^n, between the Sentence and the Execution, whether
ever time were more precious with him; how vile and secure soever he was before
it is strange, if now he be not serious. Why, (...) your case, Christians; you
are cast by God^ Law, and condemned, Body and Soul, in the Court of his Supreme
Justice; only, here w^ are reprived a while, and held in this prison of the
world, that we might provide for the other world, and sue out our pardon, while
i^ may be had; it is merely the Indulgence of ou^ gracious Judge, that has
shown this respect ^^ our Souls, and lent us this repenting, and returning
time. And, is this our case, brethren? How precious, and how dear an esteem
then should we have of our borrowed Time!

2. The Shortness of Time, adds to the Excellency of it. The time past, was
ours, b^ is now gone, and shall never be ours more. The time to come is none of
ours, nor do w^ know whether ever it shall; only the present is ours, which is
but a momentany time. W^ live by Moments, the shortest division o^ time that is
imaginable. O, Sirs! if you could but see, in what a narrow Track you are going
methinks it should amaze you; Would you n^ think a man in desperate hazard,
that wen walking on the highest Tower, from one Pinad^ to another, and had no
other footing to sec^^ himself? would you not expect to see him tu^^ ble, every
moment? This is your very case, y^^ are walking fr^^ one pinnacle of Time to
am^ there, and your graves are open underneath, ^ receive you; nay, are you sure
that Hell (...) ^ot at the bottom too? Never was there one that escaped the
first; few, but meet with both ^t once; the least trip, or step awry, nay, the
^ast withdrawment of that hand that upholds ^ou, may cost you as much as
Bodies, and Souls, and all your hopes are worth, in a moment. ^h, the value,
and consequence of one Mo^ents time! oh, the desperate blindness, and ^^ldness
of our secure hearts! Nay, if you mea^re your whole time in the world, at one
^raught, you will find it very short. Are not ^^ days few? says Job, chap.
10.20. Be^ld, thou have made my days as an hand^eadth, and mine age is as
nothing before thee, ^sal. 39.5. Again, by that time you have dis^unted all
that time you have lost, while you (...) dead in trespasses and sins; in your
Mate^a prima; besides those Deliquia animae, the ^intings, and swoonings of the
Soul, and in^missions of its spiritual, and regular motions, ^^d operations;
you will find, I fear, a very ^all pittance of time left you; for, tam diu
^ximus, quam been viximus; We never have ^'d longer, than we have lived well.

3. The Excellency of time lies much in the ^certainty of it. Time is a golden
Chain, ^ich is let down out of Heaven to us, but by ^e end, like Jacob's
Ladder; we are walking ^m step to step in it, and can see no farther ^n we go;
the very next, for ought we know, ^y be the Top-round, which may lodge us, in ^
endless, if not an easeless eternity. My ^es are in thy hand, says David,
Psalm. 35.15. And, have we lived as those, that cannot promise themselves one
hour more in the world? as those, that have taken their last, and solemn leaves
of all the world? as those that do but look for a good hour? that lie afloat on
the Borders of another world, and verily expect that the next Tide shall set
them on Shoat ^ Or, have not we been building on that which is none of our own,
and presuming on that unseen time, that is in Gods hands? Oh, the madness! oh,
the effascinated madness of such adventurers! How is it that rational Creatures
should ever act so irrationally!

4. Gods Patience contributes much to the glory of Time. This is the time of
his Pati^ ence: God is now bearing, and forbearing (...) Sparing us, as a man
spares his own son tha^ serves him, Mal. 3.17. How many thou^ sand just
occasions of ruining us, bodies and souls, has every day of our lives offered
him ^ and yet he is content to shut his eyes at ou^ infirmities, our
unthankfulness, unfaithfulness inconstancy, and stubborn undutifulness. W^ are
every day trying the strength and leng^ of his Patience; and thrusting a Sword
in^ his hands, even daring him to strike. O^ what affronts have we given! and
what Patience has he shown? Had we been but sensi^ of one drop of that wrath,
that those damn^ souls in Hell are despairing under; we shou^ know, that the
time of Patience, is precious ti^ indeed. Were you never set on the Rack of a^
^ormenting pain, or distress of body, or mind? and don't you remember what
thoughts you ^ad then? Have not you sound a vast difference ^etween sickness and
health, pains and ease; though there be a great ingrediency of Mercy and
Patience in all this? Surely, we shall ^nortly know the odds between the day of
Gods ^atience, and the time of his Vengeance. When ^nce we know what Hell is,
whether by our ^eliverance from it, or our suffering in it, we ^all then better
know the worth of a days ^atience. Nay, let me say, that one day here, (...)
of far greater consequence and moment, at ^ast, as to our selves, than a
thousand days ^were there any such Measures of Time in ^ernity) in Heaven.

5. This is the time of our Visitation, and ^erefore most precious time.
Suppose all your opes, and possibilities of salvation, should end ^ith this
day, what would your care and Ac^unt be of this day! and how very short would
(...) seem to be? How would you watch the posting ours, and bethink the
declining shadows? a then, if you could but cry unto the Lord, and ^revail with
him, as once Isaiah did for Heze^ah, 2 King. 20.11. that the Sun might go back
^me ten degrees, whilst you might work out ^^ur Salvation, and make your peace
with God. ^ow it is a little more slumber, a little more ^eep; but Then it would
be, a little more time, ^ittle more space to repent, One Sabbath more, ^e offer
of Grace more, one tender of Christ more, one repenting, one returning hour
more all the world then for ont inch of time; Riches, Honors, Ease, Pleasures,
and all for a little of this precious Time. Why, Christians! now is the
accepted time; this is the day of Salvation; What is it that God has been
calling for, and expecting from you, all your lives hitherto? what has been
the language of every day of your time? and why has he added thi^ one day
more, but that you might now hear^ and live? How long, ye simple ones, will ye
lov^ simplicity! Open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled; for my
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops (...) the night -- Behold,
I stand at the door, an^ knock. My Son, give me thy heart. Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead and Christ shall give thee light. Has not
thi^ been the voice that has waited at your door all your lives long? What
has God been doing in you, and with you, and for you, bo^ here and in Heaven,
but to prepare you for Glory, and to prepare Glory for you?

Had you a great, and a dear Friend, in a fa^ Country, whom you had a long time
long and looked for, and now at length had receive^ a promise of his speedy
return; if you had but (...) day, or some short time, to prepare for his
coming; how carefully would you improve eve^ part of that day, or time, in all
possible preparation? Every Servant should do his part, an^ every thing should
stand in its place and orde^ for the best accommodation they are capable of^ and
how little would you bethink such a days work? what fears would there be, lest
night should come on you too soon for your work! you would hardly have time to
eat your meat ^midst such Employments; much less, would you ^^c down, and talk,
and jest away your time: Oh, methinks I see, with what life and activity, with
what delightsome labor, and overcurious ^eal, you are taken up in such a
case! And ^ow, Christian, has Conscience nothing to say ^oncerning these
things? This is your case; ^ath this been your course, and your care? This ^ath
been your Preparation-day; has this been ^our Preparation-work? Shall the
Devil find ^is House empty, swept, and garnisht, Matthew. (...) 2.44, and shall
God find a foul house at ^is return? Why! what have thou else to do ^a the
world? what business of greater conse^uence, than thine everlasting happiness?
what ^are more weighty, than the care of thy Soul? and what is it thou want
for the doing of ^his work? what direction, what support, what ^ncouragement? O
be sure, that when thy Lord comes, he find thee so doing.

6. It is a determined, set time, and therefore the more precious. God has
measured ^hee out thy time, and thou must be accounta^le for every Minute of
it. He that has set ^ounds to the Sea, has set bounds also to thy ^ime; that
hitherto thou shall go, and no ^urther: He that has numbered the hairs on thy
^ead, has numbered the hours, and minutes of ^hy days; he has determined thy
last hour, and thy last breath, and thou shall not pass one step beyond it.
When that appointed Period is once come, the very next moment lands thee on thy
endless eternity; there is no mastering, corrupting, or entreating of Death;
when God sends it, it must perform its office and message, let the work of thy
Soul, or the concernments of thy Body, lie how they will: Wherever thou art,
at home, or abroad; whatever thy promises, or resolutions be for the future;
the hour that God has determined, shall stand. Oh, with what terror should
this awaken us, to lay hold on present time! Now, Christian, tell me, have thou
thus seriously weighed thy time^ Questionless, these common Notions are no
strangers to you; this is not the first, nor the third, nor, it may be, the
twentieth time, that you have heard the preciousness of Time, thus, and more
fully displayed. But, let me ask you, Have you been so thoroughly acquainted with
it, that I might well have spared my pains about it now? what solemn times have
you taken, to exercise your most studious, and retired thoughts about it? what
an influence has the knowledge of it had upon you? This is an every daye^
Mercy, and therefore should be thy every daye^ Work, as it is thy every days
Duty. Think thus of your Time oft'ner, and you will spend your Time better. Oh,
that I could so river these nails, on my own and your hearts, tha^ they might
never start back more; that they may live, and dye with us! O, never forget
you^ Time! the worth of it, and your approaching account for it! Can you forget
to draw your breath, or to eat your daily bread? Will a Cripple forget his
Crutch, or a Traveller his Pass? As long as you have time, remember your Time;
and that Time, when Time shall be no more.

This, in general. I might show you, that there are some seasons, more
especially precious than others: As, 1. The Time of Youth. The First Fruits are
Holy, and more precious than all the Crop befides; on the account of Divine
Choice, Consetration, and Propriety. Nay, on a Natural, and Moral account too;
This is the seasoning of the Vessel, the initiating, choosing,
covenanting-time. Here, ordinarily, are the founcations of eternity laid; and
the first Goal toward another world, on which the whole Race after does much
depend; the time of greatest service, or dis-service. 2. Sabbath times, are
most precious times indeed. The Day of Gods own separation. This is the Jewel
in the Ring; though every part be precious, yet the Jewel out-values all the
Ring besides. The most pure Elixir, if I may so speak, refined two degrees
above the Quintessence of Time. The Authority, and the End of its Institution,
together with the adjunct Privileges of this part of Time, do highly advance
the unvaluable price, and worth of it. 3. The times of the Gospel, are
glorious, and precious times. Times of glorious Light; of glorious Hopes; Heb.
7.19. Ioh. 1, 17. 2 Pet. 1.4.
of precious Graces; of exceeding great, and precious Promises; nay, and
Performances too. This is the Glory of the later House, prophesied of by
Haggai, chap. 2.9. Life and immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. These are the times so much looked, and longed for, of old. Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation, said old Simeon, Luke 2.29, 30. This is the
Summer, the Harvest of the Church, one day lost now, is of sadder consequence,
than seven in the Winter of former times. 4. Times of affliction, are also
eminently precious. When the Iron is hot and malleable, then has the Artist an
advantage to shape i^ to his mind; The days of the Saints greatest M^series,
are wont to be the days of Gods greatest Mercies: their most painful, their
most gainful hours; both in respect of their supporting Cordials under them,
and the blessed Ends of them. I might have eninlarg'd on these things, but my
present haste and straits prevent me.


Thus we have briefly examined our first Talent of Time. And, oh, Sirs! may we
not dip our pens in tears of blood, and write Tekel on it?

2. How have you improved your Parts and Gifts? If Conscience might but speak
freely here, it would make you blush before God.

1. Consider, how low and mean are they, of what they might have been? When for
the time, says the Apostle, for the helps, the means, the light, the high and
glorious Privileges you have enjoyed; ye ought to be teachers, ye have need
that one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God,
Heb. 5.12, How low is your knowledge! how weak are your reason and capacities!
We are still like children, and babes in Christ; like Trees, at a stand, though
by the Fountain's side, and in the midst of the Paradise of God; like
narrow-mouthed Bottles, that receive but by drops, and, it may be, leak it out
as fast again. 2. How little has there been returned to the Glory of the
Donour, of what we have received! May not God say of us, as Christ, of the ten
that were cleansed? Luke 17.19. Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the
nine? Were there not ten Gifts bestowed, but where are the nine? May not
Conscience answer, The World has had a share, and Self a share, and the Flesh
a share, Lust a share, and the Devil a share too. Have not these divided the
spoils? Tell me, Christian; Where have thou bestowed thy Wits most? thy
Learning, thy Reason? han't the Pleasures, the Profits, the Esteem and Credit
of the world, had more of thy study than God, and thy Soul? Is there no work
for Repentance here? how do thou? how dare thou answer this before the
great God? Art thou not sensible, what a damnable deal of Self-confidence,
Self-attribution, and Self-seeking, has crept into thy most spiritual Duties?
and have these things never troubled thee? Have thy parts never puff^ thee up
with some bigg thoughts of thy self, and an undervaluing account of those that
are weaker? Have thou never been ready to flatter, and adore thy self, and
pleased thee with the Reflections of thy own beams, and the good opinion of
others concerning thee? Have you no Experiences that can comment on what I say,
and run parallel with me here? have your days of private Humiliation never
afforded you just cause of secret Lamentation? have you never been forced to
seek for a corner, to weep over your own prayers and rears, on this very
account? have not you been ready to rest in the bare exercise of Gifts, without
Grace, and to mistake Gifts for Grace? have you never had reason to question,
from the selfishness, or flatness of Duties, whether it were God, or Nature
only, the spirit of Christ, or the natural, and acquired elevations of the
rational Soul that acted and steered you? have you lived on the heart and
vitals of Duty? Can you say with Bernard, Bern. Ep. 116.
Nunquam abs te absque te recedo, I never go away from thee, without thee? Oh,
my Brethren! can you pick up nothing here, that deserves to be set among your
Corrigenda, the scapes, and blemishes of your Duties and Lives? 3. How have you
improved your Graces? These are your distinguishing Talents, which difference
you from all others in the World. The Nether Springs of Time, and Parts, and
external Enjoyments, are common to the Strangers; but these Upper Springs are
the childrens Privilege. Look over your Graces now, and consider, what care,
what account, what increase, have you made of them? Have you perfected holiness
in the fear of God? 2 Cor. 7.1.
What can you say of your Repentance? has it been a Repentance from dead
works? Heb. 6.1. a mortifying Repentance? What Is become of the sins you have so
often confessed, and complained of to God, and made as if you were so
exceedingly weary and ashamed of, and troubled about? Would you willingly give
God leave to search every corner of your hearts and lives for them? Are there
none of those Stolen Images you have so constantly, and confidently denied,
and defied, to be found in your Tents? None, but those you have served, as Jael
served Sisera, that lie dead at your feet! Where are the lively Fruits of your
Repentance unto life, which may testify for you, that it has been in
faithfulness, and in truth? han't your Repentances been like a Cake not turned,
baked only on the top? or, like the Tears of the Crocodile, that seems to weep
over the Prey, he inwardly rejoices in? Have you repented unto God, or unto
men only? has your Sorrow proceeded from the evil, and sinfulness of sin, or
merely from the danger of it? Oh, Christians! as ever you expect comfort from
any of your Graces, make these things clear to your selves. All your hopes of
Pardon, and Justification, and consequently, of all that good you expect in
this World, or another, are built on the sincerity of your Repentance. What
have you to do with Pardon without Repentance? I even tremble, to think of
those many thousands in the world, that have made their own Pardons, and sealed
them with all their confidence; with what shame and horror will their faces be
appalled, when God shall tear these forged Indulgences out of their hands, and
burn them, and their lying Pardons, together. Are not you some of those that
defy the Beast, with all his Lies and Effascinations? and what! will ye turn
Popes to your own Souls? and sell your Lusts the Indulgences of your own
Inscription? Ah, Brethren! Remember, A bare Confession is but an external
concomitant of Repentance; and a bare sorrow for sin, is but a part of
Repentance. Your words, your tears, and your hopes, may all deceive you.
Repentance, is a wonderful changing and transforming thing. See, how the
Apostle describes it, 2 Cor. 7.11. For, behold, this self same thing that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what
clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what
vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge? Oh! what a difference is
there between our sorrowing for sin, and our sorrowing for the crosses and
troubles of the world? how naturally do we grieve for these things! we need no
Monitors here; our sorrows seldom keep within their bounds. But when we come to
mourn for sin; how are we straightened! how cold and dead are we! how hard must we
wring for a tear! what a tugg have we, to rub a little life into our frozen
affections! like stones cast into the air, they fly no farther, than the very
dead force drives them, and then make haste to their old Center again. Oh, my
Brethren! what can we think of such forced Repentings? If we repent, as it
were, against our Wills, will God pardon against his Will?

What do you think of your Faith? Is not a speculative Credence, and a blind
Hope, or a bottomless Persuasion, that which you call your Faith? Is it a
Covenanting Faith? an obedient, and fruitful, a holy, and spiritualli^ing
Faith? Take this for a Rule. A Justifying, ^s always a Sanctifying Faith, 1 Job.
3.3. I ^an but hint at things here, and propose you ^he general heads, which
your own hearts, I ^ope, will more largely comment on. In a word, Is your Faith
such as is required in, and by the Word of God, the Rule of Faith?

Again, For your Love, and the rest of your Graces, that reside in the
Affections; who has, and who has had, the greatest share here; God, ^r the
World; Christ, or Self; your Duty, or ^our present Ease and Safety? your
Humility, ^our Patience and Contentment; your Zeal, and Charity, and Brotherly
kindness; Is there nothing lacking here? These are the Garments ^ou are shortly
to meet the Bridegroom in; ^re they such as will become his Table, and his
^pouse? Are they not ragged, torn, and foul? ^s there no washing-work, no
mending-work here! Oh, Sirs! look up: your Lord is come to visit you, and to
reckon with his Family; his Harbingers are knocking at your doors; and is not
the sound of their Master's feet behind them? Shall he find you in this foul,
and ragged Plight? oh! that I could secretly come to every one of your hearts,
and awaken them with Martha's words to Mary, Joh. 11.28. The Master is come,
and calls for thee. And, if you will hear, now is the time; be sure, you
shall not be called upon much longer, in such a way as this. Your Consciences
shall bear witness for me, that I have done what I can to awaken you. Oh, my
Brethren! Shall God find us sleeping in such a day as this? Will he not deal
with us, as that Captain did with his Soldier, whom he found asleep on the
Guard? Mortuum inveni, and mortuum reliqui. Dead I found thee, and dead I leave
thee.

4. How have you improved your Duties? Your Duties are your Privileges, and
your work is part of your wages. Is it no honor to be Servant, nay, a Noble in
the Court of the most high King? Is there no difference between the service of
God, which is perfect liberty, and the service of Self, and Satan, which is the
highest degree of Slavery? Now, what an esteem have you had of your work? han'd
you over-yalued that, which is of man in it ^ I mean, the bodily exercise, the
Modes, and Circumstances, the visible excellencies, and accomplishments of it;
and undervalued that which is more immediately of God? Have not you rather doted
on the expressions and external Garbes, than admired and adored the Spirit, by
which you have prayed or heard? Have not you been ready to attribute something to
your own strength, and to forget the hand that leads you! And what has been
the increase of your Duties, both Number and Weight? Where Is that you have
prayed all this while for, and ^eard and meditated for? Do you find that ^uties
grow more easy and facil, and your ^earts more ready and prompt and thoroughly
^urnisht unto every good word and work? It ^ay be you are grown more Wordie or
Eloquent ^^ Prayer or Conference, more capacious or ^etentive in understanding
or memory; thus ^he exercise of natural faculties may in^ease the habit of its
natural strength, though (...) be about spiritual Objects; and yet all the
^hile it be but a carcass without a Soul. But ^n you say that duties are
improved in the ^irit and life of them? Don't you remember a ^me when you could
hardly reach up your hand (...) turn the Key of Prayer, but were forced to ^and
without and call at a distance, amidst ^eloud Rabble of turbulent profane
thoughts, ^^d cold and carnal affections? That in hear^g the cloud was so
thick upon you, that you ^uld scarce conclude whether it were Night or ^ay with
you? That in you will wordly businesses ^ad all other duties of your General or
Parti^lar calling, you had much ado to keep your ^ye on the Mark; much more to
hit it? And how is it with you now? Can you say that you are still getting
nearer to God? That those former Distances are daily abolishing through the
abundant and abounding fullness of the Grace that is given you? Are you getting
ground on God, (if I may so speak) does every step bring you nearer and every
Duty wind you higher? I mean not in fine words, or Miinical gestures, or
affected Singularities, but in the spirituality and flesh-abasing power of it?
Oh, Sirs! Can you gather nothing from this Rod, that may mind you of something
that is amiss in your Duties? Was there nothing amiss in our Preaching, and in
you Hearing, and in both our Praying and other Duties, that God has cut us so
short of it now^ The good Lord, if he has any pleasure in us fully and
effectually discover these things to us?

5. Your Company is another Talent, that you must reckon for. O what mutual
advantage might we have made of this Talent? The Merchants of the World account
their Companies and Societies, their hours and places o^ Commerce and Exchange,
one of their great privileges. Lawyers and Physicians, when they come together
will be prying into one another secrets and experiences, and proposing their
doubts and cases depending. Nay, the very Drunkards and Whore-mongers,
Brothells an^ Assassinates will improve one another Company for the carrying
on of their desired though ungodly designs, to promote the Interest of the
Devil, to ruin their Estates and families, and to damn their own Souls. How
frequent are such Complaints at the Gallows? Had it not bin for such or such
Company, I had never come to this miserable End. Though we may not curse, yet
how little Cause are we like to have, when we come to die, to bless one
another Company, and God, for that good we have done or received that way? Are
we not ordinarily as vain, as worldly, as useless in our Company, as others
are. Oh! whence is it that those that are inspired by the Spirit, led by the
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, should yet be thus Carnal? Are we the Lights of
the World? Is the Candle of the Lord in us? Join two or more Candles together,
and will not their Flames presently embrace, and dart up in one to a more lofty
Spire, and with the more transcendent Glory? Sure, it is our little Communion
with God, that has thus incarnated the Communion of Saints. Are we trading
together for Heaven, engaged in the same duties, and in the same dangers? Are
our main Conternments and Businesses one and the same? Are we all bound for the
same Harbor, and Children of one and the same Father? And have we nothing to
do with and for one another about ^t? Are there so many weak and feeble and
^ark among us, that we may fear how they will hold home! And is there no need
of a ^elping hand? Oh how well would thy Father ^ake it to see thy weaker
Brother's burden on ^hy shoulders, helping him along! This is the glorious
commendation of Christ's care of us, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. Oh that we could
resolve thus with our selves, when ever we happen (as we think we should
earnestly covet) into the company of any of the Saints of God. Well! Now here
is one opportunity more put into my hands of doing or receiving some good, the
loss of this opportunity may lose me one jewel in my Crown: Am I traveling
with him here on the Earth? Oh let me travail as many steps with him toward
Heaven!

But, by the way, take with you this Caveat. Take heed of vain Ostentation, or
empty circumstantial scruples and questions; let the matter of your discourse,
and the manner of it too, be such as may administer Grace. And meddle not so
much with other men's sins, as with your own duty. It Is to be feared, that we
spend more time to exclaim on others sins, than to bewail our own; to cast
dirt in others faces, than to wipe off, or to weep off that which is on our
own. And may not this be one Cause, why God has suffered the Penalty on our
coming together, even because he has had no more glory, nor our Selves and
Brethren advantage this way?

6. Your Privileges are Talents you must shortly answer for. And these are
either,

Temporal, or

Spiritual.

The Temporal I might divide into Ordinary, or extraordinary. Of the Ordinary,
I shall instance but in these three, and that b iefly.

Our Health.

Our Peace.

Our Plenty.

1. Our Health. How miserably have we abused our Health, both in its self, and
in its End? In its self; how often have we endangered and impaired it, through
its hard bondage to the World or the Flesh. The Body indeed is your house to
work in; but take need of eating down your own walls. May not thy diseased,
spoiled health, thy akeing ^mbs, and broken bones cry out on thy covetous
^eart, thy immoderate toil, thy greedy mind, ^hy foolhardy and audacious
tempting of God, (...) thy intemperate life? Nay, in the recovering ^f decayed
health; how has God been thrust ^side, as it were, and natural, it may be,
di^bolical means only, or especially sought un^o? And as for your ends, has
it not been more to please and ease or serve the flesh, than ^o discharge your
duties toward God? Has ^ot your Health been made your slave and ^rudge for
the World, and to hold the Candle ^o the uncleanest of your Lusts? Who has had
^e honor and service of your Health: Let Conscience speak the truth now; how
seldom ^ath God heard from you more than in your ^old and customary way, till
he has been even forced to take up his Rod, and make some breach upon your
Health? And do we wonder then that he has let fly the arrows of Death, of War
and Pestilence at us! 2. Our Peace. How sadly may we look back and lament the
Peace we have lost? When we had peace with men, we regarded not our peace with
God, nor with one another. What Quarrels were we picking? What Divisions were
we running amongst our selves? When there were none to fall out with us, we
began to fall out with one another, and to smite our fellow servants; and
therefore is God justly fallen out with us. We have stripped our own Peace to
feather our Nests, and now, Behold, we cannot sit warm in them. 3. Our Plenty.
How fat and wanton are we grown, puffed up with the conceit of our own strength:
God has filled our Barns and laden the Earth with his Mercies, and with the
Fool we have been ready to say, Soul take thine ease. Mercies are never more
foully abused, than when most freely bestowed. What has God had of all our
increase? When thou shall have eaten and be full, then beware les^ thou forget
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. God has found, that gross feeding does produce ill
humors, and gross miscarriages. As they were increased, so they sinned
against me. Hos. 4.7. And therefore he is fain to keep us low.
I might also mind you of your Privileges and deliverances extraordinary. Has
God never rescued you from the very brink of the grave, and reached you his hand
when you were just sinking? Has he never over-answered your Prayers, and gone
beyond your Faith and Hopes? Have you never seen him stepping out of his common
way, and as it were breaking the bedge of Nature and Reason to haste to your
help; that you have been forced to say, This is the Lords doing, it is
mavelous in our eyes. Psalm. 118, 23. And do you think this will be forgotten
in the day account? What wonders of Providence did God work for Israel, from
Egypt till they came into the Land of Promise? But, Our Fathers understood not
thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies, but
provoked him at the Sea, even the Red-Rea. They soon forgot his works, they
waited not for his counsels. Psalm. 106.7, 13. Therefore he lifted up his hand
against them, and overthrew them in the wilderness. ver. 26. The abuse of
extraordinary Providence, whether of Mercy or Judgment, on our selves or
others for our warning, is commonly attended with extraordinary vengeance.

2. Your spiritual Privileges, and these are either External, or Internal.
External, as 1. Our Ministry is one of your Talents, which you as well as we
must shortly give an account for. This seems to be one special voice of the
Rod, and that which it chiefly aims at. This is one of the main Bones that God
has broken, the principal vein that he has struck us in, and therefore our
search and attention here should be the more serious and solemn. Remember now
with what careless, customary Indifferency you have bin wont to hear; with what
drowsy, dead, secure affections; with what unbelief, irreverence, hypocrifie;
with what a divided, worldly, and wandering spirit; with what inconsiderate,
blind zeal? Christianl reason thus with thy self; what an excellent favor is
this, that I have thus long enjoyed. What way could the poor blind world have
grop't out to get to Heaven by; what shift could we have made? Must not I and
all the world with me, of necessity, have perished to all eternity, had it not
bin for Christ, and the blessed manifestation of his Gospel, the bringing in of
a better Hope? for Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17, And if our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that be lost. 2 Cor. 4, 3. And now what have I done? How
can I answer for what I have received of this Talent? Thus long have I lived
under such a man's Ministry, and thus long under another; Besides all those
occasional advantages, which have been very frequent and precious. With what
preparation? With what care? With what humility and self-denial? With what
resolution and purpose of heart have I sought God and the everlasting happiness
of my own Soul in the enjoyment of such Mercies? To what purpose has been all
my hearing and praying hitherto? Ah! What work have you here to deal plainly
with your selves in? How might your thoughts run into particulars, and every
stone you turn ^fford you matter of Lamentation! I beseech you, Brethren, for
the Lord Jesus sake, let not ^our ears be both the Cradles and the Graves ^f
these proposed Confiderations: oh, let me ^oe open to your eyes only, and the
curiosity of your ears and censures; and pack all up again, without any hopes
of trading with your hearts! This is none of mine, but Gods errand, I am ^ent
in; the fruit of his tender care, and com^assion of your souls. Oh, let it not
return ^mpty from whence it came! let me not carry (...) back in witness of
your ungrateful refusal! God will shortly come to reckon with you himself, he
has sent me but a little before, as the ^oice of one crying in the Wilderness,
to warn ^ou to prepare his Way, and to make his ^iths strait. And, remember!
Let Consci^nce set it down, that this day you have been warned. 2. The
Sacraments are another, and no ^mall part of your Talent. How shall we take ^he
weight, and worth of this Privilege? All ^he World, and a thousand more such,
will never move the Scales against it. Oh, the height, and depth, and length,
and breadth, of the love of God, in Christ Jesus! How might we begin ^fresh to
reckon with our hearts here? Have you been some of Gods invited Guests, that
^ave eaten, and drunk at his Table, and fed upon ^is Body and Blood? Consider
then, 1. What you have done. Have you fed on ^arist, like children, at his
Breasts? or preyed like Vultures, on his Flesh and Blood? The evidence is clear
concerning the Fact; you cannot deny, but that you have eaten at his Table; you
have had your share, and you must expect your Reckoning. It Is no ordinary fare
you have fed upon, and you may expect that the account will be some way
answerable. Salvation or Damnation will be the sum total of your Bill of Fare.
Sacraments are chargeable Dishes; It cost the Great Master of these Sacred
Feasts dear, his dearest, and only Son, and the Feast-holder himself his
dearest Blood; And do you think to sit at these Tables, at the same rate, as at
the Ordinary of the World? What! think you to plead your Foederal, and
Evangelical Right, by the seal of the first Sacrament, that gave you visible
Title to the second? Ah, but what if this should but aggravate the business?
Need I tell you, that the first admission was upon terms; and what these terms
were? Were you admitted into the Family of God, and not bound to the Laws and
Discipline of the Family? Know, my brethren that there was a mutual stipulation
in your first Baptismal Adoption. Surely, it is no small affront, for a Dog to
lap of the Master's choise^ dish, and at the Table of his most solemn Feast
though they belong, as Dogs, to the Family, an^ go in and out at the same door
with the children Oh, Sirs! there are high things, that we a^ stand chargeable
with, on this account, and ho^ little do we consider it? 2. How have you
carried your selves in the use of Sacraments! Oh! Where are your most serious
thoughts? Methinks the Rod speaks louder, and plainer here, than ordinary; For
this cause, many are weak and sickly, among you, and many sleep, 1 Cor. 11, 30.
And the cause you may see, from ver. 17. to 22. 'Twas their abusing, and
profaning of Sacraments. I shall but propose things in general here, and leave
them to be more fully discussed between God and your own hearts. Consider then,
1. What an influence has your Baptismal Vow had upon you? how little have you
studied the Terms and Conditions of those your first Indentures between God and
you? and how seldom has it been in your thoughts? Han't it past by you, as a
Ceremony, rather than a Business of any great import? 2. With what solemn
Preparation have you waited on God, in the enjoyment of the other Sacrament?
Have not you spent more time and care about your Bodies, than about your Souls? or
in the external part of Preparation, than in the life, and power, and spirit of
it? With what self-abhorrencie, with what brokenness of ^eart, with what
hungring affections, with what faith, and earnest hope, with what dear love,
and spiritual joy, and holy watchful care, have you ficeed, and filled your
selves, for so near, and intimate Communion with God? 3. What good have you
gotten by Sacraments? Have you been like Giants refreshed ^ith wine? How have
your Graces flourished under such heavenly dews? Have your resolutions been
strengthened, and your diligence doubled? has the Devil lost ground in you? oh,
what have you to show that you have gotten by Sacraments? Are you not as empty,
as vain, as worldly, as impatient, as selfish after, as you were before? Are
these things like to make for the comfort of your account, at last? Which way
can we look, but we may find guilt and shame meeting us? is not every leaf in
your Consciences filled with accusations against your selves? oh! with what
astonishing shame will it amaze secure sinners, when, all that Conscience has
to say, shall be published in open Court, before God and Angels, and all the
world! Now is the time to prevent all this; yet you have a repenting hour, a
returning season; oh! don't sit it out, and talk, o^ resolve it away, till you
come to Esau's pass, and then a whole world will never redeem you one such
offer more.
3. Good Books are another part of your Privilege. These are some of the
golden streams, that have refresht, and made glad the City o^ God. How
wonderfully has the Church flourish't under these Dews? the Pulpit and the
Press have been the two Breasts of the Spouse or, as the Hands of Sampson, on
the Pillars o^ the Kingdom of Satan. It Is true, these Breast have been, and
always are, molested with i^ humors, and give Blood, nay, sometimes, Poy son,
instead of Milk. But, we have that Glas^ in our hands, that will discover where
the Poy son lies. To the Law, and to the Testimony; ^f they speak not according
to this Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. ^ay, and we
have the spirit of Promise, and of Truth; whose Office is, to guide us into all
^uth, Joh. 16.13. This, like the Unicorn's ^orn, tries the Pool, and Antidotes
it before we ^rink. It Is confessed, that the most eminent Wri^ngs, of the
choicest Instruments of the Church ^f God, have their (...), their Naevi, their
^pots and Blemishes: This argues, that they ^re but men, though divinely, yet
not infallibly ^spir'd. The Fountain indeed is most pure, ^et the Streams are
useful too, though liable to ^ccidental, and humane Tinctures and Imper^ctions.
A Fountain without its Streams, ^ould be serviceable but to few; abstract the
^un from its diffused Beams, and where is its ^ory or service? But when every
one may have, (...) it were, a Brook, running through their ^itchins, what a
help, and advantage is it, in ^ldomestick employments? Surely, never was here
an Age in the world, that abounded with ^ch, and so many helps of all sorts, as
ours ^ave done. Now, consider, what an Account, (...) Improvement, have you
made of this Talent? ^s for the choice of your Books, and Studies, I ^ean, not
only Scholars and Students, but others; ^an't you been led by the corrupt
Genius of a ^anton Fancy, to Plays, Romances, Stories, Toys, and unprofitable
Questions, (...), Profane, and old wives Fables! or an ^oneous understanding,
and schismatical, and partial affection, led you unto the Tents o^ Mesech, the
sons of contention, to strengthen your selves, to kindle, or quicken coals
among Brethren? Have you exercised your selves, rather unto Godliness; as the
Apostle exhort^ 1 Timothy 4.7. and made your choice of such Books, and means, as
may best promote tha^ noble, and blessed End? And have you in^ proved such your
choice, with your utmost ca^ in reading, understanding, and obeying them It
cannot but grieve my heart, to think of the miserable slighting, and horrible
abuse, of the part of our Talent; to see poor souls groping and rambling up and
down in the Dark, whi^ every corner stands so full of these precio^ Lights.
When I find, of what large capaciti^^ firm intellectuals, retentive memories,
working affections, and excellent naturals, some me are of, and yet in all
these degraded, throu^ the madness of their hearts, that they little d^fer, as
to their aims, objects, and leadi^ principles, from the beast that perishes.
Son will pretend, they have no money to bestow (...) such commodities; who yet
can find, it m^ be, twice as much, to spend at one sitting, wi^ their fellow
Drunkards, or Dealers; or in son Toy, to please a cocker'd child; or to cloa^
the back of Pride; or to sacrifice to any their Lusts. If the Devil, by the
Commiss^ of the unclean spirit, lay a Tribute, as I m^ say, on thee; he seldom
goes without it. If (...) self-love, thy vainglory, or revenge, levi^ subsidy
upon thee; it presently stands for a S^^ ^cute-Law with thee, and thou dare
not refuse, or delay thy obedience, though thou pinch thy self, weary thy
friends, and undo thy family for it; But though thy Soul lie gasping, bleeding,
and dying within thee, and the mouth of Hell stand open for thee, and thy
Friends, that wish thee and thy Soul well for ever, lie hard at thee; yet here
thou pleadest a Corban, and have nothing to spare, because thou have no heart
to spare. Others there are, that count it sufficient, ^f they bestow their money
in these things, though they have little time to spare in reading, ^ess in
considering them; as though they meant ^o set up these for their Penates, their
Paper^dols, or Houshold-Gods; or else let them lie, (...) waste papers, of
little use, more than for children to play with, or to pass away a tedious our
on a Sabbath day.



Others, again, for the pleasantness of the ^yle, or some by-respects to the
Person, or ^ubject, will seem to proselyte themselves, to ^ch, or such a ones
devotion. Others, more ^r Novelty, than for their Understanding, or
^onscience-sake; tumble over one page after ^other, and when all is done, can
say, they ^ve read it, but are as wise as the Moths; those ^elluones Librorum,
that feed upon them. Oh, ^ow few are there, that, like Bees, extract the
^eetness, and service of those Flowers? Where ^e the Combs you have fashioned,
and the ^ore, you have treasured for a spending time? ^here are the
Convictions, the Resolutions, (...) Affections, they have wrought on your
hearts and lives? What pains, and watching^ and care, and cost, and hazzards,
have those eminent servants of God been at; and all, a^ the abused issue has
proved, but to feed you^ fancies, and to expose themselves to your censures,
and Critical castigations? Questionless there is no small guilt, in the Records
of Heaven, against us, on this account. It is not for nothing, that God has
set Watchers over us, an^ a Flaming Sword, to keep the way of this Tre^ of Life.

2. Your Internal Privileges; the stirrings and operations of the Spirit in
you, this will come into account too, at last.

1. Your Convictions. How often has the Spirit of God wrestled with you, till
you ha^ been forced to yield? how often has Go^ brought you to your knees, and
made you confess before him? and what woeful shifts have you made, to quench the
Spirit again? Have not you been like water forced against the stream, tha^ has
broken down, and swollen over all the Baies, and Damms, that have stood before
it Don't you find, that Convictions are hard^ to be wrought now, than once they
were? the ordinary things do less affect you, than the^ were wont to do? or are
more ineffectua^ and fruitless, than they were wont to be And is there no
matter of sorrow, and lamentation, in all this? 2. Your Refolutions. H^n't
these been lik^ the Spider's Webb, spun out of your own Bowels? and have been
broken, by every finger of temptation? Han't God been often disho^oured, and
your selves deceived, by your ^ight; rash, and half resolutions? Are you not
^ham'd, to think, to how little purpose you ^ave been so long a purposing? When
are you ^ke to be settled, in that, you have been once, and again, resolving
on? 3. Your Vows. Are not the Vows of the lord upon you? Have not you been often
plighting ^our troth with him? May not God sue you, ^or your Faith, Love, and
Obedience, upon that ^pecialty you have given him, under your own ^ands and
seals? Now, consider, how faithful ^ave you been, in performing your Oaths unto
God? Have you walked, as those that are in ^ecial Covenant with him? What a tie
has ^is been upon you, against all assaults? what stay has it been, when your
feet have been ^ding? oh, my Brethren! Han't God much (...) lay to our charge,
concerning our Vows and ^ovenants? Look back on your days of cala^itie, on
your sick-beds, when you were in the ^tterness and anguish of your souls; on
your ^nvictions, and desertions, when the sense of ^vine wrath, and intolerable
guilt lay upon ^u; was there nothing past between God and ^u then, that is worth
your remembrance, and ^lls for tears afresh now? Surely, now that ^od is
visiting for these things, it is time for us (...) consider. 4. Your Comforts.
Those reviving Cordials, ^at have so often fetch^ life into your dying ^pes;
with what thankfulness have you entertained them? with what faithfulness have
yo^ reserved, and stored them up, for standing experiences, to support you in
future dangers, fears, or miseries? Christian, what is it tha^ comforts thee
most? Is it the hope of a temporal deliverance, of better times, and greaten
freedom and peace? Why! these are the thing that natural, and carnal men, are
wont to comfort themselves with. In the Lord put I m^ trust, says David, how
say ye then, to m^ soul, flee as a bird to your mountain? Psa^ 11.1. Remember
the word unto thy servant upon which thou have caused me to hope. The is my
comfort in my affliction; for thy word hat^ quickened me, Psalm. 119.49, 50. Here
a^ three things, which contribute to David comfort in his affliction. 1. The
Promise (...) the Word, the ground of his hope. 2. His relation, as servant,
unto God, the ground of h^ propriety, or right to the Promise. 3. The
Influence of the Word, through the quickni^^ cooperation of the Spirit. It Is
not enough that there is a word of Promise made to us, unless the condition of
the Promise be wrough in us, and the Spirit quicken us, to apply the Promise
too. Comforts drawn from a Promis^ without the Condition of the Promise, are b^
stolen Comforts; and a Promise, without the Spirit, to quicken and apply it,
is but li^ a Honeycomb in the mouth of a dead man, the has not strength to
draw it.
1. Consider, of what nature are your comforts? Are they earthly, or spiritual
Comforts Where is it you are wont to retire, and to take ^ctuarie in your fears
and dangers? Are you (...) ready to answer with David? In the Lord (...) I my
trust. But, what is that thou find in ^d, that comforts thee? You will say,
His ^ributes, and Promise: you know that he ^ble, and ready to help, and has
promised ^o do, in a time of trouble. Yet this is not to (...) Question. This
shows the ground of your ^forts, but not the nature of them. You (...) guess at
the nature of your comforts, by (...) inward fears and troubles; of what kind
these? Are they the concernments of God (...) Christ, and your own souls, or
your ex^al, and private interest, that you are so ten^ of? Don't the hopes of
your deliverance (...) the Rod, affect, and rejoice you more, than (...) hopes
you have of being bettered by the (...)? Alas, Christian I God will have thee
yet (...) spiritual, he intends to wean thee from self, and to make the
concerns of his Glory, thy own Soul, yet more precious with thee. ^true,
there is comfort in every good; and (...) Creature of God is to be refused, 1 Timothy (...) so neither the comfort that issues from it, look, of what nature the
Good is, of the (...) nature, in its self, is the comfort that ^gets. It is thy
highest Good, that af^ thy highest comfort. So that hence you judge of your
choice, and consequently, of present Estate, and future Portion, accor^^ to
such Estate.

Consider, of what ground and sufficiency are thy comforts? what weight do
the^ make against all thy discomforts? Are they su^ as proceed from a true, and
lively Faith, a^ the Spirit, the Comforter? or, are they bred (...) the knees
of thy carnal Reason, and bli^ Hopes? The strength of thy Comfort will (...)
much according to the strength of thy Fai^^ Romans 15.13. 1 Pet. 1.8. and the
fullness (...) thy Joys, according to the fullness, and near^ of thy Communion
with God, 1 John 1.3. Thy Common Reason, and carnal Experien^ may serve thee,
as Rebeccah served Isaac. (...) may dress thee a savoury Dish, such as t^^
likest, and tell thee, that the Lord (...) God has brought it to thee. Bastard
Co^^ forts may seem very beautiful, and stolen ^^ters, sweet; but these are
wasting Comfo^^ Cisterns that will not hold long; these W^^ will quickly run on
the Lees; when God ^^gins to walk with thee, above thy reach, (...) to lead
thee through the dark, and narrow w^^ of his Providence, these Comforts will
(...) Shades too, and tend to thy disquietm^^^ Therefore, my brethren, examine
your C^^ forts; see whose Image and superscription (...) bear; and be sure,
that among all o^ things you have to comfort your selves w^ you be not without
that one, which will (...) fort you in Death, and sweeten the bitterest (...)
for you.

3. Consider, What use have you mad^ your Comforts? How have you set Faith
(...) Hope on work, in your straits and difficult (...) ^^th God given you this
Talent, to lie idle by (...)? Those Jewels that are of greatest worth, (...) of
greatest use; The more there is of Pri^^edge in it, the more of Duty. Blessed
be (...), even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...) Father of mercies,
and the God of all com^^t; who comfort us in all our tribula^^^, that we may
be able to comfort them ^^^ch are in any trouble, by the comfort where^^^h we
our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. ^3, 4. Here are four things observable
in (...) comforts. 1. The ground, or original of (...); and that was God, the
Father of mer^^^, and the God of all comfort. 2. Their way (...) Conveyance:
'twas, through Jesus Christ, (...) therefore he adds, the Father of our Lord
^^us Christ. 3. Their Sufficiency; it was universal cordial; comfort in all
tribulation. The end, or use of it, which was twofold; ^ate, and Public. 1.
Private. It begat him a thankful frame of heart; Blessed be (...), who
comfort us. 2. Public. viz. (...) communication of the same comfort to ^s;
That we might be able to comfort them ^^th are in any trouble. Now sit down,
and sider, what is the reason your comforts are ^ow, and spiritless? how comes
it to pass, (...) are ever and anon, fainting under the (...), and ready to
give up your hopes for lost? (...) art thou cast down, O my soul, and why thou
disquieted within me? Are the trou^^^ of this world too hard for the hopes of
the (...) to come? and lie heavier on you, than Christ can bear in you? Was it
Paul's expe^^ence only, who could say, 2 Cor. 1.5. As (...) sufferings of
Christ abound in us, so our conflation also abounds by Christ. Christia^^ thy
faint, and heavy carriage, and sad (...) quietments, do reflect on thy
Profession, (...) on the glorious Attributes of God. T^^ are your Privileges,
Temporal, and Sp^^tual, which is the sixth Talent we have (...) in question.

7. Your Afflictions, are another of your (...) trusted Talents. God is now
reckoning (...) you, by his Rod; the time is coming, that (...) will reckon
with you for his Rod. Would not be sad, if your present miseries should (...)
aggravate your future unhappiness. Oh! (...) what horror will Conscience look
back ons^^^ less afflictions? When thou lie stretched ou^^^ the Threshold of a
miserable eternity, thy (...) bedience to the Word will sufficiently asto^^
thee; but thy hardening under the Rod, (...) be one of the bitterest Memento's
that shal^^ in thy mind. When the Brute Creat^^ with whose bodies and lives,
thou art now ^^^ting thy unreasonable Lusts, shall rise in J^^^ment against
thee, who never were guil^^^^ so stupid, stubborn, and unteachable a sp^^^^ as
thou. Has God cast thee into the fire, (...) art thou the same still; or
rather, worse (...) worse? Be sure, sinner, God has a Fur^^^^ that is seven
times hotter than any thou (...) ever tried yet, and that will melt thee. (...)
one of the saddest Judgments in the world (...) come out of afflictions
unreform'd; for this is usually, one of Gods last, and most effectual courses,
to humble proud hearts. If the Rod once leave thee uncurable, there is little
hope of thee. Oh! that I could awaken you now! Oh! that God would awaken you!
That I night but open your skirt, for one of the healing, and yet wounding
Arrows, of his Spirit, ^o enter you; surely, he will not spend them all upon
you in vain. If they will not pierce thee ^ow, his Quiver is yet full of the
flaming Darts of his vengeance, with which he will ^ursue thee into Hell, and
there thou must stand ^is Butt to all eternity.

8. And lastly, Your Relations, are not the ^east part of your Talent. Here I
might subdivide my Course, many ways, in this large ^ield: but I shall knit up
all, in as few words as (...) can. There Is never a one, but stands in se^eral
Relations to others, and every Relation ^harg'd full of Duty; But within the
bounds ^f Family-Relations, I shall at present direct my way.

1. I shall begin with Masters of Families. Oh! how few are there, that duly
consider ^he duties of such a Relation! How have Gods saithful servants
labored at this Oar, to convince men of, and persuade them to the obedience,
and practice of these duties! No string (...) often set as this, and yet no
string so much ^ut of tune still. How have you weighed the ^urden that lies
upon your hands! The blood ^f your servants souls, is like to lie at the doors
of your Neglects, another day. You must not think to answer God, as Cain
answered, in another case; Am I my brothers keeper? God has committed not only
their bodies, but their Souls, to your care, Exodus 20.10. And what have you
done for them more than their bare Indentures or Covenants have enforced you?
May not God justly say to thousands among us, nay, to most of us, as once to
Cain? The voice of thy Servants blood cries unto me, not from the ground, but
from Hell. Certainly, it is a dreadful thing, to consider, what cursed and
heathenish cruelty there is shown toward the souls of poor servants. Oh! what
an influence might you have upon them, did you but take the right course with
them; how would a little condescending, self-denying, gentleness, and love
prevail with Inferiors! You are crying out upon their unfaithfulness,
idleness, stubbornness and profaneness: Oh! Consider where one great cause
lies. Has not your worldliness, or frowardness, or supercilious,
unchristian-like stoutness, or your own evil Example, or Negligence and
unwatchfulness in your duties, been the main thing that has produced it? What
time have you allowed them for their souls? what Counsel, what Arguments, have
you used with them? what pains have you taken to inform or reform them? how
often have you been o^ your knees on purpose to God, for their souls Were the
Egptian Taskmasters ever mo^^ exact for their tales of Brick, than you have
been with them? Do you think you are servi^^ of God, and that God will accept
an offering, a duty at your hands, while your poor servants are even forced to
serve the Devil, that they may serve, and please you? oh! that ever such things
should be heard of, among Christians! How few are there, that, with good
Joshua, have solemnly set up their resolutions, and faithfully walked up to
their resolutions, That they, and their houses, will serve the Lord? oh! that
God would persuade us, to more seriousness, and unwearied diligence, in this
business. Questionless, this is not the least cause, for which the Land is
mourning this day. How can we expect, that God should remove his Judgments,
before our sins be removed? that he should restore us, before he has reformed
us? and, Caudrey, Fam. Reform. Gouge, Domestical Duty. Abbot, Christian Family
builded by God.
with what reason, can we ever hope to see a National reformation prosper,
unless it be founded on a domestical, and personal reformation? I can but
briefly touch at these things; only to mind you of them, and to referr you to
those that have purposely, and fully treated of Family-Government, or
reformation.

2. Parents. Methinks, I should need no other Argument here, to provoke you to
your duty, than the nearness, and dearness of such a Relation. If any provide
not for his own, and especially for those of his own house: [and much more then
for his own children] he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Does the Apostle speak only of temporal Provisions here? Nay, were it
so, yet doubtless, by the same Argument, and virtute majoris, the spiritual
part is manifestly included; having always due respect unto our Savior's
command, Matthew. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness. Some there are, even among Christians, that are worse, not only
than Infidels, but the very brute beasts, that regard neither the Bodies, nor
Souls of their own children. But I shall say nothing to such: the very light,
and principles of Nature, do sufficiently condemn them. The greater sort of
Parents think, they have done enough, nay, very wisely and commendably, if,
through their Care, Frugality, Labor, or Wits, they have brought them up to
some calling, or competent Estate, that they may live in fashion amongst men.
Nay, strange is the Ambition of some Parents, that care not what become of
themselves, bodies or souls; so that they may, by any means, advance their
children above the rank of their Predecessors; that will bethink no pains, no
sweat, no travel, no disgraces, nor repulses, for the promotion of their
ambitious aims. Might I take such Parents aside, and ask them seriously, What
they mean, to heap up, with so much labor and diligence, the heavy curses, and
vengeance of God on their poor children? to hang Millstones about their Necks,
and so to set them afloat in a leaking Vessel? to damn their own Souls, that
they may betray those, they pretend so dearly to love! Oh, Sirs! methinks your
hearts should bleed within you, to think what a preposterous course you are
taking, to consult the welfare of your dear children. Have they not immortal
souls, as well as bodies, think you? Have you begotten beasts, or Men? Is there
an everlasting estate, both of glory, and misery, in the world to come? Are
your children born under the condemning sentence of the Law; and the Wrath of
Almighty God? If not, then expunge those Scriptures out of the Book of God,
that plainly affirm it; Matthew. 25.46. Romans 5.12. Ephesians. 2.3. with those hundreds
more, that speak to the same thing. But, if God be true, and his Word must
stand; then tell me, whether the Souls of your children be not of as great a
value, and require as much of your care, as their Bodies. I cannot stand here,
on the Institutions of Family-Discipline; I am, at present, but your brief
Remembrancer, though in a somewhat lax, and digressive way. Oh, my brethren!
Are children a blessing to you? take heed ye be not a curse to them. What pains
and care have you taken, to instruct them in the knowledge and fear of God?
With what wrestlings, and tears, are you wont to go to God for them? With what
gentleness and impartiality, have you administered due, and seasonable
correction? Have you begotten Slaves for the Devil, Limbs of Satan? and shall
they be brought up in the same case they were brought forth? Oh, remember! you
are but Stewards of these Mercies, and must shortly give up your account of
them. They are God's Propriety, and the Souls that he has made.

3. Husbands. The Apostle sums up the Husbands Duty toward the Wife, in this
one word, Love, Col. 3.19. Ephesians. 4.25. And so ought men to love their wives, as
their own bodies: he that loves his wife, loves himself, ver. 28. Here are
two things to be considered; The Object; and the Nature of this Love.

1. The Object. This should be no Accident, nor Adjunct; but the very Person of
the Wife; Portion, Parts, and Beauty, are indeed lovely accomplishments; but
yet are fading, and impermanent; and therefore, not the adequate Objects of the
Husbands affections. Hence it is, that some men love their Wives, as their
Merchandise, for their Portions sake: Some, as their Slaves, for their
Stewardship, Care, or Service-sake: Others, as their Harlots, for their Beauty,
and Lusts sake. These are the horrible abuses of such a Relation. He that loves
his Wife, as he ought, has his Love grounded on her Person, and loves her as
his Wife, abstract from all other Considerations, which Love alone is like to
hold, as long as the Relation holds. 2. The Nature of this Love. Love is both
an Active, and Passive affection. Here I might show you, what Love has to do,
and what to bear in this case. But, because it seems somewat alien from my
present purpose, I shall only mention it, and so proceed.
1. What this Conjugal Love will do, in the behalf of the Wife. We must know,
that the Object of this Love has a double respect, or consideration; both the
Body, and the Soul; the Outer, and the Inner man.

1. The outer Man. Love is a benevolous, and diffusive affection.

1. It bestows its self on its Object, and unites its self with it. And they
two shall be one Flesh. 2. It delights to live with its Object. Verus amor
maxim delectatur praesentia amati, Daven. in Coloss. cap. 3. v. 19.
and quasi cruciatur ejusdem absentia^. True love greatly delights in the
presence of its beloved, and is even crucified by its absence. 3. True love
will provide for the Wife, Amor est diffusivus sui boni.
according as her necessity, or degree, requires.
2. The Inner man. This is the special Care, and Charge of a Christian Husband.
He is therefore called the Head of the Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. And she required to
ask, and to learn of her Husband, at home, 1 Cor. 14.35. who should be able to
instruct her. What know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband:
and what know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy Wife, 1 Cor. 7.16.

2. What, Love will bear with toward the Wife.

1. With all the deformities, and decaies of Nature. 2. With all humane
Infirmities, Passions, Weaknesses, or unkindnesses, 1 Pet. 3.7. Giving honor
unto the Wife, as unto the Weaker Vessel.
4. Wives. The sum of their duty, as contradistinct unto that of the Husbands,
is, to obey, Ephesians. 5.22. Col. 3.18. Here Is the plain Precept. Besides, St. Peter
pleads prescription too, 1 Pet. 3.5. After this manner, in the old time, the
holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection
unto their own husbands. Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord. It Is
the excellency of a Christian, to know the duties of his Relation. God has
made the Husband the head of the Wife, in all things, under Christ; And
certainly, for a Wife to disobey her Husband, in things lawful, or indifferent,
is manifestly to rebel against her Maker. (...). Obedience, is the Mother of
Felicity. If you would live happily, live obediently. Though God has, in his
Providence, joined thee with a Cross Disposition, yet that will not discharge
thee of thy duty; Daven. in Col.
Quo difficilius, eo laudabilius; The more difficult, the more praiseworthy.
It Is true, the great Lord and Husband of his Church, must be obeyed, whatever
become of the Wills, or Laws of man: But, take heed, you make not a pretense of
Duty, a cloak of wickedness and disobedience.

5. Children. Their Duty likewise, is, to obey their Parents, Ephesians. 6.1.2. but
here we find their duty limited. Obey, in the Lord. Obey them, as you may obey
God too. Children have a double Parentage; a Father in Heaven, at least, by
Creation, as well as a Father on Earth. Now, in all Relations whatsoever,
Whether it be better to obey God, or man, when one must necessarily be
disobeyed, we make no doubt. But the Instruction of children, at least, in
their minority, being the bounden, and domestic duty, and care of the Parents,
and especially of the Mother, as might appear by 1 Timothy 5.10. 2 Timothy 1.5. Prove.
31.1. (...) shall not undertake it here, but commit it unto those, whose more
proper, and peculiar work it ^s. Though I doubt not, but that the obedience and
duty, here required of children, to their Parents, expires not with their
minority; The Relation never dies, while the Correlates live; The child is a
child, as long as he has a Parent; and the duties of his Relation, though, as
(...) Circumstances, may be varied, yet as to their obligation, are not at all
remitted, or diminished.

6. Servants. Their duty also, is, Obedience, and faithfulness; not with
eye-service, but in ^ngleness of heart. (loc.cit.) Remember, How^er you may
deal with your Masters on earth, ^ou have a Master in Heaven, whose eye is
always upon you, and observes your going out, and your coming in, and has a
Hell, or a Heaven, to pay your wages with. Oh! take heed (...) those sins
especially, that are most incident unto servants, and all those provocations
and ^ticements of evil Company, which are like (...) beget, or foment, corrupt
Principles in you. ^ow hard a matter is it, to find an Onesimus! wicked
Company, is ordinarily one of the ^eatest snares that servants are caught in.
My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not, Prove. 1.10. etc. Bad servants
become bad masters, and so sin and misery run in a successive, and hereditary
line. Thus I have finished the first Question, How have you improved your
Talents?

2. How have you kept your Watch? How importunately does Christ press this
duty? Mar. 13.33. Take ye heed, watch, and pray, for ye know not when the time
is. And, Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house
comes, ver. 35. And, What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. ver. 37.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16.13.
Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, Rev. 16.15. Christians!
God has set you on the Guard,; you are his Watchmen. Now there are these four
things especially requisite in a good Watchman.

1. A Watchman must be a man of Counsel and Judgment; able to discern between
good and evil, Friends and Enemies. He must know the bounds, and extent of his
Commission. Watching, is the work of the eye, therefore, surely, blind men can
never be good Watchmen. It Is true, there are a generation, whom the world
applauds, for wise, understanding, knowing men; and these are Watchmen too. But
David tells us what it is they watch for; Psalm. 4.6. Who will show us any good?
and the next verse specifies, what good it is they watch for; even the excrease
of their corn and wine. And Christ himself tells us, whereto such wisdom comes
at last, Luke 12.20. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee.

Others there are, that are wise, and watchful too; but it is to do evil; Ephesians.
4.14.
That lie in wait to deceive. Others, that are wise in their Generations; but
are such as David complains of, Psalm. ^19.95. The wicked have waited for me, to
destroy me. Of this sort were they that met with the Spouse, Cant. 5.7. That
watch to wound and to smite; Whose feet run to evil, and make haste to shed
innocent blood, Isa. 59.7. These, as wise as they are, are none of God's, ^ut
the Devil's Watchmen. Here is not only ^he Serpents Craft, but his Nature, his
Venom, and his Curse too. But, I shall tell you, through Gods assistance, more
fully, in what follows, wherein the work, and wisdom of your Christian watch
lies. Only, in general, know, by the way; that your wisdom consists in the
Choice of your work, and in the management of your Choice. And it is a
supernatural wisdom, a self-denying, flesh-displeasing wisdom; it is a simple,
innocent, and, in a word, a heavenly wisdom; -- which is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. Jam. 3.17.

2. VVatch men must be men of Courage. Alas, Christians! you know not what you
may meet with on your watch; nor how you may be ^ut to it. Men are not set to
watch, but in dangerous times; See then, that ye walk, (...), exactly, or
warily, because the days are evil, (...), difficult, dangerous, as well a^
sinful, Ephesians. 5.15. Watchmen must be resolved men. Your work is of public
concernment, and therefore you must be men of public spirits. Watching is
night-work; Watchman, what of the night? Isa. 21.11. And nights are dark, and
cold, and perilous. Now what are your resolutions? How are you armed for this
Night-work? God has already le^ you through the Caput Vigiliarum, some o^ the
first Watches of this sad night; with what undaunted zeal have you stood your
ground, against all opposers, and oppositions? where are the Prizes you have
taken? May you not say, with the Disciples, in another case? We have toybed all
night, and have caught nothing. You know not how you may be set upon, before
eve^ your morning-hopes yet dawn upon you; what Storms may arise, what
Providence may betide you; the darkest, and coldest time of the night, is wont
to be a little before the break of day; and I greatly doubt, that the hardest
work you were ever put upon, is yet behind.

3. Watchmen must be men of Care and Vigilance. It is not for you to sleep in
such a season as this is. I am not speaking now, of that natural rest, which
the weaknesses, and infirmities of Nature call for; but of that secure sluggish
frame of spirit, which so blunts the edge and benumbs the operations of Grace,
in the heart, and life of a Christian. The Ark, an^ Israel, and Judah, abide in
tents, says vriah, any Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord, ^re encamped in
the open fields; shall I then go unto mine house, to eat, and to drink, etc. As
^^ou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do ^his thing, 2 Samuel 11.11.
The Ark and Israel, abide, this day, in tents. What! can we ^^ot watch one
hour? Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring
^yon, goes about, seeking whom he may de^our, 2 Pet. 5.8. Oh! remember, while
you ^^e sleeping, he is waking, and wicked men ^^e waking; He devises mischief
on his bed, Psalm. 36.4. While you sit idle, they are hard (...) work. Nay, your
Captain himself is on the ^atch with you, My Lord Joab; your Lord jesus, is
encamped in the open fields: and, He ^^at keeps Israel, shall neither
slumber, nor ^^ep, Psalm. 121.4. O, my brethren: take heed (...) this drowsy,
careless, indifferent frame of ^^irit; you know not how dear it may cost ^^u.
'Twas while men slept, that the enemy ^^wed his tares, Matthew. 13.25. and while
^^e Virgins slept, the Bridegroom came, Matthew. ^5.5. How many thousands are
there now in ^^ell, whom all the Calls of Mercy, nor the pro^^ises, or
threatenings of the Word, nor all the ^^therly strokes of a chastising Rod,
could keep ^^aking; but were as insensible, as the earth ^^ey trod on: yet now
their senses are come (...) them, and they feel, and know that, which (...) all
keep them waking, and weeping too, to (...) eternity!

4. Watchmen must be men of Credit, and faithful in their trust. The duty of a
Christian, is not bare work, but a trust; which is not discharged by action
only, but by faithfulness and integrity. An unfaithful Watchman, is the most
dangerous Enemy; no thief, like the domestic thief: oh, Sirs! Are you sensible
what a charge lies on your hands? You have heard something of it already, what
Talents God has laid up with you; and, how dare you be unfaithful? God has
adventured his Glory, his Gospel, his Ordinances, his Sabbaths, nay, his very
Life, as it were, in your hands; you are his chosen men, his Lifeguard, his
Militant Church; and will you, dare you, through unfaithfulness, betray your
Lord, into the hand^ of those that shall crucify him afresh, and pu^ him to an
open shame? Let me farther propose these two Questions, for the trial of your
faithfulness.

1. Have you laid out your utmost for God? The utmost of your Time, and the
utmost of your Care and Strength? Have you made the most o^ all that you are,
and have, for God? Have you redeemed as many Hours, as many of you^ Thoughts,
as many Pence, for God, and Christ^ as possibly you could have done? oh! where
i^ Conscience now? how can it answer for you^ selves? Look back on all the
Mercies you have received, and all the time you have enjoyed (...) Is there
nothing to upbraid your unfaithfulness here? Is God your record, whom ye serve
i^ the spirit; that, for your lives, you could have done no more for him, than
you have done? why, then! what means thy immoderate worldly care? thy
mistrusting of God, and murmuring at his Providence? what means all this cost
thou have bestowed, to feed thy Pride and Ambition? or thy overcurious, or
over-greedy Palate? Remember! in such a Garment, in such (...) Building, in
such a Banquet, in such a Recreation, in such a Company, in such a Business,
something might well have been spared for Christ. What mean thy worldly
thoughts, and thy worldly discourse, on the Lords own ^ay; whereof, not one
minute is thine own? And, is this plain dealing with God? Is this thy
faithfulness to thy friend? oh, be convinced, and ^ham'd before God! 2. Have
you been impartial in your obedience? Have not you learned of Saul, to reserve
^ome of the chief of the things, which should ^ave been utterly destroyed? May
not God ^ome, and pull an Agag out of your Closets? ^ome delicate, choice Lust,
which you are loath ^o lay violent hands on? Have you never served God with an
Amalekitish sacrifice, with unhallowed, profane, and uncircumcised hearts?
Don't you find it harder work, to deny your selves in some things, than in
others? Are not ^ome duties more difficult, and irksome to the ^lesh, than
others? Watch your selves then, ^specially in these things, and you may quickly
find much of the partiality of your obedience.
Thus I have labored, though weakly, to set you on your Guard; and have put
the Watch^ Bill into your hands. Now let me tell you, wha^ you are to watch
for, and what to watch against^ and why.

1. What you are to watch for; and no^ only to let pass, but to defend, and
conten^ for; in general.

1. Gods Glory. Whatsoever is properly, an^ directly for the Glory of God, you
are boun^ to defend with your lives. Neither is this al^ but you are to watch,
apprehend, and improv^ all advantages, and opportunities, in order hereunto: to
set every whoel you can move, (...) going this way. This is the great Road, the
Kings high way, which you should turn ever^ wandering Passenger into. All your
thought aims, and designs, your Families, and whatever else lies within your
bounds and limit^ should be all traveling this way; for this on^ leads
homewards: which brings me to the next. 2. Your own Salvation. Christians, yo^
watch for your Lives, nay, for your Souls; an^ what have you dearer than these?
Sirs! m^ thinks this should startle you, to consider, the here you stand with
your lives in your hands^ oh! that I could but convince you, how desperately
you hazard your souls, and peace, an^ comforts, by every neglect of your
Watch^ If you could but see, what black Troops of arn^ed Enemies, have beset
you round, and eve^^ one striving to strike you first; and the lea^^ able to
strike you dead. But, alas! we are (...) the dark, and it is little we see, more
than we ^eel, and little we feel of what we suffer. What shall I say? or how
shall I bespeak you? For ^our live's sake, for your soul's sake, for Christ's
^ake, stand closer to your Watch. Oh! how ^hick are your enemies upon you? see
how your blood is running at your Feet! Every idle word wounds you, every
sinful, vain thought, draws blood from you. How grievously was David wounded,
but with the glance of his eye? How ^adly did Noah and Lot suffer by a cup of
Wine? and Peter by a carnal fear, or hope to escape the Inquest? oh! the stabbs
and wounds, that every day, and hour of our heedless VVatch, ^s attended with!
If your souls be worth any ^^ing with you; if Heaven, and Eternal Life, ^^e
worth any thing; take heed to your VVatch.
Now, in order to these two great Ends, you must watch; 1. For the Word of God.
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my ^ates; waiting at the
posts of my doors, Prove. ^^.34. I was glad when they said unto me, Let ^s go
into the house of the Lord, Psalm. 121.1. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to
write unto you, of the common salvation; It was needful for me, says St. Jude,
and, would to God, I ^ould not justly say, it is far more needful for ^e, to
write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should earnestly contend for the faith,
which was once delivered unto the Saints, Jude v. 3. Search the Scriptures.
Know your Duty: observe your Tessera, your VVatch-word. Here is your Armourie,
which is able to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy 3.17. These are the weapons, which Christ, our Captain, has
already tried against the great Goliath of our Enemies, Matthew. 4.4, 7, 10. Three
times in one chapter, he foils him with a (...), It is written. Let this be the
Beacon then, that you watch at; even at the Shepherds tents, whither you may
retreat, and be safe. Beyond these bounds, you have no warrant; if you wander
hence, and miscarry, (as some have done, making shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience; others, of their Peace and comforts) thank your selves. 2. Watch
for the Spirit of God; as the pool Cripples, at the pool of Bethesda, Joh. 5.3.
but especially, 1. VVatch for the teachings of the Spirit. This will teach you,
after another manner tha^ we can do. We can but teach the ear, this the heart:
we baptize with water, (as John sai^^ of himself) but this with Fire. Alas:
ours ar^ but the Pictures, and dark Emblems of Comfort; but these are Comforts
indeed. The w^^ of God is never like to prosper in you^ until this VVork-man
take the Tools in hand. He knows how to break hard heart and to open blind
eyes, and to prevail wi^ stubborn wills, and to teach his people ^^ profit. 2.
VVatch for the quicknings of the Spirit Prepare the Tinder of Conscience, to
catch at very Spark that shall leap upon it. What ^ay you, Brethren? where are
your hearts now? ^re you dealing with dead letters, or dead words? is there no
life, nor spirit in them? ^r is God now striking the Steel of his Word, ^n the
Flint of your hearts? and are there no parks then glancing out on your
affections^ Now catch for your lives, and take fire from ^ence. Snatch a Coal
from these Altars, and ^indle a fire, that may keep you warm, all this ^ight of
your watch. Sure, if you sit a cold, you may blame your selves; God has
allowed ^ou fire, and fuel enough: All the sweet Cedars of his Promises, nay,
all the precious Oils of his Graces, Faith, Hope, Patience, Love, etc. ^re free
for your daily use, O take heed then, Quench not the Spirit. This may be the
day, and hour, for ought you know, of the richest Grace and Mercy, that ever
you were acquainted with, in your lives; the loss of these offers and motions,
may be the loss of all. If now you ^et out your fire, who knows whether ever
you may get it to be kindled more, till it be kindled for you in Hell. 3. Watch
for all Opportunities of doing, or receiving good. As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the
household of Faith, Gal. ^6.10. We are apt to wait opportunities of receiving,
but not so forward to catch at all occasions of doing good. The man of God must
be thoroughly furnished unto all good works, not only to works of Piety, but to
works of Charity too. Your light should not shine inward only, but outward
also; not only before God, but before Men. To do good, and communicate, forget
not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. Communicate, not
only of your Purses, (though the present exigencies, and straits of the
distressed Saints plead with you also in this behalf) but of your Graces; not
to the bodies only, but to the souls of your brethren. A good man is (...), a
common good. Ah, my brethren! are you lying in wait to do good? Are you glad of
opportunities, to help, and assist the weak? to reduce the strayers? to
admonish the stubborn? to instruct the simple? to awaken the idle? to bind up
the broken? and to relieve the poor of Christ's little Flock? Are you glad of
every spare hour, that may be borrowed from your necessities, that you may run
to your Pisgah, and thence, as it were, leap into the Arms and Bosom of your
beloved Savior, that you may ream your hearts with him, and fill your empty
bottles there? oh! how little are Opportunities prized, or improved by us!



Thus you have heard the sum of what you are to watch for; In the next place,
^^ shall show you what you are to watch against, 1. Be sure, set a strong and
faithful watch against sin. These are the Gates of your Enemies: that wide
Sally-port, that broad way wherein the children of darkness are walking O take
heed! Set not your foot here. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness: but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. These are dangerous Clives; one
wilful step here, may cost you the breaking of your necks; or the breaking of
your peace as long as you live. This Road lies beyond the Line of the Covenant;
beware how you adventure this way. And for your wiser management of this Watch;
1. Watch against sin, in the Fountain of it. Crush the cocatrice in the shell.
A full grown Lust is not so easily master^d. If you intend to keep the gardens
of your hearts clean, weed them betime. Sin is a Weed that will grow apace,
both branch and root; and when once it is settled in you, it may find you work
as long as you live, to tugg at it. This is the matter, Christians, that God is
even forct to send in his Plough upon you, and to lay you to fallow, that he
may wither the roots of old sins. Old sins are one high degree of incurable
sins. Have you no experiences of this nature? Have you never been wrestling
with strong, and sturdy Lusts? Have you never seemed to have plucked them up by
the roots? and been ready to rejoice in your Optata arena, desired, and
glorious Victory? But, alas! What has the next Spring produced? Han't the same
weeds appeared again, which you thought you had been for ever rid of? What Is
the reason t^ink you? Were not part of the roots left behind, which, while the
nipping Winter of some Affliction, or Conviction, lasted, you hoped had been
dying, never to revive more; but yet were all the while but strengthening
themselves at the root, preparing for another Spring? O what sad work do we
make our selves, for lack of a more faithful watch against the first
appearances of evil! 2. Watch against the Acts of sin. Sin in the heart,
grieves the Spirit, but sin in the act dishonours thy Profession. A fool (says
Solomon) lays open his folly. Take heed of playing the fools in Religion.
Remember your Conversations are of high consequence; The honor of the
everlasting God, and the Crown and Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, are
interessed in it. The eyes of Men and Devils are upon you, to watch, and to
catch all advantages, to reproach, and blaspheme the name of God, on your
account. Nay, let me tell you, the eyes of God and Angels are upon you too,
watching you into every corner, into your closets, and into your callings, in
your lying down, and in your rising up; in your beds, and in your fields; Every
word, and every motion, nay, every thought and inclination, the very Embryo of
our confused Imaginations are (...), opened, (or anatomized) unto the eyes of
him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. Oh, with what watchful prudence should
Christians carry themselves in all places, and in all relations! Set a Porter
at the doors of your lips; make a covenant with your eyes; enter into
interchang'd Indentures with your hearts; fetter up your wanton, wandering,
self-law'd wills and affections: swear every fatulty, every member, and limb,
in faithful Allegiance unto God, and Christ; and solemnly ^^bjure all other
Covenants, or Complyances. If you will walk aright, you must walk by line, and
by Rule. Your sins, my brethren, are like the sons of Anak amongst your
enemies; Every ^ffence of yours, is another Giant, pressed for the Devils
service, against God, and your own Souls; These are the Goliah's, they triumph
and vaunt themselves in. O, let it not be told in Gath, nor published in the
streets of A^kalon! 3. Watch against the Temptations to sin. Watch and pray,
that ye enter not into temptation, Matthew. 26.41. Nay, is it not your daily
prayer? Lead us not into temptation. oh! let it be your daily watch too. My
son, if Sinners ^ntice thee, consent thou not, Prove. 1.10. We ^ive in an
enticing world, and in enticing times: every danger is enticing us, our hopes,
fears, and straits, are enticing us: the snares of Hell are set for us, on
every side, snares without, and snares within us; temptations of all kinds, and
siz's. The Devil has spread his nets for every constitution, for every sense,
nay for grace, and in every estate, and in every duty. If you are full; Pride,
or worldliness, or sensu^lity, is his snare: if you are empty; Murmu^ing,
impatience, discontent, immoderate care, ^r any unlawful course, is his snare.
He has a ^rap for every affection. If you are angry, revenge is his snare; if
you are merry, excess is his snare. Fain would I warn you of every Rock, and of
every Shoal that might endanger you; of every false Star, and wandering light,
that might possibly seduce you: of every Bivium, Creek, and turning, in your
way. But the burden is too heavy for me: every day brings in new experiences;
as Christ says of the Father, and of himself, Joh. 5.17. The Father works
hitherto, and I work: every day producing new mercies and providence; so may
we say, The Devil works hitherto, and his children work; every hour is in
travel with new temptations, And you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked, according to the course of
this world, according to the Prince of the Power of the air, the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. Therefore, what I cannot
tell you positively, let me tell you negatively; Take heed of setting one foot
out of that way, which you know to be the right way; of putting forth your
hands unto iniquity: whatsoever has not the Image, and Superscription of God,
and the Seal of his Spirit upon it. Remember! He that doubts, is damned, if
he eat, Rom, 14, 23. To go without the light of Conscience, is next to going
against its light: take heed how you like that, that is not like Christ; or
force Conscience when it is at a stand. Be sure you step not beyond your clear
Command, and promise of Protection. 4. Watch against all the Occasions that may
lead you into temptation. Look not thou on the Wine when it is red, when it
gives his color in the cup, Pro. 23.31. Hating even the garment spotted by
the Flesh, Jude v. 23. whatsoever has the tincture, or show of sin upon it.
Abstain from all appearance of evil, says the Apostle, 1 These. 5.22.
Whatsoever is likely to ensnare you. Alas, Christians! You know not how dearly
you may smart for that, which in its self, you may account tolerable, and
indifferent. If once you venture beyond your Warrant, you know not whither you
may ramble. The ways of sin are dark, and head^^ng-waies. Her house is in the
way to Hell, ^oing down to the chambers of death, Prove. ^.27. The way to Hell
is down-stairs. Here, ^ethinks, I would tell you, of several things, that may
lead you into temptation: but I dare ^ot enlarge my Digressions. Your letting
down of close communion with God. Your enterpri^ing of any business, spiritual,
or secular, without asking counsel, or craving assistance of God. ^very step in
any way, wherein your selves, or others, for your warning, have been former^^
ensnared, etc. These things, with diverse others, I might have more fully
dilated: but I asten.
2. Set a watch against Satan, Learn to pay ^m home in his own coin. He has
set a strait ^atch upon you; a watch to tempt you, and a ^atch to accuse you.
He goes from Duty to ^utie, from corner to corner with you, and is always at
your right hand, to watch you to disturb your thoughts, to quench your
affections, and to pick matters of accusation. As you write what you hear, so
he has his Notebook too, and writes, How you hear, and pray, and spend your
Sabbaths and Societies; and, as far as he can guess, where your hearts, and
what your ends are too. Oh! If this Conviction could but take with you, what
care would it beget in you? Blessed be God, that though he watch us, yet he
cannot discover us; or, though he discover, yet cannot discourage us: though we
are his Envy, yet we are no^ his Prey. 3. Be sure, Set a strong watch against
Self Here is thy greatest Enemy; This home-bred^ Traitor, this betraying
Judas, which the greater part of the world are like to rue for, to a^
Eternity. O, set a faithful watch, upon unfaithful Self These three ways you
are i^ danger here. 1. Of Self-application. Beware of this. It Is the common
course of the world, when an^ thing ails them, to run to Self for help. Thi^ is
their Egypt they fly unto, which God wi^ one day make his people ashamed of.
Nay, not God now upon this very design? wh^^ have you now to help your selves
with? Han^ you tried what Egypt can do for you? wh^^ your own Reason, and Wits
can do? Where the Deliverance that Self has wrought you where are your
Counsels and Contrivances are you not ashamed of your shifts, and wear ^ look
any longer to these Hills? Ah! how ^auiral is this Idolatry? How fain would
this Absalom judge the people? How fain would self sit in Gods throne? 2. Of
Self-relyance. This is the Staff of ^at broken Reed, that will deceive you, and
^erce you too. Self-dependence is a sacrilegious sin; It robs God of that
Glory, which he ^ath said he will not give unto another. See that care God
takes of this, Judge. 7.2. When ^erubbaal was going forth against the
Midianites; The people that are with thee, are too ^any, for me to give the
Midianites into their ^ands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, ^ying,
mine own hand has saved me. Cursed the man that trusts in man. And, surely,
^ery man in his best state, is altogether vani^^. How full is the Scripture of
cautions to is purpose! oh! take heed of trusting to a ^e! You never read, nor
found in Scripture, ^or Experience, that Salvation is of your selves; ^^t thy
Destruction is of thy self: O Israel, ^ou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9.
3. Of Self-attribution. The ascribing of honor, or praise, to our own Prudence
or fore^st, to our Might or Policy, to our Righteousness, Innocence, or
Duties. Therefore they sa^ifice unto their Net, and burn Incense unto ^^eir
Dragg; because by them, only, as they ^retend, their portion is fat, and their
meat ^enteous, Hab. 1.16. If God answer your ^rayers, and hear your cries,
think not, it was our Prayers, or cries that did it, or your righteousness, or
innocence, that turned the whee See Ezekiel. 36.25, etc. Then will I sprink clean
water upon you. A new heart also, w^ I give you. And I will put my Spirit
within you. And ye shall dwell in the land that I ga^^ to your Fathers. I will
also save you from (...) your uncleanness. And I will multiply the fruit of
the tree. But then, observe the Primum mobile, the first Mover of all this
happ^^ change, ver. 32. Not for your own sakes, (...) I this, says the Lord;
be it known unto you. Be ashamed, and confounded, for your o^^ ways, O house
of Israel! Though mercies an^ deliverances seem sometimes to be attribute unto
our righteousness, or duties, as Prove. 10.^. Psalm. 25.21. Matthew. 21.22, etc.
yet it is to be understood as the Condition, or Instrument; not the Efficient,
or Meritorious cau^^ of it. It Is the Design of the Gospel, to tak^ us off from
these Hinges, on which we are (...) naturally apt to turn. We have this
treasure (...) earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. O take heed of maintaining that design, tha^ God is
resolved to destroy in you! if you would have the Controversy made up, which
is begun, you must not expect, nor is it reason, that God should come to your
terms but you must come up to his. Until this rebellious, atheistical,
designing Self, that great. Achan, which has troubled the Camp, b^ discovered,
arraigned, and executed, you ca^^ expect no settled Peace.
4. Set a vigilant watch upon the world. As Self is your greatest Enemy within,
so the World is your greatest Enemy without. Yet know this by the way; that
the World in its self, is not the Enemy; but as it holds secret intelligence
with that Enemy within. The World could do you no hurt, did not that Traitor
within open the Gates to it. It Is a Weapon indeed, that has cost you much
blood, and many a sad wound; but then it hit you on a bare place; it found you
unarmed, or else it had never entered. The Devil has used it, and his
Soldiers have tried it; and the main reason, why it has proved so mortally
successful in their hands, is, for want of your Christian Panoplie, your
putting on the whole Armor of God. This would soon have turned the edge of it,
and frustrated it is Execution. Now there are these five or six things in the
world, that I would have you take special ^eed of.


1. Take heed of the Fears of the world. The fear of man brings a snare,
Prove. 29.25. Why, Christian! Let me reason it a little with thee then. What is
it thou stand in such fear of? the snares that thine enemies have laid for
thee? lest thou should fall into one of their ^its? or incurr the displeasure
of thy old friends? or undo thine heir or family? Is it the Crown of Thorns
that terrifies thee? or the barking of those Dogs of the world at thee? Believe
it, and take not mine, but God's word for it, It comes with the fear. Your
carnal fear brings the snare, and tempts God to give you up to that which you
stand in such fear of. I might give you a plain, and natural experiment, to
this purpose. Such is the weakness of some heads, that walking on a very high,
and dangerous Clive, if they come but so near, as to look out over, and to see
the danger; they are so surpised with the sudden fear, that they even dote on
what they so extremely dread, and cast themselves headlong, though their
footing were sure, and room to escape sufficient. Similar hereunto, is that of
Christ, Mar. 8.35. Whosoever will save his life, he that is afraid to lose his
life, shall lose it; but, whosoever shall lise his life, i. e. though not
actually, yet habitually, he that is not afraid, but ready to lose it, if
called thereunto, shall save it, in this world, or, at least, in another. Now,
pray sit down, and count your gains; see what a Bargain, Satan, and your
unbelieving hearts, are trading together for. The Devil would undertake to
teach you a nearer, or a cheaper, and easier way to Heaven, than ever Christ
appointed: and, if you will, you may believe him. But when you are caught in
the fatal snares of your own carnal fears, and shifts; then sit down, and thank
your selves: and remember, who once was sent on purpose, to warn you of it. And
let Conscience then, (or rather now, that it may not then) sadly comment on
Rev. 21.8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters and all Liars shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Here Is a woeful Portion, my Brethren, and woeful Partners. O, take
heed of the fears of the world! Remember! Such as your fears are, such are your
hopes; if your fears are the fears of the world, your hopes are the hopes of
the world: your God the god of the world; and your Portion is like to be
Portion of the world; O, let it appear that there is that in your Religion,
that can make weight against all that Earth or Hell can find to lay in against
it: Should such a man as I flee? Et Turnum fugientem haec terra videbit? Shall
a Christian turn his back? Nehem. 6.11.
O Lord, what shall I say when Israel turns their backs before their Enemies!
John. 7.8.
This base carnal fear is the Devils great Engine: the Alpha and Omega of all
his external temptations: if once he can fasten these fears upon thee, he has
fitted thee for any thing: What will not a man do that is overcome with his
fear! Peter never began to sink till he began to fear. We are never overcome
till we flee; we never flee till we fear. It Is not the loss of life, but the
loss of faith: that is thy undoing loss.

Take heed of the Flateries of the World. The Devil will promise thee fair,
that he may gain a Proselyte. All these things will I give thee, says he to
Christ, if thou will fall down and worship me, Matthew. 4.9. But alas, his
Promises are far beyond his power. He boasts of that which is none of his
own to bestow; or if it were, yet it is not the thousandth part of what you
have already promised to you, and that by One that both can and will make it
good. Godliness has the promise, not only of the life that now is, but of that
which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. The Devil, or any of his illegitimate
Bastard-heirs, may promise thee some small matter here, though they can make
thee no assurance of it: But in the other world they have nothing to do: Never
an Advowson not small Coat there; their Lands lie not in that Country. Alas!
What is there in the World, that should so tempt a Christian? Is a little
yellow Clay, or one hours sensual pleasure, on the stinking breath of a few
false friends; are these such taking things with the Heirs of glory? Believe
it, Friends! The world flatters that it may deceive, and huggs that it may
stabb and undo you, and betray you with a kiss.

3. Beware of the Hopes of the world, High expectations usually beget high
Fears, and according to the height of your fears, and the frustration of your
hopes, will be the aggravation of your sorrow, and the redoubled force and
Impetus of your Temptations. Take this for a tried Experiment; None are so
deceived by the world as those that expect most from the world. Yet however
your hopes may prosper for a while; be sure, there is a worm at the root, that
will eat out all in the end. The hope of the world is the hope of the wicked,
Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a Spider's web. Job.
8.14. Your ^opes, Christians, are the truest and liveliest ^ictures of your
hearts; your carnal hopes betray your carnal hearts.

There is nothing more natural, and yet nothing more dangerous, than to hoise
the wide fails of hope in the brunt of a Storm, when the sure Anchor of a
humble and recumbent faith were more proper and safe. Certainly, my Brethren,
great are our losses through our groundless and carnal hopes. it is not a
spiritual Object that will make a spiritual hope. To hope for the Redemption
and Peace of Sion: The glory and enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, and the
return of the Captivity of his people: These and such like, we would fain
possess our Hopes of: And hope being once an end, seems long till it be
answered; at length impatient of delays, Pro. 13.12
(for Hope deferred makes the heart sick) up she climbs up into the
Watchtower, and there consults with Reason, expounds and applies the Promises
with their own private Glosses and irregular Appropriations, prescribing or
predicting Times, Places, and Methods; and all the while our personal
Reformation is neglected, God provoked, and our Hopes deceived. Sure you would
account it a strange unheardof madness for a Town that is closely besieged, to
throw aside their Arms, and to run together in Heaps, and begin to talk of
certain old Predictions and Prophecies of Relief, though utterly uncertain, and
improbable as to their present Case, till the Enemy break in, and spoil them at
their pleasure. Oh that this were not too much the temper of the spirits of
these times! Nay, I would to God, there were none of those among us that make
the People vain, when they should have stood in Gods Counsel, and caused his
people to hear his words; then they should have turned them from their evil
way, and from the evil of their doings. Jer. 23.16, 22. For my part, I cannot
think that God, has yet done with us, or that the bitterest Ingredient is not
yet behind. Surely England is not yet ripe, nor fit for the mercy she gapes
after. I hope God will not leave all these spots in us, after that he has done
with us. Look for other manner of Task yet then ever have been imposed. These,
trust are some of the Death pangs, the parting sprawls of the Beast, which
doubeless will be strong as far as they reach.

Bit you will say, Gi^ strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to
those that be of heavy hearts, Pro^. 31.6.

I know, Hedge d^ying, than under the heavy Hammers the Mill a cleansing. But
God forbid the I should any way weaken your Christian confidence or Comforts,
or grieve the spirits who God would have revived. Repentance, in (...)
Gospel-length and latitude of it, is a very ha^ and displeasing work to flesh
and blood; and a thousand slights and evasions will be had to mitigate,
dissemble, or avoid it: And I fear that such kind of Hopes may have much of
this anti-evangelical influence. As long as we are unwarrantably looking that
God should build us a Bridge, we will never be persuaded to take the Water,
till extreme force and unavoidable necessity drive us. Oh take heed you do not
carnallize your Hopes! The Hopes of the world are empty hopes. Hopes and
nothing else, mere Hopes. Sin has cut off the Entail from the owners of them,
and shame will certainly enjoy their next Reversion. They may go big-bellied a
while: But at last, it all miscarries: The wind they were swollen with, will
turn to a whirlwind of divine wrath in the end. Though they paint and ruffle
and trim it up, and boast themselves of great things: Yet, believe it, all they
can do is in their Mouths, and all they are worth is on their Backs: They are
broken, flattering, lying, dying, killing Hopes. Oh beware then how you perch
your selves on such a Bough, as you are warned will break under you!

4. Watch against the Scorus of the world. Though you cannot watch to prevent
them, yet watch to bear them, and not only so, but to improve them too. Blessed
are ye when men shall revile, you and persecute you, and shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my sake, Matthew. 5.11. No wonder if fools
blaspheme. Alas! Iud. v. 10.
they speak evil of what they know not. But wisdom is justified of her
children. It Is but a little while you are like toly under these Scorns. You
shall shortly hear them change their Note. When the ends of us both shall be
compared together, and the definitive Sentence of a just and impartial Judge
shall have convinced them of their madness; You shall then mount above their
reach, and be as much their envy, as now you are their scorn. Come ye blessed,
and Go ye cursed will surely bring them to their right wits, and a more true
and honorable opinion of you.

5. Watch against the Persecutions of the world. Here is work for your
Patience, and for your Prudence too. For Patience, to suffer what you cant
prevent, and for Prudence, to prevent what you may foresee and warrantably
escape. Let not your Imprudence wrong your Patience, nor your Impatience force,
your Prudence. Your liberties and liycs are dear to Christ, as well as to your
selves; you are as the Apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. Oh take heed then you do
not foolishly expose the Apple of Christ's eye to every thorn that would pierce
it, as long as you may avoid it without dishonor.

It Is true, the Just shall live by his Faith. Heb. 2.4. but not aband on his
Reason: he will trust God; Psalm. 91.11 12.
but he will not tempt him. Though Angels are charged concerning him, and in
their hands they shall bear him up; Yet it is written, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God. Matthew. 10.22. ve. 16. vir. 17.
Matthew. 4.6, 7. He that has said. Fea^ not them which kill the body: has also
said in the same Place, Beware of men. And, (...) wise as Serpents. But, I
hope, I need not use much ado with you here; Self-preservation is a Principle
of Nature. But watch your Patience rather, how to bear that which you are
called unto. And should I tell you all your encouragements hereunto; I must set
open the very heart of Christ, and the Gates of Heaven to you, which is a task
too hard and too high for a poor finite, shallow, mortal Creature to do.

6. Take heed of the Cares of the world. Those choking things; Matthew. 13.22.
The care of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word. They
will choke your graces, and your comforts too. I would have you without
carefulness, 1 Cor. 7.32. How did Christ labor to beat his Disciples out of
this! Matthew. 6.17. Which of you, by taking thought, can add one cubit to his
Stature? What have you gotten by all your Immoderate cares? Have not you found
them to be unsatiable, ^exing, tormenting things? Whosoever drink^eth, of this
water shall thirst again, Joh. 4.13. Have your cares, ever filled your Bellies?
Or are they ever like to do it? Have not you bin as when a hungry man dreameth,
Isa. 29.8.
and behold he ^ateth, but he awaketh and his Soul is empty. Besides; they are
entangling things, the Cords and Fetters of the Heart, 2 Timothy 2.4. Nay, let me
tell thee. Christian, these sinful cares ^re the Instruments of Petsecution and
cruelty; ^he spears in the heart of Christ, and Thorns ^n thy own Soul. What
Fires and Feudes do they kindle in your Affections? What shuffling and
partiality do they introduce on your Duties-Certainly I cannot tell you the
thousandth part of the mischiefs of these poisoned Arrows, these pestilent,
sordid, Christ persecuting, heart-ensnaring cares. Nor can I stand at present
to enlarge as I thought to have done.

5. Lastly, watch against Death. Not only against the Stroke of Death, which is
common to all; but against the Sting of Death. Le^ not Death find you out of
the way of Life, no^ out of a lively activity in that way. Wait with Patience
till your Change come, Job. 14.14.
which shall change your Patience to possession Le^ not Death be in your Mouths
only, but in your Hearts; that both heart and mouth may join in your eternal
Triumph. This is you last Enemy, overcome this, and you shall wear the Crown to
all eternity, and set up your everlasting Trophies in the Throne of your God.
Watch, that Death find you no^ only in the Vineyard, but in your work, tha^
you may dye, not only in Christ, but in Comfort too. Blessed is that servant
whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing, Luke 12.43. Oh Christians!
When God shall call you out of your hardest work, and snatch you, as it were,
out of the midst of crew storms: When he shall break in through you
Prison-doors, and lead you out by the hand or send his fiery Chariots, to
convey you from your glorious Martyrdom to your most gloriou^ Mansions: Oh!
conceive then, if you can with what in effable compassions will he la^ you up
in the victorious arms of his Love, and place you in his eternal Rest? oh! hold
out ^^ith and Patience, one hour, one year, one ^attel more; For yet a little
while, and he ^^at shall come, will come, and will not tarry, ^eb. 10.37.

Thus I have told you, what it is, you are specially concerned to watch
against. I hope here are but few, among Christians, that are question the
reality, or necessity of such ^ Duty. Yet to keep you the better waking, ^^
this sad, and dismal night, when so many ^f our Watchmen are forsaking the
Walls, or ^^llen asleep: I shall propose these five quickening Motives.

1. They are Enemies that you are to Watch against. Such as will be sure to do
you ^ mischief, if possible: they never intended you any good. It never goes
well with Sin, longer ^han it is feeding on the blood of your Souls, and the
spoils of your Duties. Oh, how would ^he Devil rejoice, to see you falling,
like Stars, from Heaven, and God blotting your Names but of the Book of Life!
Nothing stands more directly opposite to your peace and happiness, ^han Self.
How full is the World of venom and ^nmity! and Death waits but for the word, to
^trike his last blow at you, to consummate ^our eternal Ruin. Oh, my Brethren!
you that have to do with enemies, had need be watchful. 2. They are Mortal
Enemies; Such as thirst for your blood. The wages of Sin is death, Romans 6.23.
What does the Labourer look, and long for, but his wages? oh! how hard is Sin
at its daily work, to earn the undoing wages of thine eternal death! it is that
it looks, and longs for. 1 Pet. 5.8.
What is it the Devil is seeking after, and hunting up and down the world for,
but to devour? What is that Imposthume of Self doing within, but conspiring thy
destruction? How wide does the World gape upon thee, 1 Timothy 6.9.
to drown thee in destruction, and perdidion? As for Death, it carries
mortality, and dissolution, in the very name of it. Oh! what need have we of
wary steps! Were ever Creatures in such hazard? Well might St. Paul cri^^ out,
Wretched man, that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this death? Romans
7.24. 3. They are Spiritual Enemies, and therefore the more dangerous. We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers, and
against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness
in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. Spiritual, on a double account; in their nature, and
in their operation. They are of a spiritual, and invisible nature, and are not
the objects of external sense, which is the eye we are wont, and able to judge
by: These are enemies that are all ways on the blind side of us; they wound us
and we are not aware. Their operations are also spiritual; they work on us like
an infectious Air; we will not believe, but that we are well enough, till we
drop down dead where we are going; and therefore it is called the Plague of the
heart; which is oftentimes undiscernable, till it be incurable. How closely
does Self steal in betwixt Christ and our hearts? How deceitfully does the
World charm our affections? What secret passages and trap-doors, has Satan, at
every Pore of hearts? Oh, my Brethren! We have spiritual enemies to deal with;
our Watch is especially within our own walls. 4. They are Constant Enemies:
Such as will find you work as long as you live. This comes to pass, from their
contrary, and implacable nature; Light and Darkness can never be ^econcil'd.
St. Paul could not sing his Palinody, that his Fight was over, and his Course
finished, till the time of his departure came, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. Thy Watch-work,
Christian, is thy Life's-work. Our Enemies seem to enjoy our Promises here,
Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down. Oh! which of
our fallen Lusts, can we say, is utterly cast down? Every Conquest produces a
new Combat; and our very Victories oftentimes, occasion our sadder Losses. 5.
Lastly, They are Mighty Enemies: Such is we cannot, in our own strength, stand
before. If a Lust do but becken at us, we pre^ently yield. If the World do but
frown on us, we ^remble. As Self will have it, so the Law must ^and. If Satan
turn the Key of a temptation upon us, we are his Close Prisoners. If Death once
strike, we fall. Had we not a strong God to fly to; a sure word of Promise; an
impregnable Refuge in Christ; a mighty Advocate with the Father, who is able to
save to the uttermost; an irresistible Help in the Spirit, to bruise Satan
under us. Were not the Weapons of our Warfare mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4.
these strong holds would never come down; our victories would be, according to
our strength, very small. Therefore, what you want in Power, labor to make up
in Care. O let the sense of your Weakness, double your Watchfulness! that you
may be able to say with the Apostle, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things, [or
suffer any thing] through Christ, which strengthens me.
Thus I have labored, though weakly, yet, I hope faithfully, to interpret the
Rod to you. And, oh, that now I could prevail with you to lay these things
close on your bare Consciences! Commune with your own hearts, and let your
spirits make diligent search. Now set about your mourning, repenting,
resolving, reforming-work. God has us in his Furnace, and his Jealousy is
smoking against us. He has cast our Liberties, our Peace, our Health, our
Hopes, nay, his own Ordinances, and Sacred Institutions, the holy Vessels of
his own House, as Wood under us, for the Fire of his Displeasure to heat us
with: oh! when shall we begin to melt, that we may once be capable of being
cast into a new Mould! oh! when will those hard hearts break? when will those
stout hearts yield? when will those stubborn wills comply? Shall we stick in
the Birth, till we die there? shall we tempt God on the wheel, to cast us off,
as a Lump, that will never ^ome to any thing? Shall we even force him ^o throw
us and Idolaters, us and Hypocrites, and the profane, incorrigible, and
abominable Scum of the earth, to the Dunghill at last together? The Lord forbid!
O the God of Heaven forbid it!

2. In the next place, This Rod hathalso a voice to the Enemies of God; and
these are ^ther open Foes, or false Friends. I shall join ^oth together, as
Christ has done, Matthew. ^2.30. He that is not with me, is against ^e; and he
that gathers not with me, scat^reth abroad.

These five things would I tell them from God, hight I be freely suffered to do
my Message (...) them: And with these five Bells I shall ^ing the doleful Knell
of God's, and his Churches Enemies.

1. It assures them, that God is not such an ^^e as they take him be. These
things thou ^^st done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest ^^at I was
altogether such an one as thy self: ^^t I will reprove thee, and set them in
order ^^fore thine eyes, Psalm. 50.21. Alas, Sinner! ^^ou art mistaken in God;
though he keep ^^ence awhile, he will not keep silence for ^^er; he will find a
time to speak, when thou ^^alt stand speechless before him. Though his ^^se
Providence, and thy cursed Projects, seem to join issue, yet assure thy self,
their disparit^ and incongruity, will shortly appear to the shame and
astonishment. I could tell them in what respects they are mistaken, in the^^
thoughts of God, [if God be ever in the^^ thoughts.]

1. They are mistaken in his Holiness. Th^^ is that, which seems to be
principally aimed at i^ the forecited Text. After God has charge^ them with
Incorrigibleness, from ver. 17. with Theft, and Adultery, and False-witness,
unto ver. 21. Thou thoughtest, says God, that I ha^ been such an one too; as
wicked, and as vile, a thy self: That I had loved thy Drunkenness thy Oaths,
thy Blasphemies, and Uncleanness thine Idolatry, and carnal, gaudy, Will
worship, thy Cruelty, and Oppression of m^ People. Because I kept silence, and
winked a these things; because ye were become Such Priest, and such People, ye
thought it had been Even such God too: That I had been as great a^ enemy to
Holiness as you; as implacably be^^ to ruin the Interest of my Son Christ, as
you were; that I had divorced my own Spirit, and exchanged natures with your
Father the Devil and yielded up my Scepter and Kingdom unto him, and become
altogether such a one as you^ You thought, it had been as much my envy, (...)
see men faithfully laboring to make their Ca^ling and Election sure, as it was
yours: tha^ their Faith, and Humility, and Self-denial, an^ Patience, and
Constancy, and Resolution, an^ Heavenly-mindedness, had been the only thing
(...) had been offended with, and resolved to revenge, with all possible
Indignation, as you ^^ere. The time comes, says Christ, that who^^ever
kills you, shall think that he does God ^ervice, Joh. 16.2. But, how is it
possible ^^ey should ever think so? Why? These things ^^ill they do unto you,
because they have not ^nown the Father, nor me, ver. 3. It proceeds from their
wilful mistake. They are not aware ^^at our God is the Holy one of Israel.
Psalm. 68.35. Exodus 1^.11.
That is ^^rrible out of his holy places. A God glorious (...) holiness. Alas,
Sinner! God is never the ^^holier, for that he bears with thy unholiness; ^^l
these thy mistakes will shortly be corrected (...) another world.

2. They are mistaken in his Justice, -- I knew thee, that thou art an hard
man, says the unfaithful servant, Math. 25.24. (...), a shrewd, difficult man
to please, ^^aping where thou have not sown, and gathering where thou have not
strawed. Such are the ^ard thoughts of the poor, blind, prejudiced ^orld. They
think it an impossible matter to talk by God's prescribed Rule, unto
well^^^asing; that, walking by the Spirit, is but ^^ancy, or Schism, and
therefore better let all ^^one. They hope, whatever they are told on ^^e
contrary, that God will pity them on their ^^eath-beds; that his Justice will
not be so ^^exorable, but that they may be heard, when ^^ey call upon him.
Indeed, were God such a ^^udge, as they conceit him to be; Were he who ^^des
the Circuits of Heaven, a respecter of Persons, Fallible, and Mutable, of the
Generation of those that ride the Circuits of the Earth, i^ might fare better
with them than it is like to do. But, alas! a few days more will open their
eyes, and then they shall see what a Justice that is that dwells in Heaven.
Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of his Throne, Psalm. 89.14.

3. They are mistaken in his Mercy. They have heard, that he is a God of great
Mercy, and thereupon are bold, that they may persuade him to what they will, at
last. They have heard, that he is ready to forgive; a God, gracious and
merciful, and that keeps not ange^ for ever. Psalm. 73.11.
They believe, that his mercy is all sufficient, and that he will not take any
great notice of those things, that are so far beneath him; Such are the
thoughts that keep their carnal hopes alive, and please their beguile^ souls
with a Fools-Paradise. Indeed, were God as mutable, as he is merciful, they had
some ground for their hopes. It may be, some (...) them have laid their heads
on this Pillow, Romans 11.32. For God has concluded them all (...) unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon all or on Romans 5.18. Therefore, as by the offense
of one, Judgment came upon all men, un^^ condemnation: even so, by the
righteousness (...) one, the free gift came upon all men, un^^ Justification of
life: or on some such like place and there have dreamt of an universal
Redemption; and by this means, all their care ^ over. But, they may know, when
they awake nay, to their terror, they shall know, if they awake not, before
they awake to Judgment; ^ow God will have mercy upon all, and yet they left out.
Abstract the consideration of ^^ercy, from this present life, wherein all are
^^artakers of the riches of his mercy in common, and all things happen alike,
as to outward appearance, to all; and then I Will tell them, that God will have
mercy, supra omnes, but not supra singulos: upon all sorts, or some of all
^orts, Gentiles as well as Jews; but not upon ^very one of either; Election is
but of some, and ^ot of all. But I will not stand here, to confute (...)
unreasonable, and anti-Scriptural an assertion, seeing this Dagon has been
already battered to the ground, by far abler Engines than ^^ine: The day is at
hand, that will for ever ^^cide the Controversy, and unravel all those Querks
of the Devils knitting.

Few there are, but will confess, (though they ^re but half-convinc'd) that
there is a Hell, and ^^at it is prepared for some, whom God has ^^presly
condemned in his Word: Hypocrites ^^nd unbelievers, they acknowledge, are gone
in ^^e Forlorn hope. 1 Timothy 5.24.
Some men's sins are open ^^fore-hand, going before to Judgment. Hy^^crites,
such as their Father has taught them ^^re-baptize with the Nickname of
Phanaticks, ^^r the names are synonymous; and vnbelie^^ers, such as cannot
believe, as they do, and ^^uzzle their Consciences, as they can. Well ^^en,
Sinner, Let me reason with thee, from ^^y own Concessions; If Hypocrites and
Unbelievers are the undoubted Heirs of Hell, I w^^ tell thee, (not to stand on
the Justification (...) any Party) who are their Coheirs; Matthew. 2^^ from ver.
48. to the end. The evil servant that says in his heart, my Lord delayeth h^^
coming. He that lives in the height of his security, that thinks it is time
enough yet to provide for another world: And shall begin to smi^^ his
Fellow Servants. Either with the slander and reproaches of the tongue, or with
the fi^^ of wickedness. And to eat and drink with the drunken. The Lord of that
servant shall come as secure as he is, in a day when he looks (...) for him,
and in an hour that he is not aware of and shall cut him asunder, and appoint
him (...) portion with the Hypocrites; there shall (...) weeping, and gnashing
of teeth. And Luke 1^.46. He will cut him asunder, his Soul from his Body, and
both Body and Soul from all h^^ worldly comforts and hopes, he will
irresistibly, and irrecoverably destroy him, and appoi^^ him his portion with
unbelievers. If the unb^^ I eving are condemned, then pray see, who a^^ cast
with them, and must partake with them (...) the Execution; Rev. 21.8. The
fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and mu^^ derers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, a^^ idolaters, and all liars. If you question
(...) truth of this, look back but to the fifth verse, a^^ you shall see it
sealed with an express Authori^^ from Heaven: And he said unto me, Writ^^ for
these words are true and faithful. Know (...) not, that the unrighteous shall
not inherit t^^ Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Nay, Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. This cannot be
understood literally, as if our Souls only were capable of eternal Salvation,
and not our Bodies, which is contrary to the Apostle's Argument; Contrary to
one great Design of Christ's Incarnation; nay, contrary to visible, and ocular
Demonstration; For Christ himself has visibly ascended, and, in the names, and
behalf of his Mystical Members, has entered with real Flesh and Blood, and is
inheriting the eternal Kingdom of his Father: But the same Apostle particularly
explains what he means by Flesh and Blood, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Now the works of
the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, Fornication, uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envying, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
such like; as I have told you in time past, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And now, Sinner; Can thou wash thine
hands in innocence, from all these? If thou think thou art no Hypocrite, nor
Unbeliever, (though both might easily be proved against thee) none of the Heirs
of the Kingdom of Darkness, yet art thou none of these Coheirs? Surely, thy
Conversation can never so foully belly thy Condition. Alas, poor self-deceived
wretch! Do thou think to meet thy Hopes and Comforts on the other side of the
Threshold? I cannot but pity thee, to think how I shall see thee look, and
lament thy loss, when I shall meet thee at Judgment, when God shall make a
Believer of thee, to thine everlasting Sorrow. When thou shall see that he was
in earnest, when he said, He that made them, will not have mercy on them, and
he that formed them, will show them no favor, Isa. 27.11. Though he be a
merciful God, yet thou shall then know, that he is as just as he is merciful.

4. They are mistaken in his Patience. They know no difference between his
Patience, and his Approbation: Where is the promise of his coming? for since
the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of
the Creation, 2 Pet. 3.4. This is the Generation of Rational Brutes, that can
see no higher, than they can reach with the Pole of Sense and Reason. As long
as it goes well with them in this world, they little trouble themselves about
another. The time of Gods Patience, is the time of their Presumption. Despisest
thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not
knowing, that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? Romans 2.4. A^,
Sinner! If thou could, if thou would but believe, and consider this! Is
God patient with thee? and do thou think he will be so for ever? Is thy
repentance that which his Patience is waiting for? Is God but looking one day,
and one year after another, when thou will turn? Is he patiently waiting at thy
Alehouse or Tavern-doors, longing for an opportunity, as it were, to find thee
sober, that he might treat with his Prodigal about his everlasting Peace? Does
he put up and pass by all thy scorns and contempt of his condescending Grace,
and willing to forgive all if he could but persuade thee to turn unto him? O
shameless wretch! Is it consistent with the glory and honor of a God thus to
become himself; nay, thus to humble himself with dust and ashes, for ever? In
what fury will such Patience end at last? oh how will those Items burn in thy
Soul, when Conscience shall have the reading of them in Hell? when those
Inventories of wrath, which thou art now treasuring up in this the time of Gods
patience, shall be brought forth in the day of his wrath, and revelation of his
righteous Judgment! o^, if words would prevail, how could I let my Pen run
here! But alas! These Hammers can do nothing, till God strike with them.

5. They are mistaken in Gods Delight in, and Care of his people. Haman little
thought that poor Mordecai, for whom he had prepared the Gallows, had been so
high in the Kings Books. He was thinking in his heart, To whom will the King
delight to do honor more than to my self? Hest. 6.6. But the Kings thoughts
were far otherwise. Methink these are the very thoughts and carriage of the
Haman's of our Times. Whom does God delight to dignifie more than them? Who are
advancing themselves on the Icarian wings of begged honor? A few Mordedai's
they are ailing at, who (though they deny them no civil reverence) yet know not
how to stoop and bow and cringe to their Idols. These are therefore Populus Dei
occidendus. A certain people, says he, scattered abroad among the People in
all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their laws are diverse from all people,
neither keep they the Kings laws (a Politic pretense) therefore it is not
for the Kings profit to suffer them. If it please the King; let it be written
that they may be destroyed; and I will pay ten thousand Talents of silver to
the hands of those that have the charge of the Business, to bring it into the
Kings treasuries. Oh praeposterous course to enrich Kings! Little did he think
what his designs lay in travail with. Oh that all those that are lifting up
their hands against their fellow servants would consider this! What if the King
of Heaven should call for his book of Records, which he has written, Mal.
3.16. with what Hester would they intercede? Our God has engaged not to forget
our Work and labor of love. Heb. 6.10. To recompense tribulation to them that
trouble us, 2 These. 1.6. I intend not to tell them, all that spiritual refuge
and divine strength we have to trust to; only let them know, that we have a
righteous, Almighty, Faithful, Gracious and Wise God, and a sure word of
Promise to anchor on: And we know that Mordecai shall one day ride in Honor
and Triumph, when Haman shall hang on his own Gallows. I know it is in vain to
tell the Wolf now that they are the Sheep and not the Goats he is worrying.
Therefore I shall leave it to the Decision of the great Day. And, sinner, let
me tell thee, when God shall pull his Lambs out of thy teeth, and rake their
precious bones out of thy Den, thou shall then know, to thine eternal misery,
whose and what blood it is that thou art guilty of. When Christ shall up and
tell thee, Math 25.45.
In as much as ye did it, or did it not, unto one of the least of these, ye did
it, or did it not, unto me. When he shall show thee, that every stroke lighted
on the very apple of His eye: That every drop of blood thou have drawn from
them came from his heart; that every Penny thou did unjustly exact from them,
thou stolest out of his purse. That when thou did imprison them, thou did
imprison him. Oh! these things will surely trouble thy mind another day.

6. They are mistaken in God's glorious Title of Hearing Prayer. Psalm. 65.2. I
said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain, Isa. 45.19. Let the mighty
Nimrods of the world know then that the people of God are not so naked and
helpless, as they take them to be. To speak with holy reverence, yet in
Scripture-Dialect, Prayer has the command of Heaven, Isa. 45.11. Ask me of
things to come, concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my hands command
ye me. But alas! Things that are invisible to carnal sense, seem incredible to
carnal reason. Yet, seem it never so incredible, what God has promised and his
people ever experienced, we dare, we must, we do believe. The righteous cry,
and the Lord hears and delivers them out of all their troubles, Psalm.
34.17. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy
Hill. Psalm. 3.4. Here was his experience as a witness of Gods truth. Therefore
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves
against me round about. Psalm. 3.6. Marvail not then, ye Sons of Pride, that
we fear none of your threatenings. Our God is a God hearing Prayer, and woe be to
those that have such a God for their Enemy? The prayers of God's people were
wont to be terrible to his Enemies. Exodus 17.11. 2 King. 1.13. In the first
Reformation of Scotland, it is reported, that the Queen Mother in her wars
confessed that she feared more the fasting and prayer of Knox and his
Disciples, than an Army of twenty thousand men. The Prince of Wales being
persuaded to make war with Henry the 3d. acknowledged that he was more afraid
of his Prayers and Alms, than of his Armies. So the Bishop of Magdeburgs
Fasting and Prayer was the terror of Frederick Elector, of Saxony. But however
it be grown less terrible now, it is not grown less fatal. God is the same
still, and his Promise is the same, and his enemies, even the proudest of them,
shall one day know that he is a God Hearing Prayer. Woe be to thee, Sinner, when
God shall rain upon thee the tears of his oppressed Saints, and woe to thine
House, when God shall beat upon it with the sighs and groans of his persecuted
children? Woe to that man by whom the offense comes. Matthew. 18.8.


7. They are mistaken in Gods Ends and Designs, Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off
nations, not a few, Isa. 10.7. God's end is to reform, theirs to destroy. But
here is our comfort; these are but his Executioners, and none of his Jury: God
has not acquainted them with his mind. It is not for them to know what he
intends to do with his people. Their wills are none of his Rule, nor are their
false accusations any evidence with our Judge. God has a hook in their
Nostrils, and has appointed them their bounds. If the pardon come at the very
top of the Ladder, the Executioner must obey: And if the Judge will that the
righteous shall be delivered out of trouble, and the wicked come in his stead,
Pro. 11.8.
his Will must stand.

2. The second voice of the Rod unto the Inemies, is this. It calls upon them
to Consider, and on consideration to repent. Methink that Generation is com, or
an other well like it, which was spoken of under the fourth vial. Rev. 16.9.
And men were scorched with great heat and blasphemed the name of God, which
has power ever these Plagues, and repented not to give him glory. Han't the
Plagues of God scorched us, both at home and abroad, in City and in Country;
yet who has repented to give him Glory? I have but these four things at
present to propose to your sober Confideration, and very briefly.

1. What manner of Persons are they whom God takes to be his Enemies? Phil.
3.18.19. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ. Here the Apostle
complains of Enemies: in the next verse he describes them, by their way, and by
their end. Their way, they walk, a kind of Professors they are; but, their God
is their Belly; their Lust and uncleanness. Their Glory is in their shame:
either passively, their Glory shall end in shame, or actively, they glory in
that which is the shame of their profession. Who mind earthly things; Carnal
men, carnal in their affections, and in their conversations: to which answers
Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God. And their end is destruction.
The end of these things is death. Chap. 6.21. Again, Luke 19.27. But those mine
enemies -- bring them hither, and slay them before me. Here Is their Doom. The
Persons were such as would not that Christ should reign over them. And how does
Christ reign, but by his word and spirit, and the Laws and Statutes of them?
Well then, such as yield not both visible and invisible, obedience in heart and
life unto the laws of Christ; but walk by their own laws, or the laws of men in
things pertaining to the Kingdom of Christ, are the Enemies of his Kingdom.
Nay, every man in an unconverted estate is an enemy to Christ. Romans 5.10. Col.
1.21. Now I befeech you, if your Souls, and the securing of your eternal peace,
be so much worth; make a little pause here, and soberly consider, what
infallible, nay, probable evidences you can produce to prove your pretended
Conversion; whether they are such as God in his word speaks peace through, and
on which after serious and due deliberation, you can boldly and safely
adventure your fouls on for ever. Nay, are there not many, and I think, never
more amongst a Christian people, that even hate and disdain the imputation of
Repentance and Conversion, and yet cannot so much as question whether they are
the enemies of Christ or no. Well, the day is at hand that will separate the
Sheep from the Goats, and then it shall fully appear who are friends, and who
are foes. 2. Whether Gods Enemies be not concerned in his Rod, as well as his
friends. Doubtless the Proposition is affirmed by all the Reason in the world;
If Judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of them that obey
not the Gospel! 1 Pet. 4.17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God,
Psalm. 9.17. Will a Lion roar in the Forest when he has no Prey? Shall a
Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? The Lion has
roared, who will not fear, the Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Am.
3.4.6.8.
3. Whether the course you are taking be the way to the mercies you are
exspecting? By swearing and lying and killing and stealing and committing
adultery they break out and blood touches blood. Therefore shall the Land
mourn, Hos. 4.2, 3. If all manner of profaneness and oppression be the way to
mercy and peace, then Scripture shall be no longer Scripture, nor God any
longer God, who has both threatened and executed the contrary. There is no
peace, says the Lord, to the wicked, Isa. 48. ult. Hear this, O ye that
swallow up the needy! even to make the poor of the Land, to fail that ye may
buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes. Shall not the land
tremble for this? and every one mourn that dwells therein? Am. 8.4, 6, 8.
Righteousness exalts a nation, but Sin is a reproach to any people, Prove.
14.34. Surely if the plainest Scripture, or the most undeniable experience, be
of any Credit or Consequence with us, we need no prophetical Revelations to
tell us whither we are sinking. 4. Whether or no you are fighting for Christ or
for Antichrist. Your estate is Militant, and for one of these two you are
fighting. He that is not with me, is against me. But be sure, Michael and his
Angels shall prevail, the Lamb will overcome the Beast. Therefore come out of
her my People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of
her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. The Wine Press is prepared, the Vintage is at hand; Woe!
woe! woe! to Babylon.
3. The third Voice of the Rod to the Enemies, is this; It tells them, that the
Dregs of the Cup are like to come to their share, Psalm. 75.8. For in the hand
of the Lord there is a Cup. and the Wine is red, it is full of mixture, and he
^oureth out of the same; but the Dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth
shall wring them out, and drink them. How full of Gall and Wormwood ^s every
word in this Text! In the hand of the Lord, This shows that irresistible power,
that shall enforce it, and the speedy execution of it; ^t is in his hand, and
shall shortly be set to their ^^outhes; there is a Cup, The measure which ^e
has appointed: it is the full Dose, not one Scruple, or Drop, to be abated
them. And the Wine is red. It Is a bloody Cup: fiery Indignation. It is full of
mixture, A composition of ^ll kinds and degrees of wrath and misery; the Cup is
not only full, but the mixture is full: it ^s full of mixtures, nothing left
out, that may ^xpress his terror, or their torment; it is full, and complete
vengeance. And he pours out of ^he same, They shall not sip of it only, but
shall take off their full draught, they shall be ^rencht with it; poured out,
not by drops, but with a great Gush of wrath; But the Dregs thereof, the
Quintessence of its bitterness, the ^ery utmost gall and venom of it. All the
^icked of the earth; there shall not one escape, whether openly, or closely
wicked; whosoever has not his name written in the Lamb's Book of Life, and his
doors sprinkled with the blood of the Passover: though never so great in the
world, or righteous in his own, or in the eyes of others; all the wicked of the
earth, in all times, relations, conditions, or places of the earth, shall wring
them out. It Is a Cup of their own mingling, they are treading the Wine Press
themselves; and this shall be the Worm that Conscience shall gnaw them with, to
all eternity; that there is no more poured out, than they themselves poured in:
Their undoing, is their own doing. Ah, Sinner! Every Sin, every Lie, every
Oath, every Lust, every omission of thy Duty, every Idle word, every hour
spent in an unconverted estate, lays on more weight, to squeeze out, and
extort the bitterest dregs of wrath and misery, which thou must shortly drink
up. Tremble then, oh Sinner! God is going the Round, with his Cup of trembling;
though it come to our Table first, be sure, the bottom shall return on you; The
time is come, that Judgment must begin at the House of God, and if it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel? 1 Pet.
4.17. He that has begun with us, shall sooner o^ later make an end with you.
In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will
also visit the altars of Bethel, and the horns of the altar shall be cut off,
Am. 3.14. The captive Ark, shall one day prove the utter ruin of Dagon. For,
thus says the Lord, Behold, they whose Judgment was not to drink of the Cup,
have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished?
thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it, Jer. 49.12.
It Is a sad Omen to God's enemies, when he begins to fall foul with his Friends,
Rejoice, and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwell in the land of Vz, the
Cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shall be drunken, and shall make
thy self naked, Lam. 4.21. Behold, the righteous shall be ^ecompensed in the
earth; much more the wicked, and the Sinner, Prove. 11.31. Far be it from me,
to rejoice at the thoughts of that ^udgment that attends thee; or to comfort my
self, with the hopes of that Tribulation, that is ^^ke to be thine eternal
Recompense. But knowing the terror of the Lord, we per^wade men. God, who
knows all things, ^noweth, that the desire of my very Soul is, that thou
might be saved; that, of an ene^y, thou might be made a friend; my Prayer
to God, is, that the thoughts of thy ^eart may be forgiven thee; my design is
not (...) cry out upon thee, but to cry out unto thee. ^ave your selves from
this untoward generation, Act. 2.40. I would not, that fire should ^ome down
from Heaven to consume thee; Luke ^.5^.
but that thou might be as a firebrand plucked out ^f the burning. O that,
though we are strug^ng together here, in the womb of the earth, ^^e might both
pass safe through the new birth ^ ^^nner! this is all the harm and misery I
wish ^ee, and all the happiness I wish my self. O that God would awaken thee,
and cause thy lot^ to fall with his own people! that God would make this Cup
thy blessing, and not thy bane; thy purge, and not thy poison! that he would
open himself a door into thy Soul, before he shut and lock the door of Hell
upon thee!

4. The fourth errand of the Rod, to God^ Enemies, is, to tell them, That God
will certainly be too hard for them. Trouble, and anguish shall make him
afraid, they shall prevail against him, as a King ready to the Battel^ For he
stretches out his hand against God and strengthens himself against the
Almighty. He runs upon him, even upon his neck^ upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers, Job 15.24, 25, 26. O, Sinner! what strange madness has bewitched
the? Dare thou venture upon ^ God that is armed with all Power in Heaven and
in Earth? Thou shall break them with ^ rod of iron; thou shall dash them in
pieces, like a Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2.9. Ah, poor worm^ Do thou think to
take God Prisoner, an^ bind the Almighty in chains? should he a^^ but the least
of his Creatures against thee, wi^^ a Commission to execute his wrath upon the^
could thou stand before him? To what (...) a Height was proud Herod come,
before God (...) his Worms upon him, Act. 12.23. Has G^^ left himself without
evident witness of his P^^^er and Justice, even in this age? Don't you very
Reason, and natural Conscience, some times suggest to you, as once it did to
Gamali^^ If this Counsel, or this work be of men, it w^ come to naught; but if
it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest happily ye be found, even to fight
against God, Act. 5.38, 39. We know, who will one day bruise the Head, and
wound the hairy scalp of such an one, as goes on in his trespasses, Psalm.
68.21. And for your farther awakening, Consider, and know, 1. That God will be
too hard for your Power: No weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper:
and every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment, thou shall condemn,
this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of
me, says the Lord, Isa. 54.17. He that can set the Stars in Battel-array, and
cause them to fight from Heaven ^^n their Courses, against his Enemies, Judge.
5.20. He that has Legions of Angels at the Command of a word, Matthew. 26.53. He
that has given thee all that power thou have, thy ^ife, and breath, and
being, Act. 17.28. Will not such a God be too hard for thee? Shall the dried
stubble contend with the whirlwind? -- Who would set the briers and thorns
against me ^n battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together, Isa.
27.4. Well, Sinner! ^s confident, and as bold as thou art, thou shall, after a
few moments more, know, against what ^rresistable strength thou have engaged;
and remember, thou have been warned, that our God is a consuming fire, Heb.
12.29. Remember, when thou art crying to the Hills to cover thee; when thou art
roaring under the vengeance of that God, against whom thou art now fighting:
When God is dealing dead Blows at thee, remember, that thou were once warned;
nay, thou shall remember; there is one within thee shall bear record to Gods
patience, and to my duty, and to thy shame and torment, that tho^ have been
fairly warned. When the Plagues of a Just God are raining in fire and brimstone
upon thee, and there is no escape: when it is too late to deliver thy Soul; then
remember the time that thou would not be persuaded. 2. God will be too hard
for your Policy Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, and give ear, all ye of fa^^ Countries. Gird your selves, and ye shall
b^ broken in pieces; take Counsel together, and (...) shall come to naught;
speak the word, and (...) shall not stand: for God is with us, Isa. 8.9, 10.
Associate your selves, and take counse^ together; let the Assembly be full, a
general Convocation: Gird your selves in Oath an^ Interest, as one man, and
gird your selves again^ twist the Cords of Counsel, revise and recognize your
Debates and Results; nay, spea^ the word, and yet it shall not stand, for God
is with us. God is an All-seeing, and an Al^ knowing, as well as an Almighty
God. Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom, I am understanding, I have strength,
Prove. 8.14. The Decre^ of men are not in force with God, till the^ have past
under the Broad Seal of Heaven Counsel is mine, The Counsel that is not ferch
from the God of Counsel, is Madness and Folly and not Counsel. Sinner! let me
tell thee, though^ thou have hired the D^vil for Counsel, with the Fees of thy
Soul: yet all thy Counsel shall prove thy Confusion, when the Cause shall be
pleaded before the Judge of Quick and Dead. Remember Balaam's Parable, and take
it for a Rule. Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there
any Divination against Israel, Numb. 23.23. Who has hardened himself against
God, and has prospered? Job 9.4. Ask Cain how he prosper'd against his
Brother; ask the old World how they prospered; ask Pharaoh; ask Sodom and
Gomorrah; nay, ask the damned in Hell, whether they have prospered? whether
ever they were too hard for God? and within a few years more, you may be able
to tell me, could I come to ask you, that you have had as bad success as any of
these.


5. The fifth and last Voice of the Rod, to the Enemies of God, is, to forewarn
them, that God is making short work with them. For, he will finish the work,
and cut it short in righteousness: because a short work will the Lord make upon
the earth, Romans 9.28. Oh, that I could be heard, while your hearing time holds!
oh, that now, at the eleventh hour, I might persuade you to come into the Lords
Vineyard, and labor with us this one hour that is left, that you may receive
your penny with us at ^ight! oh, that these parting knocks might be heard! that
these last calls might have a willing and kind Answer! How does my Soul long
for you? Ah, Sirs! 'twill be sad repenting in another world; 'twill be hard to
bear what you cannot not then avoid. Oh, that I could wish you, or weep you,
and pray you into Covenant with Christ! A little while longer, and you will
wi^h as I do, O that I had been wise, while I might have been happy! oh, that I
had been counseled, and ruled by those that wished my Soul well, even as their
own Souls! A few Sports more, Sinner, and then thou shall play thy last Game,
Deceive and flatter thy self a little longer, and then thou shall be undeceived
for ever. Scorn us, mock us, persecute us a little longer; and then thou shall
scorn us no more, thou shall mock nor persecute no more for ever. Be wise now
therefore, O ye Kings, and be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way: When his wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all
they that put their trust in him, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. The Lords wrath is
kindled, and that not a little: it is time to kiss the Son. But, Wi^^ you kiss
him, as Judas kissed his Master? W^^ woe, be to thee; it had been good for thee,
i^ thou had never been born. Oh, how sh^^^ bespeak thee! how shall I awaken
thee! Wha^ meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise, call upon the God. But for m^ People
and Country's sake, I only with, I might err in this part (...) Vision.
The Cloud hangs black and heavy (...) ^hee, full of the wrath of God; Wars
and Tumults, and Rapines, abroad: Poverty and Pest^lence, Mu^mu^ings,
Heart-burnings, Jealousi^^ and Fears, at home. Misery and Ruin seem to be
driving at us, as Jehu toward Jezreal. W^^ knows what Desol^tions a year or
two more may produce? who can well what a day may bring forth. The fire has
entered your dwellings, and will you burn in your Beds? God has clasht the
Bells of Nature, nay, and overturned the Bells of Aaron too, and can none of
these things affect us? oh that God would now drive home and fasten these Nails
upon you! that he would graciously persuade you to hear the Rod, and him who
has appointed it.

Proceed we now to answer one Query briefly; How to Judge of the particular
Voice of this or that particular Rod. And that I may commend the practice of
this Search to you, give me leave to premise these three or four Incentives.

1. It Is an excellent way to gain by the Rod. Though the Balm be never so
Sovereign and good; yet if the Patient knows not how or where to apply it, it
is never like to effect the cure. Correction without instruction is the way to
harden, not to reform. This seems to be one main cause why God was even weary
of smiting Israel. There was no end in it; ye will revolt more and more. The
more I strike, the more ye revolt; I may strike you dead, and all will be one.
The reason is, Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa. 1.3.
Therefore Doctrine must go with Reproof, and Insruction in righteousness with
correction; then both the Word, and the Rod will be profitable and successful.
Christian: 2 Timothy 3.6.
this is the way to turn thy saddest losses to thy best advantage: To extract
Ex vipera theriacam, out of poison an Antidote against poison: To turn
Egyptians against Egyptians; this is the art and happiness of a Christian, To
set his losses, his hazzards, his crosses, his miseries, nay, death it self,
among his richest gains. 2. It Is a notable course to make the yoke easy.
What Is that makes any case grievous or desperate, but this, when we know not
how to help it? How does it trouble and disquiet you, when a friend is angry,
and you know not why or wherefore? or how to go about to reconcile him? Only
this you know, that he will not be angry without great and just cause. The
knowledge of the Cause is always the first direct step to the Cure. You will
never go cheerfully under the yoke, as long as you go in the dark as to the end
and meaning of it. 3. It Is a special means to improve your Experience, and to
strengthen your watch. This will bring thee better acquainted with all the
false corners and Caves, the windings and Meanders of thy heart and life. When
you have not only bin taught or threatened, but whipped out of an error, it will
be a good token with you as long as you live. What you have once sensibly
smarted for, you will the more carefully watch against. The reason why we are
at such losses in those Circumstantials, wherein the Word is silent, is,
because we have not observed nor understood the Rule, wherein the Rod has
spoken more plainly. The Rod is the Festu in Gods hand, whereby sometimes he
teaches his children to spell his word. The Theorie of any art is not so
thoroughly understood, till the Practice make it familiar. Your Costly
experiences will be your standing experiences. Oh what a staff will this be in
your hands, when you are staggering and halting between Faith and Reason! when
conscience shall stand up and urge you with former experiences, This way I dare
not adventure on, God has met with me here already, and convinced me that it
is out of my way; the last time I was wandering in this or the like
unwarrantable path, I sadly remember what frowns were given me, and how dear it
cost me; and should I be found in the same or the like way again, will he not
make me remember it as long as I live? and leave such a mark on me as shall
cause me to go limping and lamenting to my grave? 4. It Is the only way to have
the affliction removed with advantage. Suppose, now God is afflicting thee in
thy Health, or Liberty, or in thy worldly Designs or Hopes: It Is not thy
ordinary course in such a case, to find out and remove the immediate and
natural cause of it? if this be accomplished, and the effect, which troubled
thee, cease, thou rejoycest and commendest thy course, and by and by all is
forgotten; the wound is cured, and all is well, and the Plaster laid up for
the next like occasion: thus the Rod loses its end, and does but stop thee in
thy way, not turn thee out of thy way; and hence it follows, that if God intend
thee any good, he must send stronger messengers after thee, which, it may be,
are forced to knock thee down before thou will yield. But suppose that God
should leave thee to thy own course, to remove natural evils with natural
Remedies, and to look no higher; unto what a distance from God would thou in
a short time wander? Nay, though thou acknowledgest thy sin in the general, or
in many principal or particular branches of it, and indeavourest to humble thy
soul in truth before God; yet if that Achan the chief Author of the present
displeasure be not found out and executed according to the law of God, thou art
as liable still, to the same miscarriage, and to the same affliction, as ever
thou were before. Though the Rod may have wrought some good on thee, yet it
has not reached that good.
Let this serve to move you unto the Duty, through the blessing of him that
waters the Furrows of Sion, and causes his people to profit. I come now to
answer unto this great and necessary Query.

To be peremptory or positive in this case is dangerous. Gods ways are
sometimes in the dark: his counsels are a great deep, where it may be as unsafe
for us to seek him, as it is impossible to find him. Yet I am not leading you
into a Labyrinth of endless or fruitless labor, nor introducing unto the
contemplation of a Platonic Idea, nor about to persuade you to turn Oracles to
your selves. That which I have to propose is not intended to distract thee, but
to direct thee. Here is certainly a Pearl of great price hid; a Gemme of
infinite value; Digg, and thou shall find it; find it, and it shall enrich thee
both in this world, and in a better. And as you hope to understand the Counsel
of God in this business, set your selves with all possible seriousness and
impartiality to seek it of God in the diligent use of these, and any other
Directions that shall from God be suggested to thee.

1. Confider what were thy last miscarriages. Deal with thy self as Physicians
are wont to do with their Patients. What was the last die you fed upon?
Possibly, there may be something in the Nature, the Quality or quantity of it,
which may produce such a distemper. Was there no distaste or dislike in the
stomach at, or immediately after, the reception of it? No Reluctance or
doubting in conscience about any thing you have lately done, or spoken, or
purposed, or advised, or omitted? Sometimes, God is pleased to intimate his
displeasure by his Rod in the first step of our departure from him, He that
has commanded us to call upon him while he is near, is sometimes pleased to
observe his own Law, and calls upon us while we are near, to reckon with us
while it is hot: before we are gone out of hearing, as it were. I need not heap
up Scripture-Instances to this purpose: daily experience is sufficient
evidence. 2. What are the cructations of thy conscience? Is there nothing, that
Conscience does begin to accuse thee of? that thou could wish had been done,
or left to doing? When David had numbered the people, see how conscience did
presently begin to work within him, His heart smote him, 2 Samuel 24.10. What
ever thou do, take heed of overlaying thy conscience, or stifling the
operations of it: If this lie speechless in such a case, its a sign the
disease is dangerous: when the Stomach is overcharged, either in Quantity or
Quality, it loatheth the very thoughts of meat: but especially of that, whereon
it surfeited. My Sin is ever before me, says David. Psalm. 51.3. It Is true the
sin of his nature comes into his thoughts, as the root and spawn of all the
rest: but it is this particular guilt, that always returns with its gashly and
dreadful aggravations upon him. 3. Sometimes the Punishment bears resemblance
with the Sin. Suffering is the Offspring of sin; and oftentimes it begets
children in its own likeness. God sometimes deals with us Lege Talionis, and
requi^eth us like for like. So he dealt with Agag, 1 Samuel 15.33. As thy sword
has made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. Such
was that Judgment of God on those Sodomites the Apostle speaks of, Romans 1.27.
Receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet. He
meted out a punishment, that should suit with their impiety, and made their
very sin to be their snare. Thus he does often, as it were, write our
accusation on our cross, and cause the suffering to bear the very picture of
the Sin. Nay, after this manner God dealt with David himself: When he began to
glory in, or to trust to, the multitude and strength of his forces; God
shortened them by seventy thousand men. 2 Samuel 24.15. So when he had sinned by
Adultery and Murder: Murder and Adultery was his punishment, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11.
Thus also God met with Ahab, 1 King. 21.19. But to mention no more: this is one
of the commonest and clearest Rules we have to judge by in this case. Has God
crossed thee in any of thy delights? Consider whether thy delight were lawful in
its self and in its circumstances, or the use of it, moderate and subordinate.
Has he smitten thee in some dear Relation? Consider whether it had not too
much of thine heart, or of thy time, thy care, or fond Indulgence. Has he
afflicted thee in any part of thy Body? Consider how thy Body (or, it may be,
that part especially) has been employed either to Gods honor or dishonor.
Have thou met with any frustration, danger, or evil success in thy enterprise?
Consider what were thy ends. Of whom did thou ask counsel? or crave
assistance? See whether there be not some offense near thee, of which thy
punishment may claim parentage. The first Question we use to ask the Patient is
this, Where does your pain lie? Wherein are you grieved most? And then examine,
whether that part be not suffering under its own guilt. It may be thou art in a
languishing, pining case, under some hereditary distemper, and have always
something to complain of. Why, may not God then be presenting to thee the
Condition of thy ^oul by the estate of the body, and visiting for ^he sin of
thy enstome or Constitution? When God enters into a Course of Physic with
thee, ^^s an Argument that the disease is rooted in thee, and let me add this
as a sure Rule, by the way. Every Affliction has a general, if not a special
eye and aim at thy most beloved, habituated, or accustomed Sin. Though
particular miscarriages be often times attended with particular corrections;
yet both, it may be, are properly reducible unto thy master-Last, the sin that
does so easily beset thee, as the root of all: for one and the same sin may
discover its self diverse ways, that seem aliene from its own nature. For
illustration take this plain example. A man that is naturally Scorbutical, and
lies under the Physicians hands for that disease, but while this is under cure,
he falls into a Fever, or Plurisie, or Dropsy, or the like; unto which the
Physician applies his art diversely; yet in all he does, has a due respect unto
the former and great infirmity, which is as the fountain of the rest, and
creates him all this toil, and variety of Methods and Compositions. Hence I
conclude then, that he that is not acquainted with his Master-sin, the King or
Prince of his corruptions; is not like to go far, with any success or real
advantage, in his search. 4. It may be God afflicts thee for prevention of a
worse evil. I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall
not find her paths. Hos. 2.6. God will set thorns in his sheeps paths, to keep
them from breaking from him. This was the course God took with St. Paul. 2 Cor.
12.7. Left I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh: a messenger of Satan
to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. God sees sometimes that
prosperity would hurt us, ease and worldly contents would prove snares to us;
and therefore in mercy he may deny or remove them. It may be, that God is
fitting thee for some more than ordinary mercy, and laying the foundation for
some fair building; if so, marvail not, nay, bethink it not if he digg deep in
thee. 5. Consider, what is thy Patience under the Rod: An impatient high
color, and the thick and eager beating of the Pulse of thy complaints are the
Symptoms of a Fever, and gives cause to think that unbelief and impatience is,
at least, an Assistent, if not the Principal cause. Pelluntur ignibus ignes.
It Is an ordinary thing with God, to drive out one heat with another. Wonder
not to see God setting his weak children on their legs and teaching them to
go, though they be froward and unwilling. He knows that exercise is the way to
beget and to strengthen habits. If thou would that God should give over his
afflicting, thou must learn to give over thy fretting. The quiet Patient is
either the most hopeful, or the most desperate Patient. 6. It may be Gods
design is only or chiefly, for thy trial. To discover to thy self that which
was hid, whether it be grace or corruption. Though sin be ever (at least) the
remote cause of the Rod, yet it is not always the main Cause; though it be cum
causa, yet not always n causa, Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents:
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. Joh, 9.3. Doubtless,
both the man and his parents were sinners, both originally and actually; but
that was not it, for which the man was born blind. 7. Go and ask it of God by
prayer. No man in heaven nor in earth is able or worthy to open this Book,
unless the Lion of the tribe of Judah do it. Prayer is the Key to open these
Adyta Templi, the secrets and Mysteries of the Spirit; the deep counsels of
Providence. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For, who
has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? Romans 11.33,
34. O then! go out of thy self, and get up to the Mount with God. Prayer has
the Promise to quicken and encourage it. Jam. 1.5. Spread thy case before him;
bewail thy Ignorance to him; draw up thy affections to a resolved and practical
submission to whatsoever he shall convince thee of; and conclude all with holy
Job, chap. 6, 24. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to
understand wherein I have erred.


1. This Informs us of a threefold Mistake.

1. They are mistaken, that question Gods rovidence. And they say, how does God
know, and is there knowledge in the most high? Psalm. 73.11. Nay, it seems that
the Psalmist himself was almost ready to think so to. Verily I have cleansed my
heart in vain, ver. 13. Until I went unto the Sanctuary of God, then understood
I their end, ver. 17. Which argues that he was mistaken before: till then, he
understood not ^he mystery. He could not perceive those inner wheels, that
secret Thread of Providence, which ^uns through all the transactions, counsels,
estates and designs of men. And is not this almost your Case, my Brethren? that
you are ready to say with that wicked Messenger, 2 King. 6.33. This ^^il is of
the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer! Though you acknowledge the
^^vine Providence in its Esse, yet know not how (...) subscribe or submit to it
in its Operari. You ^^e that it is the Lords doing, and it is not only
^avellous: but grievous, as thorns in your eyes and hereupon the unbelieving,
impatient heart (...) begetting and harboring hard th^ughts of ^od. Because
you cannot reach the other end of ^s unsearchable Counsels, are apt to censure
his ^are or his Power, as if he were a God that ^^d forgotten to be gracious,
or unable to deli^^r. God has forsaken him; persecute him, and ^ke him: for
there is none to deliver him, Psalm. ^1.11. What! is there none to deliver? Have
(...) cut the Reins in Gods hand? Have you got^^ the Bridle into your teeth?
Will you indeed ^secute and take him? Ay, but what if you be ^staken? What if
the Sampson of your Con^ence should but mock with you? what if the divided Sea
should roll her waves together again? But the salvation of the righteous is of
the Lord: he is their strength in the time of trouble. And the Lord shall help
them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them
because they trust in him, Psalm. 37.39, 40.

2. They are mistaken, that transferr the cause of the Rod from themselves.
When the guilt of sin appears in the punishment of it; Nature it self seems
ashamed to own it, Then it is not I, and it is not I. The Woman which thou
gave me, says the man: the Serpent, says the woman. Thou art he that
troubles Israel, says Ahab to Elijah: I have not troubled Israel, says
Elijah, but thou and thy Fathers house (more likely indeed) in that ye have
forsaken the commandment, of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim, 1 King.
18.17, 18. Well Sirs! it is in vain to sh^ffle and collude with God and
Conscience The Burden of England is very heavy: ou^ wound is grievous and
general; we are in a bleeding, ga^ping, dying case; the whole Camp is
disquieted, for the judgments of God are among us, and the glory of England is
departing: God will shortly discover where the fault lies; and who and what it
is, that has troubled us. 'T^^ in vain to plead, Not guilty before God. For
(...) have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God Romans 3.23. It Is true,
there are those that thing themselves without sin, and at least without an^
considerable guilt in this evil, and take up the Stones to cast at us: But when
once Conscience is awakened as theirs was, Joh. 8.9. they may begin to be
ashamed. The Wiseman tells of a woman that eats, and wipeth her mouth and
says, I have done no wickedness, Pro. 30.20. and yet she is convicted for an
adulterous woman: Nay, it is given as the mark of an Adulteress, so to do. God
is not wont to cut his Plaster larger than the wound: the Rod will tell us
where the guilt lies. Yet where the wound smarts most, there is most sign of
life and hope of a cure: that part that is most dangerously gangrenated is
least sensible, till it comes to cauterising or decision. Oh that God would
convince England of her sickness, and cause her to see her wound, before it
become utterly incurable!

3. They are also mistaken, that apply themselves to indirect means to be
healed. Good men as well as bad are sometimes guilty in this kind: it was Asa's
sin 2 Chronicles. 16.12 -- In his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wounds, then went
Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb: yet could he not heal you, nor
cure you of your wound, Hos. 5.13. They saw only the wound of their disease,
not the cause of it; and this led them the wrong way to the cure; so, Jer.
44.17, 18. We will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth ^ut of our own
mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings
unto her, ^s we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and ^ur Princes in the
Cities of Judah, and in the streets ^f Jerusalem: For then had we plenty of
victuals and were well, and saw no evil: but since we left off ^o burn incense
to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have
wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine. Is
not this the language and practice of the Generation of our days? that measure
their Religion by their B^llies, Mich. 3.10.
and would fain build up ^ion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. We will
return to our Mass and Matins, to our old Superstition and prophnness, for then
we were well and saw no evil: but since there has been so much preaching, and
such strong light, such circumspect walking, and evidence of the spirit and
power of godliness; we have wanted all things, at least that one thing we would
have. Oh 'twere good days when both Priest and People were agreed to fall into
the Ditch together, when Sabbath-daies were days of sport and recreation, and
Pardons might be had through the hands of other Meditators, and within the
price of a lust. But see what follows, ver, 21. The incense ye that burnt in
the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers, your
Kings and your Princes and the people of the land, did not the Lord remember
them, and came it not into his mind, so that the Lord could no longer be^r
because of the evil of your doings? Because ye have burnt incense, and because
ye have sinned against the Lord, etc. therefore this evil is happened unto you
as at this day, Jer. 44.21. Is your return to the cause of your P^^gues the
rational course to prevent them? will a second draught of the same Poison a^ido
e the first? The children of Israel have done evil in my sight, says the Lord,
they have set their abominations in the house, which is called by my name to
pollute it, and they have built the high places of Tophet. Their fear toward
me is taught by the precepts of man; while, with the old Samaritans, they fear
the Lord and serve their Idols. They are gone with the Dog to his vomit:
Therefore, behold the days come, says the Lord, that it shall no more be
called Tophet, nor the valley of the Son of Hinnom; but the valley of slaugter,
Jer. 7.31, 32. When we turn Gods Bethel to a Bethaven, his house of Prayer to a
den of Thieves: it will cause God to turn our Hephzibah into an Aceldama, a
land of delights to a field of Blood. Till the true cause be discovered,
acknowledged, and removed, we are far enough from the cure. The nature of the
cause might direct us to the means: If it be sin that has made the wound; who
shall heal it, but he that has authority to forgive sin, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness? For thus says the Lord, thy bruise is uncurable, and
thy wound is grievous, there is none to plead thy cause etc. All thy lovers
have forsaken thee, they seek thee not, Jer. 30.12, etc. Thy wound is in
curable with men; for few there are that understand, none that can remove it in
its Cause or effects. Thy Lovers, thy Confederates, whose Assistance thou
cravest and dependest on, will prove but Fig Leaves, not Shields to thee. For I
have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy. Thou will find that these Beds
are shorter than that thou can stretch thy self on them, and the Coverings
narrower than that thou can wrap thy self in them, Isa. 28.20. the
Abomination of thy Prayers and Sacrifices will never reconcile that God that is
in controversy wi^h these thy Abominations. The multitude of thy Offerings
will not remov^, but aggravate the sin of thine Oblations. There Is nothing of
thee, nothing in thee, nothing about thee, nothing above thee, but God that can
help thee: and if ever he do it, be sure he will do it in his own way, and on
his own terms: thou must first compound with him and submit to him. Oh! take
heed of running to thy own wits, or righteousness, of resting on thy own
duties, or innocence, or goodness of thy cause for help: These are not, these
will not be, thy Saviors.

S^ffer the word of Exhortation. Nail to the head, that I have bin all this
while driving at. Oh that these last blows might do the work on you! that God
may not take up the Hammer and drive a Jael's nail at your very heart, that I
may leave it at last as nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies. Eccl. 12.11
The spirit of God has framed the exhortation in the text it self, Hear ye the
Rod; and I shall say no more, I can say no more, but to urge you with this
Dilemma. Either you will hear, or else you will not hear. Now give me leave to
tell you, and take it as some of my parting words, as those that are not like
to be called upon much longer. God is c^ying to you, Friends, for his packing
penny; the eleventh hour is come, and some of h s last messengers are sent, for
your last answer; refuse but a little longer, and you shall never have the
^ffer more. Oh! that our words and wishes and tears might now at last prevail
with you!

1. If you will not hear the Rod in the voice of it, you shall surely feel the
Rod in the vengeance and curse of it. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind that ye
may see; who is blind but my servant, and who is deaf as my Messenger that I
sent? Isa. 42.10. etc. But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of
them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison-houses, they are for a prey
and none delivers, for a spoil and none says, Restore. Who among you will
give ear to this? Who will hearken and hear for the time to come? ver. 22.23.
Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the Strength of
Battle, and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, and it
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart, ver. 25. Sinner! do thou think that
God will leave thee thus? Has he threatened thee, and shaken the Rod at thee,
and shall thou escape so? Has he made all these dreadful preparations of wrath
only in terrorem, to affrighten thee? will thou once more try whether he be in
earnest or no? To thy sorrow shall thou try it and find it, when the
irreversible curse of God has fastened on thee, when the Fire and Brimstone of
divine and unexpiable vengeance is smoking about thine ears, thou shall know
that he was in earnest. When God shall dash the potts of thy highest Hopes and
dearest Comforts, in pieces; when the bitter dreggs of the Cup of trembling are
at thy nose and must pass through thee: when thou shall long for death, and
curse the day that ever thou were born, then shall thou know in whose hand the
Rod is. If ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says the Lord,
that this House shall become a desolation, Jer. 22.5. O hear this and tremble,
thou that wilt not hear? God has sworn thy desolation, and vowed thy
destruction. What shall I say? If thou art resolved to run the Risk with God
thou may. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes: but know that for all these things God will bring thee
into Judgment, Eccles. 11.9. Thou may enjoy a merry day or two, it may be a
few merry years more; but then, resolve to bid thy joys farewell for ever! O
that some such thoughts as these might awaken thee before it be too late!

2. If you will thus hear the Rod, you may be sure of strength to bear it.
Incline your ear, and come unto me hear and your soul shall live, Isa. 55.3.
What death soever threatens you; what dangers soever are impendent over you;
whosoever die, be sure, you shall live. You shall live even in death its self;
for your Soul shall ^ive. There has no temptation taken you, says the
Apostle, and there shall no temptation take you, but such as is common to man.
But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able, but will with the temptation also make away to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. When God sees his children willing to obey to
their utmost, he will never put them upon more than they shall be enabled to
wade through with comfort. Rejoice not against me, o mine enemy when I fall I
shall arise; when I sit in darness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Mic.
7.8. What shall I say? All the comfort in the God of comfort is engaged with
thee: If thou art willing to take up thy Cross, and to own thy duty under all
its difficulties; he that has called thee will bear thy Cross for thee and, if
that be too little, he will bear both thee and thy Burden too. 1 Pet. 5.7.
Matthew. 11.28.

In the next place, let this put you on the serious, speedy, and impartial
search and examination,

Ends in desiring the removal of the Rod. Is not this your joynt-cry, and the
common request of your Souls to God, that his blows may cease, and the bloody
executioners of his wrath be called in? Now what are your Ends? Is your
personal peace, the worldly credit of your own way, that which you aim at! that
you may sit down under your own Vines and Figtrees, as you have done
heretofore? do your ends reach only to your own enjoyments, either spiritual
or temporal? If so, you are yet short of that which is God's, and should be
your, design. Christian, I cannot tell thee what lies at the bottom of thy
heart, nor where thy ends are centered; I can but propose these things to thy
Conscience, and leave it there to be examined between God and thy own Soul. The
end of all divine actions and providence with relation to God himself is the
fuller and more convincing manifestation of the glory of all his Attributes,
wherein he is wont to make himself known to his creatures, with relation to us;
it is to accomplish his revealed will, which is our Sanctification. Wherefore
th^se designs of God, whom we are bound to imitate in all things imitable,
should be our Rule, both to direct and discern our ends by.

But you may say: Why, at nothing more than the advancement of that great End.

You say, taken up this cross, had not God necessitated thee and even forced it
on thee? Brethren, I would not be mistaken here: I have already declared my
mind in this case, before. There is nothing in the Cross it self, that can
render it desirable or eligible for it self: but if Christ be there, the Case
is altered. If he be lifted up, he shall draw all men to him. Ioh. 12.32.
The Cross is then thy Cross, and thy duty lies in it: and certainly, Duty is
desirable, on the same account that Idleness is detestable. Nay, what ever it
be that God has placed thy duty in, it is desirable for thy duties sake. A
true Soldier had as liev fight the Battle, being called to it, as to divide
the Spoil: and yet is not fool-hardie, to rush on dangers, without a
Commission. These are they which follow the Lamb whither soever he goes Rev.
14.4. They are not dragged at his heels, but they follow him. A Christians will
should hang in Aequilibrio, with an indeterminable promptness and readiness to
any thing that shall from God be discovered to be his duty. Now, can you
rejoice in tribulation? May I ask you then, whence it comes to pass? Is it from
the Comfort you find in it? Can you say, you are at hearts content even in the
Furnace, because you are there with Christ? or is it from the Good you get by
it? can you say, that you never wrought merrier than in those golden Mines,
where you are ever and anon fainting and ready to leave your lives under your
Burdens? or is it from the Equity you perceive in it? do you resolve, Mich. 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him. If
this be the temper of your hearts, let him alone to take it off, that laid it
on: and though what ever God does in the world, he is wont to do by means, yet
take heed of prescribing means to him whose Prerogative it is to elect his own
means, and then to commissionate and empower them. Examine what good the Rod
has wrought on you: either the voice of it, or the strokes of it. Have you
been humbled and reformed by what you have seen and suffered? Have you been
instructed, resolved, and strengthened by what you have read or heard? Has God
been at all these pains about you in vain? Has he been knocking on Anvils, and
I beating the air? God has no^ chastized you with dumb Blows, but has
reasoned the case with you. Oh my Brethren, where is the print of Gods Seal on
you? have you been softened to receive the impression? Blessed is the man whom
thou chastenest, and teach him out of thy law, Psalm. 94.12. This is the
Blessed course that God has taken with you; oh! where is the Blessed effect it
has wrought on you! As sure as your Souls shall rise at the Judgment, these
things shall rise with you, either to your comfort or your condemnation. And
now that I am about to shut up all, and to conclude my important Errand to you,
O let me not leave it in your Napkins, in your Papers, in your Heads, or in
your Mouths only; but in your hearts and lives! It grieves my soul to think
that I should bestow so much of my time and labor to aggravate the Damnation
of any of you. O that I knew how, or were able to prevent it! Dearly beloved in
the Lord! though my message to you be drawing to a Period, yet my heart is ever
full toward you. I know not how to leave you, for fear I should leave any of
you short of my end and desire. Oh that I could entrust a Token with you to
remember God, your souls and your Duty by, as long as you live! What Duty, what
Sin have you been convinced of? what search have you made, and what have you
found? Have we been fishing, not only all night, but all this year, and caught
nothing? What spiritual weapon, what experience, what courage, what victory,
what grace have you gotten or strengthened? oh sit down and shake your Netts;
see what you have gotten. Shall afflictions from henceforth find you as naked,
and leave you as unreform'd and unresolved, as if you had never heard a word of
the nature or use of them? Ah my Brethren! these are the things you have
adventured hard for, that you have hazzarded, and it may lost something for, and
have you gotten nothing to make it up again? Take this from me, You will never
adventure all at such a rate; such marchandizing will certainly beggar your
Profession.



1. That we should provoke God thus to deal with us. We, the People of such
mercies and deliverances whom God has so highly honored and made the head and
not the tail of the Nations; whose part he has taken against all the world,
and manifested his high account of us in the face of our enemies. Surely any
Nation under Heaven might better have done it than England. You only have I
known of all the Families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities, Am. 3.2. Is it a small offense that has drawn out such a
Flood of wrath? Oh let us sit down and weep here! we that even now were sitting
among the Lillies are now tossed and torn among the thorns and briers. Our peace
is broken both with God and Man; our health and plenty is declining like a
Shadow; we are sore broken as in the place of Dragons. O that my head were
waters! and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the slain of the daughter of my people! O that I had in the wilderness a
lodging place of waifaring men! that I might leave my people and go from them.
For they be all Adulterers an Assembly of treacherous men! Jer. 9.12.

2. That we are no more sensible of the Rod, nor bettered by it. This is the
saddest judgment on this side Hell, to be given up to a hard heart, a spiritual
Lethargy; When Calls and Promises and Threatenings and Judgments will not work,
he has but one way more, as to visible means, to make work with a People:
Ruin and Desolation will make work, but sad work! Hell and damnation will make
work with the stubbornest heart that ever sinned against God. Ah sinner! there
is a Rod that will awaken thee; there are arrows that will pierce thee; there
are flames that will warm thee; there are Fiends that will surely daunt thee,
and chains that shall bind thee to all eternity; there is a Discipline that
shall tame ^hee, as mad and as wild as thou art.

3. Lastly, lament your poor Posterities, who are like to inherit the curse of
our backslidings. Methink it is a dreadful Text, Am. 4.2. The Lord God has
sworn by his holiness, and lo, the days shall come upon you that he will take
you away with hooks, and your Posterity with fish-hooks. God is like to visit
the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation. How may the generations to come arise and curse us for sinning away
both the spiritual and temporal Privileges they should have enjoyed after us.
God seems to threaten us as David devoteth his enemies Psalm. 109.10. Let his
children be continually vagabounds and beg: let them seek their bread also out
of their desolate places. Oh Sirs! if your children are dear to you, consult
their peace and welfare: Provide the blessing, not the Curse, for their Portion
that God may yet say of us as once of Israel, Jer. 31.17. And there is hope in
thine end, says the Lord, that thy children shall come again to their own
border. Even so Lord! Amen, and Amen!

A Postscript to the Readers.
Sirs,
IF any thing in these Sheets seem to be born out of due time, know, that they
have had a hard Travail. They were at first prepared for 1665; but, through the
astonishing difficulty of our late Junctures, the Author's unbefriended
Obscurity, and want of those Minerval Powers, which are now become essentially
requisite in such cases, they have lingered hitherto.

And though some of those Judgments are come and past, which the warnings of
this Voice related to (which also are inserted here in their bare mention, on
some late review); yet I hope the main design of it is not frustrate, nor
rendered unseasonable; yea, rather let what has been already accomplished
strengthen your Faith and open your eyes to see what may be yet behind. Though
one. Woe be past, may there not come two Woes more hereafter For as this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. God has not yet
done with us, nor will he leave us thus: Nay, both Friends and Enemies shall be
brought to another Pass, before he sheath up that sword he has drawn out
against us. His work is on the Whell, and he will finish it; The Wheel whirles
a pace, and a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

Sapite (...)
FINIS.

