A SERMON upon Job 29.15.

Preached before the JUDGES, at a General Assise in Hertford, when that good
and charitable Person Rowland Hales Esquire, was High Sheriff of that Shire.

By DAVID STOKES, D. D.

OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, for Richard Davis, Anno Dom, MDCLXVII.

Imprimatur

JOHAN. FELL, Vice-Cancellarius Oxon.
Febr. 1. 1666/7.
Job. 29.15. I was the eyes to the blind, and the feet to the lame.


IN this chapter we have a brief story of one, that was (in his time) so
absolute a Magistrate, so complete a Judge, that he may well be the pattern,
and myrrour, of all that come after him.

And this way of pattern (iter per exempla) you know it is our surest, and our
shortest way; we can not better read our own duties, then in the lives of
others. We can not better see the true face of virtues and vices, then we may
do it in their actions.

I might have said in their actions, [and in them only] we need not enquire
much after their persons. For vice we must imitate in no man (be his person
never so great:) But for his virtue (be he in himself never so mean) we may
safely propound that, to our imitation.

It is neither his nor ours, it carries no mark of any owner, but of God
himself, from whom it was first taken as the Author of every good and perfect
gift.

Yet, because we rather love virtue, where we like the person, and we had
rather frame our selves to the example of those that were of some esteem, and
place, and authority; therefore who it is that speaks this, that would first be
known, who it is that says here, I was the eyes to the blind, and the feet to
the lame. They are the words of a great man (every way great:) And. (if that
may any thing move your attention) whether soever you cast your eyes round
about my text, you may spy out some arguments of his greatness.

That he was great in wealth, He washed his paths with butter, and the rock
poured him out rivers of oil.

That he was great in Authority, it is plain by the next words; He had his
chair in the public gates, and streets of the City [which were in those times
the ordinary places of judgment.]

The 8. verse shows him as great in Honor,

The young men saw him and hid themjelves, the aged arose and stood up.

Will you add unto all these, a rare gift [an excellent power in learning and
eloquence.] It is the next thing in the sequel of the words: The Princes
refrained talking, and laid their hands on their mouths. The Nobles held their
peace, and their tongues cleaved to the roof of their mouth. When the ear heard
him, it blessed him; and when the eye saw him, it gave witness unto him. And
thus we see him great in Wealth, in Authority, in Honor, in Learning, and in
Eloquence.

But was he also as great in virtue?

Did not his preferments outrun his deserts?

No, (if that may add any thing more to your attention) for the two main
virtues of so great a Magistrate, (Justice and Mercy) the next verse speaks his
greatness in them. He delivered the poor that cried; the fatherless, and him
that had none to help him: The blessing of him that was ready to perish came
upon him -- he caused the widows heart to sing for joy. He put on
Righteousness, and it clothed him, his Judgment was his robe, and his diadem.
All these usher the way to my text, and may easily persuade us, that they are
the words of a great Man, of a great Magistrate, and of a great Judge. For,
that is specially aimed at (in this so large a description) and that you may
know it is so) his Mercy and Justice are repeated again, in the next words
after my Text. I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I
searched it out. I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of
his teeth.

You see then how my Text is hedged in every way, with honorable testimonies of
this Judge. And, as it is in the midst, so it is indeed, the life and virtue of
all the rest. It is the true emblem of a good Magistrate, and perfect
character of a good Judge: I had almost said the very Idea of true Greatness,
and Justice it self. But I must not say so. It is not here in the abstract Job
is the man that had it; I was the eyes to the blind, and the feet to the lame
(says he) that is, he was ready to become any thing for their sakes, and
willing to apply himself to any necessity of their wants: For in these two [in
oculo, and pede] if they be well considered, we shall find all that is
requirable in a good Judge.

Shall I fetch them out of their natural method, and first take them both
together.

If he be both the eye and the foot; Nay, if he be either, oculus, or pes, we
are sure he is a part of the body politic. That is the first thing that
follows out of this ground; a near reference of his to all that are under his
authority; specially to the blind and the lame, that is, to the weakest of
them, I am their eye (says Job) or, (if that be too little) I will go as low
as their feet; any thing for a nearer claim, and challenge unto them. So says
Job: And the greatest Magistrates and Judges should say the like for any of us
their poor fellow members. A double interest we have in them, as the parts of
our body politic: They are the eyes, they are the feet, and therefore we do no
more then we should do, to rely upon them for their help. And they have done no
more than they should do; what good soever they have done to the weal public:
For the conservation and good of the whole body, is the language which every
particular member does naturally speak.

But I will dwell no longer in these Generals: I will come now to consider
these two parts asunder: And first the eye: Oculus eram --

Parts of the body they are (our greatest Judges and Magistrates) But this name
of the Eye gives them an eminent place in the body, seats them aloft, where
they have the command of the inferior parts, and allows them an honorable
place in the Commonwealth.

If you ask; Cui bono? To what end are the eyes mounted aloft? Is it only for
the eyes sake; or is it not still, for for the good of the whole body. Surely
in vain were so much care taken for them (as there is) by the other parts, if
their requital were not answerable.

For (to see it in the natural eye first.)

Why does nature wall the eyes about, with those bones that frame their orb?

Why does she arch them above with the eyebrows?

Why does she fence them (on either side) with hair, in such manner shot out of
the skin, that no motes, nor any other annoyance shall fall into them?

Why are they by the prominence of the cheeks every way so secured, that (if
any thing rush against them) they may be still unoffended?

Why all this for the eyes, that they may skulk in a den? be nuzled in
security, and rocked asleep in a strong fort?

When we have asked this of the natural Eye, then come to such an Eye as Job
was here.

Why was Job, and why are other great Ministers of State, the Rulers and Judges
of other men?

Why are they seated so strongly above others?

Is it only, that they may be safe, and overtop the rest in honor and dignity?

Holy Job is none of them that would have said so, he would rather have told
us, that these eyes are placed there, like Watchmen in the highest towers, that
(upon the hope of their vigilance) they which are under them may be the more
secure, and that from thence (like higher lights) they may better derive their
influence to the inferior orbs.

The height of their place is not the ground of their honor; (they begin at a
wrong and that build there) For, be the place never so high, it is but the
place of a high office; and the daily execution of that to the good of the
body, that makes it a place of Honor.

Gloria Regum investigare rem (says the wisest King;) Prove. 25.1.
and we may say (in the language of my Text) Gloria oculorum investigare rem]
It is the glory of all that are in eminent places, to be searching further with
the eye of their wisdom, then the capacity of ordinary persons can either
pierce into, or comprehend. That is the right use of such an Eye.

But, if they be Eyes of an infectious nature, like the Crocodiles eyes, able
to kill whom they list, and none shall know who hurt them.

If they be windows, ever open to let in mischief, and ready to betray the
other senses, were it not far better they were somewhere else. For to little
purpose are they set in the highest places, that do not there carefully efpie
what is good; and as providently foresee, and give warning of what is hurtful
to the other members.

I have done with the Place, with the Srength, and with the Height of it.

A second thing that we may observe by way of Analogy, natural beauty of the
Eye in it self, without reference to the place: And indeed, all the beauty that
is in the place, is from that derived unto it. Non domus Dominum, sed Dominus
domum (we use to say) it is not the place that graceth the eye, but it is the
eye that beautifies the place; nay, that beatifies the whole body. Thou have
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes (says our blessed Lord in the
Canticles.) What are those Eyes think you, that did so ravish the holiest
Bridegroom? What else, but the Ministers of the State, and of the Church?

For, these are the parts, that (of all other) must be without blemish, that so
they may be enabled to punish the faults of others, without any check to
themselves. He that here calls himself the Eye, will you see how beautiful he
was in himself: Look again upon the next words before my Text, and tell me, if
ever there was a Statesman of greater beauty.

The Eye it self is not lapt in more curious and dainty tunicles, He put on
Righteousness, and it clothed him, His Judgment was his Robe and his Diadem.

Here is a Judge in his best robes of honor, clad with Righteousness. And
Righteousness is such a beauteous and amiable thing (...) (says Aristotle)
that is, the Sun, in all his glory, comes short of that.

Now, as the Eye is the seat of beauty, so also (having the variety of many
objects) it should not choose any, but those that are beautiful.

They must not be given to filthy lucre (says the Apostle, of the Eyes of the
Church.) And so may we say of those, that are the Eyes of the Commonwealth.
What should they do with filthy lucre. That word [filthy] is able to turn away
any eye from it; theirs especially.

Some rare beauty is befitting such Eyes.
Some glorious virtue suits them best.
For, as black and white colors are to the eyes of the body, so is virtue and
vice to the eye of Judgment, in ordinary men. Black vice gathers the beams of
the sight in one, that the eye may see, and be intent upon it. Fair virtue
scatters them abroad, and therefore hardly admits of a perfect apprehension.
Whence it is, that in ordinary Judgments that partake with sense, we are
quicker to epsy and censure a man for one vice, then to love and reward him
for many virtues. So it is in ordinary judgments. But I hope it is not so in
the most judicious eye of him, that more strictly bears the name of a Judge:
His eye is not so ready to see and censure the worst of a man, as it is to see
and love the best. He is most earnest in the best cause, and most affected to
the best Lawyer that pleads before him; For he knows that it matters much, whom
the eye of the Judge does most favor. And this be said of that beauty, that
either should be in the eye, or should draw the eye unto it.

There is yet a third thing in the eye, by which nature has made it more
useful to the body.

That it is the only fountain of pity: The door where we send out our love: The
passage of our tears: and the best Interpreter of our inward mercy and
compassion (I speak not for too much pity of Malefactors, but just pity of the
Innocent.) And this, of all other, must not be left out, if we proportion a
Judge to the Eye: For we shall get little by the two former without this. To
tell him that he is in the highest place, is to make him proud, and that he is
the most glorious and beautiful part is to make him yet more proud: but to
make him the tendrest part, and that from which (of all other) we chiefly look
for love and pity: that is it that cannot but move him. And this, I know not,
whether it may be more urged, from the eye, or from the feet: So tender are
both of them, the feet no less then the eye, the veins meeting all there, and
making them also easily affected to the quick with the least touch. And
therefore for this (my Lords) having two ways to urge it, I may presume we are
sure to speed, [apud tam aequos rerum Judices] And so we should do, though it
were not urged at all.

To pity the Innocent, to commiserate the distressed estate of the poor, it
needs no persuasion; all good natures bring it with them from their Cradles:
Only this is our misery; Great fortunes (they say) use to alter our
dispositions, and many, when they are come to be great men, are fain to be
entreated to put on the natural affection of men.

Anatomists tell us, that in the eye of man there is a muscle, that lifts it
upwards (and so I confess it should be, not in pride, but in some better
ejaculations toward heaven.]

But there is a Connection in these words of my Text, which, like a strong
muscle, seems to draw the eyes of the Judge downward, as low as may be. He is
made the eye to the blind, and the feet to the lame: and therefore should his
care and oversight of the poor, and fatherless, and widow be like the desires
of the eye, never satisfied, but with the sight and succor of them. And then
somewhat would be done in reference to the feet, which now we come to.

For, a near challenge we have to the Judge, as he is the eye; but (to make it
sure) here is another part of my Text, that makes him still the more ours, and
puts him yet the more in mind of what we may expect from him. It is not enough
for him to sit alost in the chiefest Castle of the body, like an imperious eye,
and perhaps be a little affected with the trouble of it. The eye is of it self
the busiest member, and will be ever employed in the variety of several
objects. And so must they be that are the eyes of the Commonwealth, ever in
action. Rest must be rather for others then them: That is something more then
we heard before. But that is too little to set out the labor of a good Judge.
We must bring the Metaphore down to the very feet, rather then not express this
to the very full. It is the feet that are to bear the burden of the whole body;
and that must fall to the Judges share, if he will be like Job in goodness as
well as greatness. He must be the pillar, the prop, the foot of the
Commonwealth, yes, of the meanest part of it: I was the foot to the lame
(says Job there.)

We need not go sarre to learn that. The name of a King (the supreme Head and
Judge over all) implies this in the Greek. The young Scholars will tell you
that (...) (a King) is (...), the very foundation, the lowest part of all. So
is (...) in Hebrew (the name of a Prince or great man) of (...) (to bear)
because he takes the burden, and care of others upon himself: He is the foot
as well as the eye.

This was Plinie's Dialect, to express the care of Trajan. Incedis pedibus,
ambulas inter nos, says he, in Panegyr: where [ambulare] has the same sense
of public conversation that (...) in the Hebrew, often has in the old
Testament. And in the Greek (...) and (...) have in the new. Ambulare, in this
notion, when it is used of Princes (of such as Trajan) it does as good as tell
us, that something of importance it is expected he should do, by which
succeeding ages, as by several footsteps, may trace him out, and find an easier
way to the public good.

Shall I put you in mind of the language wherein Hobab, Moses his Kinsman,
Numb. 17.
expressed the great trouble that Moses had in judging the people. [Sustentent
tecum onus populi and non solus graveris]

Put them together, and here is both ambulare and sustentare: and (of the two)
this sustentare is more properly the use of the foot. And so it is of Judges,
and the greatest and noblest amongst men. The whole body, especially the blind
and the lame, (the weakest part) must rely upon them. And though I speak much
for [sustentare] yet I beseech you (my good Lords) remember [ambulare] too.
And, when you walk about in your several Circuits (to see the ruins of the
land) think upon the great Judge that says, Scrutabor Jerusalem in lucernis]
And make this your comment upon it, and the Application for every Judge in his
own person. I will be the eye to the blind, and feet to the lame (in my
Circuit) to find them out, and to help and support them. I know you will give
me leave to say so. And we all hope (my good Lords) that you will be such
Searchers, and such Lights, and such Eyes in every Circuit, where you come. And
then the next thing I have to say, shall be only this: Ride on, and good luck
have you with your Honor. Psalm. 25.5.
Let your Table be richly decked, and your head refreshed with oil, and your
cup overflow; and (more then that) Let all the eyes that see you, bless you,
and Let all the feet that come near you bow down unto you: For you are the eyes
to the blind, and the feet to the lame.

You see, as my Text does, so do I; I join the parts together again (the eye
and the foot.) And so it agrees well every way, the Eye of Honor and
Contemplation, and the foot of Labor and Practice; The Eye that sees what is
to be done, and Foot that is able to go about it. When these are joined
together, what title can we give them good enough? They are like Stars (in
their several orbs) that impart the benefit of their light and motion to the
inferior bodies. Like another great Elias [Currus and Auriga Israelis] The
Chariot and the Horseman of Israel: The Chariot (to carry the burden) and the
Horseman or Waggoner (to see and direct the way, that is [Oculus and Pes] the
Eye and the Foot.

Which are ever so well met, that the Prophet Isaiah puts them (in other terms)
into the promise of a future happy government. Erunt Reges nutritii tui, 49.23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers. Nursing
Fathers, and Nursing Mothers, What Is that? to carry them about (as it were) in
their bosoms: To be their eyes and their feet. I cannot put it into better
words then those of my Text.

For let the Nurse leav the Child a while to it self, and it will soon appear,
that the poor Infant had no other eyes or feet (to help it self withal) but
only those of the Nurse. And let those that God has set over us, either leave
the people to themselves, or be forced so to leave them. And then tell me, if
such a people would not soon prove, as these are in my Text, blind and lame.
And happy then would be the feet of those that could bring us tidings of one
that would be (in Job's description) Oculus coeco, and pes claudo] Eye to the
blind, and Foot to to the lame.

But here I must stop: For, now (my Lords) I have finished the greatest part of
my Task. If you will give me leave to search a little further into Job's
meaning, it may be we shall find, that this verse contains the Form, the Soul,
and the Essence of a good Judge.

For, Understanding is the Eye, the Affections are the Feet, and these two make
up the whole soul.

And again, these Eyes in my text, corporal eyes rather trouble the
understanding in the course of Justice: Therefore we use to paint Justice
rather blinded, then having the liberty of such eyes. And those famous Judges
among the Graecians in Areiopago were wont to sit at midnight, that they might
not discern the difference of any man's person.

And thirdly, by the law of Opposition, then we shall both confirm this sense
of the words, and gain somewhat else unto it.

For, what do you take to be meant by the blind and the lame, in this reference
to a Judge.

Sure. Blindness in the Informers, in the Witnesses, in the Jury, in the
Pleaders, but only Ignorance. And, what is Lameness on their parts, but the
tedious protraction of poor men's Suits, or what else (of that nature) offends
the [currat lex] the swift course of Justice.

Now then, to build upon this, if Blindess and Lameness, be Ignorance and
Slowness, in those that are to be guided by the Judge; what must his Eye be (in
reference to them) but the Eye of Understanding, the eye of Wisdom? And thus
it referres to such Officers of Justice as are not worthy of that name.

Then, [rei] that is to them whose cause is in hand: Then must blindness and
lameness in them be nothing else but impotency and inability to help
themselves; which should move the Judge (like God himself) to incline rather to
the weaker side; not to look upon the greatest through the optique-glass of his
own affections, and so to make them seem greater and nearer to him then they
should be, but to be the eye to the blind, and the feet to the lame, rather to
help them that cannot otherwise help themselves.

You see the ground of what we are to say.

Now, to set upon it in particular.

The first rank of our blind men,

And (that we may discover them the better) their ignorance will teach us to
make them of two kinds, according to the cause of their blindness; some of them
being blinded by gross ignorance, which we call (...) others by affected
ignorance (...). And of the two, the latter are the more dangerous, and call
for a greater caveat from the Judge. For, they can indeed, but they will not
pierce any further then to the scum and top of things; wherein, to say truth,
we are apt to offend most of us. It may well pass for an epidemical disease:
for it is not our ignorance, but our hope, and fear, and love, and anger, and
hate, that is commonly suffered to bind up our sight in darkness, and lead us
blindfolded into all error. All which are so ordinary, that Solomon accounted
them for wise men, that had their eyes in their heads. For many have found out
new devices, by placing their eyes where they should not be (in the hand,
rather then in the head) by that means seeing more where they have some feeling
of the cause, then where their heads might better direct them.

If there be any such that hear me this day, it is likely, they do not see any
such things in themselves. For what sight can we expect in blind men? yet
perhaps in a Sermon, by the help of the Preachers candle, they may begin to see
a glimmering light of what they should: But when they come to their old places
of gain, their old thoughts meet them afresh, as familiarly as if they had left
them there till their return.

And this, I would it were their fault alone. There we err too, all of us,
whatsoever we think of our worst affections in Gods house, when their ugliness
is ripped up, we shall easily come to our old former opinions, when we come to
the former places of our practice, unless (with the Lamiae) we could leave our
old eyes at home, and carry new and better along with us.

I have been the larger in this discovery of their blindness, as being the
cause of another vice that follows after it: For in that method my Text brings
them in; first the blind, and then the lame. A lame pace must needs proceed
from that blindness: And when we have found the cause of the one, we may safely
presume that to be the cause of the other also. If their blindness proceed from
gross ignorance, that is it that makes their delays. If it grow from affected
ignorance, if gain or passion stand between them and wisdom, then they are
lame; they go slowly (in the course of law) for the same cause. That is it that
makes the Trial creep so slowly, or rather so slily forward, that it carries
with it no witness of any proficiency. That is it that makes them cry with the
sluggard, yet a little, and yet a little, while the poor man's cause turns
about like the door on her hinges, and is never the nearer to what it should
be, after all their delays.

But here I would be understood with some caution; for I know the use and the
need of just demurres. The Romans had it (in their law) under the term of
[Ampliare] as appears by more then one place in Tullies Orations. In the Greek
we find it under the name of (...) (in the Apostle Paul's case) (...); Acts
24.22.
Faelix put them off for a while, and took an [amplius deliberandum] a
demorari, that is, a demurre, This was a good piece of wisdom and justice in
Faelix; and if Faelix had staid here, he had done well, and been like his name.
But go along with him to the 26. verse of this chapter: And there is such a
delay of justice, as makes little for Faelix his credit. The words go thus,
Acts 24, 26.
Faelix hoped that money would have been given him of Paul, that he might loose
him. Faelix his first demurre, verse 22. was fit to be used for justice sake:
But such as his last, and tedious delays for base ends of his own, that is it
I would not have, and that is the fault which puts these delayers of Justice
into the number of lame men, whose feet seem to crawl, rather then go, if some
bodies hands be not quick enough; an honest man may soon be as far as heaven
before them.

Pardon me (my honored Lords) for speaking of any blind and lame men, in the
Courts of Justice. For I confess I know none that are so, and I hope there are
no such here. But we have learned the more to fear other Professions, by that
we see too often in our own. All that are of our Coat should be (as it is of
you in my Text) the eyes to the blind, the Seers of Israel, and the Lights of
the land. But even into that holy Order, many blind guides are crept in (we
know not how) And one that is truly (...), a good Overseer would do well: And
if he fail, there is (...), an eye from Heaven, that sees all. So it is perhaps
in the course of Law, Many clear eyes there are, Many good Lawyers. God be
thanked. But because blind men may stumble upon their places; therefore a Judge
there must be (a clearer Eye:) And if he fail, Deus stat in medio Deorum (says
the Psalmist) that is, in medio Judicum, as the Hebrew word is taken.

So, for the other member of my Text, we should be all like feet to the lame,
surest to stand fast, and closest to them that need us most. But, because many
of us halt between two opinions, it is to be suspected, that some in law may
halt as much between two causes, and being feed on both parts, will not stir a
foot to help either. And though indeed these are no parts of the body, no more
then wooden legs; yet (of all other) they must not be touched on the blind
side: Every small reprehension galls them, because it calls their eyes home, to
see a glimpse of what they should be.

But now I have done with those blind Cripples, I will only commit them to the
eye of the Judge; it must be his wisdom to see the cause fare never the worse
for their sakes. Upon him we rely much; And If the eye be single, all the body
will be so: but if the eye be darkness, how great is that darkness?

If there be any defect in the inferior Officers of Justice, the danger is the
less, and it may the more be born with. But if the eye offend -- you know what
follows, pluck it out. He would not have said so, that is the Judge of all: but
to show us how the greatest danger is in that. As needs it must be; for the
best thing corrupted, is the worst: A bad man is the worst of all creatures,
and an evil Eye is the worst of all members.

There is no passage more easy for entry of vice, then by the cranny of the
Eye: For it is always busy about some thing, it is of too fine and quick a
metal to love idleness: If it be not employed as it should be, it will be
employed as it should not: And so the whole body may fare the worse for the
Eye. As it may for the feet too; If they be lame, the whole body is
unconstantly carried on either side: For still I must join them both together:
and so must every good Judge that will be like to this pattern here, the eye to
the blind, and the feet to the lame.

Hitherto we have seen what should be the provident care of the Judge to any
blind or lame under him, that is, to any that may obscure or hinder the cause.

Now, what is the end of all this? but only that he may be able to help, an
other rank of blind and lame, the poor Prisoners, the weak Defendants, the
impotent Widows and Orphans or any other, that being wrongfully called in
question, know not how to help themselves.

When the Apostles came near any blind, or lame, the Scripture says they would
(...), earnestly and affectionately behold them. If these eyes in my Text (our
grave and learned Judges) will please to (...), to look seriously upon them.
How many arguments may they epsy in the poorest Innocents, that could not but
move them unto pity?

In every one of them, Image of God, that is so obscured: -- and they look upon
their own nature, that is so afflicted. In what heavy plight soever they are,
they are the members of the same body with themselves; and therefore no pearls
should move their eyes so much, as the tears of a poor Innocent. They are able
to move God himself, who keeps them in a bottle as a rich treasure. They are no
eyes that see not this: and if they so pass it over, and look for others to
come and help them, in vain is it that they are styled [the eyes to the blind,
and the feet to the lame.]

Nay, it is not enough to help them in this case, that is, only to be their
hands, or their feet; the ground of their help must first come from a tender
eye: What is it to relieve a man in misery, with as little care and affection,
as if we did it to a dog? The better judgment of such a deed is from the eye,
if that be cheerful, and well affected in the doing of it. And if these eyes
here be not thus affected, they will once be sorry that ever they had the honor
to be eyes: therefore, in Gods name, let them look equally and friendly upon
all. But if there be any difference in the persons of men, here it is, God has
made them the eyes to the blind, and the feet to the lame. If they lean to any
side, the best way is, to lean to the weakest. This is one thing.

And again (which is a second motive) Who so easily abused, as the blind and
the lame? therefore God has made the greatest Judges to be their Patrons,
their eyes and their feet.

And this may beget a great confidence in a poor man: If he see with the eye of
the Judge, he need not be afraid to meet his enemy in the face: If he stand
upon their feet, whosoever rises up against him, he is sure to stand fast.

And is it not able to breed as much terror in his adversary. Shall any man
dare to grind the face of the poor, when the Judge says, he is the eye to the
poor, and therefore must not spare them, that so nearly provoke his angry eye.
Dare any man trample upon the poor, and think to raise himself by their fall?
When the Judge says, he is the feet to the poor, and therefore cannot but be
as ready to trample upon him again.

For, Lysias makes Euphiletus desire of the Judges, in his Oration against
Eratosthenes, (...), etc. I desire no more (says he) but that you would
imagine this injury done to your selves; and when you have made it your own
case, I know it cannot but much affect you.

The like you have in Demosthenes (...), etc. that is, Put on the same
affection in my cause, which you would do if it were yours.

I know not how any may be moved by these arguments; motive enough from their
own satisfaction: For there may come a time, when old Age may rank the greatest
Potentates and Judges of the earth, and best of men, in the number of blind and
decrepit, and lame, robbed of all their health, and outward contentment. And
then there will be no pleasure, to the meditation of their former good deeds.
They are only valerous then that are not afraid to think of themselves, that
dare ask account of their own lives (as Job did here) and can answer themselves
in his words. I was (once) the eye to the blind, and the feet to the lame. That
puts me in mind of another Argument, left in my Text, and with that I will
conclude.

I was (says Job) I was the eye -- He took opportunity of doing good while he
had those high places. was once the eye to the blind -- yet now the blind and
the lame were in a far better case then he, who so poor as Job? And it is
meet indeed, that all of us (especially great men) should stand thus tickle.
This jogs them as much as pleasure lulls them asleep. This whispers in their
ears, not to pass the fair opportunity of doing good to others, lest, when the
stroke comes upon themselves, they have cause to expect as little.

For greatness has no other circuit, nor ought any man to dream of any other,
then that, for which all power, honor, and wealth, is given to him; to support
the weakness of other men's fortunes, and to be (as Job was in his greatest
glory) the eyes to the blind, and the feet to the lame.

And now (my good Lords) I shall trespass no more upon your patience, then to
put you in mind, that this text is only your text, and the application must be
yours, by keeping the same Pronoun to it that Job does here; I was the eyes, I
was the feet. They are not words for any of us to speak in such a complete
sense as you can: And so ever account them as the best privilege that you
have. St. Paul would not communicate his bonds to any (except these bonds,
says he.) Be you as dainty of these titles, keep the verse still in the same
number, and make it good in your own persons.

And though you be two commonly joined together in your Circuits, so that (a
man would think) it were language good enough to say, We two were the eyes to
the blind, and the feet to the lame. Yet, if you be ruled by my Text, that is
not enough, you must keep the number as strictly as Job did in the Hebrew
[(...) and (...)] I was their two eyes, and their two feet, says he in the
duall number.

Nor did he keep it, in the tongue only, but in his practice. He never blinkt
to the Rich with one eye, while he cast the other upon the poor: While he set
one foot forward to help the poor, he never kept the other backward to secure
the rich: His two eyes were for the blind, and his two feet for the lame. All
this (to be sure on) he ever did in his own person, ego oculus, I was the two
eyes. He did not put it off to others, in hope they would do it for him. And
that is the surest way, for every man that looks for the reward, in his own
person too. For there will come a day at the great Assise of the whole world,
when this Text will be thought none of the weakest pleas for the Kingdom of
heaven. Receive the Kingdom (says the great Judge of all:) why so? because
you visited the poor, fed them, clothed them, etc.

But none have such visitations as you have in your Circuits, none have such
opportunities to makes this plea good, ego eram oculus coeco -- Wonder not that
Job said so confidently, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see
him with these eyes. Here is some ground of his confidence, himself had been
the eyes to the blind, and could not but be so rewarded.

Which happy reward, we humbly beseech that great Judge of all, Jesus Christ,
the righteous, out of the riches of his mercy to bestow upon you in the last
day.

To whom, as you do, we all desire to ascribe, all Honor and Glory, now and
for ever.

FINIS.

