A Congregational Church Is a Catholic Visible Church. OR An Examination of M.
Hudson his Vindication concerning the Integrality of the Catholic Visible
Church.

Wherein also satisfaction is given to what M. CAWDREY writes touching that
subject, in his Review of M. HOOKER's Survey of Church Discipline.

By Samuel Stone, Teacher to the Church of Christ at Hartford in New England.

LONDON, Printed by PETER COLE, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange, MDCLII.

To the READER.
IN most Controversies, though in their issues and superstructures they rise to
a marvelous height, yet in the beginning and bottom ground, the difference is
not great. So in this, though the differences and contests, not so much of
principles, as of spirits and persons; partly through inward corruptions and
prejudices, together with the secret wrath of God for them; and probably also,
through Iesuitical bellows, blowing these unhappy flames, are now grown to a
woeful height, to desperate distunces and heart burnings; yet the foundation is
in this seemingly slight Logical question, an Ecclesia instituta sit genus an
integrum? Reverend and Learned M. Hudson conceives it to be totum integrale; M.
Hooker to be totum universale. That this is the bottom question hence appears,
that the other contrary apprehensions in Church discipline, are mostly the
contrary consequences and deductions flowing from these two opposite principles.

Nor is it strange that so great a question in Divinity should border so near
upon the principles of Logic; for all the Arts are nothing else but the beams
and rays of the Wisdom of the first Being in the Creatures, shining, and
reflecting thence, upon the glass of man's understanding; and as from Him they
come, so to him they tend: the circle of Arts is a Deo ad Deum. Hence there is
an affinity and kindred of Arts ( omnes Arts vinculo and cognatione quadam
inter se continentur; Cicer. pro Arch. Poet.) which is according to the
reference and subordination of their particular ends, to the utmost and last
end: One makes use of another, one serves to another, till they all reach and
return to Him, as Rivers to the Sea, whence they flow.

Now Logic is of most general use. Divinity. ratione finis; for it is the
universal end of all: physica ratione (...); for every art rises here: but
Logic ratione (...); is most general; there is no art but uses the help of
Logic; nothing can show it self to the eye of the mind of man, but in this
light. Hence mistakes in Logic are not unusual in Writers upon this subject. A
man cannot apprehend M. Hooker's double consideration of the Church, as totum
essentiale and organicum; nor why as totum essentiale it is Ecclesia prima, if
he do not know genus and integrum and argumentum primum and ortum in Logic;
nor judge his method to be other then leaping, if he do not know the method of
the first part of Logic. Nor will his proving that Christ gave the Keys to a
Visible Church, entitle the Church of Boston, or any other Church to them,
unless it be also proved, that the visible Church is a genus, and that every
individual Church, as that of Boston, is a species or part of this genus: Nor
will it ever appear whether the visible Church be genus or integrum, till it
appear what genus and integrum be.

Hence the first part of this Discourse is taken up in clearing the nature of
these and other Logical Notions: which cannot but be needful in this question,
Review, c. for M. Cawdry was long troubled before he could find out M. 2. page
64. Hooker's meaning, when he says totum essentiale, not explaining it; though
upon serious observation he found it. The Reader needs not be puzzled hereafter
in that kind, the explication is here done to his hand.

And here by the way I am to advertise the Reader that the publishing of this
discourse may perhaps be a supersedias to any further labors, in answer to
that reverend Divine. His review glanceth at some passages, not always at the
main and most material; when he shall strike at M. Hooker's whole frame and
principles, he may receive an answer (...): mean while this may suffice,
meeting (though in pursuance of M. Hudson) with what seems most material in
the review.

The second part of this discourse iuproving and applying the grounds laid in
the former to M. Hudson's discourse, would be well attended by the Reader. Thou
can not judge aright till thou have read the whole.

If any shall attempt a reply, let me desire him to imitate this, which may be
a pattern for all discourses of this nature in clearness, and succinctness,
and close pursuing the point in hand, without distastful reflections and
diversions from things to men. Many polemical writers are so filled with
oddpangs of their spirits, as causes a secret kind of disrelishment and
offense to the Readers.

The Author hereof is one who sees about him, understands the Principles and
grounds he goes upon, and therefore knows what he says. His relation to M.
Hooker (being Teacher of the same church) together with his personal abilities,
caused many to judge him most meet to do this office of love to him and truth,
but the fullness of his employments, in his constant preaching, and other ways,
was a sufficient plea of excuse in his judgment in his not rendering an answer
to M. Hudson's book; yet upon the earnest desire of a friend (who was then
engaged for a Voyage to England) to have a few lines from him touching tho
nature of a Catholic Visible Church (that being the first and main question
betwixth M. Hooker and M. Hudson; viz. what totum the Visible Catholic Church
is) he was induced to promise, that if he might but have a fortnight free from
other service, he would (to satisfy the desire of his Friend) send after him
some Notes upon that subject; which accordingly was performed by him, and is
done accurately and strongly, though briefly, as the streights of time allotted
him would permit. It was in his thoughts to have given some larger explication
concerning the nature and distinction of the Church, in such Propositions as
these.

PROP. I. The church considered as the subject of Application, (where it is
first to be attended) is the seed of Christ. As the seed of Adam is the subject
of propagation, to whom his transgression is extended; so the seed of the
second Adam are the proper subject of redemption, to whom it is applied by his
Spirit, Isa. 53. 10.

PROP. II. The church is either Militant or Tryumphant.

PROP. III. The militant church is the number of those to whom Christ is
applied but in part, which is therefore wrestling with her spiritual enemies.

PROP. IV. The militant church is mingled with Tares, i. e. with such who only
seem to be the seed of Christ, Mat. 23. 24. to 31. and verse. 37.

PROP. V. The militant church mingled with Tares, is distinguished into
congregations, and is therefore accomodated with the rule of Ecclesiastical
policy, Ephesians. 2. 12.

PROP. VI. The word church used in the new Testament, suits most exactly with a
congregational political visible church.

PROP. VII. The political visible church is distinguished in respect of the
times thereof. It was first in a family, then in a nation, lastly among al
nations.

PROP. VIII. The political visible church among all Nations, is properly called
a catholic visible church.

It was also in his purpose, had there been time, to have given some reasons of
his dissent from M. Hudson's apprehension, concerning the visible ^eadship of
Christ. It is most true, that Christ is head of the Church as God-man: It is
also true, that Christ is visible according to his humane nature; but that is
not conceived sufficient to render him the visible head of the visible church.
Christ is head of the invisible church as God-man; Christ God-man is monarch of
the world. But he is not the visible head of the invisible church, nor the
visible monarch of the world. Christ has a more special influence into his
church by his spirit, but his spirit is invisible. Every invisible member of
Christ in the world, is not a visible member, yet every invisible member is a
visible man.

I am sorry to stay thee any longer in the porch; only there are three sad
hindrances of light in these points 1. Pride. 2. Wisdom. 3. Prejudice. Let me
therefore leave upon thy heart three words of advice, if ever thou would see
the beauty of the Lord in his Temple, and the way of his house, or get the
blessing and good of this, or any other good help for that end.

1. To be much in humiliation. It is a most remarkable passage of Ezekiel 43.
10. If they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the house, the
fashion and forms thereof, all the ordinances and laws thereof, etc. Oh take
heed there be not some unmortified unlamented secret lust to darken thine eyes
from seeing these blessed truths of God. Dues ineffabili lege spargit poenales
caecitates super illicitas cupiditates (August. Confess.) It would make one
^remble to see how dreadful the revenges of God whether for personal pollutions
or for sinful compliances with the former devices and ways of men in the things
of his house, or for secret contempt of the simplicity and power of the Gospsl,
are gone forth in penal blindnesses and other blasting strokes upon the souls
of some in these times: They that will not see the visions of their own hearts,
and of the secret distempers, and sins, and plagues there, mourning also for
them; God will not let them see the visions of himself, and of his power and
glory in his Sanctuary; They shall ask the way to Sion weeping, Jer. 50. 4, 5.
going, and weeping as they go.

2. Be not over wise, plainly thus; Seek not to accomodate the government of
the Church to the wisdom and policy of Civil Governments amongst men. We see
that crookning the Gospel to the unpurged relics of the wisdom of Nature, has
been the ancient plague and seduction of Arminians; Let not the same distemper
pervert thy tho^ghts in this matter. To conceive there are some reserved cases
for Christ himself to come in almightily by his own especial guidance, to
overruled in particular Congregations, as he has done in that way of advice;
why is not this as safe, as to place the help in appeals and classical
subordinations, where the same objection returns at last as strong as ever: For
if the National or General Council wrong a man, as they have often done, there
is no relief for him upon earth. That that is useful in Civil Courts and
Iudicatories, as Appeals may be, is ever hurtful and pernicious in Church
discipline, if not commanded by Christ, but prudentially taken up.

3. Beware of prejudices against the way and works of God.

1. Against the way, Therefore I make the same request with Bucer in Bucer
contr. Latom. another case, ut pari studio legas utriusque partis scripta. M.
Brightman conceives from. Rev. 17. 3. that some faithful ones in a wilderness
shall make the most full discovery of the mystery of iniquity in all its
abominations; clariorem adhuc lucem solitudo dabit, haud veniet^e deserto nova
ignominia etc. which words might have been looked upon as tr^fles, had they
dropped from some idle Pen, but not from his. It is certain, the practice of the
Churches in New England gives light enough to clear the Congregational way from
the most of those misprisions and injurious misrepresentations that ar^ cast
upon it. Their consultation Synod in the opinion time, was blessed of God for
their conviction, and clearing the Country of them, no lesser then if the Synod
had assumed the highest jurisdiction. The mischievous consequences and sad
effects which are alleged, are either mere mistakes and misreports in matter
of fact, or fallaciae non causae pro causa. they rise not from the
Congregational Principles. Either come ^nprejudiced in thy inquiries and
searches after truth, or thou will never find it.

2. Against the works of God, which do certainly speak something both in England
and Scotland to such as have hearing hearts, and are not espoused to any
Interest. How precious the Liberties of his people are to him, who has bought
them with his own blood, has never been more abundantly and eminently
discovered then in the dreadful changes and revolutions of Providence in these
Nations, and in these days wherein we live. The Lord Jesus is of late gone
forth into the world, with jealousy for Sion, and with a great jealousy for
Jerusalem, to still the enemy, and the avenger, to vindicate the cause and
controversy of his people, and to break the yokes of her oppressors, that the
Virgin of Israel may return to Sion, and be adorned with her Timbrels as in the
days of old. This is the desirgne he has in hand. And rather then men shall
hinder him when he is on his way and upon the wing in his travels of love and
glory to his people, he is pleased we see to break the mountains in pieces
when they stand in the way of his revenge and holiness, and to bath his sword
in the blood of heathen, even of professing people. The Father of light
enlighten and enable all the Saints to close with him, both in the way of his
worship, and in the way of his works.

Samuel Mather.

To my Reverend Dear Brother, M. Samuel Stone, Teacher of the Church at
HARTFORD.
HOw well (dear Brother) art thou called Stone?
As sometimes Christ did Simon Cephas own. Ioh. 1. 42.

A Stone for solid firmness, fit to rear
A part in Ztons wall: and it upbear.
Like Stone of Bohan, Josh. 15. 6. and. 18. 17.
Bounds fit to describe,
'Twixt Church and Church, as that 'twixt Tribe and Tribe.
Like Samuel's Stone, 1 Samuel 7. 12.
erst Eben-Ezer hight;
To tell the Lord has helped us with his might.
Like Stone in David's sling, 1 Samuel 17. 49* 50.
the head to wound
Of that huge Giant-Church, (so far renownd)
Hight at the Church-Catholike, Ecumenical,
Or at the lowest compass, National;
Yet Poteck, Visible, and of such a fashion,
As may or Rule a world or Rule a Nation.
Which though it be cried up unto the Skys,
By Philist^ms and Isralites likewise;
Yet seems to me to be too near a kin
Unto the Kingdom of the Man of sin:
In frame, and state, and constitution,
Like to the first beast in the Revelation. Rev. 13.

Which was as large as Roman empire wide,
And Ruled Rome, and all the world beside.
Go on (good Brother) Gird thy Sword with might,
Fight the Lord's Battles, Plead his Churches Right.
To Brother Hooker, thou art next a kin,
By Office-Right thou must his pledge Redeem.
Take thou the double portion of his spirit,
Run on his Race, and then his Crown inherit.
Now is the time when Church is militant,
Time hast'neth fast when it shall be Tryumphant.
JOHN COTTON.

A Congregational Church, is a Catholic Visible Church.
IN this disquisition I shall attend two things;

First, the explication of some Rules concerning Genus, or Totum Genericum.

Secondly, The Application of those rules to the question in hand.

In the Explication, I shall labor briefly to open the Fundamental Rules
concerning genus and species; and then build some conclusions upon those
Foundations, or deduce some Consectaries from those Principles.

In the Application, I shall return some answer to M. Hudson's Arguments
contained in his fourth chapter; and also propound some reasons tending to
demonstrate, that A Congregational Church is a Catholic Church.

CHAPTER I.
Concerning the Definition of Genus and Species.
GEnus est totum partibus essentiale.

The General, or the Kind, or the general kind, is a whole essentia! to the
parts.

Aristotle says, (...), Aristot.
it is that which is one and the same in more: that is, in more species. He
has other expressions to the same purpose; viz. that, the genus is that,
whereby those that differ are the same according to Essence; that is, have
community of Essence: which is the same in substance with this definition which
I have here propounded; viz. That Genus is a whole essential to his parts.

There is another definition of genus, which Aristotle gives, and his followers
have received from him, which M. Hudson has taken up; viz* Genus est totum
quod de pluribus specie differentibus, potest praedicari in quid; or affirmari
in qu^stione, quid est. M. H^dson page 77.
That is, the Genus is a whole, which may be predicated or affirmed of more
things differing in special kind, in the question, what is it? It is said to be
predicated in quid, because when the question is, what is the species? the
genus then must be predicated of it, in answer to it: As when the question is,
What is homo? what is man? the answer must be, Animal, a living Creature.

This last definition is not exact;

First, Because Genus contains not the whole quiddity of the thing: for when
this answer is given, Man is a living creature; there is yet no difference
appearing between him and a beast; a beast is a living creature: and the
question yet remains what living creature he is.

Secondly, It is the proper office of the definition, to explicate the quiddity
of a thing, and show what it is. Definitio est cum ex^licatur quid r^s sit:
when the utmost bounds of the Essence of a thing are laid forth, it is then
distinguished from all other things.

Thirdly, There may be genus where no question is made.

We shall speak somewhat briefly, tending to open the true definition of genus.
In which we may consider, first, the thing defined; secondly, the definition.

The thing desired is

Genus] the kind or general. The word firstly and properly signifies a Stock,
Lineage, Parentage, Kindred, or Family. Genus is used in this signification in
Acts 4. 6. where (...) is translated (and properly) Kindred: And as many as
were of the kindred of the high Priest. Phil. 3. 5. Paul was (...)* of the
stock of Israel.

Here it is taken for kind, community of Nature and Essence; As animal is the
gen^^ of Man and Beast; because the essence of living creature is common to
both.

The word is translated from Families hither, by reason of similitude; because
as Parents are causes of their children, so genus is of his species. And
because those that are born in the same Family, and are of the same house,
stock or kindred, have all things in common between themselves, as names,
sirnames, privileges, etc. so in like manner species have a like nature in
common between them; as Socrates and Plato.

The Definition is

Est totum partibus essentiale.

Genus est] Genus is; that is, it exists extra Intellectum, without the
Understanding; There are universals as well as singulars, and common nature as
well as special. There is a generality, universality, and community, and common
nature of things, me non cogitante. Our understanding does not give being to
genus, but it is extant, and in print in rerum natura, whether we observe it or
not.

Totum] a whole. This is the general nature of it, wherein it agrees with
Integrum. It is totum, a whole, because it is distributed into parts, and is
the container of the parts. It is true, that there is more in the species then
in the genus; yet the genus holds them together: All the parts are held
together in the whole, as in the common head to which they are reduced. They
all agree and meet together in the genus, in one common matter, and a common
form, as in one point or center.

As Animality is a common Vinculum and Bond* containing and comprehending man
and beast; they cannot but agree in that common nature, and so far they must
needs agree one with another; that bond will bind them and hold them together
while they have any existence or being in the world. There will be kindred and
community of nature between homo and brutum, while the world stands.

Essentiale] It is a totum which gives essence: herein it is opposed to
Integrum, for there the parts did give essence* matter, and form to the
Integrum. We must not conceive that genus gives his community, generality, or
universality to his species; nor that it gives to the species all that they
have: there is more in the species then is in the genus; therefore the whole
essence of the species is not in the genus. Homo has a special form, which
Animal has not; Homo est Animal rationale: here is something in man besides his
animality, which is added to it. It is true in this respect, plus est in specie
quam in genere; yet genus is totum essentiale; because it symbolically
contains the causes of the species, and species answerably the effects of the
genus. Genus is not a c^usarum essential^um commnnium; and imitates exactly the
nature of those causes: as an essential cause argues his effect, so genus
argues his species. Hence.

1. Genus gives esse to his species, as every cause to his effect: the species
had never been, if it had not been for genus: Sublato genere, tollitur species,
take away animal, and homo will not be; there will be no man in the world. Homo
gives being to Socrates, and Socrates will not be, cannot be without homo: and
as Rachel said, give me children, or else I die; so genus says, give me
species, or else I die. Posito genere, necessario ponitur aliqua species. If
homo be in the world, there will be John, Thomas, or some other Individuals or
species of that kind.

2. The genus communicates matter and form to his parts; as the parts did give
matter and form to the Integrum so the genus gives matter and form to the
species; because it is a note of the common essential causes, which are matter
and form; it therefore gives matter and common form to the species.

3. The genus communicates his whole essence to his species, his whole matter
and form: Though it does not bestow upon the species all which they have, yet
it is so free-hearted, that it bestows his whole essence and nature, and all
that it has within it self, upon the species: Hence the whole essence of the
genus is in the species, his whole matter and form; as whole animality the
whole matter and form of living creature is in homine and Bruto* in man and
beast. There is nothing in the genus (besides his universality) which is not in
the species. Humanity with his whole matter and form is in Socrates and Plato.

4. The genus communicates the same essence to all his species. It is a note of
the common essential causes, and therefore imparts it self impartially and
equally to every one of his species, is common to all, all have one and the
same common nature in them. The same common humane nature is in Socra^es,
Plato, and all Individuals.

Parubus essentiale] essential to its parts; Totum est majus qualibet su^
part^; the whole contains the single parts, as greater then any one of them,
but contains all, as being equal to them.

There is no totum consisting of one part; though the entire nature of the
genus be in every species, yet not the universal nature: Totum genus, non est
nisi in cunctis speciebus; one species cannot make up a genus: Animal was not
made up complete, and perfect, till homo was created.

We have finished the explication of the definition of genus, the kind; and
have heard how kind it is (if I may so speak) to all his species: We must now
declare briefly what respect species bears to genus in taking his part.

Species est pars generis] The species is a part of its kind; the special is a
part of the general.

Species] of the old verb Sp^cie, to see or behold: It signifies properly the
^utward face. countenance, or a sight (non tulit hanc speciem, he could not
abide to see that sight) a thing seen or looked upon. Graece, (...), and (...),
of (...), video, to see: It signifies a visible shape, fashion, show,
appearance, image, or representation; (...), the fashion of his Count^nance was
altered; Luke 9. 29. (...)* neither have ye seen his shape. Joh. 5. 29. the
same word is translated appearance, 1 These. 5. 22.

The reason of the name is, because the genus is seen in the species, in them
it appears and shows his face.

Species est] the species is; that is, really existing in nature. The genus
subs^sts in his species, and no where else; it is no where else to be seen or
found: Homo is not to be seen but in Socrates, or Plato, Alexander, or some
other Individuals which are his sp^cies. The genus being granted, does
necessarily imply the existence of the species.

Pars] a part is that which is contained of the whole; it is he^d together with
some other part by the genus, and has always some fellow or other: for the
genus cannot be divided into one part, but into several par^s* a species is but
one piece of it. If genus be the whole, a species is a part; if animal be the
whole, homo is a part.

Pars generis] non integri: Hereby it is distinguished from membrum, for that
respects the integral, but species stands in reference to the genus, and
participates of his essence, together with other species. Aristotle gives the
same definition of it. Cicero says, it is pars quae generi subest: It is pars
generis subjectiva, sub icitur generi in ordine and gradu descensionis. As man
and beast are comprehended under animal, as inferior to animal contained under
that head: animal is before homo, and above him in order of nature; those
species, viz. Homo and Brutum are cast under animal, as a more general head of
Beings. 2. The species is subject to the genus in predication; make an axiom
of genus and species, and we shall see the species to be the subject more often
then the genus; as homo est animal, Socrates est homo.

CHAPTER II.
Concerning the distribution of Genus and Species.
GEnus est generalissimum aut Subalternum] The Genus is most general, or
subalterne.

The Species is subalterne, or most special,

The Genus is distributed into two kinds; most general, and subordinate: the
species is also divided into two kinds; intermediate, or most special. God has
ranked things in order, that there is a subordination of things one to another,
and one under another. There must be extremes on either side, something highest,
something lowest; a most general, and a most special; and some between both. The
subalterne Genus and Species, as they stand in respect to their superiors,
they are Species; as they respect their inferiors, they are kinds, or
generals: that is, they receive their essence from their superiors, and
communicate it to their inferiors. As man receives his essence from Animal, a
living creature, and therefore is said to be his Species: and again he
communicates his essence with singular men; whence he is called their Genus.

The highest Genus is most general; the lowest Species is most special; the
intermediate kinds, which come between these, are the Genus of their inferiors
and the Species of their superiors; which by reason of this vicissitude and
changing, by courses and turns, are called subalterne,

Genus generalissimum est cujus nullum est Genus.

The most general Genus is that of which there is no Genus.

Genus Generalissimum] the most general Genus (which in Greek is called (...),
the most general, and the first) It is that which has none more general going
before it, but is the Prime and first Genus of all. It is called the most
General kind, because it is the supreme and highest kind, which never descends,
but always keeps the highest rank, and can be nothing but Genus. Subalternum
Genus is not only and always Genus; bu^ Generalissimum is only and always
Genus.

Genus Generalissimum est] there is a most general Genus, Est enim quoddam in
suo genere in qualibet art supremum, there is something which is highest in
every art; as argument in invention. Look also how many arts there are, so many
supreme kinds there are. If God has ordered and disposed things by certain
degrees one above another, there must be something supreme and highest, which is
the most general kind.

Cujus nullum est Genus] of which there is no Genus: this being the highest,
has no Genus above it, and therefore has no Genus at all, and in never
Species. It is supremum in suo genere non datur processus in infinitum, there
cannot be an infinite motion and procession in Creatures; Ergo standum est in
aliquo primo: we must rest in some first, and highest thing. Art in general is
the Genus of all the special Arts; and Ens the most general Genus of all beings.

The subaltern genus, as also the subaltern species, is that which is the
species of one, but the genus of another. All things coming between the
supreme genus, and species infima, are subalternal kinds and species. This is
the form of subaltern genus and species; to be genus in respect of inferiors,
and species in respect of superior, and higher things: the same thing cannot
be a species in respect of superior and inferior, no more the Alexander can be
son and Father to the same Philip; Subalternum genus and speci^s may be the
same, differing only in a respect; and therefore one definition may serve both:
genus potest esse species, quia potest esse pars Generis; It may be a part of a
genus which is above it; and species may be genus, because it may be totum
partibus essentiale to his inferiors which are under it. Cause is a species to
argumentum absolute consentaneum, but a genus to matter and form.

Species specialissima est, quae est Individ^a in ^lias species.]

The most special species is that which cannot be divided into other Species.

Species specialissima] the most special, the lowest species.

Est] is; Est enim quoddam infimum in natura; there is something lowest: as
there is a highest, above which we cannot ascend; so there is a lowest, beneath
which we cannot descend. We must proceed from the highest by the intermediate,
to the lowest, and there rest.

Qui est Individua in alias species] which cannot be divided into other
species] We may divide it into members, but we cannot divide it into any lower
species: there cannot be lower then the lowest. As genus generalissimum has no
genus above it; so species specialissima has no species under it; it is
perpetually a species, and never a genus: It always takes his essence from his
superiors, but never communicates it with inferiors; because it has nothing
beneath it, into which it may be distributed. Singular men take their essence
from homo as their genus, but never communicate it to inferiors; for there is
nothing inferior to those singulars. Thus this singular matter, and this
singular form are most special species^: and Socrates, Plato, and all
individual men, are most special spe^ies; which is individual into other
species. This is that which is commonly called individuum, an individual.

That every Individual is a species, I shall labor to demonstrate when we come
to the consectaries. To make way for this especially, I have touched briefly
upon the distribution of genus and species in this Chapter.

CHAPTER III.
Wherein is propounded certain Corollaries, or consectaries, deduced and
flowing from the explication of Genus and Species.
FIrst from the explication of genus, there is a double consectary. That genus
does partly agree with Integrum, and partly dissent from it. It agrees with it,
because it is totum; It dissents from it, because it is Totum partibus
essentiale.

First we shall therefore speak to their agreement in several conclusions.

The first conclusion concerning the agreement of totum universale, and totum
integrale,
TOtum universale, and totum integrale, the universal, and integral whole, are
both immutable in Actu signato (if I may so speak) and mutable in Actu
exercito: They are both signed with an immutable and unchangeable rule and
definition; but are changeable in the particulars. The english is, the rules
concerning these are eternal and immutable; but the special examples are
mutable, fluxile and variable. Here Mr Hudson is mistaken, for he makes
immutability an affection of genus; and mutability a property of integrum. His
words ( p. 81.) are, that totum which is mutable and fluxile, is an integrum;
for a genus is immutable, constant, permanent, (...) veritatis.

Answer, It is true that genus is immutable in Actu signato; and it is as true,
that integrum is immutable, constant, permanent, aeternae veritatis. For every
rule of art is eternally true, and without possibility of being false; being
all the rules of the eternal wisdom of the first being. Genus est totum
partibus essentiale, is an eternal immutable rule: Int^grum est totum ^ui
parts sunt essentiales, is likewise an eternal and standing rule, incapable of
mutation. The rules concerning mutable things are immutable. I cannot concur
with M^ Hudson (p. 79.) in his definition of totum integrale. His words are
these. Quod habet parts extra parts est totum integrale, Sed ecclesia
visibilis universalis ^abet par^es extra parts, ergo. The major is the very
definition of totum integrale. Answ. How can that be the very definition of
totum int^grale, when genus ^abet parts extra parts? Socrates, Plato, Paul,
etc. are species, and therefore parts ^^minis, and yet are not one within
another, but different one from another.

But take any example of genus or integrum, and both are mutable; For all kinds
of things in this inferior world are mutable Those kinds of things that live a
springing life are corruptible; and so are those kinds of beings which live
the life of sense. The whole kind of trees, and the whole kind of brute beasts
shall utterly perish at the last. In this respect totum genus plantarum and
brutorum, are mutable and fluxile. Man is now of a shorter life then he was
before the flood; I speak of man as genus hominum, of man in general. Hence
that rule which Mr Hudson propounds is not true, viz. That totum which is
mutable and fluxile, is an integral. For Tree-kind and Brutekind are mutable
and fluxile, and yet neither of them is an integral, but each of them is a
genus.

CONCLUSION II.
Totum genericum and integrale are both of them argumenta o^ta: arguments
arising and springing from the first as their root; being derived from thence,
as streams from their Fountain, and children from their Parents,; resembling
and representing their nature. They are as the image and shadow of the first,
symbolically, tacitly, and secretly comprehending the prints and footsteps of
those first arguments, wearing their badge and livery. These having the force
of the first communicated to them, argue as they in respect of their force and
affection of arguing, but in a new way and manner, as second notions at the
second hand: look what force the cause has to argue its effect, the same force
has an argument arising from the cause to argue the symbol of the effect. As
the matter and form argue their effect, so the members argue the integrum.

Hence it apears, that genus is not causa materialis, as Mr Hudson page 78.
judges; for this he speaks of it; as it does exist in the individual, it is
causa materialis individui.

Answ. Genus is not causa materialis, or materia; for that is a first argument
deriving this force of arguing from no other. It is symbolum materiae; not as
it relates to genus (as Mr Hudson there speaks) but as genus: for genus relates
not genus.

2. Hence it also appears, that Mr Hudson page 78. is mistaken in conceiving
that the genus only is a second notion, and that thereby it is distinguished
from the integral. The genus being a second notion: and also in the same page,
But Universality is of another nature, being an abstract second notion,

Answ. It is true, genus is a second notion; but it is not thereby
distinguished from integrum; for that is a second notion, arising from some
first ^rgu^^ent.

CONCLUSION III.
Genus and integrum are both capable of admission and ejection of parts. That
is not a true rule which Mr Hudson page 81. propounds. That totum whereunto
there is admission, wherein there is nutrition and edification, and out of
which there is ejection, that is an integral: his meaning is, it is not genus.

Answ. That totum may be a genus; for animal admitted beast and man at the
first under his wing: when a man is born and admitted into the world, he is
admitted into mankind: when an individual lion comes into the world, he is
admitted into lyon-kind: when Bucephalu^ was foaled, he was admitted genus
equorum, and was nourished, etc. and when he dyed, he was ejected and cast out
of that kind: when an individual lion dies, he is excommunicated from
lyon-kind. All beasts at the last shall be excommunicated, and cast out of the
society of animal, a living creature. When a Scholar is admitted into a
College and University, he is admitted into a new kind of society, where he is
nourished and edified in good literature: when he is expelled from thence, he
is cast out of that kind of society. The reason is, because there is no
individual integral corporation or society, but is of some kind or other.

CONCLUSION IIII.
There is a reciprocation between the whole and the parts. Although the parts
are not the whole, yet they are adaequate and equal to the whole. This rule
belongs to distribution and definition; In qua utraque affectio reciprocationis
est, illic partium omnium cum toto, hic definitionis cum definito. The whole
contains just as much as the parts, and the definition as the definite: and
contra parts simul sumptae, are equal to the whole, neither more nor less;
they will reach as far as the whole, and no farther; and the whole will extend
it self as far as all the parts, and no farther. They are like vessels holding
the same measure, of equal latitude and extent, one as large as the other; as
two pints, and a quart. Having the whole, you have all the parts; and having
the parts you have the whole. Omnis divisio debet exhaurire totum divisum. But
one part alone is narrower, and reaches not so far as the whole: this
reciprocation is partium omnium cum toto; not of any one. For if one part alone
were equal to the whole, all the parts together were greater then the whole.
But that is a clear standing everlasting rule, that the whole is greater then
the part; that is, then any one part. And this being a property of totum, as
such, is true of totam universale, and integrale.

1. Of Totum universale. The genus is greater then any any one species; homo is
greater or larger then Socrates; and Animal larger then homo. The totum genus,
the whole genus is not in every part or species; the generality or universality
of the genus, is not in every species; humanity universally considered in the
whole latitude and extent of it, is not in Socrates. The reason is, because
genus is totum a whole; and species est pars generis: the sp^cies is but a part
of the genus. Genus gives it self to be divided among all his species, but
gives not it self wholly and altogether to any one species. It is a whole
containing many or several parts, and is not wholly or universally in one part
or species. There is but a part of the genus in one species; and therefore when
we say Socrates est homo, Socrates is a man; we mean not that he alone is a
man: for then Socrates should be genus, giving and communicating essence to his
species, which cannot be: tota humanitas and universa, all humanity universally
considered, is not in Socrates: for part of humanity is in Plato, etc. it is
proper to genus to be totum universale, this cannot belong to any part: the
genus is of larger and wider extent then any one species; Animal extends it
self beyond Brutum, and comprehends Homo also within its compass.

Quest. When Brutum was made, and not Homo; where was Animal? When brute beasts
were made, and not man; where was living creature.

Answ. Animal, living creature, that genus or kind was still in making, and not
perfect till Homo was made,

2. It is as true of totum integrale; All the members are equal to the whole,
but not any one. Hence an integrum, an entire thing, cannot have his whole
integral entire nature preserved in one part or member.

Mr Hudson affirms, that the Catholic integral Church, i. e. the Church
Catholic, which he affirms to be an integral, may be brought into a narrow
room, and happily to one congregation; it is possible: (says he in p. 88.) yet
all the essence and privileges of the Church Catholic Visible, are contracted
and reserved therein. This position is as cross to reason, as that one is two
or three; integrum cannot be made of one member; for all the members give
essence, and being to the in^egral. A part, cannot be the whole; the eye cannot
be the whole body; 1 Cor. 12, 17. If the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? If the whole body were hearing, where were the smelling? v. 18. But
now, God has disposed the members every one of them in the body, at his own
pleasure. v. 19. For if they were all one members, where were the body? v. 20.
But now are there many members, but one body. A mutilated, and maimed body,
cannot be a perfect and entire body. M. Hudson will not affirm that a City may
be preserved entire in one members; for a City contains many Citizens: there
cannot be (...), of (...); multus, where there is but one man. M. Hudson
consents to this, that the nature of a flock is not reserved in one sheep; or a
Corporation in one man; or that a swarm of Bees cannot be in one Be. Integrum
is not made of one member, as M. Hooker chap. 15. page 26. speaks. I wonder to
what end M. Hudson speaks of a flock and a sheep; which are Integrum and
membra; when he would show that the whole nature of the genus is not in una
specie.

CONCLUSION V.
Genus and Integrum are both existing, and measurable by time and place. I find
M. Hudson clearly and fully expressing his judgment, that Genus does not
exist, and that it is not measurable by time and place: I shall present some of
his expressions concerning this business, to the Reader; viz. in page 78. he
says, Universality is of another Nature, being an abstract second Notion. And
again in the same page he has these words; Genus being a second Notion,
existeth not; but in intellectu nostro: habet fundamentum in rebus, non
existentiam; for as it does exist, it is an integral, and loses his abstract
nature, wherein the Universality does consist. And again in page 88. Genus is a
notion not existing. I shall name but one place more, in page 81. where he
expresses himself in these words; That Totum which is measured by time and
place, is an Integral; for Genus which is a notion, is capable of neither of
them. By which, etc. it appears, that M. Hudson apprehends that this is one
main difference between genus and integrum: that genus is a notion not
existing, nor measurable by time and place; but integrum exists, and is
measured by time and place.

Answ. I conceive and affirm, that both of them ( genus as well as integrum)
are existing things, measured by time and place; and that both of them show
their faces in rerum Natura; and that the Understanding finds neither of them
lurking or lying hid in the bottomless pit of non existence. The existence of
integrum is so palpable and plain, that M. Hudson has no scruple about it,
suspects it not in the least measure, but gives in his clear Testimony
concerning the existence of it; that he has seen it standing out from all his
causes, and that time and place have taken measure of it, or at least are able
to do it; he affirms that it is measurable by both. Only I conceive that he
offers some wrong and indignity to genus, to deny it the same privilege. We
shall therefore plead, (so far as the laws of Logic, and ancienstatutes of
reason will give in evidence for us) and labor to demonstrate, that existence
is a privilege duly belonging to genus; and that he cannot be denied it in the
Court of Argumentation, without the violation of the rule^ of reason.

In the touching or handling this cause, we shall speak some things, First, By
way of Explication; Secondly, By way of Confirmation of the Truth. The Question
being stated, we shall give the Explication in several Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
Second Notions are as real as first Notions: Argumenta orta are as real as
prima: arising Arguments are as real, true existing things, as the very first
Arguments from whence they arise; and have as real a Being and Entity as they.
Adam was the first man, but all his sons are true men as well as himself: So
those Arguments which arise and spring from the first, as their Ancestors or
Predecessors, are real Things or Beings, as well as their Parents, from which
they descend. Those which some call Nominal (because the force of Arguing is in
the name) yet have a reality in them, and are not mere fictions; but here the
force of Arguing lies in the things themselves. Definition is not a first
Argument, but is beholding to the first Arguments for his Birth, Nativity, and
Breeding; and has derived his whole Existence and Being from them; and yet is
not a mere Notion, crept into the Understanding of man, before it was duly
entered and enrolled into the Artificial Fabric of Reason; which is one of
those Vestigia and Impressions which the first Being has left behind him.
Those who read in the great book of the world, and turn over those leaves and
volumes, may find the explication of the quiddity, and being of things, or the
bounds of their being unfolded; which is nothing else, but their definition. E.
Gr. homo est animal rationale, a man is a reasonable creature: this is the
definition of man. Men and angels could never make this to be the definition of
man, but find it made before their eyes; they gather it up with the hands of
their understandings; which they could never have gathered, if there had been
no such fruit growing in the garden of nature, or in artificio rei. Totum
integrale is listed in the number of arising arguments, being a symbol of the
effect: and yet is never so much as charged or accused by M. Hudson, or any
other (that I have heard) for non-reality or nonexistence. We have gained thus
much already in pleading the cause of genus, that his ortive or derivative
nature is no prejudice at all to his real being, and existence. We cannot deny,
but that the impressions of other second notions, have been extant many
thousands, of years; and what reason have we (if we desire to deal impartially)
to say, that genus is not extant, because it is a second notion? For my part, I
cannot deny but that it is come abroad in the world, as the impression of the
first being, who is author, entium and ar^ium, unless I had some spleen against
this more then against other second notions; to which this (if it may have its
right) is not inferior.

PROPOSITION II.
Abstractio vel' (...) est sejunctio (...). The abstraction of the (...), is
that whereby the understanding can separate, and sever the arts one from
another, that are confounded in the (...); which is opus motu ^rtis factum. As
a Geometrician can take magnitude (length, breadth and thickness) from a body
in conceit; that is, he can understand those dimensions which are found only in
m^terial things, not considering or looking at the matter. This abstraction is
common to all Arts, there is the impression of all Arts in the things; and one
may abstract the workmanship of one Art from the workmanship of another Art. As
suppose seven Artificers have bin at work in building a Ship; the Carpenter,
Smith, Glasier, etc. a man by his understanding may sever the work of the
Glasier, or the work of the Smith, from the work of the Carpenter, etc. The
first being (having all arts in himself) has left an impression of them in the
frame and building of the world; and here a man by his understanding may sever
the fabric of one Art from another. When a man looks upon a Tree, by the eye
of Logic, he may abstract, and draw away the artificium logicum from it; he
looks upon it as bringing forth fruit; and in that respect he sees a cause and
effect there; as it is of such a color or quantity, he sees a subject there;
as it is placed in such an Orchard, he sees it as an adjunct; as it contains
root, body, and branches, he finds integrum and membra there; as it is a Vine,
Fig Tree etc. He finds genus and species there, etc. The Philosopher looks at
the artificum physicum: the Grammarian looks at the word, etc. The
Arichmetician at the number, etc. This abstraction is nothing but severing the
work and artifice of one art from that of another, in my understanding; not
considering the other frames that are there growing together with it.

As there is an abstraction of the work of one Art from the work of another; so
there is also an abstraction of some part or piece of the work of one Art, from
other parts and pieces of the work of the same Art growing together with it in
the same frame. One may abstract the workmanship of a Carpenter appearing in
the frame of the windows made by him, and look upon that piece of his art,
without consideration of the rest of the building, or any other part of it. So
here I can abstract the consenting, arguments from the rest in my
consideration, or I can leave them, and consider the arising arguguments; as
the genus, definition, etc. And this abstraction is not a real separation of
those arguments and affections from the things, but only a mental separation,
whereby a man sees a thing distinct from another, and looks upon it alone
distinctly. I can consider the nature of a thing in the abstract, that never
subsists by it self but in the concrete. As I can take color from a body
colored (although no color can subsist alone by it self) and consider that
quality alone by it self in its own nature, without consideration of the
subject, in which this quality is inherent. So likewise we may abstract
moisture from the air, and consider it only in its own nature, as a quality
whereby a thing is ready to flow out of its own bounds, and to take the figure
of another thing. Lastly, thus we may abstract humanity from Socrates, Plato,
etc. and conceive the idea of it in our minds, without the consideration of
Socrates, Plato, etc.

PROPOSITION III.
The abstraction of a logical notion from the thing, is no prejudice to its
existence: when a man by the rule of G^ometry abstracts magnitude from a body,
in his mind; it follows not from hence, that there is no magnitude existing in
bodies; I can abstract moisture from the air, and consider it abstractively and
sejurctively in its own nature; and yet there is moisture really existing in
nature.

PROPOSITION IIII.
The abstraction of genus, or the general universal nature of things, from the
things themselv^s, by mental consideration; is no argument to demonstrate the
nonexistence of genus and universals in rerum natura. The abstraction of heat
from fire, or dryness from the earth, or a color from a boby colored, i. e.
the consideration of any of these in their own distinct nature, is no evidence
that these things are not really existing in nature; so likewise, the
abstraction of genus and universality, is no evidence against their real
existence and being in nature; but a good argument (as we shall perceive
presently) of their real entity, and that they are extant in rerum natura. Is
there no color really existing, because I can abstract it? the universality of
things does not consist in their abstract nature (as M. Hudson p. 78.
conceives) as the quantity and quality of things consist not in their abstract
natures; that is, they are not so, because I discern them; but they are
existing, and therefore I discern them. I know not the reason why Mr Hudson
should call the nature of things, their abstract nature: for the nature of
things is the same, when they are not abstracted and discerned, and when they
are taken into consideration by our understanding. Colors are the same seen or
unseen: our apprehension cannot change the nature and property of things. I
cannot assent to that notion of Mr Hudson p. 78. that as the genus exists, it
loses his abstract nature; for by that reason, nothing existing could be
abstracted. I can consider the nature and definition of integrum, without the
consideration of this or that integral; and yet Mr Hudson confesses, that
integrum is always existing.

PROPOSITION V.
The subsistence of universals in singulars, is no argument of their
nonexistence, Universals are subsistent in singulars; and genus subs^sts in
individuals; as animal in homine and bruto; and homo in Socrates, Alexander,
Cicero, etc. And we must look for genus in individuis, and there we shall find
it; It is where individuals are. But this does not argue and demonstrate, that
it has no real existence. Quantity and quality have no subsistence, but in
their proper subjects; and yet there are such things really extant in the
world. Color, savor and odor, have no subsistence, but in mixed bodies; and
yet are real things. There is such a thing as paternity existing in the world;
and yet cannot subsist without Filiation; integrum is a real thing, and yet
never subsists without his members. And as integrum has his subsistence in his
members, so genus in his individuals. As integrum is, where the members are; so
genus is, where the indviduals are. A flock is, where the sheep are, which are
the members of that body. There cannot be the whole body without the head,
hands, feet, or members of which it is made. So it is with genus and species:
there cannot be homo without individuals, as Socrates, Plato, etc.

This seems rather to be an Argument, and demonstration of the real existence
of universals: for how could they be in singulars, if they were not really
existing? If quantity and quality are in their proper subjects; it is certain
that there are such things in the world. So likewise, if universals are
subsisting in singulars; it is most certain that there are such things in rerum
natura.

PROPOSITION VI.
Genus is capable of time, and place, and may be measured by both. This Mr
Hudson p. 81. denies, but we affirm.

1. It is capable of time, and may be measured by it. The essence of a thing
stands in the union of matter and form; Continue, of con and, t^nco, to hold
together.
the duration or continuance of the act of the form upon the matter, or the
holding together of the matter and form, is an adjun^t of the essence: and this
is time.

2. There is a duration of the matter and form of individuals. The matter and
form of Gabriel have continued together above 5000. years.

3. Gabriel, and other individual Angels, have been existing in the world above
5000. years: his duration and theirs is measured by time.

4. Hence the totum gen^s, Angel-kind, the whole kind of angels were created in
beginning of time, and have been in the world a certain space of time; the
duration of the whole kind is equal with the duration of the individuals, and
is therefore measured by time. There was a time when there was no kind of
inconstant natures in the world, viz. the sust 12. hours, when there was
nothing but the third heaven, and the angels created; and the first matter,
after that all the several sorts and kinds of things* which were per^ected by
degrees, came into the world in their order, successively one after another,
all the kinds have continued in the world for many 1000 years. The existence of
all these kinds is measured by time.

All these kinds also are measured by place; for where the individuals are,
there are the kinds. All the individuals of every kind are in some place or
other; and therefore it may be truly affirmed, that all kinds of things were
seated in some place or other. The stars, the whole kind of them remain in the
element of fire to this day. I conclude this proposition; The genus subsisting
in individuals, which are in time and place, in that respct is it self also in
time and place.

Having premised these things, we shall now state the question, and give some
arguments for the confirmation of the truth.

That which is to be demonstrated, is, that genus is not a notion (as Mr Hudson
p. 81. calls it) that is, a mere notion: we shall labor to prove that genus is
not a mere notion floting only in the brain; it is not a mere fantasme or
fantastical thing, existing only in intellectu nostro, and no where else: but a
real thing. Universalia non sunt intentionalia, sed realia; Universal things
are real things, existing in nature, and rebus ipsis. That genus is existing in
rerum natura, may appear by these reasons.

1. Reason, Every artificial argument is in rerum natura, existing really in
nature:

Genus is an artificial argument;

Therefore genus is in rerum natura

The Major or first proposition is evident, for that is an artificial argument,
which is in artificio rei: in the frame, fabric, and nature of the thing
immediately.

The Minor is also clear, that genus is an artificial argument: for it is
either an artificial argument, or a testimony; but it is not a testimony: ergo.
It argues not by an as^umed force as a testimony, but in, and of it self. The
genus is arguing and claiming an interest in his species, as parts of himself,
before any man give testimony of it.

2. Reason, That which may be invented and found in rerum nature, is in reru^
natura.

Genus may be invented and found in rerum natura.

Therefore genus is in rerum natura.

Invenire est in rem venire, to invent is to come in upon a thing: and it is
impossible to find a thing in nature, that is not there to be found. A man
cannot find fruits or flowers growing in orchards or gardens where they never
grew: nor mines of gold, in places where the Sun never made any. If g^nus were
not in fabrica rei, in the frame of things; it could never be found there.
Genus may be invented, for it is an argument in the first part of Logic, which
is nivention.

Reas. 3. That which may be abstracted from the things, is in rerum natura.

Genus may be abstracted form the things.

Therefore genus is in rerum natura.

That genus may be abstracted, is granted by Mr H^dson: and abstracted and
drawn away it could not be, if it were never existing in the things. Men cannot
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, where they never grew. If genus
were not growing and springing up in the garden of nature, it could never be
abstracted and drawn from thence by the consideration of our understandings. To
abstract (as we have heard) is to see a thing distinct from another, that grows
together with it in the frame. If magnitude were not really existing in a body,
and adjoined to it, it could never be abstracted from it by Geometry.

Reason, 4. Every totum whose parts are real things, really existing in nature,
is it self in rerum natura.

Genus is a totum, whose parts are real things, really existing in nature;

Therefore genus it self is in rerum natura.

The first proposition is fair and rational; for there is a reciprocation of
all the parts with the whole. The whole contanies just as much as the pars; and
it cannot contain so much as the parts, if the parts be full of entity and
reality; and the whole be a vain thing, having no reality, or real entity, and
being in it. If genus be a mere fantastical thing, and notion, which men have
got in their crowns, it is an empty vessel, and holds no real entity at all;
and then the parts must be empty. A vessel full of air or wind is empty, in
comparison of that which is filled with water or precious liquor. If the
species are real things, and the genus an empty notion, an empty vessel, how
can it hold as much as the species? If that be an empty thing it pours out
nothing but emptiness into the species; and they receive nothing but emptiness
from it. Animal is as real a thing as homo and brutum: And Homo as real, as
Socrates, or Plato.

The Minor is most true, that species, especially the individual species, are
real things. Mr Hudson will not deny, that Peter, Abraham, and David etc. are
real things.

Reason, 5. That which gives and communicates real essence and being to other
things, is in r^rum natura.

Genus gives and communicates real essence, and being to other things;

Therefore genus it self is in rerum natura.

That which is a mere fanta^ie or fantastical thing, can give no essence. How
can that which is only in the brain give essence? If it were only mental, it
could not give being; Nihil dat, quod non habet. It is a strange thing to
conceive that a notion should sit in a man's understanding, and brood so many
real things: all the species of things should then have a mighty dependence
upon men's understanding: For upon this account, if there were no reasonable
Creatures, having understanding to catch and hold this bird; it would
imediately make use of its wings, and flee as an Eagle out of the world, and
the compass of beings, and vanish into just nothing. All universalls would
betake themselves to their flight, they would all take their leave. But if
there should be but one rational creature produced in the world, they would
come flocking in thick and threefold, and build their nests in his
understanding; and being well seated there, would out of their emptiness pour
out themselves as freely upon their species, and make them as real beings as
ever they were.

Genus gives and communicates being to other things, i. e. to his species: for
genus est totum partibus essentiale. The essential causes, which constitute the
essence, are comprehended in the genus, and the form. Homo est animal
rationale: Animal, a living creature is essential to man: It contains part of
the essence of man. For the definition lays out all the essential causes.

Reason, 6. If there be a community of nature and kindred between beings, and
general kinds of things in rerum natura, genus is in rerum natura, But there is
community of nature; and kindred between beings, and general kinds of things in
rerum natura;

Therefore genus is in rerum natura.

I shut up diverse arguments in one, and conclude this question. I know no
exception against either of the propositions. I see no ground to question the
first: for what is in the genus but community of nature, and kindred between
beings from the first? If therefore some special things have the same nature in
common one with another; and if there be such near affinity and kindred between
beings; there is genus in rerum natura. If there be general kinds of things,
varia genera rerum, there must be genus; for what is genus, but the general
kind?

The minor, or second proposition may easily appear. What is more evident then
this, that there is community of nature, a kindred between beings, and general
kinds of things in nature? Constant natures, as Angels, have the same Angelical
nature in common one with another, divided between them. The Elements have one
common nature, being a kin, i. e. of the same general kind one with another.
So likewise have the Elementaries, which are made of them. All living things
are of a kindred. Things that live the life of sense, are of a near kindred:
and those that live the life of reason, together with the life of sense, have a
near agreement of nature, and are near a kin one to another. Iam. 3. 7. (...):
has been tamed of the humane nature, or of mankind (as it is in our
translation) which are both one for the substance: all mankind having the same
humane nature in common. So also there is a kindred of Arts (as Cicero speaks:
he affirms that) Poetry is a kin to Oratory; because all Arts have a common
Vi^culum and bond, and a certain kindred between them, by which they are
contained, and held together, etc.

And that there are diverse general and special kinds of things in nature
appears, Gen, 1. 11. 12, 21, 24. There are various kinds of trees, as a Vi^e,
Fig Tree, etc. and several kinds of Apple Trees under that general kind.
Several kinds of living creatures, Fishes, Birds, Beasts; and diverse sorts
under one kind: under the general kind of beasts, there are Lions, Horses, etc.
who can reckon up their manifold kinds? There is Angel-kind, mankind, etc. All
these kinds of things are real things: and all other kinds besides mankind,
were come into the world and had a real being and existence before the
understanding of man was created, and sitted to receive them. They could not
exist then in intellectu nostro: where could they exist, but in rerum natura?

We have heard of the agreement; we are now to speak concerning the difference
of totum universale, and integrale.

DIFFERENCE I.
The genus is a not of the causes; the integrum is a note of the effect: genus
and species are notes of the causes and effects: and integrum and membra, are
notes of the effect and causes. The integrum is a Totum, to which the parts are
essential: they give essence, i. e. causes. The essential causes are the matter
and form; therefore these parts give matter and form to the whole. Every
member gives a portion of matter and form; and all members make up a common
matter and form of the whole: and of the matter and form of every part, is
made up the matter, and form of the whole; the matter of the whole is made of
the matter of the parts; and the form of the form of the parts.

And as these contain the matter and form of the whole, so the Genus being
essential to the parts, contains the matter and common form of the species.
A perfect definition contains all the the essential causes of the thing, which
are the matter and form, the general, and proper nature: the form is expressed,
and the matter is included in the g^nus, which contains the matter and common
form.

DIFFERENCE II.
The Genus comm^nicates his whole essence, and his whole entire nature to the
species. Species habet naturam generis integram, non universam. The entire
nature of the genus is in the Species: and in this respect, tota natura generis
conservatur in una specie: All the entire nature of man was preserved in Adam;
because the genus is essential to its parts: it communicates his whole entire
essence to every one of them. It is not so in integrum; there the parts did
give their essence to the whole, and not the whole to them. There therefore the
rule is, quicquid convenit membr^* convenit integro; because the members were
essential to it. But the rule here is, quicquid convenit generi, convenit
speciebus; because the genus is essential to them. And in this respect, species
recipit generis sui definitionem: not in actu signato; the definition of the
genus is not the definition of the species: we must not say species est Genus;
but in actu exercito, (as I said) that is, take any example of genus, as Homo
is Genus to his individuals: and here the definition of homo is communicated to
Peter. Man is a reasonable creature; Peter is a man; therefore Peter is a
reasonable creature. Animal is endued with sense, a lion is animal; therefore a
lion is endued with sense.

Mr Hudson p. 79. does somewhat dissent from this: his expressions are these.
Though it be said that tota natura generis conservatur in una specie, and by
this rule in uno individuo, it must be fundamentaliter only, non formaliter,
for there is no such universality formally in specie, and multo minis in
individuo. I answer, That I know no man who affirms that the universality of
the genus is in specie formally; the universality is not there, but the entire
nature of man is in Socrate, etc. the evidence which Mr Hudson brings for the
demonstration of this, is, that the nature of an integrum cannot be preserved
in one member: his words are, as the nature of a flock is not reserved in one
sheep, or a corporation in one man; to use Mr Hooker 's own words.

Answ. He uses Mr Hooker's own words indeed, for Mr Hooker disputes against Mr
Hudson, and demonstrates clearly, that the nature of an integrum cannot be
preserved in one member: but he professes, that he yields that which all
writers and rules confirm; that tota natura generis conservatur in una specie.
If Mr Hudson can prove that genus and int^grum are the same, his instances will
serve to some purpose; otherwise they are propounded in vain; for a flock is an
integrum; and so is a corporation: an individual sheep cannot be a flock; but
an individual sheep has the whole entire nature of a sheep in it: there is
nothing in the nature of a sheep. that is wanting in this or that individual
sheep.

DIFFERENCE III.
The Genus communicates all his essential properties to his species, but the
integrum does not communicate his properties to his members. Genus is essential
to his species, communicates his essence and nature, and therefore he
communicates all his essential properties to his species. Dans formam, dat
form^e consequen^ia: quicquid tribuitur generi convenit speci^. Convenire is to
come together: all the essential properties of the genus do come together into
the world with the Sp^cies: for nothing can be without his essential
properties. If homo be risibilis, Socrates est etiam risibilis. If a plant has
seed within it self, a Vine also has seed within it self; Gen, 1. 11. If art
be practical, Logic is practical. And on the other side, those properties
which agree not to the genus, agree not to the Species. If Art be not a habit,
Logic is not a habit: the nature of a thing and the properties go both
together. Tollens naturas, tollit proprietates: tollens proprietates, tollit
naturas.

I wonder that M. Hudson p. 80. should affirm, that a genus is not capable of
adjuncts. That which has inherent accidents existing in it as its own, that is
an integral: for a genus is not capable of them.

Answ. Risibility is an adjunct of man existing in him as his own, it is his
own propriety he does not borrow it from any other. It is a property of man
firstly, and agrees to Socrates because he is a man. It is a Catholic property
belonging to man as man. Homo est animal risibile, is a catholic axiom which
it, called (...) primum de toto because this is first true of the whole, and
then of the parts; it is first true of homo, and then of Socrotes, and Plato,
Omne animal risibile est hom^: Omnis homo est animal risibile. But it cannot be
said truly, that omne animal risibile est Plato.

We have heard that the properties of the genus are communicated to the
species; but the properties of the integrum are not communiaated to the
members; for the members are essential to the integral. Socrates est risibilis,
yet it cannot be said properly, pes Socratis est risibilis* Socrates est capax
discpinae, but you cannot say that his heel is capable of discipline Mr Hudson
p. 93. says, that this is true only of integrum dissim^lare, not of similare.
For a whole pint of water (says he) does moysten and cool; and so does every
drop.

Answ. These proper^ies agree to a drop, not as it is a part, or member of a
pint, but because it is a sp^cies of water, having the form of water in it to
which all the properties do belong. One Be makes honey not because it is a
member of this swarm, but because it is a species of Be in general having all
his essential properties.

DIFFERENCE IIII.
Genus communicates his operatio^s to his species; but integrum does not
communicate his operations to all his members. All the essential operations of
the genus are in every species. If the genus commu^ica^e his entire nature, and
all his essential properties to his speci^s, he communicates also all his
essential operations; operatio sequitur esse. If it communicate his qualities,
and principles of acting it communicates his operations: for frustr a fit
pot^nt^a, quae nunquam reduc^ur in actum. It is true that genus exists and acts
in his species; and integ^um acts not without his members: If a star shines the
north star shines.

Mr Hudson conc^ives that genus is inefficacious, That (says M. Hudson) which
has actions and operations of its own, is an integral; for a Genus is not
capable thereof.

^eason, 1. Every real being is capable of operations.

Genus is a real being.

Therefore genus is capable of operations.

The major is clear; because operatio sequitur esse, the operation of a thing
follows the being of it. Omne ens agit; because it is propter finem: that
which is for an end, works or can work for that end: but every being is for
an end: ergo.

The minor, that genus is a real being has been proved before.

Reas. 2. A second reason that genus is capable of operations, is taken from
his properties, and qualities; we have proved that genus is not empty of such
things as those are.

That which has proper qualities and principles, whereby it is able to work,
is capable of operations.

Genus has proper qualities, and principles, whereby he is able to work.

Therefore genus is capable of operations.

We have made it evident, that genus has properties, and proper qualities: And
frustra fit potentia, quae nunquam reducitur in actum.

Reas. 3. A third reason is from the sad consequence which follows upon this
position.

If no genus, no kind of things is capable of operations, all kind of things
are made in vain:

But all kind of things are not made in vain;

Therefore genus is capable of operations,

For it is certain, that no kind of thing can attain his end without
operation; where there is no (...), there can be no (...), or well working;
which is the end of every kind of being.

Reas. 4. If there be operations proper to every kind, genus is capable of
operations.

There are operations proper to every kind.

Therefore genus is capable of operations.

There are some operations proper to Angel-kind, some to mankind, some to other
kinds. To bring forth fruit is proper to a Tree, not to be expected from a
star, etc. To bring forth, and to bear grapes, is proper to a Vine, etc. Men do
not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. Matthew. 7. 16. There are some
operations peculiar to lions, some to Bees etc. 1 mean, that are proper to the
whole kind.

DIFFERENCE V.
The name of the genus may be given to the species; but the name of the
integral cannot be given to the member: because the genus is totum essentiale,
communicating his whole nature, and all his essential properties and operations
to his species: and the names of things are suitable to their natures Homo, the
name of a man, is given to Socrates, Plato etc. but the name o man is not given
to his finger or toe: for a member has but part of the nature of the whole in
it.

Obj. Pars similaris has the name of the integrum: M. Hud^on p. 89. 90, 91.
a drop of water is water.

Answ. A drop of water is species. Aqua, and haec aqua, are genus and species,
as Mr Hooker speaks.

That aqua and haec aqua are genus and species, may appear.

Res. 1. Where there is an essential predication of the whole of his part,
there is genus and species;

But in aqua, and haec aqua, there is an essential praedication; of the whole
of his part.

Ergo.

The reason is, because genus only is totum essentiale partibus.

Res. 2. Haec aqua has some genus.

But this water has no genus but water;

Therefore this water has water for his genus.

Res. 3. If two drops of water are ejusdem generis, then aqua is their genus.

But two drops of water are ejusdem generis.

Ergo.

It is not absurd that there should be many thousand sp^cies of water in one
pailful, and many thousand sands in one handful, and many thousand Bees in one
hive.

DIFFERENCE VI.
Genus est (...) prius speci^bus, and membra int^gro priora: the genus is
before his species in priority of nature, and the member before the in^corum.
The reason is, because genus is a note of the causes, integrum of the effect:
the causes are in order of nature before the effect, and the effect after the
causes. The genus is essential to his parts, giving causes to the species; the
members are essential to the integral, communicating essence to it* the more
universal, general, or common any thing is, the more priority of nature it
has. Animal est prius homine (est e^im termiais comm^nior quam homo homo
before Socrates.

As genus is prius so it is notius natura. Claritas generis non dependet a
claritate specici, sed (...) s^se commnni^at; singulars may be better known to
us, but universais are by nature be^ter known then specials: Homo is better
known then Socrates, or Plato; Animal better known then any of them; and
substance better then that: ens a primo is better known then any of them all:
because it draws nearer to ens primum which is notissimum, and maxim
intelligibil^. Prius and notius natura eadem sunt. But the members are before
the integral in order of nature, for that is made up of the members; and
therefore cannot be before them. A house cannot be before the foundation and
superstruction: A tree cannot be before the root, body, and branches. Mr Hooker
p. 255. in his rational discourse about the nature of integrum, made it appear
as clear as the Sun, that the members which make up, and constitute the whole,
are in order of nature before it. Yet Mr Hudson p. 219. seems to plead for
the priority of an integral; affirming, that the nature of the Church
Catholic, visible in respect of the particulars, is like to the priority of a
Kingdom, to the parts of it; or of a corporation, in respect of the parts of it
Which is not meant (says Mr Hudson) in a mathematical or techtonical
consideration: for so the particular buildings are prima, and the whole city
Orta. Yet, (says he) so M. Hooker understands me.

Answ. Mr Hooker speaks not of a city only in respect of the artificial
buildings: but he speaks of a civil body or corporation, and a politicial
Kingdom: which bodies politic, and corporations hold correspondence with a
city, having many houses and buildings in it; which houses and buildings are in
nature before the whole city; which is the effect arising from those causes: So
likewise the members of every body politic, are in nature before the entire
body it self, which is made up of those causes. A city in a techtonical
consideration may be first in intention, perfection and dignity, as well as a
civil, or ecclesiastical corporation.

Mr Hudson speaks, as if a city attended in a techtonical consideration, could
not be first intended. For Mr Hudson opposes these; which is not meant (says
Mr Hudson) in a techtonical consideration, but in regard of intentions, etc.

But it is a common rule, that which is first in intention, is last in
execution, and contra. The finishing and completing the whole city is last in
execution in a techtonical consideration; why may it not be first in intention?
but no integral body is first in essence. Mr Hudson p. 219. affirms, that the
integral Church is first in ess^nce; which I confess is above the reach of my
shallow reason; for the members give essence to the whole; that is, matter and
form* and the integrum receives essence from them* being a symbol of the
effect. And how is it possible to conceive that that should be first in
essence, that is last in essence, receiving his essence from the essence of the
parts?

Neither can any integrum be first cognitione distincta and noscibilitate
perfecta: it may be notius nobis analytically, but not notius natura
genetically. When we analyze the frame and workmanship of god, we meet with the
effects, and go from them to the causes, which we perceive by their effects:
but the causes are better known by nature: because as Res sese habent in esse,
ita in cognosci, the intelligibility and Cognoscibility of things, follows
their Entity and being.

Mr Hudson p. 278 speaks well and truly, cognitio sequitur ordinem naturae in
se, But how the Kingdom of England can be known without or before the knowledge
of the distinct parts, I am not able to conceive. A man may indeed know the
Policy, Laws, and Privileges; and not know all the several Towns: but the
Towns are not the members of the Laws and Privileges. A man cannot know the
body of Laws distinctly, before he knows any of the particular Laws; For it is
certain, that as the essence of a thing consists in his causes, so the
knowledge of the essence of a thing consists in the knowledge of the Causes.
The common place of causes, is the fountain of all Science; Scirique demum
creditur, cujus Causa teneatur: ut merito dicatur a Poeta. Foelix qui potuit
rerum cognoscere Causas. It is a speculative happiness, and the ^oelicity of
the understanding, to know the Causes of things. But there is but small
happiness to see the outside of the thing, not understanding the essential
Causes, and ingredients into the essence, and being of it: A man may as well
know the nature and essence of a thing distinctly, without the knowledge of his
distinct nature and essence; as know a thing distinctly, without knowledge of
his Causes.

We have heard of some consectaries, from the definition of Genus; I shall
observe two things from the definition of species specialissima (which is that
which cannot be divided into other species.) The first is that individuum est
species. The second is that though species specialissima cannot be divided into
other species, yet it may be divided into members.

1. Individuum est species

Every singular, or individual thing is a sp^cies.

Touching this question I shall first explicate, secondly confirm the Truth.

1. The explication may be given in these following theses, or positions.

THESIS. I.
The variation only of situation or Accidents, is not sufficient to vary the
species

1. Here I concur with Mr Hudson p. 91. This man is an English man; This
English man is a Suffolk man; This Suffolck man is an Ipswich man. This
praedication is denominatio Adjunctae personae a subjectis. If a man remove his
habitation from one Country to another, or from one Land to another, this make
him not another species. As it is said Coelum non animum mutant etc. so I may
say, Coelum non speciem mutant, qui trans mare currunt. The place is but a
Subject, and not essential, and cannot make an essential difference between a
man and himself.

2. Augmentation in stature, old Age, etc. make not a specificall difference;
gradus non variant speciem.

3. Variation of sex does not vary the species; the same person may be Mas, and
foemina. An Hermaphrodite, or Androgyne, is not two persons or species; and yet
is both man and woman.

4. Various species must be various things, between which there is an
essential difference.

THESIS. II.
Various species must fall under the essential predication of some kind, which
is of a more general or comprehensive nature: For species est pars g^neris; and
the Genus is totum partibus essentiale: there must be therefore an essential
praedication of something more general, upon something more special; as Homo,
est Animal: Haec Aqua, est aqua.

THESIS. III.
When we say Socrates est Homo, there is an essential praedication of Homo,
which is more general; upon Socrates, which is more special. Homo is
essential to Socrates, and comprehends Socrates and Plato under him: this Mr
Hudson p. 89. grants freely.

THESIS. IIII.
Socrates and Plato are opposita, opposite one to another: they are disparata,
that is, such things whereof one is opposed to many; in like manner as a blew
color is opposed to red, green, etc. in like manner Socrates is opposed to
Plato, Cicero, Aristotle, equally to one as well as to another. Hence Socrates
and Plato, are not only diverse, dissenting in some logical respect; but
opposite, dissenting re and ratione, really and indeed, they dissent in their
own nature, as they are things; there is a bar in their nature, they are set
one against another, that they can never be one and the same; as black cannot
be white. Socrates and Plato are two, one cannot be the other, there is an
essential difference between them.

THESIS. V.
Socrates and Plato are distinguished one from another by their proper and
essential forms. As a man and a lion differ in their common form, so
Socrates and Plato in their proper form. All opposition is firstly from the
form; hereby a thing is that which it is, and is therefore by this
distinguished from all other things. All essential distinction and opposition
is from the forms of things; they differ not only accidentally, but essentially
one from the other, and are distinguished one from another by their essential
forms.

THESIS. VI.
The numericall difference between Socrates and Plato, is an Argument of their
specificall distinction: it includes and implies an essential difference
between things, being distinguished by their proper individual essential
forms. It is true, that our intellectualls are so wounded by the Apostasy of
the first man, that it is exceeding hard for us to find out the forms of
things: we are forced many times to describe the forms of things by their
accidents; as we are constrained to describe the Elements by their proper
qualities arising from their forms: yet every one of them has a proper form.
The existence of every thing is from all the causes: nothing can exist and be
that which it is, without its proper form. And the difference of the proper
form is no less then the difference of the common form, but rather greater.
Look how much greater the similitude and agreement is between Singulars in
regard of their common forms, so much greater is the difference of their proper
form. The difference and opposition of contraries is the greatest and
strongest; and yet they communicate in the same genus: these are more opposite
one to another then things that are not under the same genus: white and black
are more opposite, then white and bitter, etc. Gravia bella fratrum. To differ
so numerically is to differ formally; to differ in number, is to differ in
form: for number is an affection or proper adjunct following the essence.
Socrates and Plato have two distinct forms: hence they differ in essence; hence
they have two distinct essences and beings; hence they are two: one cannot be
the other, they cannot be both one and the same: hence they differ numerically
one from the other. Where there is one humanity and essential form of man,
there is one essence of man, and one man: and where there are two humanities,
and essential, proper, individual forms of man, there are two men: hence they
differ numerically, and one is not the other, or the same with the other.
Socrates is not Plato, but is numerically different from him Socrates is one,
and Plato is another: As London is one city, and York another. The difference
of number is nothing but the difference of the proper and individual form,
and to differ in number, is to differ in form: two men have two different
forms, two Lions have two different forms. If Socrates and Plato, or any other
individual men differing in number, should not differ in essence and form,
they should differ only accidentally one from the other; as one man differs
from himself, or as Socrates in his old age, differs from Socrates in his
youth; being the same man, and differing only in accidents, not in essence.
Socrates should be Plato; and Plato, Socrates. And when Alexander rides
Bucephalus, Aristotle sits in the same saddle: and it were impossible not to
set the saddle upon the right horse; for every horse is the same essentially;
and he that steals one horse, he steals all the horses in the world;
because the essence of the one is the same with the essence of the other. There
is a difference indeed in accidents, but none in essence; there being
(according to this account) no essential or substantial difference between
them. Lastly, Hence there is (upon the same accompt^ no essential and
substantial man in the world but only Ideal: for all generals subsist in
individuals, and individuals only subsist in themselves. If therefore
individualls differ not essential one from another but only accidentally;
there is no substantial or essential man subsisting by himself: because
individual men only subsist in themselves. If therefore no individual,
proper, essential, humane form, there is no individual essential man
subsisting; and therefore no individual substantial man in the world. Every
individual man is an accidental man, having no proper, substantial,
individual form or essence. He that has no substantial proper form has no
substantial proper essence; and therefore cannot be a substantial individual
man. And hence there is no substantial individual man in the world, but only
ideal and common: and Socrates and Plato should differ essentially no more one
from another then Doctor Mar^in, and Doctor Luther. But the truth is, they have
not one and the same essence, but differ in their essential form one from
another. For an accidental form cannot be the prime and principal essential
Cause of a substance.

THESIS. VII.
The name agrees most properly to Individuals Speci^s of the old verb specio to
see, or behold (as we have heard) signifies the visible face or appearance of
a thing, a sight or thing seen: the Greek word (...) of (...), video,
signifies a visible shape, form, image or representation of a thing: (as we
have heard) the reason is, because individualls are only visible in
themselves, we may see some of their faces daily with our bodily eyes.
Generals cannot beseen but in individualls; man cannot beseen* but in
Socrates, and Plato, and other individualls. It is clear therefore, that the
name which is a note and representation of the thing, suits best of all with
singulars and individualls.

THESIS. VIII.
Logicians will grant, that individuum est species. Not only Ramus, Berhusius
Snellius, Gutberleth, etc. but Aristotle will grant it: He testifyeth that the
last and lowest general kinds are next above the individualls, as man is
Arist. lib. 3. above individual men. Extrema, seu ultima g^nera supra
indivi-Metaph. c. 4. dua sunt, ut Homo. I might easily name several Authors
who conceive, that Homo is the Genus of Individual men, and that individual
men are species. But those are only inducements, not convincements, being
only inartificiall Arguments. We shall therefore (having propounded these
preparatives and expl^ations, somewhat helping to understand the Cause in hand)
present some Artificial Arguments and reasons for the demonstration of this
truth, that

Individuum est Species.

Singular Lions are species of lion in general. Socrates, Cicero, Aristotle,
Solomon, Plato etc. are Species of Homo.

REASON. I.
If Homo be the Genus of Socrates and Plato, Socrates and Plato are species of
Homo.

But Homo is the Genus of Socrates and Plato;

Therefore Socrates and Plato are species of Homo.

Major: Genus and species stand in a mutual respect, and look one to another,
so that Homo cannot be Genus, Socratis and Platonis, unless Socrates and Plato
are species Hominis: Genus, as such, has an eye upon his species, and respects
nothing else in the world: As the Cause argues nothing but his effect, so the
Genus argues nothing but his Species.

Minor. The proof therefore of the minor is most of all here to be attended,
viz. That Homo is the Genus of Socrates and Plato: which may appear thus,

Reas. 1. That to which the definition of Genus agrees, is Genus:

But the definition of Genus agrees to Homo, as he standsin respect to
Socrates and Plato;

Therefore Homo is Genus, as he stands in respect to Socrates and Plato.

Genus is totum partibus essentiale; and Homo is totum partibus essentiale,
giving essence to Socrates, Plato, and the rest of his individualls.

Reas. 2. If Homo stand in the same respect to his individualls, in which
Animal stands to Homo and Brutum; Homo is the Genus of all individual men:

But Homo stands in the same respect to his Individualls, in which Animal
stands to Homo and Brutum;

Therefore Homo is the Genus of all individual men.

Major prob. If Homo respects and argues his individualls, as Animal respects
and argues Homo and Brutum, Homo has the affection and respect of a Genus to
his individualls; For Animal has the affection of a Genus to Homo and Brutum;
and therefore, that being granted, there is as good reason that Homo should be
Genus to individual men.

Minor prob. Homo stands affected as much and in like manner to singular men,
as Animal to Homo and Brutum. Is Animal more general then Homo? Homo is more
general then Socrates, etc. Does Animal comprehend Homo and Brutum? Homo
comprehends Socrates, and Plato, and all other individual men under him. Is
Animal essential to man and beasts? Hom^ is as essential to Socrates and his
other individualls. Does Animal communicate himself, and his whole essence to
Homo? Homo is as liberal to Socrates, and Cicero, and his other individualls;
keeps nothing to himself, but unlockes all his treasures of humanity, and
bestows all his whole estate, and all his humane excellencies, his entire
nature, matter, and form, his name, dignity, nobility, and all his titles of
honor upon Socrates, and his other individualls, and challenges as great an
interest in them, as Animal can challenge in Homo and Brutum. If Homo can say,
I am Animal; Socrates can stand upon the same terms with Homo, and say I am
Homo. If Homo can say Animal is mine, and all that he has; Socrates can say
Homo is mine, and all that he has.

Reas. 3. Homo is either genus, or species, in respect of individual men;

But homo is not species, in respect of individual men.

Therefore homo is genus in respect of individual men.

Major. Homo stands in some respect to individuals and singulars: Let any man
put any other respect upon homo, as he respects his singulars, but either genus
or species.

Minor. It cannot be a species (as some would have it) for it is called species
only in respect of his genus. If it be a species of singular men, of Socrates,
Plato, etc. then those individuals must be his genus, and Socrates should be
more general then homo. But it is clearer then the light of the sun, that homo
is more general.

Reas. 4. If all individual men are ejusdem generis, of the same kind, all
comprehended under mankind, homo is genus.

But all indiuidual men are ejusdem generis, of the same kind, all comprehended
under mankind;

Therefore homo is their genus

What else can be their next genus?

REBSAN II.
If the definition of species agrees to Socrates and Plato, Socrates and Plato
are species:

But the definition of species agrees to Socrates and Plato;

Therefore Socrates and Plato are species.

Minor prob. Species est pars generis, a part of the kind: Socrates and Plato
are parts of mankind; they are of that stock and kindred, comprehended under
that kind, and are parts of it. They can be no other but parts of mankind
universally considered. If all the men in the world should be annihilated but
Socrates and Plato, there were yet a part of mankind remaining in the world.

REASON III.
Those parts which have the Entire nature, matter, form and properties of the
kind communicated to them, are species:

Socrates and Plato have the entire nature, matter, form and properties of the
kind communicated to them;

Therefore Socrates and Plato are species.

Major, It is proper to the species (as we have heard) to have the Entire
nature and properties of the genus communicated to it. If a member had the
Entire nature of the Genus communicated to it, a member were an integrum.

Minor, Socrates est Animal rationale, and has the whole nature of Homo, and
all his properties communicated to him: he is Risibilis, and has all humane
properties which are essential to the whole kind.

REASON. IIII.
Those things which have one and the same common nature, and are specifically
distinguished one from another, are species:

Socrates and Plato have one and the same common nature, and are distinguished
specifically one from another.

Therefore Socrates and Plato are species.

The Major is evident primo aspectu: The minor shall be cleared.

Those which are distinguished one from another by their proper essential
forms, are specifically distinguished one from another:

Socrates and Plato are distinguished one from another by their proper
essential forms;

Therefore Socrates and Plato are specifically distinguished one from another.

We have made it clear in some of those Theses which we have propounded, that
Socrates and Plato are distinguished one from another, not accidentally, but by
their proper essential forms: and that to differ numerically, is to differ by
their proper form.

REASON V.
Special beings comprehended and contained under that which is more general,
are species.

Socrates and Plato are special beings comprehended under that which is more
general;

Therefore Socrates and Plato are species.

What are species, but special beings i. e., such beings as have a more
special nature and form comprehended and contained under some more general
head?

Individual men are special beings, etc Socrates and Plato are special men,
each having a special form (as we have heard) they are special men, more
contracted then Homo in Genere. Whatsoever is more contracted, is more
special: But the Idea of Plato or Socrates is more contracted then the Idea of
Homo in general; therefore they are more special: Socrates is not a general,
but a special man, having a special nature, besides his common nature.
Socrates springs not from the same special individual principles out of which
Plato is made.

REASON. VI.
Singular parts, bearing the name of the whole, are Species:

Socrates and Plato are singular parts, bearing the name of their whole;
Therefore Socrates and Plato are species.

A member not having the Entire nature of the Integrum, is never called by the
name of the Integrum, as we have heard. But the species having the whole
essence, and definition of the Genus in it, is called by the name of the Genus.

A foot not having the Entire nature of Homo in it, is not called Homo: But
Socrates having the Entire nature of humanity in him, is called Homo. He has
integram naturam hominis in se. There is nothing in humanity, which is not to
be found in him: and therefore the name of man may well be given to him; he is
an entire man. Qui habet humanitatem in se integram, est homo; Socrates habet
humanitatem in se integram, Ergo Socrates est homo.

The second thing to be observed concerning species specialissima, is this
conclusion which follows.

Although species specialissima cannot be divided into other species, yet it
may be divided into members.

Socrates who is species specialissima may also be considered as an Integrum,
and so be divided into members. An individual Vine cannot be divided into more
species: but as it contains root, body, and branches, it may be divided into
members.

Diverse respects may fall upon the same things or may concrescere and grow
together upon the same subject. Dialectica concrescit cum seipsa, and cum al^is
omnibus concresoentibus. A singular vine, as it bears grapes, is causa: as it
exists from its principles or causes it is an effect: as it stands in the
vineyard it is an adju^ct: as it contains root* body and branches, there are
integrum and membra: As it respects a vine in gener^, it is species. The
definition, rule and notion of species and integrum are different; integrum and
species are diverse and various Logical respects, which cannot be the same one
with another; yet the same thing which is integrum, may also be sp^cies.
Suppose a man should reason thus, that vine which has root, body, and
branches, is an integrum: this individual vine has root, body, and branches;
therefore this individual vine is an integrum. It may appear from hence, that
which is species specialissima, may be also integrum. And this may serve to
make one of our former principles appear with greater clearness and evidence,
viz. that the entire nature of the genus is in the species: the entire nature
of a vine is in this individual vine. In like manner every individual church
has the entire nature of a church in it. An individual church is a species, as
it respects a church in general, under which it is comprehended; yet as it
contains members, it is an integral. Hence it is that every individual church
contains members, because it is an integrum; and yet is a species as it
stands in reference to a Church in genere. Hence also a Church in genere may be
said to have members and officers in it, not considered under the nature of
Genus (The Arguments of Genus and Integrum cannot be the same: Genus and
integrum cannot be the same in Actu signato) but because the species
speci^lissima contains members as it is Integrum; And this species
specialissima is comprehended under the genus. In this sense a Genus may be
truly said to have officers in it. This Mr Hudson p. 2. denies, his words
are, A Genus is not capable of officers. A. It is true in actu signato, but
that which is Genus, comprehending the species and individualls which contain
members* may in that respect be said to comprehend members and officers. This
may appear by observing some forms of reasoning which may be propounded. Ex.
gr. Every entire Ecclesiastical body politic contains officers and other
members: Boston Church is an entire, Ecclesiastical body politic; Therefore
Boston Church contains officers and members. This Argumentation is a genere
ad speciem: An entire Ecclesiastical body politic is the Genus, and Boston
Church the species. This may serve to answer that Argument which Mr Hudson p.
84. 85, 86. uses, to prove that the Church Catholic is an integral, taken
from the several appellations which are given to the Church Catholic in
scripture. It is called a body, a kingdom, a tabernacle, a city, an army, a
sheepfold, a wheat field, a barn-floor, a drag-net, a loaf of bread. Now all
these (says M. Hudson p. 86.) and many more appellations have no analogy to a
genus, but to an Integrum.

I answer, that those and such appellations are firstly and properly
appellations of an integrum, having Analogy to Totum integrale. But this totum
integrale is species specialissima; or every individual Church being species
specialissima, is also an integrum, and contains members: and the genus
comprehending all his species under him, it comprehends the individualls with
all their members under it, or within it self. Hence those appellations which
are given to an individual Church, are given to the Church in General. Quicquid
affirmatur and negatur de specie, etiam affirmatur and negatur de genere
particulariter: Et quicquid essentiale affirmatur and negatur de genere,
affirmatur etiam and negatur de specie.

If a Church be a body, then this or that individual Church is a body and all
the members, of it are (...) one and the same body, of one and the same
Corporation.

A Church is a body:

Boston corgregation is a Church;

Therefore Boston congregat on is a body.

Mr. Husdon p. 84. says that a Genus ^s no body.

Ans. Yet a body or Integrum considered in G^nere, is Genus. Mr Hooker p. 85.
does not say that a Genus is a body, and the particular species are ^tly joined
together and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth; as Mr Hudson
insinuates: But Mr Hooker p. 268. affirms that the particular members of a
congregation are compacted together, and where there are many particular
Churches there is Totum genericum existens.

I might say the like of the other appellations;

A Church is a Kingdom, Tabernacle, Temple, City, etc.

Boston corgregation is a Church;

Therefore Boston cong^egation is a Kingdom, Tabernacle, Temple, City etc.

We have heard of the rules concerning Genus; we now proceed to the application
of those rules to the question in hand, where we shall first return answer to
Mr Hudson his Arguments. Secondly propound reasons tending to prove that a
congregational Church is a Catholic Church.

CHAPTER IIII.
Containing an answer to Mr Hudson his Arguments propounded in his fourth
chapter; wherein he labors to prove, that the Church Catholic visible, is
one Integral, or Totum Integrale.
I Cannot enlarge as I would; I shall therefore return a brief answer in these
several conclusions following.

CONCLUSION I.
To^um genericum existit in rerum nature. The general or Universal whole is
really exis^ing in nature. See the fifth Conclusion concerning the agreement
between Genus and Integrum. This answers Mr Hudson his first Argument p. 78, 79.

CONCLUSION II.
Totum gen^ricum h^bet parts extra parts. See the first conclusion concerning
the agreement of Genus and integrum. This answers Mr Hudson his second argument
p. 79.

CONCLUSION III.
Individual Christians, which are not members of any particular congregation,
are not formally political Church members. Visible saints are the matter of a
visible Church; and in that respect may be said to be members Materialiter, but
not formaliter; because they are not confederate. The woman of Canaan was a
visible saint and believer, yet was not formally a member of the Jewish Church:
A proselyte was called filius foederis, a son of the covenant.

A regenerate man excommunicated, is no Political Church member. The Apostles
were members of the Church at Jerusalem, Acts I. verse. 2, 3, 13, 14, etc. The
Apostles had an extraordinary commission and influence into all Churches: But
this is not sufficient to demonstrate that all Churches made one integral. This
may serve to answer Mr Hudsons third Argument p. 79, 80.

CONCLUSION IIII.
A Genus is capable of inherent Accidents. See the third difference between
Genus and Integrum.

A Church compacted according to the institution of Christ, is visible,
beautiful, terrible.

Boston Church is compacted according to the institution of Christ; Therefore
Boston Church is visible, terrible, beautiful.

By this manner of reasoning, a genere ad speciem, it is evidentil that those
accidents to properties do firstly belong to the genus, or to a church in
genere; and then to an individual Church, as a species of that genus.

A genus is also capable of being majus and minus, in actu exercito. Mankind is
capable of increase: virtue shall increase at the calling of the Jews: If
humility, chastity, justice, faithfulness, and contentation (which are the
species of virtue) shall increase, then virtue which is the genus shall
increase; when injustice abounds (which is species peccati) peccatum (which is
the genus) abounds: If the species be extended, the genus is extended also;
Quicquid affirmatur and negatur de specie, etiam affirmatur and negatur de
genere particulariter. That the genus may be mutable and fluxile, we have
heard. See the first conclusion concerning the agreement of genus and integrum.
Genus also is measurable by time and place. See conclusion fifth concerning the
agreement of genus and Integrum. These may answer Mr Hudson his fourth
Argument. p. 80, 81.

CONCLUSION V.
A genus may be capable of admission and ejection of parts. See second
Conclusion concerning species specialissima, wherein we may find an answer to
Mr Hudson his fifth Argument p. 81. 82.

CONCLUSION VI.
A Genus may be capable of officers. See conclusion second, concerning species
specialissima.

Every entire complete Ecclesiastical society or Church is furnished with
officers.

Boston congregation is a complete entire Church, or a complete
Ecclestiastical society

Therefore Boston Church is furnished with officers.

This is part of an answer to Mr Hudson his sixth Argument p. 82. I shall add a
word more to fill up the answer.

There are no habitual officers in the Church: all officers in the Church are
actual officers. Habitual officers are non Ens possibile, quod non est sed
potest esse. Lawyers may in this sense be called habitual officers of the
Church, for they may officiate in a Church when they are called.

CONCLUSION VII.
The Church Catholic has actions and operations of its own; it is true that
it exists and acts in its Individualls, yet his properties are his own, and so
likewise are his operations. See the fourth difference between Genus and
Integrum. This answers his seventh Argument p. 82.

CONCLUSION VIII.
The several Appellations which are given to the Church Catholic, are not a
sufficient demonstration, that it is an Integrall. See conclusion second
concerning species specialissima. This answers Mr Hudson his eighth Argument
p., 84 85. And also his ninth Argument p. 86, 87.

CONCLUSION IX.
The invisible Church (not being distinguished into several political bodies)
may be an Integrum: yet the visible political Church, distingushed into several
congregations, may be a genus: and those several congregations, the several
species. The name of the whole may be given to one, and not to the other. A
thousand visible believers in confoederation one with another, etc. may be
called a visible Church: But a thousand invisible saints cannot be called an
invisible Church. Here is no visible political vinculum or bond to bind all
Churches together in one Integral body. This may answer Mr Hudson his tenth
Argument. p. 87.

CONCLUSION X.
The Church covenant is not only a covenant between man and man, but also
between God and man. We read of two staves, Zach. 11. 7, 10, 14. Beauty and
Bands: there was not only a covenant between man and man, signified by bands;
but also a covenant, which God made with his people, signified by his staff,
beauty. We may find this double covenant expressed Isaiah 62. 5. As a Bridegroom
rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. Here is employed a
covenant between God and his people. And as a young man marries a virgin, so
shall thy sons marry thee. There is employed a covenant between man and man.
When we enter into Church covenant, we bind our selves to God, and to our
Brethren, to walk with God and one with another, according to the rules of
divine polity. We make not the Covenant between man and man the form of the
Church. Here Mr Hudson is mistaken: who affirms, that the covenant of
particular congregations is a covenant between man and man: And this (says Mr
Hudson) we make the form of particular congregations. See Mr Hudson page 90.

CONCLUSION XI.
Baptism is an adjunct privilege of a political Church member, as
circumcision was a privilege of the members of the Jewish Church; Genesis 17.
Those Acts 2, were admitted into the Church, and then Baptized. they are said
to be Baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; not because the Apostles could
alter the form of Baptism prescribed by Christ (they were to Baptize all in
the name of the Father, and in the name of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Math. 28. 19.) but because they submitted to the power of Christ in his Church
and ordinances, and owned him for their Lord, and political head, and then
were Baptized. The same expression also we find Acts. 10. 48. The Eunuch was a
proselyte, a member of the Jewish Church. Obsignation with the initiall seal
of Baptism implies confoederation, and admission into the Church. Suppose a
Master of Arts in one University, takes the same degree in another University,
without repetition of his former degree, which is included in the second; this
is no Argument that all Universities are members, and that there is one
integral Universitys consisting of them all. A man that has been Baptized in
one Church, and received the Lords supper there, if he remove to another church
and receive the Lords supper there, without repetition of his Baptism (for
that must not be repeated) this is no evidence, that there is one integral
Church of which all Churches are members. This may serve to Answer that which
Mr Hudson writes page 90. his apprehension is, that a man who is no member of
any particular congregation, may be Baptized.

CONCLUSION XII.
A congregation may remove from one place to another, and yet be the same
individual congregation. A man do h not vary his species* as often as he
^arieth his place: A Church does not vary its species, as often as it varieth
its place; yet two distinct congregations, are distinct species, as two men
are. This answers to that Question of M. Hudson p. 91.

CONCLUSION XIII.
Genus containing the common matter, and also the common form of the species,
because the special form is a member of the species, the genus may be said to
contain the special form, and to hold together the one with the other. A man
may be said to hold a sword in his hand, when he holds only the hilt, haft, or
handle in his hand he holds the sword by the handle, which is but a part of it.
So likewise the genus holding, the species by the common form, which is but a
part of the species, yet, because the proper form is another part, and joined
to it, the genus may be said to contain the species: As Homo holds Socrates
by his common form of humanity, to which his proper form of Socrateity being
adjoined, Homo holds Socrates, and so may be said to contain individual men,
which are his species. This may answer that which Mr Hudson propounds page 95.
Totum essentiale sive Genericum does not comprise the form of the species in
it self, but gives the matter or common nature to the species.

I cannot but dissent from Mr Hudson his judgment concerning the constitution
of the Catholic Church, expressed in the next following words of the same
page viz. p. 95. The Church Catholic is made up of the matter and form of the
particular Churches conjoined; as a whole house of the particular rooms in it.
For Mr Hudson says that the Catholic Church is first in essence: but a whole
house is not first in essence, before the particular rooms of which it is made
up. I never heard of a house consisting of several rooms, that was first made
up of all the rooms in it, having the rooms made afterward. One room may be
made before a whole house consisting of several rooms; but it is impossible (I
conceive) that the whole house containing all those rooms, should be made up
before the several rooms are made.

CHAPTER V.
Containing Arguments tending to demonstrate that a congr^gational Church is a
(...) Universal visible Church: wherein a few propositions are premi^ed, by way
of explication.
PROPOSITION I.
THE Church of Christ at Jerusalem was the mother of us all: the primitive
Church ou^ of which all the true visible Churches in the world have swarmed,
Gal. 4. 25.

PROPOSITION II.
The Greek word (...) ( Latin Conci^) in English* Church; in a Theological
sense, is proper^y given to an Ecclesiastical political body: for it signifies
properly an assembly of Citizens, lawfully called together by a Be^dle, ^own
clark or such like public officer; to attend their civil affairs as in
Cambridge the Beadles call a congregation; it is used Acts. 19. 32. ^9. 41.
translated assembly. It is taken therefore in the Theological use of it for an
assembly of heaven^y ( i^izens joined together in a Political society and
corporation, and meeting together according to divine institution, to worship
Christ, and attend the affairs of his house and Kingdom.

A congregational Church is the proper subject of the rules of Ecclesistical
discipline and policy, which is to be guided to its public foelicity by the
rules of divine policy; as a Civil society is guided by the rules of Civil
policy to i^s Civil happiness This was one piece of the misery of the Ephesians
and other ^entiles before their calling; they were not only dead in sin,
children of wrath by nature etc. for so were the Jews, but they were also
without Christ, as political head of the visible Church and aliens from the
policy of Israel. Ep^. ^. 12. The ground of it we find in the same place and
that is, they were strangers from the Covenants: that is, from the Church
Covenant, which is not only a Covenant between God and man, but also between
man and man; and was often renewed in the old Testament: and for those reasons
especially, it is called Covenants in the plural number; and from thence
followed a double misery: first* that they were without those fair hopes and
possibilities of the good things promised.

2. And without the worship of God or ordinances of divine worship, which the
Jews had, being Church mem^ers.

PROPOSITION III.
All the visible Churches of the Gospel, which are the genuine Children of that
primitive Church, are political bodies. Visibilis dicitur ecclesia propSohnius
Scrip. ter ordinem ecclesiasticum, ac formam exteriorem, ac visibile^, M^thod.
^qua quidem fecit, ut ecclesia sit, et dicatur visibilis: Sohnius.

PROPOSITION IV.
The Catholic Visible Church is to be found in the Churches of the Gospel, and
in the days of Christ. Before his exhibition there was a domestical Church,
and a national Church, but no Catholic Church; which is opposed to the Jewish
Church. The Church was first in families, and then in populo, and that was
either in populo Israelitico, or Catholico: when the Son of God himself came
into the world, it was too light a business for him to raise up the Tribes of
Israel, but he must be a light to the Gentiles, and salvation to the end of the
earth: He must have his Honors, and Royal Houses, and keep his Court among all
nations. The Church is not confined to Judea, or limited to any part or corner
of the earth, but may be extended far and wide over all the world. Therefore
the Field is called the world.

PROPOSITION V.
The name Catholic does most properly agree to a generical Church, to a church
as the genus of al churches. Integrum, an integral whole, or totum, is called
(...) and (...) bu^ totumgenericum, or genus is properly called (...) A
generical whole is properly called catholic and universal: genus and
universale are all one and the same notion; an integral church may be called a
whole church, or (if you will) a synholick church, but not so properly a
catholic church.

PROPOSITION VI.
A congregationall church is a catholic generical church, the genus of all
churches in the world. A church or congregation is the Genus of all
congregations; and the several churches and individual congregations, as Boston
church, Capel church, Hartford church, are the species of church in genere.

REASON I.
That which comunicates his whole essen^e to Boston church, Capel church, and
all individual churches, is a catholic generical universal church, and the
genus of those individuals:

A congregational church communicates his whole essence to Boston church,
Capell church, etc*

Therefore a congregational church is a catholic, generical universal church,
and the genus of these individuals.

The major is clear at the first sight, if we consider the definition of genus,
which is totum partibus essentiale. The genus is that which is essential, i. e.
that which communicats his whole essence consisting of matter and form, to his
parts.

The minor is apparent, for a congregational church communicates his whole
essence, his matter and form to Boston church, and the whole essence of a
vis^ble, political congregational church is found in Boston church, and in all
true churches and faithful congregations of Christ.

There are visible saints which are the matter of a church we read of Saints at
Rome, Corinth, etc. and all churches are churches of the saints; I Cor. 14. 33.
these are the materials of this glorious Temple. Saints are men separated from
the world, dedicated unto God. This is the glory of a congregation to be of
such glorious materials. It is a pleasant sight to see churches filled with
such men; with men that know God, and love God, having derived a principle of
life from Christ by faith. All church members must be visible saints, having a
competent measure of knowledge, and blameless life: Mat. 5. 19. Rev. 22. 14.

I. There is also a confaederation, either explicit or implicit; whereby
church members stand bound to walk with God, and one with another in the ways
of the worship of Christ, according to the rules of divine policy. An
explicit covenant is not essential to a church, because explicitness is but an
adjunct of the covenant* and because Christ has had visible churches in all
ages since the primitive church, and yet an explicit covenant cannot be found
in all ages; yet it is to be desir^d, and there is much of the visible glory of
Christ appearing in it: when men visibly bind themselves, and their children
also to Christ, they cannot bind them to a better Master. Isaiah 44. 5. All
Jacobs Children were enrolled in the catologue of the church.

REASON II*
That totum which gives his name to Boston Church, Cap^l church, and all
individual churches, is a catholic, generical, universal church, and the genus
of all those churches.

A congregational church gives his name to Boston church, Capel church, and
all individual churches:

Therefore a congregational church is a catholic universal church, and the
genus of all individual churches.

It is true (which M* Hudson speaks, page 90.) that every visible believer is a
christian; and it is as true, that a christian is a generical, and Paul an
individual christian, and these are genus and species.

Every church member is a member of Christ his Kingdom, because every church is
a Kingdom of Christ.

We have proved that pars similaris is species; and that aqua, and ^aec aqua,
are genus and species; and tha^ it is the peculiar prerogative of the g^nus to
communicate his name with his nature to his species.

Integrum cannot communicate his whole essence to every member; for then there
would be so many men in every man, as there are fingers, and toes, and members
in his body. Therefore every finger, and toe, and member cannot be called by
the name of a man. The members of a man, being essential to him, make him a
man: but a man cannot communicate his whole humanity to all his members, and
make them so many men. It is most just and meet therefore, that a man's finger,
not being a man, should want the name and title of a man, because such names
must be given to things as may hold proportion with their natures.

Minor, Boston church, Capel church, and every individual church, is a
congregational church, and is called by the name of a church or congregation.
Therefore a congregational church is a catholic, universal church, and the
genus of all churches.

REASON 3.
There is a genus of all individual churches:

There is no genus of individual churches, but only a congregational church;

Therefore a congregational church is the genus of all individual churches.

Their community of nature is an evidence that they have a genus, and are
comprehended under some more general head: and there is no other next genus,
but only a congregational church; I speak only of their next genus: for a body
politic is genus generalissimum, or a higher and more general genus.

REASON 4.
If all individual churches are species, a congregational church is the genus
of all individual churches:

But all individual churches are species;

Therefore a congregational church is the genus of all individual churches.

That all individual churches are species, is evident, because all individuals
are species, as we have proved in the first conclusion concerning species
specialissima

REASON 5.
If all individual churches are ejusdem generis, and are distinguished
specifically one from another, a congregational church is a catholic generical
universal church, and the genus of all individual churches:

But all individual churches are ejusdem generis, ^ and are distinguished
specifically one from another;

Therefore a congregational church is a catholic, generical, universal church,
and the genus of all individual churches.

They are all ejusdem generis, of the same kind, being all congregational
churches; Boston church is a congregational church, Capel church and Hartfora
church are of the same kind.

All have the same general matter and form, the same ordinances and officers de
jure, they differ not one from another in their general kind, having all the
same common nature, and that they are distinguished specifically one from
another; is as evident Boston church, Hartford church, Capel church, are
disparata, and therefore opposita, and essentially distinguished one from
another; it is impossible that one should be the other. The assembly of saints
at Philippi are not essentially the same with those at Ephesus; those at
Ephesus are not the same with those at Corinth. We have proved before that
individuals are really, formally and essentially distinguished one from another.

REASON 6.
If a congregational church communicate all his essential properties or proper
adjuncts to individual churches, a congregational church is a catholic
generical, universal church, and the genus of all individual churches:

But a congregational church communicates all his essential properties or
proper adjuncts to individual churches;

Therefore a congregational church is a catholic, generical universal church,
and the genus of all individual churches.

The integrum does not communicate all his propeties to every members; a man's
finger is not risible, is not endued with a power of laughter: But the genus
comunicating his whole essence, communicates all his essential properties to
his species, as we have heard.

A congregational church communicates all his essential properties to
individual churches. Ecclesiastical ordinances, Officers, Seals, and Censures,
are the proper privileges of a congregational church.

And all these are to be found there.

All the springs of God are there Psalm. 87. 7. there we may meet with Jehovah
himself the first being. All the water in springs is derived from the sea by
secret pipes and channels under the Earth. The first being is an infinite sea
of being and goodness, and he communicates himself, and pours out most
glorious sweet influences of himself in his own ordinances, and ways of his
own appointment, and those who wait upon him herein, may drink of the Rivers of
Eden, Psalm. 36. 8. one day here is better then a thousand. Psalm. 84. 10.

It is clear from this discourse: there is no catholic, integral, political
church: for an integrum is species specialissima, and cannot be divided into
species, as we see the catholic church is. And therefore I shall add no more
for the present.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Epistle, page 4. l. ul^-read cousultative. p. 6. l. 38. r. quae. p. 17.
l. 2. r. invitation. p. 21. l. 18. for it, r. is. p. 37. l. 26. r. University.


