A SERMON Preached November V. 1673. AT St. MARGARETS VVestminst.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAjESTY.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed, by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at
the White Heart in Westminster Hall, and at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1674.

St. MATTHEW. VII. 15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their
Fruits.


IF we were to judge of the nature of Christianity by the designs and practices
of some, who would be thought the only true and Catholic Christians, we should
have no great reason to esteem it our honor to be called by his Name, who
first brought this Religion into the world. For if the Christian Religion did
indeed justify all the fraud and treachery, the mischief and cruelty which
has been either acted or designed by men under the glorious pretense of
advancing the interest of the Catholic Church, we might better choose not to
be Christians, than to be such men: Because whatever Religion overthrows the
common principles and duties of humane nature, such as those of Civil
obedience, integrity and humanity are, cannot be supposed a Religion proper or
intended by God for mankind; whose great end in Religion is to improve and
rectify, and not to debauch or corrupt the dispositions of men. Men need no
Religion to instruct them in the arts of deceiving, the contrivances of malice,
or the methods of revenge; such fruits as these spring up too easily in our
corrupt and degenerate natures, which need no great force or improvement to
bring them forth: But when the warmth of the Sun shall be joined with the
fruitfulness of the soil, when men are encouraged to pursue their own natural
inclinations by the most powerful motives of Religion, what bounds can be set
to the growth and increase of these accursed fruits? Of all Religions in the
world, we might have thought the Christian least liable to be abused to such
ill purposes; for it was one of Machiavel's quarrels against Christianity, that
by its precepts of meekness and patience, it rendered men unfit for such great
undertakings, which could not be accomplished without something of cruelty and
inhumanity, whereas the old Religions by the multitude of Sacrifices did inure
men to blood and destruction, and so made them fitter for any enterprise. And
Machiavel was certainly in the right, if Religion were intended only to make
men Butchers: or to instruct them in the Use of Swords and Gunpowder. Nay, the
Religion of Mahomet is in this respect to be very much preferred before the
Christian, for that makes it not only lawful to destroy those of a different
Religion, but enrolls them for Martyrs that dye in the Field, and makes the
blood of enemies as meritorious, as we do that of the Cross. But that is
reserved as the peculiar honor of the Christian Religion, that it commands the
subduing all the brutish and savage inclinations of men to acts of revenge and
cruelty; that it restores humane nature to it self by its precepts of meekness,
mercy, peaceableness, and universal charity; that it advances it to a divine
nature by the imitation of God himself, in showing kindness to enemies, and
overcoming evil with good. This is the Religion established by our Lord and
Savior in this excellent Sermon on the Mount, wherein the scope and design of
Christianity is delivered with the greatest plainness and perspicuity; which
(if it be possible for us to judge of his meaning by the clearest expressions)
was far enough from being the setting up a Monarchy in the Church to which all
the Kings of the Christian world are by their Baptism bound to vail their
Crowns, and lay their Scepters at its feet: or in case they do not, that then
this Spiritual Monarch may excommunicate, depose, and deprive Princes of their
Government, and dissolve all the obligations between their Subjects and them;
and make it lawful for them to depose them: We find not the least footstep of
any thing tending this way, where our Savior speaks most advantageously
concerning the honor of his Disciples; which honor he represents by things
which set forth their usefulness in common: Ye are the Salt of the Earth, ye
are the light of the World; Matthew. 5.13, 14.
and not by setting up one above all the rest, far above all Principalities and
Powers, to whom Kings and Princes, and all People are bound to be subject, if
they regard their salvation. If any such thing as this had been so material a
part of the Christian Doctrine, as some imagine, if it had been so necessary to
salvation, it is somewhat strange, that when our Blessed Savior gave so many
directions in order to salvation he should give not so much as the least
intimation concerning this. And yet he says, at the end of this Sermon, Every
one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them, Mat. 7.24.
is like unto a wise man that built his house upon a rock; not super hanc
Petram, i e. according to the Roman Gloss, upon the Popes Authority; but upon
such a firm foundation as will never fail him. And what is it which our Savior
endeavors to persuade men to, in order to so firm a settlement of their minds
against all the assaults of persecutions? viz. to humility, meekness, goodness,
univeral holiness, to the love of God and mankind, to sincerity in devotion,
dependence on Providence, prayer, and doing as we would be done by: this is the
substance of the Christian Law delivered by the Son of God; than which nothing
can be imagined more contrary to the Spirit of Faction and disobedience, of
cruelty and revenge, and that covered over with a pretense of zeal for
Religion. But he who gave these excellent precepts, did foresee, that there
would arise men who should preach and prophecy in his Name, and in his Name
cast out Devils, and do wonderful works: that yet for all their fair shows and
pretenses to the world should be of a temper and disposition directly contrary
to the Gospel; and therefore it was necessary for all Christians, as they
valued their own welfare, to have an eye to them, lest they should be deceived
by them: which is the meaning of our Savior in these words; Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves; by their fruits ye shall know them. Wherein we have these two things
considerable.

1. The Caution given, Beware of false Prophets, together with the ground of
that Caution, For they come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves.

2. The Rule laid down whereby we are to judge of them: By their fruits ye
shall know them.

1. The Caution given, Beware of false Prophets. There were two sorts of
deceivers our Savior gives his Disciples particular caution against, viz.
false Christ's and false Prophets; the false Christ's were those who pretended
that they were the persons who were foretold by the Prophets that should come
for the redemption of his People; Mat. 24.24
for many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, Mat. 24.5.
and shall deceive many. Not as though they pretended to be sent by Christ, but
that they would assume to themselves the Dignity and Authority of the true
Messiah; and of this sort, there were many that arose among the Jews, such as
Theudas, Jonathas, Barchochebas, and many others. But besides these, there were
false Prophets, some of which did openly oppose Christianity, such as that
Bar-Jesus mentioned in the Acts; Acts 13.6.
but there were others who pretended to own Christianity, and to prophecy in
the Name of Christ, Mat. 7.21.
whom S. Peter calls false Teachers; and whom S. Paul describes by the same
character that our Savior here does: 2 Pet. 2.1.
But I know that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock: Act. 20.29, 30.
also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
disciples after them: whom he elsewhere sets forth by their Sheeps clothing;
when he says, Romans 16.18.
that by good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple,
whom he calls false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13.
deceitful workers transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: which
carried so fair a show and appearance among the people, that S. Paul was very
full of jealousy and apprehension concerning them, lest they should by degrees
draw away his Disciples from the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ. For I am
jealous over you, says he, with godly jealousy; but I fear lest by any means
as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, V. 2, 3.
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. It
may seem strange, that after the Apostles had with so much care and diligence
planted the Gospel of Christ in several Churches, they should express so much
fear as they did, (and especially S. Paul) of their being so soon corrupted by
these false Teachers; as he does, not only of the Corinthians, but of the
Galatians too. I marvel, says he, Gal. 1.6.
that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ.
And O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, 3.1.
that you should not obey the truth? and of the Ephesians, That we henceforth
be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive: and of the Colossians, Coloss. 2.8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 18.
And Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels: Heb. 13.9.
and of the Hebrews, Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines.
But we shall see this great Caution, delivered here first by our Savior, and
afterward by his Apostles, was no more than necessary, if we consider under
what pretenses they came, and what Arts and Methods these false Teachers used
to delude and seduce the people.

1. They pretended to the same infallible Spirit which the Apostles had. And
this may be the reason, why our Savior does not here call them false Teachers,
but false Prophets. For Prophecy in its proper notion does not relate to future
events, but to divine Inspiration. So S. Chrysostom says (...) is the same
with (...), S. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. hom. 36.
a Prophet, says he, is the same with Gods interpreter: so the word (...) is
used in Greek Authors, Auct. de Mundo, c. 1. Plut. de def. Orac. Lucian. in
Vit. Phil.
as in the Author of the Book de Mundo, (...) is rendered by Apuleius effari
caeteris; and Festus says, that the Latins called those Prophets, which were
oraculorum interpretes; and so the Hebrew words are taken in the same sense
without any relation to foretelling things to come. So Moses is said to be a
God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.1.
and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet: i. e. thy interpreter. Abraham is
called a Prophet, Genesis 20.7.
and the Patriarchs are all called Prophets, in regard that Divine Revelations
were more common before the written Law: Psalm 105.15.
but the reason why the name of Prophecy came to be restrained to the
prediction of things to come, was because future events lying most out of the
reach of men's knowledge, the foretelling of these was looked upon as the
greatest evidence of divine inspiration. But in the New Testament prophesying
is often taken for the gift of interpreting the hard places of the Old
Testament, as Themistius calls one that interpreted the hard places in
Aristotle, (...); Themist. Or. 1.
thence Prophesying is reckoned among the spiritual gifts; 1 Cor. 12.10.
and so these false Prophets were not men who pretended to foretell future
events, but to the assistance of an infallible Spirit, in giving the sense of
Scripture; and by this pretense they transformed themselves into the Apostles
of Christ, giving out that they enjoyed equal privileges with them: whereby
three things may be observed which deserve our consideration.

1. That nothing is more easy, than for false Teachers to pretend to an
infallible Spirit; such whom our Savior and his Apostles did warn men
especially against, pretended to be Prophets and Apostles, and to know the mind
of Christ better than they who truly had the assistance of the Holy Ghost. Some
think the bare pretense to Infallibility ought in such a divided state of the
Christian world to be entertained as the best expedient to end Controversies,
and that Church which does alone challenge it, ought on that account to be
submitted to; as though the most confident pretenders were to be soonest
believed: so they will be, do what we can, by the weakest sort of mankind, but
by none who have and use their judgments. If bare pretenses were sufficient,
Simon Magus did bid the fairest to be Head of the Church, Epiph. haer. 20.
for he pretended to be Gods Vicar upon earth, or the divine Power sent down
from Heaven, which none of the Apostles pretended to. Why then did not the
Christian Church submit to Montanus his Paraclete, when no other Christians
pretended to such an immediate inspiration as he did? And certainly Prisca and
Maximilla were better Oracles, than a Crucifix was to a late Pope. If there be
any thing beyond a bare pretense to an infallible Spirit, we desire to see
better arguments for it, than the false Apostles could produce for theirs; if
there be nothing but a bare pretense, we must leave the Pope and Quakers to
dispute it out.

2. That the pretense to Divine Inspiration is very dangerous to the Christian
Church. For we see what mischief it did in the Apostolical times, when there
was a true infallible Spirit in the Apostles of Christ to discover and confute
it; yet notwithstanding all the care and diligence of the Apostles many were
seduced by it. For those who have the least ground, do commonly use the
greatest confidence, and denounce Hell and damnation the soonest to those who
despise and reject them. Which being expressed with a grim countenance and a
terrible accent, startles and shakes more persons of weak judgments and
timorous dispositions, than all the reasons and arguments they could ever
produce. This has always been the method of deceivers, to pretend to the
highest, and then make the sin of those who do not believe them as great, as if
the thing were real. Thus the rejecting men's Fanatic pretenses to Revelations
and Ecstasies is cried out upon, as blaspheming the Holy Ghost; and refusing to
believe upon the Roman Churches pretended Infallibility, is called no less,
than denying Gods Veracity. We profess to believe the true inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, and every tittle of what God has revealed: but we will not swallow
Pretenses for Evidences, nor Enthusiasms for Revelations. For as the true
Religion was at first founded upon Divine Inspiration; so we know that the
greatest corruptions of it have sprung from the pretense to it. Maimonides
says, that the first beginning of Pagan Idolatry, was owing to the pretense of
Inspiration, Maim. de Idol. c. 1. sect. 3.
and immediate Revelations for the Worship of the Stars. However that be, we
are certain the Devil made use of Oracles and Enthusiasms, as the most
effectual means to bring men to the practice of it, both in Egypt, in Greece
and many other places; and they who have taken the pains to collect them, have
reckoned one hundred and sixty several Oracles that were in request in the
times of Paganism. After Christianity began to be settled in the world, the
greatest corrupters of it were the pretenders to Dinive Inspiration, as the
false Apostles, the Gnostics, the Montanists, and many others. And the
pretense to this, is so much the more dangerous, because it bids high, and is
easily taken up, and requires no learning or wit, but only confidence to manage
it, and may carry men by impulses and motions to the most unwarrantable
actions, and where it meets with an Enthusiastical temper, is very hardly
removed.

3. We may observe, that a truly infallible Spirit is not sufficient to put an
end to Controversies. For when was that ever more evident than in the holy
Apostles after the miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost upon them? Many are apt
to say now, That there will never be an end of these wranglings, and Schisms,
and disputes in Religion, till there be an infallible Judge to put an issue to
them; But were there not infallible Judges in the Apostles time, that gave
infinitely greater evidence of an infallible Spirit, than any ever since have
done? But were Controversies put to an end by it? No certainly, when the
Apostles complain so much of the Schisms, and divisions, and errors, and
heresies, and disputes, and quarrellings that were among them. And if so great
an evidence of a Divine Spirit manifested by their Miracles, had no greater
effect then, what can we imagine the shadow of S. Peter, or the dream of
infallibility can do in the Roman Church? And give me leave to say, it is the
Inquisition and not Infallibility, which keep things quiet among them. But God
deliver us from such an end of Controversies.

2. The false Prophets and Apostles pretended to greater mortification and
self-denial than the true Apostles did S Hierom understands their coming in
Sheeps clothing, Hier. in loc.
of this pretense to greater severity, and rigor of life than others used.
Those that go about to deceive, must appear to have something extraordinary
this way, to raise an admiration of them among those who judge of Saints more
by their looks, than by their actions. Whereas the greatest Hypocrites have
been always the greatest pretenders this way. Our blessed Savior was so far
from making any show of this rigor and severity, that he was reproached by the
Scribes and Pharisees, those mortified Saints, to be a wine-bibber, a friend to
Publicans and Sinners. Alas! what heavenly looks, and devout gestures, and long
prayers, and frequent fastings had they more than Christ or his Disciples? The
poor Widows were so ravished with their long prayers, that they thought they
could not do better with their houses or estates, than to put them into the
hands of such mortified men to the world: till they found, notwithstanding
their Sheeps clothing, that by their devouring they were ravening Wolves. Those
that seem so much to fly from the world, do but as Soldiers in a Battle
sometimes do, that seem to fly from their enemies, but only with a design to
make them follow, that they may have the more advantage upon them. One would
think no men were so afraid of the world, as they that seem to run so fast from
it, but they lay their Ambuscado's to entrap it; and if once it gets into their
hand, no men know better how to be revenged upon it. What pleasant
incongruities are these? to see men grow rich by Vows of Poverty, retired from
the world, and yet the most unquiet and busy in it? Mortified to the pleasures
of life, and yet delighting most in following the Courts of Princes? Such kind
of men were the Pharisees of old: and who would have thought, that under the
Name of that Jesus, who so much detested and abhorred their hypocrisy, there
should others arise, who have outdone them in their own way? As though Christ
had said, Except your righteousness be like the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall not enter in the Kingdom of Heaven. But we need not
wonder that in these latter ages such pretenses should be made use of, since in
the very beginning of the Christian Church, these were the common arts of
deceivers. They found fault with the Apotles, as giving too much liberty to men
in the use of Marriage and Meats; but they thought the state of the one was not
agreeable to their sanctity, nor the free use of the other consistent with
their severe and mortified life. For they did forbid to marry, 1 Timothy 4.3.
and commanded to abstain from meats. They would not make use of the liberty
which God had allowed, but they were ready to take that which he had forbidden:
therefore the Apostle gives the true character of them when he says, they
spoke lies in hypocrisy. There was an outward show of sanctity and severity in
their doctrine; but no men are observed by Ecclesiastical Historians to have
been more eager of what God had forbidden, than they who were so scrupulous
about what God had allowed. We do not say, the case is altogether the same,
where men are forbidden absolutely, as though Marriage were unlawful in it
self; which was the case of the ancient Heretics; and where it is forbidden
only to a particular Order of men, as it is in the Church of Rome: but this we
say, that where it is forbidden to a particular Order of men, as though it did
not become the sanctity of that Order; this is reviving that hypocrisy which
S. Paul condemns: especially when it is forbidden on such an account as Pope
Siricius did it, Siric. Ep. 1. c. 7.
because they that are in the flesh cannot please God; which is in effect
sending all married persons to Hell. Ep. 4. c. 9.
This was one part of the pretended mortification of false Teachers about
Marriage, the other was about Meats. S. Paul knew no such holiness in one sort
of Meat above another, as though men could fast their bellies full of one, but
the least taste of the other destroyed it. What a pleasant thing it is to
account that fasting, which the unmortified Epicures of old accounted their
most delicious feasting, viz. Fish and Wine! This is not doing so much as the
Pharisees did, Mat. 6.17.
for they appeared unto men to fast: but in the Church of Rome they cannot be
said to do that, unless fasting and eating be the same thing. But may not the
Church call not eating prohibited meat fasting? No doubt it may; as well as
call that no bread, which we see, and taste, and handle to be bread. However I
cannot understand, but if their Church had so pleased, the eating Flesh and
abstaining from Fish might have been called fasting; and so they might have
made one entire Fast of a whole years eating: and notwithstanding all the
pretense of fasting and mortification in that Church, I cannot see that any man
is bound by the Laws of it, to keep one true fast all the days of his life.
But if all the mortification required, lies only in a distinction of meats, the
false Apostles went beyond them in it; for they utterly forbid some sorts,
saying, touch not, taste not, handle not; and not merely to show their
obedience to the commands of the Church, Col. 2.24.
but that they might not gratify the desires of the flesh, and therefore the
Apostle says, V. 23.$
these things had on that account a show of wisdom in them; being in all
probability taken from the severe precepts of the Pythagorean Philosophy, which
makes him bid them, V. 8.
Beware lest they were spoiled through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, and the principles of the world, and not after Christ. For if
this sort of mortification were a thing so pleasing to God, the Heathen
principles were more agreeable to his nature, than the doctrine of
Christianity. This only requires the subduing our inward lusts, and in order to
that, to keep the body in subjection; but in the mysteries of the Heaten
Religion far greater severities were to be undergone, in order to their
participation of them. And the hardships were so great in some of their
initiations, especially those of Mithras, that some dyed before they could pass
through them: and yet for any to be admitted without them, was present death to
them. They were to make confession of their sins, shave their heads, change
their habits, lie upon the bare ground, fast for several days, and when they
eat, it was to be only of some certain meats; these and many other severities
they were to go through in order to the purifying their souls, as they thought,
and bringing them to the state they were in before they came into the body.
Some part of these hardships the Pythagoreans took into their Philosophy; and
from them the Colossians began to be infected with them: but S. Paul calls them
only vain deceits, the commandments and doctrines of men, things that made a
fair show, but he looks upon them as corruptions of the doctrine of Christ. Yet
afterward the Montanists and Encratitae and others were much stricter and more
frequent in these fasts and abstinence, than the Catholic Christians; but the
Church thought fit to condemn them, as corrupters of Christianity. By all which
we see, how apt men are to be deceived by false Teachers, when they pretend to
so much Mortification above what Christianity requires from them.

3. They pretended to know the mind of Christ better than the Apostles did:
they pretended, that they had conversed familiarly with Christ upon earth, and
understood his meaning better than the Apostles did. And therefore their
Disciples in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12.
were neither for Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, but they were only for Christ:
and gave out that from him they understood, that what he had said concerning
the Resurrection, was only to be understood of the state of Regeneration: which
doctrine it seems had gotten great footing in the Church of Corinth by their
means. They reported, that the Apostles understood only some common and
ordinary things, but the deeper and more hidden mysteries were only made known
to them: which makes S. Paul in his Epistles to those Churches which they had
corrupted, speak so often of his understanding the mysteries of God: But we
speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7.
even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world to our glory: Ephesians.
1.9.
having made known unto us the mystery of his will: whereby ye may understand
my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. The true Apostles declared, 3, 4.
that they kept back nothing of the counsel of God, but delivered it openly and
plainly, to make all men see and understand what that mystery was: the false
Apostles pretended, V. 9.
that the Doctrine and Writings of the Apostles did not contain all the great
mysteries of the Gospel, but they were received from Christ's own mouth, and
conveyed to others by a secret and oral tradition. The things written by the
Evangelists they could not deny to be true, but they were dark and obscure, and
could not be understood but by the help of their Oral Tradition: and upon this
principle, Cerinthus, Basilides, Valentinus, and Marcion went, as appears by
Irenaeus. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
For when they saw, they could never make good their Doctrines by the writings
of the New Testament they sought to blast the reputation of these, and set up
the Authority of an Oral Tradition above them. Men do not use to pick quarrels
with their Friends; and therefore when we find any charging the Scripture with
obscurity and imperfection, we have reason to believe, they hope for no comfort
from it.

4. They made use of the most subtle and crafty methods of deceiving. To this
end they were very busy and active, watching every opportunity; therefore S.
Paul charges them with slight and cunning craftiness, lying in wait to
deceive: i.e. with using all the arts and tricks of deceivers: Ephesians. 4.14.
as (1.) By deep dissimulation and disguising themselves; not appearing at
first to be what they really are; nor letting them understand, what their true
doctrine and design is. If any of those they hope to gain, object any thing
against them, how do they pity their ignorance, and revile their Teachers, that
did so foully misrepresent their Doctrines to them! Alas for them poor men,
they neither understand us nor our Religion! They have taken up things upon
trust, and their prejudice will not suffer them to examine things as they are.
Have you not been told thus and thus concerning us, and not one word of it is
true? Never trust such men more, come be persuaded by us, and then you shall be
truly enlightened. (2.) By raising prejudices against their Teachers; as they
did in the Church of Corinth against S. Paul, representing him as a man of a
mean and contemptible presence, and rude in speech. Come, say they, 2 Cor.
10.1.11.6.
and hear our Preachers, with what admirable eloquence and moving expressions
they speak, how they dart beams of light into men's minds, and strike through
the souls of men! you would never care for this dull and obscure way of S. Paul
more. But this is a small thing to disparage only his gifts; Observe say they
his doctrine, and see whither it tends, is not he against those that forbid to
marry, and abstain from meats? Judge now whither these loose doctrines lead
men. So S. Paul tell us, that they had represented him as one that walked after
the flesh; 2 Cor. 10.2.
and had prevailed so far upon the people by these sly insinuations, as though
all he aimed at, was only for his own advantage, viz. that he might be popular,
and get himself an interest among that rich people of Corinth, so that he tells
them, he was fain to live upon other Churches to do them service: 2 Cor. 11.8.
and he tells us afterward the false Apostles gave the occasion of it: 12.
and in the Churches of Galatia they had turned his greatest friends to be his
enemies; and he give this account of it, they would exclude us, that you might
affect them. Gal. 4.15, 16, 17.
(3.) By sowing Schisms and divisions among them. This was their masterpiece,
to beget contentions where they could not prevail themselves. What joy was it
to them to see in the Church of Corinth, such parties and factions made among
them? 1 Cor. 1.12
some for Paul, some for Apollos, some for Cephas, from hence proceeded
envying, 3.3.
and strife, and divisions among them; and this gave them a fair opportunity of
breaking them in pieces one against another. And therefore the Apostle saw it
necessary to use the utmost means to cure these divisions among them; and
elsewhere beseeches the Christians to mark them that cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, Romans 16.17, 18.
and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but
their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple: i.e. they carry on their own designs and interests, by these means; and
therefore study all the ways to foment and increase them. Why should the
disciples of Peter yield to those of Paul, and why should not those of Apollos
be regarded as much as either? And such was the unhappy success of these men's
arts in this divided Church of Corinth, that notwithstanding all the care of S.
Paul to put an end to their factions, they brake out with greater fury
afterward, as appears by the Epistle of Clemens to them: Clem. Ep. p. 2.19.
and he takes notice of those who did cast the arrows of contention among them:
and therefore he makes that the chief argument of his Epistle, to defeat the
design of the false Teachers, by persuading them to peace and unity among
themselves. (4.) By the most plausible insinuations. By good words and fair
speeches, says S. Paul, they deceive the hearts of the simple: they might find
by their softness and gentleness that they were in Sheeps clothing. How meek
and humble, and insinuating are they where they have any hopes of a prey! how
do the bowels of these ravening Wolves yearn toward the silly sheep, that look
only on their outsides! They would not hurt a limb of them for all the world!
Nothing but mere zeal for their good, could make them run such hazards, and
venture so much as they do! What end could they have in following such stray
Sheep, but to reduce them to the true sheepfold? Thus, if the Wolves may be
believed, there is no danger to the Sheep, but from their Shepherds: let them
but forsake them, and then see what admirable love, and peace, and unity they
would live together in: but the Apostle well adds to all this, deceiving the
hearts of the simple, for none else are capable of being thus deceived, by all
their fair pretenses and plausible insinuations.

5. The false Teachers were for a more pompous and easy way of Religion, than
the true Apostles were: These were for the purity and simplicity of the Gospel
of Christ, the other were for joining the Jewish Ceremonies and the Heathen
Customs: together with it; and by this means they hoped with much more ease to
gain Proselytes to them; especially when to this they added a greater liberty
in men's lives; so that by these offers, they hoped to gain the vain, the
superstitious, and the profaner sort wholly to them See how S Paul describes
them, having a form of godliness, but denying the power of it; for of this sort
are they which creep into houses, 2 Timothy 3.4, 5.
and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts.
These were subjects rightly disposed to be deceived by them: their folly made
them capable, and their lusts very tractable to such a formal, pompous, easy
Religion: It was by this indulgence of men in their sins, that vile Sect of the
Gnostics gained so much ground in the beginnings of Christianity. S.
Chrysostom thinks these words of our Savior have a particular respect to the
foregoing words, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, Mat. 7.14.
and few there be that find it. Now these words coming immediately after seem
to imply, that these false Prophets were for making the gate wider, and the way
to Heaven larger than Christ has done, and such need not fear they shall have
many followers, and especially of those who are farthest from the Kingdom of
Heaven. All the blessedness our Savior promises, is to the humble and
contrite, to the meek and righteous, to the merciful, pure and peaceable: but
if others make easier conditions of blessedness, no wonder if their doctrine be
entertained by those who are willing to be happy, but unwilling to leave their
sins. As if false Teachers should turn our Saviors Beatitudes into such as
these: Blessed are ye, if ye confess your sins to a Priest, and receive the
Sacrament of Penance, for your sins are forgiven. Blessed are ye, if ye vow
poverty, and leave the world; for ye shall inherit the earth. Blessed are ye,
if ye go in Pilgrimages, and visit the seven Churches (especially in a year of
Iubilee, and receive the Popes benediction) for ye shall be called the Children
of God. Blessed are ye, if ye do or suffer evil for the Catholic Churches
sake; for great shall be your reward in Heaven. Blessed are they, that
howsoever they live, dye in S. Francis his habit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. For so Gregory the ninth says, that S. Francis obtained this
privilege of God, Sacrar. Privileg. S. Francis. p. 6.
that whosoever had that habit on, could not dye ill: and S. Francis adds
himself, That whosoever loved his Order in his heart, how great a sinner soever
he was, should obtain mercy of God. And are not these much easier terms of
blessedness, than those our Savior lays down? Besides, that which makes the
way to Heaven more narrow, is that our Savior declares, he came not to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill it: and adds precepts of his own to it: But do not they
make the way to Heaven much opener, that teach men to dissolve both the Law and
the Precepts of Christ? For this is the language of these false Teachers, if we
bring their doctrine to the manner of our Saviors expressions. Ye have heard,
that it has been said of old, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve; but we say unto you, that ye are to give worship both to
Saints and Angels. Ye have heard, that it has been said by them of old time;
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing, etc. but we say unto you, that this Command may be left out among
Christians. You have heard that it has been said of old, Thou shall not kill:
but we say unto you, that to murder Princes, blow up Parliaments, destroy
Heretics is lawful for the good of the Catholic Church. You have heard, that
it has been said of old, Thou shall not commit adultery: but we say unto you,
that marriage in a Priest is worse than fornication. Thus far for the Law; now
let us see the liberty they take as to the precepts of the Gospel. Ye have
heard that it has been said by Christ, Drink ye all of this: but we say unto
you, that notwithstanding this precept of Christ, the Laity must not do it. You
have heard, that it has been said by the Apostle, that men ought to pray with
understanding: but we say unto you, that men need not understand what they pray
for. Ye have heard that ye have been commanded both by Christ and his Apostles,
to Read the Scriptures: but we forbid the people to read the Scriptures, and
say, that more hurt than good comes by it. Judge now, whether the character of
false Teachers do not belong to them, who have found another way, nay, a
contrary way to Heaven, to that which our Savior directed? And so much for the
Caution here given, and the Reason annexed to it; Beware of false Prophets, for
they come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. I
come now,

2. To the Rule laid down by our Savior for the judging of them; By their
fruits ye shall know them. He does not send men to an infallible Judge to know
the true and false Teachers from each other, but lays down such a Rule as he
supposed might be sufficient to direct men in their judgment of them. If
Christ had ever intended to have left such a Vicar upon Earth, whose judgment
all Christians are bound to follow, he would never have put them to such a
needless trial of men's Doctrines by their Fruits: the short and plain way had
been to have said thus, There will false Teachers arise, but remember that you
are to obey and follow the Bishop of Rome; and if you will be saved, I command
you to hold in communion with him. This had been the fullest and clearest
direction in the world, and no doubt, if our blessed Savior had meant any such
thing, such was his care of the souls of men, this would have been one of the
first and plainest precepts of the Gospel. But so dark and obscure, so remote
and impertinent are the proofs brought from Scripture for the Popes Supremacy,
that I dare say, that Aristotle's Politics do prove it much better than any
Text in the Bible: and those I suppose have been of my opinion, who slightly
passing over the passages of Scripture, have been large in proving, that
Monarchy is the best Government, and therefore ought to be in the Church. Which
argument if it have any force for an Universal Monarchy in the Church, I should
not at all wonder to see the same persons zealous to promote an Universal
Monarchy in the World too. For if the argument in the Canon Law be good, That
the Pope is above the Emperor, because God created two great Lights, Gregor.
de Majorit. and Obed.
the Sun and the Moon: I hope the same reason, which will prove it necessary
for the Sun to rule the day, will equally hold, that the Moon should rule the
night. And I shall easily agree, that when it will be thought reasonable for
all the Kings and Princes in the world to submit themselves to one Universal
Monarch, it may be then expedient for all particular Churches, to give up their
rights to the Pope. In the mean time we think it most convenient to follow our
Saviors Rules, to judge of men's pretenses, how great and haughty soever, by
the fruits they produce. Which Rule is not to be understood concerning the
particular actions of men which have no respect to their doctrines; for as S.
Chrysostom observes, many Heretics have been men of excellent lives, and so on
the contrary; but we are to understand it of those fruits which their doctrines
have a direct influence upon. And therefore this Rule has a particular respect
to two things by which we are to examine the fairest pretenses: viz. 1. The
design they tend to. 2. The means made use of for the accomplishing this
design. If therefore the design be quite of another nature from that of the
Gospel; if the means be such as are directly contrary to it, we may from thence
justly infer, that how plausible soever the pretenses are, how fine and soft
soever the Sheeps clothing be, yet inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

1. I begin therefore, with the design of their doctrines. Nothing is more
easy, than for men to understand the design of Christianity, viz. the exercise
of all Christian virtues to fit men for the Kingdom of Heaven: for our Savior
declares, That his Kingdom is not of this world; Joh. 18.36.
that he came not to meddle with the rights of Princes, or to dispose of Crowns
and Dominions; all that he aimed at, was to possess men with a firm belief of
another world, and by the most powerful motives to persuade men to repentance,
and a sober, righteous, and a godly life. And if they did these things, what
ever troubles and difficulties they met with in this world, should be
abundantly recompensed in that to come. This is the main scope and design of
the Christian Religion; and the great art of the false Prophets lay in this,
that they pretended still to own Christianity, (which was their Sheeps
clothing) but withal by secret and pernicious mixtures of their own doctrines
to undermine and pervert the whole design of it. So S. Paul says of them, not
that they did oppose, but that they did pervert the Gospel of Christ. I marvel,
says he, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ to another Gospel: Gal. 16.7.
which yet is not another, but there be some that trouble you; and would
pervert the Gospel of Christ. Now I desire, it may be considered, whether any
thing does more effectually pervert the design of the Gospel, than the setting
up a Kingdom in this world under the pretense of it, that should be paramount
to all Princes and Potentates, and to which they owe subjection and obedience?
And yet this has been the open and avowed design of the prevailing Faction in
the Church of Rome for the last six hundred years. I do not deny but there were
some tendencies to it before, and wise men might easily guess what it would
come to, if the design came once to be managed by a man of Spirit and courage,
as it was by Gregory the Seventh, who in a Council at Rome published his famous
Dictates, viz. That there is but one Name in the World, Baron. An. 1076. Sect.
31.
viz. that of the Pope: that it was in his power to depose Emperors, and
absolve Subjects from obedience to their Princes. Now the grand design breaking
out, all other things were contrived and carried on which were thought
necessary to accomplish it: and there being two things needful for the
maintenance of such a pretended Monarchy, viz. sufficient numbers of men, whose
interest should lie in upholding it; and great revenues to support the dignity
of it: These two were taken care of with all the art and industry imaginable.
For the first, it was necessary to disengage them from all Civil interests, and
yet to preserve their honor and reputation with the people. The former could
not be done while the Clergy gave hostages of their fidelity to the Civil
Government by the interest of their Families and Children, therefore this Pope
did most severely forbid all Clergy men's marrying; that as the old Roman
Soldiers were forbidden marriage while they received pay, lest their domestic
interests should abate their courage; so the Celibate of the Clergy was
strictly enjoined, to make them more useful and hearty for this design. But
lest the number of these should not be thought sufficient, great swarms of
Monks and Friars were encouraged and dispersed in all Countries, and to make
them more faithful to this interest (because Princes might oblige particular
Bishops who might curb and restrain these spiritual Ianizaries) therefore they
were exempt from their jurisdiction, and kept in immediate dependence on the
Pope. To give yet further encouragement to both Orders, the Doctrine of
Ecclesiastical Liberty was set on foot; not a liberty from the Law of Moses, or
the power of Sin, or the dominion of Satan, which is all the Liberty the Gospel
speaks of; but an exemption from the power of the Civil Magistrate; in so much,
that the Popish Casuists determine, that Rebellion in a Clergyman is no
Treason, because he is not subject to the Civil power. And this doctrine of
Liberty is no invention of the Jesuits; but it is determined by the famous
Councils of Constance, Lateran, Sa Aphor. V. Clericus. Ed. Colon. Conc. Constable.
Sess. 19. Council. Lat. 5. Sess. 10. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 20. V. Pontific.
Romans in Consecr. Ep.
and Trent, that Lay persons have no Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical. But
besides this, the Pope has other ties upon them; every Bishop is at this day
sworn to obey the Pope at his Consecration; all the Regular Clergy are under a
Vow of blind obedience to their Superiors, who are more immediately influenced
by the Court of Rome. Now such an infinite number of persons being made thus
sure to the Papal Interest, it must be so ordered, that these persons may
preserve their reputation among the people; to this end, they are told, that
they must depend wholly upon the Priesthood for matters of faith and salvation;
and it is of mighty concernment to them to have the good will of the Priests,
for that upon their good or bad intention depends the making or marring of
their Sacraments. But that no designs might be carried on, which they should
not understand, never was there such an invention to that purpose, as Auricular
Confession: and yet that the people may have greater reverence to their
Priests, they are told, that they can make their God at any time by pronouncing
the Five Words of Consecration. And what cannot they do, (as one of them
bravely said) while they have their God in their hands, and their Prince on his
knees? And both these doctrines of Confession and Transubstantiation were
defined by the same Pope Innocent the third, a man of the same spirit and
undertakings with Gregory the seventh. And lastly, that no supplies should be
wanting to support the Grandeur of the Papal See, besides the pretended
Donations and Concessions of Princes, all arts imaginable were used to drain
money out of all Countries in subjection to the Pope, and to empty it into the
Popes Treasury. This very Kingdom of ours was a remarkable instance of this,
during its Vassallage under the Popes Tyranny. For an account being taken in
Henry the Eighths time, it was found, that in the compass of forty years
foregoing, Antiq. Brit. A.D. 1532.
no less a sum than 160000 l. was carried to Rome upon the sole account of
Investiture of Bishops, besides the vast sums that were raised by Peter Pence,
Dispensations and Indulgences, which were a kind of Contribution upon the sins
of the People. Thus we see, how the design was laid and managed for an
Universal Monarchy in the Church. But some will say, that the world is grown
wiser now. I heartily wish it were so; for nothing would be more prejudicial to
the Papal Interest, than its being so. But let us not deceive our selves, the
pretensions are as high and as great at Rome to this Monarchy as ever they
were. And what ever some vainly distinguish of the Court and Church of Rome in
this matter, it is certain those of the Court of Rome not only assert, but
prove it too, that this doctrine has been the doctrine of the Roman Church for
six hundred years; and they produce for it besides a great number of Authors no
fewer than ten Councils, whereof two are allowed by them to be general, viz.
those of Lions and Lateran. But this is not all, but they contend for it not as
a probable opinion, but as a thing certain and of faith, and that not barely at
Rome, but even in France. For in the memory of many yet alive, after a hot
debate in a general Assembly of the three Estates at Paris, A.D. 1615.
the Popes Power of deposing Princes was assented to by all the Nobility and
Clergy of that Kingdom. Some particular persons among them, may and do oppose
it of late; but they are excommunicated at Rome for doing it; and thereby
declared as much as they can be, not to be members of their Church, for daring
to oppose so Orthodox and Catholic a Doctrine as the Popes power of deposing
Princes. Harangue faite de la part de la Chamber Ecclesiastique en celle du
tiers Estat. sur l'article du Serment. Par Monsig. l'Eminentiss. Cardinal du
Perron L'An. 1615.
Nay, Cardinal Perron says in his eloquent Oration to the third Estate at
Paris, who opposed this Doctrine, That unless it were approved, it followed
that the Church of Rome for many Ages has been the Kingdom of Antichrist, and
Synagogue of Satan: and King James tells us, K. James Defense of the Right of
Kings, in the Preface.
That the Pope in his Letter of thanks to the Nobility, for complying with this
blessed Doctrine, called the Commons or Deputies of the third Estate, Nebulones
ex faece plebis, a pack of Knaves of the very dregs of the People. Very
obliging language from the Head of the Church! When all that the Commons
desired, was only to have this Opinion condemned, That the Pope has power to
depose Princes, and that killing of Kings is an act Meritorious to the purchase
of the Crown of Martyrdom: but this by all their instances and arguments, they
could never obtain; but the Nobility and Clergy overruled them in it. For the
Clergy King James says, He did not wonder so much, because they look on
themselves as properly Subjects to the Pope, and therefore are bound to advance
that Monarchy to which they belong. But for the Nobility, says he, the Kings
right arm, to prostitute, and set as it were to sale, the Dignity of their
King, as if the arm should give a thrust unto the head; I say, for the Nobility
to hold and maintain even in Parliament their King is liable to deposition by
any foreign Power or Potentate, may it not pass for one of the strangest
Miracles, and rarest Wonders of the World? For that once granted, this
consequence is good and necessary; that in case the King once lawfully deposed,
shall stand upon the defensive, and hold out for his right, he may then be
lawfully murdered. Which consequence is very well understood at Rome, and
allowed to be good by the Roman Casuists; and yet the eloquent Cardinal calls
that Doctrine which makes Princes indeposable by the Pope, A breeder of
Schisms, a gate that makes way for all Heresy to enter; and a Doctrine to be
held in such detestation, that rather than he and his fellow Bishops will yield
to the signing thereof, they will be contented like Martyrs to burn at a stake.
Blessed Martyrs the mean while! and fit to be put in the same Calendar with the
Gunpowder Traitors, who suffered, as I shall show presently, on the same
principle; methinks they might have chosen a better Cause to have dyed Martyrs
for. But surely it must be an Article of faith, and a main point of their
Religion, which makes men Martyrs who suffer for it. And such no doubt, it is
accounted among them; when the same Cardinal says, That it leads men not only
to unavoidable Schism, but manifest Heresy to deny it; and that it obliges men
to confess, that the Catholic Church has for many ages perished from the
earth; for he confidently avows it, that all parties in the Catholic Churh
have held it, and the whole French Church till the time of Calvin; that if this
Doctrine be not true, the Pope is so far from being Head of the Church and
Vicar of Christ, that he is a Heretic and Antichrist, and all the parts of
their Church are the Limbs of Antichrist. And if they be so, we cannot help it:
but think we have great reason to secure our selves against the infection of
such pernicious principles both to Christianity and the Civil Government. And
what can be more opposite to the design of Christianity, when that requires men
to obey even Infidel and Heathen Governors for conscience sake, Romans 13.5.
this Doctrine makes it lawful to depose, destroy, and murder Christian Princes
for the Pope and the Churches sake? This is the first thing we are to examine
false Teachers by; viz. the design of their Doctrines.

2. By the means made use of to accomplish this design: If things in themselves
evil, repugnant to the principles of humane nature, and those of civil
societies, as well as to the precepts of Christianity, are made lawful only for
the carrying on their design, we need not go farther to examine them; for by
these fruits we may know them. There are three things which mainly uphold Civil
Societies, Truth, Obedience, and a care of the good of others; but if men fall
not through any sudden infirmity or surprise, but openly and avowedly justify
the lawfulness of falsehood, treason and cruelty, when they are intended for the
carrying on their design; what could they invent more contrary to the Laws both
of God and man? where in could they better discover themselves, notwithstanding
their Sheeps clothing, to be mere ravening Wolves?

1. Falsehood, and that both in their words and dealings. 1. In their words, by
asserting the lawfulness of aequivocation and mental reservation in their most
solemn Answers: as Father Garnett, when the Lords asked him, Whether he had any
conference with Hall? Proceed. against the Trait.
denied it upon his Soul, and reiterated it with such horrible execrations as
wounded their hearts that heard him, and immediately upon Hall 's confessing
it, he excused himself by the benefit of aequivocation: which being objected
against Garnett after his Execution, the Roman Jesuit Eudaemon Johannes
defends him in it, Eudaem. Ioh.
and says it is lawful for a man to swear, Resp. ad Ep. Is. Casaub. c. 8. p.
171.
and take the Sacrament upon it, when he knows in his conscience, what he says
to be absolutely false, if he does not help himself by a mental reservation.
And Tresham a little before his death in the Tower subscribed it with his own
hand, Proceed. against the Trait.
That he had not seen Garnett in sixteen years before, when it was evidently
proved, and Garnett confessed they had been together but the Summer before; and
all that Garnett had to say for him was, that he supposed he meant to
aequivocate. Lord! that men going into another world, should think thus grossly
to impose upon God and men. What was speech intended for, if not that others
might understand our meaning by it? Did ever any man tell a lie to himself?
Truth in words consists in an entire proposition, and not of one half-spoken
and half-concealed? and if it be lawful thus to abuse mankind, it was to no
purpose ever to forbid lying; for any but mere fools may help themselves in
their most solemn protestations, by some secret reserve in their own minds: and
so this principle makes way for all the lies or perjuries in the world, if a
man thinks that he is not bound to betray himself, or if he judges his own
damage will be greater by discovering the truth, than the others damage will be
by concealing it. 2. Falsehood in dealings: and that notwithstanding the most
solemn Promises, nay, the Safe-conducts of Princes. For notwithstanding all
their shifts and evasions in this matter, no man that regards his safety, will
ever put his life into their hands for the sake of the Council of Constance.
All that they have to say is, that The Emperor did as much as lay in him to
do; but it belonged to the Council to proceed upon Heretics, and the Emperor
could not hinder that. And what is this, but plainly to say, that Princes are
to keep their words with Infidels and Catholics, but they have nothing to do
to keep their words with Heretics? And if this be their principle, we must
have a care how far we trust them.

2. Treason. It is the honor of our Church of England, that it asserts the
Rights of Princes so clearly and fully, without tricks and reservations; and
all that mean honestly, love to speak plainly. But how many cases have they in
the Church of Rome, wherein men are acquitted from their duty from their
Princes? If a Toy comes into the Popes head, or upon some Pique or jealousy,
he falls to the censures of the Church, and excommunicates a Prince: what a
case is this poor Prince in as to all those Subjects that think themselves
bound to obey the Pope? They may lawfully in their own opinion rise against
him, fight with him, assassinate and murder him. And which is very observable,
all this while they are not bound to believe the Pope infallible in these
censures; so that right or wrong, if a Prince chance to fall under the Popes
censures, we see what a liberty is left to all his creatures to ruin and
destroy their Sovereign? The frequent attempts upon Q. Elizabeth, the murder of
Henry the Third of France after their excommunications by Pius the Fifth, and
Sixtus the Fifth, are sufficient evidences of the danger of Princes in these
cases. By which last instance, we see it is not only the case of Heresy, which
renders them obnoxious to the Popes censures; but particular piques and
quarrels; or if the Pope chance to think a man unfit to govern, as in the case
of Chilperic of France; or if they detain Church-land, belonging to
Monasteries, in which case Becanus says expressly, Becan. cont. Angl. p. 127.
Kings and Princes are to be excommunicated and deprived: and Pope Paul the
Fourth was perfectly of his opinion; and declared, They were in a state of
damnation that held them But so far some of them, are kind to Princes to say,
History of the Council of Trent, l. 5. n. 392.
That they ought not to be deposed, till they are excommunicated; and yet
Gregory the seventh before excommunication deprived the Emperor Henry the
Fourth for the damnable Heresy, of defending his own Rights. But since they
are liable to these horrible censures upon so many causes, we may see how very
ticklish and uncertain the doctrine of Obedience must be among them, and that
men's being guilty of Treason depends upon the Popes pleasure. And methinks,
herein the case of Princes deserves hugely to be pittyed, that when no man
thinks it lawful to cut another man's throat, or put him out of his house and
estate, because he is excommunicated; yet if a Prince falls under
excommunication, he loses presently his right to the Crown, and his Subjects
may take away Crown, liberty, and life from him.

3. Cruelty. And by this they fully discover themselves to be ravening wolves:
when they have lost all the tenderness, and love, and good nature of men or
Christians: when no design can be so horrible or bloody, so mischievous and
treacherous, so base and cruel, but persons will be found to undertake it, and
that under a pretense of Conscience and Religion. I need not here tell the long
and dreadful stories of the Roman Inquisition, the numbers of those in other
Countries who have been butchered on the account of Religion, but the Fact, I
mean the Conspiracy, (for God be thanked it went not farther) which we bless
God for the discovery and defeating of this day, does abundantly manifest the
fruits of those doctrines, which they had sucked in from the Roman Church. If
only a few desperate persons upon personal provocations had been engaged in so
villainous a design, we should have had never the less reason to thank God for
our deliverance; but since it does appear, that those persons who undertook it,
pretended nothing in it but conscience and Religion, we have not only reason to
abhor the undertaking, but the principles which animated them to it.

I know very well what Sheeps clothing has been of late cast over the most
barbarous cruelty of these ravening wolves; and men by their impudence would
endeavor to bear us down, Apology for Papists. Reply to the Answer, p. 203.
that it was only a project of some few malcontents, drawn in by the subtilty
of a crafty Statesman in those days; and that it ought not in justice or
honor to be imputed to the principles of their Religion. Advocate for Liberty
of Conscience, p. 218.
Therefore to lay open before you the just and true circumstances of this
horrible Conspiracy, I shall proceed upon these three particulars.

1. That the persons engaged in it had no personal provocations to move them to
it. 2. That all the motives they had to it were from the principles of their
Religion. 3. That the Church of Rome has never since detested the principles
upon which they acted; or set any mark of infamy on the Actors in it.
1. That the persons engaged in it had no personal provocations. What injury
had Catesby, or Percy, or Tresham, or Digby received from the King or
Parliament, to stir them up above thousands of others to be the great managers
of so hellish a Plot? Did not they enjoy their estates and places, and one of
them at Court too? Why should these men venture lives, estates, honors,
families, and all that was dear to them? Were their estates confiscated before;
and themselves every hour in danger of having their throats cut? This might
make men of high spirits grow desperate. But not the least tittle of all this
was pretended, by the most enraged of them: nothing but Zeal for Religion and
the Catholic Cause, was ever pleaded by them. To which purpose these are
remarkable words of King James in his Speech in Parliament upon the discovery.
K. James's Works, p. 501.
For if these Conspirators, says he, had only been bankrupt persons, or
discontented upon occasion of any disgraces done them, this might have seemed
to have been but a work of revenge. But for my own part, as I scarcely ever
knew any of them, so cannot they allege so much as a pretended cause of grief,
and the wretch himself in hands does confess, that there was no cause moving
him or them, but Merely and Only Religion. And the King himself again avowed it
to the whole Christian world, K. James's Works, p. 253.
That the Papists had not before this horrible design, the least color of any
discontent from him: that he had so far suspended penalties, and abated the
rigorous execution of Laws against them, to such a degree, as gave great
suspicion to his best Subjects, who told him what would be the fruit of all his
kindness to them. Nay, he says, they grew to that height of pride in
confidence of his Mildness, as they did directly expect, and assuredly promise
to themselves Liberty of Conscience, and equality with his other Subjects in
all things: that he had shown particular Favors to many of them, gave them
free access to him, eased them of their payments, set their Priests at liberty,
granted a general Pardon to them after conviction. Now after all this, what
color or pretense in the world can there be to say, that only discontent and
despair brought these men to it? O, but it might however be the cunning of a
great Minister of State, to draw a few Gentlemen and others into such a Plot.
This I know is suggested and believed by some, who think it a fine thing to
talk out of the common road, and to be thought more skilful in Mysteries of
State than other men. But I would fain understand from whence they derive this
profound intelligence at such a distance of years. If King James may be
believed, if the Popish Historians and Apologists at that time may be credited,
there was not the least intimation given, either by the Actors or Sufferers,
from abroad or at home of any such thing. Was not the world sufficiently
alarmed at the news of this dangerous and unparalled Conspiracy? Were not men
very inquisitive into all the particulars? and those of the Church of Rome,
especially the Jesuits concerned in point of honor to wipe off the stain from
themselves, and to cast the odium of it on a great Minister of State? Were not
two of the Jesuits who were conscious of the Plot, preferred afterward at
Rome? and how many Writings came from thence about it? and yet not one man
discovered the least suspicion of any such thing. If they go on in this way
without the least shadow of proof to lay the contrivance of this Plot on a
professed Protestant: for all that I know, by the next age, they may hope to
persuade men, that it was a Plot of Protestants to blow up a Popish King and
Parliament.

2. That they had all their Motives and encouragements from the principles of
their Religion to undertake such a design. (And Philostratus contends, that the
murder of Domitian ought rather to be attributed to the doctrines of
Apollonius, L. 7. Vit. Apol.
than to the hands of Stephanus and Parthenius.) For which we are to consider,
that they were fully possessed with this as a principle of their Religion, That
it was absolutely in the Popes power to deprive heretical Princes of their
dominions: which had been rooted in them, especially after that Pius the Fifth
had fully declared it in his Bull against Queen Elizabeth. In her case they
made no scruple to destroy her if they could, and thought they should do it
with a good conscience. And there are no Villains in the world like those who
are Villains out of conscience. But as to the Queens Successor, the Pope had
declared nothing; till such time as Garnett being Provincial of the Jesuits,
had received two Briev's from Rome, Widdringt. append. ad Supplicat. p. 133.
wherein he declared, That in case they should suspect the Queens Successor
would not be true to their Religion, it was lawful for them to use their
endeavors to keep him from the Crown. These Briev's Garnett shows to Catesby,
Proceeding against the Traitors. Garnett's Trial.
who took the rise of his design from hence. And when afterward in conference
Garnett desired him to know the Popes opinion in it, he replied, That he needed
not ask that, for if it were lawful to exclude him before he came to the Crown,
it was lawful to take him away when he was in possession of it. Which argument
was so strong, that Garnett either had no mind, or was not able to answer it.
All the scruple Catesby had after this was, whether it were lawful to destroy
the innocent and guilty together: which Garnett fully resolved him in, so it
were for the greater good of the Church. Upon these two grounds as Widdrington,
a Roman Catholic well observes, Catesby laid the Foundation of his whole
conspiracy. After this, it is evident by manifest proofs, and Garnetts own
confession under his hand, that he and other Jesuits did understand the
particulars of the Plot; and Tesmond another Jesuit and he discoursed the
circumstances walking together in Moor-Fields; and that not in confession, as
is pretended, for the Jesuit did not confess it as a fault, but advised with
him about particulars, and asked him, who should be Protector of the Kingdom
after the Plot took effect? as Garnett himself confessed. But suppose it had
been in confession; why might not Treason be discovered as well as Heresy? and
their Casuists acknowledge, that Heresy may be revealed. There is only this
difference, that Treason is only against Secular Princes, but Heresy against
the interest of their Church; which is dearer to them than all the Princes
lives in the World. Yea, so busy were the Jesuits in encouraging this Plot,
that they not only debated it among themselves; but one of them gave them the
Sacrament upon the Oath of Secrecy, and then absolved them after the discovery;
another prayed for good success, another comforted them after it was discovered
by the examples of good designs that had wanted success. And must we after all
this believe, that only a few discontented Laics were engaged in it, and that
it was nothing at all to their Church? when the Jesuits gave all the
encouragement to them in it, in point of conscience: so that it was truly, as
well as wittily said of one, That the Jesuits double garment might well be
called Charity, because it covered a multitude of sins.

3. But if the Church of Rome give no encouragement to such actions; why has
it not detested the principles upon which it was grounded? Why has it not
removed all suspicion in the minds of Princes and People of giving any
countenance to such treasonable designs? But on the contrary, the same
doctrines are still avowed, and the persons of the Conspirators honored.
Widdrington says, Widdrington. Appen. p. 150.
that Garnetts name was inserted into the English Martyrology, though he gave
it under his hand, that he dyed for Treason, That his bones were kept for
Relics, and his Image set over Altars, as of a holy Martyr? Is this the
honor of Regicides and Traitors in the Roman Church? When in the late
prosperous Rebellion, the prevailing Faction had proceeded to such a height of
Wickedness, as to take away the life of our Gracious Sovereign, how did the
Church and Nation groan and grow impatient till they could vindicate the honor
of our Religion and Country! not only by an execution of Justice on the
persons of the Regicides, but by declaring in Parliament against the principles
that led to it. What has there been done like this in the Court or Church of
Rome, against the principles or actors of this Gunpowder-Treason? If it had
succeeded, by all that we can see, Paul the Fifth might have admired the
providence of God in it, as much as Sixtus the Fifth did in the murder of Henry
the Third of France: and we may guess his mind shrewdly by the Bulls he
published against the Oath of Allegiance, which the King was forced for his own
security to impose on the Papists after this Conspiracy. With what scorn and
contempt does Bellarmine treat the King in his Writings against him, and tells
him in plain terms, if he would be secure, he must give liberty to their
Religion? It seems then, their principles are dangerous to Princes where they
have it not. What mark of dishonor was there set by their own part on any one
of the Conspirators? Two of the Jesuits upon their arrival at Rome, met with
such hard usage, that one was made the Popes Poenitentiary, the other a
Confessor in S. Peter's at Rome. And is not this the way to let the world see,
how detestable such persons and practices are to their Church? To conclude all,
I challenge those of the Roman Church to produce any one solemn Declaration of
that Church, (I do not say of Secular Powers or some particular persons, or
Councils rejected at Rome) whereby they make it unlawful for the Pope to depose
Princes, or to absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance to them. But
instead of that, even in this present age of ours, that opinion which makes it
unlawful, has been condemned at Rome by three several Popes, Paul the Fifth,
Innocent the Tenth, and Alexander the Seventh: and which is more considerable,
all three have condemned it with a particular respect to the case of His
Majesty's Subjects; and not merely condemned it as a false opinion, but as
wicked and contrary to faith. And is not the world grown wiser now, as to these
matters? But if they be not, I hope we may be. And after their frequent
Treasons and horrible Conspiracies, and principles, never disowned by their
Church, have we not reason to entertain in suspicion of them, as to their
principles of Civil Government, till they give sufficient security, that these
pernicious principles have no influence upon them*

But blessed be that God, that has hitherto defeated the malicious purposes of
the inveterate enemies of our Church and Religion: that has brought to light
these works of darkness; and yet continued us in the enjoyment of the benefits
of this mighty deliverance to this day. May the same Gracious God go on still
to protect our established Religion, against all Foreign Usurpations and
Domestic Factions. May our love to it still increase, and our zeal for its
preservation make us study the best means to preserve it; that neither
Divisions among our selves, nor Assaults of our common enemies may be ever able
to ruin and destroy it; that we may still say with the Psalmist, Blessed be
the Lord, Psalm. 124.6, 7, 8.
who has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. Our soul is escaped as
a Bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the smare is broken and we are escaped.
Our help is in the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth.

FINIS.

