A Paraphrasticall EXPLICATION Of the twelve Minor PROPHETS.

Viz. Hoseah. Joel. Amos. Obadiah. Jonah. Micah. Nahum. Habakkuk. Zephaniah.
Haggai. Zechariah. Malachi.

By Da. Stokes. D. D.

JAMES 5. 10.

Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, for an example of suffering adversity, and
of long Patience --

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Davies, at the Sign of the Bible over against the
little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1659.

TO THE Right Honorable Lady, The Lady ANNE HILDEYERDE,
MADAM,
SInce your Honor made me happily acquainted with most of your Relations,
specially with those of your truly-religious, and well-ordered Family; though I
often joyed to see such variety of rare endowments in one Noble Lady, yet
(amongst them all) I could not but with more admiration observe, how as well
your many devout discourses, as your pious Actions (the apparent steps, by
which you climb to Heaven) were constantly maintained by many Recesses, and
Retirements for private Reading and Meditation; and how your greatest pains,
and delight was more freely spent upon the Holy Scriptures. This made me
gratefully, and willingly ambitious, to present your Honor with some book,
that should endeavor to facilitate some part of your study in the Bible. By
which means I might both give a public Testimony of my thankful
acknowledgments to your Honor, and some other of my Noble Friends: and withal
take an occasion to discharge a part of my Function, by inciting others, to
follow such an eminent example; while I give a just approbation of your love to
learned Piety in all kinds, and particularly of your frequent reading of Gods
holy word, which is best able to make you wise unto salvation. To which study
therefore we have many earnest exhortations, as well in the Old, and New
Testament, as in the writings of the most devout, and Reverend Fathers of the
Christian Church.

And good reason. For the word of God is the food of our souls. Therefore it
should be the very joy of our hearts, and sweeter in our mouths then honey, and
the honie-comb. So it was to the heart, and palate of him, that was a man after
Gods own heart. Who, in the front of his Divine Songs, and Hymns, sings the
blessedness of Him, that exercises himself in it, Day, and Night. As he did,
so we have all just cause to admire, and congratulate him, that is feasted
every day, with such spiritual food, and, while he is so, cannot but learn the
surest way to repose his soul, every night (after such Angelical repast) upon
that pillow that passes all understanding. I mean that Peace of God, that can
never be so well purchased, as by often feeding on the Word of God, and
concocting, and converting it into such juice, and blood, and such spirit, and
vigor, as may preserve, and cherish us, in all our ways.

Of no less use is the study of the revealed will of God, that we see in his
holy word: therefore revealed, that we should often look into it, says St.
James. And I will not conceal the force of St. James his word ((...)) that we
should pry, and peep, and look narrowly, and carefully into it, that nothing
escape our sight. For there we shall find the means of purchasing that, without
which it will prove, that we have utterly lost our selves.

If I shall need to say more, I will only add this confirmation of what I
said, from holy David his calling it a Lanthorn to his feet and Gods word, Ps.
119. Would we have a Light to conduct us into all necessary Truths? We must
have it there. Would we have an Oracle to inform us infallibly of what we may
trust to, in our greatest hopes, and expectations? We must have it thence. That
Divine Light will never mislead us. And the word of God we may safely rely upon.

Therefore they are wise, that receive it meekly (I speak it in the words of an
Apostle) And a good understanding have all they that do thereafter (says the
Royal Prophet.)

I wish your Honor, and all yours, both those parts of Happiness. Which is no
more, in effect, then to wish the continuance of what you have, and your
perseverance in what you do. So shall you continue a pattern to all those, to
whom this book shall come. Which comes as presented under your name, and so
received as it were from the hands of your Honor. For whom, and for all that
refer to you, and for all the rest of my Noble and Worthy Friends, it is, every
day, my hearty prayer, that you, and they may be preserved to everlasting
Felicity, by the continual blessing and mercy of Almighty God. So prays

Your Honors most obliged, and humble Servant, DAVID STOKES.

The Authors Advertisement to the READER.
I Was the briefer in my Marginal Notes, (which some of my friends have thought
fit to place at the bottom of the Page) because when I resolved to send this
Paraphrasticall Exposition to the Press, I resolved also to present another
Noble Friend of mine, with another work (in the Scholar's Language) out of
which, the grounds, and reasons of my proceeding in this way of Paraphrase
might have been easily understood. And indeed that book was chiefly intended,
as a Prolegomenon to this, and the like Essays; to show, before hand, some
Grammatical and Critical Observations (Hebrew and Greek) which I have met with
in the course of my studies: and to make the truth of them appear, by variety
of sufficient proofs, and examples out of the Holy Text. So should I have eased
my self of giving a particular reason of these, and the like Expositions, in a
tedious, and troublesome way. But that (being of a greater bulk, and proving a
more chargeable attempt) I am forced to give over, till I am better enabled to
impart it to others, by the help of the Printer. In the mean time, I am
persuaded to publish this brief Exposition of the hardest, and knottiest piece
of the Hebrew Text. This of the Minor Prophets (as they are usually styled) may
well be called so; their intricate Prophetical passages, being clothed with
many unusual, and difficult words, and phrases, and proverbs, and Hebrew-forms
of speech, that require a careful, wary, observant, and pious Reader. Of all
other parts of holy writ, such Prophesies have need of Readers so qualified:
and, every time they come to them (that they may pierce into such mysteries
with profit) prepared with humble and hearty prayers, or short ejaculations to
Almighty God (whose word it is) that he would enlighten our understandings by
his Holy Spirit (who spoke by the Prophets.) So prepared, while we read in
these books of so many things, so fully prophesied, and foretold before, with
intermixture of diverse excellent, and holy precepts, we shall plainly perceive
(what we have most need of in these wicked days) both the proofs of a Deity,
foreknowing, ordering, governing and disposing all things, in several Ages,
with infinite Power, Wisdom, Mercy, and Justice: and also plenty of Divine
Directions, and Counsails, that much conduce to the true knowledge of the way
of our Salvation.

To make such ancient, and useful, and holy Writers speak plain English, I
thought it needful, not only to advise with the Latin and Greek Fathers, and
other Interpreters, Expositors, and Critics that have gone before us: and to
acquaint my self with the Story of those times, to which they chiefly refer:
but, besides that, to labor to understand that Idiome, and Dialect, which the
Holy Ghost pleased to make use of, as best understood, and affected by them, to
whom those writings were first intended. And from whom they cannot be so
profitably conveyed to us, if we study not the style, and garb of that
Original Language: their little stock of ambiguous words: their concise
elleiptical Sentences: and other short, and emphatical expressions. All which
appearing to us somewhat strange, and unusual, must be carefully and discretely
examined, before they can be fitted to the right sense, and mind of the place
of Scripture. And, as well as these, we must both ponder, and labor to
express their intelligent, and convincing ways of proposing and Rhetorically
enlarging what they would say by strange Allegories, and Hyperboles; by bold,
and unusual Metaphors (that no other Nation has ventured upon) by delightful
Prosopopoeias, and Paronomasies (wherein they are more rich, and copious, and
happy, then any other Tongues) By their Dialogismes, and Colloquies) not in
the Psalms, and Canticles only, but in several other places) that the Reader
shall now and then suddenly fall upon, without any plain item given, for
distinction of the persons, that are the Interlocutors. By their frequent
Transposition of letters and words. By sudden Apostrophes, and Mutation of
Persons, and Numbers (when a man would least expect it.)

To which I may add their many other schemes, and ornaments, that are set down
in a kind of Poetical liberty. Such as we may evidently see, Isai. 14. 9. etc.
in the description of the Tyrant of Babylon's entertainment, after his death,
afforded him by those of his Military Profession, that had gone before him to
their long home. Such another we find in Ezekiel, (c. 32. 21. etc.) in the like
gratulation, that other Men of the sword gave to the great King of Egypt, in
his descent to the same place. No man would understand these literally, or, as
a Paraphrast, or Interpreter, propose them downright in that way.

If we desire more examples in these Figurative Relations, after a Divine
Poetical way, we may see them, in the Royal Prophets Description of Almighty
Gods sudden approach in great Majesty, as riding upon a Cherub, or upon the
wings of the wind. Psalm. 18. 7, 8. etc. This the Evangelical Prophet follows,
in his swift cloud, ( Isa. 19. 1.) More may appear in the Prophet Habakkuks
questions, about the manner of Gods coming out of Egypt, toward the Holy Land.
(chap. 3. 8, 9. etc.) And the Prophets Isai, Jeremy, Joel, and Haggai's
deliverie of the overthrow, and desolation of Nations, ( Isai. 34. 4, 5. Ierem.
4. 23. etc. and v. 28. Joel. 3. 15. Haggai 2. 21, 22. After whom, St. John goes
the same way. Apoc. 6. 12, 13.

We have yet more in Job's manner of teaching us Gods providence, and
protection over his servants. Job 1. 6. etc. which is paralleld. 3. Reg. 22.
19. Dan. 7. 9. and elsewhere. And what I said of Job puts me in mind of his
description of Leviathan (chap. 41. 9, 10.) and Salomons eloquent Periphrasis
of old age. Eccles. 12. To which we may add the Copy, that the holy Psalmist
first set, to what we observed before out of Habakkuk, which we find Ps. 77.17.
etc. and 114. 1.2. etc.

They that meet with such divine Rhetorical or Poetical places, cannot well
paraphrase them to the Reader, in another language, unless they take some
liberty from that holy Rhetoric, and Poetry, which they have before their
eyes in such a Description, or such a place of the Original Copy. In imitation
of which, many learned Authors, in several languages, have excellently
expressed many places of holy writ.

When we meet with such high Pathetical streins in sacro Codice, we should
reverently receive and deliver them, as the issue of divine Prophetical
Raptures. And while I, in some places, endeavor to do so, I hope, I shall be
so interpreted by all good Christian intelligent Readers. Who, though they love
a Translator, that will keep close to the footsteps of his Author: yet they
will expect, that a Paraphrast should enlarge himself according to the true
scope, and sense of the place, and follow the meaning of the Text closer then
the words. For instance, when (in some of the forecited places of Scripture) I
read of the Sun, and Moon darkened: the falling of the Stars: the turning of
the earth into the old Chaos, etc. If I am a Paraphrast, to an indifferent
intelligent Reader, it will be enough (without particular mention of the Sun,
Moon, Stars, or Chaos) to express the disgrace and downfall of the principal
Governors, and chief men of that place, and the confusion, and disorder of the
common people. For that is the meaning of it. And these figurative speeches,
among the Jews, were so easily interpreted, out of the usual terms of the
Oriental countries, that when Joseph had dreamed "that the Sun, and Moon, and
eleven Stars, did reverence to him, his Father could presently of himself,
paraphrase upon the dream, and tell the meaning of it, For what is this dream?
says he, Shall I, and thy Mother, and thy Brethren come indeed, and fall on
the ground before thee? This was so readily said by the good Patriarch, because
they were the chief of his family, and so as eminent in his house, as the Sun,
Moon, and Stars in the Firmament.

Many are the instances that I could give in the like kind, if I would venture
to be tedious. But I have delivered the Sum, and Substance of what I chiefly
desired to say. Which, with the whole work, I humbly, and willingly submit to
the judgment of the more judicious and learned Readers: specially to those
that understand the Hebrew tongue, and the difficulty of many Hebrew Texts,
which is very great. For, though all those things, that tend directly to our
eternal happiness, are plainly, and fully set down in sacra pagina, yet some
passages of holy Scripture there are, that cannot easily be fathomed. Which
made a skilful Divine, and Reverend Father of the Church say, that some sacred
texts are so shallow, that a lamb might pass over them without danger: and yet
some so deep, that the greatest Elephants (the wisest Clerks) would be troubled
at them. St. Gregory's expression is like it, that some go down easily, like
drink: other, like meat, must be broken, and cut, and chewed, before we can
make them fit nourishment. Those places Divines (above all other men) must be
desirous to apprehend as fully as they may.

I say [ as they may] because, I think, some of those places will pose the
subtillest, ablest, and most practiced, and constant readers of the holy Bible.
In which, est aliquid prodire tenus. To this purpose, the Jews have a saying,
that we cannot have a full satisfactorie resolution of all doubts, and queries,
till Elias come. We must therefore be content, to follow him that said, (...) (
i. to be Scholars, and learners all our life long, and as willing to be
informed by others, as to inform them.) He is well, that knows much: but no
man living shall ever truly (...); that he needs no help, or direction ^^om
another, while that of Solomon (in his Eccles. ^. 3. 11.) holds true, as it
ever will, which I conceave to be there spoken to this purpose, that God has
given the hearts of men a whole world of matter, for meditation: so large, so
copious, that no man can ever fully go through with it, and find it out.

Such variety of matter affording new work of speculation for us, sometimes in
plain, and easy: and sometime (to sharpen our appetite: and increase our
industry) in harder, and more intricate ways, and terms: may move us
willingly to join the help of others to our own labor, and impart our helps to
them. So, out of that plenty, and variety of matter, our prayers, and good
thoughts may have a continual, and profitable supply. Thence we may every day,
select something, to prepossesse that room in the heart, which otherwise vain
phancies (and perhaps worse then vain phancies) may incroach upon.

And if our meditations rise out of that plenty of matter, which the holy
Scriptures do best and most furnish us withal: thence we have our Armoury, to
strengthen us in our saddest combats with our ghostly enemies. And thence we
have better then the balm of Gilead for curing the wounds, and diseases of the
soul. There we have a kind of conversation with God himself, and the sight of
his blessed will, and pleasure, in as clear a way and full measure, as is most
expedient for us. In the most necessary things, we shall find it most
apparently true. For, though the Scriptures may be hid to them that wilfully
perish (to such as come to them with the spirit of Pride, or with prejudice, or
faction, or contradiction, or sinister respects.) Yet, if we come otherwise,
with pure, and faithful, and thirsty souls, we need not doubt, but we shall
find God in that, which is his way, wherein he usually comes to us all.

And God, of his infinite mercy, grant, that we may, all, so find him, to our
everlasting comfort.

A PREFACE To the ensuing Paraphrastical Exposition; BY THE Most Worthy and
Learned Mr. JOHN PEARSON, Minister of St. Clements Eastcheape.
IF the Eunuch in the Acts, having a Prophet in his hand, and being asked this
question, Understandest thou what thou read? could give no better answer
than that, How can I, except some man should guide me? If this were the best
account which could there be given where the Original Language was familiarly
understood; What need of an Interpreter must they have, who, far distant both
in time and place, can read the Prophets in no other than their
mother-language, and that most different from the tongue in which those holy
Authors wrote? As therefore the Generality of Christians could not read the
Scriptures at all, except they were first translated; so when they are, many
parts of them cannot yet be understood until they be interpreted. And, as of
all the holy writers the Prophets are confessedly most obscure; so amongst them
the smallest must necessarily be most intricate: brevity always causing some
obscurity.

Now, though there be many Commentators which have copiously written on the
Prophets: Yet we shall not find that light which might be expected from them;
because some have undertaken to expound those Oracles, being themselves either
altogether ignorant of their language, or very little versed in it. Others
enlarge themselves by way of doctrines or commonplace, which may belong as
well to any Authors as to those to which they are applied. Wherefore if any man
has really a desire to understand the Scriptures, I commend unto him those
Interpreters, whose Expositions are Literal, searching and declaring the
proprieties of the speech of the Author, and the scope and aim which he that
wrote had in the writing of it.

Of these Literal Interpreters, useful to all Readers, those are most
advantageous to the unlearned, who contrive their Expositions by way of
Paraphase, and so make the Author speak his own sense plainly, and
perspicuously; which is the greatest life that can be given unto any writing
originally obscure. For if the Interpreter truly understand the mind of the
Author, then without any trouble or circumlocution it becomes the same thing as
if the Writer had clearly at first expressed himself. And therefore
proportionably to our opinion of the knowledge of the Paraphrast, we may rely
upon the understanding of the Author.

Thus in these smaller Prophets acknowledged by all, especially by such as know
most, to be obscure, that Interpreter which shall be able to deliver their
mind, and contrive the same as if it proceeded immediately from themselves,
must necessarily be confessed the best Expositour. And no man can be able to
perform this but he which is exactly knowing of all the idioms of the Hebrew
tongue, and familiarly acquainted with, and constantly versed in the Prophets
themselves, and the writings of the Jews.

Now such a person as this is, has taken the pains to benefit the Church of
God with a paraphrase of this nature. The Reverend and Learned Dr. Stokes, who
has from the happy beginning of his studies been known most industriously to
have prosecuted that of the Oriental Languages, and has for more then forty
years constantly made Remarques upon the Hebrew Text, from which he has raised
unto himself a body of Critical Observations ready and most fit for public
view. Amongst many advantages accruing especially to the understanding of the
Scriptures, he has made choice to publish this Paraphrase of the small
Prophets: a work of more real, then seeming, value. Which I cannot sufficiently
commend to the Reader, neither in respect of it self (it is of so great use and
benefit) nor in reference to his other works, which we may hope to see
according to the entertainment given to this. And that (Christian Reader) he
desires may be found correspondent to the desert thereof; Who is the Authors

Most affectionate Friend, but in this more thine, JOHN PEARSON
.
Errata.
Page 50. ver. 3. d. [for] lege Therefore will l. p. 51. v. 5. lege in the
chief seat. p. 94. v. 1 r. fallen from him. v. 2. r. desire to offer. p. 124.
v. 28. r. illiterate. p. 151. l^^. r shall run. p. 60 v. 11. r. to their
posterity. p. 170. v. 11. r. of them N. p. 171. v. 15. r. Archer. p 179. v. 18.
r. houses. p. 187. v: 9 r. proceeded. p. 198. v. 11. r. their family p. 238. l.
1. r. his ^ervants. p. 276. v. 10. r. Iunah. p. 297. r. those that were. p.
298. v. 9. r. the wives p. 346. v. 14. r. of any longer. p. 361. v 15. before
increase dele l. p 400 v. 6. r. sore troubled p. 413. l. 2. r. may be p. 463.
v. 1. and 466 v. 7. r. Darius Notbus, as it is truly printed r. 439. (where the
note in cal^e paginae, gives a reason of it) and 442. l. 1. p. 490. v. 9. r. if
by his care. p. 531. v. 8. r. Angels. p. 546. l 2, r. So these.

Errata in the Notes in calce paginae.
Page 18. l. totum pop. Isr. 45. l. in H^ph. (...) incipe. incipere. 79 for
subest. l. subesse. 345. l. attondebantur. 490 for (...). 588 l. omni cibo.
598. l. futurum pro Imperativo.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF HOSEA.
CHAP. I.
1, THe word of the Lord that came unto Hosea the son of Beeri, in the days of
Uzzia. Jotham, Ahas, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah, and ^n the days of Jeroboam
the son of Joash King of Israel.

2. The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea; and the Lord said to Hosea,
Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms, and children of whoredoms: for the land
has committed great whordom, departing from the Lord.

3. So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, which conceived and bare
him a son.

4. And the Lord said unto him, Call his name Jezreel: for yet a little while,
and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause
to cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel.

5. And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel
in the valley of Jezreel.

6. And she conceived again, and bare a daughter, and God said unto him, Call
her name Lo-ruhamah: for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel:
but I will utterly take them away.

7. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the
Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by
horses, nor by horsemen.

8. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived and bare a son.

9. Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi: for ye are not my people, and I will
not be your God.

10. Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea,
which cannot be measured nor numbered, and it shall come to pass that in the
place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said
unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.

11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered
together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the
land: for great shall be the day of Jezreel.

CHAP. I.
1. THe word of the Lord, which was (made known) to Hosea, the son of Beeri in
the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah; and in the
days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, King of Israel.

2. When first it pleased God, to deliver his word by Hosea: this it was which
he said to that Prophet, Quid hic inimicum fidei Christianae, si m^retrix,
relicta fornicatione in caslam conjujem commutet^? (ut Aug. contra Faustum
Manichaeu^a disputaus.)
Go and take to thy self a woman, that has lived long in whoredom: and take
her children too, that have been born to her, in that time. The fittest type of
the children of Israel, that have lived long in spiritual whoredoms against
their Lord Jehovah.

3. And accordingly the Prophet went, and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim,
(which, in the very (...) deficiens (...) du^e massae ficuum aridarum. Jer. 24.
1.
names, signifies the deficiencie of that people; and that the two Houses of
Judah, and Israel, were like two baskets of dry figs: in which there were but
very few worth the keeping.) This Gomer conceived, and bare a son to the
Prophet.

4. The Prophet also had a command from the Lord, to call the name of his son,
Jezreel, (which (...)
name referred both to Iezreel, the prime City in Israel: and to their glorious
title of the (...)
children of God: which title God would shake, by disseminating, and (...)
disseminare.
scattering them in foreign Nations, where those undeserved titles should
serve them in little stead.) And this, intimated in that name, was to begin
with a fore-running punshiment, which the Prophet had command to express in
these, or the like terms, That as a revenge of the innocent blood, shed by Iehu
4 Reg. 10. Vide R. Kimchi and Lyranum.
in Iezreel, God would shortly send his visitations upon the house of Jehu, by
such a way, as should not be much unlike that bloody slaughter, that Jehu had
made in Jezreel, upon the house of Ahab. And that one effect of these heavy
visitations should be this, That the kingdom of the house of Israel, should
cease to be any longer, in the house of Iehu, (that Kingdom being thence
translated to Sallum, of another stock from Zacharias, whom he succeeded.)

5. And this was further added, concerning that time, That God would then break
the strength of Israel, by those civil Sic Jonathan ^ Kimchicitatus.
wars, that should most appear in the valley of Jezreel.

6. After this, Gomer conceaved again, and bare a daughter, which by the like
divine command, had the name of Lo-ruchamah. A name, that carried in it (...)
non consecuta misericordiam.
the sad doom, concerning the house of Israel, which God would be so far from
sheltring any longer, under his merciful protection, that he would utterly
remove them out of that good land.

7. While, in the mean time, he would graciously defend the house of Judah, in
such a way, as should visibly appear to be the miraculous work of the Lord
their God: no strength in the arm of man, nor any Art, or Instruments of war
being ever able to atchieve so great, and sudden a deliverie, as they should
have, from the mighty Host of Senacherib, the King of Assyria.

8. Now, after Gomer had weaned Lo-ruchamah, she conceived a third time, and
bare a son.

9. And God commanded the Prophet, to give that son the name of Lo-ammi. Which
name implied, that they (...) non populus meus.
should be no longer his people, to enjoy any further happiness under his
service: they should rather be the unhappy people and slaves of the Assyrian.
And God would no longer make his provident protection, to speak him their God,
as he had done.

10. Yet should it come to pass, that when the children of Israel had
increased into multitudes, like the sand of the sea, which is capable of no
number, then (...).
instead of their name Lo-ammi (wherein God disclaimed many of them from being
so much as his people) they should have the high title of Which answers (...)
in the best sense. vide V. 4.
the sons of the living God.

11. And then should the children of Judah, and the children of Israel (so much
divided before) make one Congregation, under one head, and Governor, (which
was to be accomplished by Zerobabel, in the letter; and by Christ, in the
mystery) For, then should begin the great day of Jezreel, that is, of the Vide
V. 4.
seed of God, or the sons of the living God, as they were styled V. 10.
before, (whether we understand it of the religious Jews, both of Judah, and
Israel, that (...)
returned out of the captivity: or of the devout Christians after them, that
are the true holy seed, and the true Israel of God, and were delivered from a
greater bondage.)

CHAP. II.
1. SAy ye unto your brethren, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ru-hamah:

2. Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her
adulteries from between her breasts;

3 Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born, and
make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with
th^^st.

4. And I will not have mercy upon her children, for they be the children of
whoredoms.

5. For their mother has played the harlot, she that conceived them has done
shamefully; for she said, I will go after my lovers, that give me my bread and
my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink.

6. Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall that
she shall not find her paths.

7. And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them, and
she shall seek them, but shall not find them: then shall she say, I will go and
return to my first husband, for then was it better with me then now.

8 For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal.

9 Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my
wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool, and my flax, given to
cover her nakedness.

10. And now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and none
shall deliver her out of mine hand.

11. I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast-daies, her new Moons,
and her Sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.

12. And I will destroy her vines, and her fig trees, whereof she has said,
These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make them a
forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.

13. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burnt incense
to them, and she decked herself with her earrings, and her jewels, and she
went after her lovers, and forgot me, says the Lord.

14. Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness,
and speak comfortably unto her.

15.. And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor
for a door of hope, and she shall sing there as in the days of her youth, and
as in the day, when she came up out of the land of Egypt.

16. And it shall be at that day, says the Lord, that thou shall call me Ishi,
and shall call me no more Baali:

17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall
no more be remembered by their name.

18. And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the
field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground: and I will break the bow and the sword, and the battle out of the
earth, and will make them to lie down safely.

19. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me
in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies.

20. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the
Lord.

21. And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, says the Lord, I
will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth,

22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Jezreel.

23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon her
that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people.
Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God.

CHAP. II.
1. YOu that are of the ten tribes, say to your brethren (those of the tribe of
Judah, and Benjamin) (...) populus meus.
Ammi, for, now I acknowledge them for my people. And say to your Sisters (of
those two tribes) Ruchamah. For my mercy shall watch over them.

2. And when you have acknowledged their happiness, then every one of you may
think of a quarrel, a just quarrel you have to your own Mother, ( i. to all the
ten tribes) For, she has not behaved her self, like my Spouse: Nor shall I
answer her with the love of a Husband, (...) miseri cordia consecuta. Hio
potius claudendum primum caput, cum Hieron.
unless she make way for reconciliation of her self, by a clean removal of her
filthy pollutions, and of her doting foolish demeanor, in the idle love,
showed to those imaginary dieties, that deserve it not.

3. Which she had best to remove, least (by way of requital of her making her
self gay for those, her best beloved) I strip her stark, naked, and expose her
as bare as ever she was born, to the injury of the weather, in some open
wilderness, or dry land, where I may take that advantage to kill her with
very thirst.

4. When this severitie falls upon the Mother, (the whole nation) the
particular children have no reason to expect any mercy, being no better then
children of an adulterous bed, and most foul Idolatry.

5. For, their Mother has played the harlot: she that conceived them has
brought shame upon her self, and them: the rather because she has not sticked
to profess it openly, that she would follow the example of her Paramours, (the
Assyrian, and Egyptian idolaters) that give her, forsooth, a constant supply
of her bread, and her water, and her wool, and her flax, and her oil, and her
drink, and what not? (for, all this she ascribes to their acquaintance, and to
the bounty of their gods.)

6. Therefore, says the Lord, The time shall come, when she shall brag of none
of these courtesies received from them. The time, when her way thither shall be
hedged in, as with thorns, and in every corner, so fenced about, that there
will be no evasion from the Assyrian slaverie, to which she shall be led along,
in bonds, and triumph.

7. When her quondam-lovers have brought her to those hard embraces, she will
then strive to court them, and woo them, but shall be able to work nothing
upon their affections. And finding, by sad experience, that she seeks in vain
for what will not be found; she will then fall (if not too late) upon this sad
resolution. I will now go, and return to my right Husband. He was the (...)
implies both.
first, and he was the (...) implies both.
best. And I have since tasted of no such happiness, as I ever was sure of, in
the fruition of his favor.

8. This she will then say. But she should sooner have taken notice, that I was
the true Author of what she called her corn and wine, and oil. And it was I,
that gave her that rich plenty of silver, and gold, (...) pro (...)
which she thought fitter to bestow in the service of Baal, then in mine.

9. For that unseasonable abuse of what I gave her, I will come to her again,
Sic Ab. Ezra.
with an army of enemies raised up against her, and by them I will take away
the corn, and the wine, which I had given her, in the right season of them. And
when she thinks she is in a fair way of enjoying my wool and my slax (which she
would not acknowledge to come from my bounty) (...)
I will snatch them both so suddenly, and so far out of her reach, that she
shall not have enough, so much as to cover her nakedness.

10. So shall I give way to the discovery of her Nam nudatio pudendorum
stultitia est, inquit A. Ezra.
folly, and shame, in the open view of them, that she most shamefully doted
upon, in the time of her plenty. And neither they, nor any other shall then be
able to deliver her out of my hands.

11. There shall I put an end to all her jollity, to all her festival days,
and new Moons, and Sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts; because she looked more
to her outward worship in them, then to her inward sanctity.

12. And then also her vines and her fig trees shall vanish in a general
desolation: which she never dreamed of, when she was wont to boast of them, as
of presents bestowed upon her, or made surer for her use, by the benefit of her
union with those her unfortunate Lovers. But I that could not be acknowledged
for the true founder of that her happiness, and the only means to preserve
it: will now show that I was so, by turning those pleasant vineyards, and other
so profitable delights into a rude forest: and when they are so taken from
their unthankful mouths, the very beasts of the field shall eat them up (or
their rude destructive enemies, that may be described by a parable of wild
beasts.)

13. Such will I make my sad visitation of those merry days, wherein she
honored her Baals, instead of her own Husband; burned her incense to them, and
for their sakes, like a proud strumpet, tricked her self up in her gaudie
ornaments her earrings, and her jewels. In which garb, she footed it after
those her dearest dieties: and thought little of what I deserved, or what I
could bring upon her for all this, says the Lord.

14. For this good behavior of hers, This seems to be ironically spoken to the
ten Tribes:
shall not I use her kindly? conduct her fairly into some solitary
wilderness, in a loving posture? and (in that privacie) accost her in some
amorous language, to the solace of her good heart? yes I warrant you.

I will lead her thence to her kind Assyrian Leg. (...) vinitores, ut Hieron.
Adulterers, that shall prune her vines to the purpose. She shall have her fine
valley of pleasure turned into a valley of Achor (a dismal place.) And there
will I first open (...) institutio puerorum quasi per lineas, a (...)
the way to her new instruction, wherein she shall learn a new lesson, that she
never learned before. And (because she has formerlie been so musicallie
merry, in their sweet company) Let her there learn to sing her meriments over
again, if she can, and try if her voice will be framed, to as merry a tune,
as ever she warbled out in her younger days, and equal her merry sits, that
she had after her safe deliverie out of Egypt.

16. But alas, in that sad time, her mouth will not relish those sweet, and
merry ditties: nor will she have any mind to her old language of Baal. Though
it signify a Husband, yet (because it is the name of her Idol too) I can tell
her, she will then be so wary, as rather to use the terms of (...) vir mi
(...) int Baal. (...) festivitatis gratia addi videtur (ut alibi saepe) quasi
diceres, Call me him Husband, not Baal.
Ishi, then Baali, in the ordinary salutations of a Husband.

17. For, I will teach her mouth to leave her wonted names of Baalim. They
shall have small comfort in the use of that name hereafter, which so much
abused it heretofore.

18. After the amendment, which shall attend this alteration, I will make a
league, and covenant in their behalf, and such as shall tend to their good. It
shall be a covenant with the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air,
and the creeping things of the earth. And then (for a covenant with men too) I
will put as clear an end to their former wars, and dissentions, as if, in their
sight, I should break the bow, and the sword, and all the instruments of
battle. And they shall quietly take their rest, without any fear of danger.

19. I will add this too, by way of a kind Apostrophe to my people. If thou will keep thy faith with me, for the time to come, though thou have gone a
whoring after other gods, yet will I espouse thee to my self again for ever.
And that espousal shall be made by my Nam (...) saepe pro bonitate.
goodness, and by Sic (...) saepe sumitur.
moderation of my judgments, and that in loving kindness, and in much mercy.

20. And it shall be faithfully done, with full resolution of keeping all
promises, on my behalf: and, by that, thou shall know me to be Jehovah, ( i.
that he, to whom thou art espoused, is the powerful God, that ever does reallie
make good, what he has said, which is the chief notion, and reason of the name
of Jehovah.)

V. 21, and 22. Then shall there be as much plenty of corn, and wine, and oil,
and all necessaries, as can be desired by my people Israel, which shall now
have the name of (...)
Jezreel, as being i. (...) Chap. 1. 4. 11.
a holy seed, and a Mother Church. And no blessing that can come from heaven,
or earth, shall be dutifullie asked, in her behalf, but it shall be as readily
granted.

23. And I will (...) alludit iterum ad nomen Jezreel.
disseminate and disperse her far abroad in the earth, with happy enlargement
like seed, that is cast about with expectation of a large increase) And as I
will therein make good the best notion of Iezreel, so, in great mercy, I will
change the names of Chap. 1. 6, 9.
Loruchamah, and Loammi into Ruchamah, and Ammi. For, she shall taste of my
mercy, and be my people, and resume the privilege of calling me her God.

CHAP. III.
1. THen said the Lord unto me, Go yet, love a woman (beloved of her friend,
yet an adulteress) according to the love of the Lord toward the children of
Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of wine.

2. So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an Homer of
barley, and an half Homer of barley.

3. And I said unto her, Thou shall abide for me many days, thou shall not
play the harlot, and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for
thee.

4. For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and
without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an
Ephod, and without a Teraphim.

5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God,
and David their kings; and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter
days.

CHAP. III.
AFter this, it pleased God to enjoin me once again to Dilectionem conjugalem
intelligit.
love a woman, that had been dearly affected by her dearest friend, her
husband: and yet had been false to him in no less a fault than whoredom. And
this was another typical expression, how great love God had showed to the
children of Israel: who most ungratefully neglecting him, cast their affection
upon strange gods for love of those stagons of wine, (which being offered to
such false Gods, were then tasted with pleasure, by their Idolaters.

2. Conformable to this divine command (the custom of the Jews being to
purchase their wives with money, or money-worth) I procured such a wife, at the
set price of fifteen pieces of silver, and a Homer, and a half of barley.

3. And I agreed with her, that she should live a good while, as a widow,
forsaking the love of all others, reserving her self all that while for me: as
I would reserve my self for her.

4. For, this was also a type of the Intellige retum populum Israeliticum: tam
Iud. quam Isra proprie dict.
children of Israel, that should expect my wonted favorable protection for
many days abiding in the mean while, s. in captivit. Pab. and sunt qui haec
exponunt (in hoc and seq. verse.) de Iudaeis, in fine mund^ ad Christi fidem
convertendis: post longum tempus exactum sine sacrificio, and altari.
without a King (of their own nation) and a peculiar Prince of their own.

Nay it was a figure of more than so: that they should not only want their
former way of Polity, and Government of the commonwealth: but the wonted
liberty also of those Ecclesiastical rites, and customs, which they had used
before in their sacrifices, non in Iudatanium, sed in Israel proprie dict.
erant Columnae, Ephod, Teraphim, in imitationem eorum, que in Templo Hierosol.
habebantur: ne dissimilis cliltus Sacerdotium Iudae redderet augustius.
and pillars, and Ephod, and Teraphim, (in all which they took themselves to
make sufficient expression of their love, and service unto me.)

5. After which time expired, the children, of Israel should return by
repentance, and seek for a reconciliation with their God, whom they had so much
offended, and apply themselves to Zorobabel of the line of David, whom they
should account as their King, and then should they live in the fear of the
Lord, and acknowledge his great goodness, and mercy toward them, in the latter
days.

CHAP. IIII.
1. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.

2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood.

3. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, yea, the
fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.

4. Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another; for this people are as they
that strive with the Priest.

5. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet shall also fall with
thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.

6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have rejected
knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me: seeing
thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.

7. As they were increased so they sinned against me: therefore will I change
their glory into shame.

8. They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their
iniquity.

9. And there shall be like people, like Priest: and I will punish them for
their ways, and reward them their doings.

10. For they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit whoredom, and
shall not increase, because they have left off to take heed to the Lord.

11. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart.

12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declares unto
them: for the spirit of whoredoms has caused them to err, and they have gone
a whoring from under their God.

13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the
hills under oaks, and poplars, and elmes, because the shadow thereof is good:
therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your Spouses shall commit
adultery.

14. I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your
Spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with wh^res,
and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people that does not understand,
shall fall.

15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not
ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, The Lord lives.

16. For Israel slideth back, as a backsliding heifer: now the Lord will feed
them as a lamb in a large place.

17. Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone.

18. Their drink is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her rulers
with shame do love, Give ye.

19. The wind has bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because
of their sacrifices.

CHAP. IIII.
1. IN the latter days it will be so. But will you hear, what is to be said
for the present. Hear the word of the Lord, ye Children of Israel: for, the
Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land: because there is
none of that truth and mercy, and knowledge of God, in the land, which they
pretend to, and so no true Acts of Piety.

2. But rather by swearing falsely, and as falsely (...)
denying that which is committed to their trust, by murder, and theft, and
adultery, they have ut vasa nimium impleta, id enim (...)
violently, and impudently broke through all good laws. And therefore, by way
of punishment, they shall be suffered, so long to go on in the current of
those disorders, till among the greatest of them, that should have kept the
people within their bounds, one (...) soepe pro caede
murder shall break out after another, and and pro peccatis, sanguinis
effusionesi. e. morte dignis.
other sins of a high nature, that deserve death, and effusion of blood, come
on so thick, and frequent, that you may say, they are one contiguous to another.

3. Whereupon (though they would not mourn for this increase of sin, yet) the
earth it self, seeming to put on her Sic prata ridere dicuntur, ^n summa rerum
copia: hic lugere in sterili a^e aut vastatione.
mourning-weeds (for the destruction of her fruit) shall be as an introduction
to their own sorrow, for the just increase of their calamities, which shall
come so hot and thick upon them, (those especially by Tiglath-peleser, and
Salmenasser) that the inbabitants of the land shall (...) labe-fieri,
infirmari, cum (...) ad auxesen geminat.
faint under that grief, and perplexity, which must then be suffered. For,
amongst other miseries, such an universal want shall there be of food, and
nourishment: and (by the effusion of much blood) such a corruption of the air,
and waters, that (together with those distressed inhabitants) the very beasts
of the field, and the fowls of the air, and the fishes of their ponds near
the sea shall, many of them, be taken away, in that common calamity.

4. In all this, (...) certe ut Psalm. 5 8. ult. and Job. 18. ult. sic Mercerus,
hic certe nemo ausit, i. e. reprehendi se non patientur. Deuteronomy, 17, 12.
certainly it will be to little purpose for any man to admonish another; whose
sins have contributed much to this public misery. Therefore he were as good
let it alone. For, this thy people are most of them past cure, like those
spoken of in the Law, that will neither hearken to (...) utrumque significat,
Regem and Sacerdotem.
Prince, nor Priest, unless it be to give them as good as they bring, when
they are reproved, or corrected for their faults.

Therefore it shall (...) vel (...) quasi hodie ut (...) c: 7. 2.
not be long, before I lay thee low enough, for this height of stubborness, and
rebellion. And the false Prophet, that has deceived thee, shall bear thee
company in that punishment, which shall suddenly come upon you, like a
misfortune, that comes in the al^udit ad subito, and nocte captain Hieros l. 2.
Paral. ult.
night, (when men neither look for it, nor know how to prevent it.) And thy
Mother (thy whole nation) will I then out off from this place (by the hand of
the Assyrian)

6. And yet indeed, it is not I that so cut them off, but their own folly, and
impiety. For I must tell thee plainly (oh Israel, and thou especially,
whosoever thou art, that art a Priest in Israel) thou have made no regard of
the knowledge of me, and my laws; therefore will I have as little regard of
thee, or thy service, or those Priests of thine, (whose lips should have
preserved that knowledge) Thou have forgotten the custody of the law of thy
God, which should have been most dear unto thee. Therefore will I, in the very
successions of the Priesthood, forget the care of thy children, which are
dearer in thine eye, than any thing else.

7. They have given me cause enough to say so. For, (...) hic and amplitudinem,
and dignitatem significat, ut patet ex se^uent.
as they increased in number, and dignity, so did they increase in sin,
(which was no better, than turning their glory into shame) Therefore I will
requite them in the same way, and make that now to be their shame, which they
value as the greatest glory, that can happen to them. (So that they shall be
ashamed to think of that honor of the Priesthood, that once they had.) Miserum
est fuisse.

8. For they that were in that honor, forgot themselves, and instead of
reproving the sins of the people, they rather fed themselves upon the increase
of those sins: having thence such plenty of their sinne-offerings, and
oblations, that helped to furnish out their table, as they Deuteronomy. 4. 15. (...)
elevare animum ad aliquid, est d^siderare.
heartily wished to have it, by what means soever.

9. Therefore, as they were alike guilty of sin: the Priest and the people: so
shall a punishment answerable to their sin, fall upon them both alike, when in
my just visitation of their wicked ways, I shall return them the fruit of
their own works.

10. Then they (that fed so lustily, and highly before, at their full tables)
shall find so little to feed on, that they will not be able to fill themselves
with the coursest fare. And when their enemies, in the siege of Samaria, have
brought such a famine upon this adulterous generation: their adulterous seed
shall not be so strong, and numerous, as to beat them away. And all this will
come upon them, because they forlook that, which might have kept them close
unto the Lord.

11. But, how could they keep close to him, or to his precepts, when they
su^^ered their dear whoredom, and their sweet wine to steal away their hearts.

12. It is not for nothing, that I made special mention of their whoredoms,
and spiritual fornications. For, my people, (unworthy of that name) proceeded
so far in them as to fetch their intelligence from their poor (...)
wooden Oracles, and out of (...)
little sticks (after the Chaldie device of making lots) they took their new
way of information. Thus the spirit of whoredoms, or rather their spiritual
whoredoms, and the example of those Idolaters, that they conversed withal, led
them into gross errors, while they wandered from their own God, to go a
w^oring after other gods.

13. When (directly against their own law) they made choice of the tops of
mountains, wherein to sacrifice, and offer incense: or else they did it under
oaks and poplars, and elmes, for the welcome benefit of the shade. Therefore
will I punish one kind of whoredom with another, the spiritual with the
carnal: and suffer your wives and daughters to be guilty of whoredom against
your selves, as you have been against me, oh Israel!

14. Nor will I take present punishment upon your wives and daughters for such
offenses, but wink at them, as if I saw not, how they go on in the practice of
those sins. Because you that are Fathers, and Husbands showed them the way by
your own example in your many diversions, and private walks into shady groves,
with no better company than harlots to partake of your idolatrous sacrifice.
And into these sins and these punishments may that people easily fall, that
will not hold to the knowledge of the true God.

15. But, though you of the ten tribes will run far into the guilt of spiritual
and carnal whoredom: yet let the house of Judah and Benjamin take heed of
following so bad an example. Do not you of those two tribes undertake any walks
or pilgrimages to Galgala, or Bethel. That of Bethel indeed has a specious
name as if it were the house of God: but whatsoever it has been, it is now
rather a (...) domus peccati potius a Prophetis dicitur, ob idololatriam, quam
Be^hel, i. e, Domus Dei.
Beth-aven i.e. a house of Vanity or of an Idol, which is no better than
Vanity. Learn not you to go thither, nor (as they do there) to swear by their
calves under the name of Jehovah, whom they think they may worship in such
images, and representations. In that sense to swear [ as the Lord liveth] will
be such an oath, as he will not like.

16. As for thee, oh Israel, that would be dealing with such cattle (with
calves instead of a Dietie) the time is coming on, when (to requite thy many
walks to them) thy self alludit ad vitulum in Beth-aven, sed Iarki: A Ezra and
Kimchi sumunt (...) in notione rebellandi, ut dicatur hic similis bovi
saginato, adeoque refractario.
shall wander about like a silly calf. And thou shall be Ironice dictum
videtur, etsi Kimchi sic vertat. Ni defecissent pavisset eos Dominus in
affluentia.
fed where thou may have room enough indeed; as much as sheep delight to
have, that would ever be feeding in large meadows, though to the hazard of
loosing themselves. So shall your lot fall into spacious places. (But it shall
be in the Assyrians grounds, and there will be little comfort of your feeding
at large, in that place.)

17. This is the punishment of Ephraim, that bears the name of the ten tribes
and is so violently addicted to Idols, and so incurably sick of that malady,
that it is in vain to persuade him any more against it. Therefore let him alone
oh Judah, leave him to his own ways.

18, Such a drink offering as they pour out to their Gods, has lost his best
savor, and is not worth the drinking: because it tastes strong of idolatry,
the worst kind of whoredoms. Though (...) proceres and clypei hebr.
their great ones come merrily to it, and they that should be like bucklers to
keep the people off, do rather love to say, (...) nam Propheta in (...) Idola
subintelligit: quae, eadem de causa, alibi ettam similia habent nomina.
Bring hither our Idols. They were as good have said, Bring hither our shame.

19. Therefore shall Ephraim be as swiftly ventus ligavit eam ad ducendum in
exilium, ut Kimchi Patrem suum dicit exposuisse, Ipse autem Kimchi hoc modo
exponit. Vt qui ligat ventum in alis suis, unde nihil boni provenit, sic qui
sacrificarunt vitulis, nihil praeter confusionem, lucrantur.
carried away into a remote nation (of the Assyrian) as if he had been taken up
upon the wings of the wind. And then with shame shall they think of those
sacrifices that have purchased so sad a reward for them, in that dismal place.

CHAP. V.
1. Hear ye this, O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel, and give ye ear, O
house of the King: for judgment is toward you, because ye have been a snare
on M^zpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.

2. And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a
rebuker of them all.

3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou
committest whoredom, and Israel is defiled.

4. They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God: for the spirit of
whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord.

5 And the pride of Israel does testify to his face: therefore shall Israel
and Ephraim fall in their iniquity: Judah also shall fall with them.

6. They shall go with their flocks, and with their berds to seek the Lord: but
they shall not find him, he has withdrawn himself from them.

7. They have dealt treacherously against the Lord: for they have begotten
strange children, now shall a month devour them with their portions.

8. Blow ye the cornet in Gibea, and the trumpet in Ramah; cry aloud at
Bethaven, after thee, O Benjamin.

9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel
have I made known that which shall surely be.

10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore I
will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment: because he willingly walked
after the commandment.

12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth: and to the house of Judah as
rottenness.

13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound: then went Ephraim
to the Assyrian, and sent to king Iareb; yet could he not heal you, nor cure
you of your wound.

14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of
Judah: I, even I, will tear and go away: I will take away, and none shall
rescue him.

15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense,
and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.

CHAP. V.
1. YOu that call your selves Priests in Israel, and pass under that name
among your Countriemen, I have somewhat more for you to hear. And it will
concern all you of the house of Israel, to listen to it: and you specially of
King Menahem's Court. For there is a (...) paena (secundum judicium rectum
(immine^) vobis.
just punishment ready to fall upon you, because you have been a snare to the
house of Judah, who, by your example, have been as easily seduced, as birds
are taken in nets, and gins, about the woody Mountains of Mizpah, and Tabor:
which are famous for that art of fowling, and ensnaring of those creatures.

2. And no wonder, if others were misled by their example: for, these (...)
Apostates declining from the true ways of my service, (...) pro fundarunt
mactare (ut Kimchi) i. were deeply engaged for that sin, ut (...) sit verb.
Infin. modo ut alibi (...) and sic Targum.
went profoundly to work in their butchering (for no better term deserve their
so much sacrificing to idols.) But I will (...) ego correctionem pro illis
pa^o, ut recte Jonathan.
find a way of correction, that shall meet with them all, in a slaughter of
men, not of beasts.

3. I know these, and other faults in those of the ten tribes, nor can any of
their offenses be concealed from me. I observe how Ephraim goes still forward
in his spiritual fornication, and all Israel is defiled after their example.

4. They will not frame their actions toward a way of conversion unto their
God. For, the spirit of that kind of whordom is in the midst of them, and
they have no mind to know the Lord.

5. Which proud, and obstinate demeanor of Israel does testify to their
faces, what they are. Therefore their own iniquity shall ruin those ten
tribes, (under the Assyrian) And Judah shall, not long after, fall into the
like misery (under the Egyptians and Caldaeans.)

6. Then shall they think to make their atonement, by bringing their stocks,
and their herds to be offered in sacrifice unto the Lord. Sic u. ul^.
But, that way of seeking their peace with God, will not then prove the way to
find it. They will rather find, that he has (...)
withdrawn himself from them, and will by no means admit of those former ways
of access.

7. And so he might well do, because of their unlawful access to women of
other Nations, whom they were commanded not to marry, which was a great offense
against God, and a means to furnish them with strange children, that he will
not own. Now therefore will he suffer soldiers of a strange nation (...) pro
utroque exponi potest, and pro menstrua pensione, and pro brevi tempore, quod
Mercero magis placet.
in a short time by their monethlie payments and exactions, to devour them, and
that substance, which he had allotted, and laid out, as a peculiar portion to
themselves.

8. Nor will I longer defer the calling of that army, says the Lord. Come on,
Reg. 15. 19. Hos. 8. 10.
and let your trumpets and cornets give notice of your near approach. Let the
sound of them be heard in Gibeah, and Ramah (within the portion of Benjamin,
and not many miles from the City of Jerusalem) Let them shout aloud at i.
Bethel.
Bethaven, and that pincheth close upon thy back, O Benjamin. So near is that
place unto thee.

9. And if this fall upon Judah. How will Ephraim be laid desolate in the day
of his correction? (under the army of Salmanasser) when I shall show my (...)
constantiam meam.
constant resolution of accomplishing all that, which I had foretold to be
coming upon Israel.

10. Nor, while they are so punished in Israel, may the Princes of Judah think
to escape. For, many of them have often passed those bounds, that I set them.
Therefore I will pour my anger upon them, like water (that will be kept in no
bounds, and ever breaks out violently, and in great abundance.)

11. And while I resolve of Judah's punishment, I forget not the faults of
Ephraim, and Israel: specially how the people there have been crushed and
oppressed by the power of their great ones, and the iniquity of their Courts
of Justice. Sic and Mercero hunc locum suppleri posse videtur:
My justice suffering that punishment to fall upon them, because they had a
readier inclination to walk after the edicts and dictates of men, then after
that which I justly commanded.

12. Therefore as the moth eats and consumes the garment, and rottenness the
flesh: so will I for these offenses cause both Ephraim and Judah to be
consumed, and eaten out of their own homes. And neither their own, nor other
Princes shall be able to relieve them.

13. They may remember the time, when Ephraim perceiving his sickness, and
Judah feeling his wound, that troubled him: 2 Reg. 15. 20. and 16. 6,
Ephraim applied himself to the Assyrian, (sending presents to Pull) and Paral.
28. 16.
Judah made his addresses to Tiglathpelezer, that he would be his good King
(...) Ca. 10. 6.
Jareb, i. his Protector, and (...) Ca. 10. 6.
avenger of his cause. But, all this while, he, that was so wooed, and humbly
sent to, could not heal the disease, that they were sick of: nor cure those
wounds, that put them to their pain and trouble.

14. For, to what end is it to seek favor, and succor of men, says the Lord,
when I resolve in my revenge, to be as a Panther suddenly to rush upon Ephraim,
and as a Lion violently to fall upon the house of Judah? When (...) geminatio
ad auxesin.
I my felf prove like these fierce creatures that first come abroad to tear in
pieces, and then return again into their dens to dispose of their prey: who
shall then be able to rescue that, which I have so taken away?

15. But I will retire my self from these sons of men, into heaven, my proper
place: (...) donec se re^s peragant. Id enim (...) signif. ut Levit. 4. 13.
till by repentance they acknowledge their guilt, and seek after my love and
favor, which I know they will do (...)
with all speed, and diligence, when the smart of their affliction has wrought
the right cure upon them.

CHAP. VI.
1. COme, and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heael
us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

2. After two days will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up,
and we shall live in his sight.

3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is
prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain; as the latter
and former rain unto the earth.

4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee?
for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.

5. Therefore have I hewed them by the Prophets: I have slain them by the words
of my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.

6. For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more the^
burnt offerings.

7. But, they like men, have transgressed the Covenant: there they have dealt
treacherously against me.

8. Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood.

9. And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder
in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness.

10. I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel: there is the
whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.

11. Also, O Judah, he has set an harvest for thee, when I returned the
captivity of my people.

CHAP. VI.
1. ANd when they so resolve to seek me by repentance, (as I said they would do
in that affliction) they may do it, in these words, which I shall now set down
to their hands. Come let us seek a remedy of all our troubles, by returning
unto the Lord. For no raging Lions could have thus torn and distressed us, but
by his permission: and nothing but his mercy can find a way to relieve us. It
is he that gave strength to the hand, which has smitten, and wounded us, and
none but his hand can bind up our wounds, and apply that unto them, which is
their certain cure.

2. Indeed our case is rather like theirs, that are killed outright, then only
wounded: and the day of our Countries calamities may be counted the day of her
death, and a ceasing quite to be, what she was before. Yet such is the power of
our God, that if he suffer us to lie two days in the grave of this misery he
can make the third day, the joyful day of our resurrection to our former state,
and livelihood: and so the figure of a greater day, that he shall comfort us,
and all his servants withal, in his due time: so this quickening and reviving us
out of our misery here, shall be as a pledge, and assurance, that one day we
shall come to live for ever in his sight, and hear no more of his diversions,
and retirements from his chosen people.

3. And if we will use our best endeavors, and press on more, and more toward
the knowledge and service of God, we shall soon know, that the morning of that
happy day begins to dawn. For his ready help shall appear like the joyful
morning, that speaks the approach of a clear day. Or like the welcome rain:
(...) and (...)
the latter and the former rain, that prophecy a merry day unto the Earth.
Psalm. 114. 4.
When the Montains shall skip, like Rams, and the little hills like young
sheep. Psalm. 65, ult.
And the valleys shall stand so thick with corn, that they shall laugh and sing.

4. Now when they have used this form of access to me, then will I answer them
in this manner. Alas! what good can I do to you of Ephraim, or to you of Judah?
while you continue in that wicked state wherein you are, and frame not your
selves to live well, but only by fits, and starts. For there is no more
assurance of your Sic (...) soepe significat.
goodness then there is of the morning-cloud, or the early dew, that vanish
away, as soon as the Sun begins to look upon them. (Thus you make not up your
day, and how can you hope for mine?)

5. That is the reason of the sad days, wherein I wounded you with those
judgments, that I sent my Prophets to foretell: and as good as killed you with
threats out of my holy word, and the mouth of my messengers, that I sent unto
you. In which sad time (as I called them) my Justice in those heavy judgments
that I brought upon you, is as clear as the light of the day, (fully deserved
by you, and yet clearlie foretold by me, that you might seek to avoid them by a
better course of life.)

6. For (...) hic eodem sensu sumi potest, quo v. 4.
goodness, and holiness of life is the sacrifice, with which I am best
appeased: and it is not the number of your burnt-offerings, that I look after,
but the zealous ardour of a good heart, that desires nothing more then to know
me, as I have revealed my self in my holy word.

7. But what care have they taken for this goodness, and this knowledge, that
have violated my Covenant as their old Father Adam did in Paradise? (who was
therefore turned out of that pleasant place: as their punishment is to be
turned out of their pleasant and fruitful land. And good reason: for,) (...)
It was not enough for them to sin there against me: (to sin in Adam) but I
shall instance in their own actual sins, and begin first with them of Gilead.

8. Gilead is a City wholly fraught with (...) ut (...) c. 7. 1.
makers of idols. And their bloody hands are as deep in cruelty too. If you
will follow their footsteps, to find them out, in that sin, you may (...)
traced,.. etc.
trace them all the way by that blood, which they shed in such abundance, that
I was content to appoint more Cities of Refuge beyond Jordan (considering the
space of ground) then there was on this side.

9. And this will hold true, not only of the common people, which usually add
murder to their theft, and robbery: but of their Priests too, that should be
their guides to better courses, and yet do as much harm to the souls of men, as
others do to their bodies or estates. For, there shall you have combinations of
idolatrous priests of Ieroboams new religion, that have their set meetings to
little better purpose, then those famous companies of troopers, and thieves,
that wait for any man, that passes by the high way to Sichem, there to rob, and
slay. For, such (...)
villainy is their work: they have little other, employment.

10. From whence (as an effect of this) I have seen a most horrid thing in
Israel, idolatry spread over the whole ten tribes by Jeroboam of the tribe of
Ephraim: and so all Israel polluted with that spiritual adultery.

11. Nor has Israel only offended. I shall find cause enough to punish thee,
O Judah, by Sennacherib one that shall bring (...) pro angustiis, ut (...)
great sorrow and affliction upon thee: After I have caused my people Israel to
be led captives, (...)
as at first by Tiglathpelezer, so the second time again by Salmanasser. Et
eleganter admodum (...) (afflictio, and miseria) dicitur (...) i. fructus
peccatorum q. d. (...) finis. ejus est miseria. Add quod Messis designat
tempus judicii, vide c. 8. 7.


CHAP. VII.
1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood: and the
thief comes in, and the troup of robbers spoileth without.

2. And they consider not in their hearts: that I remember all their
wickedness: now their own doings have beset them about, they are before my
face.

3. They make the King glad with their wickedness and the Princes with their
lies.

4. They are all adulterers, an oven heated by the baker; who cease from
raising, after he has kneaded the dough, until it be leavened.

5. In the day of our King, the Princes have made him sick with bottles of
wine, he stretched out his hand with scorners.

6. For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they ly in wait,
their baker sleeps all the night, in the morning it burns as a flaming fire.

7 They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their Judges: all their Kings
are fallen, there is none among them that calls unto me.

8 Ephraim, he has mixed himself among the people, Ephraim is a cake not
turned.

9 Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: yea, gray
hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not.

10 And the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not return to
the Lord their God, non seek to him for all this.

11 Ephraim also is like a silly dove, without heart: they call to Egypt, they
go to Assyria.

12 When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, I will bring them down
as the fowls of the heaven: I will chastise them as their Congregation has
heard.

13 Woe unto them, for they have fled from me: destruction unto them, because
they have transgressed against me, though I bave redeemed them, yet they have
spoken lies against me.

14 And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon
their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel against
me.

15 Though I have bound, and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine
mischief against me.

16 They return, but not to the most High: they are like a deceitful bow: their
Princes shall fall by the sword, for the rage of their tongue: this shall be
their derision in the land of Egypt.

CHAP. VII.
1. YOu have heard of their wounds, and sickness in Israel, and their desire
of recovery. Now when I had begun a fair means of cure upon them (by removing
the most idolatrous house of Ahab) a new way of iniquity was discovered in
Ephraim, and Samaria (Jehu 2 Reg. 10.31,
still leaving Jeroboams calves to be a snare to the people) For then fell they
afresh to the making of (...) hic ut (...) c. 6. v.8.
images. Therefore I left them to be punished by whole troops of thieves and
robbers both at home and abroad.

2. Yet will they not think in their hearts, how I remember all their wicked
actions, which will (...) ut (...) c. ^.5.
shortly compass them about (like enemies, that come for their ruin) if they
will not remove them out of my sight.

3. They make a merriment of these faults before Jehu their King, and cozen the
Princes as well as him (with the speculation of their imaginary prosperity in
this course.)

4. In the mean time all these (...)
Idolaters are as hot upon it, as an oven: which was heated by a Baker, that,
when he had kneaded his dough, till it was leavened, took no care to watch, and
attend the oven, (...) a vigilando c^ssavit. Ex. v. 6.
(so that the fire might easily break out, and consume the whole house,
thorough his supine negligence) Such were these in their idolatrous courses,
the more inflamed, and endangered, while their King Jehu connived, and took no
care to repress them,

5. And now the Prophet may say. In the days of this our King Jehu, our
Princes (...)
began (to be as hot upon their idolatry) as if they had been ins^amed with
full bottles of wine. The King, withdrawing his hand and deferring to punish
those wicked and profane contemners of God and Men.

6. For these Princes (under pretense of zeal to the cause) fitted, and
prepared their inflamed hearts for idolatry, like that oven before mentioned:
treacherously deceiving the King by their evil counsels. And the King, all
the while, was like the Baker (in the vide v. 4.
former parable) that slept all night, and either did not, or would not see
what they went about: till at last (...)
the day came, when the King himself was as much inflamed with that false zeal,
as any of them: and I might say; as the very fire, that first set all into such
a flame.

7. Not long after, they were all become as hot as an oven, in this business.
The People, as well as their King, and their Princes, (for, such an example
could not but heat them on) And their stomachs quickly prove so hot upon it,
that they spare not to devour their own Princes, and Governors. 2. Reg. 15. 16.
The time will come, when I shall punish them in the same way, by letting their
Kings fall by the hands of seditious People: because, in all this confusion,
there were few, or none, that would call upon me for appeasing of these
disorders.

8. Therefore shall Ephraim be confusedly dispersed among other Nations, c. 4.
2.
and suddenly too. For he shall be like a cake half baked, devoured up before
both sides be turned, and heated as they should be.

9. Strangers will consume his wealth, before he will know why: and he shall be
ruined before he is aware of it: like those that by their gray hairs are here,
and there fairly admonished of the approach of infirmities, and death: and yet
(...)
will not take any notice of that admonition.

10. And no wonder, if this be the doom of Israel, while their proud, and
obstinate demeanor testifies to their faces, what they are, and they will not,
in humility, return to the Lord, their God, and seek after him, for all this.

11. But Ephraim will still be like a silly dove, that has no understanding,
and (instead of seeking after God) 2. Reg. 15, 59. Hos. 5, 13.
fly about to his vain hopes: sometime to implore the help of Egypt, and
sometime to be reposed under the shelter of Assyria.

12. But, when they have wandered, thorough all the ways of trial, that their
idle fancy can set them upon: I will catch them in a net, that I have ready to
spread over them: and draw them like silly birds, whither I have already
determined. And there I (...) a (...) 2. Reg. 17, 13.
will punish them, according to that which they have often heard from the mouth
of my Prophets, and others, in their several congregations.

13. Nothing but woe can be due to them, for that often wandering away from me:
nothing but desolation, (from those they prefer before my help) can be the doom
of their grievous rebellions, and aversions from me, that have so often
delivered them from the hands of their greatest enemies: though they still
continue to speak falsely and vainly of me (in expressing my glory by their
idols of wood and stone.)

14. To those titular Gods, and not to me do they heartily make their moan,
when their afflicting thoughts make them howl upon their beds. And no
otherwise, in their merry days, when with plenty of bread, and wine, they had
(...) ruminare (ut hic Hieron) vel ingurgitare, vel congregare se ad
comedendum, and bibendum.
ingurgitated themselves like beasts, did they turn away from me, the Author
of that plenty. So that they could never find the way to my service, either
full or fasting.

15. Whether I weakened them by afsliction, or strengthened them by (...)
prosperity, still they held on their mischievous, and idolatrous devices
against me, and against the pure worship of my name.

16. Ever ready to turn away from being under the yoke of my law
(notwithstanding all their pretenses to it) like a deceitful bow, that seems to
aim one way, and strikes another. lege^ (...)
Psalm. 78. 37.
Therefore shall God strike them with a secret arrow, that cannot be
discovered, or prevented. For, their Princes shall fall by the sword, in those
conspiracies which shall take rise from the virulent speeches, and libels
secretly cast out against them (the usual art to feel the pulse of the people)
And this shall expose them to scorn, and contempt among their neighbors of
Egypt (who are more loyal, and faithful to their Princes; then you that
should set them a copy of that obedience.)

CHAP. VIII.
1. SEt the trumpet to thy mouth: he shall come as an Eagle against the house
of the Lord, because they have transgressed my Covenant, and trespassed against
my Law.

2 Israel shall cry unto me, my God, we know thee.

3 Israel has cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall pursue him.

4 They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it
not: of their silver and their gold have they made them idols, that they may be
cut off.

5 Thy calf, O Samaria, has cast thee off, mine anger is kindled against them:
how long will it be ere they attain to innocence?

6 For from Israel was it also, the workman made it, therefore it is not God:
but the calf of Samaria be broken in pieces.

7 For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlewinde: it has no
stalk: the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the strangers shall
swallow it up.

8 Israel is swallowed up, now shall they be among the Gentiles, as a vessel
wherein is no pleasure.

9 For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim has
hired lovers.

10 Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather them, and
they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the King of Princos.

11 Because Ephraim has made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to
sin.

12 I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as
a strange thing.

13 They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it; but
the Lord accepts them not: now will he remember their iniquity, and visit
their sins: they shall return to Egypt.

14 For Israel has forgotten his Maker, and builds Temples; and Judah has
multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall
devour the palaces thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
1. AFter this, God gave a command to Hoseah to this purpose. Lift up thy
voice, against Israel, so loud, that it may be as easily heard, as the sound of
a trumpet out of thy mouth, or the noise which an Eagle makes above the height
of the Temple. So loud do thou proclaim against them for their transgressing of
my covenant, and violating my law, nam (...) est peccatum praesumptionis.
in a high way of presumption. And if that trumpet, and noise of an Eagle
prevail not with them, I will fright them with the trumpets of their enemies,
and with Nebuchadnezar's terrible approach, which shall come as suddenly upon
them, as the flight of an and de hac Aquila nonnulli exponunt verba praced.
Eagle.

2. But they will not hear. Therefore when the time comes, that they shall cry
aloud to me in their affliction, and say, O my God! We of Israel nam hoc (...)
saepe signif.
acknowledge thee only to be the true God.

3. Then will I answer. For all your fair language now, you of Israel, (that
took your name of (...) sonat cum deo pravalentem.
Israel for prevailing with me) have notwithstanding forsaken me your supreme
good, and your best friend. And, in forsaking me, you have bereaved your selves
of all that is good for you. For, therefore will I leave you to an enemy, that
shall never forsake the pursuit of Israel, till he has brought him to utter
ruin.

4. Many Kings and Judges, (before and after Jehu and his posterity) have they
set^over themselves, without any such direct order from me, or so much as
inquiring after my pleasure, (as if my permission were enough to excuse them,
without my command) This was one way, and for a second way of forsaking their
chief good, of their silver and gold have they made them Idols, as if it were
to give me occasion, not only to take away that wealth, which they so abused:
but to cut off such a people from the place, where they have so highly
offended. As I have often threatened that I would do.

5. For, do not think, these Idols can prevent it. No, as thou did cast me
off, so thy calf will cast thee off, O Samaria. That Diety of thy first Kings
invention, and which thou make so much of ( as the chief seat of thy
idolatrous Kings) shall leave thee in the lurch, when thou have most need of a
better help. And, instead of succor from thence, her admirers shall find the
effects of my fierce anger. For, how long shall I expect, 'ere they (...)
utrumque complectitur, ( ut Ps. l. 26. 6.) innocentiam, and mundationem per
poenitantiam.
wash off the guilt of those sins by repentance, and follow after innocence
and purity in the service of the true God?

6. For, this device of the calf is a trick of Isreal's own choice, and
election. They learned it not of any of their idolatrous neighbors. The first
founders of it were their own Fathers in the wilderness. When their posterity
long after had taken it up again, it was made by those Artificers, that their
own Princes set on work. And, when all is done, how far it is from being a God,
you shall see by my breaking of it all to pieces, (while that is able to make
no resistance.) And the hands, that I shall make use of to that purpose, shall
spend those pieces of silver, and gold, as they please, without any respect to
the pretended sacred employment, which, they had before.

7. Then shall men take up a Proverb against them, and say, They have sown the
wind, and reaped the whirlewind: They have busled, and Job. 4, 8.
troubled themselves to their own further vexation, Prove. 22, 8.
rather than any advantage. Romans 6.
For, what true fruit have they of that, whereof they are now ashamed? And the
truth of this they will see in the fruits of the earth, which will as much
deceive their expectation. For, if the stalk come up, it shall have no corn
upon it, or, if it have, that shall not make any good meal: or, if it do,
strangers shall come and eat it up. Little of it shall come into their profane
mouths.

8. And such patet ex sequentibus,
strangers shall devour the men of Israel themselves, as well as their corn,
after a while. And, (for their neglect of my service) the Moabites, and other
foreign nations shall make as little account of them, as they do of a broken,
or tainted vessel, that a man has no mind to make use of, for the meanest
occasion.

9. In this distress, up will Israel get him, to seek help of the Assyrian:
but he will find him slow enough to take Israel's burden upon his own
shoulders, For the Assyrian is like a wild Ass, that feeds alone to himself
(he cares not to fit himself for others employment, but for his own ease, and
profit.) Therefore Ephraims Ezekiel. 16, 33.
bribes may walk to make friends of the Assyrians, (but it will be to little
purpose.)

10. For, Imagine (while they seek not me, their only true God, and their best
help,) that they have some fair hopes from those nations, that are hired with
their money, yet those nations will I muster up against them (chiefly the
Assyrians, whom they reckon in the number of their ablest, and surest friends,)
And then shall they (...) in Hiph. (...) incipere (ut apparet ex daghes in
Lamed) sed cu^m aellusione aliqua ad (...) dolere.
begin to be troubled by little, and little, and oppressed with the heavy
burdens, laid upon them by that King and his Princes.

11. And, since Ephraim has taken pleasure in building many Altars, wherein to
offend God: they shall meet with Altars (in Assyria) that will give no little
offense to them (when, besides their other grievances, they are forced to
convey wood, and water, and sacrifices to that service of the Assyrian)

12. All which they might easily have prevented. For, to that purpose, I gave
them many good and (...) mult^, and magna, atque honoranda signific.
worthy laws in writing, (from the time of Moses) upon which they set no more
value, then upon a thing, that little concerned them, or their felicity.

13. The flesh of those sacrifices, which they offer unto me, (for their own
sweet sakes, that must feast upon it) let them offer it, and let them eat
freely of it, if they will: (For, I little regard either, while they are done
without amendment of life) And, for all them, they shall know, that hoc n. est
(...)
ere-long I will call their sins to remembrance, and punish their offenses.
And this, in particular, that (contrary to their solemn engagement to the
Assyrian) they have entertained a resolution of applying themselves again to
the Egyptians, for an uncertain relief.

14. In which, as in other courses, they forget their God, that made them: and
dream of building more and more (...) delubra.
fair houses to their Gods, from whom they expect deliverance. Wherein also the
kingdom of Judah has not been a little to blame, which (fearing the like
incursions of the Assyrian) built not her hopes upon God, but upon the
multitude-of her new fenced Cities and Palaces, which I shall send a fire to
consume, (by the hand of Sennacherib.)

CHAP. IX.
1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other people: for thou have gone a
whoring from thy God, thou have loved a reward upon every corn floor.

2 The floor and the winepresse shall not feed them, and the new wine shall
fail in her.

3 They shall not dwell in the Lords land: but Ephraim shall return to Egypt,
and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria.

4 They shall not offer wine offerings to the Lord; neither shall they be
pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of
mourners: all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their bread for their
soul shall not come into the house of the Lord.

5 What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the Lord.

6 For lo, they are gone because of destruction: Egypt shall gather them up,
Memphis shall bury them: the pleasant places for their silver, nettles shall
possess them: thorns shall be in their tabernacles.

7 The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel
shall know it; the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the
multitude of thine iniquity and the great hatred.

8 The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the Prophet is a snare of a
sowler in all his ways and hatred in the house of his God.

9 They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah: therefore
he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.

10 I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness: I saw your Fathers as the
first ripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to Baal-Peor, and
separated themselves unto that shame, and their abominations were according as
they loved.

11 As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a bird: from the birth,
and from the womb, and from the conception.

12 Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that there
shall not be a man left: yea woe also to them when I depart from them.

13 Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim shall
bring forth his children to the murderer.

14 Give them, O Lord: what will thou give? give them a miscarrying womb, and
dry breasts.

15 All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them; for the
wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house, I will love
them no more: all their Princes are revolters.

16 Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit: yea,
they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved fruit of their womb.

17 My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him: and they
shall be wanderers among the nations.

CHAP. IX.
1. PLease not thy self too much, O Israel, in thinking thy prosperity as
secure, and permanent, as they of other nations may hope for. Idolatry is not
so great a sin in them, as it is in thee. Thou have gone a whoring from the
true God (to whom thou had plighted thy troth) And thou have done it, in
expectation of a good reward for it, in all thy corn-floors, (wherein thou
hopest to find more plenty, for doing that, which will bring a greater plague
upon thee.)

2. For, the floor and the winepresse shall not be able to maintain the owners
of them, and the new wine shall fail in this land.

3. For, this is the Lords land by a peculiar title. And he will not suffer
them to be long Inhabitants of his land, that have soon forgotten him, that
placed them in so rich, and pleasant a soil, when he brought them out of their
Egyptian bondage. No: they shall many of them trot along to Egypt again (to an
other bondage there) and the rest shall be carried into Assyria, where they
shall be forced to eat of those meats, which their law does account to be
unclean. (So far shall their idols be from supplying of them with that plenty,
which they expected.)

4. For, it is but just, that they (which would not bring their offerings to
God, when they should have done it) should not now be suffered to present him
with their wine-offerings, and usual sacrifices, when they fain would do it.
Or, if they would, and might then offer them, yet would not God be any way
pleased with such a service, in a profane land. They should have no better
acceptance, then those Parentalia, Hieron. Jer. 16. 7.
funeral-feasts, whereof nothing was wont to be presented in the Temple. All
that eat of such presents (how well soever they relish to them) would be thereby
polluted. Therefore sure they may keep the meat of such oblations Sic (...)
saepe sumitur.
for themselves. For, there would be no admittance of it into the house of the
Lord, (if you suppose such a house then standing, and them able to spare
enough, for that use.)

5. And, if your offerings will be so little regarded, what will you then
resolve to do upon your New Mons, and other solemn, and festival days,
wherein you were wont to appear before the Lord? (Your new Masters will hardly
give you leave to make them holy days: or, if they do, and you would not
appear empty before God; Where, and what can you then present unto God, that
shall be accepted, as it has been in your own Country? But, besides all this,
They, that will make your blood a sacrifice to Gods justice, and a Vide Ezekiel.
39. 17, 18, 19.
feast to which God himself will invite such as you would not like. They will
find you out new holy days, that you dream not of? What will you do upon those
solemn, and festival days? wherein they will triumph over your miseries, and
make you weary of them, and the place they live in.

6. Will you now see, what will become of them that escape out of this
then-desolate land of your own (by running from the Assyrians?) Egypt shall
find them a place, wherein to meet, and Memphis shall furnish them with a place
of burial: while, in the mean time, those lovely places, which they had
purchased here, with their good money, shall be covered over with nettles: and
thorns shall grow in those habitations, wherein, they thought, they had been
richly, and safely pitched, without the likelihood of any sudden removal.

7. I speak not now of mere speculations. Doubt not but these days of
visitation, and retribution will as certainly come, as if they were (...)
venerunt. (vide c. 11. ult vel.)
come already, and that you shall know it to your cost (that I have foretold
nothing, but what is true) And to represent my predictions in a way, that may
express the greater assurance of truth, I speak of what shall be, as of things
present, or already past. The false Prophets, that lulled you asleep with other
dreams of security, did but play the fools, and your mad upstarts, that
pretended to be inspired, did contribute much to the increase of your
iniquities, and specially of that your ill opinion, or that great malice
rather, which you bare to all them, that would have advised you better, and
withdrawn you from idolatry.

8. A true watchman of Israel is ever (...) cum Deo meo quo sensu Christus Dom.
dixit, (...) -- qui non est mecum, contra me est. Mat. 12. 30. Vel sic vertas,
Ephraims watchman (for what he says) is counted of equal authority with my
God, and his true Prophet: but he is but like a snare -- etc.
for my God (does not side with the people, to their ruin: but speaks the
truth, as in the presence of God, and for their good) but the Prophet, that
they cry up, i. the pretended Prophet, that we spoke of: He is but like a
snare, which the fowler lays to entrap you in all his ways. And what mischief
one of those false Prophets so does, against a true worshiper of God: he does
it, in mere spite against the Temple of his God, where that true worship is
performed.

9. These are they, that are profound sinners (stark naught at the heart,
whatsoever they are in show) Chap. 10. 9. 1 Samuel 8, 5. 6. Jud: 19. 6.
Their corruptions are such as can not be matched, but in the story of the
miserable corrupted times, wherein we read of the villainy of those impudent
men of Gibeah. Which (...)
great sins of theirs, with other their offenses God will remember and punish
in due time: though they think he has forgot them, and little regards what is
done below.

10. But, who would not grieve to think, how soon Israel was fallen so deep
into such foul enormities: for) When I found Israel, at first, in the deserts
of Arabia (in their passage out of Egypt into the holy land) upon the first
trial, I found withal somewhat that was good in them, and pleased me as well,
as the best grapes would please them that travail in those hot, and barren
places. I could then have compared the goodness of your forefathers to the
first fruit of the sig (that which first appears to be now ripened, and welcome
to the taste) But (such sigs may be soon ripe, soon rotten: and so were they.
For) it was not long e're they fell foul upon the worship of Baal (...) nuditas
sic Priapum vocabant.
Peor (the abomination of the Moabites and Ammonites) and (...) made new kind
of Nazarites of themselves.
separated themselves. not to my service, as did the true Nazarites, but to the
service of that shameful thing: and so because as abominible as that, whereon
they doted.

11. Their sin came on apace then: so did Ephraims after them. And so shall
their punishment. For the glory of Ephraim shall suddenly and swiftly fly
away, like a bird. Their glory is their fruitfulness, which they are proud to
see in their very (...)
name. But what glory will they challenge from the birth of their little ones
(when they are Sle Kimchi.
still-born?) What glory from the womb, when their wives shall be abortive?
What glory from conception, iex sequ.
when they shall have no joy of the fruit of their womb?

12. For, though they bring up their children, till they are of good years; yet
will I, more and more, bereave them of those children, till they have not a man
left. Part of this shall happen in their passage into Assyria, and the worst,
and most (...) vae illis.
woeful part, when I leave them there, with a more sensible impression of my
departure from them.

13. I look upon Ephraim. like an other Tyrus, very populous, and richly seated
in a most pleasant place: but thence shall Ephraim be fain to bring forth his
children, to be slaughtered by their enemies.

14. And the passing of that heavy decree makes me, that I cannot hold from
praying for some mitigation, at least, of their punishment. Give them, O Lord
(since it must be so) what thou had first threatened, that thou would give
them: Their unthankfulness for the contrary benefits deserve no less. Give
them (that, which sufficiently crosses the fair Vide v. 11.
omen of their name) barrenness. Let it suffice that they shall have a barren
womb, and dry breasts. For, that other is a Sic. A. Ezra, and D. Kim^ht.
more sad, and fearful punishment, to give up their children to the mercy of
the enemy, when their growth, and strength promise much help, and comfort to
their Parents.

15. Yet I must confess they deserve no such mitigation of their punishment,
when I call to mind all their Vide cap. 12. 11.
wickedness in Gilgal. That very place might have put them in mind of the
favors which I showed them there, presently after their miraculous passage
through Jordan, and first entrance into the land of vide I^s. 4.
promise. There I forgave the long neglect of their circumcision, and did not
only take away that reproach: but began my work of higher mercy, and
protection over them in that land. This place therefore, of all other, should
have been made a place of thankful acknowledgements, and good resolutions of
amendment of life, and holy obedience for the future. They should never have
chose to make the Vide c. 4. 15. and 12. 11.
Devila Chapel, where they were first obliged to show their service to me. The
circumcision of their flesh there, should have been seconded with the
circumcision of their hearts, and expressed in such actions, as might have
gained more of my love. But, they have so ordered it, that I cannot but hate
those things, that have been done in that place. And, me thinks, I hear God
saying thus of thom, For the wickedness of those their doings, and specially
the erection of a house there for idolatry, I will drive them far from my
house, and show them no more tokens of my love. The rather, because all their
Princes and Governors (that should have prevented these mischiefs) have bin as
deep as any other inrebellion against me.

16. We have now seen the stroke of justice come so heavily upon Ephraim, that
the very root of that fair, and far-spreading tree is like to be dried up, and
withered. Or, if they of Ephraim do bring any store of fruit (and so hold out
like their Vi v, u^.
name) yet that is a heavy sentence, which God himself has spoken in these sad
terms. I will slay the (...)
most amiable fruit of their womb (that which they so much long for, and place
so much affection upon, when they have it) because they spoil their fair
beauty, with the imitation of their fathers ugly sins.

17. Thefore my God will cast them off with scorn, because they have not been
obedient unto him. And they shall be scattered about, like vagabonds, among
other nations. All which I speak S. Ia^kl.
not as desirous to deliver a curse, but as bound to make known a Prophecy
against this nation.

CHAP. X.
1. ISrael is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself; according to
the multitude of his fruit, he has increased the altars, according to the
goodness of his land, they have made goodly images.

2 Their heart is divided: now shall they be found faulty: he shall break down
their altars: he shall spoil their images.

3 For (now they shall say) we have no King, because we feared not the Lord,
what then should a King do to us?

4 They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus judgment
springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.

5 The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the calves of Beth-aven:
for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and the priests thereof that
rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is departed from it.

6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present to King Iareb: Ephraim
shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.

7 As for Samaria, her King is cut off as the some upon the water.

8 The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed: the
thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; and they shall say to the
mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us.

9 O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they stood: the
battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not overtake them.

10 It is in my desire that I should chastise them, and the people shall be
gathered against them, when they shall bind themselves in their two furrows.

11 And Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loves to tread out the
corn, but I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride: Judah
shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clod^.

12 Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy: break up your fallow
ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness
upon you.

13 Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the
fruit of lies: because thou did trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy
mighty men.

14 Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy fortresses
shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Betharbel in the day of battle: the mother
was dashed in pieces upon her children.

15 So shall Bethel do unto you, because of your great wickedness: in a
morning shall the King of Israel be utterly cut off.

CHAP. X.
1. ISrael is like a Vine, that lies wast, and fruitless to Him that is true
owner of it. Her enemies help to lay it wast, and they that should dress her,
and look to her, by their carelessenesse leave it without good sap and
moisture: which makes the fruit accordingly little enough, and bad enough. Yet
even that little fruit, which Israel has, he (...) ponit, i. facit sibi.
makes use of for himself, to be sent spent after his own humor. And, which is
worse, the more God increases him, with the fruits of temporal prosperity, in
a goodly soil. He is so far from returning a thankful acknowledgement to God,
the good Author of it, that he does so much the more increase the number of
Altars, and Statues (in remembrance of his false gods that do nothing for him)
and (...)
bestow the more cost upon them.

Isa. 5. 6.
2. Thus the heart of Israel is now (...) ut (...) c. 5. 6.
clean departed from the observance of their duty. Therefore shall they be
laid fully desolate. And he that I will make the instrument of that
desolation, will break those Altars of theirs in pieces, and spoil their
Statues.

4. For, nothing will reduce them to their duty unto God, and their King
Hosheah. But, this will be their conclusion, Verba sunt desperantium, ut
plerique exponunt.
we will neither have Hosheah, nor any other King over us. For we, that durst
forsake the service of God, what should we fear the forsaking of the Kings
service, who has no great power now to do any thing for us, nor much power to
do any thing against us, if we be resolute, and hold close to our selves.

4. In the progress of such a violent, and treasonable conclusion, they will
not stick at a false oath, and covenant. Therefore (to answer the former plenty
of their fruitful land) their just punishments shall increase to as great
abundance, as the worst weeds, that come up so thick in the furrows of the
field.

5. Near these times great fear shall fall upon the inhabitants of Samaria,
about sending the calves of Bethel and Dan (as a present to Salmanaser) For the
people ( Vide v. 6. Et Hieron. ad locum, de vitulis aeneis, and deauratis.
taking them for the very golden calves) shall be much grieved, and troubled at
it. But the idol-priests shall be merry (and applaud their subtle arts, of
sending brazen, and gilded calves, instead of those that were all of gold)
This shall be the several deportment of the Priests, and people, when the
riches and glory of their idol shall be thus (...) migrarem in captivitate.
carried into an other land, as a forerunner of their captivity.

6. And thus shall their present be carried into Assyria, and offered to
Salmanaser, as the great King, their (...) ut c. 5, 13. est Vltor, vel
Protector. (...), qui ^ites little dirimet, eosque ut sues, in ^utelam suscipiet.
Protector, and Avenger of their enemies. But, for this (instead of succor
from Assyria) shame will light upon Ephraim, and confusion upon Israel, for
that his subtle device.

7. And suddenly shall Samaria, and her King vanish, and be cut off from being
a kingdom; like the (...) spuma in superficie aquae ferventis, and ebullientis.
Vnde pro i^ a vehementiori.
foam, that now appears upon the superficies of the water, and instantly is
gone out of sight, and become as if it had never been.

8. The like doom shall fall upon the high places, where the Israelites were
wont to worship their (...) idolum vel pro Be^h. Aven.
idols. They shall be utterlie destroyed: thorns, and thistles growing, where
their Altars had formerlie been placed. And then where will not those sinners
desire to hide themselves, from the wrath, and fury poured out upon them? Luc.
27. 30. Apoc. 6. 16. Isai. 2. ult.
They will call to the hills to cover them, and to the Mountains to fall upon
them.

9. Nor are these heavy punishments to be much wondered at in thee, O Israel,
For it is no new thing in thee, to be much overtaken with sins of a high
strain, specially from the times of Gibeah. Yet then, they of Israel, that went
against Gibeah ( Iud. 20.
though they were great sinners, and therefore sadly punished in their first
assaults, yet) they (...)
remained and stood to it, like men reserved for a better day. And upon the
battle in Gibeah, against those grievous sinners; though they twice miscarried,
yet, at last they had the victory. No (...)
man had power to take them, and wholly overcome them, because they did so
severelie prosecute the revenge of a vile, and wicked offense.

10. But now I (...) ab (...) ligare.
am more then content, to have them taken, and led out of their own land in
bonds, and captivite. And (for punishment of those sins, which they themselves
would take no order to correct) I will muster up whole armies of strange
people: when the time is come, that I will have them, to cast those sinners
into bonds, and (...) and alludit ad vitulum alligatum, qui Iascivierat.
tie them fast enough, for the liberty, which they took to themselves in those
two great offenses (the worship of the two calves, that in Bethel, and that in
Dan.)

11. In which sins, they that made those calves to be their Gods, may well be
likened unto calves themselves. For Ephraim is like a young heifer, that is
easily taught, either to plow, or tread out the corn, and to do it with some
delight, ( Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
being not muzled, but suffered to take part of it) Therefore, I put my yoke
upon his fair neck, (the yoke of my law) and guided him, as one might do, that
should (...)
ride upon the back of such a beast, and I said, Let Judah plow, and Jacob
break his clods, (which is as much as if I had said to them, in other words, A
good life is the best husbandry.) That is,

12. Let your good and righteous actions be like your sowing of good seed, and
you shall reap a good reward: (...) juxta, secundum.
according to that (...) beneficentia.
mercy, with which I shall crown that labor, Break up your fallow grounds (to
fit and prepare your selves for a blessing) And finding you are in a good time
of seeking God (by your best endeavors) so continue till he come and shoure
down his (...) (ut supra (...)) saepe pro misericordia and beneficentia)
benefits (which is a piece of (...) (ut supra (...)) saepe pro misericordia
and beneficentia)
justice, that he never fails of for his part.) Let your care be for the
seed-time, and he will provide a good harvest.

13. As much has been said to you, as this comes to. But your actions have
been nothing answerable to such good advise. Your minds run upon plowing in a
worser sense, it seems. For you have labored as hard to compass your wicked
designs, as one that follows the plow. Therefore you have reaped the punishment
of your sins. And the fruit of your labor has proved but a specious show, and
mere (...)
delusion. This is the end of thy trusting, and flattering thy self, in thy own
ways, and in the youthful strength of thy many stout companions, that have
taken part with thee in those labors, that are now come to nothing.

14. Hence arise those jars, and tumults among thy people, and the spoiling of
their strong holds by strangers, in as fierce a manner, as Alludit ad Iud. 8.
ut vult Hieronim. and Salman ponitur pro Salmana (vel Zalmunah) sicut and Arbal
pro Ierubbaal, etsi aliter Kimchi.
Salmana was destroyed by the house of Jerubbabel, in the day of battle. And
with so much cruelty, that there will be no commiseration of Sex, or Age, the
Genesis 32, 11. (...) aurora. pro princ^pio vel mane exsciudi, de improviso exi^io
intelligi potest.
Mother being dashed in pieces with her children.

15. So shall Bethel do unto you. It will bring you into this danger, for your
great, very great offenses. (p) Your King Hosheah shall be utterly destroyed,
and turned out of his Kingdom, as it were in the very morning, and beginning
of his reign, (or, of a sudden, before he looked for such a disaster.)

CHAP. XI.
WHen Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt.

2 As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto Baalim,
and burnt incense to graven images.

3 I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms: but they knew not
that I healed them.

4 I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love, and I was to them as
they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them.

5 He shall not return into the land of Egypt; but the Assyrian shall be his
King, because they refused to return.

6. And the sword shall abide on his cities, and shall consume his branches,
and devour them, because of their own counsels.

7 And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called them to
the most High, none at all would exalt him.

8 How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? how
shall I make thee as Adamah? how shall I set thee as Zeb^im: mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.

9 I will not exceute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to
destroy Ephraim, for I am God, and not man, the holy One in the midst of thee,
and I will not enter into the city.

10 They shall walk after the Lord: he shall roar like a lion: when he shall
roar, then the children shall tremble from the west.

11 They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of
Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, says the Lord.

12 Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit;
but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints.

CHAP. XI.
1. IN the first times, and tender age of the people of Israel, Ezekiel. 16. 3.
and 23. 3. Exodus 4. 22.
I loved him as my son, and my first born. And as I gave him the honor of that
title in Egypt, so with a fatherly affection I brought him out from thence,
(and made him, MaT. 1. 25.
in that a type of my own natural Son, that was, in due time, to be brought out
of the same place.)

2. In those first, and the following times, did Moses, Aaron, the Prophets,
and other my Messengers call them to works of Piety, and to obedience unto me.
But, how did they requite it? The more they called, so much the readier were
the Israelites to turn their backs upon their Teachers, and walk quite another
way from their good instructions: and, leaving my service, to sacrifice to
their Baals, and burn incense to their graven images.

3. Yet was it I, that nursed them, in their younger days, and taught them
gently, how to go sure, and safe, holding them up by the arms (or, carrying
them in my own arms, as tender nurses use to carry and hold their children) so
did I preserve them from all danger, when they were least able to help
themselves. But they would not consider, that I therefore showed this care, and
providence of mine, that I might so cure them of their national disease, their
itching after the worship of other gods, that could not preserve them.

4. I drew them to me, as men would draw their dearest friends, with the (...)
rudentes, vel vincula crassiera.
strongest bands of love, and affection. And, after I had been so good a friend
to them, as to take off their Egyptian yoke, and the bridle which their hard
Masters had put into their mouth, (...) inclinabam cibum. I held it close to
their mouths.
then I filled their mouths with plenty of quails and mannah, as it were of
food from heaven, i. dropped out of the air unto them.

5. Though in their latter days, they returned into Egypt, by seeking help
from thence, notwithstanding I will so order it, that they shall return thither
no more, upon that errand: but the Assyrian shall rule over them, because they
would not be converted unto me, that I might be acknowledged for their King.

6, 7. And do they not deserve this? when the war being (...)
begun in their own Cities by civil dissentions, and having consumed the
strongest, and chiefest of them, because they followed their own devises, and
not the good counsels, that I gave unto them by my Prophets: yet, for all this,
they that were called my people, made no have of their conversion unto me, but
were like men (...) pendent animi number ad me redeant.
that knew not. what to resolve of, though all the messengers, that I sent,
called them never so earnestly to return to the High God, still, as (...)
if all were agreed together, not so much as one of them would rouse up
himself, and follow that call.

8. How shall I give thee up to thy deserved punishment for these things, O
Ephraim! How shall I deliver thee over, O Israel? unless I should give thee
up, as once I gave up Admah, and make thee like unto Zeboim, in thy fearful,
and utter ruin. But my heart is quickly altered from the execution of so
heavy a sentence, and all my bowels of compassion are at once In^alescunt
paenitudinermea.
moved to repent of that, and take another way.

9. I will do nothing against thee in the fierceness of my anger. I will not
return to that thought of destroying Ephraim in such a manner. For I am a
merciful God, that can easily remember my covenant with thy Fathers, and
continue my desire of thy happiness. Nor do I forget, how I have been often
hallowed in the midst of thy Assemblies: and I would encourage thee to return
to the same acknowledgement, and performance of thy bounden duty. Therefore I
will not fall upon any of thy Cities, with that severitie: and specially upon
Jerusalem, the place set apart for my worship.

20. And if they will walk confidently and obediently after me: I will defend
them against all that persecute them. I will be like potest hic subest
vaticinium de reliquiis Israel, ad Christam convertendis per rugitum Domini, i.
e. Evangelii praedicationem, quam, in Iudaea primo promulgaram, Iudaei primo,
deinde, alii summa cum admiratio^e, and timore amplectentur, and huno sensum
versus etiam sequen^ admittere potest.
a roaring Lion, and at that voice they shall tremble that come from the Sea,
or any of the remotest parts, to follow after them.

11. They shall quake like (the stork) the bird, that comes out of Egypt: and
sicut avis, and sicut columba) hoc celeritatem divulgationis Evangelii, and
conversionis fidelium significare potest, si dictum, in margin, prioris versus
sensum sequamur.
like the Assyrian-dove shall they fly back into their own nests with all the
speed that may be: And there will I settle them quietly, says the Lord.

12. This will I surely do for them: Hic no^^ulli^ nova Prophetia incipera
videtur.
Yet does Ephraim fetch me about with nothing but lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit (fair promises of amendment, and few or no performances) Only, the
best is, Judah does yet hold out stoutly, (...) ut c. 918.
in the daily worship of the true God, and deals faithfully with his holy
Prophets (under their good King Hezekiah.)

CHAP. XII.
1 EPhraim feeds on wind, and follows after the Eastwind: he daily
increases lies and desolation, and they do make a covenant with the Assyrians,
and oil is carried into Egypt.

2 The Lord has also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob
according to his ways, according to his doings will he recompense him.

3 He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he had
power with God.

4 Yea, he had power over the Angel and prevailed, he wept and made
supplication unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us.

5 Even the Lord God of hosts, the Lord is his memorial.

6 Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy
God continually.

7 He is a merchant; the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loves to
oppress.

8 And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance; in
all my labors they shall find none iniquity in me, that were sin.

9 And I that am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, will yet make thee to
dwell in Tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.

10 I have also spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used
similitudes, by the ministry of the Prophets.

11 Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity, they sacrifice
bullocks in Gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the
fields.

12 And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a wi fe,
and for a wife he kept sheep.

13 And by a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet was
he preserved.

14 Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly: therefore shall he leave his
blood upon him, and his repreach shall his Lord return unto him.

CHAP. XII.
1. EPhraim feeds himself with the hopes of that, which is mere wind, and
vanity, and will deceive him at the last. Nay (which is far worse) he runs
gaping after the Eastwind. That is the wind which he follows, a wind, in these
parts of the world, of most malignity, i.e. he takes a quite contrary course to
appease the wrath of God. For, the increase of dissembling, and hypocrisy is
always Ephraims fault in the fairest pretenses: He were as good resolve to
increase the means of his own ruin and desolaiton. That will be the end of
the Ephramites engaging themselves by a league with the Assyrian, and at the
same time, sending precious oil, and other rich presents into Egypt, to beg aid
from thence against their own confederates.

2. And as Israel is guilty of this subtle Art of dissembling, and false
dealing: so Judah (in that point, though not so much in the matter of Idolatry)
has his faults too, for which God has a quarrel to him: but He will not
spare to punish hebr. Jacob.
Israel: according to their wicked ways, and according to their evil doings,
will he return a just recompense unto them (who were distinguished from the
Tribe of Judah, by the name from Israel, or Jacob; and were the greater
offenders, though those names should have put them more in mind of their duty.)

3. The subtilty of the people of Israel, is not like that of Israel, their
honored Patriarch: that had it in matter of praise, and admiration. For, he
was called Jacob, because while he was yet unborn, he did miraculously supplant
his brother, and so give a presage of that felicity, which should be taken off
from his Brother, and laid upon him, to be enjoyed by his posterity, rather
than by himself. In which miraculous supplantation (which was a kind of
wrestling with his brother for the blessing) we must not forget how afterward
Genesis 32, 22.
he wrastled, and prevailed with God himself by the strength of his hearty
prayers.

4. For, when he had such power to prevail over the Angel (that represented
the person of God) and to get the victory: you must needs conceive, that he was
strengthened by God (the Lord of all the Angels.) His prayers, and his tears
procured him that blessing in Bethel, where he found that Angel, and discoursed
sic utraque lectio exprimi potest (...) and (...)
with him, and herein he did as good as speak to us (as plainly as if we had
been with him) and show us how we may prevail with the Lord of Hosts.

5. You little thought of this, when you set up your calves in this Bethel,
where he worshipped, and made supplication to the true God, that delivered him
in his greatest danger. The same piety to God might procure you the same
assistance in all your extremities. For, Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts is the name
by which he is remembered. And out of that name you may gather the extent of his
power, and goodness.

6. Therefore do thou, O Israel, as Jacob did. Return unto thy God, by an
unfeigned conversion from all sin, and keep close to Mercy, and Justice: so
may thou always (...)
expect the like help from thy God, and put thy trust in Him.

7. But, to what purpose is all this good advice? For, Israel will continue
still to be such a crafty merchant, as he showed himself in his former
subtilty. When he gets deceitful weights into his hand (any opportunity of
deceiving others) he longs to be practicing his Art of deceit, to the damage
and oppression of them that suspect him not.

8. In all which Ephraim (or Israel i.e., the ten tribes that will now be
called Ephraim) has the face to say, I am indeed become rich. I have found
ways to purchase me good store of wealth: and have I not done well in all
this? In all the pains that I have taken for it (cavil they that will) they
will find no fault, wherein I have offended.

9. But, is it no fault, O Ephraim, that I should be so served? I, that am the
Lord tby God, that delivered thee out of the Egyptian bondage, and would have
made thee still to dwell hebr. pro (...) as in tents,
as securely, and cheerfully, in all thy habitaitons, other houses were called
(...) from the first use of Tabernacles, wherein they dwelt in the desert. In
memory whereof the Feast of Tabernacles was instituted, which was also a shadow
of the peace, and quiet, and security, that we should have by Christ.
as ever thou were in the days of the solemn feast nam (...) ex praecedentibus
reperendum.
of Tabernacles.

10. To which purpose have not I spoken to thee by my Prophets? Have I not sent
to thee by vision after vision: and used Parables, and Similitudes by the
ministry of my Prophets? But I have lost my labor, and so have the Israelites
too.

11. For, though they have set up an (...)
idol in Gilead, yet they did it to (...)
no purpose (they missed of their aim, when they looked for help, and
deliverance from such poor Deities) And they that offered bullocks (or to
bullocks in videour significare, and december, and duas tribus pari idololatriae
errore deceptas. Nam quo tempore haec prophetabantur, Galaad erat in regno
december tribuum, Gil^^^ duarum, ut monet Hieronymus, vide cap. 4, 15.
Gilgal; took a wrong course in their worship, and therefore had as ill
success. For even their Altars are come to ruin, and confusion, and lie but
as heaps of stones, that the husbandman has cast up and down, at a venture, in
the furrows of his field.

12. The time was, when Jacob (your Father) sugit agrum Syriae.
fled out of Syria into that Region of Gilead. In those days he could find in
his heart to do service for the purchase of a wife, and for a wife to be a
keeper of sheep. This did he for his two wives, but what have you done in the
service of God, to win his favor?

13. The time was too, when God sent Moses, as a great Prophet, to bring Israel
out of Egypt, and by the care and direction of that Prophet they were kept from
all danger, and safely conducted in the wilderness, till Joshuah had a command
to lead them into the promised land; which is your inheritance.

14. But, what requital have they, or you given to me? Nay, Ephraim has,
instead of that, provoked me (...) cap. 4. 1. 2. cap. 11, 1.
bitterly to anger, by his wicked deeds: Therefore his blood shall be upon him,
for his cruelty to many good persons, and the reproaches against me and my
Prophets, shall his God return upon him, in due time.

CHAP. XIII.
1. WHen Ephraim spoke, trembling he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
offended in Baal, he died.

2 And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of their
silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all of it the work of
the crafts-man: they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice, kiss the calves.

3 Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it
passes away, as the chafe that is driven with a whirlwind out of the floor,
and as the smoke out of the chimney.

4 Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt and thou shall know no God
but me; for there is no Savior beside me.

5 I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.

6 According to their pasture, so were they filled: they were filled, and their
heart was exalted: therefore have they forgotten me.

7 Therefore I will be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the way will I
observe them.

8 I will meet them as a Bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rent the
caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a Lion: the wild beast
shall tear them.

9 O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me it thine help.

10 I will be thy King: where is any other that may save thee in all thy
cities? and thy Judges of whom thou said, Give me a King and Princes?

11 I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.

12 The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up: his sin is hid.

13 The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him, he is an unwise
son, for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children.

14 I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from
death: O death, I will be thy plagues: O grave, I will be thy destruction:
repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.

15 Though he be fruitful among his brethren, an Eastwind shall come, the wind
of the Lord shall come up from the wilderness, and his spring shall become
dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: he shall spoil the treasures of all
pleasant vessels.

16 Samaria shall become desolate, for she has rebelled against her God: they
shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their
women with child shall be ripped up.

CHAP. XIII.
1. THe time was also, when if Ephraim stood up to speak, a kind of Tempore
Iudicum, and Regum aliquot ex ea tribu.
fear, and reverence seized upon all those of the ten Tribes. This height of
Honor was he come to in Israel. But, the times of that respect are past, and
for the sin, which he has committed in his Hebraei vitulos etiam, interdum
vocant Baalim.
calves, and Baals, he must look for nothing but death, and destruction,

2. For now, this sin has more and more increased, amongst them, and (not
content with their calves, in Dan and Bethel,) they have made themselves other
molten images of their silver, after their own fancy, all of those idols the
work of craftsmen. And they spare not to say to them, They among us, that offer
men too in sacrifice, shall also perform Osculum erat signum homagii, (ut
vocatur) and sic illud exponendum, Psalm 2. ult. sulemus enim, oscula manuum,
Principes adorare, and subjectionis nostrae testimonium presta^e.
their homage to the calves.

3. Therefore they shall not hold out long in this wickedness. For, I will
make them leave the place, which they have so abused, and suddenly vanish, like
the morning-cloudes, and the early dew, that is soon gone, and the chafe that
is hurried away, with the whirlwind, out of the floor: and the smoke out of the
chimney, that quickly leaves that place, and knows it no more.

4. And justly will this fall upon thee, o Israel, For, I am thy God that
brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Therefore thou should have
acknowledged no other God besides me, who only can save, and deliver thee, out
of all thy troubles, and am the only Preserver of mankind.

5. I vouchsafed to take notice, and care of thee, in the vast wilderness, a
dry, and barren place, where thou could otherwise have been supplied with no
provisions.

6. I fed them there like sheep in variety of several pastures, and when they
were fully satisfied, and fatted with good fare, their hearts were puffed up
with pride: that is it, that made them so soon forget me, that fed them.

7. Therefore I will be (no longer as a Shepherd to feed them so fat, but
rather) as a Lion, and a Leopard to watch, (...) gradiens, vel observans, ab
(...) vel (...)
and walk about, and observe, how I may destroy them in the way, which they are
to pass.

8. I will meet them in that rage, which you see in a bear, when she is robbed
of her whelps, and tear in pieces their very praecordia, vel claustra cordis,
potest ad animos alludere, occlusos ad omnes admonitiones.
heart strings, I will set the Assyrian, like a Lion, or some such wild beast
to devour some, and distract others into so many divisions, that they shall not
be able, in one body again, to make any resistance.

9. And for this thy depressio tua ex te, vel perdidisti te, vel perdidit te
(iniquitas tua)
low, and miserable estate, thou may thank thy self, O Israel: that would
not thank me for thy succor, in all thy necessities, it depending wholly upon
me.

10. For (...) pro (...) ubi tandem est Rex tuus?
what is become of thy King? that should all this while, provide for thy safety
in all thy Cities, where is he? And what is become of thy Judges, and Rulers
that should defend thee? Of whom thou said once, Sam. 8. 20.
Give us a King, to rule over us, and Princes to judge us, and go before us,
and fight our battles. Did thou not long for them a little too soon?

11. Wherefore there was a time, and may be again, when I give thee a King in
mine anger (as in Saul, and Jeroboam) and I take thy King away in my wrath (as
in the good Josiah, ann in Hosheah, of whom there was some good hope.)

12. This misery will fall, especially upon the ten tribes. For I will not
forget the sins of Ephraim, I bound them up together in a bundle, and laid them
up in a safe corner: to be again brought out, and revenged, as I see cause.

13. When the sad time of revenge draws near, and the pangs come suddenly upon
him, as upon a woman in travail; it will appear, that 4. Reg. 19, 3.
he is like a silly babe, that knows not how to make way for his Mother's, and
his own delivery. Else would he seek to me, and not stay so long for succor,
when he is as near the being rescued, as one that is come to the time of birth.

14. For (...) Modus Indicationis pro potentiali ( ut v. 4. I could or can --
I can set them at liberty, in the greatest distress: from the very power of
death and the grave. And so I will do, when I see my time, and for all those
that I will deliver 1. Cor. 15, 55. (...) ut v. 10.
Where will then be thy sting, O Death! O Grave, where will then be thy
victory? But now, since they will not seek me, I will look upon no ways how to
(...)
comfort me, and appease my wrath, but in their destruction.

15. And when Ephraim is become (like his name) c. 9. 11.
fruitful, and populous among his brethren, then a strong ventus Dei, i.
vehemens, vel a Deo missus: quem quidam de Christo exponunt, qui venit ut
ventus morti, and inferno noxius: mortis font (peccato) per Christum abolito.
and terrible East Wind, (the swift and pernicious army of the Assyrian) shall
come upon him from the deserts of Syria, (whence the most boisterous winds
arise) and dry up the springs, and fountains, that have hitherto refreshed him.
And that wind (or fierce army) shall blow away, or make spoil of all the rich
treasures, and several kind of (...) (ut Scot. gear) comprehendit omnia
utensilia, etc.
things, which he has heaped up in store, and wherein he has placed his
delight.

16. Samaria (their Metropolis) must needs be (...) reum peragi.
guilty of some great offense, that has thus (...)
bitterly provoked her God to anger. Therefore shall many of them fall by the
sword. Psal^ 137, 8.
Their Infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be
ripped up.

CHAP. XIV.
1 O Isral, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

2 Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.

3 Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say
any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless
finds mercy.

4 I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is
turned away from him.

5 I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lilly, and cast
forth his roots as Lebanon.

6 His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and
his smell as Lebanon.

7 They that dwell under his shadow shall return: they shall revive as the
corn, and grow as the vine, the sent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

8 Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols? I have heard him,
and observed him: I am like a green fur tree, from me is thy fruit found.

9 Who so is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall
know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in
them: but the transgressour shall fall therein.

CHAP. XIV.
V. 1. vel 2.
THere is yet one way, the way of serious, and timely repentance, to prevent, or
qualify all this. Come then, O Israel, Return again unto the Lord thy God, by
true repentance, as V. 1. vel 2.
thou have taken from him by thy great offenses.

2. Take this form of confession into your mouths, and say to him, with a true
penitent heart. Take away the vel (...) quamvis -- though thou have --
punishment of all our iniquities, O Lord, and pardon our (...) peco^tir^m and
paenam peccati significat.
offenses. And graciously accept (...)
of that good service, which we deserve to offer unto thee in all submission.
And, though we have hitherto been^ fruitless in our actions, yet now let the
Pro (...) Sept. l^^gerunt (...) and sic Heb. 13. 15.
fruit of our lips (our thankful acknowledgements) be rendered, as a pledge of
our future obedience.

3. We will make no more addresses to Assyria, when we would be saved from our
enemies. We will seek no more succor from the Egyptian Horse. (wherein that
nation excels.) We will never hereafter give that honor to idols, the work of
our own hands, which belongs only to God. For thou art the true and sure
refuge of all that are afflicted. The very Orphans, and they that are most
destitute of help, are wont to find pity in thee, when all other hopes forsake
them: and a pity, accompanied with such a loving (...)
affection as a dear mother bears to the fruit in her womb.

4. Upon this humble submission of theirs, I would give them this merciful
answer (says God himself) that, I will, upon their amendment of life, cure
them of all their strange aversions from me. I will embrace them most lovingly,
with a (...) Ephesians. 1. 5, 9. Gen: 27. 39. Isa. 26. 19. Mic 9.7. Ps. 128.4
free, and hearty affection. So easily would I be content, that mine anger
should be wholly turned from them.

5. I will be to Israel like the hopeful dew (the pledge of a plentiful
increase) (s) He shall slourish like the fair lilly, and take as deep root as
the trees of Lebanon.

6. His children like (t) olive-branches shall spread, and dilate themselves
all abroad. For, his Praestantia ejus sicut olea (praestantia)
excellency shall be every way like that of the olive (not in the green, and
long-flourishing boughs only, but in the goodness, and Jud. 9.9
fatness of the fruit, that pleases God, and men) And his name and good
report among other nations shall be as sweet as the smell of Or the wine of
Lebanon. as v. 7.
frankincense.

7. So that many that, upon their fame, will come to live under the shadow, and
protection of Israel shall be converted to the worship of the true God, And
their newness of life shall be with as much fruit as the corn that dies in the
ground, and is again quickened with the advantage of much increase. It shall be
compared to the growth of the fruitful vine: and the memorial of them shall be
like the fragrant, and pleasant wine of Lebanon, that is never remembered but
with high commendation.

8. But (for all these good promises of theirs, and presages of mine) how comes
it to pass, that Ephraim does still continue his worship of idols? I am ready
to hear and help him, in the time of need (which they cannot) and so carefully
to look to him, that he shall not cease to flourish like a green sirre tree.
For thou have never done any thing, O Ephraim, but it has been found, that I
have answered it to thee, with the fruit of a high reward.

9. Will any of you now be so wise as to consider these things? Psalm. 107. ult.
Jer. 9. 12. Psalm. 50. penult.
Will any be so prudent in their actions, as if they took full notice of the
passages of the mercy, and justice of God? Though you will not do so, yet are
all the counsels, and actions of God full of equity. And as all his ways are
just: so all that are just will walk in his ways. But the wicked, and unjust
are so far from walking in them, as they should do, that they cannot hold out
long, without discovery of their great faults, and relapses, wherein they fall
foul from him, and his ways, though they may pretend to walk in them.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF JOEL.
CHAP. I.
1 THe word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.

2 Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land: Has
this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?

3 Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their children, and
their children another generation.

4 That which the palmer-worm has left, has the locust eaten; and that which
the locust has left, has the canker-worm eaten; and that which the
canker-worm has left, has the caterpiller eaten.

5 Awake, ye drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine, because of
the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouth:

6 For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose
teeth are the teeth of a Lion, and he has the cheek-teeth of a great Lion.

7 He has laid my vine wast, and barked my fig tree: he has made it clean
bare, and cast it away, the branches thereof are made white.

8 Lament like a virgin guarded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.

9 The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the
Lord; the Priests, the Lords ministers mourn.

10 The field is wasted: the land mourns: for the corn is wasted: the new
wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.

11 Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen: howl, O ye vine-dressers, for the wheat,
and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished.

12 The vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth, the pomegranate-tree,
the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field are
withered; because joy is withered away from the sons of men.

13 Gird your selves, and lament, ye Priests: howl, ye ministers of the Altar:
come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God, for the
meat offering, and the drink offering is withholden from the house of your God.

14 Sanctify ye a fast: call a solemn assembly: gather the Elders, and all
the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto
the Lord:

15 Alas for the day, for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction
from the Almighty shall it come.

16 Is not the meat cut off before your eyes, yea; joy and gladness from the
house of our God?

17 The feed i^^rotten under their clods: the garners are laid desolate: the
barns are broken down; for the corn is withered.

18 How do the beasts groan? the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they
have no pasture, yea the flocks of sheep are made desolate.

19 O Lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire has devoured the pastures of the
wilderness, and the flame has burnt all the trees of the field.

20 The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of waters are
dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.

THe Prophecy of Joel was directed chiesly against Judah, as Hosheahs against
Israel. For, though he name Israel twice, yet he understands not there the ten
Tribes, distinct from the Kingdom of Judah, but takes it as a general name to
all the Jews.

He begins with threats, and motives to repentance: and so makes way for
unspeakable comfort, in the coming of the Messiah: and the necessity of
yielding obedience unto him.

CHAP. I.
1. THe word of the Lord, which was (made known) to Joel, the son of Pethuel.

2. Hear ye this, you aged men, that are supposed to have increased your
knowledge with your years. And give special ear to it, all you that are
inhabitants of the land of Judea. And tell me if you have heard the like of
what I shall now deliver, either in your days, or in the days of your
forefathers.

3. I shall speak that, which you may well transmit to your children, and they
to theirs, and so one age to another generation succeeding them.

4. And I shall begin with four several sorts of terrible locusts. You read but
of one sort of them in Egypt: here are more to be wondered at, and all of them
greedy destroyers, not of our enemies land, but of our own, nor of the land
only, but of the For most take them to be the emblemes of sierce, and cruel
nations, out of the sixth verse. And it is familiar in the Scripture, to
describe unruly, and vast armies, by such creatures, as are wholly for
devastation. Nor can it be meant of Pull, and Salmanasar, because Joel
prophesies not against the ten tribes, but against Judea (unless it be
understood of the want and calamity, that thence afflicted Judea, which had
many provisions out of Israel.
people. In such manner shall these come, That, what the Caterpiller leaves,
the Grasshopper shall devour; And what the Grashoper leaves, the Canker-worm
shall eat up; And what the Canker-worm leaves, the Locust shall devour.

5. Here is sad news to wake up the drunkards, you that are in that number,
this will make you all turn your mad mirth into weeping, and howling. You that
were, of all others, most soundly lulled asleep: for (in the destruction of the
vineyards) the sweet wine will be taken away from the mouths of such lusty
bibbers.

6. And, that you may know, what kind of creatures these locusts may be
(whether worms or men) I will now use a plainer language, to ler you
understand, what God himself says of his people. And this it is. A nation
shall certainly come upon my land (or rather a mixture of several destructive
nations, as greedy, and mischievous as any locusts) a people excelling in
strength, and number. A generation of locusts, that will bite to the purpose.
For their teeth will be like Lions teeth, and their grinders will have the
strength of the strongest Lions (in that part.)

7. This kind of monstrous creature will fearfully destroy Judea, which I
account as my own vineyard that my right hand has planted. And, with that, all
my best fruit will be used at the pleasure of the destroyer: among them my
fig trees will be barked, and pilled, and carelessely thrown about, not a bough
retaining so much as his own color,

8. For this, well may thou (O Judea) take up as heavy a mourning, and
lamentation, as a young woman would do, that girds her self with sackcloth, and
sadly composeth her self, to bewail the loss of her dearest consort, the
husband of her youth.

9. No other way can thou lament for thy Priests, or they for themselves.
They that continually wait at the altar of the Lord, to intercede for thy
welfare, and present thy thankful acknowledgements, cannot otherwise express
the absolute loss of that corn and wine, that should daily supply the
meat offering, and drink offering for the house of the Lord: and so the better
enable them for the continuance of divine service in that place.

10. The Priests mourn not alone. The grounds are so wasted, and lie so rude,
and untilled, that they also seem to have put on their ut^ contra ridere prata
dicuntur, in summa copia.
mourning apparel. And there is too much cause they should do so for the
devastation of the fair cornfieldsd, and withering of the vines, and total
loss of the oil.

11. At this sight, how can the Husbadmen but hang down their heads for shame;
and the vine-dressers cry out for sorrow? It must trouble them all to see the
fruit of the earth so destroyed, the wheat and the barley, and the whole harvest
of the field.

12. The vines specially, they have been so abused, that they seem to (...)
blush at it, as if they were ashamed to be seen in such a case. The figs are
no less spoiled, and corrupted. And, with them, the pomegranate, the palmtree
and the apple tree, and all other trees of the field are withered and decayed.
And, in them, the joy and delight of the Sons of men is taken away, and (...)
vanished out of our sight.

13. Now therefore, O ye Priests, This is implied in the close of the verse.
that have nothing else to offer, come offer, and present your sad souls before
the Altar. And gird your bodies with sackcloth, or other mournful attire, and
let your howling be heard, you that attend upon an empty Altar, and are tain to
lay aside your solemn Music. Lie all night in sackcloth, you Ministers of my
God. For, meat and drink offerings, and outward sacrifices, you must look for
none. You have only your patient, and obedient hearts to be made a fit
sacrifice for the Lord of Heaven and earth, that gives, and takes away, and
restores again, at his pleasure.

14. Nor will this sacrificing of your selves be enough. You must think what is
fit to be done by the people too. To appease the wrath of God, Proclaim a
public and solemn Fast: Let a full assembly be called. Gather your Senators
together, to advise, and enact what is to be done: And all the Inhabitants of
the land, to obey their commands. Gather them to the house of the Lord your
God, the house of prayer, and there with penitent, and unanimous hearts, cry
earnestly unto him, and say,

15. Alas for the day, the great day of the Lord, that comes on apace (the day
of vengeance, and the destruction of Jerusalem) the day of destruction that is
appointed by God himself, who is all-sufficient, and will not be wanting to
execute his own just decrees.

16. Do we not see a type of it already set before our eyes, Do we not read
some lines of it, in our present misery, and scarcity, that debars us of the
joy, and pleasure, that we were wont to take in our rich supply of sacrifices,
and offerings for the house of the Lord our God.

17. For now, not only the corn above ground is destroyed, but the very seed
cast into the earth is putrisied under the clods, so that our hope of a good
harvest is buried with it, and our garners are destroyed, our barns emptied and
ruined, and our corn withered.

18. O how the very cattle, sensible of their wants, in their loud bellowing,
seem to groan, and cry unto God (as elsewhere the hungry ravens are said to
call upon Him) who has an ear for them: and would much more be favorable to
our prayers, who are not so forward to bemoan our selves, as the herds of bruit
beasts are, in their woeful condition, and (...) perplexum esse, turbari.
perplexity, for lack of pasture. And the flocks of sheep, that as heavily,
though more remisly, and silently express their sad, and desolate case.

19. I can not but cry unto thee, O Lord (the roaring of the poor beasts might
put me upon it) for that cruelty of our enemies, that carry all before them,
like a consuming fire, destroying the fruitful places of the once-plentiful,
but now a most desert land; and, like a continued flame, fearfully burning up
all the trees of the field.

20. And if I should leave crying, and calling upon thee, the beasts of the
field, Plur. cum verbo sing
every one of them (as confuting the dullness, and coldness of my affections,
and the too little pity of my self, and them) would continue their louder, and
heavier cry unto thee: because the great rivers of waters are dried up, and the
fruitful earth parched with heat is become like a dry, and desolate
wilderness; the pastures now deserve no other name among us.

CHAP. II.
1. BLow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let
all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord comes, for it
is high at hand;

2 A day of darkness and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people and a
strong, there has not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it,
even to the years of many generations.

3 A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame burns: the land is
as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness, yea,
and nothing shall escape them.

4 The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen so
shall they run.

5 Like the noise of charets on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the
noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people, set in
battle array.

6 Before their face the people shall be much pained; all faces shall gather
blackness.

7 They shall run like mighty men, they shall climb the wall like men of war,
and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not break their
ranks.

8 Neither shall one thrust another, they shall walk every one in his path: and
when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.

9 They shall run to and fro in the city: they shall run upon the wall: they
shall climb up upon the houses: they shall enter in at the windows, like a
thief.

10 The earth shall quake before them, the heavens shall tremble, the Sun and
the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining.

11 And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army, for his camp is very
great: for he is strong that executes his word: for the day of the Lord is
great and very terrible, and who can abide it?

12 Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart,
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

13 And rent your heart and not your garments: and turn unto the Lord your God:
for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness and
repents him of the evil.

14 Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him,
even a meat offering, and a drink offering unto the Lord your God?

15 Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly.

16 Gather the people: sanctify the congregation: assemble the Elders: gather
the children; and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.

17 Let the Priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the
Altar, and let them say; Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thing heritage
to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say
among the people: where is their God?

18 Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.

19 Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people; Behold, I will send you
corn, and wine, and oil, ye shall be satisfied therewith: and I will no more
make you a reproach among the heathen.

20 But I will remove far off from you the Northern army, and will drive him
into a land barren and desolate with his face toward the east Sea, and his
hinder part toward the utmost sea and his stink shall come up, and his ill
savor shall come up, because he has done great things.

21 Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice: for the Lord will do great things.

22 Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness
do spring, for the tree bears her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield
their strength.

23 Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God: for he
has given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for
you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first month.

24 And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with
wine and oil.

25 And I will restore to you the years that the locust has eaten, the
canker-worm, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, my great army which I
sent among you.

26 And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the
Lord your God, that has dealt wonderously with you: and my people shall never
be ashamed.

27 And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord
your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed.

28 And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will power out my Spirit upon
all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men
shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.

29 And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids maids in those days
will I power out my Spirit.

30 And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire,
and pillars of smoke.

31 The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the
great and the terrible day of the Lord come.

32 And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the Name of the
Lord, shall be delivered: for in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall
call.

CHAP. II.
1. NOw, me thinks, I see Jerusalem in danger of a siege. Sic optime exponitur
^x Hebroeis, qui Ioelem Manisse (...) esse volunt.
Nabuchodonosars soldiers are on their march. It is high time to leave your
wonted mirth, and music. Let the loud sounding of your trumpets in Sion (which
is a kind of summons, and alarm to the Kings own house there) and the beating
of your drums in the holy Mountain (which is a watchword to those about the
Temple) give notice of your necessary preparation for war. And a terrible war
it may prove to all the inhabitants of these parts. They have had their day (a
long time of sin, and liberty) and now God will have his day (a severe time of
punishment) which comes on faster then we think for.

2. That destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonosor, shall be but the
forerunner of a Sic in Actis Apost. cap. 2. Exponuntur aliquot loca hujus cap.
de eversione urbis Hieros^l. post Messiam, per Rumanos, quae Joel primari^
dixisse videt^r de excidio per Chaldaos.
greater day, and a heavier destruction by the Romans. And that will be a
terrible day indeed. A sad and gloomy day: a dismal, and cloudy day, which
shall come with as much speed and as sudden danger upon Jerusalem, in all their
security, as the clear light of the morning, that, in an instant, spreds and
diffuseth it self over the mountains, and imparts his luster to all the world.
And answerable to this, will be the agilitiy and quick dispatch, that shall be
used by those ( Vrilli. c, 1 v. 6,
Locusts with Lions teeth) their numerous, and potent enemies. This will make
it such a fearful day, such a terrible army, with such slaughter of men, as was
never yet seen, nor ever shall be to the years of many generations.

3. The fearful, and utter davastation then made by the enemies, will be like
that of fire both before, and behind, that suddenly and totally consumes all
about it: so that this pleasant country of Judea, that, before the entrance of
the enemy, was as well stored, and delight some to look upon as the garden of
Eden, shall, before their vast army of locusts be removed, be rather like a
bare, and desolate wilderness. In which, if any shall be so fortunate, as not
to perish by the sword, yet there would be no way to escape from hence, nor any
hope of continuance here, without perishing by famine, or submission to the
pleasure of the enemy. Who will no way be hindered from having what he comes
for, in the compassng of our ruin.

4. Such will be the event of this coming of these locusts, who, by their
courage, and agility, and specially by their cruel visage, wherein they will
rather be like fierce horses then locusts, might fright us into death. And yet,
like stout Horsemen, they will fall upon us with that force and violence, that
the valiantest amongst us, will never be able to resist.

5. In which violence, skipping with have over our mountainous country, they
will make as great a noise, as chariots would do, if they were furiously driven
over such high places. Or (which is yet more horrid to the ear) like the noise
of a slanting fire, that devours the stubble. In these, or what else may be
worse then these, they will show themselves like an army of lusty men,
sufficiently instructed, ordered, and prepared for war.

6. This quick, and rough way of onset will be terrible to our people, and make
all their sad faces contract a palenesse, or rather (...) pro (...) ollae
nigredinem significat.
blackness, as visible as if they had lain among pots, that have changed their
natural color, over the fire.

7. While this fear makes us at a stand, they will on forward, like strong men
in their full speed, ready to mount our walls, with a valor befitting stout,
and true military persons. Every man knowing his own way, and his own task. No
man appearing so (...) habet significationem mora^: and pignoris.
slow, or careless, as if he were (...) habet significationem morae: and
pignoris.
engaged, either to stay there, or to give way to any, that would turn him out
of his place.

8. So will every one of them make sure, to be no hinderance to his fellow, in
the execution of their charge, either in their Via utram que, notionem habet.
way, or in their Via utram que, notionem habet.
work. For both which they shall be so well appointed, and so strongly armed,
that if they chance to light unawares upon their enemies weapon, whatsoever it
is, therewill be no such hazard unto them, as to expose them to any dangerous
wound. So happy, and successeful shall they be in their bold attempts.

9. Their ventrous army being so well ordered, they will resolve to make a
fierce irruption into the city (like skipping locusts) (...) discurrent ((...))
crura agitabunt ((...) crus.
running about the walls, and by sudden invasion, taking possession of them,
(...) discurrent ((...) crura agitabunt ((...) crus.
shaking their heels there, and dancing, as men secure of the victory, and then
entering into the houses: if not at the doors, yet at least climbing in at the
windows, like bold, and desperate thieves, that will neither be hindered from
coming in, nor driven out again, till they have ransacked, and plundered the
secretest corners, where there is any thing to be found, worth the carrying
away.

10. After this rude, and insulting demeanor of the soldiers, it will the be
easier to conjecture, what misery must needs fall upon the poor people, if we
express it by an Earthquake, and the shaking of the Heavens, and the obscuring
of the celestial lights. The terror of the lower, and meaner sort of the
people may be conceived by the fearful effects of an Earthquake. So may the sad
ruin of the Nobles, by the shaking of the heavenly, or higher powers. And the
woeful confusion of all Order, and Command (that followed upon that) by the
darkning of the Sun, and Moon, and the Stars withdrawing their wonted luster:
to the astonishment of all the Spectators, as well as of those eminent persons,
that will be most concerned in that calamity.

11. And that you may know the just, and powerful author of all this misery.
As God himself will have us know that he sends these signs (...) versu praced.
before him: so God himself, in a signal victory, will seem to own our enemies
as his soldiers, as plainly as if we had it from his own voice: and declare
openly, that those mighty, and numerous armies, are his, and come thither by
his (...)
own command, and irreversible decree: and cannot be hindered from (...)
doing his pleasure, in taking vengeance upon a sinful people; that would take
their liberty in their day, and now must therefore be made sensible of the
great, and terrible day of the Lord. And who will be able to abide that time?
wherein he pleases to break the hearts of them, that are assaulted, and add
courage to their enemies.

12. All this is threatened by him. By him, that would not be unwilling to have
his hands stayed, from such a severe execution of his justice. It is therefore
foretold, that it may be timely prevented. And, O that even now, while his arm
is stretched out to give the blow, or his hand to sign the decree, even now,
that you would return, from your dumb idols, and other vanities, unto me, says
the Lord, by a sad, and serious, and hearty repentance: outwardly also, and
publicly expressed by fasting (that afflicts the body) and by weeping, and
mourning (that speaks the inward relenting of the heart.) These would leave
behind them a hatred of those sins, that call for so sad a farewell.

13. But this last call of mercy will admit of no hypocrisy. The rending of
your clothes, and other outward signs of repentance, will not serve the turn.
The heart is open to me, says the Lord, and you must begin with rending and
breaking of the heart, if you think of preparing a sacrifice fit to appease me.
And I, the sad Prophet of your otherwise-imminent destruction, advise you to
make such a conversion to the Lord your God, a total alteration, and conversion
of the heart. And then, be sure, when you have so wounded your hearts, to rend
all sin from them, he can heal them again. For, He is so gracious a Father,
that he can receive a prodigal, when he returns home to God, and himself. He is
so merciful, that he is ready to make his mercy triumph over all his, and our
works. He is so slow to anger, that when he has expected, till justice can no
longer defer the blow, yet he can then be entreated, and reconciled, when he is
ready to strike. He is of so great kindness, that he is willinger to repent of
the evil of punishment, then we are to forsake the evil of sin.

14. His threats, and his punishments aim not at our destruction, but only at
our amendment. Our utter ruin must be drawn upon us by our selves: but if our
hearty return will prevent it, we may yet hope to find him all-merciful, and
mercy it self. Therefore though the sentence seem to be irreversibly passed
against us, yet (...) who knows but that^ i. who knows not, that -- nam
Interrogativa, apud Hebroeos, magis affirmant.
who knows not? (there is no doubt but) that upon our returning to Him by
repentance, he may return to us, and repent of the punishment. And leave behind
him (with our deliverance from the enemy) a blessing not upon our sad souls
only, but also upon our afflicted, and macerated bodies: and upon our estates
too, that are even ready to be taken all away by (an army of locusts) a
populous and cruel nation. Thus may our fasting, and mourning be turned into
feasting, and joy, and thankful expressions of our selves in a meat offering,
and drink offering to the Lord our God.

15. Therefore do you, that are Priests, show your selves forwardest in this
work; you that are to take care for others, as well as your selves. Call the
people together, (as you use to do) by the sound of a trumpet in Sion: put them
in mind, by a holy Fast, to castigate the body, and spend a day in holy
exercises. Call for such an Assembly.

16. Thus gather the people, to join together in prayer, and other holy
exercises: wherein the elder men should lead the way to others by their good
example, and compel them by their authority. And as children, and sucking
infants are concerned in the common danger, so let them bear a part in the
public humiliation. And while all are so taken up with fasting, mourning, and
praying, let the Bridegoom also, and the Bride, leave their Bride-chamber, and
their mirth, for that time turning their ornaments into sackcloth, and their
joy into weeping.

17. Above all other let the Priests, whose work it is mainly to intend the
service of God, and who are many ways concerned both in the conversion and
welfare of the people, and as many ways obliged to be earnest suitors unto
God, in their behalf. Let them offer up their prayers, and tears for the people
committed to their charge: and offer them up between the Entrance or Atrium^
populi.
Porch, and the Altar (as interposing their entreaties between a sinful people,
and their angry God) Wherein (as wholly taken up with the necessities of the
people) Let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, which thou have purchased to
thy self with thy mighty hand. Let not thine own inheritance hear that reproach
of the heathen, for being in a manner forsaken by God, whom they pretend to
serve: which must needs tend to the dishonor of God, and the disparagement of
his power, and love to his own servants, as our enemies will apprehend it,
while they do thus insult, and domineer over us in our great misery. And of his
honor we are to be more tender, then of our own deliverance.

18. These are the likeliest means to move the Lord, not only to be merciful
to his people, and willing to spare them, but zealous also in their behalf,
even to the turning of his anger upon their cruel enemies: (...)
with the same affection, wherewith a husband would revenge the injuries of his
beloved spouse.

19. In which affection, what answer can the Lord make to the true repentance
of his afflicted servants, and the humble supplication of their Priests, but
that, which shall carry with it, a supply of their present wants, and
necessities, by plenty of corn and wine and oil, and whatsoever else may serve
to the taking away of their reproach among the heathens, as well as the
confirming of his reconciliation with them, by such a new, and ample increase
of their store.

20. These blessings should have been seconded by others upon their true
repentance (for, Gods favors use not to go alone.) Therefore hear the words of
that gracious conditional promise to them. After you are, so well provided for,
I will remove far from you the Northern army, says the Lord. Those hungry
locusts of Assyria, and Chaldaea, your first and worst enemies, shall be sent
far enough from Iudaea, (the garden of the world) to a barren, and dry land:
his army, by the way, scattered, and divided, the foreparts from the
extremest, as much as the East of the Mediterranean Sea is divided from the
Western parts. And in the end, the corrupt smell of the poor relics of all
their great forces, shall be as unsavory in the nostrils of such, as shall be
witnesses of their ruin, and, after that, in the memory of those, that shall
make mention of their power: as all their attempts were proud, and insolent,
and intolerable against the land of Israel.

21. The whole land may turn their fear into joy and gladness, as soon as God
begins to show, what great things he can do for them, when they are rid of such
devouring locusts, and so secured of the quiet enjoying of that plenty, Vide v.
19.
which I said, their repentance, and amendment of life may procure for them,
from a merciful and gracious God, that plainly appears great in whotsoever he
does.

22. This may be the effect of our repentance. But such temporal promises of
plenty, and safety here, are shadows of greater happiness, and security from
our ghostly enemies, by the coming of the Messiah. And therefore somewhat shall
now be added in speculation of that. To shadow the time of his coming, before
which, the general Peace, and plenty of all things, shall seem to usher in the
great Peacemaker: I may speak to the cattle (such as we Vide c. 1. 20.
heard awhile ago crying out for want of food) and tell them, that our
happiness, in the near approach of the Messiah,, shall not begin without some
comfort to the very beasts of the field. For, The Pastures of the wilderness
shall (...) germinabunt, virescent.
put on the face of joy, and the color, which they delight in. And the trees,
if they show not the same color, shall show such plenty and variety of fruit,
as shall best express them to be in a flourishing estate. Among them, the
Fig Tree, and the vine (that we most enquire after) shall show the choicest
(...) vim suam, their uttermost strength.
fruit in their kind, that we could expect from them.

23. And while the earth, and trees, and dum Creatures partake of so much
refreshment: much more shall our hearts be enlarged with spiritual joy, and
comfort. Therefore do you Citizens of Jerusalem, and inhabitants of Judaea, or
you rather that make up the true Israel of God, and members of the holy Church,
whereof Jerusalem is a type, Do you study how to express the solace, and
content, that must needs follow upon the coming of the Messiah, the true
Doctor, and Teacher of Righteousness: which, under the same (...) Et Doctorem
and pluviam significat.
name, shall bring you the best rain, and showers from Heaven (in the preaching
of his holy word) both the first rain, that helps up the first hopes of fruit,
and the latter rain, which shall, in due time, secure us of a happy harvest (in
the higher, and more spiritual sense of the success of the Gospel.)

24. Such a happy harvest, under the Messiah his Kingdom, will fill all places
with plenty of spiritual food. The richest flower of the best wheat: the most,
and best liquor from the choicest Vine, and Olive will be but poor emblemes,
and figures of it.

25. This plenty will obliterate the memory of your former greatest famine, or
what other misery happened to the body, from those mighty armies of hungry
locusts, the Grassehoppers, Cankerworms, Caterpillars, and Palmerworms, that I
sent among you. This plenty will be abundant recompense for those times of
want, and distress.

26. For, if you will bring souls hungry, and thirsty, and longing to be
refreshed with the best cordials, and the true manna, the food of life that
came down from Heaven. It is to be had without money: You may freely eat, and
be fully satisfied: and have cause enough to return all possible praise and
thanksgiving to the Lord your God, for those wonderful unspeakable mercies,
which may further oblige you to a confident, and constant devoting of your
selves to his service, without any more revolting, or forsaking of him, as if
you were ashamed of your profession.

27. To which end, you shall see enough to make you know, that I am in the
midst of Israel, and I am the Lord your God, and no other beside me, (whether
we understand it of our Saviors corporal presence, and dwelling here, as God,
and Man: or of his invisible assistance, and government of his Church.)
Therefore I might well v. praced.
say that you shall be sufficiently obliged to his service, and to such a
trust, and confidence, and joy in Him, as shall make you triumph in your holy
Calling, rather then any way be ashamed of it.

28. After these times of your enjoying the happy sight of the Messiah, I will
also send down my holy Spirit, in a visible form, and bestow his Spiritual
Graces in such abundance upon all sorts of men (though they are but flesh and
blood) that some, even illeterate persons) men, and women of your own nation
shall show the power of a divine prophetic spirit, Act. 2.
to the speedy, and successeful propagation of the gospel. To which, in the
fuller progress, there shall not a little be added, by that, which in Vt (in
Actis) Petro, and aliis.
dreams, and visions shall be revealed, not only to some of the elder, but to
some also of the younger sort.

29. And as no sex, or nation: so neither any rank or order of men, bond or
free, masters or servants, shall be excluded from this high privilege of
partaking of the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

30. Not long after this prosperous beginning, and divulging of the gospel,
many prodigious signs will appear as presages, and forerunners of the fearful
destruction of Jerusalem, (the sad punishment of their rebellion, and unbelief)
wonders in heaven and earth, beside the effusion of much blood, in the
slaughter of many men in several places: and the flames of fire, and pillars of
smoke, that will appear in the burning and destroying of many Towns.

31. Upon which there will follow such a dark, and dismal aspect, and
alteration of the glorious light above, as will plainly fore-speak a sad and
bloody confusion, and alteration in the Jewish state: that under the Romans
exceeding, and completing that under the Chaldeans of the great, and terrible
day of the Lords coming in judgment against this sinful nation.

32. Yet in all this misery, as the severity of God will be seen in the
destruction of obstinate sinners: so his mercy and succor will not be excluded
from any that call upon Him, with an obedient faith. Sion, and Jerusalem shall
not then want such a means of deliverance. And that mercy shall be continued
for ever to the remnant of the Jews, that will obey the voice of their Messiah
in the Gospel, the voice of their Lord God, that shall call them to repentance.

CHAP. III.
1. FOr behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.

2 I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of
Ieboshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for my heritage
Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.

3 And they have cast lots for my people, and have given a boy for an harlot,
and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.

4 Yea and what have ye to do with me, O Tire and Zidon, and all the coasts of
Palestine? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and
speedily will I return your recompense upon your own head.

5 Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your
Temples, my goodly pleasant things.

6 The children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto
the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.

7 Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, and
will return your recompense upon your own head.

8 And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children
of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far off, for the
Lord has spoken it.

9 Proclaim ye this among the gentiles: prepare war, make up the mighty men,
let all the men of war draw near let them come up.

10 Beat your plow shares into swords, and your pruning hooks into spears: let
the weak say, I am strong.

11 Assemble your selves and come all ye heathen, and gather your selves
together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord.

12 Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Iehoshaphat: for
there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.

13 Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe, come, get you down, for the
press is full, the fats overflow, for the wickedness is great.

14 Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord
is near in the valley of decision.

15 The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining.

16 The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem,
and the heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his
people, and the strength of the Children of Israel.

17 So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy
mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass
through her any more.

18 And it shall come to pass in that day; that the mountains shall drop down
new wine, and the bills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall
flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and
shall water the valley of Shittim.

19 Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for
the violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent
blood in their land.

20 But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.

21 For I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwells
in Zion.

CHAP. III.
A Prophecy of what shall happen, after a longer, and more uncertain time, in
the valley of Iehoshaphat, which (what particular place soever is chiefly
intended) signifies a place, or several places, wherein God will please to
exercise his judgment upon his, and the Churches enemies: at several times,
and upon several occasions before the last Day of Judgment: but completely
then.

1. FOr, Behold, it shall come to pass (says the Lord) in those days of the
Messiah (the times of the gospel) when I shall bring again the captivity of
Judah, and Jerusalem: ^. reduce all the true Israelites, Jews, and Gentiles,
into one fold, to be all under one Shepherd.

2. Then will I, as occasion serves, summon the enemies of the Church in all
nations, and I will make them appear before me, A figure of this divine help,
and delivery of Gods people, under the gospel, was that miraculous victory in
the valley of Jehoshaphat. 2. patal. 20, 26. therefore that name is made use of
here.
in the valley of Iehosphaphat (or (...)
in the place, wherein I will execute my judgment) and there will I avenge the
injuries done to my own People (the true Israel of God) mine inheritance: whose
cruel enemies dispersed them through all the world, as if they would have
taken possession of my own peculiar portion, and divided it, as their own
haereditary possession.

3. In those particular days of Judgment (which will be as types, and
forerunners of the General Judgment that will, at last, overtake all the
enemies of the Church) it will appear, what scorns, and injuries have been put
upon all the Saints of God. Particularly it will be made evident, that upon
some of my People they have haec forte, and gentes in Iudaeos faclitarunt: sed
long majora hosts Evangelii in Christianos.
cast lots: they have sold the children of Christians: an ingenuous young man
have they made away for the price of an harlot, and a modest Virgin for a sum
of money, that might furnish them with wine, to drink, and be merry.

4. And what have you to do with me, and my Church, says the Lord. You that
are as great, and close adversaries to the Christians, as ever the Tyrians, and
Sidonians, and all the Tract of Palestine, were to the Jews. Does your ill
usage come in as a return of some injury, that I and my People seem to have
offered unto you? If you do either (...) utramque notionem in duere potest, and
retribuendi, and provocandi, i. de eo etiam dicitur, qui prior contulit
beneficium, vel maleficium.
provoke me with your ventrous, and first attempts, or pretend any such (...)
leviter. and celeriter, i. quam primum.
requital upon me, or mine. I shall very speedily take order, to return a just
recompense upon your own heads.

5. And I may then truly say, that you have deserved it otherwise. For both
silver and gold, and other precious things, which I bestowed upon my People,
those it will appear that you took away, thereby the better to furnish and
adorn your own (...) utrumque significat.
Temples and Palaces.

6. Likewise the true Sons of mystical Judah and Jerusalem (the good, and
constant Professors of my gospel) you sold, to the Grecians, and other
Merchants, with whom you had the like commerce, and so dispersed them thorough
several remote countries, that they might be far enough from returning to
their own home.

7. But I shall as surely recall them, and reduce them safe out of those parts,
to which you thought they had been confined, by your selling of them thither.
And then I will requite you in a like return of your deserts, upon your own
pates.

8. For I will leave your Sons, and Daughters, upon the same terms, in the
hands of those good Professors, whereof Judah is the type. And they shall have
power to dispose of them into far remoter parts, even as far off as the
Sabeans. Because I have so determined to do, and have justly passed such a
decree upon them.

9. Against which decree if you can have any hope to prevail. Sarcasmus.
Bestir your selves to the purpose, and use all the means you can. Publish, or
proclaim your war among what nations you think fit. Provide your self of the
ablest auxiliaries, Put all your strength upon it. And leave not out a man,
that can assist you in this enterprise. When you have done all you can, all
will be but lost labor, against those my Servants, that I have resolved to
defend.

10. Sell your plow-shares, and sythes, and other necessary instruments, and
implements of your country-labour, to supply your selves the better with
weapons, and engines of war. And let the weakest of all be encouraged to do
some proper service to the cause.

11. Let your troops, and Regiments out of several nations multiply into a
mighty army, and muster up all your forces together. There and then the Lord of
Hosts has his greater forces (of men, and angels, and the meanest creatures)
that will quickly, and utterly rout the very flower, and strength of your most
daring Soldiers: at the hearing of this short prayer, out of the mouth of his
afflicted Servants, There (...) in Imperativo sic exponi porest. Fac fortes
tuas descendere, Domine, (in auxilium tuoru^^)
let thy mighty ones descend, O Lord, to the releif of thy people.

12. That Prayer will procure a Command, that shall rouse all the nations, that
oppose the Church, and summon them personally to appear in the valley of
Iehoshaphat, in the place which I shall appoint, there to sit in judgment
against all nations on every side, that have been enemies to Me, and my Church.

13. Upon this summons, Hear how God himself encourages those, that he makes
the executioners of his Justice. Come, put in your sithes, for there is a great
harvest before you, the wickedness of mine enemies is now ripe. Come down into
this valley. For the wine press is full, it runs over for the exceeding
abundance of their great, and bloody offenses, (for that may be intimated in
the overflowing of the blood of the grape)

14. O the multitudes of heretics, schismatics, irreligious, and profane
livers! O the vast companies of Atheists, Idolaters, Tyrants, and other
malicious enemies of the true Profession, and Service of God, that, methinks, I
see now making their appearance in the valley of Jehoshaphat (or devine
judgment) that may now be called the valley of (...) decisionem, vel decretum:
and tribulam, vel traham significat, incisionibus plenam ad frumentum
excutiendum.
decision (where they shall receive their doom) or the valley of threshing after
the harvest (where their punishment shall begin) For now, after they have
enjoyed their time, the day of the Lord the time of divine vengeance) is ready
to come upon them, in the valley of decision, and of threshing.

15. At the approach of this terrible day, the world will seem to be all in
confusion. They that were the light, and glory of their times, and as eminent,
and conspicuous in the sphaere of their government, as the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, are in the firmament of heaven, shall be suddenly obscured, and loose
their light.

16. The Lion of the tribe of Judah shall roar out of Sion, to the terror of
all his enemies. When he first utters his voice, as the defender of Jerusalem (
i. of his holy Church whereof Jerusalem was a figure) though the powers of
heaven, and earth may shake, yet they that trust in him, will stand as firm as
mount Sion, that cannot be moved, The Lord will show himself our refuge, and
the strength of the Israel of God.

17. After the roaring of the Lion, will you hear the comfortable voice of the
Lamb of God. Thus shall ye know (says he to his Servants) thus shall you see,
that I am the Lord your God, that dwell in my Church, as in my Sion, my holy
mountain. Thus shall you be assured that my Jerusalem, my Church, is holy, and
therefore shall be secured from the unhallowed hands of those strange children,
that shall not be suffered, so insolently and triumphantly as they have done,
to go thorough her any more.

18. After this treading the wine press of the wicked, and threshing of their
harvest: we are only to hear of the happiness of the Church. For, then shall
the mountains drop new wine to her, (for her stronger Saints) and the hills
shall flow with milk, (fit nourishment for her yet tender babes) And all the
rivers of this mystical Judah lege, shall run with waters, etc.
shall with waters of life (to refresh all) And to this end, a fountain shall
come forth of the house of the Lord, to supply the sacred Font, which is placed
in the lower part of the Church, like a little valley of Shittim, which is the
vide Hieron. and Lyranum.
emblem of a vessel that will not putrify.

19. And then while Egypt, and Edom, ( i. e. great enemies of the Church) shall
lie ruinous, and desolate, because of the innocent blood, which they have shed
in the true Judah, (the Church of God.)

20. Judah in the mean while (the holy Church) shall dwell safe, and the true
Jerusalem shall be comforted with a true, and lasting felicity.

21. And the blood of the Saints, subauditur hic (...) ut recte Hieron.
which I did not before manifest to be pure, and innocent, and therefore most
unjustly spilt, that shall I, even by that means, declare to be pure, and
innocent, namely by the exemplary vide v. 16, 17, 19.
punishment of their executioners. And thus will God ever abide with his
Church, and preserve his Servants in their greatest dangers, or reward them
with that which shall exceed a present delivery, and be a sufficient
vindication of their virtue, and innocence.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF AMOS.
CHAP. I.
1. THe word of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw
concerning Israel, in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam the son of Ioash King of Israel, two years before the earthquake.

2 And he said, the Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem: and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of
Carmel shall wither.

3 Thus says the Lord; For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they have threshed Gilead
with threshing instruments of iron.

4 But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour the
palaces of Benhadad

5 I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the
plain of Aven: and him that holds the scepter from the house of Eden, and the
people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, says the Lord.

6 Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: because they carried away captive the
whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom.

7 But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces
thereof.

8 And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holds the
scepter from Ashkelon, and I will turn mine hand against Ekron; and the remnant
of the Philistines shall perish, says the Lord God.

9 Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: because they delivered up the whole
captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant.

10 But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the palaces
thereof.

11 Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof, because he did pursue his brother with
the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and
kept his wrath for ever.

12 But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

13 Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, and
for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof: because they have ripped
up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border.

14 But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the
palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day
of the whirlwind.

15 And their King shall go into captivity, he, and his Princes together, says
the Lord.

CHAP. I.
1. THe words, (...) and ^es, and verba signif.
or things Prophetically imparted to the knowledge of Amos, who was among the
(...) may signify either one that is only a keeper of sheep; or one that is a
master of sheep, as was Mesa King of Moab, that paid to the King of Israel a
hundred thousand lambs, and as many rams with the wool. 4. Reg. 3. 4. But Amos
seems to have kept both sheep and greater cattle, see chap. 7. 15.
Shepherds, or keepers of cattle in Tekoah (six miles from Bethlehem) which
were famous for that employment. Thence was he called to be a Prophet, as
David, before that, from following of sheep, was chosen to be a Royal Prophet,
by that wise, and merciful God, that chooses the base things of the world to
confound the wise. Now these things were revealed to Amos, concerning Israel,
in the time of Uzziah King of Judah, and Jeroboam, son of Joash, King of
Israel: two years Sic 2. Cor. 12. 2. (...) -- etc. Vide Hieron. and Iosephum.
and Zach. 14. 5.
before the Earthquake, that happened in the reign of Vzziah, that was smitten
with leprosy, for attempting upon the Priests office.

2. Amos being thus made a Prophet, his name agreed with the sum of his
Prophecy. For (...) ( Amost) signifies a burden. And that is an ordinary term
in the holy Scripture for the Prophecy of a heavy punishment, denounced
against a Nation, as this of Amos was against many, specially against the ten
Tribes, Against whom, what he had prophesied, was fulfilled by Salmaneser, that
led them away captive into Assyria. 4 Reg. 17. 6. But let us hear the Prophet
himself speak,

Thus said Amos. The Lord that delighted so much in Sion. and pleased to dwell
between the Cherubims in his Temple at Jerusalem, is now so offended with the
sins of Judah, and Israel, that he sends an angry threatening voice from Sion,
and Jerusalem, that may terrify them both: specially those of Israel, the
greater offenders. This terrible voice will have a doleful effect in the
pleasant pastures of all those Shepherds, that have neglected their flock; and
upon the Sheep that have turned Wolves against their Shepherds, and raised up
Shepherds of their own choice, incapable of the place. Carmel among others,
even Carmel it self, which had the fattest pasture, and the most numerous
sheep, shall in the height and glory of it be withered and made no such place
for their feeding.

3 What shall we think will become of the Gentiles, when Gods own people hear
such sad tidings from the place of their joy, and comfort? Let us now hear
that. For Syria Damascena first. Thus says the Lord. For so many foul sins of
Damascus, as have filled up the full measure of their iniquity, and may be
brought against them in the perfect number of seven, by the addition of four
more to their first three, that were bad enough: For these (...)
I will not restore Damascus to my wonted favor, or I will not recall that,
which I have decreed against that place. Specially in that they heavily
afflicted my people of Gilead (Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh)
barbarously insulting over them, and (...) metaph. ab iis, qui apud Iudaes
fruges excutere solebant per instrumentae gravia, and fer^o munita. Simile de
cribro. Luc. 22. 31.
trampling upon them, or rather (...) metaph. ab iis, qui apud Iudaes fruges
excutere solebant per instrumentae gravia, and ferio munita. Simile de cribro.
Luc. 22. 31.
laying on them like thrashers, and abusing all alike. (As it was foretold by
Elisaeus, in his words to Hazael, 4 Reg. 8, and 15.)

4. Therefore, in mine anger, I will send a furious enemy against them, which,
like a fire, shall suddenly deface and ruin the royal structures erected by
Hazael, when they shall be the Palaces of his son Benhadad.

5. And I will break the very strength of Damascus, (their gates, fortresses,
and whatsoever else it is, wherein they most confide) And I will pack away the
inhabitants of the Plain of Aven: and with them the idolatrous Princes, that
rule over i. The place of pleasure.
Beth-eden, and the neighbour-cities devoted to riot and luxury. For the
Syrians shall be led captives into Kir, says the Lord (by the hand of
Tiglathpileser, King of Assyria.)

6. When they of Gaza in Palestine have made up the like Vt expnoitur v. 3.
measure of their sins, the like punishment shall be as peremptorily decreed
against them: specially because of their cruelty to those of Israel, that fled
into their parts for refuge, upon the invasion of Sennacherib, whom, though
they came (...) captivitatem pacificam.
peaceably, and friendly to them, only for relief, and no way to offer them
any injury: yet they most injuriously sold them into Edom, as if they had been
their own captives, and, by right of war, taken by themselves. Whereby they did
as good as (...)
imprison them among their capital enemies, and obstruct the means of their
return unto their own home.

7. Therefore I will cause such warlike forces to come (from 4 Reg. 18. 8.
Hezekiah to the wall of Gaza, as shall consume and burn that City, and all the
fair buildings within it.

8. And the inhabitants of Azotus shall be turned out of doors, and the Rulers
of Ascalon shall partake of the same justice with their Countrymen. Then (after
that blow given to Gaza, Azotus, and Ascalon) I will turn my striking hand
against Ekron also, and there the rest of the Philistims shall be destroyed (by
the Assyrians) to the utter ruin of that people.

9. Thus says the Lord, For the like overflowing of the Vt exposuimns, v. 3.
transgressions of Tyrus, in so full a measure, I will not be reconciled unto
them, nor reverse the decree already passed against them. Because they used the
like cruelty, that the Philistims did, against the poor Israelites, which came
peaceably to them, but were sold away to the Edomites, as captives taken in
war. And the Tyrians shall fare the worse, because Vide v. 6.
they so easily forgot the league, and friendship, that was Reg. 9. 13.
between their King Hiram, and King David, and Solomon, and so between the
succeeding Kings, Reg. 9. 13.
that used the style, and love of Brethren: which, no doubt, was cause of much
familiarity, and many kind offices among the subjects of either Nation, and was
ill broken off for a matter of filthy lucre, in the sale of their confederates.

10. Therefore will I send an enemy (from Ezekiel. 26. 7. and chap. 27. and 28.
Chaldaea) to the walls of Tyrus, that shall set most of the stately buildings
of Tyrus on such a fire, as all the water above her shall not be able to quench.

11. The like measure of sin will draw the like Sic exponitur, v. 3.
punishment upon Edom: because he was so unnaturally cruel to his Brethren, the
posterity of Jacob, showing no bowels of compassion to these Brethren of the
same belly, but resting upon a violent, obstinate, implacable way of furious
anger, transmitted as an hereditary vice to Posterity for ever. So did Edom
strive to keep it ever alive, to his immortal shame for such impiety, and
inhumanity against so near Allies.

12. Therefore (by Sennacherib, and his Soldiers) such flames of War shall be
kindled in Teman, and Bozra, the two Cities of note in the Country of Edom, as
shall consume the fair Palaces thereof.

13. And of another Nation affianced to the people of God, thus says the Lord.
For the Vt exposuimus, v. 3.
full measure of the transgressions of the Ammonites, the Children of Lot: they
shall receive the same D^om with the Edomites; the rather for their barbaro^s
inhumanity, which sharpened their weapons against the weaker Sex, to the ripping
up of the matrones of Gilead, even when they were great with child. Not out of
any provocation in war, but out of a mere covetous and Jer, 49. 1.
ambitions desire, to enlarge their territories.

14. Therefore a fearful fire shall be kindled by the walls of Rabbah (the
gloriousest City of Animon) that, without difference of Sex, or Age, shall
devour such as are found in the choicest Palaces, and Mansions of the
Ammonites. It shall come in a violent, and Jer, 49, 2.
fearful way, with military clamours, and shouting of some, and skreeching of
others. It shall come of a sudden, like a horrible storm, and tempest to the
ruin, and devastation of the Country of Ammon.

15. Which shall be the sadder, and more irrecoverable by the captivity of the
King, and his Princes: and their titular Deity, and his Priests. For (...) per
Regem eorum, vel Molochum exponi potest.
Moloch himself (for all his Royal title) shall escape no better then the
meanest of the people, that must yield to the fury of the war. For, The Lord
has spoken it.

CHAP. II.
1 THus says the Lord For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: because he burnt the bones of the King of
Edom into lime.

2 But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of
Kerioth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of
the trumpet:

3 And I will cut off the Judge from the midst thereof, and will slay all the
Princes thereof with him, says the Lord.

4 Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: because they have despised the Law of the
Lord, and have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused them to err,
after the which their fathers have walked.

5 But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem.

6 Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof: because they sold the righteous for
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes:

7 That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn
aside the way of the meek, and a man and his father will go in unto the same
maid, to profane my holy Name.

8 And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge, by every Altar,
and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.

9 Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of
the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks, yet I destroyed his fruit from
above, and his roots from beneath.

10 Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty years
through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.

11 And I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for
Nazarites. Is it not even thus O ye children of Israel, says the Lord?

12 But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and commanded the Prophets,
saying, Prophecy not.

13 Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of she^ves

14 Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not
strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver himself:

15 Neither shall he stand that handles the bow, and he that is swift of foot,
shall not deliver himself, neither shall he that rides the horse, deliver
himself.

16 And he that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that
day, says the Lord.

CHAP. II.
1. THus says the Lord. Because Moab has filled up the same measure of sin
Expon. ut cap. 1. 3, 13.
with the Ammonites, therefore I pronounce the same punishment to them of Moab:
who to their other sins added that, which showed their arrogance, and malice to
Edom, in burning the bones of quis hic fuerit, nec ex Sacra Scriptura, nec
alibi, ut opinor, inveniri potest, Illud certe, 4. Reg. 3. ult. huc tor queri
non potest, videtur enim intelligi, non de harede Regis Edom^ sed Moab.
one of the Kings of Edom, and so most inhumanely and barbarously, sic
chaldaus, sed (...) potest exponi per (...) pro calce, instead of lime.
mingling the ashes with the lime, and mortar that they used in dawbing and
plaistering of their walls, which was an act of much pride, and scorn, and
contempt; and a contumelious way of revenge.

2. Therefore I will raise up an insolent, and cruel enemy against the country
of Moab, that shall kindle such a war, as shall be the sudden, fearful and
total ruin of or, the houses of their chief Cities.
Kerioth, their chiefest City (for such is commonly a destruction by fire) And
in the hurry, and tumult of that war, shall many of the Moabites die, amidst
the confused noise of the trumpets, sic. c. 1, 14.
and shouts of the enemy, and their own sighs, and groans, and heavy
lamentations.

3. So will be cut off from Moab, and especially from Kerioth, (or, the chief
Cities in the heart of the Country,) their eminentest (...) hebraeis, qui
aliis Rex, Dux, Princeps
Governors, and Commanders: and all their Princes, and the greatest of their
Nobility shall have their share in this punishment, that shall sweep them all
away, says the Lord, that neither can, nor will be hindered, or entreated in
the execution of this sentence upon Moab.

4. And while these acts of Divine Justice appear among the Heathen, least
Judah (because of the open profession of the true Religion, and worship of God
among them) should take themselves to be in a fair way of escaping the like
severe revenge, that God might take upon their sins, thus says the Lord
concerning his own people, Because Judah presumed to sic expone ex c. 1. 3.
make up such a high measure of sin, as cried to heaven for Justice,
therefore they also shall have their doom run in the same terms. Specially
because they forsook the most holy laws, and statutes of God, (as if they
contemned that to which they had promised obedience) and were chiefly led by
their own phansies, and lying vanities, and strange inclination to idolatry: as
the ill example of their Forefathers, and their many revolts, toald them on,
and deluded their foolish hearts.

5. Therefore Nabuchadnezar's puissant, and victorious army shall raise an
unquenchable fire in Iudaea, that shall not end without the firing of the
Temple, and the Palaces, and other costly pieces of building in their
Mother-City of Jerusalem by Nabuzaradan.

6. Which severity threatened to be exercised upon the two Tribes, (among whom
was the Temple, and the purer worship of God, may terrify the kingdom of
Israel, and be a clear evidence of their speedier, and heavier ruin. Of whom
thus says the Lord. For the full sic exponitur c 1 3.
measure of iniquity made up by the Israelites, and running over, I will make
good the sad irreversible Sentence passed against them, and foretold by
several Prophets. The rather, because of their extreme, and cruel Avarice,
which blinded their eyes, and induced them, not only to circumvent and
defraud, but downright, to sell men better than themselves, and righteous
persons at poor rates, as if the least sum of money, or a pair of shoes were
more highly to be prised, than the keeping of a poor man from perpetual
servitude.

7. Nor will I conceal some other of their faults. In respect of their malice,
Locus hic difficilis sic mihi reddi posse videtur, (...) i. Absorbent, vel
deglutiunt pauperes, super pulverem terrae (collocanteos) quem pulverem etiam
ponunt super captra pauperum (pro (...) and modestorum viam, atque institutum
pervertunt.
they are as stomachfull against the poor, as if they could eat them up like
bread. And their pride is such, that they think it not enough, to throw them as
low as the dust of the earth, unless they take of that dust, and cast it upon
their heads, as a sign of greater scorn, and contempt: where they cannot so
insult over the poor, yet, at least, (that they may be doing of some mischief)
if they meet with modest, humble, and quiet men, they disturb them in the way,
that is, in the course of their life, and occasions of their several
employments. From hence, laying the raines loose to all liberty, they take the
impudence to proceed further to sins of another nature, to a degree of
incestuous pollution, hardly named among the Gentiles, that the Father, and the
Son should wickedly abuse the same woman. By which horrid crimes, they do
what they can to pollute my holy name: and provoke the Gentiles to the
blaspheming of me, as well as speaking the truth of them, that thus dishonor
their God; whose honor, and glory should be the main end, and aim of all their
endeavors.

8. Beside all this, having taken some pledges of those, that run not after the
same sic Hebraei and Hicron.
madness of Idolatry with them, they made use of them for sacred vestures or
carpets, in or upon them to prostrate themselves before their Idol-altars
(whereas to make any use of pledges is against their law) And (still adding
sin unto sin) they delighted their palates with that wine, which they
bought with what was gained by the sale of their goods, whom themselves had
unjustly condemned. Thus were they not ashamed to cheer up themselves in the
house of their false Gods; and in their service, as it were to drink up the
blood of innocent men, that would not be drawn to the like excess of Idolatry
with them.

9. In this excess, and overslowing of sin, how much have these men forgot
themselves, and the favors, and mercies, that I heaped upon them? How (in the
way to a land of rest, and plenty) out of my love, and care of them, I drove
away the Amorite before them, a stout and strong people, giants of so vast a
bigness, and stature, that whosoever was to fight against them, would think
that his sword was to hack at Cedars, and Oaks, rather than to cut down men:
Yet these Cedars, and Oaks did I pluck up by the roots, and cut off in the
branches, and laid them prostrate (before the children of Israel) as low as the
ground they trod upon. i.e. I utterly ruined, and destroyed the Amorite, so
that he was no longer a People: as I did many other nations, that were
vanquished, and expelled out of their ancient seats, to make room for them:
root, and branch: Fathers, and children: Princes, and subjects: all were driven
out, to give them way.

10. This I did for them, whom I had first obliged by a miraculous delivery
from their Egyptian bondage, and a safe conduct thorough the red Sea, and a
vast, and barren wilderness, where they were forty years together
plentifully supplied with all things necessary, till they came to possess
those fat, and fertile grounds of all the So the name here is taken.
seven nations of the Amorites.

11. And that I might crown these temporal benefits with spiritual gifts, and
graces, I raised up some of your children to be Prophets, that they might
instruct you, and be your guides into a place of everlasting rest, in the
heavenly Canaan. And (as another means to that) I made others of the Nazarites
that they might be as living patterns, and examples of a temperate, and holy
life. Tell me, if any of these things can be denied, or if all these favors
were not freely thus disposed of, for your good, says the Lord?

12. And yet (as it were to cross my ordinances, which tended so much to your
own advantage) you would often interrupt the strict order of the Nazarites, by
persuading them to drink wine, though it were flatly interdicted. And you
longed so much to hear your Prophets tell you rather of that which was
pleasing, than of that which was true, that you spared not to lay it as an
Injunction upon them.

13. But for this liberty of sin, that you have taken to your selves, (...)
arctans ego, i. angustiam vobis afferam, nam hoc verbum priore loco transitivum
est, posteriore neutrum, ut docet Kimchi. Sunt tamen qui sic exponunt. Ego
strideo subter vos, sicut stridet plaustrum anustum manipulis; i. vestris
sceleribus oneratus, diutius vos far nequeo.
I will bring you into great streights, and pressures of misery, and calamity:
so that as a cart, streitned in it self, and as it were oppressed with too
great a burden, does seem to groan, and make a noise of complaint under the
(...) in loco vestro, i. pressurus sum locum vestrum hostibus.
weight of many sheaves: so the enemies that set upon you, and the afflictions
that distress, and humble your souls, shall force out of you many groans,
and lamentations (heavy, and loud expressions of your sorrow.)

14. In this pressure, and straightness; It will be to little purpose to think
of saving your selves from your enemies by flight, or of finding ways of
evasion from your other miseries. It will be as vain to think of resisting, and
overcoming them, by strength of body, or stoutnesse of heart. For, the means of
flight shall be taken from them, and the stoutest shall feel his stout heart,
to faint, and sink within him. And the strongest of your champions shall be so
far from rescuing others, that he shall not be able to preserve his own life.

15. Nor shall the most cunning Archers be able to stand to it so long, as to
make sufficient use of his bow. Or the swiftest of foot, to run so fast, as
to carry himself far enough out of danger. Or, the most confident Horseman
to ride so fast, but that a speedy, and deadly blow shall overtake him and make
an end of his life.

16. And if any be accounted of so Heroical a spirit, that he may presume of
better fortune than other mighty men: even he shall be forced to yield at last:
or, if he can make an escape, to betake himself to his heels, like a naked
Soldier, stripped of all his harness, and leaving all his weapons behind him.
For, the Lord has spoken it.

CHAP. III.
HEear this word that the Lord has spoken against you, O children of Israel,
against the whole family which I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying,

2 You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities.

3 Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

4 Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? will a young Lion cry
out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

5 Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him? shall
one take up a snare from the earth and have taken nothing at all?

6 Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? shall
there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?

7 Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets unto his
servants the Prophets.

8 The Lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can
but prophecy?

9 Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of Egypt,
and say, Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria: and behold the
great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

10 For they know not to do right, says the Lord who store up violence and
robbery in their palaces.

11 Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary there shall be even round
about the land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces
shall be spoiled.

12 Thus says the Lord, As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the lion
two legs or a piece of an ear: so shall the children of Israel be taken out
that dwell in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.

13 Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of
hosts,

14 That in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I
will also visit the altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut
off, and fall to the ground.

15. And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
Ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.

CHAP. III.
1. HEar now, O ye children of Israel, what the Lord says against you, against
all the twelve tribes, the whole nation of the Jews, that went as one family
into Egypt, but were increased into a mighty people, when he delivered them out
of Egypt. To this purpose does the Lord speak unto you.

2. You only I made choice of, and selected above all other nations, for a
peculiar people, to whom I would commit my sacred Oracles, and upon whom I
would freely confer my greatest Psalm. 147. ult; Deuteronomy, 4. 33.
favors. No nation under heaven had ever such laws (and so conveyed unto them
by my self, or by the Ministry of my Angels, or Prophets) or such ample
promises, such miracles, and deliveries, and such other motives to good life.
Therefore all your unthankfulness, and disobedience, and wickedness will call
for a visitation, in a heavier way of punishment. Both because you knew my Will
better, and had more means, and obligations for the performance of it: and
because you were under a more peculiar way of care, and cognizance, and
government under my self.

3. The Prophets (by whom I instructed you, and forewarned you of the plagues
that would follow your rebellions, and of the mercies, and favors, that would
crown all your good actions) never said any thing to you, but what they
received from me. They all agreed in expressing of the same message, as men
that walk together in the same way, are agreed together. Your walking Genesis 5.
22. Exodus 16. 5.
with me, and conversing in my ways, should have appeared in the like
agreement of yours with me, and them. And if your actions had been so consonant
to my will, and their admonitions, you had now been in as fair a way to the
increase of your happiness; as your dissent from me, and them, has brought
you into the high way of ruin and confusion.

4. When my Prophets came to you with threats in their mouths, it was no more
then I put into them. If you will call it the Chap. 1. 2.
roaring of a Lion, it was my voice. And will the Lion roar either in the
forest or in his den, but when the prey is in his view: so near that he may
take it, when he will. Even so make you no other account, but that my Justice
will follow as sure those Prophetical threats, as the prey follows upon the
roaring of the Lion. Therefore make your peace suddenly, unless you will
expose your selves to a sudden destruction.

5. Do birds use to fall into a net, spread upon the ground, and be taken in it,
unless it be purposely so laid by the Fowler, that it may apprehend them. So
are your punishments prophetically foretold, like snares that are laid for you
in my Justice, and by my direction. When the Prophets have forewarned you, if
you will not take heed, but by your own supine carelessenesse fall into the
net: you may thank your selves. [ praemoniti praemuniti, if it be as it should
be] And your timely repentance, and amendment of life, would be a likely means
for the removal of the snare, in which the Assyrians and Chaldaeans are
thinking to catch you, and hold you fast. But if they once come near, as the
Fowler will not remove the snare, till the birds be caught: so neither will God
recall his sentence against you, nor they remove their armies, till it be too
late for you to escape.

6. When by the sound of a trumpet, in time of war there is notice given to a
City of the forces of the enemy approaching toward them, shall not that City
be afraid, and prepare for the best way of prevention, or resistance? Why then
do not your fears produce the like care, when your Prophets, that are your
Watchmen, Isa; 58. 1.
make their voices like a trumpet, to rouse you up, and acquaint you with the
danger at hand? For is there any such evil of punishment denounced, or brought
upon a City, of which God himself is not the Author? Who therefore does it,
that you may either timely repent, or justly suffer.

7. And he keeping it not so secret, but that, by his Prophets, you are made
privy to his full intention, and they unanimously agreeing in the message, you
cannot but confess, that you are fairly and sufficiently forewarned, and
consequently, if you use not the right means of prevention, that the true cause
of all your suffering must be indeed from your selves only, and your own
impenitence.

8. Which of you now will not be afraid at the roaring of this Lion? And which
of us that are Prophets, dare refuse to prophecy, and give you notice of that,
which God himself (in such a fearful manner) injoynes us to speak, and we
cannot but at our own peril, as well as yours, conceal from you?

9. And that it may appear, how justly that may fall upon Israel, which our
Prophesies have foretold, let the very Heathen be called together, and made
acquainted with their actions, and, out of them, speak truly what they think
of the justice ever used in pronouncing, or asflicting their punishment upon
them. Let it be divulged in the most public places, in the Palaces of Ashdod
(in Palestine) and in all the Palaces of Egypt, that they are invited, freely
to meet together upon the mountains of Samaria, and there (though, being
Idolaters themselves, they may say little to their idolatry, yet) at least,
let them take notice of the strange cruelty of the Israelite, which may be
evidenced by the fearful (...) ab (...) obstreper^.
outcries, and lamentable noise, and exclamations, extorted by the many
oppressions, and injuries of the insolent Governors, that ruled, or rather
domineered (...) in ea. vel intraipsam.
within the City Samaria.

18. Nay, what speak I of the cruelty of their Governors? Take them in a more
general view, and few or none of them did ever (...)
regard, or think of doing any thing that was right, and equal, says the Lord
himself of them. All their care was, by hook, or by crook: by any false, and
unjust ways whatsoever: to hoord up more and more wealth: and furnish their
own stately house by cheating, and impoverishing of other men.

11. Therefore thus says the Lord God to the children of Israel. An enemy
(the Assyrian in the ten tribes, and the Chaldaean in the other two, shall
besiege, and distress the Land, round about. He shall tame thee, and bring
down thy strength, and empty thy rich, and stately houses, which thou had so
filled, and stuffed, with unlawful gain.

12. If any of you escape the fury of that enemy, it will prove as hard, and as
strange a deliverance, as if a shepherd should venture to snatch a leg, or two,
or a little piece of the ear of a sheep out of the mouth of a hungry Lion. Thus
says the Lord of the difficulty, and paucitie of the delivered. Such and so
rare will be the relics of those poor Israelites, that with much hazard will
be rescued out of the very jaws of the enemy. They will be sensible of this
danger, that will lie in Damascus (their confederate Cities) as in a bed; and
in Samaria (their own nests) as in the corner of a bed, thinking to nuzzle
themselves there, as in a bed of ease, and security: or a fit place for the
exercise of their spiritual whoredom. This enemy will rouse them all.

13. Hear this (you specially, that are most concerned in the care, and
oversight of the Nation) and make protestation of it in the house of Jacob
(that you may move them to repentance) says the Lord God, the Lord of Hosts,
(who only can refrain the violence of the hostile Armies, that come against
you.)

14. For (unless you prevent it by repentance) when I begin to punish those of
Israel, for the foul sins, which they have committed, I will not then spare the
chiefest places. Down will go the Altars at Bethel: and the Horns (the
supposed holier part) of the chief Altar will be broken in pieces, and the
Altar ruined, and, by that, the idolatry of that place utterly abolished.

15. And the Court shall not stand firm, where the Temple is ruined. Their
stately Palaces shall all be laid wast. The winter-house, and the summer house
shall feel the same blow. The Kings Ivory-house shall have the same fate with
many other houses, that shall be levelled with the ground. For the Lord of
Hosts has spoken it: and his sentence cannot be reversed by any other.

CHAP. IV.
1 HEar this word ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, which
oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their masters; Bring,
and let us drink.

2 The Lord God has sworn by his Holiness, that lo, the days shall come upon
you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.

3 And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that which is before her,
and ye shall cast them into the palace, says the Lord.

4 Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal multiply transgression; and bring
your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after three years.

5 And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and publish
the free-offerings; for this likes you, O ye children of Israel, says the
Lord God.

6 And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and want
of bread^^ in all your places: yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

7 And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet three
months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it
not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece
whereupon it rained not, withered.

8 So two or three cities wandered unto one city to drink water, but they were
not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

9 I have smitten you with blasting and mildew; when your gardens, and your
vineyards, and your fig trees, and your olive trees increased, the palmer-worm
devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

10 I have sent among you pestilence, after the manner of Egypt: your young men
have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses, and I have made
the stink of your camp to come up unto your nostrils, yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord.

11 I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye
were as a firebrand pinckt out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord.

12 Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

13 For lo, he that forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares
unto man what is his thought, that makes the morning darkness, and treads
upon the high places of the earth: the Lord, the God of hosts is his name.

CHAP. IV.
1. HEar ye this, which God has revealed unto me, concerning the punishment of
you, that dwell in Samaria, the Metropolis of Israel, pleasantly seated upon a
high hill. You, that in so fair and sweet a place, live in ease, and plenty;
and spend all your precious time in pampering of your wanton bodies, like
Epicures, rather then worshipers of the true God, nay, like bruit beasts,
rather then women, endued with reason, like fat kine Sic Principum uxores
vo^a^u^ Psalm. 22. ^3. ipsi Principes truculenti, and genio indulgentes vocantur
(...) Tauri Basan.
of Basan, rather then modest, and temperate wives of such Princes, as have
eminent place, and authority among the people of God. You that (in your proud,
and wanton humors) scorn, and oppress the poor, and needy. And that you may do
it with more advantage) speak to your Husbands, and Rulers, to bring them some
way under your command, that you may get as much out of them, as will defray
the charge of your (...) convivium celebrare. unde (...), convivium.
drinking, and feasting among your merry Gossips. Hear you this message.

2. The Lord has sworn by his own sacred Majesty, i. he has irreversibly
decreed, that the time shall come upon you ere long, wherein the enemy shall as
easily and unexpectedly surprise both your selves, and your pampered children,
as Fishers with their (...) hic vel humum piscatorium significat, vel contum
quo piscatores in rebus percantandis, and explorandis utuntur, and sic dicitus
a (...) in notione (...) propter ferrum acutum in capite. E^ (...) vel hami v.
l retia quaedam piscatoria sunt, ex spinis facta (nam spinae (...) dicuntur, a
(...) quod removendae sint) vel naviculae piscatoriae navi maj r^ adjunctae, ut
iis ad littus appelletur. a (...) recedere^
fishhooks, and other instruments of their art, use to catch the fishes, that
sport about that, which is brought to bereave them of their liberty, and their
life too.

3. And, for fear of the enemy, you shall be fain to creep out at the
breaches, that he shall make in the walls of your City: every one at that
breach, which she can first light upon. After this inevitable flight, you shall
be taken, and at last, with shame enough cast out as far as into Sic Symmachus,
and Hieron. and Hebraei.
Armenia, that will have no such delights for you, as you enjoyed in the rich
Palaces of Samaria. This is that, which God himself has decreed against you.

4. Therefore (if you will hear your own foolish fancies, and inclinations) you
had best enjoy your pleasure before you go thither. Yes, by all means permissio
Ironica
get you to Bethel, and take your solemn leave of your beloved calves, erected
for the worship of that place, show some of your impiety there. Hos. 4. 15. and
12. 11.
Then take your way toward Gilgal, to the idols of that place, there make up
the full measure of your sins. Every morning with great care, and diligence
bring the sacrifices that should be offered to God, and offer them (at your
pleasure, and at your peril) to those idols, your sacred Dieties of Gilgal
forsooth. And, for those Deuteronomy. 14. 28.
tithes, which should be paid every third year in the right place, let your
mistaken devotion Decimas ad 3 dies afferte. (...) annos, vel dies significare
po^est.
pay them to your imaginary gods in three days, if you will, and where you
like best.

5. If you would yet be at more cost in your will worship, Adolere. i. adolere
ex fermentato sacrificium gratulatorium. Levit. 2, 11.
offer also a sacrifice of Praise, and Thanksgiving to your idols, and in an
offering S. incense implied in (...)
by fire make use of leaven, which I commanded to be left out in such cases.
And be sure that notice be taken of your voluntary offerings. Blow a trumpet
before you, when you go to them: some way, or other proclaim it to the world.
For this pleases you well, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord God, and
you may therefore do it, at your peril.

6. But remember, that for this your forsaking of my altars at your pleasure,
and showing your selves so free, and liberal in your idol-service, I also
pleased my self in sending such scarcity of meat in all your Cities, that there
was nothing of it to be seen sticking in your teeth. And it was accompanied as
great a want of bread in all places. Yet did not these punishments produce such
a repentance as brought you thoroughly (...)
home to me.

7. Nor did I punish you, only with want of food for the present, but I
threatened a lasting famine, and thirst by keeping the rain from you too,
whereby, in your mountainous Country, your cornfieldsd were parched with heat,
and your grass withered, and those places dried up, wherein you expected your
water, which is a great part of your drink. This drought you had, even in the
three months before harvest, when you had most need of rain. And (that you
might see this was caused immediately by my self: not by any power in the
stars; not by any cause in nature: not by any accident, or chance) I granted
rain to some Cities and Towns, when I denied it to other neighbour-cities. Nay
(which was more miraculous) one piece of ground was rained upon, and another
hard by it, for want of rain, was dried up, and became utterlie unfruitful, and
barren.

8. So that, in this great defect of water, two or three Cities were forced to
travail to some other City (that had the benefit of some few showers) there to
quench their thirst. Yet was not that City so well stored, as to let them have
water, in so large a supply, as they desired. Neither would this plague work so
much upon you, as to bring you to a serious repentance, and acknowledgement of
those sins, that drew these miseries upon you, says the Lord.

9. Therefore I proceed against you by another plague of blasting the corn, by
a dry East Wind: and of mildew, which is a kind of jaundis in the fruit,
proceeding from too much moisture. What one of these did not consume, the other
commonly corrupted, of that which came out of the earth with some hope. And as
you more and more multiplied, and (...) and multiplicationem, and sumptum,
atque culturam significare porest, the improving.
bestowed cost upon your gardens, and vineyards, and your fig trees, and
olive trees: so did I more, and more increase the number of locusts, and
cankerworms, to spoil, and devour them. So that all your cost, and labor came
in the end to little, or nothing. Yet so foolish, and obstinate you were, and
so hardened in all sin, and impiety, that still you continued as impenitent, as
you were before, says the Lord.

10. And when you thought, in these streights, to help your selves with corn,
and other supplies out of Egypt (whither I had often charged you not to return)
In your Quidam legunt (...) (cum Caph) ad modum AEgypti.
way to Egypt, and from thence, I took away some of you with the pestilence,
and some with the sword of the enemy, and (among them) some of the youngest,
and lustiest men, that thought they were able to make the best resistance. This
misery was increased by the loss of your horses (which I had charged you not
to multiply to your selves) you got them in Egypt, and I took them from you, in
the way from Egypt to you. Nor did I cause you to be troubled with the fight
only, but with the stinking smell of your (...) castra, and copias vel turmas
signif.
troops, so many ways disturbed, and spent with robbery, and mortality. Yet
were not you so sensible of these judgments, as to stop and re^al your selves,
and be converted unto me, says the Lord.

11. Beside all this, I brought a desolation upon some others among you,
somewhat like unto that of Sodom, and Gomrrah, so that the few, that escaped,
were like firebrands, with much Zach. 3. 2.
ado, here and there, plucked out of a terrible flaming fire. And still you
were far enough from making your humble addresses unto me, for mercy, and
forgiveness.

12. Now therefore, since none of these sad calamities had the intended effect
of your Reformation, I have reason to continue my resolution of bringing those
and the like plagues upon you, of which I have either Vt supra v. ^.
already forewarned you by the mouth of my Prophets: or with which I have even
now expressed, how I made trial of you heretofore. Therefore because you see I
am coming against you with such variety of punishments (if you will not repent)
be wise now at last, O Israel, and carefully fit and prepare your selves to
meet me with bended knees, and weeping eyes, and broken hearts, and unfaigned
resolutions of amendment of life.

13. Consider who it is, that so graciously invites thee to meet Him by
repentance, the only means, which is now left to turn away the execution of
his wrath. He so invites thee, O Israel, that has all things in his power, and
at his command. By virtue whereof He created the mighty mountains, and, at his
pleasure, raises the violent winds. By his infinite knowledge, and all-seeing
eye, He can discover the innermost conceits, meditations, and intentions of
the heart of man; as well as what himself intends to do with him, if he do not
amend his life, and return to him. It is he which makes the glorious light of
the morning, that grows brighter, and brighter as he mounts himself: and can
cloud or eclipse that light with sudden darkness, at his pleasure; as the sole
Author, and Commander both of Light and Darkness. It is he that walks upon
those eminent places of the world, that are no way pervious, or passible to us,
and so subdues, and subjects to himself, whatsoever is exalted to the highest
pitch to which it can arrive. The Lord God of Hosts is his name, and all
creatures are but as his soldiers and servants, where his Mercy, or Justice
will please to employ them.

CHAP. V.
1. Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O house
of Israel.

2 The virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon
her land: there is none to raise her up.

3 For thus says the Lord God, The city that went out by a thousand, shall
leave an hundred; and that which went forth by an hundred, shall leave ten to
the house of Israel.

4 For thus says the lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall
live.

5 But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to Beer-sheba: for
Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught.

6 Seek the Lord, and ye shall live, le^t he break out like fire in the house
of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Bethel.

7 Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the earth:

8 Seek him that makes the seven Stars and Orion, and turns the shadow of
death into the morning, and makes the day dark with night: that calls for
the waters of the sea, and powers them out upon the face of the earth: the
Lord is his Name:

9 That strengthens the spoiled against the strong: so that the spoiled shall
come against the fortress.

10 They hate him that rebukes in the gate: and they abhor him that speakketh
uprightly.

11 Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take from him
burdens of wheat, ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell
in them: ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of
them.

12 For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: they
afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate
from their right.

13 Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil
time.

14 Seek good and not evil, that ye may live: and so the Lord the God of hosts
shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

15 Hate the evil and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it
may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.

16 Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts, the Lord says thus, Wailing shall be
in all streets, and they shall say in all the highways, Alas, alas! and they
shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skillful of
lamentation, to wailing.

17 And in all vineyards shall be wailing: for I will pass through thee, says
the Lord.

18 Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? the
day of the Lord is darkness and not light.

19 As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into the
house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.

20 Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even dark, and
no brightness in it?

21 I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies.

22 Though ye offer me burnt offering, and your meat offerings, I will not
accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.

23 Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs: for I will not hear the
melody of thy viols.

24 But let judgment run down at waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

25 Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty
years, O house of Israel?

26 But ye have born the tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun your images; the
star of your god, which ye made to your selves.

27 Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, says the
Lord, whose Name is the God of hosts.

CHAP. V.
1. HEar what I have to say unto you, O you children of Israel. Though it be a
sad Prophetical Lamentation, yet I must speak what I am commanded, and, if
that were not, I cannot but speak it over you, while I consider the deep
misery, and affliction, into which you have drawn your selves, by the weight of
your own grievous sins.

2. Israel should be like a pure Virgin, in the sincere profession, and service
of the true God. But now her spiritual whoredoms represent her, as a wanton,
and impudent Harlot. Therefore her fall from that Virginity has produced so
deep, and great a fall into calamity, and desolation, that (if she do not
speedily prevent it by Repentance) there is little, or no hope of her rising
again, and recovering her wonted peace, and prosperity. She is levelled with
the Earth, like one ready to be buried in silence, and oblivion, and knows of
none, that are able to raise her up, and reduce her to her former estate.

3. In this misery, and captivity, (which I foresee as certainly coming upon
her) very few will be left, in her Cities, and Villages. For thus says the
Lord God, A City in Israel, that could send out a thousand valiant men, well
appointed, shall scarcely be able to show the tenth part of them left alive:
And that City which could send out a hundred, shall have as little a proportion
left for the house of Israel. Not the tenth part, but nine parts of ten shall
be taken away by the sword, or the famine, or the pestilence.

4. Yet this sentence is not so irreversibly concluded by the Lord, against the
house of Isaael, but that if you will now seek after your merciful God, in
that way in which only he may be found, which is in the way of Repentance, you
may either remove, or, at least, mitigate the decree of your most just, and
deserved punishment, that will otherwise cut off so many by death.

5. This Repentance must not be verbal only, but active, and real. You must
absolutely renounce the service of your golden calf in Bethel. Vid. c. 4. 4.
You must have no more to do in the Idolatry of Gilgal or Beersheba. For the
right service of God will not consist with the worship of Idols. Therefore if
you forsake not these places you must perish in them. alludit ad (...)
For Gilgal must go into captivity (according to the omen in her name) And
Bethel (that carries in the name of it, the house of God) shall be turned to
Beth-aven, which promises nothing but (...)
iniquity, vanity, and desolation.

6. Therefore keep close to that way of Repentance, wherein God is to be found.
That Is the only way to preserve you in life, and safety. And if you be not
found in that way, you expose your selves to extreme danger, and know not how
soon the house of Joseph (as you call your kingdom of Israel, from the tribe of
Ephraim, the greatest part in it, and the Royal tribe) may be compassed with
those flames of war, that will (...)
break out on such a sudden, that the best of you, and your friends will find
no time, wherein to quench, or prevent them: no not in Bethel, the ut e. 7, 13^
Kings Court, and the eminentest place of all the kingdom.

7. And how can they look for a milder punishment, that turn Justice (the
sweetest, and loveliest of all virtues) into injury and oppression, which is as
unwelcome, and distasteful as the bitter wormwood: and, when they should exalt
Justice (and prefer her before all other respects whatsoever) do rather
suppress her, and leave her on the ground, as a thing of no value with them
(that are bribed high for injustice, in the pronouncing of a false sentence, or
the not executing of a just law, when it is in their power to do it.)

8. It were well, if they would amend this fault, and resolve to do Justice, in
awe, and reverence of that all-seeing eye, and powerful Majesty, that created
all the glorious lamps of Heaven. Among them, He made the Pleiades, or
Vergiliae (a constellation of seven stars, that ushers in the Hinc gr. (...)
dicuntur (...), quod tempus navigationi opportunum ostendant, and lat.
Vergili^, a verno tempore, sed (...) ex Arab. quasi stellarum (...).
delights of the spring, and the fittest time for navigation:) and Orion (that
appears about November, and threatens tempestuous, or at least (...) nomen
habet a (...), inconstantia and levitate. Virgilio, nimbosus Orion.
inconstant weather, as the name it self imports.) It is He that can turn the
shadow of death (the most dismal, and palpable darkness) into the clearest
morning, and, on the contrary, the brightest day into the blackest night (which
allegorically expresses another power of his, to turn the saddest calamity
into the truest felicity, and again the fairest prosperity into the greatest
misery.) It is He that can call the waters out of the Sea, (drawing them in
vapors into the clouds, by the heat of the Sun) and pour them down again upon
the earth in pleasant, and comfortable showers, where, and whenever he
pleases. It is He whose name is Jehovah (which name shows the independance of
his own essence, that gives being to all other: and the constancy of his
performance of whatsoever he has promised.)

9. It is he that does often in such measure refresh, and enable a weak man,
which has been laid (...) vaslitas pro vastato, and infirmo.
wast, and desolate; that he overcomes the strong. It is he that brings it so
about, that a feeble man, laid desolate, shall invade, and take a strong place
of defense. All these Instances of his power might well persuade the
Israelites, that He is able to relieve those that are oppressed, and wronged in
their courts of Justice.

10. Yet have not they been well advised of this. For they have showed their
malice against him, that (for their injustice) has reproved them openly in the
very gates of their Cities (that are their usual places of Judicature) There
have they made it known, how they use to abominate him, that speaks sincerely,
ex animo, and to the purpose; as if he understood the case in hand.

11. Now because you of Israel have thus unjustly oppressed, and trampled upon
the poor, not only in your Courts of Justice (as you call them) but in other
places: at your own price; taking from them burdens of wheat, which they got as
a reward of their day-labour, and for the releif of your family. Therefore you
that (by such unjust means) have built you sumptuous houses of hewn stone
shall not come to possess, and enjoy them: nor shall ye stay so long in the
land as to taste the wine of those fair and lovely vineyards, which you have
planted upon the like purchase.

12. For I observe your manifold transgressions, those specially, wherein you
afflict the just defenders of the poor, and by your bribery, and other ways
keep the needy from their right, in that very place, In the gate, (the place of
Justice.)
wherein they have most reason to expect it.

13. Therefore, in such evil and corrupt times, he that is wise will spare his
giving you any more good admonitions (at his own peril) which he sees will do
no good upon men, wholly wedded, and devoted to their own ways of unlawful
gain, and injurious to them that rebuke them for it.

14. The thought of this may persuade you, while the punishment is yet
deferred, to bethink your selves of doing that, which becomes the people of
God, and by all means, avoiding such foul faults, that you may live, and
escape the dangers, that hang over your heads. Do this in time, and the Lord
God of Hosts will be with you, as you use to boast, that he is in the midst of
you, and will preserve you from any great danger.

15. Avoid sin, with a perfect hatred of it, and do that which is good, in
pure love of virtue, and goodness. Above all take care for the free course of
Justice, in the public places of judgment. Then happily the Lord of Hosts
will be merciful to the poor remnant of the children of Israel, now under the
power of the tribe of Ephraim, the son of Joseph.

16. For, to no other end does the Lord God of Hosts threaten so much, but
that your Repentance might timely prevent his judgments, and lay hold of his
mercy. This is the intent of that, which the Lord has said, that there shall
be mourning, not in your houses only, but in all your streets, and lamentation
in all your highways, and public places. Where the general calamity shall
join whole troops of them together in the sad tone of Alas! Alas! what will
become of us? Then shall they, that dwell in Cities, invite the Husbandmen to
bear a part in their Lamentation: and they, that for their skill in those sad
ways of Mourning, were wont to be hired to do it, in the Funerals of the
richer sort of men, shall be called in: not to personate a mourner, or act a
part for money, but more really, and seriously to express that sorrow, which
equally concerned them all.

17. And in all the Vineyards, where you were wont to have such merry shoutes,
and cheerful acclamations, at the close of a happy Vintage, there also shall
you echo your doleful sighs, and outcries to one another. While I pass
thorough thy land to take vengeance of all thy wickedness, says the Lord.
That they, who would not honor me for my favors, and blessings; may
acknowledge me, at least, in my righteous Judgments.

18. Then woe to them, they will be, of all other, the most unhappy, and
miserable, that to their Idolatry, Injustice, and other clamorous sins, venture
also to add the sins of Unbeleif, Impatience, and open contempt of those
many Prophetical admonitions, that have been used to reclaim them: and, in that
wicked disposition, are not ashamed to say. Oh when will the day of the Lord
come, which the Prophets have so often sounded in our ears? Is it the day of
our death, or of the doom, that the whole nation must expect to be executed
upon them? And will it be so terrible, as they seem to conceive? We Vide Isa.
5,19.
would fain see, in earnest, what that day will prove and whether the Prophets
were not much mistaken in their Predictions. For will God ever, in such manner,
forsake his holy land, and the children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, his
dearest Saints? Oh that the time were come, when we might try the love of God,
and see the day of the Lord, which is so talked of! Alas, poor souls! why are
you so willing to see it? If you knew, what it will be to you, you would not be
so earnest to hasten it forward. For, it will be a black, and dismal day, a
time of extreme misery, and calamity, without the mixture of any light
somnesse, and comfort. And do you long for such a sad, cloudy, stormy day?

19. In that day terrors, and troubles will come so thick upon you, that while
you think to escape from one, you shall be overtaken by another. As if a man
should run from a roaring Lion, that has him in pursuit, and, in the way, meet
with an angry Bear with open mouth ready to devour him, and tear him in pieces:
or if he should make shift to fly from the Bear too, and get safely to his own
house (as his Castle of defense against all such wild beasts) and there resting
his weary body, or leaning his hand on the wall, instantly a serpent should
come out thence, and bite him, and take him quite away by a present death.

20. Will not that be a fearful horrid, dismal day, and without any hope of
light, and solace, for that time, which will have such varieties of danger,
that can be no way prevented: and must end, at the last, in the ruin of a
flourishing kingdom, and the slaughter, or captivity of many thousands of men,
women, and children?

21. To prevent this sad day of the Lord (the time of his vengeance upon
impenitent, and obstinate sinners) make your peace with him In your own day
(while you may call it your day) by amending your lives, and ordering your
conversation aright. And do not think (without that) to please Him with your
Sacrifices, or Ceremonies, or any outward Act of seeming Obedience, that
proceeds not from a faithful, and pure Heart. For, will you hear what the Lord
himself says of them? I was so far from taking pleasure in them, that I ever
hated, and abhorred, your Festival Days: And your sweet incense, or what else
you offered in my house, at the time of your solemn assemblies, was not
accepted by me, as any sweet savor, unless (with all) Piety and sincerity,
and integrity of life did commend you unto me.

22 You thought that you did me great service in your Holocausts, and other
oblations, but they never moved me so much, as to look favorably upon them,
because you did not (with them) offer your selves, your souls, and bodies, as
a reasonable, and lively sacrifice unto me. That Is the oblation and holocaust,
which the other were but to figure, and put you in mind of. And for your fat
peace offerings (which should have been the Interpreters of your thankful
hearts) they never gained any good liking from me, because the heart, and life
of them was wholly wanting.

23. Away with the bawling noise, and tedious iteration of your Songs, and
Hymns, that you do not sing with the spirit, and with understanding as if you
were truly affected with, what you sing: And such have yours commonly been.
The like I may say of your Psalteries, and Harps, and other Instruments, which,
being accompanied with sweet voices, you presented before me, as rare melodious
Music. But it was contradicted with such a discord in your lives, and actions,
that it came into my ears, like a harsh sound not to be endured. For, it is
the harmony of good hearts, and the constant exercise of holy Virtues, that I
account the sweetest Music.

24. Especially, the constant execution of Justice, and Judgment. To see them
pass smoothly, and faeirly on in your public Courts, not like water only,
but like a mighty torrent; with such plenty, and facility, that every cause
might have a just sentence, freely, and heartily delivered, without bribes,
without delays, and unnecessary demurrs: This would please me, above all
Music, above all Sacrifice.

25. But how often did you offer me any (such) sacrifice, and oblation, in the
time of your forty years safe conduct about the wilderness, O house of
Israel? when I fed you, and protected you from all evil, though you many a
time, rebelled against me. The wilderness indeed could not often supply you
with outward, and legal sacrifices; but who hindered you from offering the
inward, and spiritual sacrifice of Piety, Obedience and Thankfulness, which is
the service, that I chiefly desired? For the main intention of your other
sacrifices, was only to keep you from Idolatry, and to exercise your
obedience, and thankful acknowledgements unto me.

26. Though, on the contrary, many of your nation, at that time, in the
wilderness, were exercised in flat disobedience, and Idolatry. For, you
carried about with you Sic Chald. Sept. etiam reddunt per (...). i domunculam,
vel (...) Moloch, ( pro quo Aquila habet (...)
the shrine of Moloch (a King, and Idol of the Moabites) and Chiun (or Remphan)
one of those Images, which you represented in a Or, accounting a star for your
God.
star, peculiar to them. These were the vide Stephani concionem. Act. 7, 42,
43. ubi non ipsissima verba, sed mentem Prophetae exprimit.
types, these the Deities, which you made to your selves, after your own idle
fancies, forgetting the true God, that made you, and those Creatures, to which
you exhibited divine honor.

27. For those impieties I will cause you to be carried away captive (not to
Damascus, or any place so near your own Country, whence you have the more hope
to return, but) far (...) long ultra.
beyond Damascus, says the Lord, whose name is the God of Hosts, whose will,
and pleasure cannot be resisted.

CHAP. VI.
1. WOe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria,
which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came.

2 Pass ye unto Calneh, and see, and from thence go ye to Hemath the great:
then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they better then these kingdoms? or
their border greater then your border?

3 Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come
near:

4 That lie upon beds of Ivorie, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and
eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall:

5 That chaunt to the sound of the violl, and invent to themselves instrument
of music, like David:

6 That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments:
but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

7 Therefore now shall they go captive, with the first that go captive, and
the banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be removed.

8 The LORD GOD has sworn by himself, says the LORD the GOD of hosts, I
abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I
deliver up the city, with all that is therein.

9 And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they
shall die.

10 And a man's Uncle shall take him up, and he that burns him, to bring out
the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the
house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, No. Then shall he say,
Hold thy tongue, for we may not make mention of the name of the Lord.

11 For behold, the Lord commands, and he will smite the great house with
breaches, and the little house with clefts.

12 Shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen? for ye have
turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock.

13 Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, which say, Have we not taken to us
horns by our own strength?

14 But behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, says
the Lord, the God of Hosts, and they shall afflict you from the entering in of
Hemath, unto the river of the wilderness.

CHAP. VI.
1. WOe be to you (both of Judah, and Israel) that (taking no pity upon others
in great want and distress: nor abating any thing of your jollitie and luxury
to relieve them: nor so much as being thankful to God for what you enjoy) do
live in ease, and security, in Sion and Samaria, never troubled with any
remorse for your sins, or any fear of the punishment, that hangs over your
heads. You that trust (not in God, but) in the strength of Mount Sion, and the
mountain of Samaria; securing your selves, in that you have found out a shelter
in Syria, Egypt, and other conntries, and are Hinc apud Iudaeos, Antipatri,
Alexandri, Aristobuli, Drusillae: possumus tamen exponere (...) omnium gentium,
nomin atissimos, vel famosissimos, eoque nomine superbos.
called by the names of the chief of those great men in other nations, to (...)
( Va^^ pro (...))
whom the house of Israel use to venditare, est applicare se, and in eorum
tutelam se recipere.
apply themselves, as to their noble Patrons, and Protectors, in time of danger.

2. That you may know, how you do but flatter your selves, in relying upon such
foreign hopes, go to Chalne (a famous City in Assyria) and Hamath the great
(once the glory of Syria) Thence come nearer unto Gath, the chief strength of
the Philistims. Inquire first, what happened to them: then let this question be
asked of your selves. Are Est n. Enallage numeri. vel, si Israelitarum terram
uberiurem dicit, innuit eorum ingratitudinem.
you in a better estate, then these eminent places in those Kingdoms? or do you
extend your borders wider then they did? have you larger possessions then they
had? Why then do not you admonish your selves, by their example, that your
glory may be laid in the dust, as theirs was?

3. Repete ex. v. 1.
Woe be to you, that persuade your selves, the time of affliction is far enough
from you, and therefore you may be the bolder with your too-much authority over
others, and domineer, as in a throne of ease, and liberty, and oppression.

4. Woe be to them that lie upon sumptuous, and large Ivorie beds, where they
have room enough to stretch themselvss in wantonness and laziness. And, after
that ease, are wont to pamper themselves at a full and costly table, feeding
upon the tenderest, choicest lambs, that can be found in all the flock: and
calves purposely fatted for them in the stall.

5. Woe be to them, that spend too much of their time in mirth, and jollitie:
singing division to the (...)
sound of the Psalterie, and other rare instruments of Music, which they have
made special choice of for themselves. And to which they think they have as
fair a pretense, in the abuse of Music, as King David had to delight himself
in his Heavenly Hymns, or otherwise to recreate, and refresh himself with it,
when he was tired with his more serious employments.

6. Woe be to them that make too much of themselves, and show no pity of
others: drinking their wine (not in little cups, as others do, but) in great
bowls (to drown the memory of all sorrow) and anointing themselves with
costly ointments (not moderately for health, and neatness, as is the custom
in the Eastern parts, but wantonlie in excess) As not ashamed to show their
vanity and profuseness in expenses upon themselves, while they spare little,
or nothing for the relief of their Sic supra, c. 5. 6. habu^mus domum Joseph
pro populo Israelitico.
own countrymen, that are in need, and misery.

7. Therefore, after a little while, they shall go in the head of the captives
(among them, that are first carried into captivity) because they were ever
ready to be the first ringleaders to all sin. And there will be a speedy end of
all the banquets (even the (...) pr. convivium funebre.
funeral banquets) of those luxurious feasters, that stretched themselves, as
they pleased, upon their beds.

8. For the Lord God has sworn by Himself, says the Lord God of Hosts, ( i.
He himself has assured us, that He has passed this, as an unchangeable
decree, saying) I abhor the pride of all the children of Israel, and whatsoever
they use to boast of, though it be the Temple it self. Therefore not that
only, but their Palaces, and greatest buildings (raised out of briberie, and
extortion, and for that cause hated by me: Their Cities also and People, (or
whatsoever it is wherewith they are now plentyfully stored) will I, when I see
my time, give up into the power of a cruel enemy.

9. And if it chance, that some few (escaping the fury of war) be left in one
house: they also shall perish, (by famine, or pestilence, or some other
untimelie death.)

10. Then if the Uncle, or any near kinsman, to one that dies in the house,
shall come thither to order that the dead corpse may be thence removed, and
burned (to prevent the infection of others) If he shall say to any one that is
In femoribus domus.
within the house, Be there any more left alive with thee? One of the house
shall answer, None are left, they are all dead, or unlikelie to live. Then he
shall reply; (...)
Say no more, if that be the case of them. Leave thy tears, and complaints, and
be quiet, and patient. It is too late for us now, to betake our selves, by
prayers, to the name of Almighty God. This is the time of his just vengeance,
for our mentioning him so little before, and having our idols so often in our
mouths.

11 Now we must all look for a heavy blow. For God will command our enemies,
the executioners of his wrath, to smite all houses, Palaces, and Cotages alike,
with such breaches, and (...) pro (...)
ruins, as shall not easily be repaired, (utter ruins will be seen in Israel,
and great breaches in Judah.)

12. But I prophecy to them, that have no ears to hear, nor hearts that can be
mollified. It is as hard, and unlikely a thing to move them to repentance, as
to make horses run upon slipperie rocks, or oxen plow there, with good
success. He must change the course of nature, that can do so. And he must work
as great a miracle, that will prevail with them for repentance and
satisfaction, that have turned Justice, and Righteousness (the sweetest of all
virtues) into tyranny, and oppression, which are as bitter, and unwelcome to
the honest afflicted heart, as gall, and wormwood to the taste.

13. Woe be to you, that, from the root of pride, have brought forth such
cruelty, and injustice, and yet are not humbled at the reproof it. You triumph
in your own wealth, and puissance, and command which are as a matter of
nothing. For you say, Have not we, by our own strength, and power, pushed down
the strong forts of our enemies, as it were with horns, which they were not
able to resist, 4 Reg. 14.
and so made our selves glorious conquerours? But this arrogance will not arm,
and defend you against such adversaries as. I shall send.

14 For behold I will raise up against you (the Assyrians) a fierce, and potent
nation, O house of Israel, says the Lord God of Hosts. And as you have
persecuted, and oppressed the poor righteous man, so they shall oppress and
hunt after you, and drive you before them from one corner of the Country to
another: from the entering in of Hamath, (near Vr Hieron.
Epiphania) to that which is called the Al, mare mortuum. Alii Nilum hic
intelligun^.
river of the plain, or of the wilderness because of the barren, and desert
places, through which it runs) that you may be pursued in the very place, which
you boast that you have 4 Reg. 14. 25.
added to the Kingdom of Israel.

CHAP. VII.
1 THus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, he formed grasshoppers in
the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth: and lo, it was the
latter growth after the Kings mowings.

2 And it came to pass that when they had made an end of eating the grass of
the land, then I said; O Lord God, forgive I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob
arise? for he is small.

3 The Lord repented for this. It shall not be, says the Lord.

4 Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, the Lord God called to
contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part.

5 Then said I, O Lord, cease, I bseeech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise? for
he is small.

6 The Lord repented for this. This also shall not be, says the Lord God.

7 Thus he showed me, and behold, The Lord stood upon a wall made by a
plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand.

8 And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what see thou? And I said, A plumb-line.
Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumb-line in the midst of my people
Israel, I will not again pass by them any more.

9 And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the Sanctuaries of
Israel shall be laid wast: and I will rise against the house of Ieroboum with
the sword.

10 Then Amaziah the Priest of Beth-el sent to Jeroboam King of Israel, saying;
Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel: the land
is not able to bear all his word.

11 For thus Amos says, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall
surely be led away captive, out of their own land.

12 Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou Seer, go, flee thee away into the land
of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy there.

13 But prophecy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the Kings chapel,
and it is the kings court.

14 Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet, neither was I a
prophets son, but I was an herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit.

15 And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me,
Go, prophecy unto my people Israel.

16 Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord, Thou say, Prophecy not
against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.

17 Therefore thus says the Lord; Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and
thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be
divided by line; and thou shall die in a polluted land, and Israel shall surely
go into captivity forth of his land.

CHAP. VII.
1. NOw I shall acquaint you with some afflictions, which, by way of
punishment, had fallen heavily upon the people, if I had not interposed my
earnest prayers, as I was their Prophet. For, The Lord God was pleased to show
me a vision. It was in the Spring time, when the earth was yet in her prime,
and glory, in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth, of the
fruit of the earth, after the mowing of the hay, or cutting down of the corn,
that belonged to the King. (Jeroboam, the son of Joas) Then appeared to me God
himself, forming of locusts, that could never come at a worse time, to do
mischief to the fruit of the ground, and were as an Emblem of his gathering a
vast, and pernicious Sic Joel 1.4.
army, that would quickly overrun, and destroy a fruitful, and pleasant land.

2. And it came to pass. When the locusts seemed very busy, in cosuming the
grass, and other fruit of the land, and had done much harm already to it: I
said, Lord God be favorable and gracious to thy people. Let not these locusts,
that use to make the way to a terrible famine, prove a Prophetical prediction
of a numerous, and destructive Host, that shall, for our sins, invade, and lay
waste so rich and flourishing a Country. For, who shall then raise up again the
Posterity of Jacob, which are Sic and v. 5.
already much exhausted, and brought low by former calamities.

3. Upon my humble petition, the Lord repented of this great judgment, saying,
it should not proceed, He would alter, or mitigate the intended burden of the
vision (by making Pull, and his Soldiers be content to be appeased with money,
and void the Kingdom.)

4. and 5. I must not conceal another vision, at which I was more amazed: a
vision, and prediction of a more furious enemy, that consumed all before him,
like a flaming Sic Joel 2. 3. per ignem Hostis truculentus describitur. Hic
a^tem Hozaelem Syrum, ejusque milites intelligere possumus a qaoru^surore per
orationem Prophetarum liberatus est populus.
fire, (an element that has no mercy) And in this manner, it was revealed
unto me by the Lord God himself. Behold, he called (to his Angels, and other
Ministers) for a judgment by fire to be brought upon his people. This fire was
so violent, that it seemed to be devouring the great deep ( i. ready to lick
up, and consume many of the people, that are often compared to the many
boisterous, and raging waters of the great deep) and it had already devoured
part of them, (or of the (...) and partem significat, and praedium, agrum,
regionem, Gall. Les champs. and lat. vocamus agrum Eboracensem. -- etc. vide
cap. 4.7.
Country) Then said I, O Lord God stay thine anger: For, how shall the
children of Jacob subsist after this? Such a heavy judgment will so exhaust
them, that they will hardly ever be able, to recover their strength again.

6. Vt v. 3.
So the Lord repented of this also, I will not now go on with this way of
revenge, says the Lord God.

7. Another time, the Lord showed me a third Vision in this manner. Behold the
Lord stood upon a wall made by line, and there was a line in his hand,

8. And (that I might give the more heed to it) the Lord God said unto me,
Amos, what see thou? And I said, I see a line. Then says the Lord, Behold, I
will now make use of the strict line of Justice, in examining the faults of my
people Israel. I will not so easily pass them by, with such connivence, as I
did before, taking little notice of many offenses.

9. Upon my strickt marking of what is done amiss, it will soon follow, that
the high places of Isac, pro populo Isrealitico.
Israel, erected to the honor of their false gods, will be made desolate, and
the titular Sanctuaries consecrated to the calves in Dan, and Bethel, will be
laid waste. And, before that, I will rise against the house af Jeroboam, the
son of Joas, with the sword. And Zachary his son shall perish by the sword of
Shallum, and in him shall that family be extinct, and the Kings of Israel
decay more and more, till they are quite ruined by the Assyrian.

10. When Amaziah, the chief idolatrous Priest of Bethel, understood of these
three unwelcom prophesies, likely to be many ways prejudicial to him, and his
fellow Priests, if it should be known, and believed by the people, He sent to
Jeroboam the son of Joas, then King of Israel, saying, Amos has done that
which tends to rebellion, and has ventured to do it within thy own kingdom, in
the midst of thy liege Subjects, the house of Israel, divulging such strange
prophesies, and in such plain terms, as the land cannot and should not endure,
being they do apparently tend to intestine sedition, and are sufficient to
provoke the people to usurp that authority, for the punishment of Amos, which
properly belongs to the King, or such as he shall please to empower. Therefore
it were not amiss, to advise quickly, what shall be done with such a one.

11. For thus says Amos, of the King. King Jeroboam shall die by the sword:
and of the people he says, Israel shall be led away captive into a strange
land, as if God would cast off your Majesty, and his people, and forget the
great cost, and diligence which is bestowed in Bethel, upon his public service.

12. Thus Amaziah accused the Prophet Amos, with much subtlety, and impudence,
and very falsely, for he said nothing of the person, but of the house of the
King. Yet least this his malicious accusation of the Prophet should not
succeed, according to his desire, he fell to foul words, and menacies, and
said, Hark you, you Seer, You had best be packing hence into Judah, and there
get a poor living, as you may, by your heretical doctrine, and false
prophesies. For here is no place for such as you are.

13. Let us hear no more of you at Bethel. For here is the Kings Chapel, and
the Kings Court. Therefore it cannot but be very dangerous for you, to hanker
hereabouts: but in Judah, I believe, your prophesies against us may pass with
the good liking, and applause of all.

14. To this virulent and threatening speech, Amos made answer, with an humble,
but an undaunted spirit, and said to Amaziah. I did neither usurp, nor
ambitiously affect the place, or title of a Prophet: nor had I by birth, or
succession, or education in the Schools of the Prophets, any claim, or pretense
unto it. For indeed I was brought up among flocks of sheep, Vide c. 1. 1.
and herds of cattle, not in the Schools, not in the Court, but) as a gatherer
of sycomores for bruit beasts, rather then an instructor of men,

15. Though it pleased God to take me from following the stock, and lay this
necessity upon me of prophesying to his people of Israel. Therefore I must
obey the divine calling, rather then your pleasure, and advise, or the command
of the King (if he should so injoine me, as you would have him.) For, who shall
excuse me, when he says, Go, prophecy unto this people.

16. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord. Thou, that say, Stillare,
est Prophetam agere. vid Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Drop not thy Prophetical words against Israel. We desire not that one drop of
them should fall upon Domus Isaac propopul^ Isr. ut c 7. 11.
our nation. For we take them to be no drops from heaven, but meerlie from your
own lips.

16. Therefore (as imperious, and peremptory, as thou art, I will prophecy a
little plainer of what will nearlie concern thee. Thus says the Lord. Thy
wife, in this very City, Sym (...).
shall have her body abused, before thy face, by the Assyrian soldiers. (This
will rub the memory of that spiritual whoredom, that has been practiced, and
maintained by thee, as chief Priest in this City) Thy sons also and thy
daughters (all nuzled in the same idolatry) shall be cut off by the Assyrian
swords. And thy idolatrous Country shall be divided by Per funem in Palestina
agros metiebantur, and suam cuique mensuram, and partem assignabant, quae (...)
dicitur. 2. Cor. 10. 13. 15.
line, among those strangers which the King of Assyria will send hither. And
thou shall die (not in this holy City, as thou accountest it, but) in a
profane land, among the heathen. And all Israel, (as I foretold) shall be
carried captive from hence into Assyria, for contenming the fair predictions,
and gracious admonitions, that were afforded to them.

CHAP. VIII.
1 THus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, a basket of summer fruit.

2 And he said, Amos, what see thou? And I said, A basket of summer fruit,
Then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel; I will
not again pass by them any more.

3 And the songs of the Temples shall be howlings in that day, says the Lord
God; there shall be many dead bodies in every place, they shall cast them forth
with silence.

4 Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land
to fail,

5 Saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the Ephah small, and the shekel
great, and falsifying, the balances by deceit?

6 That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes;
yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?

7 The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget
any of their works.

8 Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall be cast out and
drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.

9 And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord God, that I will
cause the Sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day.

10 And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into
lamentation, and I will bring up sackcloath upon all loins, and baldness upon
every head, and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end
thereof as a bitter day.

11 Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in
the land, not a famine of bread, not a thirst for water, but of hearing the
words of the Lord.

12 And they shall wander from sea to sea, and- from the North even to the
East: they shall run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it.

13 In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst.

14 They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God, O Dan, lives, and
the manner of Beer-sheba lives, even thy shall fall, and never rise up again.

CHAP. VIII.
1. A fourth To confirm the third vision. c. 7. 7.
vision likewise did the Lord God show unto me, And, behold, It was a basket of
ripe summer-fruit.

2. And (that I might the more heedfully observe the meaning of the vision) the
Lord said, What see thou, Amos? I answered, A basket of ripe summer-fruit.
Then the Lord said unto me. The Alludunt (...) and (...)
end is coming upon my people of Israel. For, as when fruit is fully ripe, men
use to pluck it from the tree, (least it should rot and corrupt the sooner) so
they being ripe for judgment shall be taken from their Country. Vide c. 7. 8.
I will pass by their sins no more, in such patience, and connivence, as I
have formerlie used toward them.

3. And their merry songs in their stately Chaldaeus, and Haebraei vecte (...)
exponunt, non de Templo Hierosolymitano, sed de Israelitarum aedibus manifice
structis.
Palaces, shall be turned into fearful howling in that day, says the Lord God.
And (...) i. magna cadaverum copia (multum cadaver)
many bodies of dead men shall want the honor of the wonted funeral rites:
being privily dicetur ^ projice. vel projicere, pro projicient.
cast aside, by them that will endeavor to conceal their misery: least their
own men should be too much disheartened, or the enemy encouraged, by seeing
what a number perish by famine, pestilence, or discontent, before the sword
come near them.

4. It will highly concern you to take notice of this prophecy, and vision,
that are are come to so high a degree of covetousness and oppression, that you
are ripe enough to be taken off from any further benefit of life. You that
could find in your hearts to devour the poor, and (...) modesti, vel (...)
pauperes.
meek, and humble men, and quite obliterate the name, and memory of them from
the earth, that you alone might enjoy the good things of this life.

5. You that say, When will the New Moon, and the Sabbath be gone? (we like not
these Festival days, they are prejudicial to us, that might every day make our
markets. It were not amiss, if they were quite put out of the Calendar) that
we might be wholly employed in selling our corn, and opening our granaries of
wheat, and practicing the art we have in making our measures less, and raising
the value of our coin, and falsifying our weights by sleight, and deceit.

6. That when we have, by these tricks, cheated, and beggered the poor, we may
have an easy purchase of them, and their goods, and all that they have, for a
little sum of money; or for as poor a thing as the present supply of Vide c^p.
2^ 6.
a pair of shoes, when they are cold, and needy: or by putting off to them, at
our own price, the very refuse of our wheat, that we know not otherwise how to
dispose of.

7. Therefore the Lord, in his justice, has fully resolved, and sworn by
Himself, whom all will acknowledge to be the Luc. 2. 32.
glory of his people Jacob hic pro populo Israelitico, ut Isac c: 7 9.
Israel, that since they so often forget the interest, that they have in this
high title, or abuse it by making themselves guilty of such wicked deeds, I
will not forget to punish any of their evil courses. I will surely do it,
says the Lord.

8. For, Why should I not make the land tremble, and all her inhabitants mourn
for these things? Why shall not this deluge of sin in this nation make her
Which may be meant of soldiers to overrun the Country.
punishment overflow, and overwhelm her in every part: as the (...) his idem
quod (...)
River Nilus in Egypt, ascends by degrees, and, at last, ovorflows her banks,
and covers all the face of Egypt with her inundations.

9. When that day of revenge rises upon them, says the Lord God, I will make
all their joy, and comfort to vanish on a sudden, as if the Sun of a clear day
should set upon them in a dark, and dismal cloud before he had run half his
course.

10. And I will turn your merry festivals, Hos. 2, 11,
and gaudy days into days of mourning: and your pleasant songs into doleful
lamentations: Supra v. 3.
your rich, and loose apparel into course Job ^. 20.
sackcloth girded about your loins: and your neat heads of hair into bald
pates: that your outward garb may speak your inward sorrow for your heavy
calamity. Nay, I will bring the land of Israel to that pass, and that high
degree of mourning, that, in all the chiefest places, men shall be found in as
sad postures, and bitter exclamations, as a tender Mother uses to express in
the funerals of her only son. And, how jolly and cheerful soever they have
been, they shall close up their last times in great bitterness of woe, and
misery.

11. There is yet worse news behind, if it were rightly apprehended. Behold the
time is coming, says the Lord God, wherein I will send a famine in the land,
not a famine of bread only, or a thirst of water: but a want of spiritual food
too, and of the water of life, a scarcity of the word of God, specially of the
word of prophecy, which you neglect when it is offered, and therefore it will
not be heard, when you long for it.

12. For they that are now so coy, and dainty, that no Prophets can please
them, shall then compass about from Sea to Sea. They shall run to and fro,
from one corner of the Country to another, to seek the word of the Lord,
purely, and sincerely taught, and shall not find it.

13. Then shall even the succulent bodies of fair damsels, and proper young men
in the flower of their age, be ready to faint and wither away for thirst.

14. This shall happen to them, that swear by the idols of Samaria, (near
Bethel) as if they had no true Deity to swear by. To them that have this form
of oath [as thy Diety lives, O Dan] in imitation of their former oath [(...) as
they Lord lives] To them that swear thus [ as the living God is rightly
worshipped, in that kind of service which is used in Beersheba] or [as I wish,
that the course, and religious way of Beersheba may thrive] These men shall
fall from their former prosperous estate, and shall never be restored to that,
or so much as to their Country again.

CHAP. IX.
1 I Saw the Lord standing upon the Altar, and he said, Smite the lintel of the
door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the head all of them, and I
will slay the last of them with the sword: he that flees of them, shall not
flee away, and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered.

2 Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them: though they
climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.

3 And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take
them out thence, and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea,
thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them.

4 And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I
command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes upon them
for evil, and not for good.

5 And the Lord God of Hosts is he that touches the land, and it shall melt,
and all that dwell therein shall mourn, and it shall rise up wholly like a
flood, and shall be drowned as by the flood of Egypt.

6 It is he that builds his stories in the heaven, and has founded his troup
in the earth, he that calls for the waters of the sea, and powers them out
upon the face of the earth: the Lord is his Name.

7 Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O ye children of Israel,
says the Lord? have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the
Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?

8 Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will
destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that I will not utterly
destroy the house of Jacob, says the Lord.

9 For lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all
nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall
upon the earth.

10 All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say: The evil
shall not overtake nor prevent us.

11 In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and
close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his cumes, and I will build
it as in the days of old.

12 That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen; which
are called by my Name, says the Lord that does this.

13 Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the plowman shall overtake the
reaper, and the t^eader of grapes him that sows seed, and the mountains shall
drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.

14 And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel: and they shall
build the waste cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, and
drink the wine thereof: they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

15 And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up
out of their land which I have given them, says the Lord thy God.

CHAP. IX.
1. I Come now to a vision, that chiefly concerns Jerusalem, and the two
Tribes. I saw (in the spirit) a glory representing the Majesty of God) not
Isai. 1. and Ezekiel. 9. 3. and 10. 4.
appearing between the Cherubims, as formerly he used to do, but nearer the end
of the Temple, as if he were departing from that sacred place, and leaving his
Sanctuary by degrees. For I saw the Lord) standing upon the Altar of the
Holocausts, as ready to slay those wicked men of Judah, that had highly
provoked his Justice and Anger to be showed amongst them, and to make such a
Isai. 34. 6.
sacrifice of them, as he never calls for, but when he comes to be revenged of
great sinners. And he said to some Angel attending at that time, (or as
exciting the army of the Chaldaeans) Smite the lintel of the door, in such a
manner that the posts may shake: which signified a great blow, by his own
command, to be given to them, that were thought to be most eminent, and most
able to support and give aid to the Temple, and the whole nation to whom it
belonged. He said moreover, Cut them all, or strike all (...) avaritiam little
(ut omnium malorum Cap^^) exponit Hieron. ex M^drash a nomine (...) avaritta:
Sed melior erit constructio, and verisimilior a verba (...) in frusta
concidere: dividere.
through in the head piece. q. d.. Let them that are in the highest place (the
guides and governors of the people) have the first, and greatest blow, that,
in them, others may see their doom. And after that, I will slay the last of
them also (the lowest of the people) with the sword of a cruel enemy: and with
such a slaughter, that He who thinks to secure himself by flight, or any other
way of evading the stroke of the enemy, shall no way escape that, unless he
fall into their power, for a worse punishment of long captivity. Which does not
yet exempt him from their striking hand, when they shall have a mind to command
his life.

2. And if there were any way to escape the enemy, yet none of them should
escape me. For, who can run so far, or so fast, that divine vengeance shall not
overtake him? Where is such a secret corner to be found, wherein that will not
find him out? If any of them could Psalm. 139. 7. Jer. 23. 24. Job 23. 8.
dig as deep as hell, to fit themselves with a dark, and obscure lurking place,
thence should my powerful hand pluck them out. If they could climb as high as
heaven (far enough out of their enemies reach) thence also would I tumble them
down.

3. If they could lie scouting, and sculking in the unfrequented caves, and
holes upon the top of high Carmel (where no enemy would search for them) yet
there would I hunt them out, and cast them down from thence. If it were
possible that they could conceal themselves from my sight in the bottom of the
sea: I have Whales, and Tyrants go under that name in the Scripture. Psalm. 74.
4. Isai. 27.
Serpents of the deep that should pursue them, and bite them, and fright them
out of that refuge.

4. Could they be so subtle as to prevent the captivity of their enemies, and
be gone into theirs or some other land [ Ante hostes] a Mercero sic exponitur
(and si proprie significet, ducentibus cos hostibus) and Kunchi huic
expositioni favere videtur, instantiam afferens de illis qui cum Iohanan filio
Careah ( Ier. 42) in AEgyptum aufugerunt, putantes evadere gladium Chaldaeorum,
qui tandim superveniente Rege Chaldaeorum, occisi sunt in AEgypto.
before they come near them; yet thither will I bring the sword of those very
enemies to cut them off, and spoil all their plots. For the eye of my favor,
and providence shall not watch over them for good. I will rather be intent upon
what may help on the just, and severe punishment of all their sins.

4. Where then shall they think to be safe, (in the time of his anger) that
offend such a powerful God, whom nothing will be able to resist? He is the Lord
God of Hosts, (whom all things obey, as an Army ever ready for the execution of
his mercy or justice) of such power, that if He do but touch a land, with that
touch he can make it melt, like wax, before Him: and all the inhabitants of the
land, miserably, and lamentably to fade away, and consume; by some calamity,
that shall overwhelm them and Sic cap. 8. 8. 9, 10.
drown them in sorrow, and destruction, with a sudden inundation, like that of
the River Nilus in Egypt, when it breaks over' all the banks.

6. He fills Heaven and earth with the Majesty of his Glory. In Heaven he has
built his several Hebraiper (...) orbs ejus caelestes ab eo creatos, and motos
intelligunt, ubi singuli velut gradu uno supra alterum constituuntur. Potest
etiam and solium Regale dici (...) in quod per gradus plerumque ascenditur, ut
3 Reg. 10. 19. Potest etiam and coelum supremum, summus rerum omnium gradus.
Ascents, by which we may climb to the speculation of it. The nearest to us are
the heavenly Orbs, that are created and moved by Him, and their peculiar
degrees of elevation one above another. Over those Orbs is his spacious Court
and glorious Palace in a higher Heaven, and, in that, his Royal Throne, where
he sits, as in the highest Ascent of Majesty. Upon the earth, if we consider
not the whole globe together as one (...) fasciculus. manipulus. collectio.
combinatio. Hebraei hic Elementa intelligunt (aquam. aerem^ ignem) quorum
fundamentum est Terra. Ab. Ezra per Animantia exponit ex 4 Elementis quasi
collecta, and conflata. Aliit^ram Orbis machinam, quae Deo est velut manipulus
( vide Isai. 40. 15.) vel minor manipulo.
bundle (and a little one too, or a little handful in the eye of God) we may
observe the several bundles of united creatures, that he has placed over the
earth (which is as it were the foundation of all the rest. As first, that of
the Elements, that have their proper bounds: then, out of them, that of the
Vegetables and sensible, and rational creatures that have their several ways
of combination: yet altogether make but a little handful before him, Isai. 40.
12.
that can measure the heavens and the earth with a span. He calls for the
waters of the sea, in his anger by a deluge, or in his love to ascend up in
vapors, that he may pour them down again Vide supra c. 5. 8.
into the lap of the earth, to make her fruitful in all manner of store. He
that does all this, well may he have the name of the Lord, and Commander of all.

7. Therefore account not your selves only to be the servants. For, in that
respect, what privilege have you above all his creatures, or above all other
nations? You that descend from Israel, are not you, in that point, the same to
me, says the Lord, as any other, as they (for instance) that came from the
Cushites, a base, and servile nation, in your account? To me (your Creator, and
Lord) you are the same, though you may be more excellent, in respect of some
other people, that have not received so much from me, as you have. There is
nothing in your selves, but in my favor only, that distinguishes you from
all others. Nor have my favors been wanting to others, though they have
exceeded toward you. For as I brought you out of Egypt (where your servitude,
though you have almost forgot it, was greater then that of the Cushites) so I
brought the Philistims also from Jer. 47. 4.
Caphtor (or Cappadocia) and the Syrians from Kir (or that part of Vide H.
Grot. in 4 Reg. 16. 9.
Media, that lies by the river Cyrrus.)

8. My care, and providence has extended to others, but much more to you, that
have been most ungrateful and disobedient. Yet have you larger promises of
mercy, then any other. For, Behold (and you have great reason to take notice
of it) The eyes of the Lord God (that created and governs all: and sets up, or
pulls down kingdoms, at his pleasure) are intent upon every sinful kingdom, to
destroy it from the face of the earth, unless they repent: Ezekiel. 5.3. and 14.
22. Jer. 30. 11.
Yet (for my promise sake to your Forefathers) I will not utterly destroy the
whole nation, and people of Israel, says the Lord.

9. I will indeed, by my own command, so order it, that the Israelites, for
their sins, shall be dispersed, and tossed about, among the nations, as corn is
shaked, and moved about, when it is sifted in a sieve, or winnowed with the
fan: but the chaff only shall fly away, the least grane, or scruple shall not
fall to the earth. Afflictions may purge, or try the best amongst them, but
they shall not consume them.

10. The worst, and most obstinate of my people I shall cut off by the sword,
that amend not their lives upon fair admonition, and yet presume that God will
not let the evil day so hastily overtake, and prevent them, but that God will
deliver them at last, as he has done their forefathers in many fears, and
dangers, which they have fallen into.

11. Their security may undo them. But there is a day coming, wherein I will
(By Zorobabel) restore the state of the Tabernaculum Ecclesiam significat, q.
ex uno loco interdum in alium movetur.
Church, and kingdom of David, and whatsoever under his Successors was gone
much to decay. Which you may look upon as a Joel, Amos, and most of the
Prophets conclude their Prophesies with a prediction of the Messiah, and his
restitution of all things in a perfect way. For, the most glorious appearance
under the best Kings of Judah was but a shadow of that splendour, and comfort,
which began, when the Dayspring from on high, and the Son of Righteousness
came to visit his people. And this place must be so expounded out of Act. 15.
16. and 1. 6.
type of the kingdom of the Messiah, and settling of religion by him. Which will
be the true repairing of all breaches, and raising up the ruins made by
Scribes and Pharisees, and other enemies of the Church, and building up the
Kingdom of the true Israel of God, in greater perfection, then ever it saw
before.

12. That my people, or they (...) non est Conjunctio, sed Pronomen et est hic
Trajectio verborum sic itaque expone. Vt illi (...) qui mei dicentur,
possideant reliquias, etc.
that are called mine, ( i. my Apostles, and Servants, and their Successors,
whom I shall use in the restoration of the Church) Psalm. 2. 8.
may take a kind of spiritual possession of the Gentiles in my name, (bringing
them within the pale of the Church, and fould of the great Shepherd of our
souls) Obad. 19
Even of the greatest enemies of the Church, as the Edomites were to the Jews.
At least of a Christi Fideles, in S. Script. Reliquiae vocantur. respectu
Infidelium. ut Romans 9. 27. and 11. 5,
remnant of them, i. so many of them as shall return, by true repentance, and
obedience from their opposing of the truth. So says the Lord Himself, that
will be the main Agent in this great work; and make use of his Messengers, as
instruments for that purpose, to effect what he has often, and most graciously
promised, for the restoring and enlarging of his Church, by the conversion, and
access, not of Gentiles only, but of enemies too, to be incorporated into one
mystical body, whereof the Messiah shall be the head.

13. Behold, that joyful time is at hand, wherein the abundance of Gods
spiritual graces shall be prefigured in the plenty of all outward blessings.
The great harvest of the Church (of which our Savior himself speaks. Mat. 9
37.) is here set down in excellent Hyperbolies, which were familiar to the
Oriental parts.
The harvest shall be so long, that it shall extend, till the time of plowing
the earth again. And from the beginning of vintage to the sowing of new seed,
there will be employment enough in gathering of grapes, and treading the
Winepresse, and furnishing all the Cellars with wine. Of which there shall be
such store, as if the mountains dropped, and distilled sweet wine, and the
hills (that use to be dry and barren) were resolved, and moistened with the
overflowings Hoc suppleri potest ex Ioelis cap. ult: 18.
of milk. Which may figure the plenty of spiritual food, and heavenly comforts,
that shall attend the coming of the Messiah.

14. And I will bring the captives home again ( i. such as Jer. 22. 18. Psalm.
68. 18.
have been detained under the power of sin, and Satan) and they shall rebuild
the waste Cities, and re-inhabit them ( i. restore and settle the true worship
of God, where it was neglected) And they shall Isa. 5. v. 1. 7.
plant Vineyards, and drink the wine thereof ( i. found Isa. 5. V. 1. 7.
Churches, and taste the fruit of their labors bestowed upon the Church) and
they shall make gardens, and eat the fruit of them, ( i. the maledictions of
the Vide 6. 5. 11. and Deuteronomy. 28. 39.
Law being taken away, they shall be blessed in propagating the Gospel, and the
true service of God, for the increase of those spiritual graces, that are like
fragrant flowers in the garden of the Church.

15. And I will plant them upon their land, which I will give them: Jer. 24.6.
out of which they shall be no more plucked up again. i. In the Paradise of the
Church, they shall be like Trees of Jere. 17 8. and Isa. 61. 3.
Righteousness, so planted, that they shall take deep and firm root. Nothing
shall separate them from the love and service of God. Romans 8. 35. Mat. 16. 18.
Neither shall the gates of hell (the extremest dangers, or terrors) be able
to prevail against them. Thus says the Lord thy God to thee, Est enim
Apostrophe ad Prophe^am, vel ad Populum Israeliticum.
O Amos, (or to thee, whosoever, that art in the number of the true Israel of
God.) Thou may safely believe it, and undertake that all these things shall
certainly come to pass.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF OBADIAH.
1. THe vision of Obadiah: Thus says the Lord God concerning Edom; We have
heard a rumor from the Lord, and an Ambassador is sent among the heathen!
Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.

2 Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly despised.

3 The pride of thine heart has deceived thee? thou that dwell in the
clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, that says in his heart; Who
shall bring me down to the ground?

4 Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and though thou set thy nest among
the stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord.

5 If theives came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off!) would
they not have stolen till they had enough? If the grape gatherers came to thee,
would they not leave some grapes?

6 How are the things of Esau searched out? how are his hid things sought up?

7 All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the border: the men
that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee:
they that eat thy bread, have laid a wound under thee: there is none
understanding in him.

8 Shall I not in that day, says the Lord, even destroy the wise men out of
Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau?

9 And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every one of
the mount of Esau, may be cut off by slaughter.

10 For thy violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and
thou shall be cut off forever.

11 In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the
strangers carried away captive his forces, and forreiners entered into his
gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.

12 But thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day
that he became a stranger, neither should thou have rejoiced over the
children of Judah in the day of their destruction: neither should thou have
spoken proudly in the day of distress.

13 Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of
their calamity: yea, thou should not have looked on their affliction in the
day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of
their calamity.

14 Neither should thou have stood in the cross way to cut off those of his
that did escape, neither should thou have delivered up those of his that did
remain in the day of distress.

15 For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou have done, it
shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head.

16 For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the heathen drink
continually: yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall
be as though they had not been.

17 But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness, and
the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.

18 And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame,
and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour
them, and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau, for the Lord
has spoken it.

19 And they of the south shall possess the mount of Esau, and they of the
plain, the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the
fields of Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.

20 And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall possess
that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath, and the captivity of Jerusalem
which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the South.

21 And Saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau, and
the kingdom shall be the Lords.

1. THe vision, or Prophecy of Obadiah. Thus says the Lord Jehovah (and we
his Prophets from him) concerning Edom.

2. We have heard that, which you may take for a sentence as absolutely
determined, and (...)
pronounced by God himself, against the Country of Edom? as if you had seen an
earthly King confirm the like by his Ambassadors sent to the several nations
(of the Assyrians and Chaldaeans) with commission to raise up an army, and come
in battle against her.

3. And this I have to say in his name to Edom. See and wonder at thy self,
what a weak and (...)
silly thing, I will make thee appear to be in the account of these nations:
and how miserably despicable in their eyes.

4. For (though I know thee in thy high thoughts to be otherwise persuaded,
yet) that pride of thy heart shall at last deceive thee, (which promises to thy
self great matters, but ever falls short in the performance) or rather, Sic
Jer. 49. 16. exprimitur^ per idolum, quod ibi and 1. Reg. 15, 13.
terriculamentum vocatu^.
thy idol, (whereof thou art so proud and confident) shall fail thee in the
event. I speak it to thee, that art roosted in the clefts of those high rocks
of Arabia Petraea, and think in thy heart, that no power on earth can pull
thee out of thy strong inaccessible places in mount S^ir.

4. Thou that mountest up thy self, like an Eagle, as if thou would set thy
nest among the stars: Jer. 49. 16.
I have many ways (among which that of famine alone were sufficient) to bring
thee down from thence, and lay thee low enough, says the Lord.

5. If theives and robbers had come upon thee by night ( and how do I see thee
more than miserably undone by the sudden surpriz all of such notable shavers,
(...) ex^i^us es.
and cutters.) But had they so stolen upon thee, they would have been content
with the filching of so much as would have served their turn. And if the
grape-gatherers had come upon thee, they would have left thee some gleanings
(But thou shall have to do with them, that will cut and sweep all away: root
and branch.)

6. (Nay, and thy close hoording up will be to no purpose for.) How narrowly
will those riches, that belong to Esau be searched after? and what has he so
carefully hidden in the closest corners, which shall not be sought out, and
discovered?

7. (When all is gone and thy self art ready to be packing into a strange land)
At the borders of thy country will thy own Confederates fairly take their
leaves of thee: (...) dimittent.
they that be in league with thee will cheat, and deceive thee: they that come
to thee with pretenses of peace, and concord, will be as ready as any other to
prevail against thee: and thy entirest acquaintance, (...)
that have been often entertained as friends as thy table will (...)
offendiculum sic supponent, non pulvinos, ut solent in conviviis.
lay a stumbling block in thy way (to hinder all the good proceedings and
proposals, that may tend to thy advantage) So that, all that judge by the event
must needs say, there is no foresight, or understanding in this people of Edom.

8. And shall I not then make it good, by destroying those of Edom, Jer. 49,7
that have been so famous for wisdom? And those especially of mount Seir (of
the posterity of Esau) that have been thought to exceed all the rest in matter
of deep policy and understanding (shall not I turn their wisdom into
foolishness, and catch the wiliest of them, in their own craft?)

9. Jer. 49,7.
Yes, and, amongst them, thine O Teman, the fortes tui.
stoutest of all, that use to build most upon the strength and reach of their
own knowledge, they shall be (...)
strangely brought under, to their own amazement: so that not a (...)
man of any account, but shall be (more then brought under,) they shall be (...)
utterly ruined and destroyed, from their high mountains of Esau (...) propter
interfectionem and iniquit. in Ia^obum. (...)
Because of that slaughter (O Edom.)

10. And because of that apparent injury, which thou wast not ashamed to offer
unto thy Brethren, the Sons of Jacob, Psalm. 137, 7. Amos. 1, 11.
(when "you said of Jerusalem, Down with it, even to the ground) therefore
shall thou be covered with shame, and cut off for ever, (from being a nation,
as they shall be.)

11. I speak of the time, when thou stoodest like one of another side, while
strangers carried away all thy Brother Jacob's forces into captivity, and
foreigners entered the gates of most of his Cities, and cast lots upon
Jerusalem, (which of them should make the first assault against that their
mother-City) when all this was done, thou (that should have been one of her
best friends) did openly show thy self, to be one of her greatest enemies, i.
one of them that had a hand in all those several passages of cruelty.

12. But thou, of all other, should not have endured so much as to look (...)
upon the strange usage of thy brother, in that heavy time: much more should
thou have absteined from triumphing over the children of Judah, in the day of
their destruction: and most of all should thou have feared, to make thy own
mouth a witness of thy proud and insolent insulting over their affliction, in
the very day, when it fell upon them.

13. Thou should not have been so forward, as others, to rush into the gates
of my Peoples forts, and cities, in that time of their calamity: and then
specially have made thy self a spectator of those (...)
evils, that came so thick upon him, like a fearful storm in a sad and gloomy
day: and (which is yet worse) to have appeared as a party, which those that
laid violent hands upon his substance, in that day.

14. Nor should thou have stood in the cross ways, where many paths meet:
upon that advantage to cut off such of thy Brethren, as had escaped the enemy:
(...)
nor shut up such as otherwise had remained free, and at liberty, in those
distressed times.

15. For, after all these days of yours, the Lord will have his day too, a day
of vengeance: And it is not long before that day will come upon all those
nations about Judaea, that have been so cruel to them. And then, as thou have
alone to others, it shall be done to thee: thy reward shall return upon thy own
pate.

16. And as you of Edom shall drink (of the cup of my anger) (...) propter.
because of my holy mountain (and the holy land of Judaea which you have
persecuted) So shall all those nations that joined with you, ever taste of the
same cup, till they have drunk it up, and be as if they had never been.

17. But in mount Sion there shall be a great deliverance (from the scourge
that shall then be brought upon others by Sennacherib) and it shall continue a
place sanctified, and set apart for divine service: and then shall they of the
house of Jacob (that secured themselves for that time in Jerusalem) return to a
quiet possession of (...)
their several tenures in the land of their inheritance.

18. Then you that helped to increase the flames of those wars, that set Judaea
into a combustion, shall find, that the house of Jacob will prove a fire, and
the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau like stubble before them.
And they shall kindle them, and devour them, till there be none remaining of
the house of Esau (that shall be able to do any great harm to the house of
Israel) For, the Lord has spoken it.

19. And they (of Israel) shall possess the South (of Edom) (...) cum monte
impletum per Hyrcanum Joseph. 13,17. 1. Macc. 5,17.
with mount Seir, and the plain with the land of the Philistims. And with them,
shall they possess the Country of Ephraim, and of Samaria, and Benjamin shall
have Gilead for his possession.

20. And those few forces of the children of Israel, that return after their
captivity, shall possess whatsoever belonged to the Cananites, as far as
Sareptah (of the Sidonians) And they of Jerusalem, which shall return from
their captivity, shall possess the parts about Sepharad (or the (...) sinem
dominatus.
furthest bounds) (...) cum ut v. 19.
with the Cities of the South.

21. And they Sept. (...).
that have delivered themselves out of the captivity, shall not only come
again to their ancient right in mount Sion but (in their posterity) they shall
go as Judges and Governors, into the mountains of Esau. And then the kingdom
of Israel shall be under God alone (and under the power of no foreign Kings.)

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF JONAH.
CHAP. I.
1. NOw the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying.

2 Arise, go to Nineveh that great city, and cry against it; for their
wickedness is come up before me.

3 But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and
went down to Ioppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare
thereof, and went down into it to go with them unto Tarshish, from the
presence of the Lord.

4 But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty
tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

5 Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God, and cast
forth the wares that were in the ship, into the sea, to lighten it of them; but
Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, and he lay, and was fast asleep.

6 So the Ship-master came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O
sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that
we perish not.

7 And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we
may know for whose cause this ^evill is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot
fell upon Jonah.

8 Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil
is upon us: what is thine occupation? and whence come thou? what is thy
country? and of what people art thou?

9 And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord the God of
heaven, which has made the sea and the dry land.

10 Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why have thou done
this? (for the men knew that he fled from the presence of the Lord because he
had told them)

11 Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be
calm unto us? (for the sea wrought and was tempestuous.)

12 And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall
the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is
upon you.

13 Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land, but they could
not; for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.

14 Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we
beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us
innocent blood: for thou, O Lord, have done as it pleased thee.

15 So they took up Jonah and cast him forth into the sea, and the sea ceased
from her raging.

16 Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the
Lord, and made vows.

17 Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah was
in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.

The Prophecy of Jonah, c. 1. 9.
who was an Hebrew (as appears by his words to the Mariners) whatsoever made
Lyranus think him the Son of the widow of Sarepta, 3 Reg. 17. 23.
that was raised again to life by Eliah. Jos. 19, 13.
He seems to have been of the tribe of Naphthali. 4. Reg. 9.
For he was of Gath-heper, 4. Reg. 14, 25.
which was a City in the tribe of Naphtali. Luc. 1 1,30.
And many of the Jews think, it was he, that anointed John at the command of
Elias. Mat. 12,45.
He lived in the time of Jeroboam, the Son of Ioas, and prophesied of the
victory, which that King of Israel should obtain to the great benefit of that
kingdom, He was a sign to the Ninevites, and the conversion of Nineveh (the
great City of Assyria) by his preaching, was a prediction of the vocation of
the Gentiles, and rejection of the Jews. Lastly, He is Matt. 12, 40.
commended to us by our Saul himself, as a type of his Death, and Burial, and
Resurrection.

CHAP. I.
1. WHen Jonah, the Son of Amittai, could no way reclaim the sinful
Israelites, neither by good admonitions, nor by a clear 2. Reg. 14, 25.
Prophecy of the victorious atcheivements of their puissant King that should
restore all the coast of Israel, from the entering of Number, 34, 8.
Hamath, unto the Sea Deuteronomy. 2, 8.
of the wilderness (or, the great Lake near the plains of Idumaea:) Then,
(that the Israelites might see the greatness of their own Matt. 22, 41.
obstinacy in the speedy Repentance of the very Gentiles, and acknowledge the
Justice of that punishment, that followed upon that obstinacy of theirs) the
word, or command of the Lord, was in this manner made known unto him, and to
this purpose.

2. Arise, and fit thy self for a long journey, go to that great City Niniveh,
and, with a loud voice, boldly preach unto her colligilur ex c. 3.2.
what I have bid thee. For, their riot, oppression, and other wickedness is
grown to that height, that it calls to heaven for vengeance, and represents it
self before me, in such manner, that it must be no longer suffered to go on.

3. Jonah (loath to be a Messenger of such ill news to another Country, in
that which boded no good to his own, instead of performing ready obedience to
Gods command) thought of quitting that place, and kingdom as soon as might be,
where God had so appeared unto him, and was more specially present. Some reason
of this kind of slight from God might be, that he conceived this threat might
vide c: 4. 2.
produce mercy in God, upon the Repentance of the Ninivites, and their
repentance might conduce to the greater shame, and punishment of his own
Countrymen, that having greater inducements, gave less sign of remorse, and
amendment of life, then was found among the Heathen, This running in his head,
put him upon a sudden resolution to flee to Tarshish; the rather, because after
he had come as far as the famous port of Ioppe (the likeliest to accommodate
him for this flight) he there accordingly found a ship ready to put sail for
that place. To break off all further delay, he presently paid the fare, and
took his place in the ship: hoping that the further he removed from the place
of Gods peculiar presence, where he received his command, the further he should
be from his employment to Niniveh, which he desired, by all means, to avoid
Exodus 3. 11, and 4. 13.
(as Moses once did his journey into Egypt.)

4. But (to show how hard it was to resist the will, and pleasure of him, that
laid the command upon him) while Jonah thought himself secure, and at liberty,
the Lord sent a violent wind into the sea, which raised such a sudden impetuous
tempest in that place, that they seemed all in danger of perishing by shipwreck.

5. This drove the fearful Mariners into such a sit of devotion, as seldom
takes them but in a sad storm. First, they humbly apply themselves to their
several supposed Deities: then they are as busy in using all outward means of
safety by casting their wares into the sea, or whatsoever might thereby lighten
the ship. In the mean time Jonah had got down into the lower parts of the ship,
where he slept as securely, as if he had been no way concerned in this
troublesome, and perilous storm.

6. In this posture was he, when the Master of the ship lighting upon him,
ratled him up for sleeping so soundly in a time of common fear, and danger, and
advised him, by their example, to fall to his prayers, and call upon his God,
for his own and their safety, if perhaps God would be entreated, hebr.
cogitationem de^ nobis instituere.
to be propitious, and gracious unto them, and preserve them from perishing in
the Sea.

7. But the Mariners (seeing the violence of the storm no whit abated, after
their address to their Gods, seconded with the prayer of Jonah, and the
ordinary outward means of easing the ship of their portage) began to suspect,
that there was some wicked miscreant among them, whom divine vengeance would
not snffer to live, and for whose sake they suffered all this misery. Therefore
according to their usual course, in such extremities, they resolved upon
casting of lots, and said among themselves, Come, let us cast lots, that
thereby we may know, the true cause, and author of all this evil. And when
they had done so, after their blunt way, without prayer, or other enquiry after
God, the lot, by divine Providence, fell upon Jonah.

8. Upon this, they did not presently cast him out, whom the lot had (as they
thought) so plainly discovered to be the man, that was persecuted with that
storm. But, to inform themselves more particularly, they said unto him, Tell
us, we pray thee, for whose cause (as thou think) this evil is brought upon
us? Art thou guilty of any horrid sin, that might deserve it? Examine thy
self. what has been thy course of life? (there may be some fault of thy own,
in that) whence come thou? Of what country, and of what people art thou?
(thou may perhaps come from a wicked, and accursed place.)

9. Jonah answered punctually, to that which most reflected upon the case in
hand; that he was an Ebrew, and worshipped the Lord God of Heaven, (whither
they did, or should have directed their prayers) who made the vast Sea (which
terrified them now) and the dry land (where they longed to arrive in safety.)

10. The Men heard not this without much fear, and terror; as not being wholly
ignorant of the great wonders, which the power and Justice of almighty God had
done among the Hebrews, to the admiration of all other nations. They could
hardly come from Joppe, and hear none of those things. They considered
colligitur ex fine versiculi.
also what he had told them of his strange disobedience, and boldness, in
flying from the presence of so great a God, to prevent his going unto Niniveh,
as an unwelcome Messenger of their sudden destruction. Therefore they said unto
him, Why have thou done this? why would thou make thy self guilty of so great
a sin? who would think, a Prophet should be afraid, or loath to speak what
God had put into his mouth?

11. Yet not venturing rashly to make away an Ebrew, and so near a Servant to
the great Creator, and Governor of all things, they advised with himself, what
was fittest to be done to him, that they might appease the wrath of God, and so
quiet the raging Sea, which seemed still more, and more to swell, and beget
more trouble to them.

12. Then spoke the Prophet as from the oracle of God, and told them, that
their safety could not be otherwise procured than by casting him over board,
and so committing him to the mercy of God. And, that this their execution of
divine Justice upon him, would calm, and still the roaring Sea, which called
aloud for vengeance against him, and would not be silent, but upon his patient
offering himself to the mercy of Almighty God, and so becoming some means of
their deliverance from what himself had been a main instrument to bring upon
them, (wherein he was a type of Christ, that offered himself to a crueller
death for the salvation of the world.)

13. Nevertheless Jonas his readiness to die for them melted the hearts of
the rude Mariners (I wish our Saviors offering himself for us, could work the
like effect in us all) They resolved now to venture themselves a little further
for his sake, rather than secure themselves by his death. And (...)fodere, and
metaph. cogitare, omnem animo rationem inire, and emigare, quasi aquae fundum
investiga^e. Pessumus itaque hic (...) sic expone^e, omnes animi, corporisque
vires adhibuerunt.
casting about in their minds all the ways by which they might preserve him,
they pitched upon this as the likeliest, to try whether by rowing the ship to
dry land, they might not save themselves and him too. But, after much labor,
they see that they could not do it. For, the more they strived to gain the
land, the more fiercely did the wind, and weather beat them into new danger
upon the Sea.

14. At last, though forced unto it, yet they would not be executioners of the
death of a Prophet, till they had prayed to Almighty God (whose power the
Prophet had made known to them) that they might not be called to account for
the loss of his life, nor his innocent blood any way laid to their charge:
because all these things (the extraordinary tempest, the event of the lottery,
and Jonah's own confession) appeared plainly to fall out, and be wholly
ordered, and directed, according to his own divine dispensation, and holy will,
and pleasure. (In all which prayer of the Mariners, they were no types of the
cruelty of the Jews to our Savior, when he died for us.)

15. After this (but much against their wills) they took up Jonah, that
willingly yielded himself, and cast him into the Sea: which being done, there
followed a sudden, and great calm. (The boisterous waves and whistling winds
were laid. As the fury of Death, and Satan was quelled, upon our Saviors
exposing himself to Death for our Salvation.)

16. These things wrought in the Seamen a wonderful Fear, and Reverence of the
true God, the Creator, and Lord of all things. Of whom they might have heard
something in Joppe, and other places of the holy land: but these passages
concerning Jonah, and the words, that he spoke to them, wrought so powerfully
in their hearts, that, upon their safe landing again, they offered sacrifice to
the Lord after the way of Israel, according to the vows, which they had made
unto him, when they were in danger, adding other vows, which they intended
afterward to perform, at their first opportunity.

17. But God (that is able to rescue us in all places, and uses to be a
present help in the greatest times of difficulty) by his good providence, and
mercy had prepared a whale to swallow up Jonah alive and be as his Matt. 12, 40.
prison, or his keeper for a time. And Jonah continued in the belly of the
Fish, three days, and three nights (and so again became a type of our Savior,
that was three days, and three nights in the heart of the earth.)

CHAP. II.
1 THen Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes belly,

2 And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard
me: out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice.

3 For thou had cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me about, all thy billows and thy waves passed over me.

4 Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy
holy temple.

5 The waters compassed me about even unto the soul: the depth closed me round
about: the weeds were wrapped about my head.

6 I went down to the bottoms of the mountains: the earth with her bars was
about me for ever: yet have thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my
God.

7 When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in
unto thee, into thine holy temple.

8 They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.

9 But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, I will pay
that that I have vowed: salvation is of the Lord.

10 And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry
land.

CHAP. II.
1. JOnah, in the time of his abode within the Whale, considering the
miraculous security that he had, being scarce out of the very mouth of one
danger, (of being swallowed up by the sea) and yet presently in the midst of
another (in the belly of a vast, and monstrous Fish) did not forget, to make
his humble and yet confident prayer to the Lord his God, a kind of Prophetical
assurance of his deliverie from the Fish, as well as from the Sea.

2. And he framed his prayer to this purpose, I cried unto the Lord, out of
that Emphasis est and in Pronomine and in Nomine cum duplici terminatione f^m.
fearful affliction of mine, that straightly compassed me about on every side:
and by the life yet left in my body, with some degree of inward repose and
quiet in my soul, I quickly, and easily perceived, that he had accepted and
answered my prayer. Yes, O my Gracious and Merciful God, Out of the innermost
parts of the Whale, wherein I lay as in a kind of Grave, or a shadow of
darkness like Hell it self for the time: Even thence I cried, and thou were
pleased to give ear to the voice of my groaning in my importunate prayer.

3. Though what relief could I then, in any reason, have expected, when thou
had cast me into the innermost receptacles, and bosom of the vast Seas:
where the overflowing of the waters circled me about, and (which was more
terrible unto me) my accusing thoughts, in reflection upon thy heavy
displeasure, and my rebellious sin, were like so many waves, and surges that
passed over me, and afflicted my heavy soul. So that Psalm. 42. 9.
what the Royal Prophet once speak in a figure, I find in a more literal, and
both sensible and spiritual way made good upon me.

4. How could I then but take up those other words of the same Prophet, wherein
(betwixt hope and discomfort) he complains, Psalm. 31. 14. and v. 24,
that he was cast out of thy sight, like one out of thy remembrance, and care,
and providence. But in this bitter conflict, my faith, and repose in the mercy
of God, at last, got the victory, and then I altered my sad tone, and with
some cheerfulness delivered the hope, that I had to escape this peril, and
live to present my hearty thanks once again in thy holy Temple of Jerusalem,

5. All this while my danger continued, and made me recall another passage of
the Psalmist, where he says, Psalm. 69. 1.
that the waters beset him on every side, to the hazard of his life. His words
might he mine, when I was walled about with the great abyss, and a multitude
of weeds (all which strengthened, and collected into one bundle) which seemed
ready to wrap about my head, and confine me to my last unquiet bed.

6. For me thought that I went down to the lowest parts of those rocks and
promontories, that peep out, like mountains in the sea, and that the earth had
barred me out, and excluded me wholly from ever seeing the firm land again. Yet
out of the depth of this misery, did thou preserve me alive, O just and
powerful Lord, and my most merciful God.

7. When, in the midst of these difficulties, I was ready to faint, and
despair of recoverie, I forgot not to humble my self before God, And my prayer
found admittance unto thee, O Lord, and access into thy holy Temple.

8 They that perverslie wait upon idols for succor, which are but mere
vanities, what do they but, in effect, wilfully relinquish that mercy, and
favor, that is offered to them from heaven?

9. But I will present my self before thee, O God, with the sacrifice of praise
and thansgiving, and I will pay my vows unto thee, from whom only, we may
securely hope for mercy, and deliverance.

10. According to this prayer from a penitent, and faithful heart, the Lord
upon the third day, commanded the Whale to cast up Jonah upon the dry land (as
the grave delivered up Mat. 12. 40.
our Savior upon the third day, in the garden of Joseph of Arimathea: and (by
his power, and mercy) shall deliver us all, at last, being able to retain us
no longer then the great day of the Resurrection, and that general Spring, when
all the bodies of the Saints shall budd out of the earth 1 Cor. 15.
incorruptible, though they were sown in corruption.)

CHAP. III.
1 ANd the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying,

2 Arise, go unto Nineveh that great city, and preach unto it the preaching
that I bid thee.

3 So Jonah arose and went unto Niniveh, according to the word of the Lord:
(now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days journey)

4 And Jonah began to enter into the city a days journey; and he cried, and
said, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

5 So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on
sackcloth from the greatest of them, even to the least of them.

6 For word came unto the King of Nineveh: and he arose from his throne, and he
laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.

7 And he caused it to be proclaimed, and published through Nineveh (by the
decree of the king and his nobles) saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor
flock taste any thing; let them not feed, nor drink water.

8 But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto
God; yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that
is in their hands.

9 Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not?

10 And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God
repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it
not.

CHAP. III.
1. WHen Jonas, like one risen from the dead, was returned out of that prison,
and Grave in the Whales belly, and saw himself to be one of this World again:
he heard no more of his former disobedience (he was sufficiently admonished of
that, by his punishment in the deep) But to take away the scruple, and
perplexity, that he might have in his heart, whether he should now fit himself
for his journey toward Ninive, or no (for he might remember, Number. 14. ult.
that the Israelites, neglecting Gods first command, of entering the land of
Canaan, were slain for attempting to do it afterward, upon their own bare
resolution) To resolve him in this, by a new Commission, he was furnished, and
encouraged again by God himself, with a second, and fresh command cap. 1. 2^.
in the same terms, wherein he received it before. That is,

2. Arise, and go to that great City Ninive, the head City of the Assyrians,
and preach against them what I first enjoined thee. At which if they repent,
the Israelites may understand by that, how much they have offended, in not
being drawn to repentance, by the message of so many Prophets as have been sent
to them.

3. Then Jonah, having learned obedience from his afflictions, without any
further delay, cheerfully resolved upon his journey, and went to Ninive, as God
had commanded him. Now Ninive was a very great and spacious City, of three
days (...) de itinere pedestri ab (...) ambulare.
journey in length, from the one end to the other.

4. Jonah therefore beginning to enter into the City, ordered it so, that he
passed thorough a third part of the City in one days journey: exclaiming
against the great sins of that place, and threatening that (unless they did
prevent it, by a serious and speedy repentance) within forty days Ninive
should be overthrown: but upon their true conversion, they should find, that
God desired not their death, but the reformation of their lives.

5. In which, the people of Ninive believed God, and being well persuaded of
his Justice, and mercy, made known unto them by his Prophet; and (contented
with that first days journey, and admonition caused a solemn Fast to be
proclaimed, and further to show their inward, and universal sorrow and
contrition, they left off their costly apparel, and from the highest to the
lowest appeared all in sackcloth, as penitent, and humble suitors for mercy.

6. For, the report of this Prophecy was brought to the Kings Court, as well
as to other places of the City: and the King to show good example to his
Courtiers, and the rest of his subjects, arose from his Throne, laid aside his
Royal ornaments, and in sackcloth, and ashes made evidence of his great sorrow,
and remorse, wherein he begged mercy for himself, and his People.

7. Nor did he thus only countenance, but by his Royal Proclamation, with the advice, and counsel of his Nobles, he enjoined a Fast to be kept through all
Ninive, in such solemn and strict manner, that neither man, nor beast, greater
or less, should be permitted to taste any food, or drink any water.

8. And it was further commanded, that both men and beasts should be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto the Lord (the men out of true remorse of
conscience, and hearty sorrow: the beasts, as forced to it by hunger, upon
keeping them from their usual food) and that every man should repent,
renouncing and forsaking all their evil courses, and specially the (...)rapina,
violentia, injustitia.
violence, injustice, and oppression, which they had exercised before, and
which now they should wash off from their hands by Charity, and restitution of
what was injuriously taken away, or detained from any other: which is one of
the clearest, and most evident fruits of repentance.

9. To all which they might be the rather induced, because they had no reason
but to hope, that this message of the Prophet proceeded not from any
irreversible decree for their utter destruction, but rather as an invitation to
repentance, and amendment of life, whereby the merciful God might be moved to
reconciliation, and reversement of that heavy punishment, which they had
deserved.

10. This command of the King, which seconded the preaching of Judah, was so
readily obeyed, that God, to whom all hearts are open, seeinng their sorrow and
repentance accompanied with a serious, and real intention of amendment, in
forsaking their evil ways, and exercising themselves in all good works
(specially in the virtues opposite to their violence and oppression.) He also
repented of the punishment, which he threatened to bring upon them, and in his
tender pity and compassion, kept off the blow that was ready to fall upon
their City.

CHAP. IV.
1 But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

2 And he prayed unto the Lord and said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my
saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before more Tarshish:
for I knew that thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.

3 Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for it is
better for me to die then to live.

4 Then said the Lord, Do thou well to be angry^?

5 So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and
there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see what
would become of the city.

6 And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah, that
it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was
exceeding glad of the gourd.

7 But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the
gourd that it withered.

8 And it came to pass when the sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement
east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished
in himself to die, and said, it is better for me to die then to live.

9 And God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd? and he
said, I do well to be angry even unto death.

10 Then said the Lord, Thou have bad pity on the gourd, for the which thou
have not labored, neither made it grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night.

11 And should not I spare Nineveh that great city, wherein are more then six
scour thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand and their
left hand, and also much cattle?

CHAP. IV.
1. IN the mean time Jonah (instead of rejoicing, and blessing God for his
mercy toward the sad, and penitent Ninivites) discovered his great anger, and
impatience, and too much respect, and tenderness of his own honor, and
credit, which he would not have blemished with the welfare of the Gentiles,
against whom he had prophesied. And a strange thing this must needs seem to be,
that a Prophet should take it ill, that his Prophecy was seconded with their
repentance, or that their repentance should be crowned with so much mercy, and
deliverance. Specially, after himself had suffered so much for his disobedience
and backwardness to prophecy to them: and been delivered out of the very
jaws of death, upon his own penitent, and humble supplication in his own
behalf. For this, though it may be thought to show his tender love to his own
people, that, by this repentance, and success at Nineve, were convinced of
what the obstinacy of the Jews deserved at Jerusalem; yet is it an evident
Argument of great weakness in the Prophet, and great mercy in God, that would
pardon such a fault to a weak servant of his, who seemed now to envy that
favor to the Gentiles, which God had long before showed himself willing to
bestow, though it were to the irritation of the Jews. Deuteronomy. 32. 21.


2. But Jonah would be like his name, Dolens, and murmurans ut columba, i. (...)
grieved and murmuring where he should not; and displeased with that which
pleased God. Nor was this enough, unless he made it appear in his very prayer
also, where he venters to expostulate with God, and to frame his prayer after
this manner. Why did thou make me a Preacher, or rather a false Prophet to
Ninive? Is not this the very (...) verbum: and rem sigrificat, and causam,
thing, that made me so loath to undertake that office, when I was in Iudaea?
Is not this the only reason, that moved me to fly from thence to Tharsis, that
I might be far enough from this unwelcom employment? For I said within my self,
and I knew, that I had reason enough to say, that thou art a gracious God,
merciful and slow to anger, and of so great kindness, that thou quickly
repentest thee of any evil, which thou threatnest to bring upon sinners, if
they are ready to repent them of their sins.

3. Now therefore I pray thee, O Lord, rid me of my life, which is a burden,
and punishment unto me heavier then death. While I foresee the punishment that
I may well think will fall upon my own countrie-men for their impenitence,
which is now made fowler, by the repentance, and conversation of the Heathen,
that knew not the goodness, or pleasure of God so well as they did. Therefore
I am likely enough for this business at Ninive, to be hated by the Israelites,
as well as mocked, and derided by the Ninivites, that will look upon me, as one
quite out in his Prophecy.

4. Yet the gracious Lord answers not the Prophet according to the heat of his
passion, or the error of his judgment, but in great mercy and meekness
proposes this question, Whether he thought, that he had just cause to be angry
with him for sparing so great a City upon their true repentance? Which every
good man should rather beg by his prayers, then any way be troubled to see it
done.

5. But Jonah (having little to answer in his own defense, amd being willing to
see, what would be the final event of this business) without any reply left
the City, and sitting toward the East Side of it, made himself a little booth
there, that he might rest under the shadow of it. while he expected, what would
at last become of Ninive, after the 40 days were expired. Whether the Citizens
would so long persevere in their repentance, and, if they did not, whether
Justice would then be showed upon them, whom God seemed now willing to spare,
upon their present conversion, and reformation of life.

6. Now, (when the thin slight materials of Jonah his booth began to wither,
and fade with heat) the Lord prepared a gourd, (or some shrub, that used to
grow in those parts) to come over Jonah, like a Canopie, to shadow, and defend
his head from the heat of the Sun, which seemed not a little to afflict him.
And with this refreshment under the gourd Jonah was much delighted.

7. But that ease and pleasure was not long to be indulged unto him. For the
next day, betimes in the morning, God prepared also a worm, which by gnawing at
the lower parts of his gourd, and so extracting the moisture, was the cause,
that it quickly withered away.

8. Moreover at the rising of the Sun, God sent a soft and (...) silentem, i.
sine m^tu, and frigore.
still wind the East, that had little, or no motion, or cooling quality, which
was the thing that Jonah desired. Besides this warm breath, the son also, with
some violence of heat, did beat upon the head of Jonah, and became so
troublesome, that it made him ready to faint, and show himself weary of his
life, plainly professing, that it was better for him now to die, then to live.
Which seems to be spoken in a passion, as if he thought it an injury, to be
deprived of that benefit of the gourd, which was graciously afforded him for a
time: and considered not that this variety of means might be used, to bring him
to the acknowledgement of the truth of Gods judgments, and the sight of his own
offenses, and demerites.

9. Therefore God said unto Jonah. Is this well done of thee, to discover so
much anger, and disturbance of thy self, for a poor little gourd? To which
question he gives a rash impatient answer, confessing that he was Verb. (...)
^nterdum ad a^xesin usurpatur.
extremely angry, even unto death, and did well to be so.

10. Whereupon the Lord said again. Art thou so affected at the withering of a
poor vile gourd of a days continuance, which neither for the coming up, nor
the growth of it, is any way beholden unto thee?

11. And shall not I (the creator, and preserver of all things: whose property
it is to have mercy upon me, above all my creatures) shall not I be touched
with compassion of so great, and populous a City as Ninive? wherein, beside
much cattle, there are more then a hundred, and twenty thousand innocent
children: so simple, and weak, that they cannot distinguish between their right
hands and their left: and therefore cannot be thought, by any fault of theirs
to call for this heavy destruction upon them. Yet were they all ready to perish
in the punishment of their Parents sins, had not they timely repented. What
must you then guess of the number of men, and women of fuller growth, that
have appeased my wrath by amendment of life? Which being done, their death, and
ruin should not be rashly, and uncharitably desired, to make you seem the
truer Prophet: who was not to threaten any people, but with this implicit
condition [if they forsook not their sins.]

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF MICAH.
CHAP. I.
1. THe word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of
Iotham, Abaz and Hezekiah kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and
Jerusalem.

2 Hear all ye people, hearken, O earth, and all that therein is, and let the
Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.

3 For behold, the Lord comes forth out of his place and will come down, and
tread upon the high places of the earth.

4 And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be cleft
as wax before the fire and as the waters that are powered down a steep place.

5 For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the house of
Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the
high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?

6 Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a
vineyard: and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley; and I will
discover the foundations thereof.

7 And all the graven Images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the
hires thereof shall be burnt with the fire: and all the idols thereof will I
lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall
return to the hire of an harlot.

8 Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will make a
wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls.

9 For her wound is incurable, for it is come unto Judah: he is come unto the
gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.

10 Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of Aphrah roll
thy self in the dust.

11 Pass ye away, thou inhahitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked; the
inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel, he shall
receive of you his standing.

12 For the inhabitant of Maroth, waited carefully for good; but evil came down
from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.

13 O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast: she is
the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of
Israel were found in thee.

14 Therefore shall thou give presents to Moreshethgath: the houses of Achzib
shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.

15 Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he shall come
unto Adullam the glory of Israel.

16 Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children, enlarge thy
baldness as the eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee.

CHAP. I.
1. THe word of the Lord, which was made known to Micah, of Moreshah (a City in
Judaea) in the days of Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah: and which
he had revealed to him in a vision concerning Samaria, and Jerusalem (two
eminent Cities, by whose example the two kingdoms of Judah, and Israel were
drawn into many grievous sins, and disorders.)

2. Hear all ye people of Judah, and Israel. Attend to this Prophecy of mine,
you that dwell in any part of this land, how populous, and of how great extent
soever it is. And for my faithful delivery of what I am enjoined to say, let
God himself, that sees, and hears all, from his (...) templum, and palatium
significat.
holy and glorious habitation in heaven, hear witness against you, (if I be at
any time accused, or mistrusted for concealing any part of his will and
pleasure.)

3. For I wish you all to take notice of this, that God is now coming out of
those high and holy places of his, to show himself in the execution of his
judgments upon your nation: and the highest and strongest places, with the
highest, and stateliest persons (as stout as they are) will he trample under
his feet, and lay even with the lowest earth.

4. At his angry voice, the mountainous Cities shall melt under him, like wax
before the fire: and the lower villages in the vale shall part asunder, and
leave their former glory, and station with as much speed and violence, as
waters will run down in the steepest places, and leave no marks of any abode
in that place from whence they come.

5 And all this for the transgressions of Jacob, and the sins of the house of
Israel. Now, what caused the transgressions of Jacob, but the ill example of
Samaria: and what occasioned the idolatry of the high places of Judah but the
ill copy that was set them by Jerusalem?

6. But Samaria, that first began the sin, shall feel the first smart of the
punishment. And I will make Samaria like a heap of rubbish in the field, or of
withered plants in a vineyard. So far shall she be from having the face and
show of a City, when I have caused the stones to be cast down out of her high
buildings into the lowest holes, and bottomes: and discovered the very
foundations of that fabric, wherein she gloried so much.

7. Then shall all their graven images be beaten to pieces and the (...) a
(...) i. (...)
rich ornaments, that were bestowed upon their idoll-temples shall be consumed
with fire, and the idols themselves will I lay desolate. For at the best, those
fair donaries were but the rewards and bribes of their spiritual adultery with
idols, and to no other end shall they come, then to what such wages of adultery
and idolatry do best deserve to be brought.

8. (Thus said the Lord.) But, I their sad Prophet cannot but interpret my
inward sorrow by my bitter lamentations, and divesting my self of my best and
upper garments, and, in that little better than naked posture, mourning (...)
animal prodigiosum and monstrosum in gon^re significat.
like the prodigious melancholy beasts in the desert, and howling, like the
young (...) a (...) owls of howling.
owls (that have no other tone, and thence have their name, as fit to express
it.

9. (All which I am brought to) because this Land is so desperately wounded,
that there is no hope of her cure, no not in Judah, the best part of her. For
which cause he that has already given such a blow to Israel, is marching
toward my selected people, even to the very gates of Jerusalem.

10. Yet let not these sad things be published in Gath, or any other town of
the Philistims our enemies. Let not our tears be seen of them, that will laugh
the more at our miseries. But thou (...) a (...)
Ephraim, (that bear the name of fruitfulness) or rather I will call thee
(...) pulvis s^^o alludit ad Ephraim.
Ophrah, (from dust and ashes, that are signs of sorrow, and barrenness)
spare not thy sorrows for thy self within thy own houses. Wallow thy self in
dust and ashes in contemplation of the sad day, wherein all thy houses shall be
beaten into dust.

11. And you of Samaria, so pleasantly seated that the name of Samaria may be
turned into i. pulchra.
Shaphir: you shall pass along from thence into a land of desolation and
captivity: having your fair City laid bare and naked to your utter shame, and
confusion: while thy Sister that dwells in occulto hic nomine pro (...) ponitur
(...) qpeco^osa terra, a (...)
Sion will not stir a foot, from her hoc etiam (...) signif. (...) in statione
sua.
quiet Hill, to come toward you, and relieve you; But, (k) keeping her own
station, (and not troubling her self any further) she will (for fashion sake)
take the hint of her mourning from thee, O Bethel etiam hic later sub nomine
Beth-etsel.
Bethel, that mayest^ now rather be called Beth-etsel, i. a place of schism and
separation.

12. But (though Jerusalem be yet so senseless of misery) yet she that dwells
in hebr. Maroth.
Ramoth of Judaea (for which you may say [by transposition of the letters] that
dwells in Maroth, i. in a place destined to sorrow and bitterness) she shall
much bewail the loss of her good people, ere long; For, mischief and divine
vengeance shall come down at last, not to them only of the Ramoth the name of
many several places in Judaea, that were eminently seated a (...)
several Ramoths, and eminent seats in Judaea: but to the very gates of
Jerusalem too, (that is pirked up higher than all the rest.)

13. And thou inhabitant of Lachish shall bind the chariot to the swift
dromedaries (that chariot, ut habetur 2. Reg. 18, 17.
that must convey Sennacheribs servants to Jerusalem, to demand no less than
the rendering up of the City into his hands) because Lachish gave the first and
chief occasion of the sin (of idolatry) to the daughter of Sion. Such great
faults of the ten tribes of Israel being first found in thee.

14. Therefore also have I somewhat to say to Moreshah-Gath, and Aczib (the two
neighbor towns of Lachish) Thou, O Lachish, shall be fain to send presents
and bribe the Assyrians well to show favor to Moreshath-Gath. And the
houshoulders of Achzib shall be put to another shift, whereby to help
themselves, i. by proving themselves false dissemblers and liars, ( (...) a
(...)
as their name imports) and betraying that trust, that was reposed in them by
the Kings of Israel.

15. And now I will say somewhat alluding to the name of Moreshah, as I did to
that of Achzib. Moreshah, in the derivation of the word, referrs to an (...)
heir. And I have an heir in store for thee, O inhabitant of Moreshah. (It
shall be the Assyrian, that shall hereafter possess what is yet thine) I will
bring him to thee my self. And this Assyrian, whom you made so much of once, as
if he had been the glory of Israel; shall quickly enlarge himself and come as
far as Odullam (after he has got the safe possession of Moreshah.)

16. Therefore O thou poor and miserable Judaea that hear these sad
prophesies against the greatest Towns and Cities, fall to those ceremonies
now, that are the best expressions of their sorrow and heaviness.

Take away thy dainty hair, and make thy self as good as bald in sign of
grief, for the slaughter of thy delicate children, wherein thou have placed thy
delight. And yet enlarge thy baldness, like that of the Eagle, in token of
greater sorrow, for those thy Children, that are led into captivity, (and so
have a heavier sentence passed upon them, then there was upon them, that were
taken away, by death, from the sense of any further calamity.)

CHAP. II.
1 WOE to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the
morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand.

2 And they covet fields, and take them by violence: and houses, and take them
away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.

3 Therefore thus says, the Lord, Behold, against this family do I devise an
evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go haughtily:
for this time is evil.

4 In that day shall one take up a parable against you, and lament with a
doleful lamentation, and say, We be utterly spoiled: he has changed the
portion of my people: how has he removed it from me? turning away he has
divided our fields.

5 Therefore thou shall have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the
congregation of the Lord.

6 Prophecy ye not, say they to them that prophecy: they shall not prophecy
to them, that they shall not take shame.

7 O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord
straitened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly?

8 Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe with
the garment, from them that pass by securely, as men averse from war.

9 The women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses, from
their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.

10 Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest: because it is polluted, it
shall destroy you even with a fore destruction.

11 If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood, do lie, saying, I will
prophecy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the prophet
of this people.

12 I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee: I will surely gather, the
remnant of Israel, I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the
flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great noise by reason of the
multitude of men.

13 The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up: and have passed
through the gate, and are gone out by it, and their king shall p^sse before
them, and the Lord on the head of them.

CHAP. II.
1. THese woes and sorrows that are threatened before, are the just rewards of
sin. And they must look for a great share in that woe, that study to be evil,
and upon their beds devise iniquity, and plot several ways, wherein they may
bring their wickedness into act, as soon as the opportunity of the morning
light, and their own power, and ability will give them leave.

2. This kind of men do no sooner fasten their covetousness upon other men's
fields, but all the violence, that can be, must be used for the gaining of
them: no sooner do they entertain a desire of other men's houses, but they
think, they may take them as their own. Such violence, and oppression do they
use against other men, and their houses, and whatsoever descends to them by no
lesser right then that of inheritance.

3. Therefore thus says the Lord, these plots and devices of this family of
the house of Jacob, shall be answered with somewhat that I will devise against
them. They contrived the evil of sin, and would not be taken off from the
execution of it: so will I, in my thoughts resolve of the evil of punishment,
from whence none of you shall shrink your necks out of the collar to escape it.
And I will lay such a yoke upon you, that you shall be ready to sink under it,
and shall not be able to go (...) i. in elevatione ^o^poris.
upright. That will be an ill time unto all (the time of their going into
captivity, and bearing the yoke of a foreign Prince, and Conqueror.)

4. In that day shall men take up a proverb against you, and deliver it in
terms of a most bitter lamentation, saying, We are utterly spoiled: and the
land that was the lot and portion of my people is changed to other uses. And
how strangely has the enemy removed and taken away whatsoever he could carry
with him? and now returns again to share our lands, and tenements?

5. (Thus will they abuse us in songs, and short parables, taken up in scorn,
and sung as personating of our God, and us. But now, to speak plainly and
without parable, of our selves: there is too much truth in their abusive song.)
For I may say to my dear Country, Thou shall never have any again, that shall
divide thy several inheritances unto thee, as Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
they have done heretofore in the congregations of the Lord.

6. (And now, since I have told you others mocks against you, let me tell you,
how you were wont to mock us, that are your Prophets, and say) (...) ne inst.
lletis quod alii installarunt aut porphetarunt vel (...) sicut alii
prophetarunt.
Do not you drop and distill such prophesies into us, as other Prophets have
used to be free of. Well the time will come, when such Prophets as you so
abused, Amos 7. 12. Isai. 30. 10. Deuteronomy 32. 2.
will drop no more of such prophesies upon you, like the rain, or dew from
heaven. And (when you know what it is to want them, you will resolve, that) no
Prophet, that comes after, shall carry away such reproaches, instead of
rewards, and have his heavenly doctrine answered with such base, and
ignominious speeches.

7. This which I tell you, is said to the house of Jacob, (by commission from
God himself. And, when these, and the like threats, in our prophesies, are
declared unto you) think ye that the merciful spirit of the Lord is any way
shortened, and contracted? Or does he these things out of any ill intentions to
you? Nay, are not my words (in the mouth of my Prophets) intended to the good
of every one, that walks uprightly? (for, I speak to you now, as from God
himself, and in his person, and so I go on to speak to you, in the same person.)

8. They that went awhile ago under the title of my people (and called me their
God) do now (as if I were become their enemy ( rise up in hostile manner
against me, and they that were indeed my people. I speak it to you, who have
used them so kindly, that (according to your proverb) you have pulled off their
robe with their under garments (and so left them to the naked world) And no
otherwise do you take any thing from those, that pass on peaceably by you,
then you do from those that are returned as captives Pro (...) reversi a
praelio.
from the battle (over whom you have a fairer pretense from the privilege of
war for rifling of them.)

9. (And not the men only, but the weaker sex too, do you use after this rude,
and barbarous manner: for) you have, against all law, ejected wives of my
people out of their poor houses, wherein they took pleasure to be as good women
should do, without gadding abroad.) And so do you put them upon the
inconveniences, which they must suffer, that are turned out of doors, to shift
for themselves, and bring up their children, as they may, and not as they
should. Wherein you take away for ever that honor and glory, which I should
have had from their children (if their education had been answerable to the
will, and means of their godly parents.)

10. (Therefore, as you ejected their mothers, so will I eject you.) Come then
and prepare your selves to be packing out of this land, which your sins have so
pulluted. It shall be no dwelling place for such as you. It shall rather be a
means utterly to destroy you, and vomit you out, i. (...) ut corruptionem
pessimam:
as a matter of most filthy corruption Levit 18. 25.
that has been a long time troublesome unto her.

12. (Is not this a fit people to shake up their best Prophets as they do? But
I can tell you, what Prophets would please their fancy rarely well.) If a man
would use to vapor amongst them, like one that walks after every (...) ventum
and spiritum significat.
uncertain wind, and is led by every new spirit. If he would discourse (...)
nonsense and lies (and say) I will preach, or prophecy to thee for a little
wine, or strong drink (or any small reward) This were the only Prophet for this
people. (He would fit their turns as well as heart could wish.)

12. (Me thinks, I see such a goodly Prophet in one of his Prophetical
raptures, and thus he prophesies to Jacob, as from God himself.) I will surely
assemble thee, O Jacob, all of thee. I will not fail to gather into one the
remnant of Israel, like many sheep into one flock: a fair flock, like those in
the rich pastures of 2 Reg. 3. 4.
Bozrah and Moab: and that flock into one fould: and they shall have no further
trouble then good store of Shepherds; more men then ordinary to wait upon them.

13. But (in earnest, for all this goodly prophecy of our cheap, and upstart
Prophet) the rough soldier shall be the man to break way before them (not his
imaginary Shepherd) and he shall lead this people whither they would not go;
as you shall see, when they have broken out and passed quite through the gates
( of Jerusalem). Then shall the King of this people pass along (as a prisoner)
before those Soldiers, and Joel 2. 11.
God himself in the head of them (to prosper and succeed the designs of the
enemy) as of an army, that himself will own.

CHAP. III.
1 ANd I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house
of Israel: is it not for you to know judgment?

2 Who hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck off their skin from off
them; and their flesh from off their bones?

3 Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them, and
they break their bones and chop them in pieces, as for the pat, and as flesh
within the caldron.

4 Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he will even
hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in
their doings.

5 Thus says the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that
bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace: and he that puts not into their
mouths, they even prepare war against him.

6 Therefohe night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision, and it
shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the sun shall go down
over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

7 Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they
shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer of God.

8 But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment and
of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.

9 Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the
house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

10 They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.

11 The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire,
and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord and
say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.

12 Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem
shall become beaps, and the mountains of the house, as the high places of the
forest.

CHAP. III.
1. ( AFter that sad, and true Prophetical contemplation, that I closed
withal: desirous to show the reason of the severity of that judgment.) ut v.
6.
I said, Give ear awhile to me now, you Princes of Jacob, and other subordinate
Governors in the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 2 2. Romans 2. 1.
You that pronounce the sentence of judgment against other offenders, must not
you needs know, what heavy punishment belongs to your selves (if you had your
due.)

2. Yet are you the men, that hate doing of good, and love the practice of what
you know to be naught. And you use such oppression over those that are under
you, that you leave no skin on their backs, nor flesh on their bones, (you
pick, and scrape away all that can be gained out of them.)

3. (And, I may say more of these cruel extortioners) (...) pro (...)
When they have thus eaten the flesh of my people, and flayed the skin off the
bones, then (as if they longed for the very marrow, or loved to hear their
bones crack) they break, and divide the bones into several pieces, as the Cooks
use to chop, and cut out their meat into several joints, before they put it
into the pot, or sit it for the table.

4. There will come a time, when these men will cry to the Lord, but he will
not hear them (that had no ears for the sad complaints of the oppressed) In
that time of need will he hide his face from them (that turned their faces away
from the poor afflicted) And, as they behaved themselves extreme ill, in their
doings. (So will he show himself very just, in the punishment, which they are
to suffer.)

5. And (after this said to the Magistrates) somewhat says the Lord, I have to
say to those titular Prophets, that lead my people into much error by their
false predictions. These men, according as their teeth are plied with good
meat, (by their kind gossips) Jer. 8. 21.
so do they frame their mouths to prophecy of peace, and plenty: but, if they
observe a man, that cares not for so providing for their mouths, against him
they will be sure to prepare tidings of war and destruction.

6. Therefore I will bring so dark and dismal a night of affliction upon you,
that you shall be able to discover no probable visions of peace. It shall be so
dark and gloomy, that you shall not discern, how to pick out any clear
divinations of comfort. And the Sun shall set upon those Prophets. (you may bid
them good night, for all the peace, they shall be able to foretell.) The day
shall be so dark over them (that they shall be able to foresee nothing that is
good, either for themselves, or you.)

7. Then shall those Seers be ashamed to be seen, and those Diviners confounded
with their own divinations. Ezekiel. 24. 17. Levit. 13. 45,
And all of them may put a covering upon their upper lips, (and cry, I am
unclean, I am unclean: as being in greater danger to infect the people, then
any leaper, to whom that was enjoined) For, none of their answers will prove to
be divine oracles, but mere fancies of their own.

8. But (I am no Prophet of that stamp. I may truly say, that) I am furnished
with those abilities, and filled pro (...)
with that divine Spirit, that should be in a Prophet. I am endued with courage
(to fear no man's person) and with judgment, and discretion, that I may
seasonably tell Jacob of his sins, and Israel of his transgressions (and not
think it enough to preach what will please them, and to sooth them up in
expectation of better times, then they are worthy to enjoy, or have any reason
to hope for.)

9. And now (to put my office accordingly in execution) Vide v. 1.
Give ear to me once again, you Princes of Jacob, and other Governors in the
house of Israel, that (sit in the place of Justice, and yet) abhor doing of
judgment: and (should be the only examples of dealing rightly, and exactly,
according to the rule, and yet) are commonly seen to pervert the rule of
equity, (and make the law serve your own turns.)

10. That makes them build such houses in Sion, and other parts of Jerusalem,
with what they gain by shedding of the blood of the innocent: and by deciding
causes, that come before them, with much injustice, and iniquity.

11. For, the Princes of this City judge for the bribe, and the Priests teach
for the hire, and the Prophets divine for the reward in ready cash. And yet
they can talk devoutly, and confidently of Gods protection, for Sion, and
Jerusalems sake, and seem to rely upon the Lord, and say. Does not God dwell in
the midst of us? How then can evil betide us (that are lodged so near to his
own holy Temple?)

12. (But, talk what you will) For you and your sins, Sion shall be plowed,
like a field: Jerusalem shall become, like heaps of rubbish; and Mount Moriah,
the top of your glory, Jer. 26. 18.
as the place where the House of God stands, shall be like those Mountains in
the forest (that are fitter for the entertainment of beasts, then men.)

CHAP. IV.
1 But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house
of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it.

2 And many nations shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

3 And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off,
and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
prunning hooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more.

4 But they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and
none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts has spoken it.

5 For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk
in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

6 In that day says the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will
gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted.

7 And I will make her that halted, a remnant, and her that was cast far off, a
strong nation; and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion, from
henceforth even for ever.

8 And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion,
unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion, the kingdom shall come to the
daughter of Jerusalem.

9 Now why do thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee? is thy
counselor perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail.

10 Be in pain, and labor to bring forth. O daughter of Zion, like a woman in
travail: for now shall thou go forth out of the city, and thou shall dwell in
the field, and thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou be delivered,
there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.

11 Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be
defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.

12 But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his
counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.

13 Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and
I will make thy hoofs brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people: and I
will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of
the whole earth.

CHAP. IV.
1. YEt (for your comfort) after all this desolation, there will a time come
(at their return from the captivity of Babylon) Isai. 2. 2. etc.
when that mountain, where the house of the Lord is seated, shall overtop all
other mountains: and no hills, or high places (which the Pagans have made
choice of, for the worship of their idol-gods) shall any way be compared to the
high glory of Mount Moriah: or so frequented with multitudes of men, as this
shall be.

2. Hither shall flock the true worshipers from several parts of the World, and
say, Come, and let us go up to the holy Mountain, the Mountain of the Lord
Jehovah, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and (by his holy Priests and
Prophets) he will teach us, what is fittest for us to be instructed in, (...)
de vi a suis:
out of his ways, ^ pro [ut] sicut Psalm. 77. 5. (...) adeout non
that we may walk in them. For thence only must we look for the knowledge of
the true God: whose divine laws (specially in the days of the Messiah) shall
go forth of Sion, and his holy word out of Jerusalem (and thence be divulged,
and imparted unto other nations,)

3. This great God of Israel (that so instructs, and directs them, that make
their humble addresses unto him) will, for their sakes, (...) soepe est, in
judicium vocare, poenam infer.
show his judgments, among many people that seek him not, and correct many
remote nations, that are too strong and puissant for us to deal with (for no
strength, no distance can secure them from his power and good pleasure upon
them.) And while we serve him, he will make them to be so willingly and so
absolutely resolved of peace, that they shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks. And (rather then their own
quarrels shall be any disturbance to us) one nation shall not lift up a (...)
dicitus omne telum bellicum.
weapon against another, nor shall they learn how to practice themselves in the
feats of war any more.

4. (And so shall it be after our return from Babylon, we shall then enjoy many
days of great peace and tranquillity) Every man shall sit quietly under his
own vine, and under his own fig tree (without any to molest him, or make him
afraid.) And (to make us secure of all this) it is decreed by God himself, and
the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, (who has all hosts, and armies,
and alterations of peace and war, at his disposal.)

5. (And our serving of him will be one motive of this mercy, and favor) for,
while other people addict themselves to the worship of their false gods, and,
in their name, tender all their respects: we shall go on to present our humble
service and devotions in the name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever

6. In those days, says the Lord, I will recollect into their own Country,
and restore to their former happiness, that Claudicans poniter pro insi me,
and afflicto.
poor, weak, and afflicted nation of the Jews: that has been (...) ab (...)
ultra.
driven out of her own towns, and cities (...) ab (...) ultra.
into other remote parts, and there been ill entreated (by my own permission.)

7. And I will make that weak afflicted nation leave a fair remnant behind her.
(a numerous progeny to succeed her) And over that posterity of hers will I my
self reign for ever in Mount Sion (and no earthly Prince shall hinder them from
living after my laws, till themselves forsake me of their own accord.)

8. Vid. c. 5. 2.
And thou Tower of Ader (by Bethlehem) that stand in such an (...) locus
obscurus.
obscure and neglected place, The daughter of Sion (the fair City of Jerusalem)
shall make her access unto thee. And out of thee shall come the chiefest
fountain of dominion, and royalty. (the Messiah to be born in Bethlehem) To the
daughter of Jerusalem shall he come (I say not, how strangely entertained by
her.)

9. But now why do thou cry out so pitifully, and make such heavy lamentation
(at the sound of royalty) Do thou find no King over thee (while upon these
sad Prophesies, thou supposest thy self as in thy captivity) Are thy Sanhedrin
(thy great Counselors) perished? Is this the cause, why thou art so often
surprised with as extreme pain, and anguish, as a woman in travel?

10. I cannot blame thee, thou may well be in pain and labor to bring forth,
and to be delivered of that thy trouble. And be so. For, thou shall very (...)
breui ut v. segv. etc. 5. 1.
shortly be fain to depart out of thy Cities, and be content with what lodging
thou can get abroad in the open fields, and so walk on to Babylon. But, there
will I find out a way of deliverance for thee: and even there shall the great
Jehovah rescue thee from the hands of thine enemies.

11, And as (...) ut supra.
shortly after, many men of several nations shall uuite their strength and
malice against thee, which shall not spare to say, Let Sion be still represented
to the world, as one lying in her own pollution, and exposed to the contempt of
all us, that look upon her.

12. But, they that so talk at random, and out of malice, little know or
consider what God, in his secret counsel, and providence, and mercy does intend
to do with us. But, how little soever they consider our end, they are less
advised of their own. For, He shall gather them, as sheaves into the floor
(there to be so thrashed, and bangd, as they do not dream of.)

13. (For then will I say to Sion) Rouse up thy self, and lay about thee, like
a thrasher, O daughter Sion. Tread, and trample them under, (which is your way
of thrashing with oxen that tread out the corn) and (to help on the business)
I will make thy horns like iron, and thy hoofs like brass, that thou may
trample them and beat them all to pieces, be they never so many. And what they
have covetously hoorded I will take to my self, says the Lord. They have but
laid it up, as a thing anathematized, and set apart for my peculiar service, as
a deodate out of their substance: which I will challenge, as I am Lord paramont
over all the earth.

CHAP. V.
NOw gather thy self in troops, O daughter of troops: he has laid siege
against us: they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

2 But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in
Israel: whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.

3 Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travelleth
has brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the
children of Israel.

4 And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of
the name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide: for now shall he be great
unto the ends of the earth.

5 And this man shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come into our land:
and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven
shepherds, and eight principal men.

6 And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of
Nimrod in the enterances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian
when he comes into our land, and when he treads within our borders.

7 And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from
the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor
waits for the sons of men.

8 And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many
people, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the
flocks of sheep: who if he go through, both treads down, and teareth in
pieces, and none can deliver.

9 Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies
shall be cut off.

10 And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that I will cut off
thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots:

11 And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong
holds;

12 And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand, and thou shall have no
more soothsayers.

13 Thy graven images also will I cut off, and thy standing images out of the
midst of thee, and thou shall no more worship the work of thine hands.

14 And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I destroy
thy Cities.

15 And I will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as
they have not heard.

CHAP. V.
1. WHat has hitherto been said to thee, O Babylon, Hunc v. refer ad v.
praeced.
comes to this upon the matter: that thou shall (...) ut c. 4. 10, 11.
very shortly be exposed as a prey (to thine enemy) O thou daughter of an
arrand spoiler (of Nimrod, that first began that sport over men, as well as
beasts.) And (hear the rest from my people Israel) Therefore is the Babylonian
spoiled, because he was the man, that laid siege against us, and (that
succeeding) they were all so injurious and insulting over the very Judges of
Israel, that they presumed to strike them upon the check (...). Demosth (...)
and Psalm. 3, 8.
(which is a blow of the greatest disgrace that can be.)

2. But thou, Bethlehem Ephratha, (lay none of these scorns and abuses to thy
heart, for great matters are intended unto thee) It is but a little honor,
that thou should be reckoned among the Governors of the thousands of Judah.
For out of thee (...) mihi.
a special Prince shall be raised up for my own designs (the Messiah) that
shall be King and Ruler over the true Israel of God: Mat. 2 and supra. c 4.
whole original may be deduced (...) ab antiquo, vel ab aeterno.
from the top of royal antiquity, (from the first Kings of Judah) and more
than that from the days of eternity, (for who can declare his generation?)

3. Therefore will he (...) pro (...) ut saepe alias.
give to them of Judah (what he has promised, i. a safe return out of their
captivity, and a place of abode again in their own Country) till the time,
wherein she that is to bring forth the Messiah, shall bring forth that
happiness to the world: and till the residue of his brethren (for Psalm. 22, 22.
with that title shall he honor the lost sheep, which he shall come to seek,
and reduce to his fold) till they shall be hoc n. est (...) unde (...)
poenitentia.
converted and united vel (...) cum reliquis Isr.
to the rest of the children of Israel (and so begin all, to make one flock
under one Shepherd.)

4. And he shall perget pascere (in hebraismo) stay, or continue to feed.
never cease to feed, and govern that flock, by no less than a divine power,
being advanced thereunto, in no other name and authority, then that of the
great Jehovah, his God Psalm. 22, 1.
(as he shall then style him, when he has humbled himself to that
brotherhood, which we named before) under that care and government shall that
flock of his (...)
dwell (in joy and safety) And good reason, because (...) pro (...) ex nunc.
from henceforth this our Prince and Messiah shall be magnified and renowned
not in Jurie only, but to all the ends of the earth.

5. And this utrumque in (...) sign.
peace and prosperity of our nation shall thou begin (and not till then) (...)
quum vel quia, ut v. seq.
when the Assyrian shall have often entered into our land (sometime of himself,
sometime as an auxiliarie of the Chaldaeans) For, he shall enter in a proud and
hostile manner, trampling down our fairest Palaces. (But, this pride and malice
shall be the occasion of his utter ruin, and so of our more settled peace. For,
we shall at last so far prevail over the Assyrian, by the assistance of
Almighty God, and his blessing upon our prayers, and patience, that) we shall
be the means of as great a tyranny over him, to be exercised by septem, and
octo.
many several Governors, great Princes, and Commanders over men (that shall
lead them and rule them as easily as Sheep are by their Shepherds.)

6. (And, if these may be called Shepherds, (...) as other Kings and Rulers
are) they shall be such as shall subdue and govern their stocks of Assyrians by
the sword, and the successors of Nimrod in Babylon, (...) ut (...) gladii
stricli.
with her own naked and terrible weapons. Thus shall God punish them, and give
us a sure peace, by delivering us from further fear of the Assyrian, and
letting us be revenged of him, (...) v. 5.
because he would needs enter so cruelly upon our land, and so proudly trample
us under him in our own borders.

7. After this, the remnant of Jacob, being freed from all such tyranny, shall
be accounted by many other nations, among whom they are seated, as the dew
which falls from heaven, and as the drops of rain upon the grass, which expect
not the power or pleasure of man, or any son of man, for their access, or
recesse from this or that place (but are sent thither, and blessed there by the
sole power and favor of Almighty God.)

8. And in process of time, the posterity of this remnant of Jacob (specially
in the time of the Maccabies) shall be (in respect of their power, and
authority, and command) among the Gentiles, and in the midst of many people,
as the Lion is among the beasts of the forest, and the young Lion among the
flocks of the sheep: who, when he is pleased to pass thorough them, does tread
them down, and tear them in pieces, without control of any other, that is
able; to rescue and deliver them, in that distress.

9. Thus prosperously shall it fare with thy children, and with thee, O Israel,
when thy hand shall no sooner be lift up against thy enemies, but they shall be
cut off, and fall before thee. (All which about the times of the Maccabies
shall be but a figure of greater conquests, that they shall have over all
nations, when, after the days of the Messiah, they shall begin to subdue them,
and reduce them to his spiritual kingdom.)

10. This mention of Isreal's prosperity in these times must be accompanied with
the Prophecy of thy ruin, O Babylon. For, thus says the Lord, I will cut off
the strength, wherein thou make thy boast, the multitude of thy horses and
chariots. Jer. 50, 37.
Them will I destroy, with the riders that were so expert in managing of them
both.

11. And the best Cities of thy land will I lay waste, and throw down all thy
strong holds.

12. And I will down with thy witch-crafts, and thy magical divinations. And
thy Soothsayers, that were so cunning at them, shall have no more to do within
thee.

13. Thy graven images, and thy rich statues will I remove from the midst of
thee: so that thou shall give no more worship to those vanities, the
workmanship of thy own hands.

14. Thy superstitious groves, and thy wealthy Cities will I utterly destroy.

15. And in the fierceness of my anger will I revenge my self upon those
nations, which shall not then hear and obey hebr. desideratur accusativus, ut
saepe alias.
those Conquerors, and Governors which I shall please to set over the kingdom
of Babylon.

CHAP. VI.
1. HEar ye now what the Lord says, Arise, contend thou before the mountains,
and let the hills hear thy voice.

2 Hear ye, O mountains the Lords controversy, and ye strong foundations of
the earth: for the Lord has a controversy with his people: and he will plead
with Israel.

3 O my people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee?
testify against me.

4 For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the
house of servants, and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

5 O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam
the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the
righteousness of the Lerd.

6 Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
shall I come before him with burnt-offerings with calves of a year old?

7 Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?

8 He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

9 The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy
name: hear ye the rod; and who has appointed it.

10 Are there yet the tresures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure that is abominable?

11 Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights?

12 For the rich men thereof are full of violence; and the inhabitants thereof
have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.

13 Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee
desolate because of thy sins.

14 Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be in the
midst of thee, and thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver: and that which
thou deliverest will I give up to the sword.

15 Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap: thou shall tread the olives, but
thou shall not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but shall not drink wine.

16 For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab,
and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, and the^
inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my
people.

CHAP. VI.
1. BUt now, least the people of God should be puffed up, and forget themselves,
in the meditation of the ruin, and destruction of their enemies. Let tbem
hear, what the Lord says to me concerning them.) Come, my Prophet, says he,
Rouse up thy best courage, and faculties, and thou shall plead my cause against
those alludit ad regionem mon to sam.
mountains of Iudaea, against the highest and proudest of them all, that are so
highly seated (as most of them are in that country) and, to that end, command
attention from them.

2. According to that injunction, given to me by God himself, I do now (in the
power of my Prophetical function) lay this charge upon all you Hills, that you
prepare your selves to hear what I have to say: all you that are lift up so
high, and seem to have a stronger foundation than other parts of the earth.
Though you are so well nested, and bear the name of Gods people, (and therefore
should have been more observant of his will) yet even with you has God a
controversy, and he will (notwithstanding his own height above all hnmane
reach, and capacity) vouchsafe to argue, and Isai. 43, 26, and 5, 3.
plead with you of the seed of Israel, (a poor people not Ier. 2, 5.
considerable, among other vast parts of the world.)

3. This plea, and complaint, I am to deliver to you, in his name, and his
person, and in these terms. O my people, (my peculiar people, that I have
chosen out of all the world) What have I done against thee, that should provoke
thee to so many sins against me? wherein have I disturbed, and offended thee,
or deserved so ill at thy hands? Bring in thy answer, I pray thee, and thy
accusation against me, if any such can be found.

4. Or if I have done well for thee, and dealt graciously with thee, make a
thatkfull acknowledgement of that. Confess how I brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt, and delivered thee from the sic (...) non raro usurpatur.
place of bondage, and servitude, (where you lived no better than slaves) And
how I sent (as three special guides) before thee, Moses (to instruct thee in
my law, and direct thee by his good example) Aaron (to be thy Priest, and offer
up sacrifices and pray for thee) and Miriam (to be a pattern of modesty, and
piety, and gravitie to the weaker sex.)

5. Besides all this, O my people, (...)
remember, I pray thee, what Balak, King of Moab, contrived against thee, and
what answer I put into the mouth of Balaam, the son of Beor, (of thy safety,
and security, if thou did not bring destruction upon thy self, by thy own
default.) And forget not what wonderful things I did for thee, in all the way
from Shittim unto Gilgal (on either side of Jordan.) Of these things thou
should do well to make a loving and grateful recognition, that thou may so
appear to take notice of the Justice and Goodness of God.

6. (And that acknowledgement would be made in such loquitur Ecclesia.
words as these) Wherewith shall I appear before the Lord, and make tendry of
my humble duty, and observance, unto the high God? Shall I present my self
before him, with whole burnt-offerings (in testimony of his dominion over all
his creatures) or shall I come to him with young calves, or any other kind of
sacrifice prescribed in the law?

7. Can it be thought, that God will be appeased, and pacified with thousands
of rams, or ten thousand i vasa magna, ut mare in Templ^.
rivers of oil? Shall a man satisfy himself in giving his firstborn for the
transgressions, or any fruit of his body, as a satisfaction for the sins of his
soul?

8. No (if I, that am his Prophet, may give answer to that question.) loquitur
Propheta.
He has showed thee, O man (whosoever thou art) he has sufficiently, and
plainly enough declared by his law and Prophets, what he does chiefly exact of
thee, as the best sacrifice and ransom that he will accept. And that is no other
than to do justice, and delight in showing mercy, and kindness to men: and to
demean thy self humbly and reverently in all thy addresses unto thy God.

9. And now (because the law and Prophets have not been herein observed) the
terrible voice of the Lord himself, calls unto the City of Jerusalem, (to give
her warning of what punishments her own sins have called for.) And (when thou
so call, O Lord) it is (...)
true wisdom in him, that will dread thy Majesty, and (...) a (...)
fear thy name. Give ear therefore you hebr. sing. pro ph^r.
tribes of Israel, and repet. (...)
attend to him, (...)
who has appointed and decreed that which shall come upon you if you do not
repent, and bring forth the fruits of repentance.)

10. (And when you examine your repentance, let this question be asked) (...)
est, pro (...) ut 2. Sam. 14. 19. vel pro (...) cuiquam.
Is there yet remaining to any one a house purchased by iniquity? Has any one
yet by him treasures of wealth unjustly heaped together, and the abominable
Ephah maciet.
false weight that wants much of what is justly to be allowed?

11. (And take another question with you, as propounded by God himself, who
says) Shall I justify, and approve the unjust balances? and the bag of
deceitful weights?

12. Or, rep. ex versu praced.
shall I justify, (that City) whose wealthy Citizens are full of violence,
and oppression, and her other inhabitants accustom themselves familiarly to
speaking of lies, and to have deceitful tongues, within their mouths (that
deliver little, or nothing from the heart.)

13. Therefore will I chastise thee (O thou wicked City) with such scourges as
thou deservest with making thee poor and desolate, because of thine offenses
(that have made others poor by thy violence and rapine.)

14. Thou shall eat, but thou shall not be satisfied, and thrive with it. There
shall be a kind of lanknesse, and depression within thy belly, for very famine.
For extremity whereof she that conceives shall not be able to bring forth: or,
if she does, what she brings forth will I give up to the sword (when that
heavy siege comes, wherein this scarcity, and misery shall fall upon
Jerusalem.)

15. And then what thou have sowed, thou shall not reap, (the soldier shall
do it for thee) Thou may tread the olives, but thou shall not anoint thee
with the oil. And as much pains may thou take for thy sweet wine, but in
the end, thou shall have no wine to drink.

16, And all this shall happen to thee, O Israel, because all the edicts and
(...) (cum nomine plur.) q. d. and observa^ur unumquodque edict^rum Omri, vel
potius Israel, f^cit se observare edicta Omri, i. ultro se obtulit, in eorum
obsequium.
precepts of Omri, (that wicked King of Israel) are observed with thee, (more
readily than the precepts of the God of Jacob) and so are all the works of the
house of Ahab (the son of Omri) after whose advise and example you have so
framed the course of your lives, as if you intended, that I should make you a
desolation, and all your inhabitants a hissing. Therefore shall you bear the
reproach of my people.

v. 11, 12.
(They that pass by, and see the ruin of your City, shall lay all the blame,
and shame of it upon the rapine of her rich Citizens, and the lying, cozening,
and dissembling of the other inhabitants.)

CHAP. VII.
1 WOE is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer-fruits, as the
grape-gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the
first ripe fruit.

2 The good man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright among
men: they all lie in wait for blood: they hunt every man his brother with a net.

3 That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asks, and the
judge asks for a reward: and the great man he utters his mischievous
desire: so they wrap it up.

4 The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper then a
thorn-hedge: the day of thy watchmen, and thy visitation comes; now shall be
their perplexity.

5 Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of
thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom.

6 For the son dishonoreth the father, the daughter rises up against her
mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man's enemies are the
men of his own house.

7 Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my
salvation: my God will hear me.

Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

9 I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.

10 Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which
said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: and now
shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.

11 In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the decree be
far removed.

12 In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the
fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to
sea, and from mountain to mountain.

13 Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell
therein, for the fruit of their doings

14 Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell
solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and
Gilead, as in the days of old.

15 According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I show
unto him mavelous things.

16 The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might: they shall lay
their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.

17 They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes
like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall
fear because of thee.

18 Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy.

19 He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities: and thou will cast all their sins into the depth; of the sea.

20 Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou
have sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.

CHAP. VII.
1. (YOu have heard what you should justly have said to God, and what he has
said as justly against you: Will you now hear what I or any good man might as
well say of the sad estate, wherein you shall shortly be, under the reign of
Manasses, a most dissolute and idolatrous Prince, that will succeed the good
Hezekiah.) Woe is me, that I am fallen upon so unhappy an age, wherein there are
few or none to be seen, that love and fear God! I am in a time like that
wherein men have gathered in their summer fruits, and there are only a few
grape-gleanings left of the vintage: a time, when there is no cluster to eat: I
may long, and desire with all my soul to taste some of the first-ripe fruits,
(but there is none to be had.)

2. Such a scarcity of goodness is there in this wicked age: wherein the best
men are all dead, and taken out of the earth: Romans 3. 2.
there is not a just, and upright person to be found among men. They are all
such as lie in wait for blood. They hunt every man after his brother, and seek
his (...)
utter ruin and destruction.

3. So Supple ex praeced.
do they hunt, and lay snares with both hands, when they are to do mischief:
but when they do any good for others, the very Prince, and Magistrate knows how
to ask ( Supple ex sequent.
for his reward) and the judge for his bribe, and retribution (from him that
has the cause to go on his side) And if a great man speak out of that
wickedness, that is in his heart (as in some false relation, at a trial before
the Judge) he orders it so, that he will thereby intricate, and (...)
entangle the business (the more to puzle those, that have interest in the
thing to be decided by the Judge.)

4. And (for this matter of briberie) he that is accounted the best of them, is
no better then a brier (that catches at what can be had from all that come
near it) and he that has the name of the uprightest man is (without that
reward) no kinder then a thorny hedge (that has prickles to fetch blood out of
all that meddle with it.) But, when the day comes, which the watchmen (thy
Prophets) have foretold thee of, O Jerusalem, and the time of thy visitation:
then shall these men (of all other) be in great perplexity (as a just reward of
that Vt v. 3:
intangling and perplexing of causes, with their unjust relations, and seeking
after bribes.)

5. (In such a wicked age for briberie and injustice) take heed what friend you
trust, and put no great confidence in (...)
Princes and Magistrates. And keep the door of thy mouth from being too open in
deliverie of thy secret thoughts to thy own wife, that lies in thy bosom
(whence they are to be picked out.)

6. For (what is done by the rest of thy family, may be done by thy wife in
time) and now adays it is ordinary for the son to dishonor his father (in
disclosing of his secrets) and for the daughter to rise up (as a witness)
against her mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in law. And a
man's enemies are they of his own house as usually as any other.

7. But (be the world never so bad) I (that speak all this against these
wretched times) will still look up unto God (in my hearty prayers for patience
and perseverance in doing good, and a happy deliverance, in due time, from the
perils of a disordered state) I will constantly wait for the God of my
salvation. And I doubt not but my God will hear me.

8. (After this Prophetical discourse of my own in the foresight and
contemplation of the miseries and disorders that shall happen in the reign of
Manasses: you shall now hear my own Country (the Jewish nation her self)
bemoaning of her great affliction under Zedekiah, and the Babylonish Captivity;
and somewhat too of their return out of captivity, under Nehemiah and Ezra.
For, thus she bespeaks the Country of the Chaldeans first.)

Do not triumph over me, O thou mine enemy; When I am fallen into a low
estate, I shall rise again: and, when I sit in the darkness of a sad
affliction, there shall the Lord be as a light, and comfort unto me.

9. I will patiently bear the heavy punishment laid upon me in the fierce
indignation of the Lord, because I drew it upon my self by those sins, which I
committed against him. This will I do, till he please to take notice of my
cause, to plead for me, and to revenge the injuries, which I have received from
the Babylonians. As, in his justice, I know he will do in his good time. And he
will bring me out of this sad and gloomy time of affliction into the cheerful
luster and glory of my former prosperity. And, in that light, I shall once
again be able to see the (...) saepe pro bonita^e, and miserieordia.
goodness of the Lord.

10. And my enemy (the whole nation of the Chaldeans) shall see it, as well as
I: when she shall be ready to hide her self for shame, as impudent as she was,
in the time of my captivity, to say unto me, Where is now the Lord thy God?
(what is now become of that help, which you expected from him?) Mine eyes shall
see her then with comfort, when she will be ashamed to look upon me. And (when
I am raised out of my low estate) then shall she be cast down, and trampled
under feet, Isai. 26. 6.
by the victorious Persians, and made no more account of then the mire in the
streets.

11. The time will then come for repairing of thy breaches, and rebuilding of
thy walls, O Jerusalem. And at that time, Isai. 26. 6.
the proud commands of the Babylonian shall be out of date (instead of sending
abroad his high edicts to other nations, he shall have one above him, [the
conquering Persians] that shall over-master and command him.)

12. About those days, men shall begin to stock again unto thee, O Jerusalem.
Some from Assyria, and the strongest Cities there. Shortly after thou may
discover them, Nahnm. 2. ult.
from all parts, (...) pro protesta^e edicta mittendi.
coming toward thee: Some from the strongest forts beyond Euphrates, toward
that river. (and so toward thee) And in like manner from sea to sea, and from
mountain to mountain shall they come to thee.

17. For the countries (from whence they shall thus come to thee) shall fall to
ruin, and desolation for the sinful inhabitants thereof, which shall have that
fruit of their wicked works (and so many of them, for very need, be forced to
repair unto thee.)

14. So be it, O Lord, for their chastisement, and for our return, and recovery
of our former estate) Feed thine own people again, (as their careful Shepherd)
go before them with (...)
thy Shepherds hook, as the peculiar flock of thine heritage. They that have
lodged long, like as in a barren, and solitary place in a wood, let them now
come to feed again in as pleasant places as those of Mount Carmel, and in as
rich pastures as those of Basan, and Gilead, as in the days of old.

14. (And say to thy people, O Lord) I will show thee again as wonderful things
(in mercy) as I did heretofore, when I brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
And I will show as great a punishment upon thine enemies, as I then did upon
the Egyptians.

16. So let the nations all about be confounded, at all the might, and power of
the Jews. Let them lay their hands on their mouths (in silent admiration) and
their ears be made deaf with the noise, and fame of thy wondrous acts.

17. Like men amazed at them, so let them fall down with fear, and
astonishment, and Psalm. 72. 9. Isai 49. 23.
lick the dust, like a serpent. Let them be forced to creep out of their secret
holes, and refuges (where they had hid themselves) like worms out of the
earth. And (in the complishment of these things, which our prophesies have
foretold) let them learn to fear the Lord our God, and stand in awe of thee, O
Lord.

18. Who, among the gods, is like unto thee? that pardonest iniquity (and
removest the punishment thereof, upon our repentance) and passest by many of
the transgressions of the poor remnant of thy people (as one that is unwilling
to take notice of them if they may be amended) For, He is not so implacable as
to continue in his anger for ever (though our sins extort a punishment) His
delight is rather in mercy, and loving kindness.

19. Therefore will he have mercy upon us Revertet and miserebitur. i. iterum
miserebitur (in hebraismo)
again. He will trample all our offenses under his feet (as things he would see
no more) and cast them into the bottom of the sea, as things, that he will not
care for hereafter, nor make any more account of.)

20 So, Lord, will thou perform the truth of thy promises to Jacob, and thy
tender mercies to Abraham, Genesis 35. 12.
and what thou have confirmed by oath to our forefathers, from the days of old.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF NAHUM.
CHAP. I.
1 THe burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.

2 God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is furious,
the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his
enemies.

3 The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit
the wicked: the Lord has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm, and the
clouds are the dust of his feet.

4 He rebukes the sea, and makes it dry, and dries up all the rivers:
Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.

5 The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at
his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.

6 Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness
of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down
by him.

7 The Lord is good, a strong bold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him.

8 But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place
thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

9 What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter end: affliction
shall not rise up the second time.

10 For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken as
drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.

11 There is one come out of thee, that imagines evil against the Lord a
wicked counselor.

12 Thus says the Lord, Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet thus
shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through: though I have afflicted
thee: I will afflict thee no more.

13 For now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in
sunder.

14 And the Lord has given a commandment concerning thee, that no more of thy
name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image, and
the molten image, I will make thy grave for thou art vile.

15 Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that brings good things, that
publishes peace: O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the
wicked shall no more pass through thee, he is utterly cut off.

CHAP. I.
1. THe heavy doom against Nivive (and with her, against the whole Assyrian
Empire) foretold in this book of the Prophecy of Nahum, who was of Chald.
Hieron.
Kessi, or Elkesai, (a little village in Galilie.)

2. God is a jealous God (and so cannot suffer his Servants to be too long and
too much oppressed) and he is the God to whom vengeance belongs (and so
cannot suffer his enemies too long to prosper, and triumph in their wicked
ways) When he comes to take vengeance, his heavy anger against sin goes along
with it, as the executioner of his Justice. And, when that comes, he will not
fail to be revenged of his adversaries, against whom, (...) 2 Pet. 2. 9. Jac.
5. 3.
he laid up his wrath as in a treasure, to be drawn out, and spent upon them in
due time.

3. Indeed he comes slowly to those times of the Exodus 34. 6.
execution of his wrath, in great patience, and long-suffering, expecting their
repentance: but, when he comes, he shows himself to be great in power, and one
that will not acquit the impenitent, and suffer them to pass unpunished for
what they have done, but rather, by heaviness of the punishment, make a
recompense for the slowness of his anger. Which he shows all the way he comes
to it, making it like a way in a whirlwind and mighty storm, and walking upon
the clouds, as we do upon the dust of the earth, (which he commands, as he does
the boisterous winds, and all other creatures, to be mustered up against us, at
his pleasure)

4. In these times, if he check and rebuke the great Sea, that cheek of his
dries it up, and makes it instantly vanish and fly away for fear (as the
children of Israel found it in the red sea) needs must all the lesser rivers
then be dried up with the least angry breath of his (as they found it also in
the river Jordan.) And, when his just anger will show it self by land, as well
as by water, a little pass granted by that authority will make the rich corn
fields of Carmel, and the fat meadows of Basan, and all the green flaurishing
woods in Lebanon suddenly to fade, and wither away (as once a word of his did
it, from the mouth of Elijah.

5. And (to show himself the God of the hills as well as of the valleys) he can
make the strongest mountains to quake (...)
for fear of him, and the highest hills to stoop and melt away, (like the rock,
Exodus 17.6.
that, at his striking hand wept it self into rivers) And what should I speak
of Hills, or Vales, that yield to his anger? Any part of the earth, (...)
for fear of him, and at the breath of his nostrils would be soon put into as
great a heat, and flame as that of Sodom and Gomorrha: and the whole world with
all that dwell therein may easily be consumed in the fire of his wrath (as the
greatest part will in the last conflagration, before the day of doom.)

6. For who can stand firm, that is shaked by his indignation, or (if he be
once cast down) (...) resurget.
who can raise himself again to oppose the fierceness of his anger: which,
when it breaks out like fire, is able to rend and cast down the hardest rocks,
(...) ut (...) v. 5. (...)
at the fear of him.

7. (This infinite power may be a terror to his enemies, but as great a
comfort and support it is to his servants: for) the gracious Lord is a sure
refuge and fortress unto all his, in the time of trouble, and will ever (f)
acknowledge and take notice of those, 2 ^im. 2. 19.
that put their trust in him.

8. But like an universal deluge, he will suddenly overtake, and utterly
overwhelm him (whosoever he is) leg. (...) ut S^pt.
that rises up against him: and all his enemies shall be pursued with the
horror, and darkness of affliction.

9. Wherewith can you devise to stay this effect of the anger of the Lord, while
he is working of that, which will prove no less then an utter destruction, to
be given at one blow, one heavy afflicting blow, that shall never need to be
repeated ut v. 22.
in a second affliction, to make all sure for a final ruin.

10. Which may well be compared to the sudden consuming of thorns, that are
tied up together before they are cast into the fire: or the sudden conquest
that drunkards make over their own understanding, when they sit tippling over
the sweet liquor: For, so suddenly shall they perish, as stubble does in the
flame, when it is fully dry, before it be cast into it.

11. (And the less should be the wonder at the severity of these judgments:
because) out of thee (O Assyria) there has ever come some back-friend, or
other: some (...)
most wicked counselor and plotter against the people of God (some Phul, or
Tiglath-pelezer, or Sennacherib, or Rabsace) that studying to oppose the
peculiar people of God, proved himself therein no better, then a (...)
(...), an opposer, and contriver of mischief against God himself.

12. But, thus says the Lord (against those insulting enemies) though they had
a (...)
attained to the perfection, (of power, and policy) and so to be (...)
a numerous and great people (likely enough to execute their malicious
designs) yet would it be like easy for me ( at^endebuvtur.
when they are ripe for justice) at^endebuvtur.
to cut them down. And this will prove true by the event, when one (that I
shall choose out, i. the Chaldaean, as wise and populous a nation as they) shall
begin to make his way thorough them, without any resistance. When that day
comes, it will not be long ere I smite thee, O Ninive, with a blow, that shall
come so close and home, v. g.
that it shall not need to be reiterated by any second attempt.

13. With that blow shall I break his yoke (the troublesome and insolent
oppression of that King of Ninive, whosoever he be, that shall yet dare to rise
up against me and my people.) That yoke shall be no longer put upon thee (O
Israel.) And, with that, all the cords by which those Assyrian Tyrants held
thee in subjection, will I break in pieces. That shall be thy day of ransom,
and liberty.

14. And this shall be thy doom, O Tyrant of Ninive, which shall come out, as
an unalterable edict from me. None of thy seed, or of thy name shall be any
longer continuance. (The world shall hear no more of such a thing, as a King of
thy family, or a King of Nineve.) And, (as I will thus cut off thee, and thine,
and remove thy throne.) So will I also down with thy idol-deities. Thy Temple
shall be no longer a place for them. Thy carved and thy molten images shall be
pro (...)
of as little esteem, as thy own stinking sepulcher. For (whatsoever thy proud
heart imagines) all (...) facilia a (...)
these things will be most facile and easy for me to do (with whom nothing is
impossible.)

15. (When thy head shall be laid thus low, and thy glory buried in the dust)
methinks I that prophecy of thy ruin, see the nimble feet of the joyful
messengers, that shall trip it upon the mountains (of Judaea) and deliver the
good tidings of utrumque in (...)
peace and prosperity unto them. Methinks, I hear them call to us in a welcome
voice, Now, Iudaea, feast it with mirth, and security: and forget not to pay
thy vows as readily. For that wicked, and malicious enemy shall come no more
to vaunt it against thee and thy God (as he did in the days of King Hezekiah.)
He is now utterly cut off (we shall hear no more of his vain pomp, and
insulting tyrannical behavior.)

CHAP. II.
1. HE that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the munition,
watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily.

2 For the Lord has turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of
Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.

3 The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet:
the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and
the fir-trees shall be terribly shaken.

4 The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against
another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like
the lightenings.

5 He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk: they shall
make bast to the wall thereof, and the defense shall be prepared.

6 The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the pa^^ice shall be dissolved.

7 And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids
shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.

8 But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand,
stand, shall they cry; but none shall look back.

9 Take ye the spoil of silver, take ye the spoil of gold: for there is none
end of the store, and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.

10 She is empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the knees
smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all gather
blackness.

11 Where is the dwelling of the lion, and the feeding place of the young
lions? where the lion, even the old lion walked, and the lions whelp, and none
made them afraid.

12 The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his
lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravine.

13 Behold, I am against thee, says the Lord of hosts, and I will burn her
chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour the young lions, and I will
cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more
be heard.

CHAP. II.
1. HE is now vanished away, in thy sight, that was wont to be ever backing,
and (...)
hewing at thee: and ever ready to (...)
besiege thy strong forts, and place his scouts in thy way (that should say to
thee,) Gird up thy loins, (muster up all the strength thou have, for thy own
defense) Do thy best and thy worst: (and all that care will prove but to little
purpose.)

2. But (this insolence is now at an end) God has now returned and requited
upon this cruel enemy his (...)
proud expressions of himself against Jacob (at the siege of Jerusalem) not
much unlike to what he showed elsewhere against Israel, (the ten tribes, that
were carried by the Assyrian out of their own country.) And the rather did
this vengeance fall upon the Assyrians, because their oppression was equal to
their pride; This belongs to the former verse, c. 1, 15.
as it appeared, when (...)
they emptied and ransacked those of Judah and Israel of all they had:
exercising this waste and pillage upon upon the branches.
the poorest towns as well as the mother-cities: upon the children as well as
the Parents: upon the meanest subjects as well as the Princes: and so every way
showing themselves to be for root, and branch, for a final desolation, as far
as they could set it forward.

3. (But I have a fierce nation in my eye, the haughty Chaldaean, that shall do
as much for them of Assyria.) The bucklers of those my valiant champions shall
be dyed in blood; which is the color of most of their men of war, that are
usually clad in scarlet: and the color that their very chariot-wheeles shall
sparkle out in fire, at the time of their expeditions, And their very abietes
vanenatae sunt, pro, erunt.
arrows of fur shall be able to show part of the same livery, being
purposely (...) veneno insicere.
venomed, to suck the deeper of the blood of their enemies.

4. (In this time of execution) their chariots of war shall rattle about, and
make a clattering and fearful noise, (...) via vel locus extra aedeis.
in their open fields: and subintell, nominativus, ut sape alias, and hic v. 5.
the common Soldiers shall fly about ut (...) discurrere.
as much in the streets of their Cities. Their visage shall be made terrible
with their sparkling eyes, that shall be like funeral lamps, to show the
Assyrians the way to their graves; or rather like thunder and lightning, that
shall either (...) conterere.
break, or bear down all before them.

5. desideratur nominat: ut v. 4.
He that shall have the command of this army shall bethink himself of his
choicest warriors for this employment: who shall make their onsets with that
fury, that they shall crowd and trample upon one another for eagerness, and
haste. In that speed shall they scale their walls, and be as ready to shield,
and defend themselves against all opposition.

6. In this hurrie, their floodgates, and other passages, and forts about the
rivers shall be laid open, and useless. And, among them, the (...)
Temple (of their Bell or Jupiter Belus, that was not placed far from the river
Tigris) shall be ruined and (...)
dissolved with those water-workes about the river.

7. And the City of Niniveh, (...) von Assyr. a (...) hebr. constituere.
that was appointed as the chief, and mother-City shall be led away captive:
and in that capacity, shall the inferior towns, like so many of her
handmaids, attend upon her (...)
driven along, like so many herds of cattle, lowing as they go: or like so many
mournful doves, all the way lamenting, and (...) pulsantes corda ut tympana.
striking upon their hearts, and breasts, to a heavier sound within, than their
enemies could beat upon their drums.

8. Thus do they lament the emptying of Nineveh, which anciently indeed was
very populous, and, in that, like a Fish Pond, richly stored with water, (if
that City may be compared to a pool so enclosed, as the people are often
compared to water.) And (to follow the metaphore) when it is let open, this
people will be as mute as fishes. They will run all out of their City as fast
as water out of a pond. A man may cry to them, stay, stay, (run not so fast
from your richest City) but not a man will look back to give a word of retreat.

9. (Will you now hear the commission and power that God himself will give to
the Babylonians, for the completing of this work upon the Ninevites. It is as
much as if he should say to them.) Take all their silver and gold as a spoil,
(that I allot to you for this service) with all the (...)
infinite store, which the Ninivites have hoorded up: and the (...)
pompous and stately furniture, which they abounded withal, above all that a
man might desire.

10. With no other commission is Niniveh so emptied, and vacuefacts, and
inanita.
laid open, and exposed to all injury, and misery. In the sense of it, their
hearts shall melt within them, and their knees smite together, and extreme pain
seize upon their loins, (as upon a woman in travail) which shall turn their
very faces into a black, and mournful hew.

11. (When this Prophecy comes to be fulfilled, you may well ask the
question.) What is now become of the high, and mighty Assyrians, that
domineered over other nations, as the Lion does over other creatures and made
their Court like the Lions den, where their young ones were crammed, and
enriched, with all variety of spoils. There the Lion was wont to strut
himself, the old crafty Lion: and the youngsters, the Lions whelps, (...) pro
(...)
which none could make afraid.

12. This Lion hunted, and preyed sufficiently, where he list, for his young
ones. He strangled other creatures, at his pleasure, to be made food for his
Lionesses, and so filled his dens, and every corner in them with rapine.

13. This I winked at for a while, says the Lord of hosts, but now ut c. 3. 5.
have at thee. For, Nineve's chariots (that were wont to fetch home her prey)
shall now, at my command, be consumed, and vanish in their smoke: and her young
gallants, which were as her fierce young Lions shall perish by the sword, (in
which weapon they gloried, and presumed so much, and by which I will cut off
all her ability of ranging about the earth, to prey upon whom she list:) so
that Nineveh's proud messages, and commands, hereafter, Micah. 7, 11.
shall find none that will give them the hearing.

CHAP. III.
1 WOE to the bloody city, it is all full of lies and robberies, the prey
departs not,

2 The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels; and of the
praunsing horses, and of the jumping chariots.

3 The horseman lifts up both the bright sword, and the glittering spear, and
there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcas's; and there is
none end of their corpses: they stumble upon their corpses.

4 Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wel-favoured harlot, the
mistress of witch-crafts, that sells nations through her whoredoms, and
families through her witchcrafts.

5 Behold, I am against thee, says the Lord of hosts, and I will discover thy
skirts upon thy face, and I will show the nations thy nakedness, and the
kingdoms thy shame.

6 And I will east abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set
thee as a gazing-stock.

7 And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee, shall flee
from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste, who will bemoan her? whence shall I
seek comforters for thee?

8 Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the^ rivers; that
had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from
the sea?

9 Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength; and it was infinite, Put and Lubim
were thy helpers.

10 Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity: her young children also
were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they cast lots for her
honorable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.

11 Thou also shall be drunken: thou also shall be hid, thou also shall seek
strength because of the enemy.

12 All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the first ripe figs: if
they be shaken they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater.

13 Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women: the gates of thy land
shall be set wide open unto thine enemies, the fire shall devour thy bars.

14 Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay,
and tread the mortar, make strong the brickkil.

15 There shall the fire devour thee: the sword shall cut thee off: it shall
eat thee up like the canker-worm: make thy self many as the canker-worm, make
thy self many as the locusts.

16 Thou have multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the
canker-worm spoileth and flees away.

17 Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy captains as the great grasshoppers,
which camp in the hedges in the cold day: but when the sun arises they flee
away, and their place is not known where they are.

18 Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell in the
dust, thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathers them.

19 There is no healing of thy bruise: thy wound is grievous: all that hear the
bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee; for upon whom has not thy
wickedness passed continually?

CHAP. III.
1. WOE to the bloody City, that has filled up her measure in the heaviest sins
of lying, and extortion: and when she had got a trick of spoil and rapine,
could never be brought to leave it.

2. For this must they hear the sound of the lash held over them, and the noise
of the rattling wheels (in the Chariots of war) and of the fierce galopping
steeds in those swift chariots, that seem to skip and dance, as they pass
along in their speedy pace.

3. Among these, the horseman shall advance his glittering spear, with his
sparkling sword. After which, so great multitudes of the slain, and so many
heaps of dead carcasses shall be thrown np together, that by the continual
access of the dead corpses, a man shall not stir, but he shall be ready to
stumble upon them.

4. And all this is but the just recompense of the spiritual whoredoms of the
well-favoured harlot, that could charm and bewitched her Lovers and was grown
to be such a Mistress in that Art, that she was able to enslave whole nations
and families with her artificially-insinuating and enchanting ways of love.

5. Therefore now c. 2. 13.
have at thee thou shameless strumpet) says the Lord of hosts, and I will
punish thee according to thy own shame, suffering the skirts of thy garment to
be thrown over thy face, that other nations may see thy nakedness, and other
kingdoms thy shame.

6. And, as thou have made thy self vile, so this punishment shall be added of
casting dirt and silth upon thee (as upon a notorious harlot) to make thee
appear vile to others, and expose thee as an example, and public spectacle for
all to gaze at.

7. So that every one that sees thee, shall remove further off (as from an
odious and abominable sight) and shall say but this at the best. Ninive is
spoiled (of all her wonted beauty and glory) and who will pity, or bemoan her?
Sic v. 19.
where shall I find any that would comfort her in this distress.

8. (They will rather say, thou art as justly punished as Alexandria, or rather
Thebes, vide Boehartum in Phaleg. l. 4 c. 27.
No in Egypt, or any other) For, why should thou escape better then No, that was
like a graver Matron, and nursed up as much people. (A City as strong, and rich
and pleasantly seated as Ninive every way: for No was situate (like a little
Island) among the rivers, that circled her about on every side. The Sea
furnished her with continual supply of (...)
wealth: and the water with her wooden walls, was as strong a defense to No, as
Ninives proud walls were to her.

9. Cush, ( i Arabia) was another (...)
supply to her rich trading and Egypt. And (...)
where should I make an end of numbering the several people, that were
advantageous to her, and and helped on her traffic, among whom were they of
Africa, and specially of Lybia (the nearest part to Egypt.)

10. Yet was this famous, and rich No carried away in captivity: her children
were dashed in pieces, in all the eminentest parts of her own streets: The
conquerors cast lots upon the noblest personages they had, to divide them like
bondslaves among themselves: and bound all her greater and more honorable
Citizens in chains.

11. Thou also, O Ninive, shall taste as deep of that bitter cup of affliction,
till thou art drunk with it (and have no more power or understanding to
contribute any thing to thy own relief, then a drunken man.) Thou shall be fain
to hide thy self, for shame: and when thou come abroad) for pure need be
content to beg life and livelihood of thy very enemy (that has subdued thee,
and reduced thee to so low a state.)

12. All thy castles and strong holds, in the mean time, shall as easily fall
into the power of the enemy, as ripe figs, and other fruit (...)
that are come to their maturitie, and with the least shake of the tree, will
even drop into the mouth of him, that has a mind to eat them.

13. And if you wonder at the sudden fall of such strong holds, you may quickly
see the reason of it, in the failing of your strong men, that are among you,
who shall degenerate into the cowardice of women. Their fears shall open the
gates of their land unto their enemies: who will be wise enough to set them all
on fire (and so leave the passages free, at their pleasure, without being
further beholden to your fears.

14. (Let them go on then to their other labour-in-vain, after all is already
betrayed by their own cowardice, and thus bespeak their wretched Ninive)
Prepare good store of water before hand, that may serve in the time of thy
siege: Raise up some new forts of thy own (in several places of the City. Enter
upon a sudden devise of clay and brick to be trampled and molded together, and
of them some rampire to be raised, that from thence thou may defend the
City, which has been so kind to leave open her gates in that base manner, for
the entertainment of her enemies.)

15. (How long will this rare stratagem do thee any service, O Ninive?) How
soon rather, in the very same place, shall the enemies fireworks consume thee:
and their swords, and and other weapons cut thee off: and their hungry
soldiers devour thee, as they would the canker-worm, (which is often a welcome
food to them) Go then and fit thy self for their tooth, and before they eat
thee up for a caterpiller, or cankerworm, I increase the troops of thy
Soldiers, that they may be for number and mischief (as most soldiers are)
like to the many swarms of caterpillars and locusts, that threaten the ruin of
the place of their resort.)

16. To this number of rude Soldiers, if thou could add so great a multitude
of wealthy Merchants, as might equal the stars of heaven in number (and be all
ready with a rich supply of their aid in this thy extremity) yet would your
enemies prove to be the conquering locusts, and caterpillars, that will
suddenly rush in upon you; spread over all your City in great swarms, and do
their work and suddenly vanish.

17. (...) vox Assyr. pro hebr. (...)
Thy strangers (that come in for thy auxiliaries) flock, to thee in such great
troops, like the locusts. And, among them, the commanders of thy army are like
the greater and Locustae locustarum, ut, Canticum canticorum hab. vim
superlativi grad.
greedier grasshoppers, that, in the cold part of the day, line their hedges
with multitudes, but as soon as they feel the heat of the Sun, away they fly.
So will your mercenarie Commanders, and other pretended friends make a fair
flourish about you for a while: but in the vide Chrysostom. Tim. 5 688.
heat of the battle they will leave you all in the lurch: and the place they
undertook to make good in your defense, shall not be able to show so much as
the footsteps of those great undertakers.

18. Great was that cowardice and negligence of thy Commanders abroad: and as
great was the drowsinesse and laziness and oversight of those thy Magistrates
and Nobles at home, O King of Assyria. They took their ease when they should
have been like vigilant and careful Shepherds, watching over the safety of the
poor innocent people, that must go, like sheep, to the slaughter for their
foolish oversight. Thy Nobles lay snorting in the bed of security, while the
silly people, like so many tame cattle, must be pursued, and dispersed in the
mountainous, and desert places, and have none to recall, and reunite them, and
keep them together for their own defense.

19. And now, Ninive, what cure can there be for such a (...) contritio.
fractura.
deadly brush, as has been given thee by the best parts of thy own self? And
yet, be thy wound never so dangerous, and incurable, the worst is, they that
hear the sad story of thy miseries, will be so far from pitying thy heavy
case, Vide v. 7.
that they will applaud, and congratulate themselves in the report of thy
ruin, as in the fall of one, that has ever been injurious and domineering
over all.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF HABAKKUK.
CHAP. I.
1 THe burden which Habakkuk the Prophet did see.

2 O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear! even cry out unto thee
of violence, and thou will not save!

3 Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for
spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and
contention.

4 Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment does never go forth: for the
wicked does compass about the righteous: therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

5 Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvellously: for I will
work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told you.

6 For lo, I raise up the Chaldaeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall
march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places that are
not theirs.

7 They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity shall
proceed of themselves.

8 Their horses also are swifter then the leopards, and are more fierce then
the evening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their
horsemen shall come from far, they shall fly as the eagle that hastes to eat.

9 They shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the east wind,
and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.

10 And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto
them: they shall deride every strong hold, for they shall heap dust and take it.

11 Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend, imputing
this his power unto his god.

12 Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy one? we shall not
die: O Lord, thou have ordained them for judgment, and O mighty God, thou have
established them for correction.

13 Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity:
wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold thy
tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he?

14 And make men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things that have
no ruler over them.

15 They take up all of them with the angle: they catch them in their net, and
gather them in their drag; therefore they rejoice and are glad.

16 Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and bnrn incense unto their drag:
because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plentuous.

17 Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the
nations?

The Sum of the first CHAPTER of this PROPHECY.
THe first Chapter sets out the sins of the time, wherein the Prophet Habakkuk
did exercise his holy Function: and the heavy punishment which they pulled both
upon the Jews, and upon the Chaldaeans.

Their sins made up their full measure by neglect and contempt of the very
Laws, of Kings, and Governors, and of God himself. These strange enormities
were answered with a punishment, that had matter of as much wonder, if it were
well observed.

For that of the Chaldaeans, though it came slowly on, yet it fell the more
heavily upon them, to their utter ruin, and destruction, when they were in the
height of all their glory, and of their confidence, and presumption in their
own strength.

That of the Jews came with more speed, and more favor. For, though it were
very sharp for the time, yet it spent it self in the compass of 70 years, and
left then in a fair, and easy pursuit of their former Peace, and Liberty, when
their enemies supposed them to be so low, that there was no hope of recoverie.

And the greatest wonder, and terror in their punishment, was in respect of
those, to whom the execution was committed. For, being inflicted upon them by
the Chaldees, a fierce, and cruel Nation, and far worse livers then the Jews,
it star^led the Prophet a little at that way of divine dispensation, that
suffered Gods peculiar people to be so handled, by such lewd, and notorious
sinners.

And besides (which might trouble them, as well as the other did the Prophet)
the Chaldees, that were intended for their scourge, and executioners in this
calamity, were now (in Manasses his time, when this Prophecy came out) in the
number of their good Friends, and Confederates: whom, of all other, they little
suspected for the Authors, and Contrivers of their ruin.

The Paraphrastical EXPLICATION of the first CHAPTER.
1. THe sad Prophecy, and vision of that (...) onus.
burden which Habakkuk foresaw, as a heavy punishment, that would shortly fall
upon the Jews, and Chaldaeans: and which the heavier weight of their own
grievous sins, had brought upon them. (...) or, The sum of that which the the
Prophet received by (...).
divine Revelation, and which gave occasion to what he delivered amongst his
own Countrymen, to that effect as follows.

2. O Lord, How long shall I make my humble addresses unto thee, without any
answer? How long shall I continue my heavy Cry, and Complaint against
Injustice, and oppression (the crying sins of these sad times) while thou
refusest to relive us?

3. Why have thou reserved me for such wicked days, wherein my eyes cannot but
(with tears) behold the injurious, and violent dealing of men, in those sins,
which now walk openly, and impudently, without any disguise, without any shame
or care of being concealed? Above all, the unjust oppression of their
neighbors, even to desolation, presents it self unto me, whither so ever I
cast mine eyes. And yet (...) and lis est, vel sunt lites sub Iu^^ice.
where there is so much cause of complaint, and calling for justice, (...)
aufers processus forenses. i. efficit, ut optatum, successum non
habeant-Reticetur hic Nominativus, ut, in eodem verbo. Mal. 2. 3. (...) (and
auferet vos) and Luc. 12. 20. (auferent animam tuam.)
somewhat still there is, that obstructs, and hinders, or rather takes away the
course of justice.

4. Hence is it, that the (...) proprie de vena pulsati^i intermittente.
pulse of the law beats so slowly, as if the life of the law (which is the
execution of her e^icts) began to draw to an end. And therefore, either justice
cannot appear at all, but with too many demurs, and tedious si^^ts: or if she
do, all is not right. For while the wicked (with his malicious plots)
encloseth, and besets the righteous man on every side, and so domineers over
him, that he has not liberty, to follow the dictate of his own understanding.
All this while, Justice seems to tread inward, and comes out lame, and
distorted by bribes, and other by-respects, that turn her quite awry) and so is
she made altogether unlike her self.

5. But if justice can hear no better amongst men, let them hear the voice of
divine justice from Heaven. And she will tell them a wonder (if that can get
her audience) For, thus says she. Behold, and wonder, you that make so slight
of it, in your high pride, and scorn, and security, Wonder, and admire at what
I shall tell you of the Gentiles, by whom I shall bring such a strange work to
pass, in your days, that if it were plainly told you now before hand, you
would by no mean be induced to believe it.

6. For (whatsoever your thoughts are of me, and my mercy, and protection over
you, and yours) I shall raise up against you the fierce and nimble Chaldeans,
(that are now your confederates, and whom, of all other, you would least
suspect to be engaged in such undertakings) And they according to their innate
cruelty, and agility, shall suddenly, and barbarously overrun this land,
stretching their victorious armies into every corner, and, where they please,
possessing themselves of many fair habitations, that are none of theirs.

7. Whatsoever you now conceit of them, cruel, and terrible they will then
appear to be, as they are indeed; and the rather, because Ex se ipso judicium
ejus. and superbia ejus. i. superbum judicium, vel decretum (satis pro impert.)
their will shall be their law, and out of their proud mouths shall proceed
those imperious commands, and decrees, that you shall not dare to control.

8. When they are once mounted on horseback, to set upon you, the nimble pace
of the Leopards shall not have more speed, then their horses. And (to add
fury to their speed) their hungry appetites shall be more eagerly bent upon
the prey, then you have seen the greedy wolves, that steal out in the evening
to satisfy their hunger. So shall their horsemen be affected, spreading, and
disfusing themselves over the best part of your Country, and from the remote
parts of the Babylonian Empire, falling upon you with that have, and
soddainnesse, that you would think, neither the ravenning wolf, nor the hungry
eagle her self should be able to exceed.

9. No otherwise shall they encourage one another, and proceed to their violent
mischievous attempts, then (...) ardens desiderium in facie apparens (a (...)
absorbere) ut ventus Orientalis, qui in illis region^bus pestilentior.
with such fury, and unhappy success, as if a pestilent east wind did set
them on, to consume all before them. And, when all is done, if you would know
the number of them, that shall be carried into captivity, and so by escaping a
present death, reserved to a further misery, you may as well desire to have
the number of the sands on the seashore.

10. All this while there is little hope of opposition to be made against them
by King, or people. As for your Kings first (if such should be your Commanders
abroad) the proud Chaldean does rather scorn, and deride, then any way dread
that sacred name. And for your people, or any strong forts, and Bulwarks at
home, that you conceive them able to make, by way of resistance, in as much
scorn will he look upon them, and never doubt, by the raising of a muddie
frontier against it, to make an easy surprisal of your strong defense.

11. Which done, his haughty spirit will be the readier to pass all the bounds
of moderation (with as little difficulty, as he brake through your military
works) and so to go on to a further degree of wickedness: ascribing this goodly
success of his bold enterprises to no other Deity, then one of his own making.
Ex v. 16. seq.
And that is his own valerous policy, which is the idol, that he will magnify
above all, that is called God.

But, (...) sape est signum Vocat. cafus.
O my Lord God, (the true Deity, whose power, and wisdom is over all) my Holy
Lord, who art from all eternity to oll eternity, and by whom only we hope to
be preserved from death, and destruction. Have not thou set him up? (have not
thou raised this Babylonian Tyrant:) as the executioner of these thy judgments
upon us, Have not thou enabled him thus to Hebr. ad intrepand^m petram.
chastise us, and thus to prevail over the rock of our strength (that power of
ours, that we accounted to be most impregnable.)

13. Surely thou art of purer eyes, then to see, and approve the wicked designs
of our cruel, and malicious enemies, that entitle their own prowess to all
their Trophies, and Triumphs over us. Why then do thou seem (by their
prosperous achievements) to favor so great sinners, and to keep silence, and
wink at it, while the wicked Chaldeans do thus consume thy own people, that are
far more righteous then they?

14. Were we but only as other men, yet shall we not, as men, have a more
peculiar aspect of thy loving providence? But we are thy people. And while we
are in the troublesome Sea of this world (where the greater fishes are ever
ready to devour the less) Shall there be no more regard had of our lives, then
is of ordinary Fishes, and other inferior Creatures, that have no such ready
address, as we have to the Gvide, and Ruler, and defender of mankind.

15. Shall Nebuchadnezar, and his rude Soldiers have liberty to fish where
they will, and take all for fish that comes to their net? Shall such cruel
fishers of men (that pursue their ruin, and destruction) have so good success
attending their nets, and hooks (their projests, and devises) that therein they
shall go on to triumph, and applaud themselves.

16. And that therefore they shall be encouraged to H c v. exponit illud v. 11.
(...) i. vires ejus, illi sunt pro Deosuo.
sacrifice to their own nets, and impute all their victorious successes to the
virtue of their own power, and policy, by which they are enriched with so many
fat booties, that increase upon them, while they devour us, and our substance,
and, at their pleasure, feed greedily upon that which is none of theirs.

17. And, for all this, shall they be still suffered to expose, and extend
their nets more, and more? And, while they make no spare, will thou also defer
to revenge our slaughters, and oppressions, by the deserved punishment of that
barbarous people, guilty of so many, so gross sins, as they are?

CHAP. II.
1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to
see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved.

2 And the Lord answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon
tables, that he may ^un that reads it.

3 For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak,
and not lie: though it tarry wait for it, because it will surely come, it will
not tarry.

4 Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him: but the just
shall live by his faith.

8 Yea also, because he transgresses by wine, he is a proud man, neither
keeps at home, who enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot
be satisfied, but gathers unto him all nations; and heapeth unto him all
people:

6 Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb
against him, and say, Woe to him that increases that which is not his: how
long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay.

7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall
vex thee, and thou shall be for booties unto them?

8 Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnan^ of the people shall
spoil thee: because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land, of the
city and of all that dwell therein.

9 We to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set
his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil.

10 Thou have consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and
have sinned against thy soul.

11 For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it.

12 Woe to him that builds a town with blood, and stablisheth a city by
iniquity.

13 Behold, it is not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labor in the
very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity?

14 For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea.

15 Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: that put the bottle to
him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness.

16 Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin
be uncovered: the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and
shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.

17 For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee: and the spoil of beasts,
which made them afraid because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land,
of the City, and of all that dwell therein.

18 What profits the graven image, that the maker thereof has graven it; the
molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusts
therein, to make him dumb idols?

19 Woe unto him that says to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise; it
shall teach: behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no
breath at all in the midst of it.

18 But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before
him.

The Sum of the second CHAPTER.
The Prophets Quaeries in the former Chapter were followed so eagerly, in the
behalf of his Contrymen, that St. Hierome, and some others are almost angry
with him, and think he may well take the name of Chabakkuk, from his touching
so near, and (...)
wrestling so boldly with almighty God. Not only in his prayer for them, (like
another Jacob) in his third Chapter: but in the first Chapter too, (like a
close Disputant) in his pressing so hard upon God himself, and his Divine
Providence, and disposal of humane afflictions. But whatsoever was the true
occasion of the name, it seems that his open and patheticall delivery of his
Questions did put them upon that conjecture: and so, upon the point, that those
learned men were as much troubled at his expression, as himself was at the
apprehension of that strange course of divine Justice.

Now this second Chapter resolves the holy Prophet (as it may do us) in that
scruple, and shows him the progress of God's divine Justice, overtaking the
bloody, profane, sacrilegious Chaldeans (in the height of their security) and
falling the more heavily upon them, for their abusing the power, that was put
into their hands, when they were permitted to be the scourges of men, that were
c. 1, 13.
better than themselves.

Which may read a Lecture to any, who contribute too much to the malignity of
such wicked days. This may advise them (while they have time of Repentance)
seriously to examine themselves, and their own cause. This being a Truth, that
is evidenced by this passage of holy Scripture, and this example in the Jews,
and Chaldees; That God may be so angry with the sins of his own People, or so
willing to have their Piety, and Virtue made known to the world, that it may
produce some effects, that are little expected. So that either for the severe
punishment of some (to whom it is likely he means to show the more mercy, in a
greater, and more terrible day.) Or for the Fatherly correction of others (that
by outward calamities he will hasten to a better amendment of life.) Or for the
exacter trial of the Faith, Obedience, Patience, and Perseverance of others,
(for whom he intends a weightier Crown of Glory in everlasting Mansions. For
these, and the like respects, it may please God, to give way to the doing of
many things, which may well seem strange and wonderful in the eyes of men.

And, while such things are in agitation, He may let them see many cruel, and
malicious designs, seconded with as prosperous successes, as the evil hearts
of the Actors could wish. We found it true, in the former Chapter, of the
Chaldeans, and may, elsewhere, of others, that were enabled to say, that God
goes in, and out with their Forces: that Micah. 2. 13, 14. Joel. 2, 11.
He fights for them in the head of their Armies, and crowns their Actions with
Triumphs, and Victories over far more innocent, and religious undertakers than
they are. All this being no more, than the Prophet implies here, and God
himself speaks, in effect, by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

And yet this second Chapter may inform them, that all this is not enough to
secure the vain confidence of the Enemies of the Church: and excuse the idle
boasting of strange, and fortunate attempts. Which may end in as sad a
Catastrophe, as that of the Chaldeans did, after all their pride, and effusion
of much blood: as now we shall hear.

The Paraphrastical EXPLICATION of the second CHAPTER.
1. AFter these sad, and scrupulous Quaeries, and Objections, which presented
themselves unto me, I could do no other, then (as a Prophet, a Watchman, a Seer
of Israel) betake my self to my watchtower, and, with all Reverence, and
Patience, expect, what the Divine Oracle would discover unto me, and make me
able to return, as the best solution of those doubts, and (...) argumentum, vel
argumentatio, ut Job. 23, 1.
Interrogatories of my former Discourse.

2. And such did the solution prove to be, that others have as much reason to
observe it, as I have. Therefore was I commanded by God himself, so clearly to
deliver, and explain the Vision, which I shall now relate; that it might be
given down to Posterity, as a thing written, in ut antiquitus in buxo, cedro,
etc.
Tables of some durable substance, and in fair Capital letters, so that he
that runs might read it, and see in it, as in a little Map, a draught of those
ways of Gods divine Wisdom, and Justice, in the ordering, and disposing of
things below, far beyond the reach of our weak judgment, and apprehension.

3. And beyond the little compass of our time too. For, it looks further,
than our short and evil days. Yet, as they that live to see it accomplished,
will account the hardest part of it to be slipped over, as in a dream: so we
that (by the eye of faith) can look forward, and fix our thoughts upon that end
(which will prove the end of our misery, and the end of our Enemies prosperity)
may see it posting on, as all our Times do, with such speed, as if it were
(...) in notionem sufflandi.
carried upon the wings of the wind. For all which speed, nothing that is
foretold of it, will fail, or (...)
come short of the truth. Therefore let no seeming delay take off our
expectation, and hope in Gods promises, which will certainly come at last, and
cannot (...)
come slowly to a heart, that is ready, and prepared for it: and wants not that
solace, wherewith it may, in the mean while, support it self.

4. But that heavy, faint, Sie exponitur hic locus, Hebr. 10. 38. ub. in
[(...) and (...)] apparet vestigium antiquae lectionis (...) and (...) and
(...) idem est quod (...) obini afflictionibus, and turbari, deficere, (...),
q. animo contrabi. Qui autem malunt adhaerere, (...) (in notione eminentiae)
apre possunt exponere de superbia and confidentia in propriis viribus, quae
Chaldaeos ad interitum produxit, cum fides interim in Deum pios Israelitas, and
vivos conservaret, and pristinae etiam Paci restitueret. (...) fidem,
veritatem, and constantiam complectitur, ex natura vocis (...)
distrustful Soul, that draws back with fears, and sad apprehensions of
danger, faster than affiance in divine promises can incite it forward: that
Soul is not yet in the right posture, wherein it should be. Nay, it wants that
which is the very life of a Soul, that is in the right indeed. For it is by a
true constant Faith, that the righteous man lays hold upon Life. It is Faith,
and confidence in the truth of Gods word, and promise, which makes him quod
refertur ad [(...)] Heb. 10.38. a sit Romans 1. 17. and Hebr. 10,38. [(...)]
construitur cum [(...)] and idem est quod (...), ut apparet ex scop^, and mente
totius Epist. ad Romanos.
accepted in the sight of God: and is a good means, both to keep him a
constant servant of God in all Piety, and Obedience, (which prepares him the
more for the ways of his present delivery) and to furnish him with a modest
security of Happiness hereafter. For, He that is made righteous, or justified
by Faith, shall live for ever.

5. Now he that labors for such a Faith, is a fit Auditor for such a Prophecy
as this, which (after this Preface) I will now proceed to declare: that you may
with me (in this Vision, and Divine speculation from my Prophetical
Watchtower) plainly foresee, what our common Enemy, the Chaldaean, will prove,
after all the insolences, and presumptions upon his own fortunate successes,
and our sad afflictions. You might see him then This may allude to proud
Baltassar, and the Childeans, that in a drunken fit, made bold with the sacred
Vessels of the Temple, and were that night showed the uncertain estate of
humane greatness: falling them from their height of glory, and command to
little less than slavery under the Medes, and Persians.
drunk with wine, and drunk with pride, and as a drunken man so shall he
afterward be Our English Translation expresses all very well in one word. [ He
shall not endure] i. he shall not hold out in that condition, nor continue in
that prosperity he was. The Hebrew signifies properly, [ he shall have no sure
Mansion.] He shall be like one turned out of his house, to seek his fortune, as
we use to say. Non dimorera in casa sua, (says Diod. in his Ital. Translation.)
tottering in his fortunes various, and inconsistent to himself, and to what he
was every way: reeling, and wavering, and tumbled about from his highest, and
most prosperous estate to worse, and worse. It was his own covetons, and
ambitious desire, that set him on work, and thrust him forward, till he got up
at last to that high pitch of honor, and abundance of wealth: from which, he
must begin his heavier ruin, and downfall. For the longing of his greedy
Soul, in his filthy Avarice, was enlarged like Hell, (as if he would have the
Devil and all) and in his Malice, and cruelty, he gaped after our destruction,
like Death, and the Grave, that will never be satisfied. The Addition of whole
nations and several sorts of People, either slain by his sword, or subdued,
and united to his former too vast Empire, could not work so much upon him, as
to make him think, that he had enough, either of their blood, or of their
wealth.

6. Will you see, after all this, how he shall be exposed to the scorn, and
derision of them, whom he has rifled, and plundered, and abused at his own
pleasure? The time is coming on apace, when they shall take up a gibing taunt,
and Parable against him, and say: Woe to him, that had too much of his own, and
yet would never leave scraping, and heaping more and more together, out of
others little store. How long will he thus toil, and bustle in the world, to
take from them? And how little a while shall he live to enjoy it? His heaps of
gold and silver which he studies to multiply without end, are but heaps of
Earth, a little more resined than that thick mire, and clay, that shall, after
awhile, stop his own greedy mouth.

7. For, as he lies gaping after us, and ours: so others shall arise up (...)
from a place he little suspects, that shall gape after him, and his. Nay, they
shall more than gape, and threaten, and show their teeth. It shall not be long,
before he feels, that they can bite too. And well might I say, that they should
arise. For though (in his supine ease, and security) he may conceive them to
lie still, and have no such intentions against him, unless it were in a dream:
yet shall they suddenly awake rouse up themselves, and him too, muster up their
forces, make toward him, (...) commav^re, exagitare, lacerare.
shake him in pieces, and divide him as a rich prey.

8. Thus will they do, and thus will they speak of thee, and thy just doom,
thou proud Chaldean. And as thou have preyed upon many nations, and enriched
thy self with their spoils: so shall all they that are left about thee, help
to expose thee to the like spoil, and rapine. All which may justly come upon
thee, for thy bloody cruelty, and other most injurious acts of thine, which
ever attended thy too furious execution of Gods anger upon ours, and other
(...) sing. pro plur. ut v. 17.
Cities, and Countries, and them that dwell in them.

9. Woe be to his covetous, and foolish Ambition, that longs for that which
cannot but prove the ruin of himself, and his own house. For while he thinks
of building his nest so high, as may set it hebr. de manu.
out of the reach of all danger: that very rise does not only expose it to the
greater hazard, but make the fall so much the more fearful, when it does come.

10. Whosoever thou art (Chaldaean, or other) that could entertain a fancy of
such a vast, and high building, thou were not well advised, to take this for
the best course of advancing thy self, and thy Posterity. This was not to make
way to your honor, but to your shame. And know this, that while thou resolvest
to raise thy self, and Thine by the hebr. cutting off.
utter ruin of many other People, thou sinnest against thy own Soul, and
make thy self the greatest means of thy own downfall, and their rising
again.

11. For rather than such crying sins shall not be silenced, with the execution
of Justice, the very stones out of the wall will help on the Cry, and the beam
out of the Timber-work will answer them, in as loud, and true a testimony
against such cruelty, and oppression.

12. And the joint cry of all together, will be nothing but woe. Woe to him that
lays the foundation of a Town in blood, and most injuriously makes preparation
of raising a City to himself out of others ruins.

13. Upon this cry of the Wood, and Stones, that they have heaped together,
mark if this Sentence proceeds not from the Lord of Hosts: that This wicked
warlike People have, in all their great toil to get from others, but only
labored to kindle a fire, wherein all they have shall be consumed. Or, at
least, all that they have so unjustly gotten, if it be not justly taken away,
shall serve them, and theirs, for some other use, which shall show them the
vanity of their own dangerous attempts.

14. For ere it be long, as the immense waters do fill, and cover the bottom of
the vast Sea: so shall their spacious Land be covered, and overflowed with that
which is more unruly than any waters, with innumerous troops of several
Nations, and People, that shall come against the Chaldeans, and let all the
world (...) ut agnoscant.
know (in the final recompense, and revenge of our enemies) what cause they
have every where to join with us, in giving all Praise, and Glory unto God.

15. And that universal glory to God shall be accompanied with another
particular woe to our insulting Enemies. Woe be to him, that gains so far upon
his Friend, and Confederate, or any that have near reference unto him, as first
to besot him with his strong, and enticing liquor: and then to make use of that
time of infirmity, for the discovery of his nakedness, and the disclosing of
any secret, which he knows is best gotten out of him, when the warm drink has
sweetly washed away the remembrance of his Duty.

16. This woe is for thee, O Chaldaean, that art so ready to discover, and
deride the weakness of others: For thou shall be fuller of shame, than glory,
when thou meetest with thy reward at last in a worse cup, whereof thou shall be
forced to drink deeply, when (...)
thy turn comes. So shall thy nakedness also come to be discovered, when (...)
in the midst of thy Pride, and Gallantry, the right hand of the Lord, (which
cannot be resisted,) shall hold out that cup unto thee, and make thee drink it
all off, though thou art forced to cast it up again to thy further disgrace.
And so shall Divine Justice repay thee with that shame, and affliction, which
thou have abundantly deserved for thy insolent opprobrious dealing with others,
whom thou have laid open, and naked to all kinds of injury, and reproach.

17. And deserved again (if thou had no other fault) for thy base,
sacrilegious, and scornful abuses of the p^r Lebanum plerique Templ^m
intelligunt.
Temple, to which the whole Forest of Lebanon did contribute her best Timber,
and therefore gave it also the name of another more sacred Lebanon: but thy
violent profane Army have now turned it again into the likeness of a ruder
Forest, that the wild Beasts have had to do withal. That (...) and (...)
open injury to Lebanon, that (...) conteret eas (seras) i. milnes.
spoil, and havoc made there, to the very laying it in the dust, shall (...)
conteret eas (seras) i. milnes.
beat those Beasts (thy rude Soldiers) into dust, that behaved themselves
there like wild Beasts indeed, rather than like men. That Impiety, in the
desolation of my holy house, (says the sacred Oracle) (...)
shall overwhelm thee with a worthy punishment, and thy own Houses, and fair
structures shall therefore be laid as waste, and desolate, as that which is the
openest, and vastest Habitation of the wild Beasts of the Forest. The rather
because of thy imitation of those savage Creatures in the effusion of blood,
and ransacking of so many ut v 8.
Persons, and Places, as do now, in their ruins, give a testimony of thy
barbarous proceeding against them all.

18. All which Sacrilege, and cruel Barbarisine was accompanied with other
ways of Irreligion, and Idolatry, and what fruit, and advantage did any of
them gain? What profit can be showed from the graven, and molten Images? He
that made them, and he that preached them up for Deities, were both of them
Inventers, and Dispersers of Lies. Yet could that Maker, and Raiser of them
add this folly to the other, to trust, and repose a confidence upon such mute,
and false Gods, as could not so much as make answer unto their Prayers.

19. And this calls for another woe upon that sinful nation. Woe to him that
commenceth his Prayer for releif to a piece of wood: and calls to the dumb Idol
of stone, to awake, and give him audience. The Idol it self might teach him,
that another Deity would be looked after, if he look for help. For who cannot
see, that, though it be fairly gilded over with silver, and gold, to seem
glorious to the eye, yet there is not so much breath, and spirit within it, as
can add life, and vigor to that glittering outside.

20. But the Lord is not so. Heaven is the glorious Temple, wherein he dwells,
and whereof all other Temples are but figures. And the Reverence we show in
them, is a Copy of that hebr. explicatur per silentium.
Fear and Reverence that is due to Him from all the ends of the Earth.

CHAP. III.
A Prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet upon Sigionoth.

2 O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy work in
the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember
mercy.

3 God came from Temon, and the holy one from mount Paran. Selah. His glory
covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.

4 And his brightness was as the light, he had horns coming out of his hand,
and there was the hiding of his power.

5 Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.

6 He stood and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations,
and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his
ways are everlasting.

7 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of
Midi^n did tremble.

8 Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the
rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou did ride upon thine horses,
and thy chariots of salvation?

9 Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even
thy word. Selah. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.

10 The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the water
passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high.

11 The sun and moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of thine
arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.

12 Thou did march through the land in indignation, thou did thresh the
heathen in anger.

13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed, thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, by
discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.

14 Thou did strike thorough with his st^ves the head of his villages: they
came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as to devour the
poor secretly.

15 Thou did walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap of
great waters.

16. When I heard, my belly trembled: my lips quivered at the voice:
rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest
in the day of trouble: when he comes up unto the people, he will invade them
with his troops.

17 Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the
vines, the labor of the olive shall fall, and the fields shall yield no meat,
the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the
stalls.

18 Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

19 The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds feet; and
he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my
stringed instruments.

The Sum of the third CHAPTER.
THe third Chapter, in a devout Prayer, or divine Hymn, set to an Instrument
of Music, admires the Justice, and Providence, and Goodness of Almighty God.
And teaches us, by the holy Prophets example, to trust, and repose our selves
in the will and mercy of God, whatsoever it pleases him to bring upon us.

Wherein we cannot but observe, that the devout Prophet made no scruple, either
at a set Form of Prayer, or of putting that Prayer into a In like manner holy
David put all his penitential Prayers into Musical Psalms. And one of them
(the 32.) as the learned Grotius, and some others think, was purposely composed
to be sung upon the day of Expiation, which was the solemnest day for ^asting
and afflicting themselves. Levit. 23. 27.
Song, and having that set to a Musical Instrument, which contains in it not
a Prayer only, but a Prophecy of much sadness, and calamity to his whole
Nation. I believe, it cannot be said, that any were more truly, and
compassionately affected with it, than himself was; and I think he was never
the less affected with it, when he made it a part of his solemn Music.

Shall I add this too? that, though his Prayer could not move God any thing
the more, by the advantage of the rarest skill in Music, wherein it might be
delivered: yet if the Prophet, or others, that used it after him, by the help
of those solemn, and harmonious Tones had their own Devotion any thing the more
affected in the delivery: then was there Motive enough, why he should (for
theirs, or his own sake) commend it to some Artist, that could fit it to a
Musical Instrument.

Of the Title of the third Chapter, and of the Musical terms there mentioned.
1. A Prayer of the Prophet Habakkuk upon Shigionoth, wherein he expresses his
content, and acquiescence in the solution of his former doubts, from the Divine
Oracle: comforts himself in the examples of Gods love and Providence over his
Church: puts his own pious thoughts, and Resolutions into a Divine Meditation:
and refers all to be set to a Musical Tune. As appears by the Shigionoth in
the front: and the Musical Sela^ in the body, and again by his Neginoth in the
foot of this excellent Song, and divine Ditty.

For Shigionoth first it seems to be some Musical Tune, or Instrument. I agree
with those that take it to be some erraticall, various, delightful Modulation:
and I think it to be the same Tune, or Instrument, that the sweet singer of
Israel made choice of, under the name of Shiggaion, in the Title of the seventh
Psalm. Which is also a Prayer of David's, made upon occasion of some words (or
actions) of Cush the Benjamite, i. of Saul, that was like a Cush, or Ethiopian
in this, that he would no more change his malice to David, than the Ethiopian
his skin.

As for Selah (in the third, and thirteenth verse of this Chapter,) that is a
Musical note, which serves as a direction for the raising up of the voice in
that place, wherein it is fixed. And I like that which Kimehi joins with it,
the elevation of the heart too. We never meet with it, but in the Psalms of
David (in whose time it seems to have been taken up as a word of Art) and,
after him, in this Prayer of Habakkuk.

Then for the word Neginoth, It is properly referred to Instruments of Music,
especially those that were played upon with the fingers, and had the Voice
joined with them, as in the solemn Hymns, and other Musical Service of the
Jewish Church.

And he that had a more extraordinary skill in that way, and was the chief in
composing, or overseeing that kind of Melody, is called here, by the Prophet
Habakkuk, in the conclusion of this Prayer, and by the Royal Prophet, in the
Title of the fourth Psalm. Menatseach Binginoth.

One thing more I have to say, before I come to the Prayer itself, that in
this Chapter, (as it may well be expected where such Music is) the holy
Prophet, in expressing his Meditations, seems to use a kind of Divine vide
Observationes nostr. hebraicas, page vel cap. 287. etc. ad fin^^n lib.
Poetry. And he must follow that kind of Poetical expression, that will follow
the Prophet, in this Musical Chapter.

The Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the Prayer it self, beginning at the second
verse.
2. WIth fear, and reverence have I heard that answer, O Lord, wherein thou art
pleased to reveal the execution of thy Justice. First upon the Jews by
Chaldeans, and then, more heavily, upon the Chaldeans themselves, by other
Nations: when thy own People, after the expiration of seventy years, shall be
graciously delivered from Captivity. aliam horum verborum explicationem exhibet
Doctissi. Light footi spirilegium in Exodus p. 7.
In the interim of those years of their captivity be thou the life, and comfort
of thy Church, the special work of thy own hands, and let thy People feel the
benefit of thy presence. In that sad compass of time, O make thy self known to
them that need thee most, and in the midst of thy Anger, and Justice, remember
Mercy.

3. Remember thy tender mercies showed unto us of old, in our miraculous
delivery from the Egyptian bondage, when, after our safe conduct into the
wilderness, out of the reach of our enemies, Thou came in such Majesty from
Teman, and made thy holiness shine forth in such beauty from mount Paran.
The first appearance of thy glory diffused in self over the The Scriptnre often
expresses the Air, by the name of Heaven, as Mat. 13. 32. the birds of Heaven.
air above, filling it, after an extraordinary manner, with Thunder, and
Lightning (the forerunners of thy divine approach) and the Earth below was
abundantly made happy with the just occasions of Praise, and thankful
acclamations.

4. For in great Light, and Splendor, and hebr. brightness, in his very hands.
. Glory were all the ways of God's most gracious appearance (a Figure of that
greater Light, and Glory, which is altogether invisible and inaccessible to
poor Mortals) But, for our weakness, they were so (...) absconsio Majestatis
ejus.
shadowed, and qualified, as might best fit the eyes of them, that were then
entertained with those wonders.

5. And as such Lustres were a pledge, and testimony of comfort to his own
people: so, as a terror to their Enemies, fearful Death, and Destruction went
before Him, and He left behind Him the footsteps of (...) pestis, vel sebris
ardens.
Horror, and speedy consumption.

6. At last, when he rested in his holy Ark, in the land of Promise, he divided
that Land by lot, for their inheritance. At his appearance the Nations were so
troubled. They that had dwelt so long in those (...) and (...) (which signify
eternity) are often put for a long time, and Mountains for them that dwelt in
them.
Mountainous Countries were much distracted with the sad apprehension of their
likelihood, to be now roused, and expelled out of those ancient Seats, and
forced to submit to new Lords, and Masters: brought thither by Him, in whose
Power are all the Hebr ways, and passages of the world.
Actions, and alterations of the world.

7. It was not for any good deserts of ours, but for the wickedness of those
Nations, that they were so rooted out by the hand of Justice. That apparently
removed (not the Cananites only out of their dwelling, but) the Cush and
Cushan (the diminitive of that) are the same with Midian. See Bochartus in
Phaleg. l. 4. c. 2. And Sir. W^ Raleigh's Discourse of Cush, L. 1. c. 8. of his
Hist.
Midianites for their sin. When it troubled the tents of Cushan, afflicted
their whole land, and made them content to pack away with their portable Houses
to other places of mansion, where they might be found.

8. But still, as the way of thy Justice was observable over other Nations, so
was thy Mercy, O Lord, over us, to the very alteration of the ordinary course
of Nature. We found that in our passage thorough the Red Sea, and thorough the
River Jordan. The waters seemed to start aside, at our coming toward them,
and, for very fear, to give way to us. Was it thy anger, O Lord, against the
proud waves? that forced them thus to shrink back? Was the Sea afraid of thy
triumphant approach? Was it the noise of thy Chariots, and the prancing of thy
Horses that shrunk up the rivers, with this terror, and drove them out of
their wonted Station? For, in such triumph indeed did thou seem to draw near
the waters of Jordan, when the Ark was thy Chariot, the Chariot of our
Salvation, and thy glory seemed to be carried upon the holy Cherubims.

9. After that glorius, and miraculous passage over Jos. 5. 14.
Jordan, an Angel showed himself, for a Captain of the Host of the Lord. And
thy self, O Lord, as the great Lord of Hosts, preparedst for the battle. Thine
arrows were apparently drawn out of their quiver and thy Bow out of the Case,
to be in readiness against thine Enemies. The several Tribes of Israel, as
thy Soldiers, were mustered up to their military Sacramental oath. And the
very Earth, and the Waters, and all the Elements divided themselves into their
several ranks, (...)
at thy command, and for thy service.

10. And, when thou beganst to set forward, the Mountains, O Lord, as if
standing higher, they had made the first discovery of thy coming afar off, were
sore troubled at it, (...) dolor partus.
like a woman that is in labor, and longs to be delivered. Presently, whole
Rivers of waters gushed out (as the issue of that birth) The noise and murmur
which they made at their breaking forth of the hollow Earth, was like the cry
of this newborn Creature. And the diffusion of those waters into several or
currents
courses, and rivulets, was like the stretching out of his arms ( Job. 38. 9.
which thou can bind, and lap up in his swaddling clouts, as it pleases thee.)

11. And if the Hills can thus discover, and express thy powerful approach,
how can the two fair eyes of the Firmament, (the Sun, and the Moon) but see it,
and give some acknowledgement of it? As they did to all the world, when the Sun
stood still over Gibeon, Jos. 10. 12.
and the Moon over the valley of Ajalon: as if then indeed they had come to
their (...)
Houses, wherein they should rest. While by that so miraculously continued
Light, thy Hailestones, like glittering spears and ^wift arrows did s^y
about, to execute vengeance upon thine Enemies.

12. This was the obedience every where tendered to our Lord, when he brought
us, and our Armies to take possesion of the Land of Promise. Into which (we
must ever thankfully acknowledge, O blessed God) as thou did enter with
wrath, and terror against all the Inhabitants of the Land, so in the end, in
the like displeasure, thou did cause the Heads, and Commanders of those
Heathen people to be Jos. 10. 24.
trampled on by the feet of the Conquerours.

13 This was thy doing O Lord, and thus have thou often gone out with our
Armies, to save and defend thy People, and thine Anointed whom thou have set
over them. Thou have often wounded the heads of those wicked Families, that
oppose them, and (...) Proverb. hebr.
discovered their Foundations: so that from the highest to the lowest part of
their best hold, and confidence, they were laid open to ruin.

14. Thou have pierced the Heads of those Peasants, that sought our
destruction, with the same weapons, that they used against us (might Israel
then say) and taken them in their own Inventions, when they had thought,
suddenly and violently like a whirlwind, to have set upon us, scattered us,
and blown us away. When their Triumph before victory was like the exultation
of those that have (in their hopes) already devoured the poor, and innocent,
that hides himself from their fury, and persecution.

15. So did our enemies perish in that passage, where they purchased their own
death, in the pursuit of ours. While the Triumph, which they hoped for was
thine own, and not their Horses, or Chariots, but Thy Chariots, and Arms
prevailed in the RedSea, and went safe, thorough the unusual paths, and heaps
of many waters.

16. Such has been thy Providence over us, in our former calamity: so far did
thy Power then show it self in our delivery. And shall it not be such, in thy
good time, from the Babylonian slavery, as it was from the Egyptian? But, alas!
what do I venture to entreat? I have non dicit quid audierit. Est enim
Rhetorica Aposiopesis, qua riste Oraculum tacere mallet, quam exprimere.
heard, and seen so much in my former vision, of the long sad time of our
Captivity, as makes me startle, and interrupt my prayer. But my bowels do
earne with compassion of my poor Countrymen, as well as quake for fear. My
inward parts are so wholly possessed, and troubled with sorrow for them, that
my fearful quavering lips will not suffer me to express it. And, though I
live, yet me thinks, my bones are almost consumed with rottenness, while I
labor to conceal my selfe-devouring fears, and perplexities, that I have
within me. And so much the rather, because I must be still, and silent for the
day of their affliction: For it seems the doom is now past, no prayer can avert
it, when he shall rise up against thy poor People, that shall bring his troops
of cruel Soldiers, to prey upon them.

17. To this most heavy, but most just Sentence, I humbly submit: with this
Prayer, that they may endeavor, as I shall, to make sure for some inward
solace, when all outward helps, and comforts shall be taken away.

For (...) quamvis ut Jeremiah 12. 6. and alibi, vide, Observat. nostr. hebr.
though the Fig Tree shall not flourish, and give her wonted sweets: nor the
Vine-tree prosper, and yield her comfortable wine: though the Olive shall
deceive our expectation of her fatness, and the Cornfieldsd shall not continue
the provision of their food to strengthen us: though the Sheep shall be
plundered out of their folds, and the Oxen out of their stalls.

18. Yet will I resolve to place my heart in the Lord, and to rejoice in the
God of my Salvation.

19. And it shall be my Prayer, and my Hope, that the Lord my God will be my
strength, and my safeguard; supply me with Patience, and Obedience, and
courage: make my feet as nimble as Harts-feet, and so conduct me cheerfully, in
the way to those high places, and Sanctuaries above, were I shall be set, out
of the fear of all danger, in everlasting bliss.

And as a testimony of my Joy, and Solace in that, I will take order with the
chief Master of the Music, to have this Prayer set to my Instruments, which
may help to rouse up my spirits, and my repose in God my Savior.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF ZEPHANIAH.
CHAP. I.
THe word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of
Gedaliah, the son of Antariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the
son of Amon king of Judah.

2 I will utterly consume all things from off the land, says the Lord.

3 I will consume man and beast: I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and
the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked, and I will cut
off man from off the land, says the Lord.

3 I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the
name of the chemarims with the priests:

5 And them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops, and them that
worship, and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham.

6 And them that are turned back from the Lord, and those that have not sought
the Lord, nor enquired for him.

7 Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God: for the day of the Lord is
at hand: for the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has bid his guests.

8 And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords sacrifice, that I will
punish the princes, and the kings children, and all such as are clothed with
strange apparel.

9 In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the threshold,
which ^ill their masters houses with violence and deceit.

10 And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that there shall be
the noise of a cry from the fish-gate, and an howling from the second, and a
great crashing from the hills.

11 Howl ye inhabitants of Maktesh: for all the merchant-people are cut down:
all they that bear silver are cut off.

12 And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with
candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees; that say in their
heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.

13 Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a disolation:
they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall plant
vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.

14 The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, even
the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.

15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
waftnesse and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds
and thick darkness,

16 A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities and against the
high towers.

17 And I will bring distress upon them, that they shall walk like blind men,
because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood shall be poured out
as dust, and their flesh as the dung.

18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in
the land.

CHAP. I.
1. THe word of the Lord which was (revealed to Zephaniah (whose very (...)
arcanum Dei.
name tells us, that God would more clearly reveal by him some of his secret
counsel, concerning those heavy judgments, that were now ready to fall upon
the Jews, and so needed this nearer and clear Interpreter, of his will and
pleasure, as an other (...)
(...) Genesis 41. 43.
as Joseph was called by Pharaoh.)

This Zephaniah was the son of Cushi; the son of Gedaliah; the son of Amariah:
the son of Hizkiah. And he prophesied in the days of Josiah, son of Amon, King
of Judah. (for even in the reign of that good King, so pious and so eminent an
example produced little amendment in a wicked, and perverse generation.
Therefore

2. I will even Congregando consumam. i. collectim auferam. ubi 2. radices
(...) and (...)
sweep away all together out of this land, says the Lord (and so make a quick,
and fair riddance of so rebellious a nation.)

3. I will make an end of man, and beast. I will consume the fouls of the air,
and the fishes of the sea. I will quite take away both the wicked offenders,
and all their scandalous sins, and offenses. And (all by one sin or other being
gone out of the good way, wherein they promised to walk) I will also, by one
means, or other, Sic redditur angl. Psalm. 12. 4.
root out every man out of that land (of promise, (which I had bestowed upon
them, says the Lord.

4. And even against Judah (as I have done against Israel) will I stretch out
my powerful and revenging hand: and therein against (the proudest and worst of
them) the Citizens of Jerusalem. And (I will do what good Josiah in all his
care, and industry could not do in that stubborn, and rebellious City, which
should have been a pattern, and example to all the rest) from that place will I
cut off (by the sword of my Justice) all the relics of Baal, and the name of
the Chemarims (their downright idolatrous priests) and their Cohanims too,
those priests of their own, that will now, and then be tampering with the
accursed mysteries of Baal.

5. Such as can find a time to worship the host of heaven, upon the tops of
their houses (which were made flat for prevention of danger from thence, and
not to introduce so dangerous, and flat idolatry as that) those Reg 18. 21.
halters between two religions, that think they can do their homage to the true
God, and to the false: and swear by Jehovah, and by their (...)
Moloch (the imaginary Deity of the Ammonites, Amos 5. 26.
which they have now made to be theirs.)

6. And those also that (otherwise, and by other vanities, and diversions (
fall away from following the Lord Jehovah, and from seeking and inquiring after
him alone (in such holy places, and ways of divine worship, as himself has
prescribed.)

7. Wherein (as being in the presence of him, and before his all-seeing eye)
use all the Hebr. exprimunt per silentium, ut Hab. 2. 20.
reverence and holy fear and devotion that may best whosoever thou art, that
would (live secure, and without all fear, and danger of a day of justice, and
vengeance.) For, such 1 day is coming, and it is near at hand, when they that
offer not such pious, and cheerful sacrifices to him, shall find that he will
make a merry, and festival day of sacrificing them, and bidding such guests, to
be entertained with that sacrifice, as they would be loath to be dressed up
for, and to be devoured by such hungry companions.

8. And in that day of the Lords sacrifice, and that feast; he will spare none,
that have not spared to serve, and sacrifice to others besides him. They must
all to the pot, the highest as well as the lowest: the Princes, and their royal
race, and all the gandy gallants, that look so strangely upon it, in their
rich, and costly apparel.

9. Amongst all this fine irreligious rout, I will not forget to punish them,
that follow the 1 Samuel 5.5.
superstition of the Philistims, in not presuming to tread upon the threshould
for sooth, but rather using the nimblenesse of their feet for a speedy
conveyance (which is no fit way of entering into the house of their God) And
with these contemners of their Gods house, I will visit those that take too
much care for the furnishing, and enriching of their Masters house, by hook or
by crook, and by all the violent and deceitful courses, that they can imagine.

10. And I will give you a more particular discovery, and prediction, of what
shall happen in three of the chiefest parts of the City, in that day. A great
noise, and cry shall then be heard from the Fish-gate (which is in that part,
which you call the City of David) Then a sad, and doleful howling from the
second part of the City. And as woeful and (...) con --
crashing a noise from the highest, and most eminent part, (wherein is the
Temple and the Palace, places that have been often acquainted with sweeter
sounds.)

11. When the three chief places in Jerusalem have thus begun to express their
sad condition, then you, that dwell in (...) mortarium, and cavitatem signif.
Inde his locis nomen.
the hollower part of the City may second them with as doleful an echo, to
bewail the ruin of the multitudes of Merchants thereabouts, and the many fair
Pondera argenti: vel, potest intelligi de divitibus argento onusti^.
heaps of silver (that they must leave behind them.)

12. Then will I suffer every rich corner in Jerusalem to be as narrowly
searched, and ransacked (by the Chaldaean soldiers) as a man would peep, and
pry into the closest places, with the help of candles, that he might be sure
to let nothing escape him, that he has a mind to bear away. And so shall my
justice meet with those, that have lived in ease, and plenty, and without any
disturbance; like wine that has been long settled on the lees, without any
removal out of one vessel into another. These are they, that soothed up
themselves in their own foolish persuasion, that God took no great care of
humane affairs, either to reward, or to punish us here below, according to our
good or bad life, and conversation.

13. But, this is the day, wherein I will confute them, by exposing their
ill-gotten goods as a prey to the enemy: and bringing their houses (wherein
they nestled themselves so securely) to utter ruin, and (...) stupenda
desolatio.
fearful desolation: or, at least, by changing the owners, so that other men
shall dwell in those goodly buildings, which they have erected: and drink up
the fruit of those costly vineyards, which they had planted for themselves.

14. This great day of the Lord is near, very near: and withal, it flies
swiftly toward us (as a time that has quicker wings then ordinary, to convey
it self.) It will be such a bustling day, that you may hear it as well as see
it: and the stoutest man (that hears the approach of that day) will not pass
it over so quickly, but that he will be heard to express the bitteruesse of
the day, in most bitter lamentations.

15. This day will be a day of wrath, and a day of trouble: and yet a day,
wherein we shall be so (...) coarctare ut (...) v. 17.
straightened, and penned in, that there will be no way of evasion. It will be a
day of desolation, of utter desolation (without hope of recoverie, to most of
them.) A dark, and gloomy day without the least appearance of comfort) and a
cloudie, and thick-cloudie day (wherein the heavens, whither we use to cast up
our eyes for relief, will seem continually to frown upon us.)

16. A day that will fright us with the sound of the trumpet, and the alarm of
war, against the strongest Cities, and highest Towers, that we have.

17. In this day, says the Lord, Vt ^v. 15.
I will cause men to be in such pressure, and such streights, that they shall
see no more, then blind men, which way to turn themselves, or what course to
take, that may rid them out of this distress. And, in the midst of those
streights, because they have sinned against the Lord, their enemies shall make
no more scruple of shedding their blood, then of treading upon the dust, that
is under their feet: and their bodies shall have no better esteem, then the
dung of the earth.

18. In this day of Gods wrath, their silver, and gold shall not be able to
purchase their ransom: but the whole land shall be suddenly consumed by the
fierce and jealous wrath of the Lord: wherein he will make a full and speedy
riddance of all, that dwell in the land.

CHAP. II.
1 GAther your selves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired.

2 Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come
upon you.

3 Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be, ye shall be hid in
the day of the Lords anger.

4 For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shall drive out
Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up.

5 Woe unto the inhabitants of the seacoast, the nation of the Cherethites: the
word of the Lord is against you: O Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will
even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.

6 And the seacoast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds, and folds
for flocks.

7 And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah, they shall
feed thereupon, in the houses of Ashkelon shall they ly down in the evening:
for the Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.

8 I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of
Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against
their borders.

9 Therefore as I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab
shall he as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of
nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation, the residue of my people
shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.

10 This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and
magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts.

11 The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods of the
earth, and men shall worship him, every one from his place, even all the isles
of the heathen.

12 Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.

13 And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria,
and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness.

14 And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the
nations: both the cormorant and the Bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of
it: their voice shall sing in the windows, desolation shall be in the
thresholds: for he shall uncover the cedar-works.

15. This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in their heart,
I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a desolation, a place for
beasts to lie down in! every one that passes by her, shall hiss and wag his
hand.

CHAP. II.
1. (THe day so foretold being so terrible, and so near at hand) Scrutamini vos
ipsos, and scrutamini (alia.)
Make an exact scrutinie, and examination of your selves first, and then of
what else may conduce to your safety. O nation, little worthy the love, and
good liking of those that know your ways!

2. Do this, before Gods peremptory, and irrevocable decree produce the
certain, and final resolution for this day: which shall be like one of his
fanning, and winnoing days, (wherein he will separate the chaff from the good
corn) Do this, before the fierce anger of the Lord, and this terrible day of
the execution of that fierce anger of the Lord come upon you.

3. And for you that are of the good corn, and not of the chaff: you that are
of a meeker, and gentler disposition, then others of the land are, and obey his
commands, in your best devotions, and endeavors, seek after God (and implore
his merciful protection over you.) And still seek after the exercise of
goodness, and meekness, if so perhaps you may prevail so far, as to be hid
under the shadow of his defense, in this day, wherein the fierce anger of the
Lord shall be poured out upon several parts of this wicked nation, and few or
none shall escape.

4. For Gaza shall be forsaken (by her fearful inhabitants) Ashkelon shall be
laid desolate, (and forced to the like) And, as for Ashdod, the enemy shall be
so secure of the conquest of that, that, in the very noon day, they shall
attempt to drive them out of their own holds, and habitations, with happy
success. And Ekron ( (...) elegans paranomasia.
according to the bad omen in the name it self) shall be rooted out.

5. Then woe to you of the nation of the Cherethites, that dwell all along upon
the seacoast: for, I can cite the word of the Lord against you. And no less
against you, the Cananites, and Philistims, that are left in the land. The word
of the Lord, from his own mouth, concerning you, is no other then this, that he
will utterly destroy your land, and all that dwell within it.

6. And the Sea coast (that is made choice of as the fittest place of
habitation for the richest Merchants) shall be taken up with no better then
cottages for poor Shepherds, and folds for their flocks.

7. For, I have allotted that coast to those of the house of Judah that shall
be left behind in the land (when their brethren are carried into captivity)
that it may serve for the feeding of their cattle ( They that constantly attend
upon their innocent charge all the day, shall there have a place to retire to,
when they are weary) In those mansions, that belonged to Ashkelon, shall those
Shepherds of the house of Judah repose themselves in the evenings; when the
Lord their God (in that conquest of Iudaea by the King of Babylon) shall lay
his visitation upon the Ashkalonites, and Revertet. i. repetet captivitalem.
Ezekiel. 25. 16.
reiterating their captivity, cause them to be carried again, and again into
the land of Chaldaea.

8. (After I have showed this justice upon the land of Iudaea, and the remnant
of the Cananites in those parts: I will then go on, to do the like justice upon
the enemies of Iudaea, of whose wickedness I have not been ignorant, nor have
I forgotten it, though hitherto I have deferred the execution of my wrath, in
expectation of their amendment.) For Jer. 48. 29. Ezekiel. 25. 3.
I heard and took notice of the proud opprobrious speeches of the Moabites: and
the reviling and (...) blasphemare, ut Nostri Psalm. 44. 17.
blasphemous taunts of the children of Ammon, wherein they have reproached my
people, and, with which foul language, they presumed to (...) ^. greatly
vaunted, or advanced themselves: or showed themselves great.
make a most bold, and violent invasion upon those territories of the children
of Israel, which I my self had measured out for them, as the lot of their
inheritance.

9. Therefore, as I live, says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, I will
not fail to make as absolute a ruin of Moab, and Ammon as I did of Sodom, and
Gomorrha. Their populous Cities shall lie wast, overgrown with netles, and
overspread with salt pits, as a place destined to perpetual barrenness, and
desolation. And the re^idue of my people, that shall survive, and return after
their great captivity, shall, in due time, invade and make spoil of the
territories of that people, and take possession of theirs: as they did first so
proudly attempt to make themselves Masters of a part of Iudaea.

10. This shall be the issue and the reward of their proud reproachful
speeches, and of their as haughty, and insolent attempts against the peculiar
people of the Lord of hosts (who will therefore show his power, and vengeance
upon their gods as well as upon them.)

11. For in so fearful and terrible a manner shall God come in judgment
against them, that not they only, but their very gods too shall be brought to
as poor, and miserable condition, as men that are ready to be starved for
hunger. And the like doom shall fall upon many idolaters, and their titular
gods in other parts of the earth. So that multitudes of people shall come out
of their Countries to Jerusalem, to worship before the true God, and such
converts and proselytes shall there be from diverse places beyond the seas, and
from the Isles of the heathen.

12. You of Cush shall be of this number: of which Country many shall die by
my sword ( Jer. 46. 2.
in the hand of Nebuchadnezer.)

13. And he ( Elleipses nominativi. ut Hab. 1. 3. and alibi.
that I make my Deputy for the execution of my judgment, i. the same
Nebuchadnezer) shall stretch out his hand also as far Northward (and make use
of my sword in those parts) till he has destroyed the Assyrians, and made
their royal Ninive a place of utter desolation, like a dry, and barren
wilderness.

14. Flocks of sheep shall have their folds, where the Ninivites had their fair
houses. And all kind of other living creatures too shall find admittance and
entertainment about the ruins of that City. Both the Pelican, and the Owl
shall pick o^t their nights-lodging about the (...)
knops and carved prominent works upon the tops of their houses: while other
birds securely sing over their several tunes in their windows. And yet other
signs of Nisi pro (...) legendum (...) corvus.
desolation shall appear in their doors and thresholds: and in their curious
seiled rooms, where the rich Cedar-work shall be laid open to the injury of
the weather, and the use of ravenous fouls of the air.

15. This is the end of that jovial city, that dwelt in wealth and confidence
of a lasting prosperity, and said within her self. I am the only she, Isa.
47.8.
and none will presume to come in comparison, or competition with me. How is
she now become a very picture of desolation, and a place for beasts to lie
down in? All that pass by her will hiss, and wag their hands at her, in
wonder and astonishment.

CHAP. III.
1 WOE to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city.

2 She obeyed not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted not in
the Lord: she drew not near to her God.

3 Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves,
they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

4 Her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have polluted
the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.

5 The just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will not do iniquity: every
morning does he bring his judgment to light, he fails not, but the unjust
knows no shame.

6 I have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate, I made their streets
wast, that none passes by: their cities are destroyed, so that there is no
man, that there is none inhabitant.

7 I said, Surely thou will fear me: thou will receive instruction, so their
dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early,
and corrupted all their doings.

8 Therefore wait ye upon me, says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to
the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble
the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: for
all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.

9 For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call
upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even the daughter of my
dispersed shall bring mine offering.

11 In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou have
transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of the midst of thee,
them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shall no more be haughty because of
mine holy mountain.

12 I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and
they shall trust in the name of the Lord.

13 The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speaks lies: neither shall
a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall feed and lie down,
and none shall make them afraid.

14 Sing, O daughter of Zion, shout O Israel: be glad and rejoice with all the
heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.

15 The Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemy: the
king of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee: thou shall not see evil
any more.

16 In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let
not thine^ hands be s^ack.

17 The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he will save, he will
rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee
with singing.

18 I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who are of
thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.

19 Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee, and I will save her
that halteth, and gather her that was driven out, and I will get them praise
and fame in every land, where they have been put to shame.

20 At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you^
for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I
turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the Lord.

CHAP. III.
1. (BUt that Israel applaud not themselves too much in the ruin of their
enemies royal City: let them now hear the woes pronounced against their own
Jerusalem) Woe to the City, that grew (...) a (...)
fat with her gluttony, and polluted (with all those sins, that accompany a
full table) and with all kind of (...) depr^datrix, vim inferens. a (...)
rapine and oppression (that were made the means to maintain it.)

2. She would not hear Elleipsis genitivi. Psalm. 73. 18. aquae pleni (calisis)
the voice (of those that foretold her ruin, if she did not amend) She would
not entertain any such good instruction (before the blow came) Nor would she
trust in the Lord Jehovah, and (...) accessit.
make her devout approaches, and addresses unto her God, (in the time of her
extremities; but to the Egyptians, and Assyrians, and who not, rather then to
him, that was ever her surest friend in the time of trouble.)

3. (And to say somewhat again of that oppression, that we named v. 1.
before.) The threats, and menaces of her Princes and Governors within the City
were grown to be as high, and terrible, as the roaring of a lion: and her
Judges, (that, instead of doing justice, put these unjust threats in execution)
Ezekiel. 22. 27.
became like those ravenous wolves, that seek out for their prey in the evening
(when their hunger makes them to be more greedily, and fiercely set upon it) so
that what they lay hold on is presently devoured: they Hebr. They gnaw not
their bones in the mornnig.
leave not so much as a bone to be gnawed, and examined again in the morning.

4. Their pretended Prophets (for their lives, and for their opinions too) are
as various, and inconsistent ( as Sic (...) de aquae, and animorum levitate.
Genesis 49. 4.
water, that will not stay long in his own bounds, but must be kept in by some
other body, that is not so fluid as that) And (which is yet more) they are
persidiously wicked persons (in betraying that trust which is reposed in them,
that should be the pattern^ and maintainers of true religion: and not the bare
outward professors of it, for their own private interests) And the Priests come
not much short of the Prophets, for, instead of hallowing, they pollute the
Sanctuary and all holy things: and, instead of keeping and expounding, they do
most (...) vine inferunt legi.
violently (both in their actions and expositions) wrest and abuse the sense of
the law, to what it was never intended by the Lawmaker.

5. But the righteous Lord (whose Laws and Sanctuaries are thus abused)
observes all that is done in this wicked City: and He will not deflect from
doing right (as they do, that should be the Patrons of right and justice in his
stead) Every morning will he show some examples of his justice upon them that
should every day be the executioners of it upon others.) Thus will God never
fail to show his justice. And yet the unjust and wicked men that know this) are
so past shame, and fear (that they will not repent, when they see my
judgments, upon their own, and their neighbor Countries, says the Lord.)

6. But, when I destroyed those Gentiles (for so I may call your ten tribes,
that had nothing in them of Israel) I made their strong towers desolate, and
their populous streets I laid wast, and left none to walk about them. Even upon
their greatest Cities did I bring that solitude, and desolation, so that there
was not left a man, nor any of mankind to dwell within them.

7. You should have learned to take heed by their punishment. And so I said
within my self, Surely thou, my land of Judah, wilt thence at least learn to
fear me (by what thou see inflicted upon Israel.) Their correction will be
thy instruction; that the Cities of Judah, and other places of her habitation
may not be cut off in the same manner: but that all the good (...)
that in my best, and kind visitations I have made profer of, may come upon
her. But, they deceived my expectation, and, instead of rising early to seek
me, they rose early to currupt their own ways more, and more (as if they were
so eagerly set upon mischief, that they would break their sleep to be at it.)

8. Therefore (after my expectation deceived I will give you an item before
hand, to expect (that which you shall not be deceived of, i.) my rising (to
answer yours) and my rising out of the place of my rest to prey upon you (and
disturb you of your rest) For, I am now resolved and have peremptorily decreed,
to gather some of other nations and kingdoms together specially the Chaldaeans,
and their auxiliaries) and by them to pour out my indignation upon these Jews,
even all the fierceness of my indignation. For no otherwise then in a kind of
fierce zeal, shall all the land of Judaea be destroyed.

9. But, after that affliction, I will convert the people to a more penitent
and devout, and holy language, that they may call upon the name of the Lord
with more reverence then now is to be found amongst them, and jointly endeavor
to serve, and obey him, as they that willingly join Hebr. humero ^ao.
their sholders together, to bear that yoke, that he lays upon them (which
easy yoke is no other then his service.)

10. And then from the remotest parts of their captivity, from as far as those
places about the rivers of Cush shall my suppliant and humble servants, the
offspring of my people Israel and Judah, far and wide dispersed over several
nations; from thence shall they bring offerings unto me (in testimony of their
hearty thanks for their joyful return into their own country.)

11. About that time will I take away the shame and grief, which thou had
conceived for thy former great sins, and offenses committed against me. For
then shall I (by death and misery) have removed from thee Hebr. tuos in
superbid exultantes.
those haughty and insulting Countrymen and Priests of thine. And then shall
thou offend no more, as thou have done, by pride and v. 4.
contempt of my holy places, and my Sanctuary in Mount Sion (when those
Masters of misrule, and ringleaders to the proudest and most presumptious
offenses are taken away.)

12. In stead of them I will furnish thee with (...) and (...) and afflictum,
and humilem, ac mansuetam signif. ut g^. (...).
a meek and humble generation of men, though poor, which shall trust in the
name of the Lord, (and not in the proud mistake of their own fortunes and
abilities.)

13. This good remnant of my people (that return from their captivity) shall
not return to their (...)
great and grievous sin (their idolatry) nor shall they so accustom themselves
again to the speaking of lies, and deceit. Therefore in all peace and plenty
shall they feed well at last, and take their rest securely, having none to
fright, or molest them.

14. Rejoice then, O daughter of Sion: sing, and shout for joy, O Israel. Be
merry, and cheerful from the bottom of a thankful heart, O Daughter of
Jerusalem.

15. For, God has taken off those judgments, wherewith thou were afflicted
for thy sins. He has (...) removere quae offendunt.
removed thy enemies out of thy sight (that they may trouble thee no more) And
(instead of those Tyrants Jehovah, the the God and King of Israel is in the
midst of thee, and thou shall see no more of those calamities, which thou have
seen heretofore.

16. In those days it shall be said to Jerusalem, and to Sion. Fear not, nor
be any way discouraged. Let not thy bands faint, or give over (till they have
raised an other City, and Temple, wherein to serve the Lord.)

17 Jehovah, thy God, in the midst of thee, is of great might, and power: and
of as ready a mind, and will, to save, and defend thee. He will rejoice over
thee exceedingly. He will (...)
acquiesce and solace himself in his love toward thee. They that sing for joy
shall not have more content, and delight, then he will take in thee.

18. They that were the cause (...) ab (...) significationem mutuatur, eisi
inflexionem Grammar. a (...) quod in aliis videre est, ut mox.
of removing thy merry Feasts, and Solemnities, will I (...) auferre, ut (...)
remove far from thee. For, Accentus in (...) non suo loco ponitur ut saepe in
lib. Psalm. and Prophet.
they have been but a burden, and Pro (...) (nam y sape subintelligendum
relinquitur.)
a disgrace unto thee.

19. And, take notice of it, at that time will I undo not them only, but all
those, that have any way troubled, and afflicted thee. And I will cure them
amongst thee, that are any way siic (...) sumitur ut Psalm. 35. 15.
weakened in their fortunes, and gather them daily to their own homes, that
have been as good as ejected, and banished from thence, in the long time of
their captivity. And I will make them famous, and renowned in those very
places, where they have been put to shame, and disgrace.

20. (Again I say it to you all, that shall then survive, and serve me) At that
time will I reduce you (to your own homes) and gather you together (to your own
friends, and acquaintance) and I will make you famous, and renowned among all
the people of the earth, so that your own eyes shall see, with what advantage I
have brought you back again from your captivity.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF HAGGAI.
CHAP. I.
IN the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day
of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel
the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Ioshuah the son of Iosedech
the high priest, saying,

2 Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is not
come, the time that the Lords house should be built.

3 Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying,

4 Is it time for you, Oye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie
wast?

5 Now therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts, Consider your ways.

6 Ye have sown much, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye
drink, but ye are not filled with drink: ye cloth you, but there is none warm:
and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.

7 Thus says the Lord of hosts, Consider your ways.

8 Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house: and I will take
pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord.

9 Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I
did blow upon it: why? says the Lord of hosts: because of mine house that is
wast, and ye run every man unto his own house.

10 Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed
from her fruit.

11 And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon
the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon that which the
ground brings forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor
of the hands.

12 Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Iosedech the
high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the Lord
their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, (as the Lord their God had sent
him, and the people did fear before the Lord.

13. Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger in the Lords message unto the
people, saying, I am with you, says the Lord.

14 And the Lord stirred up the spirt of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Iosedech the high
priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and they came and did
work in the house of the Lord of hosts their God,

15 In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of
Darius the king.

Of the PROPHESIES OF HAGGAI and ZACHARY.
HAggai was the first of the Prophets, that were sent to preach to the Jews,
after their return from the captivity of Babylon. He began to prophecy in the
second year of By Ezra it appears to be that Darius which reigned betwixt the 2
Ar^ax^rxes's. Now that was Darius Nothus, not Darius H staspis.
Darius Nothus, and within two months, the Prophet Zachary was joined with
him, and they were both sent upon this occasion.

Cyrus had very graciously given leave to the Jews, to return into their own
Country, and there to rebuild their City and Temple. Which indulgence many of
them made use of, and laid the foundation of the Temple, and raised the Altar
of Holocaust: but Cyrus being much entangled in ^everal wars, and Cambyses,
after him, not a little troubled the Governors of the neighboring places upon
that advantage did much hinder the Jews, accusing them, in their letters to the
Persian Monarchs, as men that set upon that work, with a purpose of rebellion
against them, when they had fortified themselves. But, after Darius was come to
the Crown of Persia: God was pleased to express his pleasure (by Haggai, and
Zachary) for their proceeding in the work of the Temple, mercifully intending
to move the heart of Darius to favor the design.

Some there were that gave ear to these two Prophets, by the encouragement of
Zorobabel, their Commander, and Iosuah, the Son of Iosedec, their High Priest.
Yet many of the common people, partly unwilling to undergo the labor of the
work, and the danger of the enemy, that opposed it: and partly desirous to
avoid the charge, and expense of such a Fabric, had no mind to hear of that
ear: and thought it far better, and safer, to live frugallie in those houses
which they had built somewhat convenient for themselves, and so (as they
thought) to secure themselves of the profits of the Country, and save their
money in their purses, making no further contribution toward those public
structures, which did but give offense to their enemies. But, in process of
time, God blessing the endeavors of the two Prophets, (that preached earnestly
against the peoples cowardly fear, and sloth, and covetousness) and withal so
inclining the heart of Darius, that he gave out an edict, for the liberty of
the Jews to build, and their enemies to let them do so, the work of building
the Temple went on with happy success. And in the Prophecy of Haggai, which
began the exhortation to that work, something is, for their encouragement,
clearly Haggai c. 2. 7. 9.
foretold of the near approach of the Messiah, that was to honor the Temple
with his own presence. In the other, Zachary does as plainly set out, his c.
9. 9.
coming to Jerusalem upon Palm Sunday: and the c. 11. 12.
price that should be set on him, in that place, and his c. 12. 10. and 13. 7.
passion there.

CHAP. I.
1. IN the second year of Darius Nothus, in the sixth month which has part of
August, and part of September) in the first day of the month (which the Jews
observed, in every month as a festival day (the Lord spoke by Haggai the
Prophet, unto Zerubbabel, Luke 3. 27.
the Son of Shealtiel (or Shalathiel) Governor of Judah, and to Iosuah, the son
of Iosedec the High Priest (who had both become too remiss in urging, and
promoting forward that good work of reedifying the Temple, after they perceived
the slowns and backwardness of the people in that task.)

2. And this was the sum of that which the Lord of Hosts so Ex v. 12.
spoke to them two, in the audience of many other of the Jews. This my people,
that should be most forward to advance any work about my house: yet, for their
private ease, and interests, can be content to say, The time is not yet come,
the fit season, wherein the Lords house is to be built. (There is no such have,
but that we may stay well enough for a quieter, and fitter opportunity, wherein
to enter upon it, without fear of interruption.)

3. Whereupon the word of the Lord came to them by me his Prophet Haggai,
saying.

4. (...) o ves.
O you covetous people, and flow to all that is good! Is it a seasonable time
for you to dwell in your fair seiled houses, while my sacred House must lie
open and wast (with nothing but a mere foundation of the structure, and an
altar for the holocausts) Have you leisure, and will, and money enough for your
own houses, and nothing for mine?

5. Now therefore, says the Lord of Hosts, (whose command all things obey)
Consider well the unadvised courses, that you have followed hitherto, and the
success, that has insued upon them, answerable unto your deserts.

6. You have sowed much in your fields, and brought in little into your barns
(your harvest has no way answered the expense of your seed-time.) God would
rather revenge your neglect of him, and his house, then give a prosperous issue
of your labors, which were untertaken only in a greedy desire of your private
gain. Or, if you got enough to feed you, yet nature has not thrived, and been
satisfied with that food, which wanted my blessing upon it. And therefore also
the good drink that you had could not cheer the heart, and make you merry, nor
your wonted apparel keep you so warm as it used to do. And your money which you
gathered together with much labor, and industry, you found to be so suddenly
vanished away, and exhausted (with so many several ways of loss, and expense)
as if it had been put into a bag so full of holes that nothing could be long
kept within it.

7. Therefore ut v. 5.
once again does the Lord of Hosts advise you to take these things to heart,
and seriously consider this unexpected event of your own ways.

8. And, when you have done, so then (by way of amendment) go into these
mountainous places, that are best stored with timber, and furnish your selves
with so many cedars from thence, as will be needful toward the building of my
house. And then raise up that structure as it should be, fit for my public
service, and I will geatiously accept of that cost and labor of yours, and
requite it with many blessings, for which Or, I will show my glory there.
you shall have just occasion to glorify my holy name.

13. For, hitherto indeed you have looked carefully (...) ad rem augendam.
to the increase of your estate, specially for your crop abroad, and have taken
the best course for it, as you thought: yet you cannot but see that I brought
all that great care, and expectation to little, or nothing. And when you had
fetched home your gains, and your wealth so carefully purchased; I made it to
vanish and fly away with the least blast of mine anger, as easily as the dust
is blown away before a mighty wind. And why did I this? says the Lord of Hosts
(what is the reason of this curse?) I will tell you why I did it. Because you
let my house lie desolate, and unbuilt, while you were all too hastily, and
wholly taken up with the building and adorning of your own private houses. So
your neglect of me and my service produced my neglect of you, and your profit.

10. That is the reason, why the Heavens, that are above you, were prohibited
to supply you with that dew, which should help on the growth of those things,
that spring out of the earth. And the earth, that is under you, had the like
prohibition from affording her usual increase of fruit.

11. And I commanded a drought and barrenness to come upon all the land,
specially upon the mountainous and most eminent parts. A barrenness both of
the corn, and the new wine, and the oil. And this barrenness extended to all
that, which is brought forth of the ground, or repete (...)
of men, or of cattle: and so to every thing that mny be esteemed as a fruit of
the labor of your hands. So that nothing that you went about did any way seem
to prosper.

12. These words of the Prophet wrought so with Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, and Iosuah the son of Iosedech the High Priest, and the remnant of
the Jews that returned out of the captivity; that they readily obeyed what God
had enjoined them to do; and to what his Prophet Haggai had delivered to them,
they gave great attention, and respect, (...)
because the Lord, their God, had set him upon that message. And so the people
humbled themselves in the fear of the Lord, and submitted to what had been said
against them, and to what was not required of them.

13. Whereupon Haggai, that had delivered the former message from the Lord,
spoke again to them, by virtue of a further commission, and deputation from God
himself, and said, I will be with you, says the Lord, not only to pardon all
that is past, but to prosper also what you readily undertake, for the
reedifying of my Temple.

13. In prosecution of which promise, the Lord stirred up the spirit ( i. the
will and courage) of Zorobabel, the son of Shealtiel, Governor of Judah, and
the spirit of Joshua, the son of Josedec, the High Priest, and the spirit of
all the Jews, that remained after the captivity of Babylon. And they began to
compose, and prepare themselves for that work, in the house of the Lord of
Hosts, their God.

15. And what was thus resolved on, was accordingly begun, upon the 24. day of
the sixth month (which has part of our August, and part of September) in the
second year of Darius the King.

CHAP. II.
IN the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month, came the
word of the Lord by the Prophet Haggai, saying.

2 Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel governor of Judah, and to
Joshua the son of Iosedech the High Priest, and to the residue of the people,
saying,

3 Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do ye
see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it, as nothing?

4 Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong, O Joshua,
son of Iosedech the High Priest, and be strong all ye people of the land, says
the Lord, and work: for I am with you, says the Lord of hosts.

5 According to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt,
so my spirit remains among you: fear ye not.

6 For thus says the Lord of hosts. Yet once, it is a little while, and I will
shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land.

7 And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and
I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts.

8 The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts.

9 The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, says
the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace says the Lord of hosts.

10 In the four and twentieth day of the nineth month, in the second year of
Darius came the word of the Lord by Haggai, the prophet, saying,

11 Thus says the Lord of hosts, Ask now the Priests concerning the law,
saying,

12 If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do
touch bread, or pot age, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? and the
Priests answered and said, No.

13 Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these
shall it be unclean? and the Priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.

14 Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this people, and so is this nation
before me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, and that which
they offer there is unclean.

15 And now I pray you, consider from this day, and upward, from before a stone
was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord.

16 Since those days were when one came to an heap of 20 measures, there were
but ten: when one came to the presse-fat for to draw out fifty vessels out of
the press, there were but twenty.

17 I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with hail, in all the
labor, of your hands, yet ye turned not to me, says the Lord.

18 Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of
the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lords temple was
laid, consider it.

19 Is the seed yet in the barn^ yea, as yet the vine and the fig tree, and the
pomegranate, and the olive tree has not brought forth: from this day will I
bless you.

20 And again the word of the Lord came unto Haggai in the four and twentieth
day of the month saying,

21 Speak to Zerubbabel governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens
and the earth.

22 And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the heathen, and I will overthrow the chariots, and
those that ride in them, and the horses and their riders shall come down, every
one by the sword of his brother.

23 In that day, says the Lord of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel my
servant, the son of Shealtiel says the Lord, and will make thee as a signet
for I have chosen thee, says the Lord of hosts.

CHAP. II.
1. IN the seventh month (which consisted of part of our September, and part
of October,) and in the twenty first day of the month, the Lord spoke again to
the Prophet Haggai, and by him to the people of the Jews, to this effect.

2. Speak now to Zerubbabel, the Son of Shealtiel, Governor of Judah, and to
Joshua the Son of Iosedech, the High Priest, and to the People, that are
returned from the captivity of Babylon, and say unto them.

3. Quis ^^c vobis i. siquis inter vos, ut Mar. 7. 9. (...) i. siquis. vide
etiam c. 4. 10.
If there be any of you left of the captivity that has seen the Temple, which
was formerly built in this place, in the rich and glorious state and beauty,
which then it had (being a work of much time, and cost) What do you now see
this likely to be (which you have begun in haste to raise up, and cannot
furnish with such wealth, and ornaments as the other had by the beneficence of
several Kings of Judah) Does not this fabric, if it be compared with that,
seem to be quasi non vel nihili.
of no great hope and expectation for state and glory.

4. But (...) hic est expletiva, vel excitantis particula.
yet, be of good comfort, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and thou, O Joshua, Son
of Iosedech the High Priest, cheer up thy self. And let the rest of the People
of the land be no way discouraged. (...)
But go on cheerfully with the work now in hand. For I am with you) (to bless
and prosper you) says the Lord of Hosts (whom all things serve and obey.

5. Whatsoever I promised (...) pro re promissa ut angl. I passed my word.
and covenanted to do for you, when you came out of Egypt, (that will I make
good, in my merciful protection of you, and crowning your obedience unto me
with all the blessings of that covenant.) And my Spirit shall be stay with you.
constantly with you, by the ministry of my Prophets, and other ways to
direct you in this work, or what else you shall take in hand for the like
advancement of my service) Therefore be not dismayed, or discouraged at these
little beginnings.

6. For, the time is coming on, says the Lord of Hosts, and it is but a
little while to be expected, (it shall be, while this Temple is standing) when
I will once again make as great Apparet ex Hebr. 12. 26. ejusmodi motum notare
mutationem eorum, quae commoventur, and regnorum mundi mutationem innui
confirmatur ex bujus cap. v. 7. and v. 21. 22. vide and Jer. 4. 23. Joel 2. 10.
motions and alterations in the world: in the Heavens, and in the Earth, and in
the Sea, and in the dry land, as ever I did, since I began to bring you out of
cujus mentio v. 5.
Egypt. And you shall find a great alteration, and difference from my own
works then to be done, and those done heretofore, since your coming out of
Egypt. For, the thunder, and lightning from Heaven in Mount Sinai, when I
descended to give the law, will be nothing to that opening of the Heavens, Add
quod ut omne Regnum, and corpus Imperii Mundum refer^titae Coelum in hoc Mundo
politico quicquid excelsim est, ut Terra, quod infimum Sol, Luna, Stellae eos
qui in summa dignitate constitumtur. Mare Diuonis amplitudinem sub ejusdem
Iuris politici communione, ut Jer. 51. 36. 44. vide v. 21. hujus c.
wherein my holy Spirit shall visibly descend upon the Messiah in Jordan, and
his Apostles in Mount Sion. And again, the bringing water out of the hardest,
and driest parts of the Earth, or dividing the waters of the red Sea, will be
nothing to the Earthquakes at the death of the Messiah, and his coming out of
the grave, and (before that) his walking upon the waters.

7. And for the motions or commotions, that I named v. 6.
before, Those commotions, and alterations in all nations shall be such, (by
several wars, and tumults) that they shall all be ready to shake, and tremble
at them. But, after the appeasing of those stirs, the Messiah himself, the
longing desire and Genesis 49. 10.
expectation, and the (...) etiam delicias significat, unde Mabumetam quoque
sic dici volunt ejus discipuli, quasi (...) i. desiderium, and delicias gentium.
delight, and sweet comfort of all people, shall come in person. And then will
be the time, when by his coming into my Temple, who is the King of Glory, I
shall fill this house that you are building, (this second Temple) vide c. 1. 8.
with glory, indeed, says the Lord of Hosts.

8. As for the outward splendor and rich offerings, in the first Temple, I
prize them not so highly as you do. And when I please to be honored with them,
I can make this Temple as richly supplied as ever Solomon's was. For, all the
silver is at my command, and the gold is at my disposal, says the Lord of
Hosts.

9. But in far higher respects, than those of wealth, and splendor, ut v. 7.
shall the glory of this latter house exceed that of the former, says the Lord
of Hosts. And the time of that glory shall be a time, when I will give peace
unto this place, says the Lord of Hosts.

10. In this second year of Darius, upon the twenty fourth day of the ninth
month, (which took up part of our November, and December: and by v. 18. and 19.
which time, the materials being prepared, the work began to be set forward
with much alacrity) the Lord spoke again by Haggai, the Prophet, saying.

11. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Ask now the Priests a resolution of a case
put in their own Levit. 10. 10. Ezekiel. 44. 23. Mal. 2. 7.
law, (wherein they are, or should be able to decide any scruple, in that kind,
proposed unto them) and do it in these terms.

12. If a man should carry any holy flesh, (that, being offered up to God, has
been sanctified by the altar) and carrying it in the skirt of his garment,
should with that skirt touch any ordinary bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil,
or any kind of meat: should that, which is so touched by that wherein the holy
flesh is, be therefore holy? To this quaere the Priests answered and said, No.
(the common meat would not be sanctified, by touching that wherein the
sanctified meat was carried.)

13. Then again said the Prophet Haggai. But if any one that is legally unclean
by touching of a dead body, should in that time, touch any of these, would that
which he touches be unclean by the law? And the Priests answer was, Nmmbers.
19. 22.
that it would be unclean, (for the legal sanctity is not so easily
communicated by one thing to another, as the legal impurity is.)

14. To which the Prophet Haggai replied, and said, So is it with the impure
and disobedient heart of this people, ex fine bujus versoculi:
that has polluted whatsoever they offered upon their new altar, which they
made in Cyrus his time, Ezra, 3. 3.
when they began to lay the foundation of the Temple, and would not afterward
so proceed in it, as I gave them direction. Therefore I account no otherwise of
this disobedient nation, than of a nation impure in my ^ight says the Lord.
And this uncleanness sticks to every work of their hands, and to what soever
they have offered at that altar, being so polluted with the bold sin of the
neglect of that command of mine (to raise the Temple.) For, neither can that
which is sanctified impart holiness to that which is profane: neither can that
which is unclean but derive the like uncleanness to that which was holy, which
shows you a little light, wherein you may see the power of your sins above
your virtues, (if you had them.)

15. And now (to see the fruit of your unclean hearts, and hands) consider
seriously with your selves, what has happened to you and what punishment I
laid upon you, before you settled your selves to this work of re-edifying my
Temple, and the builders went on with the foundation of it, for the promoting
of my service.

16. From those times of your negligence and disobedience, till that time
wherein the fabric was cheerfully undertaken: When a man came to a heap of
corn, in which he hoped well to be supplied with twenty measures, there he
received but ten, (the half of what he expected, according to the usual
proportion of the increase of his feed.) And when a man came to the presse-fat,
where he had thought to have drawn fifty vessels out of the press there he
drew but twenty, (he could never see that blessed increase, that he was in hope
of.)

17. The reason was, because I turned that blessing into a curse. I smote the
labors of your hands, and corrupted the fruit of your grounds with blasting
and mildew, and hail. And therefore I did it, because I would have had you to
reflect upon your sinful hearts, and be converted unto me: but yet this
punishment was not followed with your conversion, says the Lord.

18. And now take it also into your serious consideration, what better success
you have had from this day and upward, vide. v. 10.
from the twenty fourth day of the nineth month, wherein you began to go on
with the Foundation of the Temple of the Lord, (which had been laid before, and
too long neglected) And again, I advise you to take special notice of this day.

19. We are now in the v. 10. and 18.
ninth Month. And ^s your corn, which you lately sowed, yet come into your
barnes? Are you as sure of it, as if you had it home into your own possession,
and at your own disposal? No. It is still under the ground: you have it but in
hope, and you stand still in need of my blessing upon it, that it may be
ripened and sitted for the barn. And do you not see, that the Vine, and the
sig-tree, and the pomegranate, and the Olive Tree are yet far from bringing
forth that which gives you some likelihood of a good and plentiful year. Yet
from this day, (though these fruits are no forwarder, and the seed be yet in
the ground) from this very day will I pour my blessing upon them, and so from
this day give you an assurance, that all these things shall prosper and
increase as you would have them.

20. And again the word of the Lord came to the Prophet Haggai, in this twenty
fourth day of the aforesaid month, to this effect.

21. Speak to Zerubbabel, the Governor of Judah, and say. It shall not be long
before vide quae diximus in v. 6.
I shake the heavens, and the earth (those that are placed above others, as in
a higher Orb: and those that are under them) with many great wars, and tumults.

22. I will bring ruin and destruction upon the rich and large Kingdoms under
the command of the Persian Monarch: and so overthrow that high throne, and
state of His: and bring down the pride and puissance of that great Empire,
which so overtops the kingdoms of the Heathen. I will overturn their chariots
of war with their skillful Riders. And their stately Steeds with those that are
so bravely mounted upon them shall have a fall. They shall all perish by the
sword of those nations that are their brethren in iniquity and idolatry, and
deserve no better than they do.

23. At that time, (when all these storms shall fall upon them) says the Lord
of Hosts will I take thee into my own sicut ante.
protection, O Zerubhabel the Son of Shealtiel, my Servant, and I will preserve
thee as warily, and as carefully as a man would preserve his own signet.

(Thou and thy people shall be secure in the midst of those stirs, that in
thy time, and long after shall be among the greatest nations) And all this will
I do, because I have set my love and favor upon thee, and selected thee and
thy nation, to be a more peculiar object of my care, and mercy, says the Lord
of Hosts.

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF ZECHARIAH.
CHAP. I.
1. IN the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the
Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

2 The Lord has been sore displeased with your fathers.

3 Therefore say thou unto them, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn ye unto me,
says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of hosts.

4 Be not as your fathers unto whom the former Prophets, have cried, saying,
Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your
evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me says the Lord.

5 Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?

6 But my words, and my statutes which I commanded my servants the prophets,
did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the
Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to
our doings, so has he dealt with us.

7 Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month
Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord unto Zechariah,
the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

8 I saw by night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood
among the myrtle-trees that were in the bottom, and behind him were there red
horses, speckled and white.

9 Then said I, O my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked with me,
said unto me, I will show thee what these be.

10 And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These are
they whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro through the earth.

11 And they answered the angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle-trees,
and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and behold, all the
earth sits still, and is at rest.

12 Then the angel of the Lord answered, and said, O Lord of hosts, how long
will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the cities of Judah, against
which thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years?

13 And the Lord answered the angel that talked with me, with good words and
comfortable words.

14 So the angel that communed with me, said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus
says the Lord of hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion with a great
jealousy.

15 And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for I was
but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.

16 Therefore thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my
house shall be built in it, says the Lord of hosts, and a line shall be
stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

17 Cry yet, saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts, My cities through
prosperity shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion,
and shall ye choose Jerusalem.

18 Then lift I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.

19 And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? and he
answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem.

20 And the Lord showed me four carpenters.

21 Then said I, What come these to do? and he spoke, saying, These are the
horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but
these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lift
up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.

CHAP. I.
1. IN the eighth month (the month Bull, which had part of our October, and
part of November) in the second year of Darius, the son of Hystaspes, God spoke
unto the Prophet Zachary, the son of Barachias, the son of Iddo, and thus said
unto him.

( ex v. 3.
Thus shall thou say unto the Jews) The Lord was very much, though very
justly, displeased with your Fathers: whom he therefore delivered up, as
captives, into the hands of the King of Babylon.

3. And thou shall further say unto them. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, (whom
all things serve and obey.) Return unto me by a true repentance and amendment
of life, says the Lord of Hosts: and I will return unto you, in that favor,
and mercy, and tender care of your welfare, which the great sins of your
Fathers made me, for a time, withdraw from your nation, says the Lord of
Hosts.

4. Be not you disobedient as your Fathers were, whom the former Prophets have
earnestly and zealously called upon, saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts,
Repent ye now, forsake all your evil ways, and your wicked actions, wherein
you go on to get unto your selves a dangerous habit of sin. Yet they would not
diligently attend, and accordingly obey me, says the great Jehovah.

5. But, where be your Fathers now, that were so refractory, and disobedient
unto me, and what is b^come of their false Prophets, that soothed them up in
their sins, Did they live for ever? Did I not send one calamity after another,
to hunt after them, and bring them to their graves?

6. Notwithstanding all their security, and vain hopes of peace, and an
imaginary protection from me, for my Temples sake, have not my words, and
decrees, which my Servantt the good Prophets delivered to them, by my command
proved now to be true? Have not those judgments, which I so decreed, and
foretold, at the last, justly overtaken them, so that many of them, in a true
sense, and apprehension of the greatness of their sins, and the truth of those
predictions returned in the end to a sober mind, and ing^niously acknowledging
their error could not but say, Just as the Lord of hosts resolved to do unto
us, by inflicting a heavy punishment, answerable to our grievous sins in all
the several ways, and wicked actions, wherein we had offended, even so has
he made it good upon us. (This confession my punishments extorted from your
Fathers, let it be one Motive of your true repentance, that so you may escape
those miseries which they pulled upon their own heads by not applying
themselves unto me, by a timely repentance.)

7. Now within two or three months after Zachary had preached this Sermon,
namely upon the twenty fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month
Shebat, (and contains part of our January, and part of February) in the second
year of Darius, the son of Hystaspes; the word of the Lord was revealed unto
Zachary, the Prophet, the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo, in this manner, as
I shall tell it.

8. In the quiet silence of the night, I saw a vision (that promised, though in
a dark, and mystical way, a quiet and peaceable time for the advancement of
the work about the Temple: and partly discovered, how many Angels were ready,
with the Messiah, to assist and defend the Church in that time: and much more,
under that figure, how many helps would be afforded from heaven, for that more
spiritual Church: whose foundation should be laid in that City, by the
preaching of the Messiah, and of his Apostles, and Disciples) In this vision
(to show the speed and forwardness of them that were sent) I observed, Apoc.
6. 4.
a man riding upon a red horse, (the very color of the horse speaking the
revenge, that he meant to take of the enemies of the Church.) And he stood
among the myrtle-trees, that were in a bottom (...) aquarum profundum
significat, vel prope aquas.
by a river side, (wherein again as the bottom, and the shadow of the trees bid
us take notice, how obscurely these things are revealed, and how little hope
appeared from men, for the delivery, and tranquillity of the Church: so the
trees being the sweet and humble myrtle, were a figure of meek and humble men,
that were, for their holy life, accounted as a sweet odor unto God.) But after
the view of this Horseman, came more holy Emblems of our help. For behind him
(as the Captain) there appeared other (as attendants) on red horses and
speckled and white, (as if the red were to signify those, that should attend
their great Captain in prosecution of the revenge of the bloody enemies of the
Church, whereof we spoke before: and the other two, those that came for the
punishment of such as were other ways spotted with sin: and for the protection
of the pure, and innocent.)

9. Then said I to the Captain of this troop of Horse, the great Commander of
this various army under the Lord of Hosts, Who are these, my Lord? And that
great Angel or Messenger (sent from God himself,) vouchsafeing to answer, and
discourse (...) pro (...) ut Ial. 15. 1. ^^de (...) pro ^ur Col. 4. 6.
with me, said, videre sinam.
I will let thee know what these be.

10. Then presenting himself in the form of a man, and staying still under the
shade of the myrtle-trees, he said. These are the Army and Messengers, that
the great Jehovah sends abroad, to compass the Earth, (to punish the worser,
and defend the better sort of men.)

11. Whereupon the rest, in reference to what that great Messenger of the great
Jehovah had said, while he stood under the myrtle-trees gave this further
answer to what I had presumed to ask of Him. We have passed thorough the whole
circuit of this land, and we have taken such order, that this and all the
Countries hereabouts are in peace, and quiet (and therefore they may safely,
and securely proceed in the fabric of the Temple, without any fear of
disturbance at home, or abroad.)

12. Upon this occasion, that great Messenger from the Lord was pleased to say
(as the great Mediator for his despised Church) O Lord of Hosts, how long was
it, ere thou would have this pity upon Jerusalem, and other the Cities of
Judah, (which still appear but in their ruins and rubbish, and) which in thine
anger thou did keep under the Babylonian captivity, no less than threescore
and ten years (the very age of a man.)

13. And the Lord Jehovah himself gave answer to that great Angel, that had
spoke so to me in most loving, and comfortable words.

14. Hereupon that great Angel, and Ambassador that had vouchsafed so far to
commmune with me added this further, and said, Go and preach again unto thy
people the Jews, and say, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I have indeed been
jealous over Jerusalem, and Sion, and very jealous over them (because of their
spiritual adulteries, which they have committed against me, and I have punished
them, in some proportion to that jealousy.)

16. But now my anger shall fall, in as great a measure upon those nations,
Ezra. 4.
that have enjoyed their ease, and plenty, while you have been under the rod.
And I will punish them the rather, because, whereas I used them like
Schoolmasters for your correction only, they added more to your punishment
than they should have done: as if they endeavored your ruin rather than your
amendment: and so hindered, as much as in them lay, the good hopes of your
recovery, and your return to this place, and to my service.

16. Therefore this now is the merciful resolution of the lord. I will return
with a gracious aspect upon Jerusalem, and I will prosper the building of my
Temple there, says the lord of Hosts. And let them be as sure of it, as if
they now see their Carpenters drawing out their lines for the whole work, that
not the Temple only, but the City of Jerusalem too Nehem. 2 3.
shall be re-edified, and made like her self again, in her walls, and gates,
and other places of ornament, and defense, that are fit for so great a City.

17. And add this moreover, when thou preachest to my people, and say. Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, My Cities in Judah shall be so stored, and filled
once again, with all good things, as a vessel is, that is haec vis voc. (...)
and (...) unde Ital. recte redd^ur per scoppieranno.
ready to run over, and burst with abundance of liquor. And the Lord will again
comfort Sion, and show his loving kindness to Jerusalem, as a place that he
has selected and picked out, for the object of his love.

18. After this, lifting up mine eyes, I presently saw four horns.

19. And I said to the great Angel that discoursed with me, what mean those
horns, that I see? And he answered, These horns are four several Nations, all
enemies to Judaea, and ready, like wild beasts, to (...)
toss and molest her, upon every advantage: and so to hinder the good work,
which she intended about the Temple.

^Nehem. 4. 7.
And these were, the Cuthaeans, the Ammonites, the Arabians, and the Philistims.

20. Then the Lord showed me four Carpenters (well furnished with hatchets, and
sawes, and other instruments of their Art, as it were to cut those Horns
shorter, that made so great a show: or to help forward the building of the
Temple.)

21 Then said I, what come these men to do? and he answered: The horns that
you saw, are several nations, that would fain toss and scatter Judah from
place to place, and like horned Beasts, have so gored and pushed at that weak
people, that they dare not turn head against them, or make any resistance.

sicut ante.
Now these Carpenters are come (as friends that God has raised up for you) to
fray away, and disperse them, and all such like among the Gentiles, that shall
presume to lift up their horns against the land of Judah, to make another
dispersion of that afflicted people.

(And, things being so quieted, you may the better attend the work about the
house of God.)

CHAP. II.
1 I Lift up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a man with a
measuring-l^ne in his hand.

2 Then said I, whither go thou? and he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem,
to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.

3 And behold, the angel that talked with me, went forth, and another angel
went out to meet him,

4 And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be
inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein.

5 For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will
be the glory in the midst of her.

6 Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, says the Lord: for
I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, says the Lord.

7 Deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the daughter of Babylon.

8 For thus says the Lord of hosts, After the glory has he sent me unto the
nations which spoiled you, for he that touches you, touches the apple of his
eye.

9 For behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to
their servants: and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent me.

10 Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for lo, I come, and I will dwell in
the midst of thee, says the Lord.

11 And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my
people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall know that the
Lord of hosts has sent me unto thee.

12 And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall
choose Jerusalem again.

13 Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he ie raised up out of his
holy habitation.

CHAP. II.
1. (AFter what was told me of the four Carpenters, and as it were in
confirmation of that) Another vision caused the lifting up of mine eyes, where
I beheld a man with a measuring line in his hand. ( Nehem. 2. 13.
A resemblance of Nehemiah, that was to take care for the employment of the
builders of the City.)

2. To this man I presently applied my self, and said unto him, whither art
thou going? And he returned me this answer: I am going to measure Jerusalem,
that I may see what is the breadth, and what is the length of it.

3. Ecce.
You may take notice, that, in the mean while, the great Angel, with whom I had
been entertained in discourse before, withdrew himself from the place where he
then stood: and another Angel went out to meet him, and receive his commands.

4. To whom this was that, which the great Angel gave first in charge. Make
have, says he, and deliver this Prophecy to that young man, ( Zachariah, the
young Prophet) and say. Jerusalem shall be once again so populous, that many of
her Citizens shall be fain to inhabit in the suburbs, and in the little
villages all about them, because neither they, nor their cattle, and other
wealth shall be able to be contained within the walls. (In all which Jerusalem
shall be but a type of a greater access of true converts to the Church of God,
which is the true Jerusalem, the mother of us all.)

5. And to this Jerusalem (and to that which is figured by it) will I be like a
wall of fire round about her (to defend her from all outward assaults) And
within the City, I will be a glory to her in the many, and miraculous
expressions of my power, and Majesty.

6. You therefore that account your selves in the number of the children of
Israel, and are yet in the land of your captivity. Come, O come quickly to us
out of those Northern climates, says the Lord. For I will dilate and extend
your habitations toward the four winds of Heaven, and much enlarge the borders
of your possession, says the Lord.

7. Therefore make have, Come away, come away you Citizens of Sion. Delight not
to continue your captivity, and prolong the time of your banishment from your
Jerusalem: but speedily come out of Babylon, you that hitherto have continued
in that place. (Come out of your places of idolatry, and seat your selves in
the spacious limits of the true Church of God.)

8. For thus says the Lord of hosts (the great Deliverer and Defender of his
Church.) Rep r. ex v. praeced.
Come after that glory, wherein I shall go before you, as your glorious guide
and Champion, to conduct you safe to your Jerusalem (that here and that above)
For Sic Christus in Evang. non semel dicit se missum a Patre.
he that sends me (as his great Angel of the covenant, and commander of his
Hosts.) has sent me, upon this errand amongst the rest, to visit the nations
that spoiled you to be avenged, and to deliver you out of their Tyranny. Nor
could you expect any less, since he that touches you, touches the very apple
of his eye. He is as sensible of your injuries, and sufferings, as if they were
his own, and offered to him in a part of the tenderest touch.

9. Therefore you may observe me already shaking my hand over them by way of
menace. And accordingly them that have heretofore used you as Servants, I shall
not fail ere long to make servants unto you, and some of them more then so (as
in the time of the Maccabees) to be no better then captives, taken in warlike
manner (which shall serve also as a type and figure of those that shall be
taken into my service, when Psalm. 110. 2. etc.
I send the rod of my power out of Sion, and when my spiritual soldiers shall
bring them of all nations into the number of the true Israel of God) And, when
they that I send, shall compass so great achievements, you will know
assuredly, that it was the Lord of Hosts that sent me (the great Commander, not
of those troops only, that appeared in the first vision, but of all things
that are in heaven, and earth.)

10. Rejoice then, and be exceeding glad, O daughter of Sion: for, Ecce.
which thou shall see and wonder at, I will not only vouchsafe to dwell in
this Temple, that you are building, but I will further be pleased to come and
dwell with you, visibly, and personally conversing among you (in the sacred
Temple of my flesh) says the Lord Jehovah.

11. And many nations shall apply themselves to the Lord in those days, and
like true Proselytes, and converts indeed, be joined unto Him, (as soldiers to
sight under his banner, and no longer as enemies to him and his Church) So
shall they become my people, as you are, and true members of the true
Jerusalem: And I will abide, and dwell in the midst of thee, and within thee
(as my holy Temple, and my Heaven upon earth) And so thou shall be more and
more assured that it was the Lord of Hosts, that sent me unto thee, O thou v.
10.
daughter of Sion, (the Church and Congregation of the true servants of God.)

12. With this happy success shall the Lord inherit Judah again, as his
peculiar possession, in the holy land, and again make choice of Jerusalem,
wherein to show his power, and glory.

13. Therefore let all Caro (...) pro homine.
men be still, and show Silentium saepe pro timora and reverentia.
fear and reverence before the Lord. For he will rise up from the throne of his
glory, and show himself from his holy habitation, to Psalm. 110.
subdue his enemies under his feet, and be glorified in his servants.

CHAP. III.
1 ANd he showed me Joshua the high priest, standing before the angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.

2 And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the
fire?

3 Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.

4 And he answered, and spoke unto those that stood before him, saying, Take
away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of
raiment.

5 And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head: so they set a fair,
mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments, and the angel of the Lord
stood by.

6 And the angel of the Lord protested unto Joshua, saying,

7 Thus says the Lord of hosts, if thou will walk in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge, then thou shall also judge my house, and shall also keep
my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by.

8 Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows that sit before
thees for they are men wondered at: for behold, I will bring forth my servant
the BRANCH.

9 For behold, the stone that I have laid before Joshua: upon one stone shall
be seven eyes, behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, says the Lord of
hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.

10 In that day says the Lord of hosts shall ye call every man his neighbor
under the vine, and under the fig tree.

CHAP. III.
1. NOw the Lord, in another vision, let me see Iosuah the High Priest,
standing before that great Angel, or Messenger of the Lord: and Satan standing
at Joshuah his The place of an acouser.
right hand: that he might there show himself to be The place of an acouser.
a Satan. i. an adversary and malicious accusar of him, and so, like his name.

2. And the Lord Jehovah (or some Archangel representing his person) said unto
Satan. Jud. v. 9.
The Lord rebuke, or restrain thee, O Satan, from prevailing in thy malicious
accusation, to any prejudice of the High Priest. Even that gracious Lord so
restrain thee, in the behalf of Jerusalems High Priest, that has in so great
love made choice of Jerusalem, as a place to be made a special object of his
favor, and mercy. (...)
For, is not this Joshua, whom thou opposest, one that has more need of divine
compassion, and indulgence; as being like a brand plucked out of many sad
dangers, and fiery trials, that befell him in the time of his long captivity:
And by him plucked out, and rescued thence, that gave that token of his care,
and protection over him, for the time to come.

3. Now Joshuah appeared to me, in this vision, as one clad in filthy apparel,
while he thus stood before the great Angel of the Lord (which might be an
emblem, not so much of his poor estate, as of some As suffering his sons to
marry strange wives.
sin, that he had contracted in the time of his captivity. For, sin represents
us no otherwise in the sight of Gods pure eyes, then as men covered with rags,
and pollution.

4. Then said that great Angel to the other, that stood ready to (...) stare,
saepe pro inservire, vide c. 4. 14.
obey his commands. Take away Joshuahs filthy garments from him (as a sign of
the removal of his sins, that had made him appear so unpleasing in the sight of
God) And then, turning himself to the High Priest See, says he, and forget not
this mercy, wherein I have caused the removal of thy sin, which might now have
been laid to thy charge, and I will cause thee to be arrayed in such new and
decent garments (the robes of righteousness) as wherein thou shall be accepted.

5. I have also Dixi. s. ministris.
taken order with my attendants, (said he) that they set a fair mytre upon the
head of Iosuah, Exodus 29. 4. Levit. 8. 9.
as the High Priest of the Lord. And this they did accordingly (in sign of a
confirmation of him in his great, and sacred office, notwithstanding all that
his greatest (...) ut supra.
enemy could have objected against him) And they clothed him all over with new
and comely apparel, and set a fair mitre upon his head, while that great Angel
of the Lord was pleased to Nam and hoc est (...) ut stare Ital.
stay there, and see all this done, as he had commanded.

6. After which, that great Angel of the Lord protested also unto Ioshuah, thus
consecrated for the High Priest of the Jews, and said,

7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts unto thee. If thou will walk in those good
ways which I have commanded Number. 3. 7.
and diligently observe that charge of divine service, that I have entrusted
thee withal: then thou shall judge and determine, and give commands concerning
all that belongs to the sacrifices, and ceremonies of my house, and to the
custody of the several Courts of my Temple. And in due time, thou shall have
more honor and liberty then to make use of the walks, and galleries about the
Temple; when, for thy walking here in my ways I shall admit thee to those
places, where thou shall walk, and converse with these Angels, that stand all
about to (...) eo sensu quo v. 4.
attend me (this is the reward of them, that here walk with God.)

8. And now give ear, O Ioshuah the High Priest, to the ground of that promise.
Thou may hear it, and so may thy friends (the Prophets, and other my good
servants) that use to sit with thee (to advise of setting forward that which
belongs to my service. They are fit Auditors of such mysteries as these,
because being Hebr. Men of, or for miracles.
miracles of piety, in respect of other men, they may be accounted the more
worthy to have, miracles, and signs of things to come, imparted unto them. And
such are these which I shall now relate. For, Behold, I will at last bring
forth Isai. 11. 1.
my servant the BRANCH. I will "make the root of Iesse bud out of the earth,
and appear: the Messiah, of whom Zorobabel is now the type and figure, and that
comes out of the same stock.

9. And there is another mystery, worth an Ecce. For you may observe Sic (...)
hic signif. ut cap. 4. 10.
the plummet which Zorobabel made use of, when he laid the foundation of the
Temple, and (...)
which I caused to be given him, in the presence of thee, Ioshuah the
High Priest. Upon this one plummet, there appeared the figure and
representation of seven eyes (to show my Oculus providentiam signif.
septenari^s numerus perfectionem.
watchful providence over this, and all other places devoted to my service: and
withal, 7 dona Spiritus: Isa. 11. 2.
the wisdom and other graces, which should be eminent in the Messiah, the chief
corner stone of all the mystical Churches of God) The engraving of those seven
eyes in the plummet, was not cut out by any Art of man, but I my self by my
extraordinary power made the engraving of it appear, as there it did, says
the Lord of Hosts. And, for that Messiah his sake, I will take away the sins of
this wicked Vnde illud Iohannis Baptista -- qui tollit peccata mundi. Idem n.
hic (...) terra, the earth; quod ibi mundus, and vide ad hanc interpretat.
confirmandam. Dan. 9. 24. vel sic verte. -- amongst others, of this wicked
land, -- etc.
world, in one day (by virtue of his death and passion upon that day) or, Sic
diem pro tempore sumi saepe diocimus, and appares ex v. seq.
at one time (in that Hebr. 9. 12, 25, etc. and. c. 10. 12.
once offering of himself for sin.)

10. In those days of your deliverie from the bondage of sin, there shall be a
time of peace, and mutual amity, when men shall be easily disposed to invite
their neighbors to come, and sit with them, every man under his vine, and
under his fig tree, says the Lord of Hosts, (which is a figure of that inward
peace, they shall have, and that true love they shall bear to others; who shall
feel the benefit of that days passion, and the love, and mercy of Him, that
died for them.)

CHAP. IV.
1 ANd the angel that talked with me, came again and waked me, as a man that is
wakened out of his sleep.

2 And said unto me. What see thou? and I said, I have looked, and behold, a
candle-stick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps
thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which were upon the top thereof:

3 And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the
other upon the left side thereof.

4 So I answered and spoke to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are
these, my Lord.

5 Then the angel that talked with me, answered, and said unto me, Know thou
not what these be? and I said, No, my Lord.

6 Then he answered and spoke unto me, saying, This is the word of the Lord
unto Zerubbabel, saying. Not he might^ not by power, but by my spirit, says
the Lord of hosts.

7 Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain,
and he shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shourings, crying, Grace,
grace unto it.

8 Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

9 The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house, his hands
shall also finish it; and thou shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent me
unto you.

10 For who has despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice, and
shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with those seven, they are the
eyes of the Lord which run to and fro through the whole earth.

11 Then answered I and said unto him, What are these two olive trees upon the
right side of the candlestick, and upon the left side thereof?

12 And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive-branches,
which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves?

13 And he answered me and said, Know thou not what these be? And I said, No
my Lord.

14 Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of
the whole earth.

CHAP. IV.
1. NOt long after these Visions, I was rapt into another ecstasy, wherein the
Angel, that had conference with me before, seemed to come again and awake and
rouse me up, as one out of a deep sleep and transe, that I might be the more
attent, and observant of other mysteries, that were then to be revealed unto
me, by way of vision.

2. And he said unto me, what see thou Zachary? And I said, there is another
sight presented to my eyes, which takes me up with such admiration, that I
cannot deliver it without an Ecce.

Methinks I see a Candlestick all of gold (one of the great ornaments of the
house of God) and the bowl belonging to the top of it (whence the oil was
conveyed, as out of a fountain) and his seven lamps thereon, and seven several
pipes, which emptied the oil out of the bowl, and bestowed it the in match, or
wick of the seven lamps: which pipes were upon the top of the shaft.

3. And by this fair Candlestick stood two olive trees, one upon the right side
of the bowl, and the other upon the left-side thereof: which gave a continual
supply of oil to the bowls, and might signify V. ult.
the two sons of oil (as we call them) i. the two sacred persons, that have
holy unction, the King and the Priest: and might intimate unto us, that a
Prince and Priest we should have, till the times of the Messiah, according to
the Prophecy of Jacob. Though these mysteries both here, and in the Temple
might have a farther light in this Candlestick; to show us the ecclesiastical
function in the greater Church of God, wherein the several Ministers, like
several and clear lamps, should shine forth in their doctrine, and
conversation, that others, by their good light, may be brought to glorify
their father, which is in heaven.

4. But, these things, at the first representation of the Vision, I did not so
discover, but, being wholly taken up with admiration, I proceeded, and said
further to the Angel, that discoursed with me, what is the meaning of these
things, my Lord.

5. To which that Angel, that had pleased so to talk with me, replied, and
said. Do thou not conceave what is meant, by the Candlestick and the
Olive Trees, and the other parts of the Vision? and I said, I do not indeed, my
Lord: therefore I desire, that you would vouchsafe to explain the mystery of
them.

6. Then says he to me, by way of answer. Thou may gather part of the
meaning out of those words, which thou art commanded to deliver unto Zorobabel,
that takes so great care, and pains about your sacred Fabric. For, thus you
are commanded by God himself, so say unto Zerubbabel. This building shall thou
be able to raise, and fit for my service, (...)
not by any wealth or power of your own (for, who sees not, how poor and weak
your nation is at this time) but by my spirit says the Lord of Hosts, (by the
virtue and courage that I shall infuse into you all: and the means and friends
that I shall raise up for you) while your own poor abilities contribute as
little to the finishing of so great a work, as you do to the supply of oil for
those lamps, which are fed by olive trees, raised up miraculously by me, on
purpose, for that intent.

7. And who can hinder that which the Lord of Hosts will do? Can thou, O
Babylon? Alas, what art thou, that vaunts thy self and thy Empire to overtop
that of Zerubbabel, and his little Jury, as far as a high Mountain appears
above a little molehill? Did not I lay that high and mighty empire as low as a
pore plain, in the sight of Zerubbabel, (who carried in his very name, a good
omen of the confusion of Babel, and the (...) a (...)
dispersing of her several Provinces) Shall I not do the like, against any
other Potentates, that oppose my poor Church in any age? Yes, and now, (to
begin with Jury, and her Jerusalem, and her Temple there) maugre all
opposition, I enabled Zerubbabel to appear Ezra. 3. 8.
strong and powerful iu the work: I made him the man, that laid the first stone
thereof, accompanied with the acclamations and good wishes of all the people,
that cried out, (...) geminatio nominis ad majorem emphesir.
Let God ever favor, let his mercy ever support it. He bless, and succeed,
and maintain this great work so happily begun.

8. Moreover the word of the Lord came to me V. 5. and 6.
his Angel, saying,

9. As the hands of Zerubbabel laid the foundation of this house, Ezra. 3.
so when his hands have finished it ( i. by his care, at his command, and
direction, and in his time the whole work be perfected as I foretold) then
shall you, by that accomplishment of my prediction, be able to conclude, that I
came with commission from the Lord of Hosts, to encourage you in this business.

10. But, ^iquis. vide ad c. 2. 3.
if any man slight, and mistrust the time of these little beginnings of the
Fabric, and think it promises but little for the conclusion. If any such
there be, they will rather have cause to rejoice and cheer up themselves, when
they consider what was c. 3. 9.
said of the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, and of those seven eyes, that
were so miraculously engraven in it by the immediate power of Almighty God. For
that is an emblem of the eyes of God, that run thorough the whole world, i. of
his infinite providence, and care, that extends it self over all things, and
specially over his own people.

11. Then said I further to him. What is mean by those two olive trees, whereof
one stands upon the right, the other upon the left side of the Candlestick?

12. And, he deferring his answer. I presumed to propose the same question
again unto him, and said, What are those two branches of the olives, hanging
over the golden pipes, thence emptying their precious oil, as pure and (...)
pro (...)
clear as gold.

13. Then he replying said unto me. Know thou not yet, what is meant by
them? And I said I must confess to my Lord, I do not fully conceave the
meaning of them.

14. He answered. These are the two Sons of Oil, as you use to speak, i. the
two sorts of sacred persons, anointed with holy oil: the Prince and the
High Priest, who (...) in notione inser^iendi. c. 3. v. 4. and 7. sic (...)
Joh. 3. 29. and Genesis 41. 46. Deuteronomy. 1. 38.
attend as two principal servants upon the Lord of the whole earth, and whose
vigilant care over the Temple, and the whole Church of God, in their respective
places, is here figured by those two branches of the olive, that impart a
continual supply of oil to all the lamps, i. of comfort, and assistance to all
those, that shine, as clear lights in the Church of God.

CHAP. V.
1 THen I turned, and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, a flying roll.

2 And he said unto me, What see thou? and I answered, I see a flying roll;
the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.

3 Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goes forth over the face of
the whole earth; for every one that steals, shall be cut off as on this side,
according to it: and every one that swears, shall be cut off as on that side,
according to it.

4 I will bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the
house of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my name:
and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the
timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

5 Then the angel that talked with me, went forth, and said unto me, Lift up
now thine eyes, and see what is this that goes forth.

6 And I said, what is it? and he said, This is an ephah that goes forth. He
said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the earth.

7 And behold, there was lift up a talent of lead: and this is a woman that
sits in the midst of the ephah.

8 And he said, This is wickedness; and he cast it into the midst of the
ephah, and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

9 Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came out two women,
and the wind was in their wings, (for they had wings like the wings of a stork)
and they lift up the ephah between the earth and the heaven.

10 Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the
ephah?

11 And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar, and it
shall be established, and set there upon her own base.

CHAP. V.
1. AFter this, lifting up mine eyes (...) ( revertere) in Hebraismo
iterationem signif.
again, I discovered that which took me up with so much wonder, that it may
challenge another Ecce: and it was a kind of flying book written all in one
long scroul.

2. And the angel, that I mentioned before, said unto me, What see thou? And
I said, I see a flying roll containing so much in that one volume, that the
length of it seems twenty cubits, and the breadth ten cubits.

3. Then said he unto me. This roll, or volume is a book of curses, or dire
punishments, and it is gone out to fly through the whole land (so far as the
children of Judah or Israel do inhabit) For every one of this nation that is
guilty of stealing, and has his name for that fault on one side of the book is
accordingly to be Wiped clean of all they had sic (...) Isa. 3.26. and alibi.
emptied of his ill-gotten goods, and suffer the loss of Ex v. seq^.
all in his house besides: and every one Ut ex v. sequ. apparet. ut
subintelligatu^ (...)
that forswears, and has his name, for that fault, upon the other side of the
book, is emptied of what he got by his perjurie, acrording to the evidence of
the fault there.

4. This roll will I produce, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall come into
the house of him that steals, and into the house of him that swears falsely, by
my name. And it shall continue in the midst of his house, till it have quite
consumed it, like a fierce, and raging fire, that consumes or disperseth the
very stones, as well as the timber.

5. Then the Angel, that used to discourse with me, as my Interpreter and
Director for the understanding of these mysteries, having gone out for a while,
returned again unto me, to explain a new Vision, and said, Lift up now thine
eyes, and observe that which seems to be coming forward toward us.

6. At the sight of it, I demanded of the Angel, what it might be? And he
replied, This is the full measure of an Ephah, that now seems to move forward,
and discover it self (an emblem of their heavy sins, that have now filled up
their measure, and therefore must lie no longer concealed, and winked at, as a
great while they did in expectation of their repentance, before they brought
them up to this height) And he added withal, that this might serve for a fit
(...) forma vel figura, vide Thesaurum n. Hebr.
resemblance of those sins or sinners, through the whole land (whose full
measure of sin brought that full measure of punishment, which, you see, was
visibly inflicted upon the whole nation, in this last captivity.)

7. And you would wonder what a strange sight immediately appeared with it: the
likeness of a huge massy weight of lead, that was brought thither, to be laid
upon it. And this other sight withal: (...) una ut gall.
a woman sitting upon the midst of the Ephah (impudent enough, and no whit
ashamed, or afraid to own such a weight of iniquity.)

8. And, while I was looking upon her, and observing the pride, and
shamelessenesse of her posture, the Angel informed me, who it was. This is the
lively portraicture of the Jewish Impiety, says he, (from whence all those
robberies, and perjuries, that we named before, had their rise, and their
growth, till they called to heaven for vengeance) And, at that word, he took
her, and thrust her into the midst of the Epha, and laid a great (...) non de
lapide olumsed de omni pondere graviori.
weight of lead upon the mouth of the Ephah) to exclude her from getting out
from that, which she seemed so ready to return to, as to a creature of her own.)

9. No sooner had I withdrawn my eyes from this sight, to look up again, but I
perceived there two women coming forward (suppose the two nations, the Assyrian
and the Babylonian, by which God was pleased to revenge himself of this so
great a measure of sin) And they came with such speed, as if they had come upon
the wings of the wind (which figured the sudden execution of Gods wrath, that
accordingly came upon our nation, for our many offenses) And the wings seemed
to be like the wings of a stork (another expression of that sudden
transmigration, and deportation out of our Country) And these two flying women
lift up this Ephah we spoke of, between heaven and earth (as we lift up a
burden that is presently to be removed from where it is.)

10. Then I asked the Angel that discoursed with me, whither they intended to
remove that heavy weight of impiety? (to what place of punishment, and
execution of Justice.)

11. The place, says he, which they are going to provide for that purpose, is
the land of Babylon: where they shall be set fast, upon their own basis (the
sure footing which themselves were the cause of) sure enough for stirring
thence, till God, of his own mercy, make way for their removal.

And this Vision and representation of what they have suffered already, may be
a fair warning, that the like sins, or sins in the like measure bring not the
like punishment upon their heads again.)

CHAP VI.
1 ANd I turned, and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came four
chariots out from between two mountains, and the mountains were mountains of
brass.

2 In the first chariot were red horses, and in the second chariot black horses,

And in the third chariot white horses, and in the fourth chariot grisled and
bay horses.

4 Then I answered, and said unto the angel that talked with me, What are
these, my Lord?

5 And the angel answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the
heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.

6 The black horses which are therein, go forth into the north-countrey, and
the white go forth after them, and the grisled go forth toward the
south-countrey.

7 And the bay went forth; and sought to go, that they might walk to and fro
through the earth: and he said, Get ye hence, walk to and fro through the
earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.

8 Then cried he upon me, and spoke unto me, saying, Behold, these that go
toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north-countrey.

9 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying.

10 Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Iedajah,
which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house
of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;

11 Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of
Joshua, the son of Iosedech the high priest.

12 And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold
the man whose name the BRANCH, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he
shall build the temple of the Lord.

13 Even he shall build the temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory,
and, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a priest upon his
throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.

14 And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Iedajah, and to
Hen the son of Zephaniah for a memorial in the temple of the Lord.

15 And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the Lord,
and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent me unto you. And this shall
come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God.

CHAP. VI.
1. WHen I lift up mine eyes again, to look about me, I saw four warlike
Chariots, passing from between two strong mountains, that appeared like
mountains of brass (a type of four warlike troops, under the conduct of their
famous Commanders, that made, all, their passage through the Pyla Cilicia.
streights of Anti-taurus, which are between the fastness of the rough, and
craggy hills in Cilicia: and through which the Babylonians, and Persians, and
Alexanders forces, and the armies of the Commanders, that succeeded him, were
wont to make their way into Syria, and Iudaea, and other parts thereabout.

2. The first Chariot was drawn by red horses (figuring the bloody actions of
the Babylonians, which we had felt already) The second Chariot was furnished
with black horses (which sad and mournful color made them apt to represent the
frequent famines, and other heavy calamities, that many were to suffer under
the Persian Monarchy.)

3. In the third Chariot I observed they were white horses, which color, in
opposition to the former of the Persians sable hue, might figure the joyful
triumphs, and victories, that the forces of the great Alexander (who commanded
that Chariot) were to have over the vast armies, and countries of the sad, and
mournful Persian, that was at last to taste of that sorrow, which himself,
before, had brought upon others.

The fourth Chariot, consisting of divided forces, was brought along by Horses
of several colors, some (...)
speckled with round white spots, like hailstones, other of a (...) vel (...)
Chald. cinereos transtulit.
pale color like ashes (the emblem of the Syrian, and Egyptian forces: which
fell so often and suddenly ( like hail-shot) in several places, before they
were looked for: and by policy, and subtilty concealed, and covered their
intentions (like fire under the ashes) till by the sudden breath of their
boisterous commands they would have it to break out. And these armies of the
Syrian and Egyptian Kings were the rather joined together in this vision,
because they came both from Alexander: and the sufferings of the Jews under
them, should be much alike: some full of sad storms, other of greater miseries,
that would turn many of them to their last dust and ashes: sometime under the
one sort of Commanders, and sometime under the other.

4. Then I applied my self again to the Angel, by whose instructions I had been
all this while informed, and said unto him. What are these my Lord?

5. And he answered me to this purpose, that these were for their busling in
the world; and the large compass they take up, (...) pro (...)
like the four winds under heaven, i. the four Empires, under several
Commanders dispersed toward the four climates of the known habitable world. And
though the winds may show their boisterous, and uncertain dispositions, in
themselves considered: yet they shall execute nothing, but according to the
providence, and wisdom, and pleasure of the Lord of Hosts, and therefore it is
said that they go not forth, till they have (...) sistere coram aliquo.
presented themselves before the Lord of all the earth, Quo sensu etiam (...)
c. 4. 14. and alibi.
to receive his commands.

6. That which has the black horses is the Persian Army, which took their
progress not long since toward the Northern countries. And the white, (those
of Alexanders troops, shall follow as hard after them of Persia, when the time
of their Commission for that service is is come. But the speckled, the various
expeditions of Alexanders forces under Called by Duniel, King of the South.
Chap. 11. 40.
Ptolomaeus Lagi, shall take their way toward the Southern parts, and be settled
in Egypt.

7. And the pale horses, i. those troops of Alexanders followers, that shall
take their name and rise from Seleucus, they shall have many several plots, and
essays about these parts of the world, and in all the countries hereabouts
they will make their several attempts. Dix^ Deus.
And the Commission which they recovered from the Almighty Commander of all,
runs in these terms. Go, make your several per ambulations and assayes in
several Countries of the earth. And so accordingly they will dispose of
themselves here, and there, in the several progress of their military forces.

8. While I was intent upon the Visions, the Angel called me nearer to him, as
if he had some new observation to impart, and this it was. Mark these Armies of
the Persians, says he that took their journies into the North, they have
revenged the injuries you received from the Babylonian, and so abundantly
satisfied the anger, which I justly conceaved against those Northern parts.

9. Then came a particular commmand to me from the Lord to this effect:

10. That I should take to me some of them, that were newly returned from the
captivity of Babylon (which God had so powerfully revenged by the hand of the
Persian) And, amongst those that I was to make choice of, Hulday (al. Helem)
was to be called by name: From whom, and from Tobijah and Iedajah: my self
making my appearance at the same time in the house of Josiah, the son of
Zephaniah. --

11. From them I was to receave silver and gold which lay in their hands for
the ornaments of the Temple) and employ it to the making of several crowns,
whereof one to be set upon the head of Iosuah, the Son of Iosedeck, the
High Priest (that herein he may be Vnde Apoc. 4. 4. 24 Presbyteri coronas
habent, qui sunt Ecclesiae Christianae Episcopi, per Principes Sacerdotum, vel
Principes 24 Ephaemeriarum adumbrati.
like the Highpriests, his Predecessors, that were wont to be honored with a
crown in times of public joy, and gratulation.)

12. And then shall thou say unto him, Behold the man, whose name is the
BRANCH, from the root of Iesse. (Fix your eyes upon your Messiah, your great
Deliverer, of whom and whose deliverie, all other deliverers and deliverances,
as this of Babylon, are but little shadows) He shall bud forth and flourish in
due time (answerable to his name of BRANCH) and it shall be out of that place
which himself shall make choice of, and he shall build the Church of God, into
a just fabric (your Temple now to be raised, and your Builders that are now in
hand with the work, shall be Types and Figures of it.)

13. It is he, that shall build that spiritual Temple of the Lord. It is he
that shall purchase to Himself great Honor, and Glory, and a name above every
name. And he shall have not a crown only, like your High Priest, but a throne
of Glory upon which he shall sit and rule, remaining a Priest for ever, and a
Kingly Priest, a Priest upon his throne. And the counsel of Peace shall
proceed in virtue of both those Titles, and Dignities, that of His Kingdom, and
that of His Priesthood.

14. There shall be crowns also, as for the High Priest, so for the honorable
memory of others, that have found favor with God, for their good endeavors
about the outward Temple, now in hand: by name for Helem, for Tobijah, for
Iedajah, and for Hen, the Son of Zephaniah. And these crowns shall be hung up
in the Temple of the Lord, as a memorial of them (with their names to that
purpose expressed upon the crowns.)

15. And (to help on the work, and the ornaments, and honor of the Temple)
many foreiners, and people of remote countries shall come, and contribute
toward this building (as the praeludium to the whole crowds of Gentiles that
shall help to build up the spiritual Temple) And by this you shall know, that I
Zachary, that relate the prophecy of these things, am a true Prophet of the
Lord, and have my Commission from the Lord of Hosts, for what I promise to you,
judge of me by the event. Provided always that you be diligent in obeying the
commands of the Lord your God. For this promise runs under that condition.

CHAP. VII.
ANd it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of the
Lord came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the nineth month, even in
Chisleu:

2 When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer, and Regem-melech, and
their men to pray before the Lord.

3 And to speak unto the Priests which were in the house of the Lord of hosts,
and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating my
self, as I have done these so many years?

4 Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me, saying,

5 Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye
fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years,
did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me?

6 And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for your selves,
and drink for your selves?

7 Should ye not hear the words which the Lord has cried by the former
prophets when Jerusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity, and the cities
thereof round about her, when men inhabited the South of the plain?

8 And the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, saying,

9 Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and show
mercy and compassions every man to his brother.

10 And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the
poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.

11 But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped
their ears, that they should not hear.

12 Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone least they should hear the
law, and the words which the Lord of hosts has sent in his spirit by the
former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts.

13 Therefore it is come to pass, that, as he cried, and they would not hear,
so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts.

14 But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew
not: thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor
returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate.

CHAP. VII.
1. NOw in the fourth year of King Darius (the second year after they had begun
the structure of the Temple) the word of the Lord was again revealed unto
Zachary, in the fourth day of the ninth month, which is called the Month
Chisleu, and contains part of November, and of December And it did so, upon
this occasion.

2. There was sent to the Temple (and to the Priests there) about that time
Serezer may signify a Treasurer (...) and Regem-melech a Prince about the
King. And they seem to be men of great place, and repute, that are employed
upon this errand.
Serezer, and Regem-melech, and some Attendants upon them, to tender their
humble devotions before the Lord, in the behalf of those that lived out of the
City, and had sent them thither upon that service.

3. And withal a message they had to the Priests that ministered in the Temple
of the Lord of Hosts, and to the Prophets, Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
(who were to advise and direct them in matters of scruple or controversy.)
This Message came in the name of the People, who, being desirous to be
satisfied in some doubts about fasting (in which it seems all had been well, if
their care to make it a true and acceptable fast unto God, had been as much as
their desire, and power to enact it and enjoin it, as a holy Fast) and being
all considered as one body, they ordered their message to be delivered in
these, or the like terms. Shall I continue the times of fasting and mourning,
which I imposed upon my self under the captivity, and have since most strictly
observed? whereof that is one in the fifth Month, (upon the tenth of July, in
the sad Jer. 52. 12.
remembrance of the destroying, and firing of the Temple by Nebuzaradan;
Captain of the guard, to Nebuchadnezar) Shall I still afflict my self, and
observe my wonted abstinence from pleasant meats, and other matters of delight,
huc enim alludit verb. (...) separari.
like a Nazarite for that day, as I have now kept it upon the return of that
day, for many years?

4. Then (as I was saying) came the word of the Lord of Hosts unto me,
furnishing me with an answer to that question of the People, after some things
to be premised upon occasion of their Fast, and saying unto me.

5. Speak to all the people of the land, and among them to the Priests too, (to
those of Jerusalem, as well as to those out of the City, that have sent these
men hither) and say. When you fasted, and mourned in the fifth Month, in
remembrance of the destruction of the Temple: Jer. 52. 12. 4. Reg. 25. Zach. 8.
19. Jer. 41. 2.
and in the seventh Month, in memorial of the death of Godoliah, and so in
the other Months, in like pretended humble service, for these seventy years of
your captivity. Did I require those Fasts? or, when they were voluntarily
undertaken, did they tend, as they should do, to my honor and glory, by your
true humbling, and bettering of your selves upon those days? For, your Fasts,
without that, are, in themselves, nothing so pleasing, and acceptable to me, as
you may vainly conceive.

6. For, as at other times, when you eat, and drink at your liberty, no
advantage accrews to my honor, out of that feasting of yours, barely in it
self considered (without any other consequence of your due returns of
thankfulness, and obedience, for the blessing of that plenty) so at these
times, when you fast, that fasting, in its self adds nothing to me, nor is it
any way considerable in my esteem.

7. Should you not rather Verbum hic subintelligitur ex usitatiss. apud hebr.
verborum elleipsi.
have observed the divine commands so plainly, and openly delivered unto you,
by the Prophets that have gone before us, when Jerusalem was at ease, and
abounded in peace, and plenty. And when the Cities and Towns all about her:
when the more mountainous, and Southern parts, that were then entirely
possessed, and when with them the lowest and fruitfullest countries in the
plain had the same benefit of a quiet and secure repose, and a rich habitation.

8. And the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying.

9. Thus spoke the Lord of Hosts (by former Prophets) saying. In your public
places of Judgment, proceed according to the rules of true Justice and Equity,
(without any regard to silthy lucre, or to the prejudice of Affection.) And in
your private actions, and commerce with one another, show that kindness and
compassion, that should be expected among Brethren, of the same stock and
alliance, and of the same Religion, and Profession.

10. Let there be no injuring, or oppressing of the widow, the orphan, the
stranger, or any that are poor and afflicted amongst you. And do not, so much
as in your hearts devise or conceive any mischeivous intention against one
another. All this I commanded your Fathers, by the former Prophets.

11. But they would not hear of that ear, they shrunk up the shoulder, and in
plain rebellion turned their backs upon their good guides: and followed those
courses that would make their cares duller, for any holy counsel that called
for this obedience.

12. And, thus by degrees, they made their hearts (as it were in a set
opposition to all exhortations of obedience) as hard as flint or any the
hardest, and most durable stone: that (...) lapidem allquem durum, longoque
tempore durantem significat a (...)
there might be no admittance for the voice of the law, and the precepts, which
the Lord of Hosts sent them by those that were, to that purpose raised up, and
enlightened by his holy Spirit: for such were all your former Prophets. And
this wilful and obstinate rebellion of theirs could not but draw down the
heavy and just indignation of the Lord of Hosts.

13. And accordingly, you see, it came to pass, that as they suffered God to
call upon them, and would return him no answer of obedience: so when their own
miseries forced them to call for divine assistanee, then did I refuse to answer
their desires, says the Lord of Hosts.

14. And I (...) and deturbavi, vel dispersi eos, velut temp^st^^e. Nequ^ n.
est in Niph. sed ^^ K^^ (punct^s non obstantibus quae dilatau^^^ p^opl^
guttural^^ in (...) divisit eos, in Kal. 1. P^^al. 3^. 6. and 14 3. pio (...)
dispersed them in mine anger, as if it had been with a mighty whirlwind into
several nations, which they never knew before: and their own land, (after
their deportation into other parts) was left waste and desolate, like a
wilderness behind them. There was not so much as a passenger to be seen either
going thither, or returning from that place, 2. Paral. 36, 21.
that had been so much frequented. Such and so heavy was the solitude and
barrenness of that land, that had been accounted the delight, and Paradise of
the whole earth.

CHAP. VIII.
1. AGain the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying,

2. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy,
and I was jealous for her with great fury.

3 Thus says the Lord, I am returned unto Zion: and will dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a City of truth, and the mountain of
the Lord of hosts, the holy mountain.

4 Thus says the Lord of hosts. There shall yet old men, and old women dwell
in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very
age.

5 And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the
streets thereof.

6 Thus says the Lord of hosts, if it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant
of this people in these days, should it also be mavelous in mine eyes? says
the Lord of hosts.

7 Thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will save my people from the
east-countrey, and from the west-countrey.

8 And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in
righteousness.

9 Thus says the Lord of hosts, Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in
these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day
that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that the temple
might be built.

10 For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast,
neither was there any peace to him that went out, or came in, because of the
affliction: for I set all men, every one against his neighbor.

11 But now I will not be unto the residue of this people, as in the former
days says the Lord of hosts.

12 For the seed shall be prosperous, the vine shall give her fruit, and the
ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew, and I
will curse the remnant of this people to possess all these things.

13 And it shall come to pass, that a^^ ye were a curse among the heathen, O
house of Judah, and house of Israel: so will I save you, and ye shall be a
blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.

14 For thus says the Lord of hosts, As I thought to punish you, when your
fathers provoked me to wrath says the Lord of hosts, and I repented not;

15 So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and to
the house of Judah: fear ye not.

16 These are the things that ye shall do, Speak ye every man the truth to his
neighbor: execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.

17 And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and
love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord.

18 And the word of the Lord of hosts, came unto me, saying.

19 Thus says the Lord of hosts, The fast of the fourth month, and the fast
of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth shall be
to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts: therefore love
the truth and peace.

20 Thus says the Lord of hosts, it shall yet come to pass, that there shall
come people, and the inhabitants of many cities.

21 And the inhabitants of one city shbll go to another, saying, Let us go
speedily to pray before the Lord and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also.

22 Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts
in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.

23 Thus says the Lord of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that
ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations even shall take
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we
have heard that God is with you.

CHAP. VIII.
1. ANd the commands of the Lord of Hosts were thus expressed further upon the
same occasion, and to make way for a satisfactory answer to their question.

2. Thus says the Lord of Hosts. As my great wrath, and justice upon my own
people followed upon the greatness of those sins, which were mentioned before:
so now the greatness of my jealousy for Sion, the seat on my Jewish Church,
and my great anger no now against her, but for her shall be felt by he^ enemies.

3. For, Thus says the great Jehovah, I return now to Sion, and to my former
love, and v. 14 and 15.
compassion, that I showed to her of old. And I will dwell again in the midst
of Jerusalem: my gracious presence, and daily favors shall make them appear
like my own domestic Servants, which shull gain Jerusalem the title of the
City where the true Religion is professed and the Mount of the lord of Hosts
where you build your Temple unto me, shall be called by the name of the holy
Mountain, because of the peculiar presence of my Holiness, and the daily
observance of your sacred Duties, and Devotions in that place.

4. And (concerning your temporal blessings) thus also, says the Lord of
Hosts, there shall be seen again they had now living^ very aged men, as
Zorobabel, Josuah the H.P. Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah.
in the streets of Jerusalem, Men venerable for their age, and grave Matrons,
sitting there to refresh themselves: and every one of them with a staff in
their hands to support their feeble bodies, because of their extreme old age,
and the extraordinary number of year,, to which they shall attain.

5. And with this grave sight of your Ancients, sitting before your doors, you
shall have another that will please you well: This time of peace, and security
lasted long. 2. Macc. 3. 1.
great store of young children, that shall fill up your spacious streets with
several companies of young boys, and girls, here and there recreating
themselves with their merry, and innocent sports.

6. And do not startle at it, says the Lord of Hosts, for though this may
seem a strange and wonderful thing, in the apprehension of this poor remnant
of the People, that are now returned out of the land of their captivity: yet
nothing should seem impossible for me, says the Lord of Hosts.

7. And look not upon your selves alone, that are first returned, and can yet
make up but a little company, for thus says the Lord of Hosts: I will
wonderfully provide for the welfare of my people in the Eastern and Western
parts.

8. I Will conduct them safely hither again from all parts of the world, whither
they are dispersed, and they shall dwell in the midst of my holy City
Jerusalem. And they shall be my peculiar people, and I will be their powerful
God. Truly and justly shall I make this good to them, by my blessing upon
them: and they to me, by the true worship of my name, and their just dealing,
and conversing with one another.

9. And therefore, Go on cheerfully in the building of my Temple, which you
have now begun, says the Lord of Hosts, you that live to see these days, and
hear the comfortable words of these late Prophesies, from the mouth of us the
Prophets, that were in the times that the foundation of the house of the Lord
of Hosts was laid, and that God has raised up, to incite and encourage you in
the building, and perfecting of his holy Temple.

10. And, to add the more life, and speed to your undertakings, I am enjoined
to tell you, that, whereas before you settled your selves in earnest to this
good work, your men and your cattle at home had little reward of their labor,
in matter of Husbandry (ye toyled and took pains with little, or no success)
and they that ventured further abroad, could find no peace, and quiet, by
reason of some affliction or other that was ready to overtake them: beside the
many quarrels and distractions which by my permission, and connivence rose up
amongst you.

11. Now, since I perceive your readiness, and alacrity, to proceed in the
building of my House, I will not show my self so averse, as formerly I have
been, from this remnant of the captivity, says the Lord of Hosts.

12. For you shall be (...)
a generation, that shall live in peace and prosperity. Your Vines shall be
fruitful, and your land shall bring plenty of corn. For the Heavens shall drop
that dew, which shall make them so. And the remnant that return from Babylon
will I make to be eyewitnesses, and owners of all this felicity.

13. So shall it come to pass, that as you of the house of Judah and Israel
were held accursed of all nations, by reason of the great misery, that your
great sins had brought upon you: so, upon this safety, and prosperity, which I
shall give unto you, you shall be accounted a Nation, that God has now blessed
with extraordinary favors. Therefore do not faint and give back from your good
intentions, but proceed on cheerfully, and courageously in the building of the
Temple.

14. For, thus says the Lord of Hosts, As there was a time when my thoughts
and intentions were chiefly set upon afflicting of this nation for those sins,
by which your forefathers provoked me to anger: and I had no mind to repent of
it (I would not (...) diverted.)

15. So now, in these times of amendment, and of a more readiness to go on in
my service, I am willing to repent, and to put on other resolutions of doing
good, and bestowing favors upon Judah and Jerusalem. And therefore be not
discouraged, nor taken off from your good beginnings.

16. And let these be the (...) de quo vide Thesaurum n. heb. in (...)
actions, wherein you shall practice and entertain your selves. Let every man
use candor and integrity in those things which refer to others and himself:
And you that, as more public persons, are entrusted in your gates, which are
your courts of Justice; pass your sentences according to that truth, and
equity, which will be the best means to procure and prolong your peace and
prosperity.

17. And much more must you be careful, that there be no studying of mischief
against one another: or delighting to deceive others, or dishonor my name by
false oaths. For howsoever wicked men may love and take pleasure in such
things, yet are i. Those things.
they all of them the object of my hatred, says the Lord of Hosts.

18: After this, for a full and clear solution of the queries, and demands,
that were the errand of Sarezer, end Regem-melech, the word of the Lord was
made known unto me, to this sense.

19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts. Your fast of the fourth month, Jer. 57. 6,
7, etc. 39,
which you observed in the sad remembrance of Jerusalem at that time taken by
the King of Babylon: and your fast of the fifth month, Jer. 52.12.
wherein the Temple was consumed by fire, and the City laid ruinous, and
desolate: and your fast in the seventh month, which put you in mind, Jer. 41.
1.2. 4. Reg, 25.25.
how your noble Patron, and Commander Godoliah was treacherously and unhappily
brought to an untimely death: and your fast of the tenth month, Jer. 39. 1.
and 52. 4. 4. Reg, 25, 1.
in which the Babylonians began their siege against Jerusalem: All these days
of fasting shall be now to your whole nation, upon your return from Babylon.
festival days, set times of merry and joyful Solemnities. In all which, let
not your joy obliterate the memory of your duty: forget not to deal heartily
and truly with your neighbors, and to entertain one another with the mutual
offices of true love and courtesy, as well as of jollity, and feasting.

20. And to encourage you yet more in this: acceptable duty of mutual love,
thus says the Lord of Hosts of that love, and affection, wherein your own
people yet abroad, V. 7. and 8.
and others with them shall be drawn to you, and to your Country. You are yet
but a few: but the time is coming on, when many shall come hither form remoter
parts, and that are now inhabitants of many feveral Cities.

21. For, they that dwell in one City shall impart their desires to the
inhabitants of another City, for a journey toward the holy land, and they
shall say, Come, let us go thither to tender our humble supplications before
the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts in his holy worship, and service, and the
precepts of his law. Then the several parties thus invited shall say (every man
undertaking it in his own person) I shall willingly make one for so good a
voyage.

22. Thus shall many, and mighty nations come to Jerusalem, to seek the Lord of
Hosts, in this Temple which you are building: and to be informed by your
Priests, and Levites, which is the true way of his service, according to his
divine laws: and as a good means to that, to offer up their hearty prayers for
a blessing from the Almighty.

23. For, thus again says the Lord of Hosts, Ten men of several languages, and
nations shall then take hold of the skirts of you that are Jews, and, in that
action, deliver their desire to you, and your Country, saying. Let us attend
you to your happy home in the holy land, Psalm. 128. 3. 4.
for we have heard how wonderfully God has been with you, restoring you to
your former happiness in your own possessions, repressing your enemies, and
settling the ancient forms of his holy worship, as he had foretold by his holy
Prophets. And He that foretells and fullfills such things, shall be the God
that we would fain serve, and obey, as you do.

CHAP. II.
1. THe burden of the word of the Lord in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus
shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel
shall be toward the Lord.

2 And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus and Zidon, though it be very
wise.

3 And Tyrus did build her self a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the
dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

4 Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea,
and she shall be devoured with fire.

5 Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also shall see it, and be very
sorrowful, and Ekron: for her expectation shall be ashamed, and the king shall
perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

6 And a bastard shll dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the
Philistines.

7 And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from
between his teeth: but he that remains, even he shall be for our God, and he
shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Iebusite.

8 And I will enc amp about mine house because of the army, because of him that
passes by, and because of him that returns; and no oppressor shall pass
through them any more; for now have I seen with mine eyes.

9 Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold,
thy king comes unto thee: he is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding
upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass.

10 And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse frrm Jerusalem,
and the battle-bow shall be cut off, and he shall speak unto the heathen: and
his dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the river even unto the ends of
the earth.

11 As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.

12 Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope, even to day do I declare,
that I will render double unto thee:

13 When I have bend Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up
thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a
mighty man:

14 And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the
lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with
whirlwinds of the South.

15 The Lord of Hosts shall defend them, and they shall devour, and subdue with
sling-stones, and they shall drink and make a noise as through wine, and they
shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the altar.

16 And the Lord their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his
people, for they shall be as the stone, of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon
his land.

17 For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty? corn shall
make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.

CHAP. IX.
1. A Burdensome Prophecy to the enemies of Israel. I shall now acquaint thee,
O Iudaea, with a sad, and heavy Prophecy; nothing like that prophecy of
peace, and prosperity, which I delivered to thy self. And it is the word of the
Lord Hadrach plerisque propr. nomen Syriae. sed potest hic esse and nomen
commune nam (...) sonat penetrale tuum.
for Hadrach: that is, it concerns Syria one of thy places of retirement,
whither thou have often fled, to secure thy self against the assaults of a
sudden enemy. And it concerns Damascus too, the Metropolis of Syria, and her
best refuge and (...) requiem ejus.
repose for security, whereon she relies, when a storm is coming upon her self.
For, Deo est oculus homines spectans, vel oculus hominis Deu^^ spect. debet.
The eyes of the Lord are upon all men, and all should fix their eyes upon him.
(His power, and providence, and justice watching over others ^pro sicut, ut
alibi.
as well as over you, the Tribes of Israel, that are his peculiar people.

2. Hamath also (or Antiochia) must be brought within the limits and compass
of this prophecy, as it borders upon Syria, and the maritine parts, Tire and
Sidon too, though they seem so wondrous wife that they challenge a greater
interest in wisdom, then other countries must do.

3. Howsoever Tyrus ( Ezekiel. 28. 3, 4, 5.
to be like her name) has built her self a Hebr. elegans paranomasia in (...)
and (...) Tyrum and rupem signif. (...) munitionem.
strong defense, and (knowing what are the sinews of war) has heaped up silver
like dust, and the finest gold in such plenty, as if it were with them as
ordinary Ezekiel. 28. 4.
as the mire of the streets (like the store, that your nation enjoyed in the
days of Solomon.)

4. Yet, you will wonder in the end, how God will (...) utrumque significat ad
paupertatem redigere a (...) and possessione ejicere a (...)
bring her to poverty, and cast her out of those possessions, (...) in genesis
robur, vel propagnaculum signif.
and give her wooden walls wherein she trusts so much, and with them her strong
fort, another piece of her confidence, such a blow, as shall cast them
altogether into the sea, while Tyrus her self, with all her rich buildings,
shall be This was done by Alexanders forces.
consumed with fire.

5. Ashkelon will trembie, to see her neighbors houses thus set on fire, and
Gaza will be in as much, or more perplexity. So will Ekron, for shame that she
has failed of her expectation, presuming that the enemy should have had such
a blow given them, by the subtle and potent Tyrians, as should have freed them
from the fear of all danger. Gaza, after this shall no longer be ruled by one,
that shall live in the state of a King, rather then the Commander of such a
little compass of ground. And Ashkelon shall be laid wast, and, for a long
time after this, not be inhabited.

6. Then shall Azotus be possessed by a kind of bastard-brood, a mixed and
mungril people, out of the conflux from several Nations. And all the neighbor
parts of Palestine shall have such a share in this calamity, as shall take down
their haughty pride, and insulting over my people Israel.

7. And I will take away the bloody, and abominable language out of the mouth
of the domineering Philistims, who delight as much in horrid, and cruel
threats, as if it did them good to chew upon them, and please themselves while
they keep it between their teeth, as if they would set their teeth on work too,
with devouring of others, that are better then themselves. But the remnant of
this fierce, and boasting Nation shall come at last to be subdued, and united
with the people of Israel, and so brought to the service of the true God. And
as the Iebusite being first become a Proselyte, was thereupon made capable of
places of dignity, and command amonst the people of God, so shall it be with
the Philistine, and so with the Ekronite, that in that captivity shall be in a
fair way to become as one of the Princes, and Rulers of Judah. 1 Maccab. 5. 66.


8. And I will make my Angela encamp about my Temple, to preserve it from all
hostile and violent attempts, and sudden incursions of such as may go, or
return any way near unto it. And none shall be suffered to have any passage
hereafter toward those parts, with power to tyranise, and usurp upon them. For
mine eyes are now and ever open to observe, and prevent the dangers, which
otherwise might fall upon this holy place (as I promised that I would be, at
the consecrating of your first Temple.)

9. And when I cast my all-seeing eye upon times yet more remote from your
days, then I may well say of your deliverance from spiritual, and greater
enemies. Rejoice exceedingly O Daughter of Sion: shout and sing aloud for joy,
O Daughter of Jerusalem. For the Messiah, thy long-expected King, (of whom the
best of all thy Kings heretofore were but types and figures) comes to deliver
thee from thy invisible enemies. He is (...) and (...) Iustitiae notionem
habent and Misericordia. Sic Psalm. 24. 5. and 71. 1. and alibi pro misericordia.
just, and merciful, and in his Justice and Mercy brings salvation to you that
shall be justified through him. Though he come not in the pomp of regality, but
poor enough in outward show: and not in the flourish, and noise of Ergo (...)
servatus. s. a seipo sua ipsius virtute, and sic alios servare potest.
military forces, and horses prepared for war, but riding upon an ass, even
upon a colt, the foal of an ass, which is a beast, that you use for more
peaceable, and quiet journies.

10. Then will I take away all the need of chariots and horses, and other
outward military forces from Ephraim and Judah, or her Metropolis of Jerusalem,
and the bow with other weapons of war will I knap in sunder. And this King,
your Messiah, shall preach true peace to the nations of the world. And his
spiritual kingdom shall be enlarged from Sea to Sea, and from the Rivers to the
ends of the earth.

11. And as for thee also Est n. (...) pronomen in faem. ideoque nomen fam,
respondens sub-intelligendum. and
O my Church, by the blood of the covenant that I have made with (...) (
testamenti tui) cum pronom. faem. ad eandem Ecclesiam refertur.
thee, Praet. pro futuro in Prophetiis.
I will redeem, and deliver thy prisoners from the infarnal pit, wherein is no
water (no hope of refreshment.)

12. Therefore repent, and apply your selves unto God your only help and
refuge, you that are such Vincti spel. ex hebraeismo pro sperantes.
prisoners, as are not without a good hope, and modest assurance of divine
succor, and relief. For I declare to you and assure you, this very Dies pro
tempore. ut Ital. hora.
time, wherein I have showed the fruit of your Messiah his coming in such
humility, that I will return what he shall merit, in a double testimony of my
love to every one of you (that shall not only have deliverance from what ye
might fear; but the assurance too of eternal felicity.)

13. To make way to this by the public preaching of the Gospel, for subduing
the Nations to my spiritual kingdom; I will pick out my first Champions from
among you of Judah: so that Judah shall be like my bow, that I bend, and make
ready against mine enemies, and Ephraim like my quiver which I will fill full
of arrows to be shot against all opposers. And I will raise thy Sons, O Sion,
against thy Sons, O Graecia, ( i. the first Preachers that shall be Jews, to
reduce the Graecians with the first under the easy yoke of the Messiah) And I
will make thee, O Sion, to be like the sword of a mighty Commander (for by my
word in thy Ephesians. 6. 14. (...) i. (...), est verbum Dei.
mouth, which is my spiritual sword, I will reduce other nations unto my
kingdom.)

14. And the great Jehovah shall easily be seen to be a defense over these
Champions of Iudaea, and to fight for them as out of a tower and fortress
higher then their enemies. His arrows and other instruments of this warfare
shall go forth as quick as lightning. The Lord himself shall be amongst them
and sound the trumpet, to give the sign of battle, and shall set upon his
enemies with storming like the violent Southern tempests, that lay all even
before them.

15. Even the Lord of Hosts himself shall be their shield, and buckler to
defend them, and they shall feed upon the spoils of their enemies. And as
David did Goliath, with little stones out of his sling, so shall they by weak,
and unliekly means vanquish and subdue the greatest that come against them. So
that they shall be like those A rhetorical expression of a Conquest, to be here
understood of a spiritual warfare.
Conquerors that have their revenge satisfied with the blood of their enemies,
and therefore shout and triumph, like those that are filled with storng wine.
For they shall drink their fill of it, till they are as full as your silver
bowls Number. 7. 19.
in the Sanctuary replenished with the holy offering, and the Levit. 4. 25. and
16. 18.
horns of the Altar, whereon the blood of the sacrifice is so plentifully
poured.

16. For, in those days, their God the great Jehovah shall save and protect
his Soldiers in these spiritual combats, as the sheep of his flock, and his
own people, that are the sheep of his pasture. And these sheep shall prove As
their Master is the Lamb of God, and the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. vide c.
10. 3.
Lions, and Conquerors for the Lord of Hosts in his land. And the Ensigns
carried before them shall be with Coronae gemmatae, ut recte Bootius n. exponit
(...)
crowns set with pearls (an emblem of the last reward of these holy Victories,
specially to be set upon the head of those, that are great Actors, and
sufferers in so great a work.

17. For, how great is the goodness of Him, that is the Lord of these mighty
Hosts? and how great is the beauty of his glory? that will cheer them up at
last, and put such joy into their hearts, as the young men use to (...) a (...)
canere, aut exclamare prae gaudio.
express in their shouts, when they bring home the last corn of a plentiful
harvest: and the young maidens in their Songs and Acclamations at the end of a
happy Vintage, that has furnished them with good store of new wine.

CHAP. X.
1 ASk ye of the Lord rain in the time of the later rain, so the Lord shall
make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the
field.

2 For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie. and have
told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a
flock, they were troubled, because there was no shepherd.

3 Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the goats: for
the Lord of hosts has visited his flock the house of Judah, and has made them
as his goodly horse in the battle.

4 Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the
battlebow, out of him every oppressor together.

5 And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire
of the streets in the battle, and they shall fight, because the Lord is with
them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

6 And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of
Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them:
and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their
God, and will hear them.

7 And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall
rejoice, as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad, their
heart shall rejoice in the Lord.

8 I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them: and they
shall increase as they have increased.

9 And I will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me in far
countries, and they shall live with their children, and turn again.

10 I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out
of Assyria, and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon, and
place shall not be found for them.

11 And he shall pass through the sea with afliction, and shall smite the
waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and the pride of
Assyria shall be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart away.

12 And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in
his name, says the Lord.

CHAP. X.
1. THe Prophesies of your plenty, and prosperity presuppose the continuance of
your service, and devotion. Therefore if you would live in plenty, and have
your husbandry to prosper, Let your hearty prayers beg rain of the Lord in the
time of the latter rain, which you would have for the advantage of your corn.
For it is God that ordains the cloud for that use. It is he that pours you out
Pluvia imbris pro larga. sic n. nomina geminata ad significationis (...)
usurqantur.
plentiful shours of rain, to help on the increase (...) generalo, pro omno
fruge.
of all kind of fruit, in your fields, and (...)
for the good of every one.

2. For, if you forsake this divine help, and seek help from your idols, your
own former experience in that, can show you, what you may expect. For, the
answers of your idols have ever proved to be mere vanity, and their diviners
flattered you with visions of that, which was but falsehood and delusion; and so
led you on with fine talk, sweetened with imaginary hopes, or rather dreams of
comfort. And accordingly they that relied upon those idle prophesies of future
solace, were carried away captives, like silly sheep, that had no careful guide
and Shepherd to look to them: and in the end, (...)
found nothing but that trouble and misery which attends such transportations
into a strange land.

3. Your Princes and Governors should be your watchful guides and Shepherds,
therefore in such times of supine neglect I was most offended with them (as you
may read in the strange punishment of some of your Kings) And so will I still
visete such (...) hirci, vel arietes majores.
goats and rams, which rather disorder, then rule, and lead the flock, as they
should do. But the Lord of Hosts will mercifully visit his poor deluded, and
neglected flock, the house of Judah. And (when I send them against their
enemies, they Vide c. 9. 16.
shall not be like weak, and silly sheep, but) I will make them Hic n. est
elleipsis adjectivi. ut Apoc. 6. 12. (...) luna (rubicunda) ut sanguis.
valiant, and strong, and courageous, like the warlike horse, (...) pro (...)
cujus gloriade qua. Job 39, 22. etc. Sic Judah tempore Maccab.
whose pride and glory it is to be most forward in war against the troops of
the enemy.

4. Out of this my flock and people, will I bring such as, in your civil
discords, shall be like the sing. pro plur.
corner stones, that unite, and compact the rest together. And out of this
others that shall be like nails, and pegs, that fasten the several parts of the
fabric. For they shall be stays, and supports to fix or keep up those that
are weak, and wavering. And yet more, out of this (for your expeditions against
a foreign enemy) I will raise up such as shall be of as necessary use and
strength there as the bow and arrows be in the day of battle. And so what
Tyrants, or oppressors soever would oppose your nation they shall altogether
be forced to be gone Ludit in verbis (...) nam (...) and prodire ( sensu
superiori) significat, and (hoc sensu) exire vel abire. Sic (...) ab eo, and ex
eo.
from you. (And all these main props, and defenders of your state, from your
temporal enemies, shall be but the types and figures of such, as shall be used
as the means of your deliverie from your spiritual enemies: the great Messiah
himself being the head sa. 28. 16.
cornerstone, and others to be employed by, and under Him, for the general
good, as he shall please to order it.

5. And these which I will thus raise up for your defense, shall be, in your
battles, like valiant Captains and Commanders, that triumph over their enemies,
and trample them under their feet, like the mire in the streets. They shall
encounter them to the purpose. For the great Jehovah is with them, as their
great Commander and Protector. And Antioch his forces.
they that come against them with several troops of Horse (wherein they place
their confidence) shall carry shame and confusion away with them, instead of
victory.

6. Thus will I add strength and courage to the house of Judah) whence you
have your greatest supply for Soldiers of command) and protect the house of
Joseph or Ephraim, (that furnish you with your ordinary fighting men) I will
(...)
bring them off safe from their battles, and make them return with honor. This
I will do, out of my mercy and compassion toward them. And so they shall be
safe, and prosperous, as they were in former times, before I cast them out of
their own Country. For, I am the Lord their God, and I will be ready to hear
and supply them with what they want and desire of me.

7. And they of Ephraim shall quit themselves like stout warriers: and their
heart shall be as cheerful in that hard employment, as the heart of a strong
man, newly refreshed with wine. Their very children shall take notice of their
fathers alacrity, and readiness to the war, and express it in their own joy
and forwardness. Thus all of them shall heartily rejoice in the favor and
protection of the Lord.

8. I will whistle for them that are not yet returned from Babylon, and Egypt
(as the Shepherd does for his flock and gather them together into my own fould
(the place that I haee chosen out for my own worship) For I have resolved to
redeem, and deliver them from their enemies, and here they shall be as
numerous, and as prosperous again as ever they were.

9. ^ pro enim, and futurum pro imperfecto, ut alibi saepe and cum (...) and
sine (...)
For I dispersed them obroad into several and remote nations, and there they
remembered to serve me. Therefore now will I remember them, and theirs. They and
their children shall survive and return to their own home, and their ancient
possessions.

20. I will bring them back from the land of Egypt, and gather them together
from the land of Assyria (by several ways, and instruments of my providence)
and reduce them to their Gilead (that furnished them with rich balms) and
Lebanon that stored them with strong timber. And upon their return, they shall
swell into such multitudes, that upon their own inheritance, there will hardly
be found room enough, wherein to contein them.

11. And (to accelerate and facilitate their return) ille populus.
they shall find passage through the streights of the sea: for God shall
repress the waves of the sea by his mighty power, as if his own stroke made
them give way to these passengers. And he shall dry up the deeper channels of
the Euphrates in S. Script. saepe vocatur fluvius (...). and Huc alluditur
Apoc. 16. 12. ubi fluvius qui hic (...) per Euphratene exponitur. vide Isai.
11. 15. 16.
river (Euphrtaes) i. rather then they shall not have an easy passage, the
waves shall give back, and the deeps shall be dried up, to make way for them.
(All which may represent in a figure a more conspicuous conduct Vide Meadi. n.
Commentat. in Apocal. ad c. 16. page 272. etc.
over that great river of Assyria, in the latter times.) And as you come
forward to your prosperity, so the pride of the Assyrian shall go downward: and
the scepter of Egypt, (to which you were subject, while you were sojurners
there) shall vanish away (the Egyptians shall have no more power, and command
over you.)

12. And I will make my people strong and cheerful in the Lord their God. And
all their actions shall they prosperously undertake and finish, in that name,
says the great Jehovah. (...) (ambulare) ad actiones refertur, sic (...) Marc.
7. 5.


CHAP. XI.
1 OPen thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.

2 Howl fir tree, for the cedar is fallen, because all the mighty are spoiled;
howl, O ye oaks of Bashan, for the forest of the vintage is come down.

3 There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is
spoiled, a voice of the roaring of young lions: for the pride of Jordan is
spoiled.

4. Thus says the Lord my God, Feed the flock of the slaughter.

5 Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that
sell them, say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich: and their own shepherds
pity them not.

6 For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, says the Lord: but lo,
I will deliver the men every one into his neighbors hand, and into the hand of
his king, and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will not
deliver them.

7 And I will feed the flock of the slaughter, even you, O poor of the flock:
and I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I called
Bands, and I fed the flock.

8 Three shepherds also I cut off in one month, and my soul loathed them, and
their soul also abhorred me.

9 Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it die: and that that
is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest eat, every one the flesh
of anoanother.

10 And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my
covenant which I had made with all the people.

11 And it was broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock that waited
upon me, knew that it was the word of the Lord.

12 And said I unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if not,
forbear: so they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.

13 And the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I
was prised at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to
the potter in the house of the Lord.

14 Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands, that I might break the
brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

15 And the Lord said unto me, Take unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish
shepherd.

16 For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not visit those
that be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is
broken, nor feed that that stands still: but he shall eat the flesh of the
fat, and tear their claws in pieces.

17 Woe to the idol shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword shall be upon his
arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye
shall be utterly darkened.

CHAP. XI.
1. BUt, your hearty obedience unto me, and to these pleasant days of victory,
and prosperity will not last for ever. Some days of heavy First by Antiochus,
then by the Romans.
suffering there will be, and a sad visitation of the Temple, and of the City
When thou O Jerusalem, that have brought Vnde civitas, and Templum sub nomine
Libani, ut Hab. 2. 17.
so much of Lebanon within thy gates for the fabric of thy Temple, and other
stately buildings, that thou may borrow the name too of another Lebanon, 1
Mccab. 1. 21.
must be forced to open thy gates, and with other delights, expose all the
store which thou broughtest from Lebanon, to the pleasure of a cruel enemy:
that with 1 Maccab. 1. 31.
fire and sword will consume thy Palaces of Cedar, and destroy the rich owners
of those fair habitations.

2. There will be matter of fear and lamentation for you of the poorer sort, in
the lesser towns and villages, that stand so thick about Jerusalem, like the
firre-trees about the tall Cedars. For, some of your fairest Cedares in
Lebanon, the Arbores pro Hominibus, Proceriores pro Magnatibus. reliq. pro
plibeiis. Isai. 2. 13. and 14. 8. and 37. 24. Apoc. 8. 7.
rich, and great ones, that are nestled so high) must fall as how as the
ground. And the gallant Citizens, that looked so big upon it, must be humbled
and seek abroad for another place of habitation, while Jerusalem is laid
desolate. You were mounted before, like the oaks of Basan, but you will stoop
and howl, to see your Lebanon, (...) his non vindemiam, sed munitionem, vel
munini^a significare videtur.
your mighty forest cut down, (your populous City, where the rich buildings
were mounted to the height of the proudest trees in the forest.)

3. This lamentation in the forest will cause the howling of the shepherds. l.
the ruins about the Temple and City, must needs be accompanied with the
miserable cry of the nam and Reges (...).
Princes and of the Governors both Ecclesiastical and Civil, whose glory is
quite spoiled, when their glorious City, and Temple suffer so much. Shepherds
did I call them? I should rather have Vide 9. 16.
called them Lions then Shepherds (devourers, rather then feeders and
governors of the people) But now these Lions shall roar, and heavily bemoan
themselves (They that Lion-like, did so Lord it, and domineer over their own
nation, shall endure the injuries, and abuses of strangers, that will domineer
over them) While the pride of Prophetae, per fluvios, regiones saepe
intelligunt, ut pro Nilum, Egypt^m, pro Euphratem, Assyriam, and hic Iordanem,
Iudaeam.
Iudaea that stretches her self as far as Jordan, is turned to nothing but
misery, and desolation.

4. The sins and disorders that call for such desolation, will make it high
time for the Messiah to come, the true Shepherd of Israel, (of whose care and
government, my exercise of my function among you is but a little shadow) And to
Him thus will my Lord God say, when he sends him to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. Pascere est regere.
Feed and govern these poor sheep, (the Psalm. 95.
people of my pasture, and the sheep of my hands; that, by ill guides, and
pretended Shepherds are so often in danger to become like Sheep ready for the
slaughter.

5. For their Governors, that undertook the care of their welfare, or (as they
would call themselves (...)
the Masters and owners of them, are little better then their Butchers, that
make the best advantage of their sheep, though it be by cutting of their
throats and Ex verbis seq.
selling them to their skin. And yet, all the while, they are never startled at
it, as at that which makes them guilty of any great offense. But, when they
have so sold them, they make a devout face at it: and (as if they conceived,
God himself had liberally conferred upon them, all that unjust gain, and would
take no notice of such faults in them) they put their applause, and hypocrisy
into a solemn form of thanksgiving, and say, Blessed be the Lord, that has
given a happy success to this means, by which I am enriched (which is no
better then to thank God for the success of their wicked and cruel actions.
Thus these Rulers, and Shepherds in name, but Butchers in deed, take no pity,
and so make no spare of the people, when they meet with an occasion, that fits
their own advantage.

6. Neither will I any longer spare them or any in the whole land, that
countenance, or advance their wicked actions, says the Lord: But, you shall
see, I will deliver them into one another hands, to perish by civil
dissentions, and mutual slaughter. And I will give them every man into the
hands of a The Roman Emperor whom the Jews styled not Emperor, but King, whence
he is called (...) in the Revelations.
King of his own choice. (Since they will have no king but Caesar) And their
ruin shall be such as if they were dashed against the earth, and hit that in
their fall. And I will not deliver them (...) (e manu) a^nd Hebr. idem quod, e
vel ex. ut (...) ex inferno.
out of the depth of these calamities.

7. But now will I (...) pascere, pro instruere.
instruct this miserably slaughterd sheep, and among them I will speak to you,
that have the meekness, and innocence, and patience, whereof sheep are the
best emblemes: by representing a visible way of instruction before your eyes.
For this is that which the Lord says unto you. Long since I took to my self
two Shepherds-staves (as two ways of happy government of my people, the sheep
of my fould) The one I call Beauty, or (...)
amiable and pleasant (which is the way of protection from all evil, and
calamities abroad) the other I call Bands, or Binders, which is the way of
keeping them at Unity, and concord at home) Thus I did (...) pav^; eadem
notione, qua supra.
govern my people at first, and it proved happy, and successeful to them, under
their first King, of my own choice.

8. Then, for the ingratitude of the people (my simple, amd straggling flock)
within the (...) unus hebr. pro prima, unde Marc. 16. 2. (...) ex hebraismo.
first month of years (after that good government of my servant David) I began
to impair and cut off somewhat from the glory of their three chief vide. v. 16.
Shepherds, and Governors (their Kings their Priests, and their Prophets) For
my love was much Heb. shortened.
taken off from them, as theirs was now become somewhat (...) aversari. Amb.
fidem non exhibere.
averse, and kept not touch with me.

9. So that I said within my self, I will (...) regere ut v. 4.
govern you no more, by that gentle way of loving, and solicitous care for your
welfare. They that are sickly and scabbed sheep, let them die of the ro^: and
they that are so silly to be snapped up by the wolf, let them be snapped up.
And the rest (that neither die of their own inbred maladies, nor are cut off by
others) let them fall into some frenzy, and devour one another flesh (like
wolves out of their own sold.)

10. And accordingly I took my Shepherds staff, that I styled by the name of
Beauty or Amiable, and cut it in pieces, to signify, that since they had
broken their obligations of duty, I would also break that part of the
Covenant, that concerned my self: wherein I stood conditionally engaged to all
the flock, that should have lived as the people of my pasture, and sheep that
would follow my voice, whithersoever I called them.

11. Thus, and about that (...) pro tempore, ut saepe diximus.
time was the staff and covenant as good as broken on both sides. And in
process of time, when the meek and innocent among the sheep observed, that it
was (...)
so, such as had observed me too, and kept my precepts: when they saw that it
was my doing, and that all these things came to pass by the command of the
Lord --

12. Then I said unto them (as willing to condescend to the giving of a reason
of my actions, and to make them understand, what just cause there was, why I
should at first begin to do what I did, and why I should afterward more and
more go on to desert them) If you are indeed well pleased, that I should be
your Shepherd, tell me plainly what wages I shall receive? And if you think I
deserve nothing, cease from that thought: trouble your selves no further, and
say, you will give me nothing. Now what price do you think they set upon me?
(for so it proved to be, rather then a fair sum, appointed as a reward of my
care, and pains) That which they weighed out for me, was thirty pieces of
silver, that was the price they set me, or rather set upon me, This I Zachary
saw in a vision, but they will make it good. When the Messiah is amongst them,
they will give so much silver, Mat. 26. 15.
to be sure of Him: and they will do it really, and openly, that all the world
may know it.)

13. After this (the prophetical vision going on) the Lord said unto me, Is not
this a goodly sum, whereat they prise me? They might have given it to the
potter, for one of the worst brickle vessels, that you use about the Temple.
And to the Potter let it go. Let it be so cast away, as a sum fitter for the
reward of some mean employment, then as wages for me. So I took the thirty
pieces of silver (as I was commanded in the vision) and threw them to the
potter, that has his workhouse, and figulinam in tellige proxime templum ubi
siguli vasa in usus Templi fabricabant, and in quam projiciebantur fracta
fictilia, aliaeque sordes.
his field, near the Temple of the Lord.

14. Then it pleased God to proceed to the breaking of the second staff, and to
say. I will even break asunder my other Shepherds staff too, to which I gave
the name of Bands, and This began in the rent made at the choice of Jeroboam.
so dissolve the unity, and brotherly concord, that formerly had been between
Judah, and Israel (the two tribes and the ten tribes) as the Sons of one
father, coming all out of the loins of Jacob.

15. Then said the Lord unto me, yet we will have somewhat more of the
Shepherd. Go, and get thy self (...) hebr. generalissima significationis, ut
Scot. gears.
the poor habit and furniture of some silly Shepherd (such as he uses to carry
abroad with him.)

16. For, this is my meaning by that silly Shepherds provision, that (for the
sins of the people) I will often send amongst them silly Sing. pro plur.
Shepherds and Governors in the land, that shall neither have skill, nor will to
attend any thing, but the advancement of their own advantages. They shall not
do their Nam (...) efficium, and cura.
office to take care for the reducing of that which is lost and stragled from
the company, nor seek after the weak lamb, that is left behind, because it
cannot hold out the pace of the rest: nor heal that which is hurt and wounded
by some evil accident: nor feed that, which continues healthful, and free from
hurts. But (providing rather for themselves, then their flock) they shall feed
upon the fattest: and so hurry many of their sheep up and down, at their
pleasure, as if they longed to wear out their very clams, that they might not
be able to stir about, for that which their Shepherds will not provide for them.

17. Woe to such Shepherds (...) ab (...) non, i. nihili vel nullius ut Job. 23.
4. (...)
no Shepherds (that will have the name, and place of Shepherds and Governors;
but nothing else, that is requirable in good Shepherds. Such careless
Shepherds as these leave their flock, to look to themselves, but my curse shall
attend them. Such a Shepherd will I strike with a bright and sharp sword, that
shall break his arm, and dazzle his right eye, so that his arm shall wither, and
be unfit for action, because he would be lazy, where he should not: and his
right eye shall not be able to see any thing, that tends to his own good,
because he he would not look after that, which was for the good of his flock.

CHAP. XII.
1 THe burden of the word of the Lord for Israel, says the Lord, which
stretches forth the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and
forms the spirit of man within him.

2 Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round
about when they shall be in the siege both against Judah, and against Jerusalem.

3 And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all
that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in piece, though all the people of
the earth be gathered together against it.

4 In that day, says the Lord, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and
his rider with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and
will smite every horse of the people with blindness.

5 And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of
Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God.

6 In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among
the wood, and like a torch of a fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the
people round about, on the right hand, and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be
inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.

7 The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the
house of David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify
themselve against Judah.

8 In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that
is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David
shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.

9 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the
nations that come against Jerusalem.

10 And I will pour upon the house David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son,
and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn.

11 In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning
of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.

12 And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of
David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart,
and their wives apart.

13 The family of the house of Levi apart and their wives apart; the family of
Shimei apart, and their wives apart.

14 All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.

CHAP. XII.
1. ANother (...) onerosa Prophetia.
Prophecy, that carries a burden in it, to be laid upon Israel, by the (...)
pro jussu.
command of the great Jehovah. Thus says the great Jehovah, that stretched out
the heavens like a curtain: and fixed the vast Job. 26. 7.
globe of the earth upon nothing: and created the breath of life, which he
breathed first into (...) hic videtur nomen proprium.
Adam, and placed within him, i. who made all, and therefore governed all from
the beginning.

2. You will wonder at the time, when you see all things so brought about by my
providence, that Jerusalem shall become like a drunken cup of giddiness, and
astonishment to all the nations about her (not so much, that others which would
greedily swallow her up, shall taste of that cup, which will work their own
shame, and confusion: but in reference to her self, that she shall do the
actions of As in the times of Antiochus Epiph.
a giddie-headed people) Therefore upon all Judah there shall fall great (...)
affligere.
tribulation, by occasion of that punishment, which shall light first upon
Jerusalem.

3. But about the close of that (...) dies pro tempore.
time (when I have so punished my own people) I will make Jerusalem prove like
a huge weighty stone, to all people that shall go about to disturb her. All
that lift hard at her, shall sooner show their strength in breaking of their
own veins in pieces, then in removing her from that loyalty toward me, and
that state of tranquillity, wherein I shall place her. And this difficulty of
so moving Jerusalem, shall be thus, though all the people of the earth should
be mustered up against her. (And this may be a figure of what shall afterward
happen to the fierce, and ventrous opposers of the mystical Jerusalem, and such
as are Jews within: They that will be lifting at them, and heaving at the true
Messiah (their corner stone) will have but ill success in their vain attempts,
but on whom^soever that stone falls, it shall bruise him to powder.)

4. For, at that time, says the Lord, if they come against my people with
their great forces of horse (wherein they put their confidence, I will strike
all their horses with astonishment, and their riders with fury (as Jerusalem
was struck before, when she had drunk of that cup of giddiness, that exposed
her to ruin.) But toward the house of Judah, at that time, will I open my
watchful, and favorable eye, while I smite their enemies horse-forces with
blindness, (that they may rather engage themselves more, and more in their own
danger, then see how to effect what they subtly plotted, and contrived
against my people.)

5. Then shall the Princes and Champions of Judah say within their hearts, that
the strength of the inhabitants of Jerusalem must be in me: even in the Lord of
Hosts, their God.

6. About that time I will make the Governors of Judah, like a live coal of
fire hebr. inter ligna.
compassed about with dry wood (that can quickly set all about it in a flame)
or like a torch of fire, that is compassed about with sheafs of corn (that will
soon convey the heat and danger to all that is near) Like such a fire shall
they suddenly and fearfully consume all their enemies that compass them about
on the right hand, or on the left. And Jerusalem all the while shall remain
immovable (like V. 3.
the stone we spoke of before) in her own place (where Jerusalem was ever
seated.)

(And so shall that larger Church, whereof Jerusalem is but a figure. It shall
not be removed from that rock, which gives it such support, Mat. 16. 18.
that the gates of hell shall not be able to prevail against.)

7. And the Lord will save the inhabitants of his people in Iudaea, (...)
as he ever did from the beginning, i. by himself, and his own power, and
wisdom, that the honor may be his own, and man may have no part in it: and
that the glory of the house of David, and the glory of the Inhabitants of their
great City of Jerusalem do not magnify it self for the protection of the
people of Judah, as if it were to be ascribed unto them.

8. Thus in those times shall God defend, with his people of Iudaea, the
inhabitants also of Jerusalem (that we may account them, Vt v. 7.
not our Guardians, but the partakers of the same divine protection with us)
and the infirm and inferior sort among them, that you think (...)
likeliest to fall from their station, shall then prove another David (for
valor) (...)
to go before them. And they of the house of David, like men of the repete
(...) praced.
House of God (which is nearest to his care and defense) and like an Angel of
God (that being in near attendance upon his person, and in his holy Temple
above, cannot but be near to all safety and freedom from danger.)

9. Then shall any justice find out ways for the destruction of all those
nations, that have come in hostile manner against Jerusalem.

10. But I will pour upon the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
the graces of my spirit, in such plentiful manner, that many of them shall in
hearty sorrow and contrition, and in Jer. 31. 9.
humble prayer and supplication beg my gracious pardon for what they have done
amiss. And, in a sad repentance, they shall look upon me, whom they have
pierced (not in my Psalm. 22 16. Mat. 27.39. Joh. 19.37.
hands, and feet, and head, and side only, but in my very heart too, with
their wicked and blasphemous words, more then with their spear) And they shall
mourn for Him, that suffered so much by them, before they knew him, to be what
he was^ As bitterly shall they mourn, Jer. 6. 26.
as one would mourn for his (...) pro unigenito vel primogenito, vel unice
dilecto.
firstborn son, or his only son, that has the greatest share in his love,
and affection, (with such sorrow shall they look upon his Passion, that they
may learn to look upon it with love; and with resolution, Heb. 6. 6.
to forbear the piercing him afresh, by continuance in sin. Or else there will
come a time, when they will Apoc. 1. 7.
weep and howl too late, at the sight of him, when he comes in his glory.)

11. But in the first, and more seasonable time, then will there be a great and
heavy lamentation in Jerusalem (which shall be seconded in the Church, that
Jerusalem yet resembles) It shall be like the great mourning for the death of
good 2 Reg. 23. 29. 2 Paral. 35. 24.
Josiah, called the mourning of Hadadrimmon a City, in the valley of Mageddon,

12. And the whole land shall have cause to mourn every family apart. The
families of the house of David apart, and their wives too apart, (as your
custom is, in times of great sorrow and repentance) The families of the house
of Nathan apart, and their wives apart (For what family has not been guilty of
piercing their Messiah. It is not the issue left of the Royal Family, nor the
posterity of the Princely Tribe that can plead an exemption from that guilt.

13. The Families of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart) (For even
the Priests and Levites had as great a hand in it as any other) The Family of
the house One of the posterity of Gershon, reckanod among the first sons of
Levi, 1 Parael. 6. 1. 7. Apoc. 1. 7.
Shemei apart, and their wives apart.

14. And so, in sum, all the several families that remain un-named: every
family apart. and their wives apart: as all, some way or other guilty of that
great offense against the Messiah, whom they have pierced by contributing much
to his heavy sufferings, and therefore should pierce their own hearts with some
deep remorse, and impression of sorrow.

(With these shall the several Families of all the nations in the world, sooner
or later bewail their sins) the chief murderers of our Messiah) which make them
all accessorie, or rather Principals in the Death of Him, that is the God of
Life. And the sooner, the better: but still, as one eye looks upon the grief,
the other looking upon the love, wherewith he was pierced.) For,

CHAP. XIII.
IN that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness.

2. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord of hosts, that I
will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be
remembered and also I will cause the prophets, and the unclean spirit to pass
out of the land.

3. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophecy, then his
father and his mother, that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not live;
for thou spakest lies in the name of the Lord: and his father and ^his mother,
that begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophesies.

4. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Prophets shall be ashamed
every one of his vision, when he has prophesied, neither shall they wear a
rough garment to deceive.

5. But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an husband man: for man taught me
to keep cattle from my youth.

6. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? then he
shall answer, These with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.

7. Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered:
and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.

8. And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, says the Lord, two parts
therein shall be cut off, and die, but the third shall be left therein.

9. And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as
silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my
name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they shall say,
The Lord is my God.

CHAP. XIII.
1. ALl this mourning (wherein their eyes become like fountains of tears) if
it be seasonably undertaken, may end in a great blessing. For Hic etiam, and v.
2. dies pro temporc.
even them shall a fountain be opened to the House of David, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem (the mourners, that were cap. 12, 10.
named before, as a particular instance for the rest) a lavacrum
regenerationis, Isai. 1. 18.
fountain, that shall wash away the guilt of all their sins, though they be
such as have made them most foul, and (...) ut menstruum.
polluted Souls.

2. And then also will the time come, says the Lord of Hosts, wherein I will
begin to take away the very name of Idolatry from off the Earth (by the
conversion of the Gentiles) so that in many places there shall be no more
mention of Idols. And, with them, will I make the false Prophets, and the
Divinations by help of i. Devils, Mat. 10. 1.
unclean Spirits, to vanish out of the lands, that have been polluted with them.

3. And such shall be the common zeal against Idolatry and false Prophets, that
if a man should yet venture upon that way of pretended Prophecy, even his own
Parents shall be ready to call for Justice against him, and tell him, that he
is not worthy to live, because he broacheth false doctrine, under the color of
a message in the name of the Lord. Thus shall his own Father, and Mother that
were the means of his life, become the means of his death too, and, in a zeal
like that of Number. 25. 8. Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
Phineas, presently run him through, as one not to be suffered any longer to
breath, after such a fault against the God of the spirits of all flesh.

4. And, in these days, you shall see it often come to pass, that the
divulgers of false and erroneous doctrine, under the pretense of a Vision, to
usher in what they teach or foretell, shall soon be confuted, and made ashamed
of those ways. Neither shall they venture any more, to take the outward 2.
Reg. 1. 8.
Habit of a Prophet, as a sufficient cloak for their deceiving and misguiding
of others.

5. Nay, when any one of them is examined, whether he be a Prophet, or no, he
shall not dare to avouch it: but he shall rather confess and say, I lay no
claim to the spirit of Prophecy, I am but a plain Husbandman (fitter for
plowing than prophesying) and one man or other has still (...) ut mancipium
possedit, vel instituit, nam (...) significa^ non possidere tantum, sed and
discere, ut in Hiph. discere facere, i. d^cere sic Prove. 4, 5. 7, and 17, 16.
and 18, 15.
trained me up that way, and had me as a servant under him, in that kind of
drudgerie, from my youth upward till now.

6. And, if any one say, but what is the meaning of these marks, that have
taken such deep impression in thy hands? (Are they not such ut apud veteres,
servis, and militibus inusta fuerunt stigmata (ad indicandum cujus erat ^
mancipia, aut cui militabunt) ita and illis etiam, qui Diis Gentium
inserviebant, quo alluditur. Apoc. 13. 16, 17. and ^4, 1. and 7, 3. Ezekiel. 9. 4.
marks, and figures as the false-Prophets have, that acknowledge themselves
devoted to some false Gods? Or shall we call them blows, or (...) stigmata, vel
vulnera
wounds, that have been otherwise received? Then, to purge himself from all
suspicion of Idolatry, he shall say, These were blows indeed, that have made
some impression in me for the better: the signs of such correction as I
deserved, while I was in the house of my Friend. Therefore I shall take them
for no other than love tokens.

7. But now, I will go on with the Prophecy of the death of the Messiah, to
show what more the Lord is pleased to have foretold concerning those passages
of his Passion, that will be quo sensu de B. Virgin, Luc. 2, 35.
like a sword, to pierce him to the heart. Arise, O sword, against the Shepherd
of my flock, says the Lord of Hosts, and against my dear Companion, that is
nearest to my love. Mar. 14, 27.
Smite the Shepherd, and let the Sheep be scattered. Yet, for the same hand,
that dispersed them with that sword, will I return my gentle hand to Ap^stolos
intelligit.
that little innocent stock, that forsook their good Shepherd, out of mere
infirmity (while the storm fell about them.)

8. And for the greater flock, through the whole Earth, this shall come to
pass, says the great Jehovah, that, of those that shall profess themselves
to be of my fold, Two parts and a third, i. a greater proportion, und a less,
ut c. 14, 8.
two parts therein will be cut off, and Luke 8. 13, etc. Matthew. 13, 21,
perish, for want of perseverance: but a third part in it shall continue Luke
8, 15.
to the end, in obedience unto me.

9. And that third part will I lead along under a fiery trial, for by many
temptations, I will 1. Pet. 1,7.
prove them, of what metal they are, as the Goldsmith makes proof of his
silver and gold, (to see what dross there is in them) till they are refined,
as he would have it. And he (...) ( qui) saepe subintelligitur, ut Jer. 17,4,
Thren. 2, in (...) Psalm. 25,12. Prove, 27, 16. 1. Sam. 2, 33.
that under this trial will call upon my name, and so endeavor to improve
himself. I will acknowledge, he is one of my people: and he shall persevere to
profess me to be his God.

CHAP. XIV.
1 BEhold, the day of the Lord comes, and thy spoil shall be divided in the
midst of thee.

2 For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the city
shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished, and half of the
city shall go forth into captivity, and residue of the people shall not be cut
off from the City.

3 Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he
fought in the day of battle.

4 And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is
before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall ^leave in the midst
thereof toward the east, and toward the west, and there shall be a very great
valley, and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it
toward the south.

5 And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains: for the valley of the
mountains shall reach unto Azal; yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from before
the earthquake in the days of Vzziah king of Judah: and the Lord, my God shall
come and all the saints with thee.

6 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear,
nor dark.

7 But it shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord, not day, nor
night: but it shall come to passe^ that at evening time it shall be light.

8 And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem:
half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in
summer and in winter shall it be.

9 And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be
one Lord, and his name one.

10 All the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon, south of
Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up and inhabited in her place: from Benjamins
gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner-gate, and from the tower
of Hananiel unto the kings wine-presses.

11 And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction,
but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.

12 And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people,
that have fought against Jerusalem: their shesh shall consume away while they
stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and
their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.

13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord
shall be among them, and they shall layhold every oneon the hand of his
neighbor and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor.

14 And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of all the heathen
round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel in great
abundance.

15 And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule of the camel, and of
the ass, and of all the beasts, that shall be in these tents, as this plague.

16 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the nations
which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year to worship the
King the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of Tabernacles.

17 And it shall be, that whosoever will not come up of all the families of the
earth unto Jerusalem, to worship the King the Lord of hosts, even upon them
shall be no rain.

18 And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain:
there shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite the heathen that come
not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

19 This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations
that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

20. In that day shall there be upon the ^els of the horses HOLINESS UNTO THE
LORD; and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the altar.

21. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be Holiness unto the Lord
of hosts: and all they that sacrifice, shall come and take of them, and feeth
therein: and in that day there shall be n^ more the Canaanite in the house of
the Lord of hosts.

CHAP. XIV.
1. BUt, before these things come to pass, there is a sad day of the Lords
wrath coming on, that will more particularly touch thee, O Jerusalem. For Ex v.
seq.
they of the Gentiles shall make havoc of all the Countries about thee, and
make division of those spoils, in the midst of thy land.

2. And I will muster up all sorts of people to fight against Jerusalem, and by
their forces the City shall be taken: upon which advantage, the temp. Maecab,
2. Maccob. 6.
houses shall be plundered, and the women ravished. And the one half of the
City shall go out, and deliver themselves up, as Captives, for very fear and
famine: but as for the rest they shall show themselves more valorous, and
religious in defense of their Temple: they shall neither be iusticed, nor
forced out of the City.

3. After this the Lord Himself (that suffered these Nations, for a time, to
come thither, and show their spite and fury against Jerusalem) shall appear
for his People, and fight against those barbarous Nations as he has often
heretofore (at the red Sea, and elsewhere) showed himself the Lord of Hosts,
and, in our defense, chose himself a day of Battle, and Victory.

4. In that day shall the feet of Elleipsis nomini^; hic Ba^chid^^, intellige.
him that shall be leader of those Nations against Jerusalem, stand upon Mount
Olivet (which has the prospect of the East-part of the City) that he may
thence spy out a fit place, wherein to pitch his camp. And, by his command,
they shall dig so much toward the East, and West of that Mountain, that it
shall seem to have a great cleft, and rupture in the midst. Which earth,
being so dug; and removed from thence, to be used for several military
designs, against the North, and South part of the City, there shall seem to be
a very great Valley, made out of that, which was before a great part of the
Mountain.

5. Then shall you flee, like men affrighted at the valley made as it were in a
mountain: For that valley so made out of the mountain shall reach as far as
Asel (the place that has the name from the (...) juxta.
vicinity of that Mount) Even so shall you fly from the sight of this vast
rupture, as you fled from the great Earthquake, Amos 1. 1.
which made such a rupture in the same mountain, in the days of Vzziah, King
of Judah. But then shall the Lord, my God, the Lord of hosts himself, come to
your defense, and all his heavenly Host of holy Sancti pro Angelis, ut Dan. 8,
13.
Angels with Mutatio personae Hebraeis familiaris:
Him.

6. But, in that day of their trouble, and affrightment (before the Lord shall
thus appear) there shall be no light of comfort, and refreshment: but cold, and
quaking horror (fear, and astonishment.)

7. But this shall be as one day (or a time) whereof God has determined in his
foreknowledge, and special providence: and which I cannot well tell, whether I
should call it a Day, or a night. (For, the Day is a time of comfort, but this
shall have none: the night is a time of rest, and quiet, but this shall have
none) Yet it shall come to pass, toward the Eve and expiration of this sad
time, that (when you would think your Sun is setting, and the hope and joy of
your life quite vanishing away) then shall arise a new glimpse of recovering
your former happiness) for you shall epsy a light of comfort and joy,
appearing to you, ex fine v. 5.
in the approach of those Angels of light, that God shall bring for your
succor.

8. Then shall come a time of Peace, and works of Peace. You shall then have
Aquaeducts, and useful passages for running water made from Jerusalem: hebr.
half of them, vide c. 13, 8.
some of them toward the Eastern Sea, (the lake of Asphaltites) and some of
them toward the Western, or Syrick Sea. And they shall be constant supplies of
water, for your ordinary occasions, as well in Summer, as in Winter.

9. And then shall of Judaea be free from the imperious commands of foreign
Nations, as when the Lord vouchsafed to style Himself your King, and you his
People. So shall you then be in all your land under that one gracious Lord,
whose name, and his only is honored in Judaea (no Usurper having power over
you.)

10. This time of Peace shall make you populous, All the places about Iudaea
shall be compassed about with inhabitants: even in the plains, and more desert
places (that have not yet been inhabited) from 1, Sam. 13, 2.
Gibeah of Benjamin, in the Northern borders, even unto Josuah. 15, 21, 32, and
19, 7.
Rimmon, that lies as far South of Jerusalem. And (with the addition of her
higher Towers and Walls) Jerusalem shall seem to lift up her self higher, and
glory to see her self so fully, and richly inhabited, in her own place, Jer.
37, 13.
from the gate of Benjamin (which leads into the Country of Benjamin toward
the North) and so to the Nehem. 3, 6.
old gate (on the West) and to the 2. Paral. 25, 23.
corner-gate (that has so many Towers jetted to the East) and thence all along
from the Tower of Hananiel (which Nehem. 3, 1.
bounds the South of your City) as far toward Sion, as the place, where the
Cantic. 8, 11.
Kings wine-presses were wont to be. And there also shall you have some
buildings raised up for your new inhabitants.

11. And they which shall then inhabit it; in so populous a manner, shall find
that there will be no more such miserable destructions, as have formerly been
in that place: but Jerusalem shall be inhabited in safety, and security for a
long time.

12. And these shall be the plagues, wherewith the Lord shall smite all the
people, that have come in hostile manner against Her. Maccab. 13, 49.
Such a fearful famine and sickness shall he send amongst them, that, their
flesh shall consume away, while they stand upon their feet: their eyes shall
consume away, while they are in those strong holds, wherein Nature has placed
them for better use, then from thence to watch the mischief of others, that
were better than themselves: and their tongues shall moulder away, while they
are in their own wicked, and blasphemous mouths. So that they shall walk about,
like living carcases, and ugly noisome spectacles of misery, and memorandums of
divine vengeance,

13. And somewhat else shall happen in those days, as an addition to their
sorrow. For, great tumults, and combustions will God raise among them, in those
hurries. Every man shall be willing to lay hold of his neighbor, and by their
joynt-hands engage him, Prove. 6, 1^
to be faithful, and secure unto them; but that hand of fidelity (as he took
it) shall deceive his trust, and be one of the first hands, that shall be lift
up against him.

14. An^ (which is the worst of it) such deceit, and contention shall not be
only amongst them, but even Judah too shall pick quarrels against Jerusalem.
And a means to tempt them to this, will be the wealth of all the Heathen round
about them, that shall be gathered to this place: great abundance of gold and
silver, and apparel, that shall be in the tents of the Enemy.

15. While that plague of war, and famine, that is amongst them, will breed as
great a mortality among the horses, aad mules, and asses, and all the beasts in
their tents, which shall be like another plague among them.

16. But, these afflictions, and your miraculous delivery shall prove good
instructions to many, that shall be left of those Nations, that marched against
Jerusalem. For (in acknowledgement of Gods Justice upon themselves, and his
miraculous protection of that place) thither will they resort from year to year
(being made your Proselytes) to tender their worship before the King of Kings,
and the Lord of hosts, and to keep the Feast of Tabernacles (at least) as you
do: that falling out in a time more seasonable for the undertaking of long
^urnies to Jerusalem.

16. And while they do so much (that are but Proselytes) they read a Lecture of
more readiness to be required in you. Therefore whosoever of the Families of
this Land, shall not come up to Jerusalem (out of those countries into which
they are dispersed) once a year, at least, to bear a part in the divine service
of the great King of Kings; and Lord of Hosts, no shower of Divine favor,
shall be expected to be powered upon them.

18. As, for instance, if those Jewish Families that are in Egypt, shall not
make that ascent, and approach hither, neither shall that shower of his favor
be upon them: but, ininstead of that, some plague rather with which the Lord
will strike all those people, that will not come up, to keep so much as the
Feast of Tabernacles (after they have taken upon them the profession of his
Name.)

19. This shall be the punishment of those Professors of the Jewish Religion,
that live in Egypt, or among any other Nations, and will not come up to the
solemn Feast of Tabernacles, and then, at least, bear a part in the public
service of God, in that place, which he has chosen for that purpose.

20. In these days of the strict observance of the worship of God, great
additions of prosperity shall be heaped upon this People (and specially upon
the place of Gods service) by rich presents from foreign Nations. Then the
bridles of the war-horses, and the rich ornaments about them, shall be offered
as a holy thing to the Lord, and so come into the Treasury of the Temple, as a
Testimony, that they acknowledge the victory, in which those horses were
employed, is to be ascribed to God only (though they seemed to guide and
direct the Horses, with the bridle in their own hands.) And not in this way of
acknowledgement only, but many other ways too, the offerings shall be so
rich, and frequent, that the pots in the Lords house shall be as Elloipsis
adjectivi, ^^ c. 10. 3.
numerous, as the bowls before the Altar, (whereof you have greater plenty,
than of any one vessel about the Temple, because of the several uses, to
which they are of necessity required, both in the offerings, and in receiving
the blood of the sacrifices.)

21. And, not those pots only in the Temple, but (by reason of the great
abundance of sacrifices, in those days) every pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah
will commonly be hallowed to that use, which those in the Sanctuary are
employed in, for that service of the Lord of Hosts: that all they that bring
their Sacrifice, may take of them, and sees their meat in them (with which,
after the Sacrifice, they use to entertain the Levites, and their Friends, whom
they invite to the Feast) And in those days, as you shall have such store of
Proselytes, about the house of the Lord of hosts to help and encourage you in
the service, so you shall have no Cananites there, to draw you from the service
of the true God, (So shall you be all holy, and clean, without mixture of
profane, and idolatrous people, Isai. 35, 8. Joel. 3, 17.
as was prophesied long before. And withal, you shall therein give a type of
that happiness, which the whole Church shall have, Apoc. 21, 27, and 21. 15.
in the last day.)

A Paraphrastical EXPLICATION Of the PROPHECY OF MALACHI.
CHAP. I.
1 THe burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi.

21 I have loved you, says the Lord: yet ye say, Wherein have thou loved us?
was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord: yet I loved Jacob,

3 And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains, and his heritage wast, for the
dragons of the wilderness.

4 Whereas Edom says, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolate places: Thus says the Lord of hosts. They shall build, but I will
throw down, and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the people
against whom the Lord has indignation for ever,

5 And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified from
the border of Israel.

5 A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father,
where is mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of
hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name: and ye say, Wherein have we
despised thy name?

7 Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we
polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible.

8 And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the
lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor, will he be
pleased with thee or accept thy person? says the Lord of hosts.

9 And now I pray you, beseech God that he will be gracious unto us: this has
been by your means: will he regard your person? says the Lord of hosts.

10 Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for naught? neither
do ye kindle fire on mine altar for naught. I have no pleasure in you, says
the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.

11 For from the rising of the sun even to the going down of the same, my name
shall be great among the Gentiles, and in the very place incense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the
heathen, says the Lord of hosts.

12 But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted,
and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible.

13 Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it,
says the Lord of hosts, and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and
the sick: thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hands?
says the Lord.

14 But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, says the
Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.

CHAP. I.
1. THe word of the Lord, by the Prophet Malachi, Onus verbi domini. i. onerosa
Prophetia a Domin^.
delivered in heavy, and threatening words against the Israelites that were
returned from the captivity, and were guilty of many great sins: specially of
negligence, and misdemeanour in things belonging to the worship of God: and of
keeping strange wives, against those laws, and admonitions, that should have
wrought better upon them.

2. I might have expected better fruit from my people of Israel, were it but
merely by way of thankfulness for my peculiar love, and indulgence unto them:
not above all other nations only, but even above those of the same stock and
original with them. For, I have ever loved you of Israel says the Lord, and
you may read it in many arguments of that love. But you will say, Wherein have
thou showed any particular instances, and evidences of that thy special love to
us? To which I answer, that, if you look to the root, from whence you took your
beginning, there you may best begin to see the signs of my love. For, was not
Esau brother to Jacob, your Patriarch, by the same venture? Were they not twins,
and Esau the firstborn? yet did I show a more tender, and fatherly affection
to Jacob and his posterity, placing you in the land of promise, a land flowing
with milk and honey: and, when your sins had cast you out, reducing you hither
again, and shielding you here from all danger, by the hand of providence.

3. Esau all this while, and his posterity, the Edomites that came from him,
may rather see the signs of my hatred and disaffection to them from the very
womb. For, as I foretold, that he should be inferior to his younger brother,
before he was born: so, afterward I placed him and his in the barren mountains
of Seir, no way to be compared with the fruitful land of Canaan. And when my
Justice had Jer. 49. 8. Thren. 4. 22, Eze^. 25. 13.
cast him out from thence, I did not restore him thither again, as I did you
into Canaan: but I turned those mountains of Seir, his ancient habitation, into
a wilderness: and, as a testimony of mine anger, that which was his peculiar
lot, and inheritance Elleipsis verbi, nisi (...) repetamus ex praeced.
I gave to the Dragons, and other wild beasts of the Desert, as a place of
habitation for them.

4. And I am so far from any intention of restoring them now to those parts.
that if they of Hi^, ut supra Edom pro Edom^lis ut Jacob pro Is. ae^^is.
Edom should say, We are now in poor condition indeed, but we will take
courage, and return from whence we came, and there we will build up again
whatsoever the enemy has laid wast: Thus would the Lord of hosts answer to
such fool-hardie undertakers. If they rebuild them, I will find ways to pull
them down again, and lay them even with the ground. And they that see the By
Judas Maccab. and Hyrcanus.
execution of that justice shall say, It was but deservedly done to a Country,
whose bounds, and limits, were all full of impiety to God, and unnatural
cruelty to you, their brethren: and the inhabitants thereof a People, whom God
had threatened with the effects of his anger, and heavy displeasure for evermore.

5, Your own eyes shall be the witnesses of the performance of what I thus
speak against the Edomites, and your own tongues shall makes profession and
acknowledgement of this difference that I put between you and them, and say,
Let God ever be magnified, and praised for his mercy to the land of Israel,
which he restored, and continues to us with the same bounds, and limits, that
we had before.

6. Such has been my Fatherly affection to you: and my anger and severitie
upon them. Which you should be so sensible of as to express it in your
thankfulness and obedience. For, Does not a Son worthily honor his father? Is
not a servant ready to express his bounden duty to his Master? If my benefits
show my fatherly love, why should not your honor, and respect, be answerable
to them? If I defend, and maintain you, as your Lord, and Master, where is that
fear, and reverence of my Name, that should be seen in you? says the Lord of
Hosts. Specially in you my Priests, that live upon such things as are devoted
to my service, and yet are so far from serving me aright, that you rather
openly contemn, and despise my name. If you ask, wherein you have done any
thing, in neglect and contempt of me, and in derogation to the Honor and
Majesty of my name? Look into your daily employments about my Temple, and
there you will see it.

7. For, You bring to my Altar such (...) panis, bic pro omni cibi, non pro
panibus propositionis.
provisions to be there offered up to me, as I can no otherwise account of,
then as of things polluted, rather then sanctified to my service. But you will
say yet further. What is that pollution, wherein we are said to offer contempt
unto thee? And I must tell you, it lies in those base words of yours, that the
Table of the Lord is so despicable a thing, that we need not be very scrupulous
of sacrificing and offering any thing there, though it be not so perfect and
without blemish as is required.

8. And so, when you bring a lamb, or any other creature, that is blind, to be
offered up in sacrifice, that is no great harm. O, by no means, in your opinion
it is not. And when your offering is of that which is lame, and sickly, there
is no ill in so doing, as you seem to imagine. But, go and bestow such a blind,
and lame, and sickly present upon your Prince and Governor, and see if he will
accept kindly of it, and be of your opinion, that it is a present good enough
for him, says the Lord of Hosts. Sure he will not. What shall then be said of
those poor contemptible sacrifices, so unfit to be brought in your addresses to
me, and as types, and figures of that immaculate lamb, that must take away the
sins of the world.

9. Now therefore it only remains, that in lue of them, you present your
selves before him in humble prayer, that he would please to be merciful to us
all: (who are, all of us, likely to fare the worse for these great sins.) For,
it is plain, that, this Elleipsis substantivi.
great fault has been committed (...) ut (...) per.
by you. And therefore (while you continue in it) do you think, that you can be
acceptable in his sight, at whose altar you serve, or that he shall accept of
such offerings of yours, says the Lord of Hosts?

10. Nay, if these be thought fit sacrifices for my Temple, which of you will
do me that acceptable service, to shut up your doors, and passages to your
Sanctuary, (...) ut non.
that there may be no more fire in vain kindled upon my altar? (for, all your
service is in vain, while it is tendered in such negligent, and scornful
manner) I can take no pleasure in you that are such sacrificers, says the Lord
of Hosts, nor will I accept of any such sacrifices from your hands.

11. But I will tell you, what sacrifice I shall delight in. In the spiritual
sacrifice of a good, and spiritual heart. For ere long from East to West (all
the world over) shall my Name be magnified among the Gentiles: and, in every
place, shall the holy incense of Apoc. 5 8.
prayer, and the pure offering of Romans 12. 1.
themselves, their souls, and bodies, be presented unto me. For, once again I
tell you, great shall my name be among the Gentiles, since it is so slighted,
and undervalued by you, says the Lord of Hosts.

12. But, you still go on to pollute that sacred name, as much as in you lies:
as, when you say within your selves, that the Table of the Lord is no such pure
thing; nor the Or continual provision for supply of the offerings. (...).
offering so pure, that is laid upon it: neither is that fire, Hebr. That which
consumes it, quod illud consumit (s. sacrisicum) nam (...) est etiam consumere,
and igni quasi in cibum dare.
which consumes the sacrifice, so pure, that we need be so nice, and dainty
about the choice of the sacrifice.

13. Nor is this contempt among the Priests only that do attend the sacrifice,
but it is the fault of you among the people too, that bring it to the Priest.
For, you have been heard to say, when you have brought the sheep, or what else
was sent into that Court of the Temple, where you were to leave it. O, what a
wearisom business is this? How am I tired with the weight of this burden? And
then. you have puffed and blown at it, as if that you brought had been so fat
and plump, that the bringing of so heavy a burden, had almost taken away your
breath. This you have said in a jesting and scornful manner, puffing at my
sacrifice, and indeed slighting of it, says the Lord of Hosts. Nay, such
things have some of you brought to be offered, as have been stolen, (...)
or purchased by rapine, and oppression: and you have sent into the Courts of
my Temple, lame and weak sickly creatures, to serve for an offering, and so
for a poor acknowledgement of the many mercies, and favors, that I have showed
to you. And do you think I shall ever be pleased, with what is offered (...)
by you, in such contempt, says the Lord of Hosts.

14. No, cursed be that (...) and dolosum significat. i. malign astu^um a
(...) and eum qui ^iquid potest. a (...) unde Sept. (...).
subtle, and deceitful man, that makes a mock at these Acts of Religion and
(...) and dolosum significat. i. malign astu^um a (...) and eum qui ^iquid
potest. a (...) unde Sept. (...).
being able to send that which is good, and having in his flock, a male,
Elleipsis adjectivi.
that is sound, and in good liking, does yet, when he comes to pay his vows,
render a poor, weak, and blemished sacrifice unto the Lord. But, I am the great
King of Heaven, and earth, Vide v. 8.
and therefore other kind of presents were fitter for me, says the Lord of
Hosts: and among the very Gentiles, more fear and reverence shall be given unto
my Name.

CHAP. II.
1. ANd now, O ye priests this commandment is for you.

2 If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto
my name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will
curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart.

3 Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even the
dung of your solemn feasts, and one shall take you away with it.

4 And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my
covenant might be with Levi, says the Lord of hosts.

5 My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him, for the
fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name.

6 The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips:
he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.

7 For the Priests Lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at
his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

8 But ye are departed out of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at the
Law: ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts.

9 Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people,
according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

10 Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? Why do we deal
treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the Covenant of our
Fathers?

11 Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel
and in Jerusalem: for Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord which he
loved, and has married the daughter of a strange god.

12 The Lord will cut off the man that does this: the master and the scholar
out of the Tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offers an offering unto the
Lord of hosts.

13 And this have ye done again, covering the Altar of the Lord, with tears and
weeping and with crying out, insomuch that he regards not the offering any
more, or receives it with good will at your hand.

14 Yet ye say, Wherefore Because the Lord has been witness between thee and
the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously: yet is she
thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

15 And did not be make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit: and
wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed: therefore take heed to your
spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.

16 For the Lord the God of Israel says, that he hates putting away: for one
covers violence with his garment, says the Lord of hosts, therefore take
heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.

17 To have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have we
wearied him? when ye say, Every one that does evil is good in the sight of the
Lord, and he delights in them, or where is the God of judgment?

CHAP. II.
1. ANd now I come to speak to you again, O you Priests. For, somewhat more I
have in charge to acquaint you withal. And this it is.

2. If you will not hear (...) utrumque significat.
and obey what is told you, by my Prophets, against your own profaness, and
negligence in my service: and your connivence at the like fault in the people:
or rather your drawing of them into it, by the scandal of your own ill
example. If you will not take it seriously to heart, and show your repentance,
by your amendment, giving more honor, and respect to me in the execution of
your several functions, then you have done heretofore, says the Lord of
Hosts. Then will I (instead of a blessing) send a curse upon you that
sacrifice, and you the people, that bring such contemptible sacrifices unto me.
And I will send a curse upon your haec enim vocat (...).
corn, and whatsoever I have bestowed upon you as a blessing upon your former
labors. I will, did I say? Nay, you may see, that this curse of mine has
begun to work upon you already: because as you neglected me, and my service, so
you neglected to take that great fault into your serious consideration, but
made light of it, notwithstanding the many admonitions, and exhortations, that
have been made unto you.

3. Therefore (if you will at least consider the punishment of your sin) you
shall see, and wonder what sic (...) significat. Psalm. 9. 6.
destruction I will bring upon you, and your seed after you^ And, when you come
to appease me by sacrifices, rather then I will be pleased with such poor
service, I will throw the dung of them in your faces, even the dung of your
solemnest (...) pro victima, ut Psalm. 118. 27.
sacrifices (to show my contempt of you, in that sacred place, where you have
dared to show your contempt of me) And out of that place, out of the very
Temple, Elleipsis nominativi (ut Habbac. 1, 3. cum eodem verbo (...) aliunde
supplendi. Hic autem videtur intelligi, vel Antiochi Miles, vel Miles Romans in
ultimo urbis excidio. Est and idem verbum auferendi similiter cum elleipsi,
Luc. 22. 20.
one, that I will appoint, shall take you away with him, and dispose of you
with as much scorn and contempt, as you have showed to Me, and my holy Altars.

4. Thus you will know (by your own punishments) why I send these first
commands and laws, of Reverence to be showed in my House, and in my service. I
did it, that my Covenant might be kept, which I made with the Tribe of Levi,
says the Lord.

5. For, my Covenant with the Levitical Priest Number. 25. 12, 13.
was a Covenant of Life and Peace, i. of long life, and felicity; or of a long
prosperous and happy life: upon the careful discharge of their Priestly
office. And these favors I bestowed upon him, because of his fear, and awe of
me, which made him show so much heed, and reverence in my service, (...) a
facie nominis mei pavebat.
and make his approaches before me with all religious devotion, and humility:
as one sensible of the service, he was to perform to me, and in a place of my
special presence.

6. Nothing came out of his mouth, but what was agreeable to Law and Truth, and
Equity. And (when he was to express his judgment in any case) no word was
found to proceed from between his lips, that had any wicked, or by-respect. And
his good conversation was answerable to his good words. He converted many from
their sinful and unrighteous courses.

7. And from whom should all this be expected, but from the Priest. And so ever
let the Priest be exemplary in his life, and language. futurum pro prae^. saepe
apud Hebr.
Let the Priests lips preserve knowledge, And let him be such a one, that from
him Levit. 10. 10. Ezekiel. 44. 23.
men may enquire the true sense, and meaning of the Law. For, He is like an
Angel of the Lord (not only to present before God the prayers of the people:
Levit. 16. Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
but acquaint them also with the will, and pleasure of Almighty God. Which two,
are the great employments of the blessed Angels.)

8. But, you are Priests of no such Angelical strain: for, as you have gone out
of the right way your selves, so you have made others stumble after your
scandalous example, and mistake the way, which is made plain for them in the
law, and wherein your first and good v. 6.
Levites walked with me, according to the Covenant: whereas Zach. 11. 10.
you take a course to frustrate and null the Covenant, made with those sing.
pro plur.
Leviticall Priests, says the Lord of Hosts.

9. Therefore will I also null my part of the Covenant, and bring you to that
pass that you shall be scorned and contemned of all the common people: because
you would not contein your selves, within the ways of my laws, and
ordinances; but stepped aside for private respects wresting and wracking of the
law, that it might be brought to what would fit your own turns, for pleasing
the persons of men.

10. But are we not all Brethren in Nature, the Sons of one man, of Jacob our
Father? And are we not Brethren in Religion too? Has not one God, by a kind of
sic (...) sumitur Isai. 43, 1. and 45, 8. Psalm. 102. 19, etc.
new creation molded and formed us into a peculiar people for his service? Why
then do you injure and oppress, and defraud one another, and so make a breach
of that Covenant, made with your Fathers, and of that love, which you owe to
one another, as Brethren?

11. They of the Kingdom of Judah are guilty of this great transgression, and
so are they of the Kingdom of Israel (such of the ten tribes as returned with
them into their own Country.) And they of Jerusalem too, nearest to my own
House, where the best livers should have been expected. They and these have
been abominable in their actions. Even Judah my more peculiar people, have
profaned my Sanctuary, and the holy City which I honored with so many
testimonies of my love. Nehem. 13, 23. Ezra 9. 10.
For, they have made a mixture of Jews, and Gentiles, and married them that
are devoted to the service of a strange God.

12. God will destroy the man, that has done this vile act, whether he be
Priest or Laick: and send him far enough from the tents of Jacob. Yes, though
he came to make peace by presents, and offerings unto me, as to the Lord of
Hosts.

13. But, there is another fault too, that you have committed, upon occasion of
this marrying of strange women, i. You show so much love to them, and so little
to your own wives, that you make them cover the altar of the Lord with tears,
and disturb the sacred Temple with bitter lamentations: so that I can have no
more delight in your offerings, nor can I take any thing well from your hands,
though it be purposely brought thither to appease my wrath, and make you
acceptable in my sight, says the Lord.

14. And why so? will you say. Because the Lord Jehovah is a witness between
thee and the wife of thy youth (thy lawful and first love) whom thou abusest,
after such a harsh and inhumane manner. But she should be used as thy Dear
Consort, and Fellow Servants to the same God, and the wife of the same Covenant,
(not only made thy wife by a solemn Covenant, and stipulation mutually tendered
before me, for the securing of your mutual love, and affection: but the wife
that is interested in the Covenant made with God himself, to serve and obey
him. Whereas neither of these so strong obligations to engage thee to those
wives that are superinduced, and of mere strangers, are made the proud Usurpers
and Commanders of thy House.)

15. Now Echad, Abraham dicitur (...) quasi Vnicus, a quo omnes Israelitae, and
unicus in Dei cultu. vide Isai. 51. 2. unde Hebr. 11, 12. (...).
i. Abraham, whose example you pretend to follow, did not so. But he was of a
more excellent Spirit, And when he took a maid for his Concubine, why did
Abraham do it? He did it not for lust, nor with injury to Sarah (for, it was at
her entreaty) but Genesis 16.
only desirous of a semen dei, i. divinitus promissum.
pious seed, and a seed promised by God Himself. Therefore take heed of being
led by that violent and erring spirit of your own. Think of Abraham's meek and
obedient Spirit, and commit not such a cruel fault, as to suffer a stranger to
domineer over the wife of thy youth.

16. For, thus says the great Jehovah, the God of Israel. He that does so,
hates to put her away. He cannot do that, for shame: but he cloakes the injury
that he does to her, by keeping her still in his own house, says the Lord of
Hosts. But (once again I warn you) take heed of being led by your own unruly
spirits, and let me hear no more of this great fault.

17. There is yet another thing in your ordinary talk, wherein you have
offended and wearied out the patience of Almighty God. And wherein have we so
tired and displeased Him? will you say. It is in using those wicked Proverbs of
yours. Every one that is evil is acceptable enough in the sight of the Lord,
and, sure, he takes delight in them: (for, so you guess by the preferment of
wicked men.) And in your other said saw. Where is the God of Judgment? (that
does not rather presently punish those wicked men, if he knew them to be such)
As if we were to limit and confine him for his times and his ways: how and
when He shall make proof of his Justice.

CHAP. III.
1 BEhold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me:
and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple: even the
messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in: Behold, he shall come, says the
Lord of hosts.

2 But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap.

3 And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify
the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto
the Lord an offering in righteousness.

4 Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord,
as in the days of old, and as in former years.

5 And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers,
and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me
says the Lord of hosts.

6 For I am the Lord, I change not: therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

7 Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances
and have not kept them: return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the
Lord of hosts: but ye said, wherein shall we return?

8 Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we
robbed thee? in tithes and offerings.

9 Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed one, even this whole nation.

10 Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not
open you the windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there shall
not be room enough to receive it.

11 And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes: and he shall not destroy the
fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time
in the field, says the Lord of hosts.

12 And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land,
says the Lord of hosts.

13 Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye say, What
have we spoken so much against thee?

14 Ye have said, It is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it, that we
have kept his ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of
hosts?

15 And now we call the proud happy: yea, they that work wickedness are set
up; yea, they that tempt God, are even delivered.

16 Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name.

17 And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up
my jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.

18 Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked;
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

CHAP. III.
1. NOw, because you inquire after the Lord of Judgment, and after his coming:
will you hear what himself says of his first coming: Behold I will shortly
send my Alludit ad nomen Malachiae, qui Angelus Dei ad Iudaos postrem. i.
ultimus Prophetarum fuit, and a Iudaeis putatur fuisse Esdras (ut Kimchi nos
docit in cap. 1.) Eum secutus Praecursor Domini Johannes Baptista: qui hic
etiam Dicitur. Angelus Domini vel Nuntius a Domino, in Ante^essum Messia, Mar.
11.
Angel or Ambassador (John the Baptist, my forerunner) who shall prepare the
way before me (by his Baptism, and Sermons of Repentance, and his Testimony of
Me and my coming) and then the Lord (the Messiah) that you so earnestly expect,
and inquire after, shall suddenly come into his Temple (before Dan. 12. 9.
he is looked for: the time being concealed from men) to Agg. 2. 8.
honor his Temple at Jerusalem with his bodily presence, and there to teach,
and instruct his people of the house of Israel. Even he shall come that is the
great Angel of the New Testament, whom you long for (as your promised Messiah)
Behold, He shall surely come, says the Lord of Hosts.

2. But, who will abide the time of his coming? and, when he appears in person,
who shall be able to stand (without great fear and terror) before Him (to hear
the discovery and reproof of their sins, and the Prophecy of that heavy
punishment, that will fall upon you for them, and the many afflictions, that
must be expected and suffered by all those, that will follow him) For, He shall
be like a Refiners fire, (to Dan. 12. 10.
make trial of us in the fire of affliction, as well as like the Fullers Vide
(...) in Thesauro n.
purging herbs (to cleanse and purge us in the Laver of Regeneration, by virtue
of his precious blood.

3 And, when he settles himself to (...) great work of trying and purging, as
the Refiner does, when he removes the dross from the pure silver: then shall
He cleanse and purify the sons of Levi (reducing many of them from the
dross of their false doctrines, and traditions, and other mistakes, to the
knowledge and profession of the truth. And, so being purged from what was
amiss in them, (like silver and gold, that comes out of the Refiners furnace)
they shall offer unto the Lord a righteous, and pious sacrifice of humble
prayers and divine praises, and the constant exercise of all holy virtue.

4. All these offerings and sacrifices of Judah and Jerusalem, shall be as
acceptable, and well pleasing unto God: as ever were any of their most costly
presents, and oblations in former times, and in the days of old (the days of
your good Patriarchs, and Judges, and Prophets.)

5. But, if you will not forsake your dross) c. 2. ult.
As you called for the God of Judgment, so I will come near to you in the Acts
of Judgment and Justice. (says the Lord) And I (that have been privy to all
your secret sins, which cannot be concealed from my all-seeing eye) I will
not be wanting to be a ready witness, my self, against such as have been
tampering with Magic Arts, and against adulterous and perjured persons, and
against all such as defraud the poor hirelings of their wages, and the widows
and orphans of that, which is their due: and against those, that oppress the
stranger, (all which have the least means to relieve themselves) and withal,
my Justice shall be showed upon all those, that do any thing against the fear
and reverence of my name, says the Lord of Hosts.

6. For I am a God immutable in all my ways (in my ways of Justice, and in my
ways of Mercy) the same God in the performance of all threats and promises
upon all persons. And yet, you sons of Jacob do not (...) desiistis.
make an end of your wicked courses: and (either for fear or love of my
immutable ways) follow those good steps, that your Father Jacob has traced
out before you.

7. And so, from the days of all your forefathers, you have gone astray from
the way of my statutes, and have not kept them, as you should have done. And
yet return unto me by a true Repentance: and I will return unto you in great
mercy, says the Lord of Hosts. But I know, you will be ready to excuse your
selves, and ask, wherein you should return. For, you would be accounted the
only Observers of my laws, and cannot bethink your selves, what it should be,
wherein you have offended.

8. Therefore I will tell you wherein. Will any man think it fit, to rob, and
defraude God of his due? Yet are you, that justify your selves, guilty of
that fraud, and injury toward me. If you ask, wherein thse your fraudulent
actions against me may consist. I answer, In your tithes and offerings, which
you have paid in a sordid, covetous, and deceitful way.

9. And, for that fraudulent detaining of my ancient right from me, there is a
Maledictione maledicti estis.
heavy curse hangs over your heads. And the whole nation are in danger of it,
(as the reward of a national fault) if it be not averted by your speedy
repentance.

10. But let me see you faithfully, and truly bring in all my tithes into my
barnes, that there may be a plentiful provision for those that attend the daily
service of my house. And make trial of me now in this one point of your
obedience, says the Lord of Hosts, whether I will not open the windows of
Heaven, for your sakes, and power a blessed increase upon you in such a
superabundant way of plenty, that your barnes and vessels, wherein you intend
to lay it up, shall not be able to contein it.

11. And, for your sakes, will I hinder the devouring locusts, that are
destructive to your fruit, and they shall not corrupt any more fruit of your
grounds. And it shall be my care and providence, that your vines in the field
(the remotest from your eyes) may not cast their fruit before their due time,
to deceive your expectation of a good vintage, says the Lord of Hosts.

12. And (whereas by my curse upon you, and my punishment of your great sins,
you lived, a long time, poor and despicable among the heathen) now all nations
shall call you blessed. For you shall be a delightsome land (worthy the love,
and admiration of all, for your peace, and plenty, and specially for the
exercise of the true Religion amongst you) says the Lord of Hosts.

13. Yet, are you no way worthy of these loving promises from me, or these kind
words from other people. For, you have used very bitter, and wicked words
against me, says the Lord of Hosts. Yet you will be ready to deny it now, and
to say, What is that, which we have spoken so Frequentativum in Niphal. Nam
crebra verborum ejusmodi repetitio, passiva voce pro activa posita, sic
exprimitur, ut v. 16. and Ezekiel. 33. 30.
often, and so ill against thee?

14. This it is. In saying, that it is a vain and unprofitable thing to serve
God: and in asking, what you have gained by observing those things, that God
would have you to observe, and that, in times of fasting, and humiliation, you
have walked, like pensive and sad mourners, before the Lord of Hosts.

15. And this also you have said, Now, when all is done, we account them the
happiest men (not that have so humbled themselves, but) that have stoutly and
proudly (without any scruple) showed themselves the contemners of all Religion.
And this too. They thrive best in (...) hic est sobole florere, unde (...)
filius dicitur, quaesi quo domus patris aedificatur, and consurvatur nomen
Patris, and contra Foeminae (...) dicta a (...) quod nomen Familiae paternae in
iis pereat.
raising of their houses, and families, that dare do the worst things. And yet
more. You say, They that have tempted and provoked God most, have been soonest
delivered out of affliction, or escaped the best.

16. Such have been the impious, and profane words of the wicked. But then,
they that fear the Lord Est enim hic frequentativum, ut v. 13.
have often had better discourses among one another. And to their discourse God
himself gave serious attention, observing well what they said, and causing it
to be written down in his book of Remembrances for them that fear the Lord, and
think reverently of his name.

17. And he dismissed them with this encomium, and gracious promise. These are
they, says the Lord of Hosts, that shall have my special protection, at that
time, (...)
when I shall fully execute what I intend against the wickked. I will be as
chary of them, as one would be of his choicest Jewels. And (whatsoever I lay
upon others.) I will spare, and favor them, as one would spare his own most
dutiful and obedient Son.

18. Then you (that have spoken so carelessly of my providence) Hebr. you will
turn to (another mind.)
will change your opinions, when you see what difference I put betwixt a
righteous, and a wicked man: between one that serves God, and one that serves
Him not.

(And a special time, when that difference will appear, is the time of the
destruction of Jerusalem, by the Romans. That is a day, when I shall come in
judgment against the nation of the Jews, and it shall be an image and
resemblance of the last day, when I shall come in judgment against all the
World. And that particular day, or time, is not far off.)

CHAP. IV.
1 FOr behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall
burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root
nor branch.

2 But unto you that fear my name, shall the sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the stall.

3 And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles
of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord of hosts.

4 Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb
for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.

5 Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great
and dreadful day of the Lord.

6 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers, least I come and s^ite the earth with a curse.

CHAP. IV.
1. FOr, behold, that day of the fearful destruction of Jerusalem, is coming
on, that shall be as burning hot as an oven (kindled by the wrath of God) And
then Cap. 1. 12. and 3. 14. 15.
all the proud contemners of my service, and blasphemers of my Providence, and
all others, the workers of iniquity shall be like stubble, that is easily
inflamed. And this hot time, that comes on so fast, shall put them into such an
all-devouring heat, says the Lord of Hosts, that Securis ad ^adicem. Mat. 3.
10.
neither root, nor branch shall be left to any of that wicked crew, that shall
dare to sin against me, with such a high hand.

2 But the rising Sun shall be the blessing of you that fear my name (ever,
more and more, increasing your joy and comfort) The true Son of Righteousness
shall warm, and refresh your hearts (while the wicked perish in the fire of my
wrathful displeasure.) And as they, like stubble, shall quickly be enflamed and
consumed: so your heat of solace shall be as quick from your Messiah. For, he
shall fly to gou with salvation under his wings, to heal your broken hearts,
and set you into a sure way of eternal life. He shall do it with such an
effectual, and apparent recoverie of your spiritual health, that you shall show
it in the vigor of the body, and be of as good liking, and in as thriving a
way, as the fatted calves, and oxen, that are purposely fed, and kept up in
their stall, to make them plump and tender.

3 And you shall concul^abitis.
have full power over the wicked, that now trample and domineer over you: and
they that shall be left of them, like ashes out of the furnace of Gods wrath,
and the flames of that sad punishment that was v. 2.
named before, them shall you tread down like ashes, under the soles of your
feet. This shall ye do, in the day wherein I shall put these things in
execution, says the Lord of Hosts: which are told them beforehand, that they
may prevent them, or be without excuse.

4. In the mean time, while you are in expectation of this Son of
Righteousness, and so ordering your lives, that you may escape the fire of his
anger, when he comes in judgment against your City and Nation. Forget not to
observe the law which I delivered in Mount Horeb to my servant Moses, as a Rule
and Direction for all the children of Israel. Square your selves according to
those Statues and Judgments, which you had from him.

5. And, that you may know when the time of your glorious Sunrising is come
upon you: ye shall discover it by the morning star, that appears just before
Him. For, observe and you shall see that I will send you his Forerunner, Luke
1. 17.
in the power and virtue of Elijah the Prophet, that (in a zeal, and austeritie
of life, like his) shall labor to restore the true Acts 2. 20.
worship of God amongst you, before that great and terrible day of the Lord
come upon your Nation, that shall give you the greatest blow, that ever, yet,
was given.

6. And (coming in a time, wherein there will be many Sects, and much
diversity of Opinions) He shall labor to convert, and reconcile the hearts of
Parents to their children, and children to their Parents: Matthew. 3. 2. Mark 1.
7. Luke 3. 16. Joan. 1. 15.
directing all to their great Master, and Teacher (their promised Messiah) and,
in Him to the Truth it self.

And therefore will I send him upon this employment, that so he may make way to
the appeasing of my wrath, least I come, and (...) and anathema significat, and
occisionem, vel perditionem extremam, ut supra, de securi ad radicem posi^a.
utterly destroy the whole land. For, only that romnant, which shall prevent
my judgment by true repentance, shall be Romans 1. 29.
plucked like Lot out of Sodom, and delivered from that common calamity, that
shall then attend the destruction of Jerusalem.

A Catalogue of Books printed for, and to be sold by Thomas Davies, at the
Bible over agninst the little North Door of St. Paul's Church.
THe History of this Iron Age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe,
as it was in the year 1500. also the original and causes of all the Wars and
Commotions that have happened: together with a description of the most
memorable Battles, Sieges, Actions, and Transactions, both in Court and Camp,
from that time until this present year 1659. illustrated with the lively
Effigies of the most renowned persons of this present time. folio.

Bp. Andrews his Sermons, which he preached at St. Giles Cripplegate, and
elsewhere; with a Preface written by Mr. Th. Pierce, Minister of Brington in
Northamtonshire. folio.

A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Ephesians,
wherein the Text is learnedly, and fruitfully opened; with a Logical Analysis,
Spiritual and Holy Observations, Confutation of Arminianism and Popery, and
sound edification of the diligent Reader, by Mr. Paul Bain, sometimes preacher
of Gods Word at St. Andrews in Cambridge: The fifth Edition: To which is added
the life of the Author, and a Table of all the Doctrines. folio.

A Commentary on the most Divine Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans: written by
the Learned and Religious Thomas Wilson, late Minister of Gods Word at St.
Georges in Canterbury, Folio.

Beza in Novum Testamentum cum Camerario. folio.

Hews his Phrases in English and Latin, with an augmentation of several
Phrases, by Alex. Rosse; a Book very useful for all Grammar Shools. octavo.

The Substance of Christian Religion, methodically handled in LII. Lectures, on
chosen Texts of Scripture, learnedly and solidly illustrated, with apt
Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses; by that late, Famous Labourer in Gods Vineyard,
Will. Ames, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor thereof at Franeker in Friezland.
octavo.

Basilius Valentius his last Will and Testament, showing the ways he wrought
to obtain the Philosophers Stone, and taught it to his fellow-Collegians.
octavo.

Ougtredi Trigonometria, hoc est, modus computandi Triangulorum latera and
Angulos, ex Canone Mathematico traditus and demonstratus. 4.

A Discourse of the Empire of Germany, and of the Election and Crowning the
Emperor and King of the Romans, with the interest of the Electors, and the
reasons why the present Emperor was lately chosen; By James Howell Esquire. octavo.

A Discourse made in the solemn assembly of Nobles and learned men, at
Montpelleier in France, of the cure of wounds by the powder of Sympathy, with
the manner of making and applying the said powder; By Sr. Kenelme Digby Knight. 12.

By whom also all sorts of Latin Books transported from beyond the Seas, are
to be sold.

FINIS.

