SHECINAH: OR, A Demonstration of the Divine Presence In the places of
Religious Worship. BEING AN ESSAY, Tending to promote Piety, prevent Apostasy,
and to reduce grossly deluded souls, first to their right wits, then to the
right ways, of Gods Public Instituted Worship.

By John Stillingfleete, M A. Rector of Beckingham in Lincolnshire, late Fellow
of St. John's College in Cambridge.

(...) The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. (...) And I will dwell among the
Children of Israel, and will be their God, Exodus 29.45. And behold (...) the
glory of the Lord filled the house, Ezekiel. 43.5. LONDON, Printed by R. I. for
Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North
door. 1663.

TO THE Right Honorable ANTHONY Lord Ashley, Baron of Winterburne St. Giles;
One of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
TUtelar Angels are a controverted Theme: But protection from your Honor, has
been an unquestionable matter of my experience, which therefore calls for a
grateful acknowledgement. Gods providence in the disposal of my nativity,
calculated me for your neighbor, by vicinity of place; and you have owned me
as a favorite, by your benign affection. For your Noble disposition admitted
me as a Client, to your signal Favor, and singular Patronage, when the
progging attempts of an ambitious Phylargyrist, had well nigh made me truly
distressed. Had the bright rays of your Lordships Bounty been only terminated
on myself, in that peculiar Patronizing of a cause, as just on one hand, as
sneakingly undermining on the other; nothing less than a Public Reflection of
gratitude, when ever occasion offered it self, would have been expected from
your devoted Client. But your Goodness (being no ways defective in its native
and genuine property of communicativeness) has from its unalterable Center
derived most conspicuous lines of pregnant Bounty, to some of my endeared
relations also. To smother these favors then with a flat denial, would be an
high impeachment of veracity; and not to acknowledge them on such an occasion,
could plead for no distance, from downright sordidness, and plain ingratitude.
This small Treatise on these Considerations, prostrates its self at your
Honors feet, not with any hopes to equallize your worth, or to merit your
Patronage, with so slender an Essay as it is; but with a desire to leave this
Testimonial to the world, that your Favors have not been fruitlesly bestowed
on an ungrateful or unmindful servant. Yet if your piercing eye be but animated
with a Candid Aspect, so as to pass by the faileurs and imperfections of the
Author, the Theme it self, and the main design of the Treatise, may without
presumption be deemed not unworthy the Patronage of the most Noble person in
the world. Of the former I need not doubt, when I reflect on that clear
resemblance in your Honors deportment of the Primitive Nobles, who were styled
(...) by the Hebrews, and (...) Candidi, and filii Candidorum, not only for
their white garments, but also for the candidness of their minds, and integrity
of their manners. The latter I may with more boldness aver, since the
Majestic SHECINAH, See the word explained, c. 4. ss. 14. p. 70
or the Divine Presence in Gospel Worship fills both pages of the ensuing
discourse. Who now can think himself too great, or too good to patronize that,
which alone has the sovereign prerogative of conveying real goodness and
virtue to those that are so far blessed, as to be partakers of it. Socrates
meeting Zenophon, and perceiving him to be a smart youth, holds up his staff,
bids him stand, and asks him where those small wares were sold, that were
ordinarily used, to which, when Zenophon gave him a ready answer, he further
asked him where men were made truly good: Alas Sir! said he, that I cannot
tell: Follow me then, said Socrates, and thou shall learn that of me. Let
those that are so great strangers to themselves, as not to be acquainted with
their own weakness, venture upon the presenting to the world a Systeme of
Socratical Wisdom. All my ambition is by this slender Essay, to act the part
of Socrates his staff, to put those to a stand, that are wise enough to be
trading in the small wares of the world, with a neglect of real goodness; and
like a Mercurial Statue; to point out the way to the Presence of God, which can
make us both good and glorious, holy here, and happy hereafter. To be your
Lordships Remembrancer in this, I humbly conceive it to be a piece rather of my
bounden duty, than any bold or presumptuous attempt: And that I need be no
more, the world sufficiently knows that is already fully acquainted with your
constant zeal and forwardness to promote the flourishing of the Public
Ordinances, where the special Presence of God is to be enjoyed. But others, too
too many others there are, that want such a staff to correct them for their
Errors, as well as to direct them to their duty. Such I mean who have in their
Judgments turned Bethel into Beth-haven, the House of God into an house of
Iniquity, and then take occasion to desert it profanely. The House of Prayer
they now abominate, as if it were a Den of Thieves. The established
Church Government is looked upon as an unsupportable yoke of Tyranny, and is
accordingly detested. Gospel Ministers are looked on as the Pursuvants of the
Whore of Babylon, fit only to Trappan souls into Egyptian darkness, and are
dealt withal accordingly, set at open defiance. All Ordinances are
disdainfully slighted as dry Beasts, and Barren Wildernesses. The two
Sacraments are undervalued and disgusted as mean food, fit only for those that
are dry-nursed at very low and outside dispensations. The Spirit of Life, the
Light within, the ever-living Word, the everlasting Gospel, are the choice
rarities that will relish only in the curious pallates of our Quakers. In the
mean while the Church of God lies destitute and forlorn, as if God had removed
the Golden Candlesticks out of his own house, and had set them up in their
Parlours: And as if no other Oil could be used for the Temple-Service, but what
drops out of the good woman's cruse. I wonder whether the first Gospel-Preacher
John Baptist, could have secured his head any better from these, had he been
living among them, than he did from Herod, who being (...), The voice of one
crying in the Wilderness, would both in his doctrine and practice decry their
dumb conventions, and their high kind of pretended devotion in their silent
expectation of Enthusiastical raptures. It is very difficult to determine,
which of the two sorts are farthest off from the true manner of edifying; they
that read their service in an unintelligible language, or they that use no
language at all, and yet pretend it is for edification. And indeed by this, and
many other Syncretisms of theirs with the other, both in practice and doctrine,
it may be easily seen whether that fond Generation were ru^^ing amain. I could
think at present of no better character of these people, than the old Roman
Letters S. P. Q. R. with venerable Bedes witty interpretation of them: Who
coming to Rome, and being asked the meaning of them, he dissemblingly
answered, Stultus populus quaerit Romam. It Is true, the forefront of the
Portal, that leads to the Papal Cloisters, are, by their being bedeckt with
variety of magnificent Gawderies, highly abominable to this seemingly
self-denying, and mortified Generation of fondlings. And they are so far in
love with that ingenious Acrostick, mentioned by a Right Reverend Prelate of
our own on the name PAPA, viz. Paparum Ambitio Peperit Antichristum: That now
they cry down all stipends of Preachers as the Hire of the Whore of Babylon,
and the Legal maintenance by Tithes as an introduction to Antichristianism.
Thus have they wheeled about so far from the forefront, that at length they
are tumbling in amain at the backdoor of Popery. And let any disbeleeve this
that can, who has once acquainted himself with the Rules and Method laid down
by Contzen the Jesuit, for the reducing England to the Romish Catholic
Obedience. To obviate these gross delusions, and to provide an Antidote for
this spreading Gangrene, was both the Original and end, of this following
Tractate. Which that it may promote the Glory of God, be serviceable to his
Church, and as a Testimonial of Gratitude, be acceptable to your Lord ship, is
the most importunate desire, and hearty breathing of

My Lord, Your Honors most deeply devoted and most humble Servant, John
Stillingfleet.
Beckingham, November. 8. 1662.
The Preface to the Reader.
WEre Hyeroglyphicks as usual and intelligible with us, as formerly they have
been amongst the Egyptians, I should have made no other Preface, or address to
the Reader, than by presenting to him, the portraiture of Justice and Charity
in the frontispeece of this small Treatise. For the main scope and design of my
present undertaking, is to vindicate the Public Worship of God, and his sacred
Ordinances, from that undervaluing contempt, which has been thrown upon them,
by Quakers, Familists, Libertines, Anabaptists, Sectaries, and Separatists, of
all sorts and sixes. Now Charity, that makes me look abroad, and take a view
with an eye of pity and tender commiseration, of the distressed, and
distracted estate, of Gods Vineyard planted among us: And me thinks I hear her
rounding me in the ear with the words of Christ to his Spouse in the
Canticles, c. 2. v. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the
Vines: For our Vines have tender Grapes. Heretics and Schismatics, are the
greater and the lesser Foxes, and the hunting and taking of such, is not only a
noble recreation (adaequate indeed for the vast abilities of the most
generously spirited Christians) but also a very charitable undertaking for the
Church of God, in those that can but any ways help forward so serviceable a
design. For these, like Foxes, are both cunning, and cruel, and both ways they
corrupt the Vines, destroy the Churches of Christ. As cunning as a Fox! Where
could we find the Proverb more fully verified, than in the subtle deluding
Schismatics of our age? And for bloody cruelty, can we find a parallel to
these, where they get power? How have the tender Vines, nay the Vineyard of
England, been corrupted, and destroyed of late by such cunning, and cruel
beasts, as these devouring Foxes are? And is it not highly charitable to
endeavor the reclaiming and reformation of those, whose main intendment is to
ruin the Church of God, and decry the precious Truths and Ordinances of the
Gospel? The Wolves were destroyed out of this Land by the wisdom of a
victorious Prince: Oh! that we could see the like deliverance from the Foxes.
Then,

As for Justice, that puts me upon looking well about me at home, since that
in that little spot of ground Divine providence and goodness has called me to
be resident upon, in the work and calling of a Minister of the Gospel, I found
many, even too many of these little Foxes, to have their fixed abode, being
sadly perverted by the gross and strong delusions of the Quakers. These I find
to be such, who have not only rejected the just Authority of the Church, and
the lawful power of the Magistrate in the decent ordering of the external
adjuncts of Religious Worship, but also, with as great indignity against God,
as injury to their own souls, have utterly thrown off the very essentials and
substantials of Gospel Worship. Pride, ignorance, prejudices, errors, and gross
principles of Enthusiasm, have hurried them on to an high degree of contempt of
Public Prayers, Preaching, Sacraments, and the rest of Gods sacred ordinances.
These by right are part of my charge, though they have withdrawn themselves
from being any part of my flock. Not only Charity, but Justice and equity, have
put me upon a deep resentment, of that desperate and forlorn condition, they
have wilfully and obstinately plunged themselves in, by giving up their souls
to gross and strong delusions. To attempt the best means, and to use the most
likely ways and methods for their recovery, seems to me not only truly
charitable, but highly just and equitable: As being obliged, in imitation of my
blessed Redeemer, to do my utmost by all lawful means, to re-gain the lost
sheep, who have voluntarily strayed from the house of Israel. Private
conference, which I have had with many, I have hitherto found very successless,
harp and harrow agreeing as well, as the using of reasons and arguments with
absurd and unreasonable men. Preaching down their errors, though necessary to
preserve others right and sound in the Faith, yet have I found it fruitless
too, to the reclaiming of those, whose grand error is in an utter incapacity
of being reached this way, it self being a wilful absenting from, and a proud
contempt of the Public Ordinances. I have sometimes thought that prayers,
tears, and pity toward such desperately forlorn wretches, were the only means
for reclaiming of them, or else they were for ever undone: These I have thought
must do the work, yet even these have I known, when proffered, and promised, to
be notoriously, and profanely rejected by one, who told me he stood not in
need of the prayers of any. But will they, nill they, the benefit of my
prayers, they must and shall have, till I have reason to believe, that God will
have me to pray no more for them; and how to be assured of that, I know not,
but by being evidently assured, that they have sinned the sin unto death. But
prayers, and the use of other probable means, are no ways inconsistent for the
obtaining of any desired blessing. Considering therefore how industrious the
little Foxes are in searching out their prey, how studiously diligent seducers
all along have been by continual prating in their canting language, and by
publishing their unintelligible phancies, and all to purchase Proselites to
Hell, and to delude poor silly souls into the damnable paths of irrecoverable
ruin, without rich mercy. Out of a deep resentment of that dangerous and
ruinous course, many, not only in my own Parish, but throughout the whole
Nation, are seduced into which took its rise principally from the rejection of
the Public Worship, have I adventured the publication of this small Treatise,
as an antidote, through Gods blessing, against that corroding Canker, and
spreading gangrene of heretical and diabolical delusions. If many poor souls
thus grossly deceived, were but rationally convinced, that by leaving Gods
public instituted Worship, they did throw off Gods special presence, and
violently rush upon the Devils ground, I am apt to believe a little mature
consideration, would suddenly reduce them to their right wits, and then to the
right ways of Gods Worship again. This have I made my present task, to
convince souls of Gods special Presence, in the places, and assemblies of
public instituted Worship of God. This truth, if once admitted with rational
satisfaction to the mind, those other errors and delusions, which are taken up
partly upon mere ignorance, partly through mis-apprehensions, and gross
prejudices, by a sound and solid discovery of the mind of God in his Public
Ordinances, would soon vanish away, and dwindle into nothing. What remains,
shall be only to implore an effectual blessing from Heaven, upon these weak
endeavors of mine, That they may promote piety prevent apostasy, raise those
that are fallen, confirm those that stand upright in the ways of God, and
contribute somewhat or other to the furtherance of souls in their progress
toward the new Jerusalem.

Thine in all Christian service, John Stillingsleete.
July 22. 1662.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. SElf-reflection discovers the being of an Omnipotent God. Gods
Omnipresence. These two introductory to this discourse. The right use of a
Light within. The Scriptures declare and prove Gods Omnipresence. Several
degrees of Gods special Presence. The design of this Treatise. Pages, 1 Chap.
II. The World made for God himself. Preserved for the Churches good. God
respects the Church as his Presence Chamber. His singular favor for it. His
gracious presence in it. The Original of that, The nearer the Church, the
further off from God. The Saints panting after Gods presence in public. Psalm.
42.2. cleared. Why the wicked slight it, and desire it not. Pages, 13 Chap.
III. Genesis 4.16. And Cain went out (...) presence of the Lord, etc. The place
cleared, out of the Original, by parallel places of Scripture; by the
concurrent Judgment of learned men. Cains dwelling in the Land of Nod. The
basis of the ensuing discourse, Pages, 26 Chap. IV. Adorability proper unto
God, Mat. 4.10. explained. Socinians, Papists, and others mistaken. Why the
Heathen never admitted the Worship of the true God. All intelligent creatures
obliged to actual Adoration. The Angelical Worship how performed. Man being of
a mixed nature bound to time and place in his Worship. The Original of the
Sabbath. The necessity of Public places, the convenience of Churches. Set
places for Worship; some commanded, some approved. The Tabernacle. The Temple.
The use, difference, and original of Proseucha's, and Synagogues. Gods
Symbolical presence in the Old Testament. The Shecinah. Ceremonial holiness of
places removed. Difference betwixt the Temple, and our Churches. Pages, 38
Chap. V. (...) special Presence set out by his Train and Retinue of Angels,
Psalm. 68.17. cleared. The presence of Angels in places of Religious Worship
under the Gospel. Angels Ministering Spirits, 1 Cor. 11.10. explained and
vindicated. Because of the Angels. Not meant of Ministers. Not of the Devils.
Not propounded to excite to an imitation of the holy Angels. Why the Argument
is drawn from Angels to urge decency and reverence in Religious Worship in
Public. Pages, 75 Chap. VI. Practical Inferences drawn from the Angels
presence in the places of Worship, and Religious Service. Sitting at Prayer,
sleeping at Sermons, worshipping of Angels, all condemned. Pages, 94 Chap.
VIII. Gods Presence in Public Worship by his Word. The Word of God an
Instrument of Conversion, Romans 10, 17.1 Cor. 1.21. opened. Why Preaching of the
Word is deemed foolishness. The Word reaches to the heart. It discovers secret
thoughts, secret sins; answers doubts; yields suitable comforts. Two
peculiarities of Gods Word. Revealing Mysterious Truths. Pressing of Practical
Duties. The life of Faith. Heavenly-mindedness. Mortification of sin. Inward
Humility. Pages, 100 Chap. VIII. Practical Inferences from the second Argument.
Teachers of the Word must not corrupt the Word of God. Hearers must own it as
the Word of God. And must receive it with Reverence. Mingle it with Faith.
Practice it with Obedience. Avoid a curious pleasing of the ear. Both Teachers
and hearers must highly prize it. Pages, 120 Chap. IX. Gods Presence in his
Worship by his ministers. The truths of God must be heard though from ungodly
Ministers. Preachers are Gods Ambassadors. Stewards of the mysteries of God.
Four requisites in Gospel Stewards. Ministers are Co-workers with God. How God
and man work together in the conversion of Souls, and production of saving
Faith. Pages, 130 Chap. X. Practical deductions from Gods Presence with his
Ministers. The Ministers dignity. Their duty. As Ambassadors. As Stewards. As
Co-workers with God. People must eye God and not men. Prize Gospel truths. Not
be prejudiced against, nor undervaluers of Gospel Ministers. Good grounds for
Ministers to Preach, and people to hear. Pages, 146 Chap. XI. Gods Presence in
his Worship, by the Holy Spirit. The Presence of the Spirit proved by sundry
Texts of Scripture. The Word and Spirit go together. The teaching of the
Spirit, no plea for Enthusiasm. The Word of the Gospel, the ministration of the
Spirit. Ten Reasons grounded on experience, evidencing the Presence, and
teaching of the Spirit in the Word. Pages, 152 Chap. XII. Quest. How does the
Spirit teach? Removendo. Removing impediments, unwillingness to be taught.
Fleshly lusts. Pride. Curiosity. Five ways Satan promotes Curiosity.
Suggerendo. By suggesting Gospel Truths to the Soul. 1 John 2.27. John. 16.13.
Expl. Illuminando. By enlightening the mind. Ephesians. 5.8. Opened. Inward light of
the Saints, stated. Corroborando. By strengthening the Soul. Recolligendo. By
raising Truths. Heb. 2.1. John 14.26. Explained. Pages, 171 Chap. XIII. Quest.
What are the qualifications of the Spirits teaching? Answ. He teaches fully,
pleasantly, seasonably, certainly. 1 Cor. 2.4. expl. Profitably, in that he
teaches, practically, and particularly. Gradually; The Spirits gradual
teaching, brings in no New Lights objective. The remarkable Vision of five
Lights noted. Pages, 189 Chap. XIV. Practical Deductions from Gods Presence by
his Spirit. Matter for examination and trial. Seven Rules to try whether we
are taught by Gods Spirit. Exhortation to own the Spirit as our Grand Teacher.
Motives and Directions. Matter of Reproof to those that are all for the Spirit,
and nothing for the Word. To Formalists. To Carnal and careless Persons. Matter
of Consolation to true Christians. The Spirit teaches them the best lessons.
Especially four. They are taught to walk in the best way. To aim at the best
ends. Pages, 206
SHECINAH: OR, A Demonstration of the Divine Presence, in the places of
Religious Worship.
CHAP. I. Self-Reflection discovers the being of an Omnipotent God, Gods
Omnipresence: These two introductory to this Discourse. The right use of a
Light within. The Scriptures declare and prove Gods Omnipresence. Several
degrees of Gods special presence. The Design of this Treatise.
. 1. Man's rational Reflection upon himself, if faithfully improved, would, with
convincing evidence, secure him, both against Atheism, and Irreligion. The
sound acknowledgement of a Deity, presently leads the mind to a Religious
Apprehension of him: For that comes short of a truly Divine Being, and cannot
rationally be owned as God, which when discovered, does not forthwith present
it self to intelligent creatures as the true object of their Religious Worship,
and Sacred Adoration: Now Self-reflection may easily discover that there is a
God, and this may serve to rout Atheism. And that same mind that is able thus
to discover a Deity, does also naturally prompt us to an acknowledgement of
that undoubted homage which is the unquestionable right of the Supreme
Sovereign of the world, viz. Religious Worship, and Adoration: And this speaks
Religion to be highly rational, as that which is connatural to intelligent
creatures, and withal brands Irreligion, with the greatest unreasonableness in
the world. Let us a little consider now what Self-reflection can do toward the
discovery of a Deity. It Is evident that man's soul is not limited, and
restrained only to direct Acts in its operation, but it is usually as able to
reflect upon its own Actions, and take a review of them, as it is at the first,
in a direct Act of knowledge, to apply its self to any peculiar intelligible
Object. As Scripture plainly intimates a distinction 'twixt the direct and
reflect Acts of Faith: 1 John 5.13
So the constant experience of a rational soul, evidences a clear distinction
of the reflect Acts of knowledge, from those that are direct. For the mind in
its reflection, peculiarly fixes upon its own former Actions, as the proper
object it converses about: But as it exerts direct Acts of knowledge, its
circumference is as large, as the latitude of Beings, or objects that are in
themselves intelligible. Suppose now a contemplative mind, setting it self to
take a true scantling of man's nature; it must needs abstract the humane nature
from all those conditions, that would limit it to individual persons; and it
must conceive it as somewhat common to all men; here is a direct act of the
mind: But when he reviews this Action, and narrowly searches into the manner of
apprehending, and distinct understanding of the humane nature, and takes notice
of the power, and species, by which the act of the mind was exerted; this is
properly Reflection. Now the mind by this may clearly perceive, that those
intellectual Images which represented the nature of man, as abstracted from all
material accidents, cannot be corporeal and material themselves, but
immaterial, and refined from the dreggs and dross of matter. These being
immaterial, do necessarily require a Spiritual Power, and Incorporeal Substance
to reside in, as their proper subject. Therefore it follows, the rational soul
that thus reflects upon its self, can be no other than an incorporeal, and
immaterial substance. If it further searches into the Original of an immaterial
substance, as the soul of man is concluded to be; it cannot but conclude, that
it could not possibly be made of any pre-existent matter, when in its own
nature it is immaterial or spiritual. Besides, the nobleness of its being, and
the excellency of its operations, speaks it to be of no mean, earthly, or
sublunary extraction. If the soul (being immaterial) cannot be generated, or
made by any material production; it remains, it must have its being immediately
raised out of nothing, which (being a work of Omnipotency) will evidently
demonstrate the being of an Infinite, and Omnipotent Agent, which first gave
life, and being, to an immortal, and immaterial soul, which can be no other
than God himself.

2. Having thus discovered the Being of God, and that he must be of an
Infinite Power, to create an incorporeal substance out of nothing; it were no
difficult task, to demonstrate the rest of Gods Attributes, from this, that he
is Omnipotent, or of an Infinite Power. But to pass by all other Attributes, I
shall only consider the necessary Inference, of Gods Immensity or
Omnipresence, from the presupposed Being of his Infinite Power. For a Being or
Agent of Infinite Power, must of necessity be of an Infinite Essence; because
otherwise the principle of operation would transcend the nature of the Essence
and Being; and a Finite Essence would absolutely and simply be invested with an
Infinite Power; which is as repugnant to right reason, as derogatory to the
nature of the Supreme Being, or Being of Beings, God blessed for evermore. If
the Essence be infinite, that is, of Infinite Power, it follows, that that
Essence cannot be limited, or restrained to any finite space: For that which is
any ways limited, cannot every ways, and absolutely be Infinite. If an
Infinite Essence be not limited by any finite space; then this created Fabric
of the world (being finite, because created) cannot contain it within its
bounds. But as it is every where present in the world, so being infinite, it
must needs exceed the limits of every creature; and so also the largest bounds
of the highest Heavens: So that God which is Infinite, and illimited in his
Essence, must necessarily be granted to be in that boundless Imaginary space,
which must be supposed beyond the surface of the world. This may further be
proved thus; either God can produce another creature, in that supposed space,
or he cannot: If he cannot, then he would not be Infinite in his Power, which
would be repugnant to his Being, and the contrary has already been evinced. If
he can, then he would either be present with that creature, or not: If not,
his Essence would not be Infinite, because excluded from that space, where the
creature is supposed to be. If he be present, then either newly present with
it, or he was eternally so: If newly, then there would be a real mutation in
his Being, being present now, where he was not before, which is as derogatory
to Gods Infinite Perfection, as a local restraint and limitation is to the
Infiniteness of his Essence. It remains then, that he was eternally present
there, and if so, then he always was in that boundless Imaginary space, where
the creature was supposed to be produced, which was the matter to be proved.

3. That this Introduction thus industriously designed, may not to any one seem
wholly unsuitable to the ensuing discourse, concerning the special Presence of
God: I would advise the Reader, seriously to weigh both the matter expressed,
and the manner of its discovery; and he shall find both highly subservient to
my main design. The chief matter is Gods Omnipotency, and his Immensity, or
Omnipresence. Consider these jointly, so they are a solid foundation for that
Religious Worship that is due to God; for both Omnipotency and Omnipresence,
are necessarily required in the proper object of Religious Adoration, as is
more fully shown, c. 4. 2. C. 4. 2.
And Gods Omnipresence considered singly by its self, and abstractly from the
other, is presented as a necessary Caution, to less wary minds, to secure them
from all those unworthy thoughts, that may any ways derogate from the
Infiniteness of his Essence, when they shall see a discovery made of Gods
special Presence, in the places of his Public Worship under the Gospel. For
Gods special manifestation of himself, either in Heaven, or in the Temple of
old, or in his Church, and faithful Servants now a days, as places of his
peculiar residence, is no ways inconsistent with his natural Immensity; and
being every where present, as I shall more fully declare, in the sequel of this
ensuing Discourse.

4. If we do again consider the manner of discovery of these two
forementioned Attributes, viz. that it is by the very light of nature, and by
the improvement of right reason, and understanding (that common benefit, that
Christ enlightens every one withal that comes into the world.) Joh. 1.9.
Quakers.
This may let that fond generation of people know, who are so hugely enamoured
with, and do so superstitiously dote upon, their so much admired and adored
notion, of A Light within: That there is other work that God has designed that
inward Light for, than by its native, strength, luster, and radiancy,
infallability to guide us, if faithfully followed, as they no less profanely,
than ignorantly do imagine, to the place of bliss, and eternal happiness. For,
consider this inward Light, in its speculative part, we see in some measure
what useful discoveries it may accommodate us withal, by what has been before
mentioned. And look upon it again in its practical office, as it sparkles in
man's natural conscience, so it may be very serviceable to the design of
Christianity, when inward convictions of many gross sins, repugnant to the very
dictates of natural light, do render us restless in our spirits, till we have
found a more spiritual conviction of sin, by the Law of God revealed in his
Word, and a conversion from them unto God, through Christ, by the Holy Spirit,
according to the tenor of the New and Gospel Covenant. But that this Inward
Light, which the Wise man styles the Candle of the Lord, and at the best, Pro.
20.27
burns but in the socket of a corrupt mind, with very much dimness, should ever
discover the right and ready way to the New Jerusalem; is the product only of
men's foolish fancies, their pride, and ignorance. Would not from hence a strong
impeachment of the Divine Wisdom be raised, that he should send Christ into
the world, to purchase salvation for lost, and fallen man, when by this inward
Light, he might have obtained it well enough before?

5. Having thus briefly hinted the benefit of Self-Reflection, and the true use
of in Inward Light, which, as it is common to all men, so it is but of common
concernment in order to salvation, of which more, (...) its proper place. chapter
12. 8, 9
I shall now in the close pursuit of my present intendment, betake my self to
Divine Revelation. And what Caution I before handled from the light of nature,
is as necessary in the first place to be shown, from Divine Revelation in the
Holy Scriptures, viz. That God is every where present, filling all places, and
spaces, both real and imaginary by his Immensity, 1 King. 8.27. Behold the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10 Isa. 66.1
Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I cannot see him; do
not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Scripture does not only barely
assert, but with strength of Argument prove Gods Omnipresence, Act. 17. Act.
17.27, 28
He is not far from every one of us; for in him we live, and move, and have
our being. For indeed, we cannot otherwise know the presence of a Spiritual
Being, than by its operations: And it seems no less impossible, for one to
produce any thing immediately where he is not, than when he is not at all in
being. Now we living, and moving, and having our being in, and by God, it must
necessarily follow, that God is present with us, and every thing that either
lives, moves, or has a being.

6. But though God be every where present, and so with every creature equally,
in regard of his Infinite Essence, and of his Immensity: Yet as to the
Specialty and peculiar Efficacy of his presence, he is not with all, either
things, or places and persons, after the same manner present. For it has been
observed, that the Scriptures do evidently set out, diverse degrees of Gods
special presence. The first, and chiefest, Gods Presence, 1 Of union.
is with the humane nature of Christ, which God the Son, the second person of
the Trinity, has hypostatically united to himself, and really taken into the
unity of his own person: Whence God is said to be made man, the Word to be made
flesh. Joh. 1.14
This is the sublimest mystery in the world, that two natures should be so
united, as to become one person. And the highest, and most wonderful degree of
Gods presence, that ever was. A second degree, and the lowest, 2 Of Providence.
is, that God is present with all his creatures, as the preserver, guider, and
governor of them. A third degree is, 3 Of Glory.
that God is present with the Glorified Saints and Angels in Heaven, whom he
does not only uphold in their Being, but peculiarly vouchsafes to them the
solace and sweetness of never fading bliss and happiness. A fourth degree is; 4
Of Grace.
Gods special Presence with his own people, whose temporal life he does not
only preserve and sustain, but also by his grace prepares them for life
eternal. This Special Presence of God is that which is promised to Gods people
in his Church, 2 Chronicles. 15.2
in his Ordinances. Thus Azariah told Asa, and Judah, and Benjamin; The Lord is
with you, while ye be with him. The presence of Gods Grace, and his singular
Favor, is assured to those that continue in Gods ways. Thus David in
banishment, earnestly, and importunately breathes after the enjoyment of God,
in his Church, and Ordinances. Psa. 42.1
As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God. David knew, that God, who was every where, could not but be present with
him in his exile. But his desire here is for Gods special presence in his
Church. He acknowledges therefore, Pareus Advers.
that there is a very great use of Public, Holy Assemblies, and that there is
none so holy and perfect, but that stands in need of the hearing of the Word,
and pious use of the Sacraments. And against those, on whom he turns this
present place of David, is my design mainly intended, viz. contra cos, qui,
quoniam sibi sapientes videntur, conciones sacras, and Sacramenta negligunt.
Against those, who, because they are wise in their own conceit, do neglect all
Public Sermons and Sacraments.

CHAP. II. The World made for God himself, preserved for the Churches good. God
respects the Church as his Presence Chamber. His singular Favor for it. His
gracious Presence in it. The Original of that. The nearer the Church, the
further off from God. The Saints panting after Gods presence in Public, Psalm.
42.2. cleared, why the wicked slight it, and desire it not.
1. God having curiously and wonderfully framed the stately Fabric of the
World, left it not, as the ablest and exactest Artificers, are wont to leave
the chiefest Pieces of their Workmanship. The skilful Carpenter, when he has
taken much care and pains in building of an house, looks no more after it;
because he makes it not for himself. But when we look upon the Visible World
(whose builder and maker is God) we find that it was made for himself; Pro.
16.4.
he having made all things for himself, and therefore it co^^^^ him to uphold
it, and preserve it, as we as create it. Though Gods Right, and Sovereign
Dominion over the creatures, does not arise from the highest benefits he has
bestowed on them, even that of their very Being by Creation, but from that
supereminent Excellency of his own Being and Essence; yet having bestowed a
Being on them by his Power, he counts himself obliged in point of honor, to
give them a necessary support in their Being, by Preservation and Providence.
The whole World was made, as a Mansion House for himself, and would not this be
ready to sink under its own ruins, and presently creep again into the bosom
of nonentity, if God should withdraw his manutenency, and leave it to it self,
as it is created? And why God should not suffer the Creation to dwindle into
nothing, and return to its first principles, especially, since that it groans
under the heavy burden of man's sin, and degeneracy from God: There can, I
think, no more pertinent reason be given for it, than this, that God has made
all things in it, but some things more peculiarly, for himself. It cannot but
seem very rational, that that which has been, throughout all ages the chiefest
object of Gods Providence in the world, should be looked on, as the chiefest
intendment of his Preservation of the world its self, in its Being, and that
is, next to Gods Glory, the Good of his Church. Is not this lively represented
to us in that temporal Salvation which was freely promised to Sodom and
Gomorrah (a little world of sin and iniquity) if that ten righteous persons
could have been found therein? Genesis 18.32
And we have God himself inquiring in Jerusalem, but for one man, Jer. 5.1
that executes Judgment, that seeks Truth, and he will pardon it; if but a
man can be found. What reason then have we, but to conclude, that the world
had presently fallen about man's ears, after his degeneracy, had there not been
a Peculiar People, a Royal Seed, even the Church of God, to be raised out of
the ruins of fallen man, by the interposing of Christ, first proffered and
propounded for the worlds reparation, in that Fundamental Promise, Genesis 3.15
The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head.

2. God having made the whole world as his Royal Mansion, yet he has reserved
that part of it which he owns as his Church, to be as it were his Presence
Chamber. Look to the place of bliss and happiness, where the spirits of Just
Men are made perfect there God does in an eminent manner discover the tokens of
his Glorious Presence, it the midst of the Church Triumphant. Look to the place
of our Pilgrimage, where the best of Gods Children are but sojourner and
strangers, as all their Fathers were: Here God displayes his banners of love,
and discovers the Signal Tokens of his singular Favor and presence amongst
those, who are sighting the good fight of Faith, under Christ their Captain, in
the midst of the Church Militant. And that Gods care has always been very
great toward his chosen and peculiar people, and his favorable aspect upon
those that tremble at his word, may hence appear, in that the visible parts of
Gods Creation, have been in all ages, by an Omnipotent Arm, made
extraordinarily subservient to their safety and preservation. As might be shown
in the Seas division for the Israelites deliverance. Exodus 14.
In the rebating of the natural effect of the fire, Dan. 3.
for the preservation of the Three Children in the fiery Furnace; and in the
Suns standing still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley of Ajalon, till Gods
people were avenged of their enemies, and the reason is given, For the Lord
fought for Israel. Josh. 30.
And indeed this might be made evidently apparent in a multitude of other
instances of the like nature, of each of which may be truly said, what Calvin
expressed of the last mentioned passage in Joshua; Hic autem refulget
singularis Dei favor erga Ecclesiam: calvin in locum.
They were all visible tokens of Gods singular favor toward his Church.] But
amongst all the manifestations of Gods presence and favor, there are none more
remarkably signal, for constant reviving and comforting the hearts of his
people, than those that have been truly experienced in his Ordinances, enjoyed
by his servants in those places, which either by divine appointment, or at
least by divine Approbation, have been separated, and set apart for Religious
Worship, and the Service of God.

3. Considering now, that great experenced reality of Gods gracious Presence in
his Ordinances, and in those places and Assemblies where they are
conscientiously attended upon; may it not seem very strange, that amongst us,
who generally own the Public instituted Worship of God, That should be owned
as a current expression, which is so much derogatory to it, and carries much
more of profaneness, than of truth in it, viz. The n^erer the Church, the
further off from God. I confess in our English Nation, Custom has made it
very common, and some men's carelessness has made it too true. But take it in
its latitude, and it better suits the Irreligious Italians, from whom it had
its original, than sincere Professors of Christianity, on whom afterages have
cast it. For the Italians do abhor Religion, because they see the Pope make a
politic Robe of it, taking the liberty of putting it on, and off, as best
suits his occasions: So that he may be said to imitate Peter only in this, in
denying of his Lord and Master. And at their door let us leave this Babylonish
Brat, which indeed seems to degenerate, by speaking so plainly the English
Tongue; the Latin only had been more proper for it, it being purely of the
Roman breed.

4. And as for sincere Christians, that have their senses exercised in the
things of God, that are neither bewitched under the power of sin, nor besotted
with any prevailing errors, they dare boldly contradict it as profane, and
untrue. For their often experience can evidence to the world, the nearer they
come to the Church and Ordinances of God, the nearer they come to God too:
Because there they are wont to have an heart-ravishing, and truly comfortable
meeting with God, unless they are extremely wanting to themselves. What made
David wish to be a Doorkeeper in the house of God, rather than to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness? was it not because he could experimentally say, It was
good for me to draw nigh unto God? And in his house and Ordinances he was
wont to find him: What made his panting soul breathe after the waters of the
Sanctuary? was it not because he often found the refreshing streams of Gods
Presence there? An experienced Child of God, is out of his element, when
debarred from Gods Public Worship, and sits down restless, and dis-satisfied,
when he is thus kept off from such communion with God, who is the only Center
of the Souls Peace, and of all solid satisfaction. See with what pathetical
language, David, exiled from the Sanctuary, breathes out his pitiful, sad, and
lamentable condition unto God. Psa. 42.2, etc.
My soul thirsts for God, for the Living God; when shall I come and appear
before God? my tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually
say unto me, where is thy God? when I remember these things, I pour out my
soul in me; for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the House
of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept Holy Day.
Why art thou cast down, oh my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me! Is this
nothing unto you, all ye that pass by, to hear the doleful moan, and
heartbreaking complaint of a Child of God, debarred from Gods Worship? And
dare you count it your privilege, your perfection, to throw off Gods Public
Ordinances, with an admiration of your silent and dumb Congregagation in
private? A Quaker told me, he got more good by their silent meetings, than
ever he got by hearing the Ministers in Public.
must it not needs argue a very sleepy, not to say, a benumbed and besotted
conscience, thus to throw away the wholesome Milk of the Word, in a disdainful
pet, and yet never complain either of the hunger, or thirst of your souls? Or
was David only an Old- Testament Saint, dandled only as an Infant in the
Churches Minority, and that made the poor Babe thus whimper, and cry, and be
impatient, till he enjoy the Milk of the Word? Alas! Alas! this is the temper
of a Saint, as a Saint, and not as educated under this or that dispensation of
the Covenant, to be restless and unsatisfied without, and always to be
hungring and thirsting after God in his Ordinances. --

5. But what means David by that passage? Psalm. 42.2. When shall I come and
appear before God? David himself elsewhere acknowledge this, when his double
question puts this out of all question. Psa. 139, 7, 8.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whither shall I flee from thy
presence? And does not his peremptory assertion clear it beyond all
contradiction, that God is every where present? If I ascend up into Heaven,
thou art there, if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there, etc. It Is
true, and this we have c. 1. 5.
and shall further clear, that God is every where present. But there is another
meaning of this expression of David, than what is here urged, (Though many
perverse spirits tremble at this phrase, to give the meaning of Scripture, as
much now adays, Jacobus Andreas in colloquio. Mom. pel. Jarkimsi.
as a Lutheran once did at the name of a Syllogism, in a conference with Beza,
of whom it is said, ad nomen Syllogismi totus exhorruit) Yet I say, another
meaning of this place, may clearly be seen, by comparing it with other places,
and with the Original. (...)
In the Hebrew it runs thus, when shall I appear before the face of God? The
like phrase we have concerning Uzzah, who, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. died before God,
Hebr. before the face of God. (...)
Which kind of speech, what it means, is fully cleared in a parallel place, 2 Samuel 6.7. And Uzzah died by the Ark of God. David's desire then to appear before
God, is to appear before the Ark of God. And there was great reason for this
his importunate desire, See c. 4. 14.
because the Ark was a token of Gods special presence, and of his audience of
his servants prayers. God ordains not our immediate address to himself in
Heaven (we must live by Faith, and not by vision) But he commands us to use
ordinary means, adapted to our imbecility, and necessary for us to use them as
means, viz. the exercises of Religious Worship, appointed by himself, as the
helps of our Faith, and promoters of our devotion. These David pants earnestly
to enjoy, and being banished from these, he is no less troubled, than if he
were banished from God himself. We see then that the Saints of God had rather
call upon God in the Church and Public Congregation, than in some secret
corner.

1 Because they are assured that it is the mind and will of God, to be honored
publicly, as well as privately to be worshipped, and served only with our
heart. Let your Light so shine before men. Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, I am there in the midst of them. It was therefore the
promise of the Divine Presence in Public Congregations, and Gods special
command that produced this pious desire in David's soul.

2 Because the truly godly have an ardent desire of advancing Gods Glory, and
promoting the salvation of other men. Their desire mainly is, therefore to
worship God in public, that they may by their example excite, and encourage
others to the same Religious Offices, of Piety, and Worship toward God.

3. For the security of their own comfort; For the public voice of the Gospel,
is the Instrument of the Spirit of God, whereby he is wont both to increase
and preserve Faith and Piety in the hearts of his own people. No wonder then if
David heretofore, and the Saints of God in all ages, are so importunately
desirous to enjoy God in his Public Worship.

6. On the other side, wicked men, that have no sense of Gods Gracious
Presence, no saving influence of his heavenly blessing showred down upon their
souls, in the use of the Public Means, they, like clouds without water, are
carried away with the winds of false Doctrine. These men, like Trees without
sap, soon wither, and lose their former flourishing beauty: Their pretended
love to God, in his Ordinances, is still on the decaying hand, and their very
Profession, by little and little, comes at last to dwindle into nothing. Brown
Bread and the Gospel, would come far short of being a satisfying portion to
these men's spirits, who can sit down contented well enough, without the
apprehension of any great disadvantage, in being deprived of the comfortable
presence of God, in his Public Ordinances. Alas! what is the reason of all
this? Truly it is because they never tasted how gracious the Lord is. For as
one well observes, Ex gusta est amor ex amore est absentis desideri^m Rolloc ^n
Psa 84
From tasting does arise love, and from love the desire of an Absent God. And
blessed are those that hunger and thirst after Righteousness. But alas! wicked
hearts, that never yet at any time tasted how gracious the Lord is, by his
refroshing, and reviving presence in Gospel means; they are ravished with no
kind of love of God at all, and they which never love God, never earnestly
breathe, and desire after God, when he is absent from them. Quae non est causa
cur videas multes destitui visibili hac Dei praesentia, quae est in Ministerio
ipsius neque tamen ea re vel tantillum commoveri? Nunquam illi gustarunt quam
suavis sit hac Dei praesentia in Ministerio suo. Id. ibid.
What is the cause that so many are seen destitute of this Visible Presence of
God, which is in his Ministry, and yet not in the least moved at it? Alas! they
never tasted how sweet and pleasant this presence of God is. Hence it is that
there is no love of God, and hence again, no desire after him. But what shall
we think of those men, who do not only willingly suffer themselves to be
deprived of this Presence of God, but also by all ways, and means possible,
hate, persecute and oppose it? How do these men stand affected either to God,
the Gospel, or their own souls? Well! however Sampsons Foxes may have their
heads looking diverse ways, yet they are joined together with Firebrarnds in
their tails. And however those that desert the Public Means, may tend some of
them to profaneness, others to a Schismatical, not to say Heretical Separation
(many Heresies going currantly for new lights) yet this is the Firebrand, or
rather the Devils dead coal, that is common to them both, to wit, an
unexperience of Gods gracious presence, and comfortable appearance unto souls,
in the Public means of his own appointing. And when wicked men's offerings are
not accepted, they are ready to throw off Divine Ordinances, and Gods Worship
too. A memorable instance we have of this in accursed Cain. Genesis 4.16
And he went out from the presence of God, and dwelt in the Land of Nod.

CHAP. III. Genesis 4.16. And Cain went out of the presence of the Lord, etc.
The place cleared, Out of the Original, by parallel places of Scripture. By the
concurrent Judgment of Learned men. Cains dwelling in the Land of Nod. The
basis of the ensuing discourse.
1. THe last mentioned place, Genesis 4.16. being of great usefulness as to my
present design, and of some difficulty in its self, I shall not count it lost
labor to spend this chapter in the brief explication of it. And Cain went out
of the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod. In the general view
and consideration of the whole verse, two things are presented to us.

First, Cains sad farewell to his best friends, in that first, he leaves his
Fathers Family: Having killed his Brother Abel, he bids farewell to his Father
and Mother too: In killing his Brother, he had stabbed all his comfort at home:
He could expect nothing but frowns from them, whom his malice and madness had
bereft of a tender Child; this is implied. Secondly, in leaving his Parents,
he shakes hands with, and shamefully leaves, his most absolute and best friend
too, even one that would be a friend indeed, when Father and Mother forsake
one, viz. God himself. And he went out of the presence of the Lord. Whilst
with his Parents, he was in the place of Gods Worship; the whole Church of God
was then in Adams Family. Junius.
Now in leaving of it, he forsakes Gods Worship, and Ordinances, and so
forsakes God too: And this seems to be the saddest farewell of any in the whole
world, to leave our Parents, and our God together. And Cain went out of the
presence of the Lord.

2. The woeful unsettlement he brings himself into: And dwelt in the Land of
Nod; Vagari
that is, of wandering: And indeed he must needs be unsettled, who once leaves
God, Jude (...)
the Center of Rest. If Parents are left, and God forsaken, no wonder if rest,
and quietness, and comfort, and settlement, are all lost too. It follows
presently upon the leaving of Gods presence, that he dwelt in the Land of Nod.

2. But to give further light into the full meaning of the place, two questions
are necessary to be resolved.

Quest. 1. How is Cain said to go forth out of Gods presence? (...) from the
face or presence of the Lord.

Answ. 1. It cannot be meant of his presence of glory. The enjoyment of Gods
presence of Glory, is a privilege only of the life to come, of which Cain,
upon the account of the present state he was in, was incapable of, he being
yet a Citizen of this world, and his soul confined to a Tabernacle of Clay.
Besides, what should a murderer do in Gods glorious presence, he can never
come there without repentance. For vileness and vanity, to obtain the
beatifical Vision, is wholly impossible.

2. It is not meant of Gods natural and essential presence. Psa. 139.7
Whither shall I flee from thy presence? says David. And whither could Cain
flee from God, who is Omnipresent? The Circle of an Infinite Being, has its
Center every where, and its Circumference no where, and there is no avoiding of
his presence. In vain shall the wicked call to the Hills to fall on them, and
to the Mountains to cover them, when even there the wrath of an Omnipresent,
and sin-revenging God, will find them out, and seize upon them. How could God
exert his Vindicative Justice, on rebellious Mortals, if they could either
cunningly sculk, or cowardly sneak out of his presence? As God is in Heaven by
his Glory, so is he in Hell by his Justice; yea every where by his Essence,
where any of his Attributes have any operation. And it is as possible for a
Creature to turn its self absolutely into nothing, as it is for it, to withdraw
from the Omnipresence of God.

3. As to the presence of Gods Grace, we must distinguish. For this is twofold.

First, That whereby he enlivens men's persons, without which they remain dead
in sins. Thus is he present always with his Saints, this is not here meant.
Cain never went from this presence, for he never enjoyed it. Never any yet
brought Cain as an instance, or example of falling from Grace, which would be
very plain, if it were meant of this presence.

Secondly, That whereby he enlivens his Ordinances; without which they are as
an empty sound, and a dead letter. God is singularly present, where he is
worshipped, and his Ordinances enjoyed. Where two or three are gathered
together, I will be there in the midst of them. Cain forsook Gods presence,
when he left the place of Gods Worship, and his Ordinances.

3. That this is the meaning of that place, will appear,

1. From the intendment and purport of the Hebrew phrase, (...) a facibus
Domini.
From the face, or presence of the Lord. The face of God in Scripture is often
used to set out the presence of God in his Ordinances, in the Congregation of
his people, Vid. Glassii Rhetor. Sacr. Tr. 1. c. 7.
Exodus 23.15. None shall appear before me empty. In the Hebrew thus, (...) My
face shall not be seen, which is meant of his presence, in his Worship, in the
place appointed. Verse. 17. Three times thy males shall appear before the Lord,
Hebr. (...) before the face of the Lord. Therefore the Shewbread is called
panis facierum, Exodus 25.30. (...) panis facierum ex eo quod immediate
sequitur. (...) juxta faciem meam semper. Schindl. Lex. Pentag.
the bread of faces, or of Gods presence, because it always stood before God
in the place of his Worship. Or, as Aynsworth fully expresses it, because the
Shewbread was always to be set before the face, or in the presence of God
continually. We may find this phrase, The face of God, used often, to denote
Gods presence, in the Scripture. And that Moses in this place, made use of this
same kind of speech, to set out Gods presence, in his Worship, though that
which first occasioned it, was not till the Sanctuary was erected for Gods
Service, fully known. It is by a Prolepsis usual, and frequent in Scripture.
Another Instance of which we have in the very verse before us; And he dwelt
in the Land of Nod. Though the Land had its name from Cains wandering, yet by an
Anticipation, it is here set down, as if it had been called, the Land of Nod,
before ever Cain came there.

2. From parallel Scriptures. The same phrase occurs twice in one verse. Jonah
1.3 (...)
And Jonah went down to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. The same words
in the Hebr. with those in Genesis 4. Jonah would have left Gods Church, and have
flown to Tarshish, where the Heathen lived. He knew, that out of the holy
Land, there were no Visions nor Revelations, and so thought God would trouble
him no more with his Message to Nineveh, when he was in those strange places.
This, one thus explains; The presence of God, Vide Mercer. in locum. Baro in
lon. c. 1. prael. 7. p. 46
is here taken for Gods singular presence and favor; not that whereby he is
every where present, but with which he manifests his favor to certain
peculiar families, and the persons in them. Hence God is said sometimes to be
absent, sometimes present. In which sense Cain is said to go out of the
presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.16. that is, from the favor, and singular
presence of God. For since he could be no where, but he must needs be in Gods
sight; Moses here says, he went out of Gods presence, because, when the rest
of Adams children continued in the favor of God, with which he cherishes and
supports his own people; Cain, only as a Vagabond departs from God, and from
that place and company, Ab ce loco and coetu.
in which God was wont to manifest his singular grace. But that this phrase
does denote Gods presence in the place of his Worship, may most clearly, by
comparing two places, appear. In 1 Chronicles. 16.29. Bring an Offering, 1 Chronicles.
16.29. with Psalm. 96.8
and come before him; Hebr, (...) the same with that in the forecited place.
And this, in Psalm. 96.8. is explained, the Courts of God, the place of Divine
Worship. Bring an Offering, and come into his Courts. These are terms
equipollent.

3. This may further be evidenced by the concurrent Judgment, of very many,
able, and learned Expositors. Some of which I shall here mention. Piscat. in
Genesis 4.14
From his presence] that is, from the place where his Parents, with their
family, were met together, for the Worship of God, with which kind of
Congregations God is wont to be present with his singular Grace. Junius thus,
Junius Anal. in Genesis T. 1
He went out of the presence of the Lord, and so also out of the presence of
his Parents, and of the Church of God, that was remaining with them. Glass.
Rhet. Sac. 1. Tr. c. 7
Glassius explains it thus, A loco in quo Parents ejus Deo cultum praestabant,
He went out from the place where his Parents were wont to worship God. A
threefold cord is not so easily broken. I might add others. The English
Annotations are as express in this sense as any. ^ey in L. Aynsworth ^n Loc.
Let me only add what Aynsworth notes on these words, From his presence] that
is, from the place of his Public Worship, and his Word, which was held by
Adam, who taught his children how to sacrifize, and serve the Lord. So that
Cains leaving Gods presence, is casting off Gods Ordinances, and leaving his
Worship in Public. Thus much may serve to answer the first question.

4. The second Question, What is meant by Cains dwelling in the Land of Nod?

Ans. 1. V. Chr. Cart-Wright in Genesis
Some think the name here to be a mere Appellative, and not the name of a
place. Thus S. Hierom, who interprets Nod, by (...), one wandering and wavering
up and down, in the Earth. And thus he thinks Gods curse is fulfilled on Cain,
who says he should be (...) Verse. 12. A Fugitive, and a Vagabond, thou shall
be on the Earth. But the description of this Land of Nod, by the punctual
situation, in the end of the verse, Nod on the East of Eden. Is a sufficient
confutation of this Opinion.

2. It Is evident, the place is so called by a Prolepsis, or Anticipation from
Cains wandering there. For it was not called by that name, till he came to it.
This I find agreed on by all those I have seen, except the foresaid Author.
And it seems to me very clear, that not only the place where Cain was, but
also the state and condition that he was in, is hinted to us by that
expression, the Land of Nod, which comes from (...) Vagari. Thus the learned
Bochartus renders it. Bochart. Geog. Sa p. 57 Junius Anal. in Genesis T. 1.
Terra Nod est terra exilii, quia ibi exulavit Cain, The Land of Nod, is the
Land of Banishment, because Cain was banished there. And likewise Junius, Terra
Nod est terra vagationis and erroris, The Land of Nod is the Land of wandering
and error; yet he there geographically describes the Country: So that the
meaning of it seems to be this, That Cain was in a wandering, unsettled
condition, when once he left Gods presence. Not, but that he was fixed in a
place; for the next verse tells us, he built a City. But, as Luther well
observed, he was without Gods promise, and Gods protection, he was upon the
Devils ground, when he had left Gods Worship. Sine certa Regula, tum vivendi,
tum moriendi, He had no fixed rule either for holy living, or happy dying.

5. Having thus cleared the difficulties of this place, I shall in one word or
two show the usefulness and subserviency of it to my present design, which may
easily be seen in a double corallory, which naturally flows from it.

That the place of Gods Worship, Cor.
is the place of Gods singular presence. And if any think this to be a truth
appropriate only to the Sanctuary, and Temple-service, and to the Ceremonial
Worship of God, under the Law: Let such seriously consider, that though the
phrase be borrowed from Gods manifesting of himself in the Sanctuary, yet Moses
was directed by the Spirit of God, to apply it to Gods Worship, in that time
which was a long while before any Ceremonies were instituted or commanded by
God, as Ceremonies; Though some things were then in use, which afterward were
incorporated into the body of the Jewish Ceremonies. But the Gospel, closing
with, and owning this Truth, as proper to its dispensation, after the coming of
the Messiah, we have no reason but to own it as a sober Truth, pertinent to
the Worship and Service of God in all ages, and to the diverse dispensations,
that the Church lived under: Though we easily grant it to be more visibly
exemplified, under that dispensation which was chiefly Ceremonial. Of which
more afterward. c. 4.. 14 2 Cor.


That they which voluntarily leave Gods Instituted Worship, and his commanded
Ordinances, put themselves into a wandering condition.

The first of these Conclusions I intend chiefly to prosecute, and build upon
it, as the main basis and groundwork of my present discourse.

CHAP. IV. Adorability proper unto God, Mat. 4.10. Expl. Socinians, Papists,
and others mistaken. Why the Heathen never admitted the Worship of the true
God. All intelligent creatures obliged to Actual Adoration. The Angelical
Worship how performed. Man being of a mixed nature, bound to time and place in
his Worship. The Original of the Sabbath. The necessity of Public places, and
convenience of Churches. Set places for Worship, some commanded, some approved.
The Tabernacle. The Temple. The use, difference, and original of Proseucha's
and Synagogues. Gods Symbolical presence in the Old Testament. The Schecinah.
Ceremonial Holiness of places removed. Difference 'twixt the Temple and our
Churches.
1. BEfore I come to the full prosecution, and clear demonstration of the
forementioned Conclusion, I shall endeavor to prepare my way, and to make it
clear, by premising and making good these seven Propositions.

Propos. 1. That God ought to be worshipped, is essential to the Divine Nature.
By Worship in the general, I mean the performance of respect unto any thing, or
person, according to the estimation and dignity thereof. In regard of its
object, it may be either Civil, or Divine Worship. Divine Worship, usually is
called Adoration, which is that whereby the mind yields due reverence, and
respect unto God, owning of him as the Supreme Sovereign of the world, and
depending upon him, as the bestower of all good, and preserver from evil. Now
this Adoration, or Religious Worship, is essential unto the Divine Nature; God
having that in his most perfect Nature, which necessarily calls for it at the
creatures hands. To avoid all mistakes, take the Proposition thus, Adorability
is proper only unto God. This Adorability, or Inward Worship in God, in its
formal notion, seems not to be placed in that Transcendent Excellency, in that
singular and independent Majesty of the Eternal Deity, whereby God is
infinitely above every creature; But it does most specially denote his
Spiritual Dominion over intellectual creatures; and thus God ought to be
worshipped by them in Spirit, as he is the Father of Spirits. For, John 4 24
Heb. 12.9
although Adorability be conceived to be in God from all Eternity, yet it
cannot so much as be imagined, or conceived by us, but as a relative and
respective Attribute of God, which we conceive of, in God, in order to the
creatures, some Action of theirs interposing; so that in Gods Knowledge of
Vision, Deus adorabilis, adorans creabilis, adorationis -- actio possibilis.
we must necessarily suppose these three things to be together; God Adorable,
One adoring Creable, and the Action of Adoration possible. Neither is God said
to be adorable, with a respect had to every creature indifferently: For there
are but two created natures only, viz. that of Men, and of Angels, in
reference to which, God is said to be adorable, and ought to be worshipped by
them.

2. Having thus briefly opened the terms of Worship, Adoration, and
Adorability, I shall now prove the Proposition by these Arguments.

1. Either Spiritual Worship and Adoration is necessary, and naturally due unto
God, and proper unto him alone, or else our Saviors weapon was but weak, that
he used to repel, one of Satan's principal temptations. To undervalue the skill
of Christ our Captain, in the managing of spiritual weapons, against the Devil,
is both blasphemy against God, and undermining of the Gospel, and the greatest
injury to our own Faith. But the very strength and force of our Saviors answer
to the Devil, is couched in this. That Spiritual Adoration is proper only unto
God. It is written, Mar. 4.10
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. It is
written] Our Savior, to instruct us, uses nothing but Scripture Arguments; And
where is this written? Deuteronomy. 6.13
In Deuteronomy eronomy we find it. But the words are thus, Thou shall fear the Lord
thy God, and serve him. Our Saviors Argument is never the worse, nor the
weaker, in that he takes the sense and meaning of the place, though he does
not exactly tie himself to the words. To fear God, is a more general term, and
includes Worship under it; and when our Savior is to deal with Satan, that
would have Worship given to him, he deems it a solid way of reasoning, to
infer a particular from a general, and calls that Scripture that comes by a
clear consequence from it. It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.
And Further, our Savior sticks not to say, It is written, And him only thou
shall serve. Though it be but implied in that place of Moses. Spanhem. Dub.
Evang Par. 3. D. 65. p. 292
For indeed the very nature of the subject spoken of, implies a peculiar
reference unto God alone. Because those things (such as worship and fear) which
are due unto God as God, are due only unto God, with whom no creature can
claim a partnership, in Divine Adoration, without great Sacrilege, and none
can be admitted to it without gross Idolatry.

Argum. 2. If the necessary requisites of the proper object of Adoration be
only in God, then Adorability is proper only unto God. For how can that be
the object of Divine Worship, which is not qualified with those properties, and
attributes, that are necessary for its constitution, in such a capacity? but in
God alone are those requisites found. Which are these three.

Frist, Omniscience, that he that is worshipped, should know all our wants,
our sighs and groans, and know the deepest secrets of the most retired thoughts
of our hearts. As true Worship may inwardly be performed many times, by the
secret thoughts of the mind; so it is necessary, that he that is thus
worshipped, should have a peircing and omniscient eye, to have a clear, and
full view of those very thoughts. For otherwise he may be worshipped, and he
not know it: And then what small comfort would it be for the most spiritual
worshippers, to serve him with their hearts, who, unless he be omniscient,
would be ignorant whether they worshipped him or no.

Secondly, Omnipotency, that he should be able to help us in our wants, and
give in a supply suitable to our greatest grievances, and necessities. Why
should I worship one that is not able to help me? or why should I not worship
and adore any thing else besides God, if that were as able to supply my wants,
and relieve me in any kind of misery, as God is, who is Omnipotent?

Thirdly, Omnipresence, that he should every where hear our prayers, and
answer our requests. This was one great piece of unreasonableness in the
worship of the Heathens, that they made choice of such Gods to worship, which
they themselves acknowledged were confined to particular places, and so could
not be present to help them under any sudden emergency; and because they wanted
power, their worshippers would remain helpless still, though they were present
in their very Temples, the places of their confinement. Now God, the God of
Israel, the Only Being in the world, that is both Omniscient, Omnipotent, and
Omnipresent, and therefore Adorability is proper only to him.

3. This Proposition being thus proved, it may easily be improved, to convince
the Papists of grievous Idolatry, in worshipping those things, with a Religious
Worship, which are not proper objects of Adoration, as Images, Saints, and the
like. As also to condemn the Socinians, those great Patrons of Reason, of their
gross absurdity and unreasonableness, in devesting Christ of his Divinity, and
yet of attributing Divine Worship and Adoration to him, notwithstanding he is
held but a Creature. But I had rather prevent a mistake and miscarriage amongst
ordinary Christians, than stand to confute those, that are visibly the
Disciples of Antichrist, as the former; or those that have really forfeited the
very name of Christians, as the Latter.

The mistake is this, when Christ our Mediator, God and Man, is propounded in
Scripture as the Object of our Religious Worship and Adoration; less wary
minds, may be apt to terminate their Worship, upon his humane nature. When, as
it is evident, the humane nature, and flesh of Christ is not God, though it be
the flesh of God, viz. of God the Son, and personally united to him. But the
personal union, of the Divine and Humane Nature, in Christ the Mediator, does
neither destroy, nor confound the proprieties of either, but leaves them entire
as they are in themselves. And Adorability is no less a propriety of the Divine
Nature, than Omniscience, Omnipotence, Omnipresence, and Eternity are. God
therefore manifest in the flesh, is to be worshipped with a Religious Worship,
but his flesh ought not thus to be worshipped. As the King may be civilly
worshipped, who wears a Crown, or Diadem upon his head, and bears a Scepter,
the emblem of Majesty in his hand, yet neither Crown, nor Diadem, nor Scepter,
can be said to be honored with a civil worship. And the godly, are then said
to have worshipped Christ, when they knew clearly his Divinity, that he was
God as well as Man. As the blind man made whole, when Christ had told him he
was the Son of God, that cured him; Then he said, Joh. 9.37, 38
Lord I believe, and he worshipped him. Thus those that saw Christ walking
upon the Sea, and quieting of it. Mat. 14.33
Then they that were in the Ship came and worshipped him, saying, of a truth
thou art the Son of God. See also the example of Peter, Luke 5.8. And the Women
that sought Christ in the Sepulcher, Matthew. 28.9. And the Apsstles, that were
gathered together in the Mount when Christ took his leave of them. Verse. 17.
When they saw him, they worshipped him, whom they knew now, to be the Son of
God, by his resurrection from the dead.

4. Before I pass to the next Proposition, we may here from this first learn a
true account, why Heathenish Worshippers would never admit the Worship of the
True God of Israel, under the Old Testament, or of Jesus Christ revealed under
the New Testament dispensation, but would willingly entertain the Worship of
all other Gods whatsoever. One would have thought, the True God, who truly is
the proper object of Adoration, might as well have been entertained, as any of
the false, and fained Deities. The reason was this, because it was very
indifferent to Satan, after what manner he was worshipped, so he was but
worshipped at all, he could easily admit a multiplicity of Gods. But The God
of Israel, and Jesus Christ, when they are worshipped, they must be worshipped
alone, they, and none other, all else must be excluded, it being the first and
chiefest of all Gods Commands, Thou shall not have (...), any other Gods before
my face. But the Worship of false Gods did not at all hinder, but that worship
might be given to other Idols, so that the kind and degree of it peculiar to
each Idol, was but distinguished by their Disciples.

5. Propos. 2. Actual Adoration or Worship is due to God from all intelligent
creatures, by the obligation of nature. Actual Adoration, and the formal
exhibition of Worship, is neither essential to God to have it, or to the
creatures to give it. Not to God to have it; because God was before there were
any creatures to worship and adore him: And it was no less possible for God, to
have continued in his Essential Perfections without Adoration, than for him to
have been without Actual Creation; which was an Action as arbitrary unto God,
and as far short from absolute necessity in its production, as any creature is
from an absolute necessity, and independency in its being. Nor to the creature
to give it. There being many intelligent creatures, as Apostate Angels, damned
spirits, and the like, which do not exhibit this Actual Worship unto God, and
yet remain in their being still. But an Actual Obligation to give God this
Worship, is Essential to all, both Angels and Men. The creatures moral
degeneracy, not at all lessening or diminishing their natural obligation to
duty. And that this obligation lies upon all intelligent creatures, will appear,

1. Because they are Gods Creatures. A Creature, as such, must needs own his
Being, Dependence, and Preservation, as the Product of his Creators goodness:
And is any thing more just and equitable, than for such a depending Being, as a
Creature is, to worship and adore the fountain of his Being, and the foundation
of his present, and all future welfare? And is there any higher piece of
unreasonable injustice, than for the Creatures to slight him, from whom they
drew life, and breath, and all?

2. Because they are Rational Creatures. God has endowed Angels and Men, with
minds and understandings, that they might know, honor, and adore him. As God
made all things, so more especially intelligent Creatures for himself, to do
homage to him, and herein lies their Natural Obligation to serve and worship
God.

6. Propos. 3. Pure Spiritual Beings, such as Angels are, need not be
circumstantiated, to time, These. Salmar. par. 3. p. 412. 4, 5.
and place, in rendering Actual Worship unto God. The Holy Angels, being not
properly the parts of the Church, for which Christ died (for the directing and
perfecting of which the revelation of the mind of God was given to us in the
Scriptures) because the foundation of the union, of the Members of the Church,
and Christ, lies in the Communion in the humane nature, of which the Angels are
not capable naturally. And hence it was that our Savior bore the sins of men,
and not of Angels upon his body on the Tree. For, that Christ redeemed not the
Angels, it was not only because they stood not in need of redemption. (I speak
of the holy Angels, that never left their first state) but because, Christ took
not upon him that nature, in which he might undergo the punishment, due to
Angels in case of sin. I say, for these, and other reasons mentioned by
Amyraldus, Loco supra citato.
the Angels being not genuine parts of the Church, for which Christ dyed, and
to which the Scriptures were given. It Is no wonder at all why the Scriptures
have so deep a silence, of the manner and circumstances, of the Angels
worshipping, and adoring of God. And it is but a learned Ignorance for us to sit
down satisfied, and contented, without the knowledge of that, which God thought
unnecessary, to be revealed in Scripture. How the Angels then do worship God,
we need not much trouble our selves to inquire after, since we have not
evident manifestations of it in the Written Word. But this seems to be clear,
they are not tied to any time, strictly so called, because their very nature is
measured by aviternity, and not by time. And being of a pure Spiritual Nature,
they have neither those avocations by any particular calling, nor necessary
diversions from Gods Immediate Worship, as Man, if he had continued innocent,
must have had, for the very sustaining of his life, and being, which would have
been by seasonable food. (The fruits in the Garden of Paradise being a
sufficient evidence, that God intended innocent immortality to have been
supported by ordinary means.) It is probable therefore, they have no set times,
but continue constant in the Immediate Worship of God, unless when God imploys
them, as (...), as his Ministering Spirits, for the service of his Church. And
perhaps, even then their employment, speaks them only distant from the other
Angels, their fellow-worshippers, and not absent from the real worship, and
service of God. And thus it appears, they are not tied to any place neither, as
they are not to any limited time of Worship. For they being Spirits, are
incapable of any local circumscription. And to enquire any further, may run us
upon the Rocks of bold, and unsafe, and unwarrantable conjectures, in those
matters, the knowledge of which we may very well spare, without the least
prejudice of our present comfort, or future salvation.

7. Propos. 4. The Sons of Men, which are of a mixed nature, partly Spirit, and
partly Body, are by their very Beings determined both to time and place, in
their rendering Actual Worship unto God. For man to worship God, is immediately
consequent upon his Being, as a rational creature; and for man to worship God
in some time, and place, is necessarily involved, in the very Worship it self,
that man is obliged to give unto God. And the very same reasons that do evince
a necessity of Worship, to be given unto God by Creatures, that are partly
Body, and partly Spirit; will infer a necessity of making time, and place, the
inseparable adjuncts of that Worship: So that these two, time, and place, in
the general, as appertaining to Divine Worship, are not to be esteemed
therefore good, because God has appointed them; but God has therefore
appointed them, and commanded them, because they are in themselves good, that
is, necessary to Divine Worship, that man must yield unto God.

1. That some time is necessary for man to worship God in; is the clear dictate
of natural light. For man being partly Body, as well as Spirit, and being
naturally obliged, to worship God with both, external, as well as internal
Worship, is necessarily required of him. Now all Actions of man, especially
those which are external, must of natural necessity, lay claim to some time,
for the performance of them. Neither can man conveniently attend upon the
Worship of God, unless some time be set apart, in the which he may be freely
disintangled from his ordinary work, and employment. Thus far, time, and the
Worship of God, seem to fall under one, and the same command. For as God in
creating of the world, did concreate and make time together with the world: So
also when God commands, and appoints, any Religious Worship to be performed, by
any actions of men, he does withal command and appoint, that necessary
circumstance, of some time, wherein they should be dispatched. And that man
might not be left wholly undetermined, as to the time of Worship, in regard
some time in general was necessary; and it being highly rational, that the
disposal of the time for Worship, should be at the pleasure of God, the Supreme
Sovereign, and Creator of man, who made him an intelligent creature, capable of
worshipping God: It has pleased our Sovereign, and Creator, to set apart some
portion of our time, for his Worship, and to indulge the rest to us to be
employed, according to the necessity of our natures.

8. Thus God, taking a pattern from his own Creation, employing six days in
the production of the world, and resting the seventh: He has freely indulged
six days for common and ordinary work, and a seventh he set apart for his
more solemn Worship, and Service. And God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it, Genesis 2.3
because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and
made. Gods sanctifying of the day, was setting of it apart for an holy use,
that is, designing it to his Public Worship and Service. It is true, the word
Sanctify is variously used in Scriptures, but here it must be one of these two
ways taken: Either

1. By infusion of Holiness, and Sanctity into it, as holy men are said to be
sanctified; or else

2. By separation of it, from common use, and dedication of it to holy use; as
the Temple and the Altar, are said to be sanctified. The first cannot be meant
here, because the circumstance of a seventh part of time, is not capable of
being made holy, by the infusion of Habitual Holiness, whereof only
intelligent creatures, men and Angels are; it must therefore be said to be
sanctified, in regard of its separation from common use, and dedication to holy
use, as the Temple was, which had no inherent holiness. Being thus dedicated
for an holy use, it must be either for Gods use, or man's; that is, that either
God should keep this holy day, or that man might observe it, as an holy day
unto God. The dishonor, that the observation of such an holy day, would bring
upon God, must needs by ass us to believe, that it was dedicated, and
consecrated for man's use, for him to observe it as holy unto God. This day is
therefore said to be sanctified of God, that man might sanctify it, and
dedicate it unto God. And hence it follows, that as man could never have
lawfully dedicated it unto God, without a foregoing institution from God; so
the institution of God, implies a known command given by God unto man. So that
if any desire to know where God commanded the observation of the Sabbath,
before Moses his time, they may see it here necessarily implied in Gods
sanctifying of it. And that God, does here declare his mind by Moses, by way of
Prolepsis, and Anticipation, concerning the sanctification of the Sabbath,
because his intention was, to sanctify it two thousand five hundred years
after: Is but a mere shifting evasion of prejudiced minds, the vanity of which
has been sufficiently discovered, by many worthy and learned Divines. Only
this may suffice to evidence, that God himself has interposed in the
determination of a portion of time for his Service, in that he has set apart
a seventh part of man's time for his Worship. And herein we may observe Gods
infinite goodness and condiscention of love. If God had asked man, how much
time he would willingly allow, for the worship of his Maker, who had given him
his Being, and furnished the world with necessaries for the use of man: He
could not for shame, have denied God the one half of his time, considering his
frame, and making, that he is half Spirit, when as the holy Angels, which are
wholly spiritual in their Beings, are continually employed in Gods Worship, and
Service; and yet we see God requires but a seventh part of our time: They then
must needs act very dis-ingenuously, not to say, highly dishonourably against
God, who would rob God of this too. Shepherd Pref. to the Moral. of Sab.
Especially if that hold good which one has observed. That it is easy to
demonstrate by Scripture and Argument, as well as by experience; That Religion
is just as the Sabbath is, and decaies and grows as the Sabbath is esteemed:
The immediate Honor and Worship of God, which is brought forth, and swadled in
the three first Commands, is nursed up, and suckled in the bosom of the
Sabbath. If Popery will have gross ignorance and blind devotion continued
among its miserable captives, let it then be made (like the other Festivals) a
merry, and a sporting Sabbath. If any State would reduce the people under it to
Romish Faith, and blind obedience again, let them erect again (for lawful
sports and pastimes) a dancing Sabbath. If the God of this world would have all
Professors enjoy a total immunity from the Law of God, and all manner of
licentiousness allowed, without check of conscience; let him then make an every
day Sabbath.

9. 2. That some place also is necessary for man to worship God in, is evident
by the very light of Nature. For every Body, such as man has, must by the
natural necessity of its Being, be contained in some real place in the world;
and indeed, to be in a place, is so proper to a Body, that we may as well
suppose it not to have a Being, as not to admit of a local circumscription. If
a Body cannot be, or exist, then neither can it operate, or perform any action,
unless it be in some place; now therefore, the Worship of God being an external
action, when publicly performed with others; it not only requires a place,
but necessarily requires a place capacious of many that must join in the same
Worship: Because Public Worship speaks a joint concurrence of several
Worshippers, for the performance of the same action of Religious Worship: So
that the very light of Nature gives its clear suffrage, for the necessity of
convenient places of meeting, for the performance of the Public Worship and
Service of God. Is it not a shame now, not to live closely up to such clear
dictates of the Light within? must the convenient places of Public meeting for
Gods Worship be forsaken, because the necessity of them is thus evident and
apparent by Natural Light? is not this to cry up inward Light, and yet plainly
to live in Darkness, voluntarily closing their eyes against the sparkling
beams of it? And if popular consent, and the Christian Magistrates Civil
Sanction, have interposed, in the designation of such places; separating them
from common, and dedicating them to a Religious use; and if prevailing Custom
has styled the meeting places CHURCHES, probably according to the languag of
Saint Paul himself. 1 Cor. 11.18.20, 22. and 34. verses, compared. See Mr.
Modes Treatise of Churches.
Is it not merely sottishness and ignorance, to withdraw from these, because
they are so called, and so set apart for Religious Worship? How much better did
the very Heathens improve their natural dictates, than these pretended Patrons
of the Light within, who from the sight of a necessity of some Public place
for Worship, invented their Groves, Oratories, and Temples, for the service of
their Idol Gods. But I proceed.

10. Propos. 5. God by his instituted Law did particularize and set apart some
places for his Worship and Service. The Old Testament gives many instances of
places separated to Gods Worship. Paradise it self was a place designed,
wherein innocent Adam was not only appointed, Terram, but also Deum colere, to
worship and serve God in, as well as to till the ground thereof. The place
where Adam and his family had their residence, afterward, which, when Cain
left, I have already shown; c. 3. 2, 3
He departed from the place of Gods Worship. The Church of God was after that
continued among the Patriarchs, who had also their particular places for the
Worship and Service of God. But where the condition of the Worshippers was so
flitting and inconstant, as that of the Patriarchs was, we cannot expect to
find, any set and solemn, but only occasional places, set apart for the
Worship of God. But after the Israelites coming out of Egypt, the places for
Religious Worship, were more punctually determined, and appointed by God
himself. Now those places which served for the Worship of God, were either
places commanded by God, or approved by him. Places commanded, as the
Tabernacle, and Temple; places approved by God, were their Synagogues, and
places of prayer.

11. 1. God appointed the Tabernacle. When God had once adopted the Israelites,
the seed and posterity of Abraham, to be his peculiar people, having made a
Covenant with them; he also prescribed the Worship, that he would be served
with, punctually unto Moses, and fixed it to one certain and determinate place:
That it should be exhibited to him in the Tabernacle, where the Ark of the
Covenant, and the Altar were placed. This Tabernacle was not only a place fit
and convenient for them to meeet in, but also, where God has promised to meet
with his People that worshipped him. And the Tabernacle is often called, (...)
The Tabernacle of meeting, not only of men's meeting together, as is usually
supposed, when we find it translated, The Tabernacle of the Congregation, but
also of Gods meeting there with men. For so the Lord gives an account of the
name, himself, in three several places of the Law. (...) The Tabernacle of
meeting, Exodus 29.42.30.36 Number. 17.4 Schindler L. Pentaglot.
where I will meet you: and it is sometimes called (...) the Tabernacle of
Testimony, because the Testimony, that is, the Decalogue, or Tables of the
Covenant, were laid up there in the Ark. Now the reason why God fixed the
Jewish Worship at the first, to the Tabernacle only, was this, because all men
by reason of sin, being strangers to God, can no ways become righteous and
acceptable unto God, but by the Mediator, Christ Jesus, God and Man, the
Eternal Son of God. It is Christ alone, that by virtue of his offering himself
up as a Sacrifice to God for us; at a certain fixed place, viz. at Jerusalem;
has reconciled finful man to an offended God: It is he that has made God a
Propitious Father to us, and by his intercession makes all our Prayers,
Service, and Worship, that we offer up unto God, to be acceptable unto him. Of
this thing the Lord made the Tabernacle, with its appurtenances, to be a clear
type; and therefore commanded all that Legal and Ceremonial Worship, with which
he was served by the Jews, to be performed no where else, but on the Altar,
and before the Ark and the Tabernacle; by the which he would clearly teach us,
that neither our persons, nor performances, nor any of our Worship and Service,
would ever be acceptable to him, unless it be in and through Christ, who was
shadowed out by those Types, and Ceremonies. And again, the reason why the
Tabernacle, Ark, and Altar, were fixed in no certain place, but moved to and
fro, and variously placed up and down, in the Land of Canaan, which God gave to
his People, was this; Because Christ, who was shadowed out by those Types, was
to come to that People in the flesh, and was to live and converse among them,
having no fixed habitation in the Earth, but occasionally going to and fro,
traveling up and down through that Land, doing the Will of his heavenly Father.

12. 2. God commanded the Temple to be built for his Worship and Service: The
choice of the Temple for the place of his Worship, was not so much for himself,
as it was for his People; For the Lord dwells not in houses made with hands.
Act. 7.48
God fitting and accommodating himself to man's capacity, by way of infinite
condiscention, imitates the Grandeur of Sovereign Monarchs and Princes in the
world. For as a Prince makes choice of some great City for his residence, so
does the Lord make choice of Jerusalem. And therefore it is called The City of
the great King. Mat. 5.36
As a Prince has his Palace within a great City; so has the Lord his Temple
within Jerusalem, and therefore it is called the place of his habitation. Psa.
76.2
And as a Prince has his Palace distinguished into so many Courts, so was the
Temple of Jerusalem. And as they have their furnished Tables; so has the Lord
his Altar for his Table, Mal. 1.7
and his appointed times, were the morning and evening Sacrifice. This Temple
was called the Throne of his Glory. So, the Perfection of Beauty, Jer. 14.21
Lam. 2.15 Psalm. 132.14
and the Joy of the whole Earth. So, the place of his rest. Now the reason why
God would have the Portable Tabernacle erected by Moses, to be changed by
Solomon into a most magnificent and stately Temple, to be fixed and settled at
Jerusalem; was to typifie the heavenly Temple, and Sanctuary, into which Christ
entered after his Passion, and his Resurrection; where we also shall appear
before him, to worship and adore God in most perfect Peace, after the blessed
resurrection, exhibiting to him most pure and acceptable Worship, and that for
evermore.

13. 3. Places for Worship among the Jews, which were not commanded, but
approved by God, were Synagogues, and Proseucha's, or places of Prayer. Though
the Jews were to have but one Altar, or place of Sacrifice, that namely, which
the Lord should choose, to place the Ark of his Covenant there, the Tabernacle,
or Temple, yet had they other places for Devotion, and Religious use. As for
the places of Prayer, if different from the Synagogues, as very many learned
men think; their difference lay in these two things chiefly, that the
Proseucha's were a plot of ground encompassed, with a wall, or any other
enclosure, like to our Courts, and open above. But the Synagogues were covered
buildings, like our houses and Churches. Again, they differed as to the Service
that was performed in them: In the Proseucha they prayed only ordinarily; in
their Synagogues they prayed and interpreted the Scriptures; then in the Temple
they both prayed, interpreted the Scriptures, and sacrificed. To these a third
may be added, viz. Act. 16.13 Act. 15.21
That the place of Prayer was without the City; but the Synagogues were within
the Cities. But Moses of Old time has in every City, them that preach him,
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day. Medes Diatribae on Josh. 24 26.
p. 192
The places of Prayer I find are fixed as high as the times of Joshua, upon no
slender and improbable grounds, of the which see Mr. Mede. But as for
Synagogues, many fetch the original of them no higher than the Captivity of
Babylon, thinking that necessity first taught the Jews the use of them, in that
Captivity, which afterward they brought with them at their return into their
own Country. But me thinks if we consider, how the Jews, upon many accounts,
were peculiarly engaged to Worship, and serve him. And that there was but one
Temple for the whole Nation, whereat they were bound to appear, and those the
males only but thrice a year; And how that Temple, or Tabernacle was from some
of them above an hundred miles distant at the least; it seems not either
probable, or credible, that the Jews should be left wholly destitute of places
for their ordinary meeting, for the Service and Worship of God. Upon these, and
such like Considerations, I judge those men's conjectures most specious and
plausible, who count it probable, That Synagogues then began, when the Tribes
were settled in the promised Land. Thus Aretius. Aret. in Mar. c. 1. p. 237
Godwin. Moses and Aaron. l 2. c. 2. p. 79
After the Jews came into the promised Land, they built certain Public places,
in which the Word of God was both taught and heard, and the Law of Moses
explained. And also Godwin; The Temple being too far distant from them which
dwelt in remote places, it is likely that they repaired unto certain
Synagogues, instead of the Temple. That the Synagogues were very ancient, Act.
15.21
appears from that expression of Luke. And that they were in David's time, is,
I think, admitted of by most, Psalm. 74.8
from that place. They have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land.
Taking it now for granted, that by (...) in that place we are to understand
the Jews Synagogues. All that I shall further observe, is this, that by being
termed (...) the Synagogues of God, we may easily gather, that the Lord
approved of them, though he did nor command them. And our Saviors so very
often frequenting of them whilst he was in the flesh, was not only an evident
Testimony, of his real liking of those Pablick Performances of Religious
Worship that were then celebrated, but also a tacit approbation of the places
themselves, where they were thus solemnly performed. Yea, and to countenance
those Synagogue-Solemnities the more, our Savior did take upon him the part of
an Interpreter, and Public Preacher among them. Luke 4.16, 17, 21
And, as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and
stood up for to read. And there was delivered to him the Book of the Prophet
Isaiah, and when he had opened the Book, he found the place where it was
written. So that it was not an occasional action only of our Saviors coming
to the Synagogue, merely out of novelty, or desire of opposition, or the like;
But as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue, yea and that upon the
Sabbath day. What clearer grounds can there be for our Religious Imitation,
than this undoubted frequency of our Saviors attendance on Public
Synagogue-Service. N. B.
Christ never yet gave any countenance to any Private Meetings, which should
over turn the Public Ordinances. And if it seem strange to any, how our
Savior, who was deemed an illiterate Mechanic, a Carpenters Son, by the Jews,
should be permitted, yea invited by the Ruler of the Synagogue, to preach
publicly, which privilege was granted only to the Learned. Let him consider
but these two things, viz. Horae He braicae. p. 76
The spreading fame of Christ's miracles, and that, at that time he was a
Ringleader of a Religious Sect. These were two Wards in our Saviors Key,
which could at any time open the Synagogue door, to make way for his entrance
there, and for his admittance to teach in Public amongst them.

Well then, to sinish this Proposition, we see that there were Religious Places
of Public Worship, besides the Temple and Tabernacle both in Jerusalem and
several other places, Theses ^alm. par. (...). p. 664.9. ^i. Medes ^iatrib. p.
^05. on ^osh. 24.6.
throughout the Land of Canaan, viz. Synagogues, in which the People met every
Sabbath day, both to he the Word read and to Pray. And to what end was all this
in reference to us? Capellus tells us; In documentum nostri officiierga Deum,
etc. It is to teach us our duty toward God, that we ought as long as we live
upon the earth, religiously to meet together in the Public, to profess and
testify our Piety and thankfulness unto God: And that we should every day
grow more and more in the knowledge of God by our constant attendance upon the
Public Preaching of the Word of God.

14. Propos. 6. God vouchsafed evident tokens of his special presence, in those
places, he commanded for his public worship under the Law. So both the
Tabernacle and the Temple were honored with several manifestations of Gods
presence: According to that full promise made by God himself to the Jews. In
all places where I record my Name, Exodus 20.4.
I will come unto thee and bless thee. All those places where God fixed his
solemn worship for the memorial and honor of his Name, were under the Promise
of Gods especial Presence. Now God having fixed first the Tabernaecle, and then
the Temple, for the solemn Public Worship, there God promises to come unto
them and bless them, to give evident tokens of his Presence, and real effects
of his blessing. Now these Symboles or tokens of Gods special Presence were
many and various. As Gods sending fire from Heaven to consume their Sacrifices
upon the Altar; His appearing to the Priest yearly in the Holy of Holiest; His
answering by Urim and Thummim, and many others of the like nature. But above
all, I think we may safely pitch upon the Ark as the most remarkable token of
the Divine Presence; It having the Cherubim placed over it, from whence God was
wont to declare his mind, and very probably, with sensible words. Exodus 25.22
And there will I meet with thee, and I will commune with thee, from above the
mercy seat, from between the two Cherubims which are upon the Ark of the
Testimony of all things that I will give thee in Commandment unto the Children
of Israel. This was the standing memorial of Gods Name and Presence with his
People. Hence God is said to dwell between the Cherubims, Because God had
promised to be Present there, Psalm. 80 1.
and from thence to give his answer to the People. Here the Jews placed the
SHECINAH, the Majesty of God and his Glory dwelling upon the Ark, Divinitas
(...) Gloria Divina inter homines habitans a (...) habitare. Haebroram magistri
vocant divinum Majestatem, Shecinah, quod suae ecclesiae habitet and adsit
ubique locorum presentis. Merc. in Pagn.
for this was the usual term to express Gods Majesty and Presence in his
Church by. And the Hebrews by Shecinah are wont to note; that visible sign of
the Lords Presence, whereby he signified to the Jews, that he would dwell and
stay amongst them, and what the Jews are wont to call Shecinah, in the
Scripture we may often find set out by Gods Glory; And the word (...) is
frequently used both in the LXX. and New Testament, in that Sense. Now, because
the Ark was counted the most holy type that the Jews had, and the most
Principal evidence and Pledge of Gods Presence, hence God sanctified those
Places where the Ark came, because of the solemnity of manifesting of his
Presence. This Solomon has fully expressed. ^2 Chronicles. ^8.11.
The places are Holy, whereunto the Ark of the Lord has come. Hence came that
Legal Sanctity, that ceremonial holiness that was put upon the Tabernacle and
Temple, because of the Arks being there. Exodus 29.43. Aram privatam non esse
licitam nisi prophetis.
The Tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. Here they ^ere to Sacrifice
without an extraordinary ^arrant to the contrary; As the Hebrews say, A private
Altar was not lawful to be erected but by a Prophet. And the Temple, upon such
accounts was a Part of their ceremonial Worship. 1 King. 8.48. Dan 6.10.
And they were to set their faces toward it, when they Prayed. And all this,
not so much for the Types sake as for the thing Typifyed by all these, and that
was Christ, through whom alone God accepts both of our Persons, Prayers, and
all our Performances. Therefore it follows that all that Legal and Ceremonial
holiness of Places should quite vanish away with the Types, when Christ who is
the substance, at which all these shadows Pointed is come. So that however we
may grant under the Gospel, Places appropriate to divine worship, and in that
sense Holy, because separated from a common use; (as the word used for
Holiness, in Scripture, viz. (...) does Properly signify:) Yet I have neither
faith to believe, nor any reason to see, that there is in any such separated,
Merc. in Rad. (...) Pagn.
I add, and consecrated Places for Divine Worship, any such Legal or Ceremonial
kind of Holiness, which renders Duties performed there, more acceptable unto
God, than if performed by the same Persons and in the like manner in any other
Places. Which both in the Speculation, Raph de Torre in 2.2. q. 83. ^^r. 3. p.
301 ^cit. in Taste. Sa. p. 247 These. Sal. p. 3.667. 22.
and in the Practice, smells too tank of downright Popery. This leads me to
the last Proposition.

15. Propos. 7. Though Christ has removed all distinction of places through
legal Holiness, yet has he made ample provision for his special presence, in
places of Religious Worship under the Gospel. I need not stand at all upon this
Proposition, the former Part of it being cleared already, and the latter Part
to be proved throughout the remainder of this discourse. Only for further
satisfaction we may consider the speech of our Savior to the Samaritane Woman,
concerning the abolishing of all distinction of Places for Worship, through a
Ceremonial Holiness. The hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain,
John 4.21
i. e. Mount Garizim, nor yet at Jerusalem Worship the Father. The Public
Worship of God was now to be restrained to no Place, as formerly it was to the
Temple at Jerusalem. That is, to no Place for its Ceremonial Holiness, which
may render the Parts of Divine Service more acceptable to God, than if
performed elsewhere. Because those Types which sanctified the Places formerly,
were now to be taken away, when Christ the substance is come. And the body of
the Ceremonial Worship, being now to expire, and the Partition Wall taken down,
that the Gentiles might be admitted to worship God in Spirit and Truth. It
could not possibly be, for these reasons, that the true worship of God, should
be tied and fixed to any one such Temple as was at Jernsalem, any more. So that
the observation holds very true of our ordinary Temples. Our Temples are but
loci ut loci, Weemes 1 vol. Christian Synagogue p. 110.
places as mere places, when as the Temple at Jerusalem was locus ut sic, a
place in such a respect, viz. a mean of Gods Worship, and part of their
Ceremonial service, and Type of Christ. But our Temples are not a part of the
Worship of God, nor Types of the body of Christ, neither are we bound when we
Pray to set our faces toward them; They are called places of. Prayer only,
because the Saints meet there, and if the Saints meeting were not in them, they
were but like other common places. The Temple of Jerusalem sanctified the
meeting of the Saints, but the meeting of the Saints sanctifies our Temples.
Here then arises that ample provision that Christ has made for his special
Presence in the places of religious Worship, viz. from the communion of Saints,
meeting in convenient separate places for Public Worship, and from the
Promises annexed thereto, and not from any peculiar holiness that is in those
places where they thus meet to Worship and serve God, and perform Religious
Duties. Which I shall endeavor to make good in the proof of that conclusion,
c. 3. 5.
I formerly mentioned, viz. That the place of Gods Worship is the place of Gods
singular Presence.

CHAP. V. Gods special Presence set out by his train and retinue of Angels,
Psalm. 68.17. cleared. The Presence of Angels in places of Religious Worship,
Isa. 6.1, 2. opened. Arguments to prove the Angles Presence in places of
Worship under the Gospel. Angels Ministering Spirits, 1 Cor. 11.10. explained
and vindicated. Because of the Angels: Not meant of Ministers, not of the
Devils: not propounded to excite to an imitation of the holy Angels. Why the
Argument is drawn from the Angels to urge decency and reverence in Public
Worship.
1. HAving in the foregoing Chapter premised and proved, seven Preparatory
Propositions: It is high time to set upon the proof of the main Conclusion,
just before propounded. And the first Argument that I shall make use of, is
taken from the holy Angels.

Arg^ 1. If the holy Angels are peculiarly present in places of Religious
Worship, then those are the places of Gods singular Presence: The reason of the
consequence is clear, because the very formality of Gods special Presence, is
often set out in Scripture, by his Train and Retinue of Angels. Two things here
are to be made good.

1. That the Presence of God is set out by his Retinue of Angels.

2. That this Train and Guard of Angels is present in the places of Worship.
For the first of these, it were easy to show from several Scripture instances,
that Gods special Presence is set out by his Guard and Retinue of Angels. Medes
Reverence of Gods house. p. ^ 92. 2
But that I find it already done to my hand, which saves the labor of taking
much pains, or spending much time upon this particular. Only I cannot but take
notice of the signal and singular modesty, of so admirably learned a man, who
propounds his notions with much clearness and evidence, yet still with a full
submission to better Judgments. This present notion he thus propounds; The
specification of the Divine Presence, whereby God it said to be in one place
more than another; I suppose (under correction) to consist in his Train, or
Retinue. A King is there where his Court is, where his Train and Retinue are:
So God the Lord of Hosts is there specially present, where the heavenly Guard,
the blessed Angels keep their station and Randezvouze. This he clears from
Gods appearing to Jacob at Bethel; Genesis 28. Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19
from the Law given at Mount Sinai, which Stephen, and the Apostle say, was
given by Angels, though no mention made of them in the story; the expression
therefore arising from a supposition, that the special Presence of the Divine
Majesty, consists in the encamping of his Sacred Retinue the Angels; and from
Dan. 7.10. and verse. 14. Epist. Jude. It may serve, I confess, to clear up the
sense of very many difficult and obscure places of Scripture. I shall mention
only one more which he insists not on. Psalm. 68.17
The Chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels; The
Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the Holy place. That the Psalmist is here
speaking of Gods special Presence, is evident and apparent, if we consider the
foregoing verse, Verse 16
This is the hill that God desires to dwell in. He speaks here of the Hill
Zion, where the Temple was fixed, the place of Gods residence, his Mansionhouse
as it were, where God in a peculiar manner is said to dwell. Now in verse. 17.
David declares what this Presence is. (...) which, Calvinus in locum.
thus Calvin, Quia malign ut plurimum nec justo pretio aestimatur Dei
Presentia eam magnifice Elogio commendat h^c David. Most men are very apt to
entertain very low thoughts of Gods Presence, and therefore David here does so
highly exalt it. And how does he describe it? The Chariots of the Lord are
twenty thousand, etc. In the translation of this place, I find some variety;
But I think, Dulcius ex ipso font, the nearer the fountain, the sweeter and
clearer the stream. Aynsworth following closely the Original, thus renders it:
Gods Chariot, twice ten thousand thousands of Angels; the Lord is with them, as
in Sinai in the Sanctuary. (...) Gods Chariot] that Chariot of Majesty, that
God in a peculiar manner is said to be present in, that he uses for his
service to defend the Church, and destroy his enemies. What is it? (...) Twice
ten thousand thousands of Angels] The Hebrew Shinan, De voce (...) V. Merc. in
Pagn. in R. (...) and (...) and in quadratis. See also Aynsworth on the place.
translated Angels, is not elsewhere found in Scripture. It seems to come
from Shanah to second; The Angels being second, or next to God; Thus the chief
Princes, Dan. 10.13. as those in place next Kings are called the second to
them, 2 Chronicles. 28.7. and Esther 10.3. of Elkanah, and Mordecai, who were next
to the Kings, there mentioned, of each it is said, (...) he was second to the
King. This name excellently well suits with the Angels, as being of Gods Train
and Retinue; and that they are taken in this notion, in this place, is evident
from that which follows, (...) the Lord is with them, or in them] The thousands
of Angels, they are the Guard, the Train of the Majesty of Heaven, and the Lord
is present with them, they are his Chariot of state, and the Lord is in them,
where ever they are, they denote his special Presence. (...) As in Sinai in the
Sanctuary] These words are Elliptical, very short, and concise, as the Hebrew
phrase often is, and therefore there is a necessity of a supply to make out the
sense. Two ways I find the most approved.

1. As our Translation, and Aynsworth, and others, by adding the particles As
in. As in Sinai in the Sanctuary, or Holy place. Then the meaning is best known
by referring the last clause, to the words foregoing, (as we know
transpositions very usual in Scripture as well as other Authors) Thus, The Lord
is with them [or among them] in the Sanctuary, as in Sinai. Now how was the
Lord with the Angels in Mount Sinai? I have showed before, as in the midst of
his Train and Retinue: So that the Law which was given by God unto Moses, the
Angels being present, is said to be given by them; or it is all one, if we
gather only thus much, that the Law was given, and proclaimed among them, they
being then as an heavenly Army attending upon God at that present; and though
Moses never expressed this, yet it may clearly be gathered out of the New
Testament, from three places. Thus likewise is the Lord with them in the
Sanctuary, Act. 7.53 Gal. 3.19 Heb. 2.2
to evidence which, the Cherubim were placed upon the Ark, which was the place
of his special residence.

2. I find the Ellipsis otherwise supplied by the LXX. (...). The Lord is in
them in Sinai, in the Sanctuary. And this I take to be an Asyndeton, and the
sense then to run thus, and the Lord is among them, both, as he declared his
special Presence in Mount Sinai, and also in the Sanctuary, whether we take
the Sanctuary for the Tabernacle, or the Temple, Gods special Presence in both,
was by the Angels. Of which I come now to speak, it being the second thing to
be made good.

2. Now that this Train and Retinue of Angels is present in the places of
Religigious Worship will be evident from those places, which in describing Gods
Presence there, do immediately make mention of the Angels. Thus the Prophet
Isaiah, Isa. 6.1, ^
I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high, and lifted up, and his Train
filled the Temple. Above it stood the Seraphims. To assert here, that the Train
in this place, is to be understood of the Retinue and Train of Angels, would
but impose a fallacy upon the minds of the less judicious, by reason of the
equivocation of the word. For it is evident, that the word (...) Fimbria ejus.
here refers to the Train of a Garment of Majesty, or the coverings of the
Throne of State, See c. 4. 14.
yet so as to be an emblem of Gods special Presence there; and therefore the
LXX, How (...) is frequently used by the LXX.
renders it thus; And his Glory filled the house. And in this sense St. John
takes it, John 12.41. These things Isaiah said when he saw his Glory, and
spoke of him. Joh. 12.41.
Speaking of this very Vision of the Prophet. V. Hensium in loc.
But having mentioned the Royal Presence of the Sovereign of Heaven, sitting on
his Throne in the Temple, presently he subjoyns an honorable mention of his
sacred Retinue. Above it, stood the Seraphim, which is acknowledged by all to
denote the holy Angels, which sang that (...) to the blessed Trinity; Holy,
Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts. For this cause the curtains of the Tabernacle
were filled with the pictures of Cherubims, and the walls of Solomon's Temple
with carved Cherubims. 1 King. 6.29, 32. Dr. Gouge on 23. ver.
All which set out the multitudes of Angels in Churches. The Ark of the
Testimony was overspread and covered with two mighty Cherubims, called Heb.
9.5. The Cherubims of Glory, that is, of the Divine Presence. All to denote,
that where God commands his Worship to be solemnly celebrated, there the
blessed Angels, out of duty, give their attendance; and afford their protection
to those that worship God. Thus Solomon, out of that received opinion of the
Angelical Presence in places of Publik Worship, speaks concerning vows to be
made in the house of God; Eccles. 5.6
Say not before the Angel, it was an error. The word Angel being taken
collectively, and put for the many Angels that are present in Gods Worship. And
some do refer these words that were uttered a little before the destruction of
the Temple, Let us depart hence; to the Angels leaving of that place, because
that was shortly to cease to be the Place of Gods Worship.

3. Object. Well! but what is all this to us under the Gospel? The presence of
the Angels is proved to be in the Temple of old; are they now present in Gods
Worship under the Gospel?

Ans. I doubt not but to evidence that they are so too, and that upon these
following grounds.

1. If the Angels are busied in the propagating of the Gospel, then it is
evident they will be most there, where there is the greatest probability for
dispatching that work; which must needs be in the Public Assemblyes, where the
Gospel is Preached. But the former is true, for can we think they are wear^ of
so good a work, are they (...) ministering Spirits still, Vid. Eras. Schinidii
Not. and Animad. verse. in N. Test. p. 157. in Mat. 17.10.
and can their service be better employed, then in that which has been their
honorable work heretofore? Now that they have been forward and cheerful in
propagating the Gospel, Scripture does abundantly testify. How cheerfully
busy was the Angel Gabriel in declaring to Zachariah the nativity of John the
Baptist, the forerunner of Christ? Luke 1.11. After that, he declares the
conception of the Messiah, to the blessed Virgin. v. 26. When Christ was born
an Angel again appears to the Shepherds, and said unto them; Luke 2.9, 10, 11.
Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great Joy, which shall be to
all people. And then it follows: And suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the Heavenly Host, verse. 13, 14.
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth peace,
good will toward men. The Angels again, Mat. 28.2, 5. Act. 1.10.
with much joy, declare the Resurrection of Christ, and after Christ's
ascension, they declare his second coming. May we not hence rationally
conclude, that they have the same work still to carry on? and if so, what
reason have we, to shut them from our public assemblies, where this work may
the best be promoted? and to confirm this the more, we have their Presence in
our Church Assemblies, hinted at, in several places in the New Testament. And
Paul charges Timothy not only before God and Jesus Christ, See Baines on
Ephesians. 3.10 1 Timothy 5.21.
but also before the Elect Angels; supposing their Presence in Church
assemblies, teaching us that the consideration of them should bind us to be
careful: Adsunt spectatores, propter injunctam sibi ecclesiae curam. Calvin in
Lo.
The Angels they are as spectators in discharge of that care of the Church,
that God has laid upon them. And probably our Savior aims at such a thing as
this is. And I Jesus have sent mine Angels, Rev. 22.16.
to testify these things to you (...) in the Churches.

4. 2 A second proof seems clearly to be couched, in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Angels are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them that
are Heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1.14
Have the Saints more need of Angellical assistance, than when they are about
heaven work, and heart work, (which is very hard work) in Gods worship? Has
God said they minister for us? And dare we say they do not help and assist us
in his Worship? Nay is it not expressly said, they help the Heirs of Salvation?
And why not in the means of Grace and Worship, which do immediately tend to
promote our salvation? Do not the Devil and his Angels most of all disturb and
distract us in our holy duties, in Public Worship? And why not the good Angels
help us and aid us, since God has appointed them to be ministering spirits for
the Heirs of Salvation? If we had but discerning eyes, we should see but a few
devils in Alehouses, Taverns, Markets, and Fairs, etc. in comparison of what
there are in the Church in the Public Assemblies. There the devil has but a
little work to do, the work is commonly done to his hand: Men can drink, and
swear, and lie, and cousen, and cheat, fast enough without the devil to tempt
them. Now the great trade the Devil drives, is to hinder our Communion with God
in his Ordinances; Here we may find many devils to tempt us, distract us, and
so rob us of that which is the Kernel, the very Marrow and Quintessence of all
our performances, viz. the enjoyment of God and Christ in them; Is there not
reason then to extend their Ministration mainly to the Saints worshipping and
serving God? Thus St. Bernard did. Intersunt cantantibus, adsunt orantibus,
insunt meditantibus; That is good Music indeed in Gods ears, when the holy
Angels bear a part, and join with the Saints, to make up a complete Heavenly
consort.

5. 3 If we are upon Gods ground when we are in the place of his Public
Worship, we may not only expect his Angels to be our Companions, but in a
safe sense to be our Protectors. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear him, Psalm. 14.7
and delivers them. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, Psalm. 91.11.
Piscator
to keep thee in all thy ways. [Thy waies] that is, those that God has marked
out for thee. Now the Devil lays his cloven Foot upon the Principal part of
the promise, and if Possible, would have cheated our Savior into disobedience,
to expect the Angels help, when he was not in any of Gods ways, but upon the
Devils ground. But are we not in Gods way when we are enjoying of his
Ordinances? If so, here is a clear Promise for the Presence of the Angels, yea,
and of their Protection too. They shall keep thee in all thy ways.

6. 4. Though consequences are clear Proofs, such as our Savior made use of to
prove the Resurrection, yet we shall produce clear words. 1 Cor. 11.10.
For this cause ought the woman to have power over her head, (...), because of
the Angels; What can be more clear? Admit but this truth of the Angels Presence
in Public Assemblies, and all the difficulties that have perplexed this place
will soon vanish away. Many I confess have troubled themselves much, and
others more, rather by augmenting, than removing the difficulties of this Text.
Give me leave to clear it a little, and before I have done, we need not (I
hope, insert the Geneva note on this place; What this means I do not yet
understand. And I humbly conceive we need not reserve the knowledge of this,
as also of that, of being Baptized for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.29.
till we come to heaven; As the Reverend and Holy Mr. R. Bolton, with much
modesty and humility thinks we must. Let us therefore briefly examine the
Text, and clear the emergent doubts. For this cause ought the woman, [(...)] to
have power on her Head. The Apostle is here bringing the Saints of Corinth to a
right decorum in their Church Assemblies, this verse. concerns the women; It is
indecent to have the veil [(...)] Velum appellat (...), potestatem, pro signo
vel indicio potestatis, quam in uxorem vir habet, vel patius velum quo caput
faeminarum obnubilari vult Apostolus, ideo vocatur ab co (...) quod ejusmodi
velum Hebraice (...) vocatur (Arabes illud vocant (...)) Cant. 5 7. Isa. 3.23.
quarum vocum illa enim ^ R. (...) ista a (...) utrumque autem thema significat
(...) Dominari. (...) potestatem in aliquem exercere, itaque (...) non m^le
reddi potest si primitiv^ vocis prop^^am signific^^ionem spectemus, velum autem
illud dietum esse ab Haebraeis (...), ideo quod esset sign^^s subjectionis
faeminarum erga viros. Facile concesserim. D. Fesseli Adversa. Sacra. l. 2. c.
17. sect. 6. Camer. in Locum.
off from the woman's Head. For by [power] we are to understand the Veil, which
is the sign, Power, the thing signified; this Metonymy is frequent in
Scripture. Thus Camerarius glosses upon the word, (...), i. e. (...), Power,
that is, a covering or veil, being a sign of the power of her Husband, to which
the woman is subjected to. Now the reason is subjoyned, (...), Because of the
Angels, who are Guardians of the Church, and Assistants of the Church
Assemblies, these would be offended at it. So we see, the Text is clear, and
the Argument strong, all irreverence and indecency must be avoided in our
Public Assemblies, because it is not only odious unto God, but even offensive
to the holy Angels, whose Presence God has afforded, to be both spectators and
assisters in his Public Worship. Having thus cleared the Text. I shall
endeavor to remove these four doubts following.

7. Quest. 1. But may it not be understood of the Ministers of Christ, who are
often called Angels? as the Revelations of St. John mention the Angels of the
seven Churches, viz. the Pastors and Ministers of those places.

Answ. It Is granted, Calvin in Los. habet sensum; Pareus autem ibid. verba
regulae.
they are called Angels sometimes; but that Rule that Calvin lays down, will
tell us when the word Angels is not to be applied to them. Angelorum Nomen
absolute positum, nunquam ponitur nisi proprie. The word Angels put absolutely,
is never taken otherwise than properly? So that it cannot be meant of the
Ministers of the Gospel in this place. And I find but one place which Beza
produces as an instance to overturn this general Rule. Eccles. 5.6
Say not before the Angel (...) he would have it, the High Priest, and to be
understood of Ministers after him; But I have already shown, that the word in
that place is meant of Angels properly, and is taken collectively, to denote
the good Angels that attend at Public Assemblies.

8. Quest. 2. May it not be understood of the Devils, evil Angels? so they may
be taken absolutely, as the rule would have it. And the Apostle himself uses
this very word; for the Devils, 1 Cor. 6.3. Know ye not that we shall judge
the Angels? that is, the Devils, and the Argument would be clear, and strongly
urged by the Apostle, because the Devil would abuse the beauty of women, when
unveiled, to tempt men to lustful thoughts.

Answ. Dr. Lightfoots Harm. on the place.
I acknowledge this a most ingenious gloss upon the place, which Tertullian
hinted of old, and our late learned Harmonist urges from 1 Cor. 6.3. and the
Argument is good and strong, urged by the Apostle. Yet still by consequence we
may infer the presence of good Angels; for if the Devil be there to tempt, why
not the good Angels to assist us in Worship? since they are Ministering Spirits
to help the heirs of Salvation. Yea, Heb. 1.14
but if we narrowly look into the Text and Context, we may find all the
Arguments there to be drawn from the indecorum, the indecency it self, and not
from the remote and occasional consequences of it, as tempting to lust, and the
like, and therefore I humbly conceive, the Argument in the tenth verse speak
reference immediately to the good Angels, and not to the bad.

9. Quest. 3. Suppose it be meant of the holy Angels, yet may it not be
understood by way of exhortation, rather than aggravation? that is, are they
not exhorted to have a veil on their heads, in imitation of the Angels, who
have a special care to reverence the Blessed Trinity, and therefore with two
wings cover their faces in the presence of the Lord of Hosts. Isa. 6.2
So should Women be veiled in token of subjection to their Husbands. This would
only speak the imitation of the Angels in Public Assemblies, and not their
presence there.

Answ. I acknowledge the truth of this in a Cumulative, but not in a Privative
sense; It may strengthen the Argument, but not at all undermine or oppose the
Presence of Angels in the Public Assemblies. We may well admit this by way of
illustration; but the words [(...)] will scarce bear it, as a genuine
Interpretation; yea, suppose the words would bear it, yet those that contend
for such a sense as this, do not exclude, but rather assert the Angelical
Presence. As Heinsius acknowledges in his Exercitations; Angelos and testes hic
and prauntes habent. Dr. Heins. exer. Sa. p. 370
The Women have not only the Angels as their Pattern, but also their Presence
as Witnesses. And again, Non Christum modo sed and Angelos illius testes
habent, qui sunt (...) illi in Ecclesia, hoc est, Vigiles, quibus curae semper
est, ut omnia decenter ac ordine ibi fiant and gerantur. They have not only
Christ, but his Angels Witnesses, who are those Watchers in the Church, to whom
the care is committed, that all things be done there in decency, and in order.
Besides, I find it observed by a Learned Doctor of our own, that the Jews of
old, Dr. D. Featly in Locum.
as well as Christians, do agree in this, that the Angels are present at the
Divine exercises of Worship, and are eyewitnesses of our carriage there: And
so it is more than probable, that the Apostles Argument runs according to the
then received opinion, and that which was never yet contradicted by Apostolical
Authority: So that there is no need of pitching upon any strained sense, when
the plainest ( simplicissima expositio, Piscater (...) Locum.
as one calls that sense we give) is both clear and evident.

10. Quest. 4. But why does not Paul endeavor to draw the Corinthians from
indecency in Church Assemblies from the Presence of God, and Christ, rather
than by an Argument drawn from the Presence of good Angels?

Answ. The Apostle had urged them with God the Father, and Christ the Son,
before, in that chapter, to dissuade them from irreverence. He named God as
the head of Christ, and Christ as the head of the Man, and now to both these
he joins the good Angels, which are always individual companions, and
faithful Servants to God, and Christ, in the Worship they command; And all
these, Paul in another place, 1 Timothy 5.21
in his charge to Timothy closely couches in a few words. I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these
things. And here he gives warning to the Corinthians, not to grieve these
chaste and holy spirits by any rude and irreverent behavior before them, in
the Assemblies of his Saints.

CHAP. VI. Practical Inferences drawn from the Presence of Angels in the places
of Public Worship, and Service of God. Sitting at Prayer. Sleeping at Sermons.
Worshipping of Angels, all condemned.
1. HAving made good those two Positions, viz. That the Presence of God is set
out by his Retinue of Angels; and that this Train or Guard of Angels is present
in the places of Worship. They do sufficiently (I conceive) back and confirm my
first Argument, produced to prove Gods special Presence in the places of
Religious Worship. Before I proceed to another, I shall a little endeavor to
wipe off that suspicion from this Truth, which as to many it may lie under, (
viz. That the Angels Presence in places and Assemblies of Public Religious
Worship, is but an empty notion, a mere barren and jejune speculation) by
pointing out some practical and useful inferences, which may be drawn from it.

1. Hence we may see, that there are more witnesses of our irreverence in Gods
Worship, than we ordinarily are aware of. What though our bodily eyes, when
open, cannot behold the Angels in our company; yet Faith knows they are
present, because God has revealed it in his Word, and they can behold to their
grief, and our shame, our eyes when shut through sleep and laziness. The Angels
that stand on our guard, take notice, and are offended at our irreverent
sitting, instead of kneeling, or standing, in Public Prayer. Those postures
that are condemned, or not allowed in Scripture, are upon that account
offensive to those holy and pure Spirits. Of this posture, thus Tertullian of
old, contra Scripturam fecerit, qui in Cathedra, vel subsellio sedens oraret;
He acts against the Scripture, who sits in his chair, or on his seat, while he
prays. Ames Case of Consc. l. 4. c. 18. 6.
And Ames in his Cases of Conscience tells us, that sitting (per se) of it
self, is not a gesture of Prayer. (The limitation seems to be added to very
good purpose, because sitting, by accident, may lawfully be gestu orantis,
licet non orationis, The gesture of our praying, in case of sickness, or
lameness, though not of Prayer it self, And the reasons he adds, are very
pertinent, because it neither expresses any reverence of the mind, nor is
approved at all in the Word of God. And whereas it has been objected, to
enervate this last Reason, That our Savior consecrated the Paschal Supper
sitting, and that David sat before the Lord when he prayed. 1 Chronicles. 17.16
And therefore sitting has been approved of as a gesture of Prayer by the
Scripture. To that of our Savior, I answer

1. That it was an Action pertaining to a Private Family duty, and no part of
any Public Worship, and as to that I am apt to believe either standing or
sitting may be lawful, in that occasional and ejaculatory Prayers may lawfully
be made in such a posture as he is in, who sends them forth.

2 The Jewish Table-posture was rather lying along, than sitting, as ours is,
and we know that prostration has been recorded as no indecent posture for
Prayer. Schindl. Lex Pentagl. R. (...) V. Piscat. ^. ^.
To the instance of David's sitting when he prayed: I answer, That the Hebrew
word for sitting, is often used to denote staying and remaining; Thus Piscator
renders the word in that place, Mansit, scilicet don^c absolvisset, preces
suas. He stayed before the Lord until he had made an end of his Prayer; So
that notwithstanding these instances seemingly to the contrary, it stands good
that sitting is not approved of in Scripture, and therefore it must needs be
offensive to the good Angels, who are offended with any indecency in Public
Worship.

2. 2. If the woman ought to have a veil on her head because of the Angels,
then certainly we ought to keep off the veil of sleep and sloathfulnesse
because of the Angels too. The reason or argument enforcing it is the same,
because, as that was an high indeency, so also is sleeping and lazyness in the
Worship and Service of God. What greater argument of careless and carnal
minds, than men's sleepy drowsinesse under Gods Word? Must it not needs be a
great offense to these Holy Spirits, to see some as solemnly compose themselves
to sleep, as if it were one great part of that Homage and Worship, that is due
unto God? Or as if they did verily expect, that God would deal with them, as
with some of his servants, of old, that he would speak to them in a dream? It
is a most lamentable temper, when men's laziness and sleepiness in the
Congregation, declare to all that are present, that they have no mind to be
taken with Divine Truths, unless God take them napping. It Is dangerous to sleep
after taking of Physic, it may not only hinder its working, but destroy the
Patient: Thus it is like to be damnable, to be frequently sleeping, when we
should not only receive Physic, but food for our souls, from the Word of God.
Naturalists tell us, that sleep is caused by the vapors that ascend out of the
stomach into the head: And must not those hearts needs be very full of vapors,
the cursed vapors of sin and carnality, that produce the spiritual drowsiness
of the mind, and very often a downright laziness and sleepiness of the body
too, under the Preaching of the Word. However we may conclude, as Philosophers
do, that fleep has a good end in nature, saelus animalium, the health of the
body; but sleeping under the means of grace has as ill an end as we can well
imagine, ruina animae, the destruction of the soul; and so must needs be very
offensive to the good Angels, who do rejoice at the good of our Immortal
Spirits.

3. 3. It may be a matter of caution to us; That though Angels are present as
our Guardians, and Assisters of us in the Public Assemblies, yet neither
there, nor elsewhere, are they to be made the object; of our Worship and
Adoration. Though they help the Saints of God to worship him, yet they must not
have that Worship themselves, because it is due only unto God, Non minus
veneratione offenduntur, quam turpitudine. They are no less offended with
Worship given unto them, than they are with our indecency, and irreverence in
the Worship of God. We do not so assert the Angels Presence, as to deny the
Presence of God: And therefore it is little else than downright sottishness,
and ignorance, that cries up Angel-Worship as a great Diana; and that makes any
to own them, as Mediators and Intercessors, and Messengers to offer up, and
carry our prayers unto Christ, which is to rob Christ of that Glory that is due
to him, and incommunicable to any mere creature. For it is Christ alone that is
the Angel, Rev. 8.3.
that offers up our prayers unto God. A full place to evidence the unlawfulness
of Angel-Worship, Rev. 19.10. And I fell at his feet to worship him, Rev. 22.9.
and he said unto me, see thou do it not; I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
Brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus, worship God. Angels are at best but
our fellow servants, and God alone must be worshipped with a Religious Worship.
Mat. 4.10
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve.

CHAP. VII. Gods Presence in Public Worship by his Word. The Word of God an
Instrument of Conversion, Romans 10, 17.1 Cor. 1.21. opened. Why Preaching of the
Word is deemed foolishness. The Word reaches to the heart. It discovers secret
thoughts, secret sins; answers doubts; yields suitable comforts. Two
peculiarities of Gods Word. Revealing Mysterious Truths. Pressing Practical
Duties. The life of Faith. Heavenly-mindedness. Mortification of sin. Inward
Humility.
1. II. Arg
A Second Argument to demonstrate Gods Presence, is taken from the Word of God.
Reading and Preaching the Word, are owned as two standing parts of Gods Public
Worship, and Gods Presence is discovered in both. A Kings presence (that is but
finite in his person) is vertually there where his commands and proclamations
are made known; much more is God (who is infinite in his Essence, and Immense
in his Being) specially present there, where his Word is made known according
to his command. As there is but one true Happiness, Eternal Life; one giver of
it, God; One Mediator, Jesus Christ: So there is but one certain and infallible
means of imparting of it, the revealed Will and Word of God: In the which, God
shows his special Presence; and as both an Author and Finisher of every good
thing for us, does both begin and perfect all in the soul for its salvation.
This, and the following Argument, I shall endeavor to prosecute in a more
plain, familiar, and practical manner, and that God is present in and by his
Word, will appear,

1. In that the Word of God is the Instrument of converting souls. When men of
unbeleevers, come to believe by the Word, it is an evident sign of Gods Presence
with it. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. (...). Romans
10.17
This is such a word as is uttered by the tongue, flowing from the party
speaking, and yet the Word of God, because such as he has revealed in the
Scriptures. For it is the Word of God, and not the word of man, that is the
foundation for our Faith, and an instrument to produce it. This Word of God
Preached, declared, and discovered, so as to be conveyed by the ears, the
instruments (...) hearing, unto the mind, and understanding of man, is that
vital Seed from whence springs the glorious Fruit of Faith. Faith, it is true,
is the gift of God, and the work of God; yet it is attributed to the Word, as
the next producing cause of it, not the principal, efficient, but only the
instrumental cause. 1 Cor. 1.21
It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to save those that believe.
(...). Preaching is here called Foolishness, not that it is so in its self, but
that it is commonly esteemed so. How many now adays condemn it, and have cast
it off, as solly to hear, and look on it as foolishness to Preach? and there is
a double reason hinted at in the very word. (...).


1. Because it is unsavory to carnal hearts, it has no relish in it, so the
Greek word (...) properly signifies, unsavory; and the Latins use fatuus in
the same sense, as fatuae maluae, unsavory mallows. Thus the Preaching of the
Word of God is a thing of no savor at all to very many; they want scientiam
sapidam, that savoury, tasting, relishing knowledge, that Believers have, and
so look upon Gods Ordinance, of Public Preaching of the Word, as mere
emptynesse and folly; because many have no relish or spiritual taste of the
word of God, they think it is but folly to Preach it, and foolishness to hear
it; They do not profit by it, they will not therefore hear it.

2. Because men's hearts are naturally rebellious against it. (...) ab Hebraico,
(...) re^ellis Is. Casauh. Exer. 16. ' 23.
For so a learned Author derives the word for Foolish, from an Hebrew word
which denotes rebellious. When the Word of God Preached should command our
hearts, they rebelliously do rise against it, and so condemn it as folly.
(...). Origin. con. Cells. P 12. ed. Cant. Romans 3.3, 4.
Well! let carnal hearts, and deluded souls think and say what they will, this
foolishness of Preaching God has appointed to save those that do believe.
When many hear the word Preached, and few there are that are saved; what is the
reason? is it in the Word? No, it is in themselves, because they do not believe.
Deus vult omnes salvos fieri, sed non vult omnes salvos facere, sed solum
credentes. God would have all men that hear the Word to be saved, but he will
actually save those only that do believe. Man's unbeleef does not make the Word
of God of no effect. The Presence of God is sufficiently discovered to be with
his Word, in that some by it do believe and are saved. If God and the Gospel,
yea, if God in the Gospel, be hid to any, it is only to those that are lost.
It Is neither Gods, nor the Words fault, but their own, if any hearers of the
Word are not saved. So that it may be truly said of those that perish under
the means of Grace; Ye have destroyed your selves. To clear this further, take
that full place of St. Paul; I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Romans
1.16.
for it is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, to the
Jew first, and also to the Greek. Understand, hear the Gospel, read, preached,
meditated upon, So it is the Power of God, not his essential, but instrumental
power, which effectually moves the hearts of Gods elect ones, helps to convey
the Holy Spirit, to stir up faith to the obtaining Righteousness and Salvation
through Christ. Gods Power, and Gods Presence, is abundantly manifested, by the
Gospel in men's salvation. Calvin.
And they do plainly set Gods Power at defyance, who do withdraw themselves
from the preaching of the Gospel. The Arm of the Lord is ordinarily revealed in
the conversion of souls, not in any secret revelations, but in the open
preaching of the Word. This is the power of God unto salvation, and a
convincing argument of Gods Presence with his Word.

2. 2. Gods Presence is discovered in his Word, in that it reaches to the very
heart. It is Gods privilege to be (...), a knower and searcher of the heart:
And if at any time the heart be troubled and affected with the Word of God,
must we not needs say, of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
God was present with his Word. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. If all Prophecy; (that is,
those that are in Office, and appointed by others for that purpose, which is
clear from 1 Cor. 12.28, 29.) And there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is Judged of all. verse. 25. And thus
are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he
will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. This is the work of
the Word of God Preached to convince men's hearts, to judge them for their sins,
and those thus wrought upon, must acknowledge Gods special Presence in his
Ordinances; such will say, God is in you of a truth. No greater sign of a
barren, fruitless, and senseless heart in the things of God, than to condemn
the Word Preached as barren and unfruitful; When any have been careless and
did not profit under the means, they have sadly and uncharitably judged the
Word it self carnal and unprofitable, when alas, Lapwing-like, they keep far
enough off from the eggs of iniquity that are hatching within; they look not to
their own hearts where all the fault lies. Oh! what thin Congregations should
we have throughout this Nation, if all should throw off Ordinances, or be
compelled to leave them, that never yet profited by them? How much better were
it to sit down and mourn over those wretched, base, and rebellious hearts of
ours, that have been the cause of all our fruitlessenesse, under the powerful
Preaching, of the heart-searching, and soul-risling Word of God. Let us be sure
to look well to the Word what it is in it self, and not what it proves by
reason of our corruption; if ever we would have right apprehensions of the
Preaching of the Gospel; and not undervalue and slight the public means of
Grace, because some men either have not been bettered, or do not at present
profit under them.

3. But I shall further evidence, that the Word reaches to our hearts upon this
fourfold consideration.

1. The Word does discover men's very thoughts; take them in the fullest
latitude, all sorts of thoughts. Have you not been sometimes at a Sermon, where
you have plainly heard those very things that have been formerly working in
your thoughts? Nay, have you not sometimes foolishly suspected, that some one
or other has told the Preacher your very state and condition, or else he
could never have spoke so closely, distinctly, and directly to it? Lay by all
such fond jealousies and foolish suspicions for the future, and know it is the
Word of God that is preached to you, and this reaches to your very thoughts
without the help of humane information. It is a discerner of the thoughts. Heb.
4.12.


2. The Word discovers the most secret sins of men's hearts; Has not the Word
told you of that many times, which you thought, none in the world knew you were
guilty of? Have you not sometimes heard those secret sins and miscarriages
reproved in public, that you have been guilty of in private, and you thought
till you heard it reproved, that none was ever guilty of such sins but your
self? As I have known a very gracious Christian, when he heard fearfulness of
the Devil, in secret Prayer, reproved as a great piece of our unbeleef, and
that some were so fearfully miscarrying as to this, that they would sometimes
start aside and look behind them, to see whether the Devil were not really
present there or no; he told the Minister, that this was his very miscarriage,
and withal thought that none had ever been thus foolishly fearful and guilty
of that but himself. What made Felix to tremble when he heard Paul discourse
of Temperance, Righteousness, and Judgment to come? Why 'twas the Word of
God that he heard preached that came close to his conscience, and told him of
his intemperance, and unrighteousness, that caused this colic in the
conscience that produced this Aguish sit of trembling in the Noble Viceroy.
When the Word powerfully rifles a man's conscience, and sets his bosom sins
in order before his eyes, is it from Man, or from God? We must acknowledge,
it is the Word of God, and not of man that does it; even that Word that
reaches man's heart, and discovers those secret sins there, and this manifests
Gods Presence by his Word. What is it that makes the hearts of Kings to
stoop, and their consciences to be startled upon the discovery of their sins,
as Saul's was, when Samuel told him of his disobedience to God? 1 Samuel 15.24
Is it the word of man that is thus formidable to them? alas! this cannot be,
when man has no coercive or compulsive power over Kings and Sovereigns, and
the sharpest menaces of mortal men, cannot make these Pillars of the Earth to
shake. Must it not then be the Word of that God, that does this, to whom Kings
and Scepters must vail, and yield obedience? And if the Word at any time
produces such a fearful amazement in the heart of Majesty it self, must we not
say, God is in that Word of a truth? Men are apt to think well enough of
themselves, till the Word reveals their sins to them; then they see much sin,
they took no notice of before, when once the Word of God comes close to the
conscience. This was the case of St. Paul. Romans 7.7, 9
I had not known sin but by the Law: For I had not known lust, except the Law
had said, thou shall not covet. Verse. 9. For I was alive without the Law once,
but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed.

3. The Word meets with, and answers the scruples of doubting souls; whence is
this but from Gods Presence with the Word? Have not many souls experienced the
Word to come close to their very doubts, and to have satisfied them? When
laboring under unbeleef, it has much informed their minds; when fearing
Apostasy, by it they have seen solid grounds for perseverance; the Word
teaching, that they are kept by the Power of God, through Faith, unto eternal
salvation.

4. The Word affords suitable comforts to particular cases of the soul, and to
afflicted consciences. No cure for the Corrasives of the world, like to those
Cordials of Comfort out of the Word. No plaster for a wounded conscience, like
to the Balm of Gilead, purchased by Christ, and prepared in the Word, always
to be found ready for the use of saving Faith, in the boxes of Gospel-Promises.
It was the very design of the Word of God, to back and strengthen our souls
with comfort in this life, upon well-grounded hopes of life in the world to
come. Romans 15.4
For whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. These
are all matters of experience, and I dare appeal to the hearts of Gods Children
for the truth of them. Have you not had your thoughts discerned? your secret
sins discovered? your doubts answered, and suitable comforts given in at
Sermons? Whence comes all this? Alas! the Preacher is but a finite creature,
and is no more able of himself to reach men's hearts, and particular cases, than
he is to create a world. Well! but though the Preacher cannot, yet the Word
preached can; and this speaks Gods Presence with his Word.

4. 3. The Word of God presses those duties, and discovers those Truths which
must needs own God for their Author, and this also speaks the Presence of God
with his Word. As Gods People are his Segullah, his (...), his Peculiar People:
So Gods Word has its peculiarities with it, which own God as the proper Author
of it. Now there are both Mysterious Truths, and also some Practical Duties,
that are peculiar to the Word of God.

1. Some Mysterious Truths; such as these.

First, The great Mystery of the Incarnation of Christ. Without controversy
great was the Mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16
God was manifest in the flesh.

Secondly, That any should obtain Righteousness for their salvation, by
imputation, when they are inherently sinful and unrighteous. For he made him
sin for us, who know no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21
that we might become the Righteousness of God through him.

Thirdly, That sinners should obtain Life Eternal, by another Temporal death,
and suffering for a season. Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised
again for our justification. Romans 4.25.


Fourthly, That two natures should be united into one person, and that that
person should be so worthy, as to make an expiatory Sacrifice, and full
satisfaction to the offended Justice of God, for the sins of so many thousands
as shall be saved. He is a Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.2
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Isa. 53 5
These are such Truths (many more might be named) that neither men nor Angels
could ever have thought of. Yet these we preach and declare, these the Word
of God clearly discovers; these are the very foundations of our Faith, Hope,
and Eternal Salvation. Adam in innocence was unacquainted with these Mysteries;
and now they are not men's inventions we preach, or a bundle of fallacies bound
up in a little canting language, fit only to entrap and ensnare souls into
gross delusions, (to which, veracity is as great a stranger, in the notion, and
sense, and pertinency in their delivery, as the lively power of Religion in the
practice of them) But the very mind, and the will of God revealed in his
written Word, which is an evidence of Gods Presence with that Word we preach.

5. 2. Some Practical Duties, such as these are,

First, To live by Faith, not by sense or reason. Brutish men, as well as bruit
beasts, live merely a life of sense, wallowing in the filthy mire of sensual
lusts. The most raised Moralists, that have most refined understandings, but
yet want grace, live only the life of reason at the best. The light of reason,
the inward light of the mind, improved with rules of morality, may make us
morally honest, but it is the Word of God that teaches us how to be truly
gracious. This directs us to the life of Faith. And this is his Commandment (
his Commandment, 1 John 3.23
by way of peculiar appropriation) that ye believe on the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ. Here is the Alpha and Omega of true Christianity, the beginning
and end of a saving Faith in Christ, and love to the Brethren. How ever carnal
men may live by sense, and serve their sins, yet the Just shall live by Faith,
Hab. 2.4
in the service of their Savior. Neither is this an idle notion, or a mere
speculation, it is the very life of the Saints practice, as we see by St. Paul.
The life which I now live in the flesh, Gal. 2.20
is by Faith in the Son of God. What a poor character had this been of St.
Paul's Christianity and Saintship? I live according to the light within, I am
directed by the rule of Reason; I avoid all those gross sins that the light of
nature checks me for; I am no sensualist, nor swearer, nor drunkard, nor
adulterer, or profane person; yea but what is all this to the life of Faith in
the Son of God. And indeed Paul could have said all that, and much more, whilst
he was in his wretched estate of unregeneracy; Yea as touching the
Righteousness of the Law he was blameless. Phil. 3.6
He was (...), such an one, that in the judgment of others he could not be
complained of, as a breaker of any Law; he was a strict Pharisee, a very exact
observer of Gods Law. Yet how does he esteem of these things which once he
counted his gain, verse. 7. Verse. ^
But what things were gain to me, these I counted loss for Christ. The inside,
the outside, the all of a Moralist, reaches no further, than the mere outside
of a true Believer. I have sometimes thought that the Pharisees prayer, which
describes his profession of Holiness merely by negatives, was a pretty exact
character of that Religion, that is most exactly squared by the Light within.
Quaker
God I thank thee (says the Pharisee) that I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Pablican. Luke 18.
Thus they ordinarily make up their Profession of Negatives, they are none of
the debaucht, profane, swearing rabble. Alas! what is all this to the Positive
part of Christianity, to the life of Faith and Holiness, in a crucified Jesus,
and depending upon his Righteousness for eternal salvation. Look but to the
Positive Practical part of a Pharisees Religion, see how they are shamefully
outstript. Verse. 12. I fast twice in the week, Verse. 12
I give Tithes of all that I possess. Alas! what hopes of Heaven in the way of
such a Profession, that leaves men far short of Pharisaical Holiness? When as
our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, tells us plainly, Mat. 5.^
Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Well! when
all is done, the life of Faith, is the life that a true Christian must lead;
that will bring him to Heaven. This the Word of God teaches, and this was St.
Paul's practice, when he outwent his own former Pharisaical Holiness. Phil.
3.8, 9
I do count all things but dung that I may win Christ; and be found in him, not
having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

6. Secondly. Heavenly-mindednesse. It Is the Word of God only directs us to
this. ^ol. 3.2 (...)
Set your affections upon things that are above, not upon things that are
below. The word (...). To set our affections, implies a double act of the soul,
the one of the mind meditating, the other of the will loving and embracing.
Things above should be objects of a true Christians thoughts, will, and
affections. Does any Loadstone in the world, draw Heavenward except the Word
of God? To mind things that are above, is quite cross to our natural
inclinations, and our carnal desires. And if ever we are effectual in this
duty, we must attribute it wholly to Gods Presence in his Word, that sets it
home closely and powerfully upon our hearts. Hence S. Paul, Phil. 3.2
Our Conversation is in Heaven, (...), our Citizen-ship it is in Heaven. The
Word of God is a Christians Charter, that entitles him to be a Citizen of the
New Jerusalem. Look to the wisest man in the world, that wants Grace, and the
direction of the Word, he has much of the Devil, and of the Beast in him;
his very wisdom is both sensual and Devilish. Will not such as these are
stand upon their own heads, and shake their heels against Heaven, rather than
set their hearts, and affections, and minds there. It Is the Word of God alone,
that herein is like to water, which mounts up as high as its first rise: it had
its Original from Heaven, and it rests not till it brings men's minds thither
again, at present, and both soul and body too, of all true Believers at the
last.

7. 3. Mortification of all the most hidden, and secret sins. Romans 6.1^ Col 3.5
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, etc. Mortisie therefore your members
that are upon the earth; that is, we must study how to repress and beat down
all our corrupt nature, however it breaks out, whatever affections, or unlawful
actions do arise, we must slay in their first rising. This is a peculiar
injunction of the Word of God, to promote inward mortification of the whole
body of sin, and all the members thereof. And this speaks,

First, A serious purpose of resisting of sin, and this turns the heart from
the ways of sin.

Secondly, An avoiding all the occasions of sin, this keeps the heart from
returning unto sin.

Thirdly, A daily use of the best means to subdue sin, this helps us to a
constancy in our purpose against sin, that we may prosperously go on in this
work of God.

8. 4. Inward Humility of the mind. Be clothed with Humility, Pet. 5.5
1 Pet. 5.5. To make Humility the inward ornament of the soul, is only an
effect of the Word of God, which no other Rules can reach unto. And herein the
Word of God is no ways unreasonable, in this Rule for our inward
soul-adorning. If we consider man, either as a creature depending upon God, or
as a sinful creature defiled with Original sin; or as a renewed creature,
accomplished with grace (the free issue and product of Gods distinguishing
mercy) who may by grace become sincere, but can never be made innocent; or as
one endowed with humane Learning, though his knowledge be much, yet his
ignorance is greater. Such like considerations as these are, speaks it highly
rational for a man to be truly humble. The highest Moralists are ignorant of
this spiritual duty, because they are unacquainted with those pressing motives,
that the Word of God urges us to humility with. Let never so great a show of
humility be made; if we own not the Word to teach us, our very humility will
discover our pride. We may perhaps make a show of humility, because there is
some real comeliness in that grace, but not in that way, or manner, that the
Word directs us, and so we discover our pride, in that we will not be
beholding to the Word to teach us. Such duties as these are, come not from
corrupt nature, nor indeed can they; for nothing crosses it more than these.
We need not suspect the Devil to have a hand in the putting of us upon the
sincere practice of these; for they all do immediately tend to over-turn his
Kingdom. But the Word of God, which we read and preach, drives mainly at
these, and so it evinces Gods special Presence in his Word, which is the
promoter of such spiritual duties.

CHAP. VIII. Practical Inferences from the second Argument. Teachers of the
Word must not corrupt the Word of God. Hearers must own it as Gods Word. And
must receive it with Reverence. Mingle it with Faith. Practice it with
Obedience. Avoid a curious pleasing of the ear. Both Teachers and hearers must
highly prize it.
1. THe Presence of God being evidenced to be with his Word, we shall
propound a few Practical Inferences, which do naturally flow from it.

1. Hence Teachers of others, must learn to keep the Word of God they preach
free from corruption, and adulterated mixture. Let Paul's practice be an eminent
Pattern for imitation. For we are not as many which corrupt the Word of God;
but as of sincerity but as of God, in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 2.17 Pollux
O^omast. p. 372
speak we in Christ, (...). The word properly belongs to those that sell
Wine, as Pollux observes. Now Hucksters of Wine are wont to corrupt generous
Wine with base mixtures. And thence (...) is used for deceitfully and
crastily, (...). Schol. in Aristoph. 103. recte (...) pro (...). Suidas. (...).
because of that corruption that is found amongst sellers of Wine; from whom
the Metaphor is taken. The Apostle abominates this dealing with the Word of
God. He does not adulterate it, by mixing any thing else with the pure Word
of God; he does not corrupt it with false Doctrines, and the inventions of
men, and propound them for the Word of God. But there seems to be a further
meaning of the phrase. (...), which does not only denote a corrupting of the
word, Non quia a veritate deficerent, sed quod eam fucatam pro Ponerent, non
ingenuina sua sinceritate. Calv. in L.
by the base mixtures of false doctrine, but also a putting a false gloss, a
painted face upon the genuine Word of God. As many Teachers were wont to do in
Paul's time, and too many at all times. Darkening the natural luster, and innate
radiency of the word of God, by the paint and flourishes of Rhetoric, deeming
very little Power in the plainness of the Gospel, (...).
without the help of their strong lines, and but little Beauty in the
simplicity of the word of God, without their varnish of Eloquence, and Comical
strains in Preaching. Like Brokers, that put a new gloss upon an old garment,
to make it vendible; and others, who to make a deformed face appear beautiful,
think to mend the matter with a little paint. Thus many corrupt Teachers there
were in Paul's time (and happy were we, (...). Scholiast. in Aristoph. p. 103.
A. E.
if there were not too many such now adays) who esteemed the plain word of the
Gospel, as an old, and antiquated garment that would not off, without a new
Gloss of their own Rhetoric; and accounted the simplicity of the Gospel, far
from being any taking beauty amongst their curious Auditors, and therefore had
always a varnish of their own, the enticing words of man's wisdom, as the
Apostle calls it, to set it off withal. And thus they did prostitute the
Gospel, for the gaining of applause, rather than winning of souls; for fauning
a little credit to themselves, rather than fishing for the good of souls, and
the glory of God. Paul he abominates, and detests such corrupt and deceitful
dealing with the word of God; in neither sense did he dare (...), to corrupt
the Word of God. And that others might avoid it too, he hints a threefold Rule
to be observed, verse. 17.

2. 1. They must preach with a right zeal for God. [But as of sincerity] He
was so far from any secret sinister and by ends, that should cause the
corrupting of the word of God, (...). Constable. L.
that he dares lay his doctrine open to the very Sun beams, as the word for
sincerity does import: All he aims at, is to advance Gods Glory, he has no
corrupt fancies to vent with Divine Truths, nor any popular applause, and
credit from the vulgar, to trade for in his Preaching, and so has no designs
at all to carry on by his Preaching, but what is highly consistent with Gospel
Sincerity.

2. They must remember they are doing Gods work, and so it must be done after
Gods own way. [But as of God.] They are Gods Commissioners, and therefore must
vent nothing but what comes from God. Ministers are Gods Ambassadors, and they
must be sure to keep close to their Masters instructions.

3. They must remember, that when Preaching, they are set in Gods special
Presence, and therefore must not dare to vent any thing, but what they can be
content to have Gods own judgment pass upon it. [As in the sight of God.]
There is Gods special Presence in the delivery of the Word, and would it not be
an Act of very high presumption to give God the lie to his very face? And is it
not a piece of extreme madness and folly, to study then to please men by our
corrupt varnishing the pure Word of God, when by it we do not only displease
God, but destroy Souls, and deceive our selves the worst at last.

3. II. Hence hearers must learn to bring a right Gospel Spirit to the Word
Preached, that is, they must hear it as the Word of God, and not as the Word of
Man. 1 These. 2.13.
Ye received it, not as the Word of Man, but (as it is in truth) the Word of
God. It is one thing to receive the Word of God, another thing to receive it as
the Word of God. The Papists embrace the Word of God, but not as the Word of
God, because, they tell us, the written Word has no Authority in it self,
unless it be approved by the Church. Rob. Rolloc. in Loc.
Nam quid aliud hoc est, quam Verbum Dei quidem, non tamen ut Verbum Dei,
amplecti? For what is this, but to embrace the Word of God indeed, but not as
the Word of God? But if we would hear the Word so as to thrive by what we
hear; we must hear it, and embrace it, as the Word of God. And to that end
these four things must be done.

4. 1. We must hear the Word with due reverence and fear. Heb. 12.28.
Let us serve him with reverence and Godly fear. If hearing be any part of Gods
service, the argument urges strongly, that it must be done with reverence and
Godly fear. God has a good look, much favor, for those that tremble at his
Word. I will look to him that trembles at my Word. Isa. 66.2.
What ever reverence is due to God, we must express it by reverencing his
Word. Multi enim se Deum reverei and timere jactant, sed dum negligunt ejus
verbum, Calv. in Loc.
simul se Dei contemptores esse ostendunt. For many there are who boast that
they reverence and fear God, but while they neglect his Word, they do withal
show themselves to be contemners of God. God invites such hearers into his
Presence, as do tremble at his Word, and will be sure to make them welcome.
verse. 5. Hear the Word of the Lord, Verse. 5
ye that tremble at his Word. Here is the gracious invitation. And the end of
the verse presents us with the welcome they shall have. He shall appear to
their joy, but their enemies shall be ashamed. We never tremble at Gods Word
as we ought, if we do not own God speaking to us in it.

5. 2. We must mingle it with Faith. If we would have the Word of God work
effectually as Physic for our Souls, we must mingle it with Faith. Heb. 4.2.
The Word heard, proficed them not, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. The word (...), that denotes mixing, is a metaphor taken from a
potion of Physic, according as the ingredients are, so it is either
medicinable or mortal. If we hear the Word of God, and do not mingle it with
Faith, we turn this wholesome potion into a cup of poison. The Word separated
from Faith profits nothing; not as if the efficacy of the Word did depend
upon us, or any thing in us. For neither, if the whole world and every creature
in it should prove a liar, would he cease to be true who cannot lie. But the
Word discovers its power and efficacy no other ways, than where Faith makes
entrance for it into the Soul; So the Word is the Power of God, Romans 1.
to all that do believe. And righteousness is revealed in it, but it is from
Faith to Faith; where there is no Word, there can be no Faith. And therefore
that is no Faith, but Fancy, which on the one hand is built upon the traditions
of men, as the Papists; and on the other hand is resolved into the immediate
revelations of the Spirit of God, as the Enthusiasts, and on both hands,
(concordia discors!) without the written Word of God.

3 We must practice it with obedience. We then let the world know, that we
really own what we hear, and cordially embrace it as the Word of God, when we
dare not but conform our lives thereto. But ye have obeyed from the heart,
that form of doctrine which was delivered you. Ro^ (...) 17.
We then evidence it, that God has spoken to the heart, when we yield
obedience of the heart, to the Word we hear.

6. 4. We must carefully avoid an immoderate ate hunting after the pleasing
of the ear. This (...) makes us receive truths many times because they are of
such a man's stamping, and not because they bear Gods image and superscription.
And hence comes it that many respect truths because of their Apparel, as they,
(of whom St. James speaks,) respected persons that had a gold Ring, and gay
Apparel, when men in an ordinary Dress are neglected. Thus do not Gods Truths
fare the better many times, rather for the Rhetorical Dress, and neat Language
they are delivered in, than for the Divine Authority they carry with them? We
have many that can say, as they of old, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos says
another, (He is an eloquent man) another I am of Cephas, truths fare the better
for such and such men's sakes that Preach them. And some there are, yea too
many, that will say, They are of Christ; they care for no Preachers, no
Preaching, no Public Ordinances at all. But of those that hear constantly how
few are there, that say they are of God in all their hearing? Where is the man
that cordially says, I care not how plain the truth be set off, I embrace it
willingly if it be a truth of God, and receive it with welcome into my heart.
God grant there were many such hearers in every Congregation in England; and
then those that now too profanely slight the Word Preached, would soon be
enamoured with the love of it, when such evidences were given of Gods Presence
with it.

7. III Inference. Hence both Teachers and Hearers should learn, highly to
prize the Word of God. Oh it is a token of Gods special Presence. We may
bless God we are not left without this token and witness of Gods Presence
amongst us. As God does honor us with his Word and Presence, so should we
honor him, with the practice of holiness, and the life of praise. Let us
bless God, that he has written his Word for our direction, and that he
continues the Preaching of the Word for our instruction. O how glad would the
Martyrs of old have been, with our freedom, of enjoying the public means of
hearing the Word Read and Preached? They that joyfully hugged some few scraps
of the Bible in a corner, and counted the dark Caverns of the Earth, rich
Temples, when they, though secretly, and in the night, could enjoy the presence
of God in his Word: Oh how thankful would they have been for such overflowings
of mercy, as now may be enjoyed, which some profanely abuse, and others
blasphemously undervalue, and wilfully contemn. It is a shrewd sign, that chose
men are either downright Atheists, that will not own any such thing as Gods
Presence in his Word, or else gross unbeleevers, that never had any experience
of it in their own souls, that are so far from blessing God for the public
Preaching of the word, Quakers.
that they count Preaching it self the greatest delusion, and the way of
maintenance for Preachers, the greatest oppression in the nation. And though
some of them are as much against Praying, as all are against Preaching, yet
their constant practice and discourse speak them all unanimously to concenter
in this their ungodly Letany, FROM PRIESTS, and PREACHING, and PAYING TITHES,
GOOD LORD DELIVER US.

CHAP. IX. Gods Presence in his Worship by his ministers. The truths of God
must be heard though from ungodly Preachers. Ministers are Gods Ambassadors.
Stewards of the mysteries of God. Four requisites in Gospel Stewards. Ministers
are Co-workers with God. How God and man work together in the conversion of
Souls, and production of saving Faith.
1. I Now proceed to a Third Argument to prove the presence of God in places of
religious worship. Ambassadors, the Ministers of the Gospel. Ministers of the
Gospel, as well as Ministers of State, speak the vertual presence of their Lord
and Master. When Gods Majesty will not suffer us to see his face and live. It Is
Gods mercy to speak to us by his servants the Ministers of the Gospel. And Gods
Ministers being engaged in Gods work, do vertually speak Gods Presence. As Mr.
Calvin has observed, Calvin in Deuteronomy. 18.17.
Deus certo praesentiae suae symbolo favorem erga nos suum testatur, quoties
spiritus sui dolibus il lustrat, and in medium producit fidos probosque
Doctores. That God does give a signal witness of his singular favor toward
us, by a certain token of his Divine Presence, as often as he enlightens by the
gifts of his Spirit, and sends amongst us faithful and Pious teachers. And the
reason why they evidence Gods Presence, is this, because it is not their own,
but Gods work they are about. We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled
to God. 2 Cor. 5.20.
A Minister pressing reconciliation unto God, to his Auditors, even to thee in
particular, Aretius in L.
facit praesentem Christum te habere, He makes even thee to have Christ
present with thee. Christ cries aloud in the Sermons of those that are his
faithful servants, the Ministers of the Gospel; and in hearing them, we hear
Christ, and in rejecting them, we reject Christ himself. He that hears you,
hears me; Luke 10.16.
and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. Here it is plain and clear, that Christ by his
ministers speaks unto us, they are but Christ's Vicegerents, they sustain
Christ's Person; And therefore he will have the Word of God by them delivered,
heard so, as if Christ himself were personally present and did Officiate
amongst them. We are not to look upon Gospel Ministers as mere men: it is true
in themselves they are so, in their work they are not; for so we are to
consider, that Christ speaks to us by them. Thus God sent Samuel to Eli with an
unsavory message, 1 Samuel 3.11. etc.
yet Eli received this, not because Samuel spoke it, but because he brought
Gods message, as being Gods Ambassador, and bearing his Person. It is the Lord
let him do what seems to him good. (...) It Is Jehovahs message, 1 Samuel 3.18
but Samuels voice. Samuel speaks, but God is present; Let God do what seems
good in his eyes.

2. This is so certain a Truth, that if the Minister be bad, yet if he preach
the pure Word of God, we must receive the Word, because we are not so much to
regard the man preaching, as the Word preached. An Earthen Vessel not well
wrought, may serve to convey pure and clean water. God forbid I should
Apologize for any wicked and ungodly Ministers, to boulster them up in the
least ungodliness or profaneness. I plead not (I say) for any wicked ones, See
5. of this chap.
to be employed in the sacred work of an holy God; only to keep souls right in
their duty. It Is not the person, but the office; not the man, but his Ministry;
not his life, but his Doctrine, we are to look to. For as one observes very
well upon Caiphas his propesying that year that he was High Priest, Joh.
11.51. Schmidius. Not. and Animad. in N. T. in Joh. 11.51
God oftentimes honors the Office, and so orders, that a wicked person in a
good Office, may perform somewhat helping forward our Salvation. If God does a
good work by bad men, we must not reject the work for the persons sake, but
we must rather embrace the good offered or done by bad men, and leave them to
stand, or fall, to their own Master. When Christ sent out his twelve Apostles
to preach, of all of them he says; He that receives you, receives me.
Mat. 10.40 Verse 4.
Yet one of these was Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. We plainly see by
Christ's own words, we may receive Christ by the Ministry of a Judas, a
Traitor, I might say, a Devil: The expression it is true is harsh, but our
Savior fears not to speak thus of one whom he had personally sent to preach
the Gospel; one of you is a Devil, meaning Judas. Nay the Scripture makes no
difference between Judas and the other Disciples in the success of the
Ministry; they all twelve were sent out, they all did miracles, they all cast
out Devils, they all returned to Christ, and gave him an account of their
success. To them all Christ said, He had ordained they should go out, An.
Burgess soirit. refining. p. 504 Joh. 15.16
viz. in preaching, and bear much fruit, viz. in their Ministry. And Phil. 3.
There were salse Apostles who preached Christ out of envy. Supposing to add
more affliction and persecution to Paul, which must needs be an high degree of
malice and wickedness; Yet Paul said, he rejoiced that Christ was preached
how-ever, Which could not be if their preaching did no good. Thus we see, that
seed which is sown by a foul diseased hand may bring forth fruit, as well as
that which is sown by a clean hand. Give me leave to allude to that passage, 1
King. 17.6. God there in a time of hunger and want, commands the Ravens
(unclean Birds) to feed the Prophet Elijah. The Ravens brought him bread and
flesh, morning and evening. They were Ravens, unclean by the Law of Moses, not
Doves, yet Elijah refuses not the meat, because God sends them. Chemnit.
Harmon. in Evangelia.
This Chemnitius thinks has a mystery, that God is wont sometimes to afford to
his people the wholesome food of his Word, by the hands of wicked and ungodly
men. Thou therefore, hear, receive, and mingle by Faith what thou hear, take
whatsoever God sends, as from the hand of God. Be it a Raven, or a Dove, thou
need not trouble thy self, so the food come from God. Elijah might have
starved, if he had refused the food, because the Ravens brought it. So may
thou starve thy soul by nourishing prejudices against the Minister that is sent
with food for thy soul from God, and then refuse the Word, because thou
dislikest something in the Ministers person. And indeed if this principle once
prevail, That a Minister ought not to be heard that is ungodly; Though he
preaches nothing but sound doctrine. It would lay a certain foundation for
Separation from the outward means and Ordinances, at least from the
administration of them, as now they are enjoyed. For the case would presently
return hither, as it is with many already, not whether the Minister be really
ungodly or no, but whether he seems so to them; and if he answers not those
characters of Godliness, they have laid down then they are obliged to hear him
no more. Such sad works do bad principles, and erroneous consciences make in
the Church of God. A sad example of this may be seen among the Quakers, who
upon the sore-mentioned principle, reject and throw off all the now Ministers
in England, making no difference; because they are all ungodly, being all
guilty of that great abomination, and sinful oppression of taking Tithes. How
much better may we determine thus, Officium est Sanctum and honor dignissimum
licet Ministri sunt peccatores. The office of the Ministry is sacred, and most
worthy of honor, though Ministers may be ungodly. The promise of Christ's
Presence is made to persons for the office sake, and not to the office for the
persons, and so to the office more than to the persons. Lo I am with you always
to the end of the world. Mat. 28 20
Christ's promise was to the office primarily, secondarily to those that then
were, and successively should be entered into it, to do Christ's service, and
preach the Gospel, as the Apostles did. Go preach the Gospel, and lo I am with
you always to the end of the world. However, it is certain Christ promises his
presence here, which is peculiar to the Church of God, and so it clears that
which we are upon, that God is present in his worship by his Ministers. Three
things I shall add to clear this.

3. 1. Gospel Ministers are Gods Ambassadors; this speaks Gods Presence by
them. 2 Cor. 5.20
Now therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ. The very office of an
Ambassador, is to be but a Vicarius to another; He is a Proxy to his Master,
and bears his person; who is sometimes thus described, Legatus est officialis,
qui alterius locum tenet. Martin. Lex Philolog.
An Ambassador is such an Officer as supplies the place of another; thence
called by the Greeks (...), one that stands in another stead. Thus the
Ministers stand in Christ's stead. For

1. As Ambassadors they act only upon Christ's Commission, None takes this
honor upon him, but he that is called of God, Heb. 5 4
as Aaron was. It Is an honor to be employed as Christ's Ambassador, and none
must take this honor upon them, but those that are called of God.
Gospel Ministers, that have Christ's Mission, and Christ's Commission, they in
their Preaching represent Christ's Person.

2. As Ambassadors, they deliver Christ's Message. God is present where his Word
and Mind is declared. It is the Lord, says Eli, when Samuel speaks to him,
because it was the Word of God he spoke to him. The Word of the Lord, where
that came to the Prophets, they then could appear in the place of God amongst
the people. I have put my words into thy mouth, says God to Jeremy. Jer. 1.9.
They are Gods Words that Gods Ambassadors do declare; therefore the Apostle
Paul says, 1 These. 4.8
He that despises, despises not man, but God. They are much mistaken, R.
Rolloc. in Locum.
says Rollock, who in the preaching of the Gospel, think they have to do only
with men, and not with God. The Apostle plainly confutes such. The man preaches
indeed, but it is Gods Word he delivers; and contempt of that, is not on man
only, but mainly upon God himself. He despises not man, that is, not so much
Man, as God.

4. 2. Gospel Ministers are Gods Stewards; this speaks Gods Presence. Let a man
so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1
as the Stewards of the Mysteries of God. When great men cannot dispatch their
business personally, they employ their Stewards; what they do, is done as by
the Master himself. Christ our great Lord and Master is present now in Heaven,
he has sent his Ministers to be his Stewards, to dispatch his work, in
Preaching the Gospel, and converting of souls. It Is no ordinary Stewardship,
that of the Ministry, they are Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Is. Casa^b.
exercit. 16. 43
So had the Heathens their Mysteries; the Mysteries of Cybelle, who was termed
the Mother of the Gods, in Samothracia of Hecate in many places; of Ceres, and
Proserpina, in Africa; of Bacchus in Boeotia; of Orphsus up and down in
Graecia; of Isis in Egypt, and in many other places; and these were all
performed unto the Devil. For as he observes, Mirum dictu, and cogitatu
horrendum, quantopere Satan olim, per illa quae dicebantur Mysteria, hominibus
illuserat. It was wondrous to think, and horrible to speak, how much Satan
heretofore had deluded men, by those things which were called Mysteries. Thus
Antichrist too has his Mysteries. The Whore of Babylon, has Mystery written
in her forehead, because her Kingdom is full of Mysteries. But these are the
Mysteries of God, Rev. 17.5
that Gospel Ministers are Stewards of. We speak the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery. 1 Cor. 2.7
The Word of the Gospel for salvation of souls, these Mysteries therein
contained do Ministers preach. And without controversy great is that Mystery
of Godliness, they are Stewards of.

5. Aristotle in his Oeconomicks requires four things in Stewards, all which
are necessary requisites in Gospel Ministers.

1. They must have (...), good skill and knowledge. Thus must Ministers be well
skilled in the Word where the Mysteries of God are recorded. Its an ill
Steward, that knows not how to use his Masters Treasure; for the best
advantage: He wants a great requisite of a Gospel-Steward, that knows not
where to find, or how to use the great Treasures of Heaven, that are reposed
in the Scriptures, for the good of souls. It was but a poor commendation of
Carolostadius that at eight years standing Doctor; Amam. Aulibarb. Bibli p. 47
He never had read the Scriptures, but then first set upon the study of them.
Another great Doctor and Divine being asked about the Decalogue, answered, he
never had that Book so much as in his Library. Rare Stewards indeed of Gods
Mysteries, when they know not what they are!

2. They must have (...) bonam indolem, a good temper. Hypocrisy is but an
ill-becoming garment for a Steward of Christ to wear. Every Saint should have
his garment dyed white in the blood of the Lamb, much more should Christ's
Stewards; they should be clothed with the white Robe of Sincerity, to act
unfeignedly for Gods glory.

3. They must have (...), constancy of labor, assiduity in taking pains. Thus
Ministers must be laborers, if Christ's Stewards; they must give themselves to
the things of the Gospel; daily labors in the things of God, make Ministers of
a good conscience, oft-times appear with no good countenance. There is onus, as
well as honos in the work of the Ministry, whatever slight thoughts, ignorant
slanderers may have of it. It Is laborious, as well as honorable, to be a
Steward of Christ.

4. They must have (...), Righteousness. Thus Christ's Stewards must be
righteous, as well as learned and laborious. For a Bishop must be blameless as
the Steward of God. Tit. 1.7
Life and Doctrine must agree, that he may not pull down with one hand, what
he builds with another. Though I have formerly showed that hearers must not
reject Gospel Truths, though he that brings them be ungodly; yet withal,
Ministers must know, that if they are really such, of all other men they are
the worst, and their condemnation will be the greatest. Let me leave with
such, one Latin sentence, out of which they may easily pick plain English;
Arrows. Tas. Sacra.
Pessima creaturarum visibilium est homo degener, pessimus hominum
pseudo-Christianus, Christianorum vero pessimus, nequam Verbi Minister. The
abovenamed particulars, are some qualifications of Gospel-Stewards; Christ is
signally present in his Ordinances, when his Stewards are faithful dispensers
of the Word.

6. 3. Gospel Ministers are co-workers together with God; this speaks Gods
Presence with them. 2 Cor. 6.1 1 Cor. 3 9
We therefore as workers together with him, beseech you not to receive the
Grace of God in vain. For we are laborers together with God, (...). If
Ministers are fellow laborers together with God, in the doing good to souls,
then certainly God is present in his Worship by his Ministers. Mark 16.^0
They went forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them.

1. Ministers do work together with God. Behold here is infinite condiscention
of God toward Ministers, that God, who can with one word convert and save
souls, as well as create a world, yet should vouchsafe to admit men his
fellow-workers for the conversion of souls. It Is true, Grotius in Ep. ad
Philem. v. 10.
Dei opus est regignere hominem, it is Gods work to regenerate and convert
souls, but God pleases to use the Ministers as his Instruments in the work: And
God by the secret grace, and virtue, and power of the Spirit, works in them,
and by them: He joins himself to the Ministers, resigns not his right, but
only communicates his power with them, and graceth his Instruments with the
honor and title of the work. Thus God does not only speak to us after the
manner of men, but also by the Ministry of men, Romans 11.14
and that so, that they by their Ministry are said (...), to save us. Therefore

2. The Lord truly works together with the Ministers. Mark 16.20
The Lord working with them. It is an high privilege only to be the Servants
of God, in the work of the Ministry; but this is common to us with other
Saints: But to be Fellow-labourens with God in the salvation of souls, this is
a piece of singular favor God vouchsafes to Gospel Ministers. The Angels are
Gods Servants too, being his Ministering Spirits, but to which of the Angels
has God said at any time they are his fellow laborers? Both ways the
Presence of God is evidenced, with the Ministers of the Gospel.

7. Object. But is it not derogatory to God, to have Man as a co-worker with
him, in the conversion of souls? is not Faith, by which we are saved, the gift
of God?

Answ. 1. God is the principal cause, man only by the Ministry of the Word is
the instrumental cause, and so Gods glory, and man's duty, may very well stand
together.

2. In saving Faith, we must distinguish these two things.

First, There is the knowledge of the things to be believed.

Secondly, An assent of the heart to those credenda, or things to be believed.

First, Then the knowledge of things to be believed, arises from the word
preached by Gospel Ministers. Gospel saving knowledge is not communicated now
adays, by revelations, and immediate inspirations, but by the Word preached
and heard. Romans 10.14 See Romans 1.16
How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard, and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? Now Ministers are co-workers with God, because Faith
depends on the Word preached by them, as a necessary Instrument, for its
production, as to the knowledge of things to be believed.

Secondly, As for that Internal Assent of the heart, whereby a Believer does
firmly apprehend, and comfortably apply the Doctrine propounded, of things to
be believed; this arises from the habit of Faith infused by Gods Spirit. The
Doctrine of Faith, is preached and promulged by men, herein they are co-workers
with God: But the habit of Faith, that is infused and implanted by God alone,
without any concurrence of the Preacher; Thus it is the gift of God. Man
propounds truths to the soul by his preaching; God by his Spirit makes us
believe those Truths preached and propounded. Thus have I cleared the third
Argument.

CHAP. X. Practical deductions from Gods Presence with his Ministers. The
Ministers dignity. Their duty. As Ambassadors. As Stewards. As Co-workers with
God. People must eye God and not men. Prize Gospel truths. Not be prejudiced
against, nor undervaluers of Gospel Ministers. Good grounds for Ministers to
Preach, and people to hear.
1. FRom this third Argument to prove Gods Presence in Religious worship, as
being represented by the Ministers of the Gospel; These practical deductions,
might be prosecuted, and enlarged upon, which I shall briefly name, and come to
the fourth and last Argument.

1. It informs Ministers of two things.

First, Of their Dignity; That God should set them in the Church, to represent
the Majesty of Heaven. This ought not to puff up pride in Ministers, but to
cause humble admiration of Gods goodness, to honor their weakness so far,
as to be the representatives of God himself. This may vindicate them from
contempt amongst men. An affront is offered to the Prince, by affronting of his
Ambassador: So God is affronted by any indignities that are offered to His
Ministers. He that despises, 1 These. 4.8.
despises not man, but God. Corinth was ruined by the Romans, for abuse of
Ambassadors: And it were just with God to destroy any place or person for the
contempt of his Ministers.

2. Secondly, it informs Ministers of their duty. Gods Presence with them calls
for a threefold duty from them.

1. As Ambassadors, they must eye that mainly that God sent them about, viz.
The salvation of Souls. We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.
2 Cor. 5.20.
Here is the main end of our Preaching, and your hearing, that you may be
reconciled. How then can any have so impudent a face, as to pretend they are
sent of God, who make railing and reviling of others, to be their work, with a
neglect of the salvation of Souls, and holding out the Word of reconciliation.

3. 2. As Stewards of the mysteries of God, they must be faithful. 1 Cor. 4.2.
It Is required in Stewards that they be faithful. That is, that they keep
nothing back from the people of God, but discover to them according to their
ability the whole council and will of God, that they deal faithfully with them
in all things, that they may render a good account of their Stewardship at the
great Audit. Now this faithfulness of Gods Stewards is seen in these two
things.

First, Davenantius in Col. c. 1. v. 7.
that they seek Gods honor, and not their own praise. He seeks the glory and
honor of God, that speaks as the Oracles of God, that God in all things may
be glorified through Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 4.11.
He seeks praise of men, that so speaks that he may please men, that he may
fan to himself some praise from them, for his wit, eloquence, and learning. Of
this hunting after vain glory, and popular applause, St. Paul with disdain
enough thus speaks, Gal. 1.10
Do I seek to please men? For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the
servant of God.

Secondly, That to their utmost endeavor they promote the spiritual good, and
eternal welfare of the Flock committed to their charge, by watching over them,
preparing suitable food for their souls, according to their capacities and
conditions, omitting nothing that is necessary, and doing nothing that is
prejudicial to their salvation. An example of this we have eminently in St.
Paul. 1 Cor. 10 33.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit but the
profit of many, that they may be saved.

4. 3. As Co-workers with God. They must be diligent. If we work with God, we
must be diligent in our employment, least we ruin our selves, as well as
wrong other Souls, and dishonor God by our carelessness and indiligence.
Prayer, Meditation, and Affliction, contribute much to the making of a Divine:
The two former, speak that care and diligence that is requisite to the
Ministerial Office, the other God uses as his lash to prevent laziness, and as
a Spur to quicken to Duty. He that works together with God for the good of
Souls, had need be very diligent, In that men must have more than Sermons to
lead them: The visible Preachings of Ministers lives, must (...) cooperate,
and join in the work of drawing sinners unto God, or else will hardly prove
successeful.

5. II. Gods presence with the Ministers, teaches the people to eye God more,
and men less, in the Ministry of the Gospel. It is an ill sign of a squeamish
Stomach, not to take meat down, unless it be dressed by such an hand; And as
ill a sign of a distempered heart, not to receive the Word cheerfully and
readily, unless delivered by such and such Ministers. This we have by eying
men more than God. Three directions.

First, Own and prize Gospel truths, by whom ever they are delivered. An
unclean hand may convey to you a precious Jewel, A wooden pipe may convey to
you rich and generous Wine. We must have truth in admiration for Gods sake,
and not entertain Gospel truths because we have the persons in admiration that
do deliver them.

Secondly, Let not prejudice against men's persons, cause in you a prajudice
against the doctrine they preach. The best way is to keep all prejudices
against any out of out hearts, the next is to throw them out suddenly, when we
perceive they have cunningly crept into us. Prejudices, against Ministers if
harbored in our breasts any time, will be very apt to make us contemptuous
against God; And to contemn the truths of God, if upon any private grudge we
condemn the party that brings them. It Is weakness to entertain groundless
prejudices against Ministers; but it is wilfulness then to take revenge upon
our own Souls; And either in a pet to throw off hearing wholly, or not to
embrace the word heard cheerfully.

Thirdly, Let not the meannesse of men's parts cause you to slight or
undervalue Gods Ordinances. There are diverse gifts, yet but one spirit. There
is much of Gods power seen in man's weakness. If good men are without great
parts, they are without that great pride that does attend them. And then those
Sermons that have only the plain trimming of Holiness and Humility, as most
befitting the simplicity of the Gospel are most operative upon hearers. How
ordinary is it, for great and learned Doctors, to leave their people mere
dunces in Religion? Now others, what they want in learning and parts, God many
times helps out by their tenderness of affection for the good of Souls, and
this is ordinarily accompanied with Gods blessing.

6. III. Gods Presence with his Ministers, affords good ground enough for
Ministers to preach, and people to hear. Ordinances will continue, as long as
Christ's promise continues, and presence with the Ministers, and that is to the
end of the world. If any do absent themselves or would withdraw others, from
hearing the Word publicly Preached, let them first prove that Christ's promise
is out of date, then may we have reason to believe that hearing and preaching
are out of date too. Till that be done, let us assure our selves, that the
enjoyment of Public Ordinances, and the Presence of Christ in them, is the
only safe and sure way, for us to walk to the new Jerusalem in.

CHAP. XI. Gods Presence in his Worship, by the Holy Spirit. The Presence of
the Spirit proved by sundry Texts of Scripture. The Word and Spirit go
together. The teaching of the Spirit, no plea for Enthusiasm. The Word of the
Gospel, the ministration of the Spirit. Ten Reasons grounded on experience,
evidencing the Presence, and teaching of the Spirit in the Word.
1. THe Fourth and last Argument to prove the Presence of God in Places of
Religious Worship, Holy Spirit. The Spirits assistance is necessary in all
duties of Gospel Worship. As vital and animal spirits are necessary for all
operations of life and sense in the body; so the Holy Spirit for works of the
soul in all Gospel-duties. Before Christ's coming, the great thing under
promise, and in constant expectation, was the coming of the true Messiah: After
Christ's Ascension, the great thing under promise, and in constant expectation,
was the full manifestation and shedding abroad of the Spirit of God. Now this
was abundantly fulfilled after Christ's Ascension. But what I have to speak to,
lies mainly in this, that there is the special Presence, and Operation of the
Spirit of God in his Ordinances, especially in his Word. This being manifested,
will fully evidence, that the place of Gods Worship, is the place of Gods
singular Presence. The Presence of Gods Spirit shall be cleared, both by
Scriptures, and Reasons, grounded upon undeniable experiences of the Children
of God.

2. When God by the Prophet Ezekiel declared the promises of the Kingdom of
Christ, he makes a gracious promise of his Spiritual Presence with them, Ezekiel.
37.26. I will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them, for evermore, that is, I
will be present in my Grace, Word and Spirit, in their Assemblies, See c. 4.
11, 14
and in their heart; of which Spiritual Presence the Tabernacle and Sanctuary
heretofore were signs and pledges. And that this Presence of the Spirit is to
be had and enjoyed in these times of the Gospel, will be evident from these
following places. I shall begin with the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah. Isa. 59.21
As for more, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; My Spirit which is
upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. In this full place
God has joined his Spirit and his Word together. God has left the footsteps
of his bounty every where, for the advantage of the Church, yet no greater than
this, to have his Word and Spirit to guide them unto Heaven. The Spirit is
joined with the Word, because without the Efficacy, and Presence of the Spirit,
the Word preached would be unprofitable. And the Word too must be joined with
the Spirit, because as one observes, Calvin in Locum.
Est Satanae spiritus qui divellitur a verbo, it is no better nor worse (if
worse could be) than the Spirit of the Devil, that is separated from the Word
of God. We may have the Devil deluding, but no promise of Gods teaching, when
the Spirit is pretended, without the Word. Now where are we to have this?
(...) In thy mouth] Spoken to the Prophet, implying a Ministry of the Word
under the Gospel, to hold this out. God might indeed speak to us immediately
from Heaven, or use the Ministry of Angels. But God consulting with our
weakness, uses the Ministry of Man rather, like our selves, to deliver his
mind to us, that by that means, we may the more familiarly be drawn unto him.
In vain do any boast that they obey God, when they reject his Ministers. If
they obey God, why not in Gods way, who has appointed Gospel Ministers to hold
out his Word, and has promised the Presence of his Spirit, to beat us off from
such fancies and delusions, which would make us gape after revelations without,
and many times contrary to the Word of God.

3. Another place of the same Prophet. Isa. 54.13.
And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. God is wont to teach his
children two ways, by the outward Word preached, and by the secret revelation
of his Spirit, working by the Word: Now which is meant here, the Evangelist
John, Joh. 6.45. shows us. The Father draws souls to Christ. But how? It is
written, they shall be all taught of God. All Gods children shall be clearly
taught by the Spirit of God. The elect ones that are drawn home to Christ, are
(...) taught of God, not in opposition, but in subordination to the Word. It Is
not to deny the Ministry of the Word, but to assert the essicacy of the Spirit.
Mares. L. Com. Lo. 1. ss. 51.
For as one well observes, we are said to be taught of God, in that place of
Joh. 6.45. So far as that the Doctrine, which outwardly sounds in the
Scripture, and Ministry of the Word, is imprinted in our minds by the Spirit of
God, not as if we should receive new revelations without the use of these
outward means. We must so distinguish the Ministry of the Word, and the
teaching of the Spirit, so as not to give the efficacious teaching of the
heart, unto man who preaches the Word. For so the Prophet says, the Sons of
the Church of Christ are (...) taught of God. And as Augustine, Augustinus
Cathedram in coelis habet qui corda docet, He that teaches the heart is
Doctor of the Chair in the New Jerusalem. Yet we must not divide and separate
them, as if Gods teaching, and the Spirits teaching in Gospel Times, were
without the Word preached. The Spirit of God teaches in the Church, and
Ordinances there. Discipuli sunt Diaboli non Dei, Calvinus in Isa. 54.13
qui ordinem a Deo institutum repudiant, They are the Devils Scholars, and none
of Gods Disciples, who do reject that order that God has appointed. We see
these joined together, the Children of the Church, and taught of God; so that
they are not the Disciples and Children of God, that will not be taught in the
Church.

4. Another place is that of St. Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4.9.
As touching Brotherly Love, I need not write unto you; for ye are all taught
of God, to love one another. The meaning is, I need not now use many words to
you, to treat at large about brotherly Love. A word is enough to the wise. You
that are made wise by the Spirit of God, know at first what the duty means, an
admonition is enough. God teaches you by the Word, and you know what that is by
the Spirit. He does not so speak, as if they that were taught of God, had no
need of the Word. But only thus much he intends, that when once the Spirit
teaches in the Word, there is less labor on the Ministers parts to teach, than
where the Spirit has not taught at all. And truly woeful experience does
demonstrate this. A gracious heart that is taught by the Spirit in the Word,
apprehends a Divine Truth, or Gospel-duty at first mentioning. As the
Thessalonians that were taught of God needed only the very mentioning of the
duty of Brotherly Love. But what ado have we, to beat a Gospel Truth, into the
head, or heart, or memory, of a carnal wretch? Gospel Truths are hidden
Mysteries, dark sayings, obscure parables, to natural hearts: They cannot
apprehend what they mean, and whither they tend ordinarily. Or suppose a
Minister has been beating a long time upon such Truths, possibly a carnal man's
understanding, may under the preaching of the Word, obtain the common work of
Illumination, and he may know many things; yea but what is this all this while
to the reformation of the heart, to the working upon the affections? this must
be by the teaching of the Spirit of God in his Ordinances. Man's preaching may
fill the head full of notions, but the Spirits teaching must fill the heart
with real notions of grace and goodness toward God. As long as you hear only
with the hearing of the ear, the Word preached profits not; but when you are
taught of God by his Spirit, then the Word gets within you into your very
hearts.

5. Look also into that place of John; It is the Spirit that quickens, Joh.
6.63
the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit,
and they are Life. The Disciples thought it an hard saying, Verse. 55. My flesh
is meat indeed. Though it was not the saying, but the hardness of their hearts
that made it so. But Christ here answers; The flesh profits nothing] that is,
my Humane Nature without the Spirit, without my Divine Nature, can never obtain
you life. All that I have done or suffered, in the flesh, is worth nothing to
purchase life and salvation, unless I were God as well as man. It Is the Spirit
that quickens; my Deity, as I am God, that makes me capable of obtaining
life for souls, by offering my flesh a sacrifice to Divine Justice. And the
words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life] The Word of
Christ is the Instrument the Spirit makes use of to beget life in the soul, by
working Faith. Christ's very Sermon could do no good in order to the producing
of life in the soul, were it not accompanied with the Spirit of Christ.

6. I shall only hint at one place more. It Is very observable, that St. Paul
calls the Gospel, The Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8
because of the Spirits Presence with the Word, and because it has the
efficacy of the Spirit joined with it. For the understanding of this, observe a
twofold opposition betwixt the Law and the Gospel.

First, The Law is called the Ministration of the Letter, the Gospel the
Ministration of the Spirit. The Law is called the Ministry of the Letter,
because whilst it commands or forbids us any thing, it affords no inward
strength at all, whereby the heart may have an inward obedience wrought in it;
but only propounds the external command, written in Tables of Stone, and
therefore called the Letter. But the Gospel, whilst it declares remission of
sins, and life eternal through Christ, it administers also the help,
assistance, and presence of the Spirit by which Faith is stirred up in our
hearts, whereby we apply Christ himself, and all his benefits unto our souls;
and therefore it is called the Ministration of the Spirit.

Secondly, The Law is called the Ministry of Death, the Gospel the Ministry of
Righteousness and Life. The one the Ministry of Death, because of the Letter,
for the Letter kills, whilst it gives no inward strength or assistance, to
yield obedience to those commands it lays upon us; and so the flesh and
corrupt nature is more and more provoked, and becomes more obnoxious to death
and sin, than before. This is clear from Romans 7.11. The Law gives occasion to
sin to slay the man. The Gospel is the Ministry of Life, because it affords
power, and the help of the Spirit, which produces Faith, by which Christ is
applied to the soul, for life and salvation, so that by the Spirit, the Gospel
affords life to the believing soul. This made Paul say, Gal. 2.20
the life which I now live, is by Faith in the Son of God. Take a Christian
without Faith, and you do unchristian him, he is left as an ordinary man: So
take the Gospel without the Presence of the Spirit, and it is but a dead
Letter. That there is such a Presence of the Spirit, I have showed by
Scripture. The next thing is to show it from reasons grounded upon undeniable
experiences. For the better apprehending of them, I have molded them into so
many practical Queries.

7. Qu. 1. What makes Gods Children, that have excellent Teachers, yet pray for
the opening of their eyes, and spiritual illumination? It is from their sense
and sight, of the want of the Spirits teaching, to be superadded to the
preaching of men. Though David had Nathan and Gad, excellent Teachers, yet he
begged of God, that he would open his eyes, that he might see the wonderful
things of his Law. All the light in the world cannot make a man see, if he
want a seeing faculty. The most raised Preaching can do as little good to the
souls of men, if they have not spiritual eye salve bestowed upon them, to open
the eyes of their dark understandings. Barrenness in Prayer, is seldom without
unfruitfulness in hearing, because they seldom get much good in hearing of the
Word, that are not often begging the Spirits Presence in the Word.

8. Qu. 2. What made so many that heard our Savior Christ in the flesh, yet
remain in their unbeleef? Was it not because they only heard the Word of
Christ, but had not the Spirit of Christ going along with it? How blind were
the Jews, even after Christ brought light into the world? They loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. When the good Word of God
comes to had hearts, unless the Spirit sets it home effectually, to make them
better, they ordinarily become worse. For wicked men are much like Swine, turn
their eyes up to the light, and they fall a crying; and bring the light of the
Word to wicked hearts, and they fall a railing and reviling. Thus the Jews
dealt with our Savior. You would think it were an admirable way for
conversion, to have heard Christ preaching to men; and truly so it was; yet we
see, many believed not. You may be ready to think the Ministers preaching,
foolishness, as many do; yet many have been converted by their teaching. Is it
not strange, that ever any that heard Christ, should go away unconverted, that
was God as well as Man? and that any should be converted unto God, that hear
sinful men preach? Truly not at all; because the Word of Christ went to some
men, and was not set home by the Spirit. And the same Word and Gospel Truths,
though preached by sinful men, is accompanied with the Spirit, and that makes
it effectual.

9. Qu. 3. What made Peter so successful in his Ministry, that at one Sermon
he converted three thousand souls? Act. 2.41
And yet we never read of such a plentiful harvest, gathered in at once, by
our Savior Christ. That chapter tells us, God had just then poured out the
Spirit, which was the fruit of Christ's Ascension. Verse. 33. There were the same
Truths before, and one would have thought, a better Preacher, when Christ
himself was in the Pulpit. And see how Christ's Sermon takes with the people.
From verse. 16. to verse. 31. ^uke 4.
Is not this Joseph's Son? Instead of looking well at the Doctrine, they fall a
cavilling at the Person; a poor, mean, inconsiderable fellow, a Carpenters Son.
He was then upon as precious matter as any in all the Book of God. He told
them, what he came into the world for, it was to do good, and to save souls,
verse. 18, 19. Enough to have melted the hardest hearts, and humbled the
proudest sinners, if mere words would have done it; and it is said, they all
wondered at his gracious words, verse. 22. Well! but see the issue of all. Verse.
28. They were filled with wrath. Verse. 29. They thrust him out of the City, and
endeavored to tumble him down the Hill. You see here, their good will to
Christ, notwithstanding all his pains and preaching. He came to break their
hearts, and they in recompense would have broke his neck. He preached to save
their Souls, and they would have taken away his life. Certainly if Christ had
so bad success, then Peter who denied his Master, would have had far worse, if
worse could be had. No such matter! There was the Spirit powered out, and did
powerfully set home the Word by Peter's ministry, which Christ was not pleased
to let work powerfully, upon the hearts of his hearers, for reasons best known
to himself. And that is the reason of that kind welcome the Word received. Now
when they heard this, Acts. 2.37
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the
Apostles; Men and Brethren, what shall we do?

10. Quer. 4. What makes the same Preacher, successeful at one place, and not
at another? Only this, that God accompanies his Word, with his Spirit at one
place, and not at another. We may suppose, the same Word Preached, to a
different people, to a very different event. The one mock, rail, revile: The
other, prove humble, meek, yea true converts. The Word is the same, all men by
nature, have the same vileness in their hearts, and opposition to the Word,
and truths of the Gospel. The difference then lies, in the presence of the
Spirit of God. And now, that God is not always present, by his Spirit, to set
home the Word upon all; This should not make us slight and neglect hearing,
but make us more diligent in praying, that the Spirit may always be present
with the Word, to render that which we hear, truly and really effectual to our
souls.

11. Quer. 5. What makes the same truths, heard by the same man, at several
times, produce different and several effects? Is it not wholly from the Spirit
of God? One has often heard of Christ's death and passion, and sufferings for
mankind; of his tenderness, love, and compassion, for the good of lost, and
undone souls: And this perhaps, he has not only once, or twice, but many
times heard, and yet no profit. He can still boldly slight Christ,
carelessely neglect his soul, and highly contemn the Gospel, that offers him
Christ, and salvation by Christ. At another time perhaps, this makes him quite
another man. Is Christ dead for me, and my sins, and shall I love sin more
than my dear Savior? Did Christ bleed, to cure the wounds of my Soul, and
shall I wound Christ again by my cursed lusts? Did Christ descend from Heaven,
to save me out of Hell, and shall I slight his infinite condiscension of
love, follow sin, and vain lusts upon the earth, and sink into Hell and ruin
at the last? What makes this great change, upon hearing the same truth, is it
not Gods Spirit? The same truth, has no life at one time, no effect upon the
soul: At another, Oh! the most precious truth in the world! the Soul would not
part with such a truth, such a promise, for all the world, when the spirit sets
it home upon the heart. Thus it is in reading, we sometimes reap much benefit,
from that portion of the Word, when God sets it home, which we often read
before in the Bible, and found no comfort from it, took no notice of it at all.

12. Quer. 6. What makes the same passages, delivered at the same time, to men
of the same profession, temper, and opinion, produce differenteffects? That the
one is affected, the other not, the one trembles, the other not, the one is
converted by it, the other not. The Word is the same, and the parties supposed
the same, as to temper, education, profession, and the like. Yet the Spirit
works on the one, and not on the other, and that makes the difference.

13. Quer. 7. What makes men of the same age, living under the same powerful
ministry, to be converted, and brought home at diverse years distance? Is it
not because the Spirit, sets home the Word betimes, on some, and not on other
men's souls? Conversion, when ever it is wrought, is the irresistible work of
the Spirit of Grace, it is the gift of God, when ever effected. Yet the Holy
Spirit, that blows where he lists, blows also when he lists, on some
sooner, on others later.

14. Quer. 8. What makes the same truths, working conversion in diverse
persons, work not one, and the same way? But in one it causes many terrors,
and in another sweet Gospel meltings of Soul, and both by it, are brought home
to Christ. It is certainly to be resolved into the Spirits arbitrary working
upon the soul, in order to conversion. Conviction of sin, is necessary to every
man's conversion, but terrors are not. The spirit works the former, more or
less, in all; But the terrors of conscience, and ratlings of the chains of
Hell, are not alike in all. And the same spirit, may use the same truths, in a
different manner, to bring home diverse souls to God. Great sinners have
oftentimes the greatest terrors. Yet the spirit of God, may use the same Gospel
truths, to bring home some to God, by strong terrors, and others by a Gospel
sweetness, and pouring in much comfort, at first conversion.

15. Qu. 9. What makes the Gospel Preached, to be a savor of life, unto some,
and a savor of death to others, in the same Congregation, perhaps in the same
seat? It Is because some are left to the hardness of their own hearts, and the
Spirit comes powerfully with the Word unto the hearts of others. In a plain and
powerful Sermon, Christ stands at the door, and knocks at the hearts of all,
that hear it in a Congregation. Now the Spirit, that has the Key of men's
hearts in his hands; opens some, and lets others alone, locked fast up, in their
impenitency and unbeleef. Thus God opened the hearts of Lydia, and the Jaylour:
And others again, go to Hell unconverted, perhaps unconvinced, from under
powerful Preaching. Of whom I say, as St. Paul did. If our Gospel be hid, 2
Cor. 4.3
it is hid to them that are lost.

16. Qu. 10. What makes diverse truths set home upon diverse men, produce one
and the same effect? Is it not from the Spirit of God, that different truths
should be set home, in order to Conversion? If in the Word only, why not the
same portion of it, always a means of conversion; But we see one place, for
one, and another place, for the conversion of another. Fr. Junii vi^^ p. 11. c.
2.
Junius reports it of himself, that he was converted by reading the beginning
of the first chapter of St. John's Gospel. Austin after his hot fits of Lust,
Hears an Echo sounding in his ears. Toll and lege, toll and lege. Take up
the Book and read. Hearing a voice but seeing no Person, he presently takes up
the New Testament, Reads Romans 13. Not in Rioting, and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering, and Wantonness, and by this Scripture brought home to God. Luther
was first wrought upon, by Romans 1.17. Therein is the righteousness of God
revealed, from faith to faith. This now must needs be the work of the Spirit,
which can produce one and the same effect, on diverse Subjects, by different
Truths.

CHAP. XII. Quest. How does the Spirit teach? Removendo. Removing impediments,
unwilling to be taught. Fleshly lusts. Pride. Curiosity. Five ways Satan
promotes Curiosity. Suggerendo. Suggesting Gospel Truths to the Soul. 1. John
2.27. John. 16.13. Expl. Illuminando. By enlightening the mind. Ephesians. 5.8.
Opened. Inward light of the Saints stated. Corroborando. By strengthening the
Soul. Recolligendo. By raising Truths. Heb. 2.1. John 14.26. Explained.
1. HAving showed by Scripture, and experience, the Presence of the Spirit, and
his teaching by the Word. I shall to clear up this Argument further, answer
these two Questions.

Quest. 1. How does the Spirit of God, teach in the Word?

Quest. 2. What are the qualifications of the Spirits teaching?

Quest. 1. How does the Spirit teach in the Word?

Answ. These five several ways.

1. Removendo, by removing of Impediments. Before the Spirit of God, does fully
dispatch his work, he removes all hindrances and impediments out of the way.
Though the Spirit of God be not the natural Agent, yet herein he much
resembles them. They remove hindrances, ere they finish their work, or can
effectually complete it. The fire burns not till the moisture be consumed: The
Sun enlightens not, till the darkness be expelled. Thus the Spirit works not
fully on the soul, to teach it, till the hindrances of our learning be
removed. Four Impediments removed.

2. 1. An unwillingness to be taught. Job lays down the character of a wicked
man. Therefore they say unto God, Job 21.14
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Observe here
the particle Therefore; it refers to the foregoing verse. (...)
They spend their days in wealth, or mirth, the word denotes both, or
whatsoever may be deemed, Bonum juaundum.
A pleasing good thing. Therefore they say unto God, depart from us. Oh it is
wealth, and worldly prosperity, and carnal jollity, that make many so unwilling
to be acquainted with God, and the knowledge of his ways, that is, of those
ways, that God would have them to walk in. They are willing to be rich, but
unwilling to be holy. They are forward, to entertain jovial mirth, but loath to
give way to real sorrow for sin. If they have but the blessings of Gods left
hand, they care not for the mercies of his right hand. Gain is is their
Godliness, and Gold is their God. But say they, we care not for thee, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Mercerus in Locum.
God here rips open the hearts of wicked men; They say, that is, as the
Psalmists Fool did, in his heart, there is no God. Few so grossly profane, as
to say this openly, that they care not for saving knowledge; yea but this is in
their hearts, they are unwilling to be taught; They love folly, Prove. 1.2
and hate knowledge. Now this is that the Spirit removes, as a great hinderance
of knowledge. What Master can do good on any Scholar, that is wholly averse to
his endeavors, unwilling to be taught, yea that plainly hates learning? Thus
there is no good at all to be done, on such who are wholly unwilling to learn
saving Truths. There is the cure. Behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you,
Prove. 1.23
I will make known my words. It Is the Spirit of God, must remove our
unwillingness to be taught, or else we shall still be block-heads, and dunces,
in the School of Christ. Psa. 110.3
Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power. Till Christ send out his
Spirit to prepare subjects for him, they will not come unto Christ, that they
may be saved.

3. 2 Impediment, Fleshly lusts. These Barracado the Spirit of God, out of the
soul. The Spirit of God, takes no liking, or pleasure, in such impure houses.
Veniunt ad candida tect a columbae, Doves come cheerfully, to white and clean
houses. The Spirit of God, Ephos. 4.18, 19
the Dove of the Gospel, abominates impure, unclean, and unchaste souls. In
Ephesians. 4.18. We read of those that are darkened in their understandings. Verse.
19. gives the reason. They gave themselves up to lascivionsness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. The loss of God at first in Paradise, left all men
in a state of Ignorance and Darkness: but our fleshly lusts and corruptions,
make us have an hard heart, and a seared conscience, and keeps us from renewing
our acquaintance with God. The natural man knows not the things of God. It Is
true of every natural unregenerate man, but most clear in those, that are
devoted to the worst sort of carnality, to fleshly lusts. The Spirit of God
removes this Impediment.

4. 3 Impediment, is Pride. Ignorance and Pride, ordinarily go together. Though
few are so sottish, as to be proud of their ignorance, yet usually ignorant
people have so much of pride, as to keep out the means of saving knowledge. It
is ordinary for much natural knowledge to be there, where there is not a dram
of saving grace. Now knowledge, without grace makes men devilish proud; this
was the very sin of the Devils. Knowledge puffs up. 1 Cor. 8.1
Now the Spirit of God must make us humble, ere we shall be taught by him. A
proud Christian, seems to be a contradiction, when as all things in
Christianity administers matter for our humility. So that the Spirit, must
first remove our Pride, ere he will make us Christians indeed.

5. 4 Impediment, is Curiosity. Curious inquirers, have always layn under the
lash of Christ. Upon all emergencies, he takes occasion severely to condemn
them. Peter is sharply taken up for this, by our Savior, who would fain have
known, what should become of the beloved Disciple John. Christ tells Peter; If
I will, John 21.22
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. A full
example and instance we have of it, Act. 1.6, 7. All the Disciples being
together, they asked Christ, Lord! will thou at this time, Act. 1.6, 7
restore again the Kingdom unto Israel? Verse. 7. And he said unto them, It is
not for you to know the times or the seasons. The reason why our Savior
always checks this humor of Curiosity, is because the great indulgers of
this, are most times neglecters of matters of necessity. This is plainly hinted
at, and Curiosity it self reproved, and condemned in that place of St. Luke.
Luke 13.23, 24
One asks of Christ, Are there few that be saved? What a curious question is
here? What profit; if it should be known? or how could this advance the
inquirers salvation, to know punctually how few, or how many shall be saved?
Our Savior sets him upon other work, secretly, yet sharply reproves this fond
curiosity; verse. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate. As if he had said,
what is that to thee, whether few or many; here is your work, if you would be
saved, you must strive your selves, to enter in at the strait gate. Be rather
conscientious in practice, than curious in your enquiries; this is the way to
bring you to Heaven. This is the most dangerous Engine, the Devil uses to undo
souls withal. For when the Spirit has made souls willing to be taught, and
have thrown by, lust, and pride, which made them slight and under value
knowledge: And the Devil sees they are in good earnest for knowledge; they
hear, and read Scriptures to get knowledge; then he strives to turn them to
vain inquiries, and curious speculations, that so, if they will be knowing, he
may keep them busied about unprofitable curiosities, contrary to the saving
knowledge, taught by the Holy Spirit of God.

6. Five ways Satan promotes Curiosity, to prevent saving knowledge.

First, By putting us upon inquiring after those things, which God has not
revealed. It might prevent many miscarriages in inquisitive curious minds, if
they had often such handsome jerks, as St. Aust in gave him, that would needs
know what God was doing of before he created the World; he told him, he was
making Hell for such curious inquirers into Gods secrets. Secret things belong
to God, yet the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Labor to fear
God, and all those secrets that are for our advantage, shall be known. It Is the
greatest folly in the world, to endeavor to be wise beyond Gods revealed will.

Secondly, By making us industrious to inquire after those things that nothing
concerns us. As when any are busying themselves about the Apostasy of the
Angels, and searching after reasons of the irrecoverableness of their fall, and
in the mean while neglect salvation offered by Christ, for their own lost and
undone souls.

Thirdly, By putting us upon the studying after the knowledge of things less
necessary. As when one should devote, and immerse himself wholly in the
searching into the circumstances of Worship, and the ceremonies of the Church,
and in the mean while, neglect the studying the very Articles of the Covenant
of Grace.

Fourthly, By putting us upon studying the more difficult places of Scripture,
neglecting those that are most for edification. When one reads the Revelations
of St. John, more than his plain Epistles. The Devil knows he is no loser, and
the curious soul but a little gainer, if he can but persuade him to be always
poring upon Daniels Prophesies, with a neglect of David's Psalms. If he can but
put him upon reconciling difficult Scriptures, and neglect mortifying unruly
lusts, and the quickening his affections by the plainest Truths.

Fifthly, By making souls not to rest barely in Gods revealed Will, without a
reason of it, and for it. How far this Curiosity-hath driven those of the
Socinian persuasion, may easily be seen, by those many gross opinions, that are
extant in their writings, which make many for-bear to own them as Christians.
It is a very gross failing in the studying of things of God, to bring all
things down to the measure of humane reason. There is reason for us to believe
it, if God says it, and to practice any thing if we are assured that God
commands it. And yet Christianity is so far from stripping men of their reason,
that no Profession does put any upon so true an use of it, and does so ennoble
the rational faculties of man, as the Christian Religion does. The Spirit of
God in teaching souls effectually the things of God for their salvation,
removes this gross impediment of a curious mind, and makes plain, necessary,
and most edifying Truths, to be most acceptable.

7. II. Suggerendo. The Spirit teaches the Soul by suggesting Gospel Truths
unto the soul. When the Spirit of God, teaches any in order to make them new
men, it brings new Truths into the minds of men. All Old things are done away,
and all things become new. These are called new Truths in regard of the subject
receiving of them, not in regard of the Spirits suggesting of them, for the
same Truths are always taught by the Spirit now, as were formerly, nor in
opposition to the Word, for so they are not new Truths, but such, as of old
were revealed and declared in the Word. The very office of the Spirit in
suggesting Truths is restrained by Christ himself, to those Truths which our
Savior had formerly taught us; I shall show further from John 14.26. 11. There
may be new suggestions of the Spirit, in setting home Divine Truths upon the
mind, and these are really new, to the soul that receives them, but they are
old Truths of the Word, and not new Revelations, that the Spirit teaches to
believing souls, and in this sense we are to understand those Scriptures, which
speak of the teaching of the Spirit of God. -- Ye need not that any man teach
you, 1 John 2.27.
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is Truth. -- Not
that we need not a Ministry, but he speaks comparatively, you shall not be so
helped by any instructions without the Spirit, as with the Spirit. The Spirit
shall declare the Truth as it is in Jesus. The Spirit this Holy unction, shall
teach the Saints all things, not all things knowable, that is impossible for
finite creatures to attain to. But The Spirit teaches 1. All things needful for
salvation of the Soul. 2. All things needful to life and godliness, 2 Pet.
1.3. 3. All things needful to our places, callings, and ages. 4. All things
needful to preserve us in the way of Gospel Truth, against error and seducers,
which is the main thing St. John hints at in that expression. So also in the
Gospel of St. John. When the Spirit of Truth is come he shall guide you into
all truth. John 16.13.
This promise primarily belongs to the Apostles. Secondarily to all Believers.
Three things promised to the Apostles.



First, immediate illumination by the Spirit of God.

Secondly, A full knowledge of all those Truths belonging to their
Apostle-ship, necessary Truths for them at that juncture of time, and as to
their Office.

Thirdly, Absolute infallibility as to matter of Doctrine. Three things also
promised to all Believers.

First, Mediate illumination, teaching Truths by the Spirit of Truth, in the
use of the means of Grace.

Secondly, Knowledge of all Truths necessary to salvation.

Thirdly, Infallibility too, so far forth as they adhere to the spirit teaching
in the Word, otherwise Gods dearest Children may be overtaken with errors.

8. III. Illuminando, By enlightening the mind. There must not only be an
object presented, and the light of truth without, but a light also within, for
the mind to see objects that are presented. All the light in the world is never
able to make us see Divine Truths savingly, till we are enlightened of the
Lord. Ye were sometimes darkness but now are ye light in the Lord. Ephesians.
5.8.
The Ephesians while unregenerate, were mere darkness, but after conversion
they are truly enlightened, their eyes are cleared, their minds are rightly
informed, so that now, they may be rightly called, light in the Lord. This is a
light within, that we must own and commend to all, viz. Light in the Lord.
Light that comes in, after darkness (that speaks unregeneracy) is expelled,
we must walk as Children of this light. [Light in the Lord] None truly
enlightened, but those that are in Christ. Out of Christ, the highest light, is
mere darkness. There is no true light, that leads to salvation, but what comes
from Christ the Sun of Righteousness. And this is not in every man by Nature,
but conveyed only to some, by the Spirit of God, who is called the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation. Ephesians. 1.17.
Gospel Light in the soul, that leads to salvation, is the benefit of Christ's
Redemption, and not of our Creation. Therefore when Christ is spoken of, to
come into the world as Mediator, to him is attributed this light of salvation.
The people that walked in darkness, have seen a great light, Isa. 9. Avenari.
Lex Hebr. Mal. 4, 2.
they that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light
shined. Some observe that the Hebrew word (...) to shine, has great affinity
with (...) to heal. It holds true here, the light of the Gospel, is an healing
light, where ever it comes. All men lie sick in sin, and ignorance till this
light recover them. No soundness in the Faith, without a clear discovery of
this light. And it is worth our observation, Luke 4.18.
that healing of the broken hearted, and recovering sight to the blind, are
both joined together, and both as the effect, of Christ's undertaking his
mediatory work. If Christ's as God, enlightens every man that comes into the
world, with the light of reason, yet we must not therefore believe, that Christ
enlightens every one by saving Grace, as he is Mediator. It Is true, all that
are savingly enlightened, are enlightened by Christ and his Spirit; yet there
are many, that are never enlightened. Yea, and of all those, that are thus
savingly enlightened, time was that we might say of them, Ye were sometimes
darkness.

9. What has been said, may sufficiently serve to answer any, that would be
satisfied, about that inward Light, so much spoken of now adays, of which I
shall only propound these four things.

First, Every man in the world, has an inward light of nature, or light of
reason, called in Scripture, Prove. 20.27.
the candle of the Lord. According to which, every man has some seeds of the
knowledge of good and evil. This is the light of man's natural Conscience. Romans
2.14, 15.
This light serves to many good uses, but not to bring Souls to Heaven.

Secondly, Every true Saint, one that is regenerated truly, by the Word, and
Spirit, has an inward light of the Spirit, the light of Grace. This is light
in the Lord. According to this, Ephesians. 4.8.
a Saint has his Conscience savingly enlightened. This light is not only
useful, but necessary, to all true Christians, in their life here as
Christians, and will bring them to Heaven at the last.

Thirdly, There is a middle light, betwixt the light of Nature, and the saving
light of Grace, that is the common work of the Spirit, called illumination too,
which many in the visible Church do enjoy, and yet are reprobates. According to
this, Heb. 4.6.
men may have an awakened conscience. This light may be useful to others, but
it will not advantage a wicked man at all, if he go no further than this
common work.

Fourthly, No man that receives inward saving light of the Spirit, but was
first in great spiritual darkness. Thus S. Paul says of the Ephesians. Ye
were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. Ephesians. 5.8
So that it must needs be a very gross mistake to think that any, a far
greater, to assert that all, are born with this inward saving light. And our
Savior was much overseen, in sending Paul to open men's eyes, and to turn them
from darkness to light, Acts 26.18
by preaching of the Gospel, if so be they had this Light by Nature. We grant,
you see, and if need were, would sufficiently prove with undeniable Arguments a
Light within, yet not such as many ignorantly enough plead for. Vide Fr. Junium
de Theol. vera. c. 16. expl. ss. 32. T. 1. p. 1414.
Let others therefore, sit down and embrace that so much admired Darling, of an
Inward Natural, yet saving Light in all; we know it is but a Changeling, and
not the genuine offspring of the Spirit of God. Much like that
Strumpet-Goddesse of the men of Ephesus; Great is Diana of the Ephesians. But
in St. Paul's Language, it proved a great cry about nothing. For, says he, We
know that an Idol is nothing.

10. IV. The Spirit of God teaches Corroborando, by strengthening the mind and
understanding. The mind of man is full of weakness, as well as darkness. The
Spirit of God, in his teaching, brings not only light, but also strength to the
souls of Gods Children, Paul prays, that they may be strengthened, Ephesians. 3.16.
with might, by his Spirit, in the inward man. The inward man, the soul of a
Saint, is the chief object of the Spirits care. For the outward man, that is
many times weak and vile, but the Spirit, comes by his teaching to renew, and
streng-then the inward man, that though the outward man decay, yet the inward
man may be renewed, strengthened, and confirmed day by day. And if any shall
enquire how God by his Spirit, does strengthen the minds of his Children. Fr.
Junius de Th. vera. c. 12. p. 1403. T. 1.
A learned and judicious Divine, gives this solid satisfaction, to his inquiry.
Whatsoever power is implanted in man by nature, to apprehend, that God by the
power of his Spirit does so possess, that to those gifts of nature, he
conjoyns the gifts of his grace, that are answerable to them. For to the
Principles that are naturally placed in the understanding, he super-adds, the
Principles of Grace: To Reason that arises out of those Principles he conjoyns
the increase of his Divine Light. To the Conclusions and Determinations, which
reason has attained to by the most imperfect light of nature, he super-adds
supernatural and most perfect Demonstrations, out of which heavenly Knowledge
may be raised in the minds of godly men. To conclude, he propounds heavenly
objects, to be apprehended, by the mind and will, after an heavenly manner, and
also raises the will to the apprehension of those objects that are propounded.

11. V. And lastly, Recolligendo. The Spirit teaches by raising and
recollecting fallen Truths. Man's memory is very slippery, especially as to
Divine Truths, very apt to let them slip, and leak through. Therefore we ought
to give the more earnest heed to the things that we have heard, lest at any
time we should let them slip. Heb. 2.1.
(...), lest we let them run out, as leaking Vessels are wont to do. Or the
Metaphor may be taken from Paper that lets letters sink in, and the Ink run
abroad, that they cannot be distinctly read. Thus Divine Truths, either leak
out, or run abroad, that they prove useless to souls at the greatest need. Now
the Spirit recollects, and brings in Divine Truths, upon several occasions, as
may be most for the souls advantage. He shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatever I have said to you. Joh. 14.26
Here is one admirable advantage of Gods teaching by his Spirit, that when the
Word comes only to the outward ear in hearing, yet Gods Spirit can set it home
afterward, and make it effectual for comfort, or counsel, or quickening, as
his Children want it. The Apostles heard our Savior himself preach, yet our
Saviors words, without his Spirit, would work no comfort or benefit to their
souls. Again, the Spirit shall teach, and be their remembrancer, yet observe
it, our Savior sticks close to the Word, Whatsoever I have said unto you, V.
Chamier L. C. l. 1. c. 7. in fine.
that the Spirit shall teach you again. If any will pretend that they are
taught by the Spirit of Christ, and yet will not stick closely to the words of
Christ, this very place will prove that it is but a delusion.

CHAP. XIII. Quest. What are the qualifications of the Spirits teaching? Answ.
He teaches fully, pleasantly, seasonably, certainly, 1 Cor. 2.4. expl.
Profitably, in that he teaches, practically, and particularly. Gradually; The
Spirits gradual teaching, brings in no New Lights objective. The remarkable
Vision of five Lights noted.
1. I Now proceed to the second Question propounded, to clear the Spirits
teaching.

Quest. 2. What are the qualifications of the Spirits teaching? The full answer
to this I shall give in, in these seven following particulars.

1. The Spirit teaches fully. Gods Spirit never teaches fouls that he
undertakes, with half teaching. He does not make men to be almost only, but
altogether Christians. Should the Spirit of God open one eye only, and leave
the other blind, the Devil would have great advantage, he would always
strike men on the blind side. Now the Spirit of God teaches all fully, as to
necessary Truths for salvation. There is no one Truth, the Devil can tell a
Child of God, he is so wholly ignorant of, that the ignorance of it will
cause his eternal damnation. This is the great work of the Spirit of God, to
make the soul acquainted with the deep things of God, which are kept hid from
the world, and worldly men. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12
None but the Spirit of God is fully acquainted with those Truths, that
concerns our salvation, and therefore the Spirit alone can fully discover them
to the soul.

2.2. The Spirit of God teaches pleasantly. Matters of Divine sense and
feeling, carry much of a secret pleasure with them. No such real and solid
pleasure in all the world, as that which a gracious soul finds, in the
experimental discoveries of Gospel Truths. It Is sensual and swinish pleasure,
which men take in following sinful ways. But the only solid pleasure is in
Divine Experiences. It is a pleasure worthy a rational soul, to be ravished
with the love of Christ, and to be enamoured with that commanding beauty that
the ways of holiness do afford. A tincture of pleasure carries the soul far in
its operations. Men would never run on headlong in ways of wickedness, were
not pleasures laid as the bait to allure them. Now what is it makes many souls
to quit their comforts in this life, their friends, their estates, their
liberties, yea their lives themselves, rather than part with those Truths the
Spirit has taught them? Only this, they apprehend a greater pleasure in
owning them, and sticking close to them, than in all other things in the World.
What makes Duties and Ordinances, irksome and tedious to carnal hearts, but
delightful to gracious souls? It Is the pleasure the Spirit gives in, to the
one, and not to the other, that makes the difference. A man may know much of
the spirituality of his heart toward God, and that he is under the teachings
of Gods Spirit, by that pleasure, and delight, and content he takes in the
Ordinances of God. Gracious souls cry, oh let us go up into the house of God,
when will Sabbaths, and Sermons, and Ordinances come, that our souls may be
refreshed with them. But worldly minded men cry out as they did, when will the
Sabbaths and New Moons be over? when will Sermons, and Prayers, and Reading be
done? Alas! they take no pleasure at all, no delight, and therefore care not
whether they enjoy these mercies or no; or if out of formality they wait upon
the Ordinances, they care not how soon they are done. Custom carries sinners
upon duties, conscience puts the Saints upon them. Formality and Hypocrisy
makes the one, true delight and pleasure makes the other, go through with them.
Moses, when he came out of the Mount from God, his face did shine. Thus, when
gracious souls come from Gospel-duties, their hearts shine, they are filled
with unspeakable joy and pleasure.

3.3. The Spirit teaches clearly. Christ spoke while he was upon the earth in
parables, and proverbs, but after his Ascension, and the Spirit was poured out,
Job. 16.25
he then teaches plainly, and clearly. Spiritual teaching is the plainest and
clearest teaching in the world. According to the diversity of Lights, there is
a great difference of sight, in point of clearness. One man sees an object by
the Moonlight, another by a Candlelight, but he sees most clearly, that
takes a view of his object by the light of the Sun, when it is riding in its
noonday glory.

A true Christian sees divine things not only by the dim light of nature,
nor merely by the light of the Word, but by the bright, and clear light of the
Spirit, which manifests things to the soul. A clear light discovers all, even
the smallest objects which otherwise would not be seen: So does the Spirit of
God discover those Truths, and Divine Mysteries to a believers soul, without
whose light they would be wholly undiscerned. The words of our Savior in the
forecited place are very remarkable. The time comes when I shall no more
speak to you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the Father. (...),
plainly, Schmidius N and Animad. in N. T.
as one observes, it is from (...), a discovery of all things, q. d. (...) vel
(...). All things by the Spirit are manifested, even the most hidden things of
God. Three things go to a clear discerning, the Object, the Visive faculty that
is stated in the eye, and the Medium, or mean through which we see, all must be
clear, and then there is a clear discovery made. Thus the Holy Spirit plainly
reveals the counsels of God in the Word; there is the Object, then opens the
Judgment to discern it, then clears all the Mediums, the Means for conveyance
of those objects to us. And because a due distance is required in spiritual, as
well as bodily seeing, the Spirit brings Divine Objects home to the soul in
particular, and so they are the plainer and clearer to the understanding. Thus
the Spirit of God is a clear instructor, no man need be taught more clearly.

4.4. The Spirit teaches seasonably. The wisdom and goodness of the Spirit of
God, is much discerned in his seasonable teaching of souls. To speak in season,
is an high piece of wisdom; words spoken in season, are like Apples of Gold in
pictures of Silver. His goodness appears too, in that he helps, when there is
most need. How suitable is a refreshing promise in the time of desertion, a
word of comfort, in the time of affliction, a word of establishment in the time
of tentation? And even thus seasonably is Gods Spirit wont to apply himself
unto souls. Sometimes the Spirit of God directs the Preacher from his Text, to
send some seasonable Truth home to a soul. As I have read of St. Augustine, as
he was preaching, he was suddenly carried from his Text, he knew not how, to
speak against the Manichees. A little after one meets him, and thanks him for
that discourse of his, it was a means of reclaiming him from those errors he
was preaching against. And it has been the experience of some good men, that
those Truths that have been suggested to them in preaching, beyond their
ordinary meditation, have had some good effect; and they have heard souls to be
more affected with those, than with other Truths delivered at the same time. A
digression in a Sermon, sometimes, proves a diversion in some men's thoughts,
which may help forward the conversion of some soul or other in the Auditory. I
have sometimes thought, those affectionate Parentheses, of the Spirits
suggesting in preaching of Sermons (well digested otherwise beforehand) are
much like that most exquisite story of the woman, that had a bloody issue,
whose Faith made her whole, that is inserted in the passage of Jairus, his
Daughter being healed of our Savior. Luke 8.41
The Evangelist sets down the beginning of that passage about Jairus the Ruler
of the Synagogue; as our Savior was going to cure his Daughter, the woman
meets him in the way, and he cures her first, and then raises Jairus his
Daughter that was dead. Thus the Spirit of God does sometimes direct the
Minister, to such a subject, that may raise a dead soul, that may quicken dead
affections, but by the way, he meets with a soul that has a bloody Issue of
sin, some reigning lusts or other; here may be some Truths seasonably suggested
to cure his soul, and then he is directed forward to raise and quicken those
that may be overtaken with deadness, and dullness. This occasional, and
providential discovery of Truths, that come close to the soul that receives
them, speaks very much the seasonable teachings of the Spirit of God. As some
by an occasional reading of such a place of Scripture, or such an ones
writings, or such an one they have perhaps heard occasionally preach, and such
Truths have dropped into the soul, so suitably, as if God had immediately
spoken from Heaven; this must be resolved into the work of Gods Spirit, that
directs all for the best advantage of Gods Children.

5. 5. The Spirit of God teaches certainly. A Child of God is not lead by mere
conjectures about the things of God that he is taught. The highest the Saints
can arise to ordinarily, is but a conjectural probability, according to the
Papists, so that they may give some probable conjectures at their good estate.
But the Spirit of God, where it comes and teaches, leaves not the soul at such
uncertainties. How could St. Paul have bid the Corinthians examine themselves
whether were in the Faith or no, 2 Cor. 13 5
unless they could have known this certainly? What made Calvin, and Perkins,
and many others lay down the very nature of Justifying Faith in full assurance,
and certain persuasion? Was it not their certain experience of it, that made
them oppose the Papists mainly, who would lay it only in a bare assent? Though
the middle way be the truest, to hold out Justifying Faith, as an act of
recumbency, yet the experience and certainty those good men arrived to, made
them the more violent in their opposition. When the Spirit comes to teach the
soul, it comes in a demonstrative way, (...). In the demonstration of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.^
and of Power. The plainest language is most peircing, when the things of God
are to be treated of, the reason is, because the Spirit sets it home with
power. Men must use flourishes of Rhethorick to persuade, when matters of
humane concernment are treated of, they have then their (...) perswasives, but
when Gods Spirit comes with the Word, he brings his (...), downright
demonstrations. Thus when Celsus objected against the Christians, the
barbarousnesse of their original, (...). ^rig. con. ^els. p. 5. ^d. Cant.
Origin tells him by way of answer, that the Christian Religion, has a
demonstration peculiar, and proper to it self, of a diviner strain, than that
of the Greek Philosophers, and this the Apostle calls the demonstration of the
Spirit, and power. Demonstrations are the most certain kind of syllogismes with
Logicians.

Aristotle tells us that it is (...), it produces knowledge, that goes upon the
most certain grounds, it has an insight into things by their causes. Thus Gods
Spirit works in a most certain kind of way in the Soul, that few or none, but
do, or at least may know it if they are careful. A Woman with Child has such
qualmes and distempers that she certainly knows it; So they that have had the
breeding of the Spirit in their hearts, they know by the motions and stirrings
of the Spirit of God within, that they are those that are taught by the Spirit
of God.

6. 6. The Spirit teaches profitably. Let the Minister speak never so
powerfully, and plainly, yet the heart of man cannot discern it, and profit by
it; unless the Spirit strike in with it, we shall do little good. This is the
dexterity of the Spirit, that he tells you what use to make of such a
Scripture, such a Truth, such a Providence, such an affliction. Isa. 48.17
I am the holy one of Israel that teaches you to profit. Men are naturally
ignorant, and unprofitable, they are all the Sons of Belial, that is as the
Hebrew derivation, of the word (...) does imply (...) without any profit at
all, unprofitable wretches, good for nothing; ignorant wretches, that know
nothing. Now when the Holy one of Israel takes men in hand to teach them, he
teaches them (...) to profit. Men that before were good for nothing, neither
profitable to themselves or others, when he teaches them by his Spirit, he
makes them profit for their souls good, and eternal welfare, and most times
they are made very profitable unto others. The Spirit of God teaches
profitably, in that.

First, He teaches practically. The Spirit in his teaching directs souls to
happiness, now one part of a Christians happiness here on earth lies in this,
that he learns his knowledge into practice. John 13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. If the Spirit should
teach us knowledge without practice, he would leave us lame, if practice
without knowledge, he would leave us blind, but teaching profitably he teaches
both, that leads us unto happiness. There are many obstructions 'twixt the head
and the heart, which hinder our knowledge from having a kindly influence upon
practice, which the Spirit by his teaching does remove. So that what enters
into the head in the notion, comes down to the heart for operation. True
Christians are of another make, than to resemble the Toad, which has a Pearl
in the head, but the whole body full of poison. They have not the Pearl of
knowledge only, but the Jewel of practice also, and this makes them truly
precious in Gods eyes. Alas! what will all the notions in the world do good,
for the mortifying our sins, and cleansing the soul from sinful affections,
without practice? If we have a receipt only for a disease that troubles us,
and not take the physic prescribed, we may languish away by the violence of
the disease, be the receipt never so rare and admirable. Application works
cures, both as to spiritual and bodily diseases. 'Twas practice of the Law of
God that made St. Paul differ from himself, a proud and knowing Pharisee, by
becoming an humble practical Christian. He knew much, but practiced little,
that left him in Hypocrisy. If I have all knowledge, and want Charity, I am
says Paul, but as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymball. It Is not much
knowledge, but practice according to what they know, speaks men thriving
Christians indeed. David's Prayer is made for both, as knowing, that knowledge
without practice is but vain. Psalm. 119.66.
Teach me good judgment, and knowledge; For I have believed thy command. For
good judgment, it is in the Hebrew, (...) bonitatem sensus, goodness of sense
and feeling. He prays for an inward sense, a Spiritual feeling, a practical
taste of the commands of God. His eyes were enlightened before, now he desires
to have his heart exercised in the Law of God, as to the practice of it.

7 Secondly, The Spirit teaches profitably, in that he teaches particularly.
Gods Spirit teaches a true Christian to apply all that he hears and reads unto
himself. He thinks the Commands belongs to him, the Threatenings to him, and
all that is written, or preached, that speaks matter of obedience or
reformation, that he is concerned in it, he sees all concerns his souls
welfare, as if it had been written on very purpose for him, Observe here the
carriage of ungodly hearts: When they hear particular sins reproved, they put
it off to others, such an one (say they) had his lesson to day, he was met
withal in such a Sermon, and by such expressions. Well, but a true Christian,
in any such close expressions that meet with the conscience, is taught by the
Spirit to say, Numquid ego talis? Am not I the man? Is not this my sin? Is it
not my very case? He hears hypocrisy condemned in attending upon the service
of God: Well, am not I che Hypocrite that is lashed by those cutting reproofs?
He hears a Christian may obtain assurance, young men may overcome the world,
Have I had these things or no? Am not I far short from what a true Christian
may be, and ought to be? Thus ungodly men rest only in the generals, but the
true Christian brings the generals down to his particular case, well knowing
that Dolus latet in universalibus. That grossest soul-deceit lies in resting
only in universals.

8. 7. The Spirit of God teaches souls Gradually. God deals with particular
souls as he has done with the Church in general, clears up truth by degrees.
The Church at first, and when lowest, had truth enough discovered to constitute
it a true Church, but by degrees, little and little, truths in particular were
made more clear. Is. Casaubonus Ex. con. Baron. Ex. 1. ss. 2. mihi p. 14.
Thus every soul, when he becomes (...), taught of God, has necessary truths
for salvation made known: So that suppose him to dye presently after
conversion, he has knowledge enough to carry him to Heaven; But the longer
he lives, the more he grows, an increase is made in his Grace, in knowledge as
well as in the rest of his Graces. We have no foundation for such gradual
teaching, as to expect the Spirit should teach more truths afterward, than are
written in the Word of God. No, but that which I speak of is, that the Spirit
clears up the same truths with greater evidence of light, then the Soul had
before, if they were truths absolutely necessary; And as for other truths which
contribute to the well being and not absolutely to the being of a true
Christian, the Spirit teaches these by degrees, some after others, none of
which perhaps were known to the soul at first conversion.

But still in revealing New Truths to the soul, the Spirit does not add New
Truths to the Word, but sets home the Old Truths, with New Lights. New Light in
the faculty, we acknowledge; Now lights, as to the Object we reject, as that
which if once admitted, proves the uncontrollable Guide to the grossest
delusions. For when once the mind is pre-possessed with an expectation of such
New Lights, then every suggestion of the Devil is presently embraced in it
self, and propounded unto others, as Divine Raptures, and Heavenly Visions and
Revelations. See c. 14. ^. 11
And then how miserably forlorn are such deluded creatures, when they by such
courses tempt God to work miracles for their recovery, or they are for ever
undone. For the pretense of the Spirit, in its dictates of Truths, besides, and
above the Word, will fetch Arguments from the same Spirit to maintain them
(though the grossest delusions) and so the Word, and all ordinary means of
reducing such souls to their right wits again, become wholly useless, and
unprofitable. We have had too many years experience, of the dismal sad
effects, of this grand principle of Enthusiasme, and Delusions. Africa was
never more fruitful, and productive of Monsters of nature, than England has
been, of Monsters in Morality and Divinity, since such New Lights, and
Revelations have been owned, and greedily entertained. Instances of this nature
are as obvious, as for their nature horrid and blasphemous. But that the Reader
may see these are not mere declamations, but great realities, let him consider
that remarkable one of the five Lights of Walton in Surrey. See this as large
in the History of Independency. 2. part p. 152.
Six Soldiers came to the Parish Church there, one of them told the people,
that he had a Vision, and received a command from God, to deliver his Will to
them, which he was to deliver, and they to receive upon pain of damnation. It
consisted of five Lights.

1. That the Sabbath was abolished as unnecessary, Jewish, and merely
Ceremonial.

2. Tithes are abolished as Jewish and Ceremonial, a burden to the Saints of
God, and a discouragement of Industry and Tillage.

3. Ministers are abolished as Antichristian, and of no longer use; now Christ
himself descends into the hearts of the Saints, and his Spirit enlighteneth
them with Revelations, and Inspirations.

4. Magistrates are abolished as useless, now that Christ himself is in purity
of Spirit come amongst us, and has erected the Kingdom of the Saints upon the
Earth; besides they are Tyrants and Oppressors of the Liberties of the Saints,
and tie them to Laws and Ordinances, mere humane inventions.

5. Showing them a Bible, he said, here is a Book you have in great
veneration, consisting of two parts, the Old and New Testament, I must tell
you, it is abolished, it contains beggarly rudiments, Milk for Babes: But now
Christ is in glory amongst us, and imparts a fuller measure of his Spirit to
his Saints, than this can afford, and therefore I am commanded to burn it
before your faces; and so took a Candle that he had in a Lanthorn, and set
fire on the leaves. Oh horrid and monstrous blasphemy! Are not these New
Lights, think you, such as are kindled, with some sparkles from the fire of
Hell? When such Revelations and Visions are admitted, then the Word is vilified
and decryed. And the same Spirit we see, that witnesses in the Saints (as they
call themselves) against Tithes, witnesses also against Sabbath, Ministers,
Magistrates, yea and against the very Bible too. So true is that observation of
Aristotle, Grant one absurdity, and many will unavoidably follow. Admit once of
New Lights, and Visions of the Spirit, as they are termed, and you cannot keep
out the most devilish and damnable errors from following after. To return
therefore from whence I have a little digressed, when I say, the Spirit teaches
gradually. It is thus to be understood, that he sets home Old Truths, with New
Light, and Discoveries of them made to the soul, which were not experienced
before. Gradual progress, and such growth in grace and knowledge, is the
Christians duty, as well as the donation of the Spirit of God. Grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.18
God in the Gospel commands us, and he by his Spirit helps us to grow in grace
and knowledge. And though the Spirit teaches in the Word, that there can be no
absolute perfection in this life, telling us in the Words of St. John. 1 John
1.8
That if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not
in us. Yet the Spirit teaches the soul of a true Christian, gradually to
breathe after Perfection. He makes him come to God in and through Christ, for
justification and absolution from sin, ne damnet, that the condemning power of
sin may be taken away; he breathes after sanctification, ne regnet, that sin
should not reign in their mortal bodies; he breathes after glorification, ne
sit, that sin should not exist, or have any being at all in him, that he may
be wholly freed from sin.

CHAP. XIV. Practical Deductions from Gods Presence by his Spirit. Matter for
examination and trial. Seven Rules to try whether we are taught by Gods
Spirit. Exhortation to own the Spirit as our Grand Teacher. Motives and
Directions. Matter of Reproof to those that are all for the Spirit, and nothing
for the Word. To Formalists. To Carnal Persons. Matter of Consolation to true
Christians, The Spirit teaches them the best lessons. Especially four. They are
taught to walk in the best way. To aim at the best ends.
1. FRom the Presence and Teaching of the Spirit of God, many practical and
profitable inferences may be raised. Some few that are most material, and most
subservient to the design of this Treatise, I shall propound and prosecute in
this chapter, as the Conclusion of the whole.

I. If God be present to teach his Children by his Spirit. If we would know
then whether we are the Children of God, let us examine and try whether we
are taught by the Spirit or no. There is an easy way for our being deceived
herein; Natural parts may carry men far in the knowledge of the things of God,
and common illumination of the Spirit may carry us much further, and yet all
this while we may come far short from the saving teaching of the Spirit of
God. It Is worth while then to examine our selves by such Rules as may clearly
undeceive us, in a matter of so great concernment.

2. Rule 1. That Knowledge of Divine Truths that drives us off from God, comes
not from the teachings of the Spirit. The very end, and main design of the
Spirits teaching, is to bring us home to God and Christ. Now if any Truth
drives us off from God, how can this come from the Spirits teaching? Conviction
of sin, and self-abhorrency under it, may and usually do come from the Spirit
of God, but then these drive the soul to God for the pardon of sin. And when
the Spirit is come, he shall convince the world of Sin, Joh. 16.8
and of Righteousness. When the Spirit sets home sin upon the soul, in order to
conversion, and salvation, he also clearly discovers the Righteousness of
Christ, for the removal of it. But when sin is discovered, so as to drive us to
despair, or to tempt us to presume upon Gods mercy, without any consideration
at all, that the Justice of God also must be satisfied; this is no teaching of
the Spirit. Coming unto God, in a way God never owned, nor prescribed, is a
direct running away from him. So that though we come to God, to presume upon
his mercy, we do in reality run away from him, because God cannot show mercy,
to the eternal dishonor and ruin of his Justice. Mercy cannot be exerted on
poor sinners, till the breaches of Gods honor are repaired, and his Justice
satisfied. Coming to God by Faith through Christ, makes way for both, and then
both Mercy and Justice shall triumph and rejoice together, in the salvation of
rebellious sinners.

3. Rule 2. He that pretends to much new knowledge, and yet continues in his
old sins, is not taught by the Spirit of God. To pretend to the Spirit, and
live in the flesh is double iniquity. Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas.
The Law of the Spirit frees the soul from the Law of sin and death. Romans 8.2
Verse. 5.
They that are after the Spirit, mind the things of the Spirit; read 6, 7, 8,
9. verses. Gods Spirit teaches none to continue, in the constant practice of
known sins. He does not allow them to sin, and then teach them, that that is
to be spiritual, to deem nothing sin, that we possibly can commit. He does
not allow souls to live as they lift, and then teach them, that God sees no sin
in his Children. How can you be taught of God, and yet follow your old courses
of sin and profaneness. See 2 Pet. 1. verse. 4, 5, 6. Those that are made
partakers of the Divine Nature, have escaped the pollution of the world; they
add to their virtue, knowledge; to their knowledge, temperance, etc. The Spirit
changes the garments of those he takes to be his Scholars; he throws off the
rags of their old sins, and puts on the Robes of Christ's Righteousness, and
upon those Robes, he places this Golden Chain of Graces, as an Ornament to
him, being under the guidance and teaching of the Spirit of God. This Chain is
made up of many links, Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience,
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, Charity. He that has all these, is truly
knowing, verse. 8. He that wants these, is stark blind, verse. 9.

4. Rule 3. He is taught by the Spirit that has the sweetness, and comforts
of Gospel Truths made out seasouably to the soul. Thus may a Christian know
that a promise is set home by the Spirit, when it comes in to the upholding of
the soul, under grievances and afflictions, at present incumbent on the soul;
or for the mortification of sin, which is his great burden, and trouble of his
life. Where our own strength and parts fail, there the Spirit of God ordinarily
comes in with a supply. When we know not in what box, our evidences, our
comfort, our quickening, our strength lies, then the Spirit of God comes in,
and opens the promise to us, and such places of the Word as are both suitable
and seasonable for us.

5. Rule 4. He is taught of the Spirit, that is impartial in his desires of,
and endeavors after knowledge. Whatever concerns either the Glory of God, or
the welfare of his soul, he labors to have that made known to him. Partiality
makes men act only to have so much knowledge, as to have their tongues by it
tipped with the language of Canaan, when in the mean while they look not at the
ordering of their lives, as becomes an Israelite indeed. The language of
Cornelius to Peter, is that which well becomes a true Disciple of Christ. We
are all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of
God. Act. 10.33
Nay, be they never so bitter things, yet a gracious heart desires to know the
worst, as well as the best, of himself; what makes most against him, as well as
what makes most for him. As it was with Eli; 1 Samuel 3.17
he urges Samuel to let him know, all that was the mind of God, be it never so
bitter. It is contrary with carnal hearts, if any thing cross their lusts, or
go contrary to their carnal designs, they care not for knowing of it. Herod
cast John into prison, because he told him it was not lawful for him to have
his Brothers Wife. Mark 6.18
Thus ungodly hearts rise against the Word, when it would part them from their
sins: and ascribe a close, and convincing Sermon, rather to the envy of the
Teacher, than to the teaching of the Spirit of God.

6. Rule 5. He receives the Truths of God with much humility. Paul was
desperately proud whilst a Pharisee, ignorant of the spirituality of the Law,
but very humble when he became a sincere Christian. Act. 20.19
Serving the Lord with all humility of mind. Sincere souls, like the lowest
valleys, are very fruitful, whilst proud hearts, like the lofty hills, are
barren and unprofitable. See the deportment of Agur; I am more brutish than any
man, p. 0.30.2, 3
I have not the understanding of a man. Yet he exhorts his Scholars to fetch
their knowledge from the High One. The Holy Spirit seeing so deep a
Self-denial, and Humility in him, ranks his wisdom with Solomon's, and his
Proverbs, and the Wise man's, are both joined together.

Rule 6. He that is taught by the Spirit, by that knowledge is carried out to
purify himself from sin. 2 Cor. 7.1
Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh,
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. Where the Spirit
teaches, purity of life is one main lesson. The very office of the Spirit is to
sanctify the soul. Act. 15.9
Impurity of life is no Livery for the Disciples of Christ to wear, 1 John 3.3.

Rule 7. Knowledge taught by the Spirit, speaks the soul under the influence of
the Spirit, both before and after his teaching.

First, Antecedently, The Spirit puts the soul to pray earnestly for his saving
discoveries of Gospel Truths. Luke 11.13. How much more shall the heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it. The Spirit here, is further
discoveries of the Spirit. And he that goes in the sense of his darkness and
ignorance, seldom comes away without an answer to his prayer.

Secondly, Consequently, he is carried out to praise God for the communication
of saving knowledge, and teachings of his Spirit. Carnal hearts ascribe all to
their own parts and industry; Gracious souls own Gods Spirit in all their
discoveries, and do desire to improve all to his glory and praise.

7. II. Hence arises matter for Exhortation; If the Spirit be present to teach
us, we should easily be exhorted to own the Spirit as our grand Teacher. In
that it is both our greatest wisdom, and chiefest comfort so to do.

First, It is our greatest wisdom. Learners, if wise, make choice of the
ablest Masters to teach them. There is none better, nor abler to teach thee,
than the Spirit of God. Best of men have their imperfections in point of
Knowledge, and so are but imperfect Teachers. But the Spirit of God, as he is
omniscient, and knows all things, so he is infinite, and able to teach us
all things. Job. 14 26
He that teaches you all things. (...), this word (...), to teach, is
oftentimes accommodated in the New Testament, to the Articles of Faith in the
Gospel, and then the meaning is, the Spirit teaches us all things necessary to
salvation. Is it not our wisdom now, to have an Omniscient and Infinite
Teacher? Other Teachers, though never so well accomplished, are not able to
teach an Art or Science, if they meet with an unfit subject. A dull Scholar is
many times a discredit, to an ingenious and very good Master; yet the reason is
not because the Master wants skill to teach. but because the Scholar wants
parts to learn. Now the Spirit of God, either finds, or makes men fit to be
taught: If men want parts, he enlarges the abilities of their minds; if they
have natural parts, he sanctifies them. And indeed in this sense he finds
none, but makes all fit to be taught; for none has the least degree of saving,
and fanctifying knowledge, but what comes from the Spirits teaching.

Secondly, It will be our chiefest comfort. One dram of knowledge from the
Spirit of God, goes further than a thousand notions from natural, and mere
humane teaching, in point of comfort. What comfort will the most knowing men
have, of all their knowledge and learning, if when they come to dye they want
Grace. That will be the most comfortable knowledge, that a man can reflect
upon, and find comfort in, when he comes to leave the world, and is just going
to give up his account to God. And I leave any to judge, whether the profound
Scholar, the deep Politician, the knowing Artist, the skilful Lawyer, the
expert Physician, the exact Mathematician, or the plain practical Christian, is
like to have more comfort, in reflecting upon their knowledge at that day. The
name of the Holy Spirit our teacher is also Comforter. John 14.26.
Because what the Spirit teaches, advances the Christians comfort, as well as
informs his conscience.

8. To back the present exhortation further, to the two motives mentioned, I
shall subjoyn some directions, which show us how we must own the Spirit as our
teacher.

1. Let us hear him frequently. The best teaching cannot come too often. The
Word of God, and Ordinances of the Gospel, are those means the Spirit teaches
Souls in. Frequency in these is our duty, and the Spirit will teach us therein.
Frequent reading the Word. Meditate day and night in the Law of the Lord. Psalm.
1.2.
Be often hearing the Word Preached. Psalm. 26.8
Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells. Men will be there often, whither their love carries them. Gods
House will be frequented, by those that have any love to the Ordinances; those
that do not own them, show they have no love to them at all. Psalm 122.1
I was glad when they said unto me, come let us go up into the house of the
Lord. The great joy of a Christian lies in this, that he can Frequent Gods
Ordinances. Oh at what a rate would the persecuted Christians in the primitive
times have purchased those liberties of hearing, which now may be had, yet
most abominably contemned? When they were forced to meet in Caves in the night
to hear the Word; and would lose their lives rather than be deprived of the
benefit of Ordinances.

9. 2. Let us hear the Spirits teaching diligently. It is one thing to be
bodily present, another to have an ear to hear the Spirit teaching. This
therefore comes in often in the Gospel. He that has an ear to hear, let him
hear what the Spirit says. Most men are like Idols, when they come where the
Spirit teaches, they have eyes but see not, ears but hear not. But, if we
would have the Spirit to be our teacher, we must labor to have that frame,
that Eli put Samuel into. Saying, go lie down, 1 Samuel 3.9
and it shall be, if he shall call thee, that thou shall say, speak Lord, for
thy Servant hears. Here is a Rule for us to learn to profit by, wherever God
has a word to speak, we should have an ear to hear. Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears. The more earnest heed we give, the more are we like to keep
up the Spirits teaching. Heb. 2.1.
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed, to the things that we have
heard least at any time we should let them slip. Diligence and attention, are
the best materials, to stop our leaking souls from running our.

3. Let us hear, ardently, with devotion. It Is the unhappiness of all men, to
be dark by nature, and of some, in the midst of spiritual light. The way for us
to have preaching profitable, is to beg the Spirits teaching, in the teaching
of the Word. Psalm. 119.18.
Open mine eyes that I may understand the wonderful things of thy Law. Hebr.
(...) Reveal mine eyes, i. e. take off the veyle of darkness and ignorance
from mine eyes. Had not David, Gad, and Nathan, and other excellent teachers?
Yet he prays to have his eyes opened by the Spirit. Where we may observe,
he does beg to have his eyes opened so, as not to throw by the Word, and to
account that, Spiritual perfection, to live either above or without the Word.
But his devotion lies here, to have enlightened eyes, to look further into Gods
Law, which has (...) wonderful things in it, or as the word denotes. Things
that are above, and separated from us, from our reason and understanding, and
so want a better teacher, the Spirit of God to inform us. Gospel Truths, like
Gods Children, are separated things: Carnal eyes can see but the outside, of
true Christians, and carnal hearts can perceive but the external part only of
Gospel Truths, till the Spirit comes to teach them.

10. Judges 3.20.
4. Let us hear him reverently, with submission As Eglon to Ehud when he came
and told him, he had a message from God, Eglon in reverence to that, rises off
his seat. When God speaks in anger, he can make the Heavens and Earth to
tremble with fear; And if he speak by his Spirit to our souls, in mercy and
love, we should tremble too, with reverential affection, and a Filial fear.
Great Doctors do command reverence from their inferior Scholars: How would
Solomon with his wisdom be reverenced by us? but behold a greater than
Solomon is here. Here is the Spirit, that is wisdom it self, to teach souls
the way to Heaven. Solomon's teaching is but the teaching of a man, but this is
the teaching of God himself; which calls for our reverence and submission.

5. Let us hear him obediently with resolution to practice. To hear the Spirit
teach, and not to Practice, is the next way to lose the benefit of so good a
Master. If the Spirit kindle a spark within us, we should endeavor to get it
up to a perfect flame. Quenching of the Spirit either in our selves or others,
is no work for a Christian to put in practice. Quench-coals as to the Spirits
teaching, are the Devils Grenades, he throws into the world to do mischief
withal. These are the devils plots to blow up men without fire, to undo men by
extinguishing the fire of the Spirit within. Be not hearers only, but doers
also of the Word: Otherwise ye deceive your selves. It is the grossest
self-deceit, Jam. 1.22.
because souldeceit, to rest barely in hearing, and knowing, without doing. He
that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be be aten with many
stripes. Either obey what ye know is commanded, and practice what ye hear, or
else better never to know or hear at all.

11. III. From Gods Presence and teaching of his Spirit, there arises matter of
reproof to three sorts of persons.

1. To such as depend only upon the teachings of the Spirit, without the Word
of God. If there be any delusions, in the world, we must own this as the
Beelzebub amongst them. This is the master plot the Devil has used in the late
times, to lay Gospel Ordinances under the brand of ignominy, and grossest
contempt. Oh it is an easy way to be spiritual, to say the Spirit teaches, and
then we can condemn all for carnal, that stick to Ordinances, and call these
outward forms, beggarly elements. Instead of David's language, Oh when shall we
come up into the house of God, Psalm. 122.1.
we may hear, when shall we meet in some obscure corner or other. Romans 10.15.
And instead of St. Paul's exclamation, How beautiful are the feet of those that
Preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! We may
hear, how excellent a thing is it to hear no Ministers at all, but to sit still
in silence, and to expect heavenly raptures. Quakers.
To meet together, to sit in an amazed posture, as if all were possessed with a
dumb Devil. To this end, that which was spoken about a temporal deliverance, I
have known, and heard used to defend this practice, viz. Stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord. And this uttered by one, who was so impudently
absurd, as to avouch, more good to be gotten by such dumb and silent meetings,
than by hearing those who were Ordained Ministers. But, must we not needs look
upon such practices, as gross delusions, when we have neither precept,
precedent, nor promise in all the Word of God to give any countenance to them?
It is an endless delusion, and grossly uncertain in the very foundation, that
such give themselves up unto, that wait for the Spirits teaching, without the
Word. For what rule have I to try the Spirit by, but by the Word revealed, and
written in the Scriptures? When as Christ says, search the Scriptures. And St.
John, try the Spirits whether they are of God or no. But how shall I know
whether I am taught of the Spirit, See before c. 13. ss. 8.
or no, unless the Word direct me? As for those that are deluded out of Gods
way, into this endless path of error. I look upon their case as sad and
miserable, and yet it calls for the prayers of all their friends, relations,
and acquaintance; yea and in this respect their condition is much the more to
be pitied, in that their obstinacy in error, puts them upon rejecting (as by
my self sometimes has been heard) even the benefit of others prayers for them.
Me thinks it might startle any sober-minded Christian to consider, that those
glorious Martyrs, that submitted their necks to the block, and their bodies to
the flames, yet never suffered for any of those things, which these obstinately
maintain, who have fallen from hearing the Word, and have left the Ordinances,
which we have good ground from the Word of God to brand, as errors, and gross
delusions. And they that fill the world with so great a dinne of their purity,
perfection, and sanctity of life, when they are searched to the bottom, it
amounts to no more than a senselesness under sin, or at the best, but a
freedom from some gross and scandalous sins of the world.

12. 2 Reproof, to such formal Hypocrites, as are merely for the teaching of
the Word, without the inward teaching of the Spirit of God. When we plead for
Ordinances, we say not the bare hearing of Sermons, and presence at Prayers,
will bring souls to Heaven. The way of dull formality, and outside boasting,
Pharisaical Hypocrisy, was never the way prescribed to eternal salvation. It Is
a small commendation to be a good Churchman; and yet some praise it does
deserve, because it speaks them to be upon Gods ground, whilst they are waiting
upon the outward means. But to frequent Sermons on the Sabbath, and the
Alehouse on the week-daies, is a Religion that pleases none better, than the
Devil, and boon companions. Such are but Religious Atheists, Religious in their
Profession, and Atheists in their Practice. The Devil would never have raised
persecution against the Christian Religion, if none that professed it, would
ever go further, then the bare outward performance of Gospel-duties. The Devil
loves Hypocrites well, and therefore has prepared them a principal seat in
Hell. Hypocrites and unbeleevers are placed in the very forefront of the
damned crew. Mat. 24.51


3 Reproof to such carnal wretches, as through mere laziness, and negligence,
throw off Gods Ordinances. An afternoons sleep, is far better to such, than an
afternoons Sermon. Any business, that cannot be dispatched on week-daies, or
would hinder other work by the doing of it then, on the Sabbath they have time
enough for it, though with the loss of Public Worship. They can be bold with
God, to trespass upon him in that way, that if others should but trespass so
much upon them, in the like nature, they would endeavor to recover damages of
them. Such neither care for the Word, or Spirits teaching; all is a case to
them, they can do well enough without either. Let such consider that passage of
St. Paul. 2 These. 1.8.9.
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. A
place that might startle a carnal and careless wretch, into the serious minding
of Gods ways.

13. IV. From the teaching and presence of Gods Spirit, there arises matter of
Consolation to Gods Children. God is present to teach them by his Spirit, and
is not this matter of very great comfort, to have such a Teacher? and
especially, if we consider, that they are taught by him 1. The best Lessons.
2. To walk in the best way. 3. And to aim at the best end.


1. They are taught the best Lessons by the Spirit of God. Men indeed may
propound the same Lessons, but the Spirit of God only can effectually teach
them. These four Lessons they are taught effectually.

First, Recte credere, to believe aright. It Is the work of God, Joh. 6.29
that we believe on him whom he has sent. True Faith is fixed upon Christ,
as he was sent by the Father, and not as he is fancied to be by our corrupt
minds, and this is a work of the Spirit in the soul. St. Paul says, 2 These 3.2
All men have not Faith. Those that have it are true Christians, and do receive
it as a special gift at Gods hands. By grace are ye saved, through Faith, and
that not of your selves, Ephesians. 2.8
it is the gift of God. The Spirit works this Faith, by opening the eyes of the
understanding, convincing of the conscience, of sin in himself, and
righteousness in Christ, then the will is renewed, and made willing to accept
of Christ, not only out of safety, but out of delight.

Secondly, Recte vivere, to live aright. As many as are the Sons of God, are
lead by the Spirit of God. Romans 8.14
It holds true thus, as that of the Apostle does; As many as are lead by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Faith in a true Christian is not a dead
Faith. The Just shall live by Faith. As the Spirit helps Christians to receive
Christ by Faith, so he helps them to live in Christ, and to Christ by new
obedience.

Thirdly, Recte diligere, to love aright. The fruit of the Spirit is love. Gal.
5.22
They that are taught of the Spirit of God, are taught, love, both to God and
Men; they then love God for himself, and Men for Gods sake. It Is Love, not
envy, not malice, not reviling, not hatred, not backbiting and slandering
others that are not just of our opinion; that is the fruit of the Spirit of
God. The Spirit of Love teaches men to be conscientious, and not to be
censorious.

Fourthly, Recte orare, to pray aright. With what face can any pretend the
teaching of the Spirit, and either neglect or contemn the use of prayer: When
as the Spirit is set out in Scripture by this Title. Zach 12.10
The Spirit of Supplication. And in that known place. Romans 8.26
The Spirit helps our infirmities, and teaches us to pray. The grace of
prayer is one of the sweetest flowers that grows in a Christians Garden, and so
very comfortable, and cordial.

14. 2. They are taught to walk in the best way. Some run on in a way of carnal
pleasures, others are taken up merely with Ceremonies of Worship, with a
neglect of sanctity; others in a way of separation and error, but a Child of
God, guided by the Spirit, walks on in the way of Holiness and Peace. Heb. 12.14
They are taught to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. Ephesians.
4.3
They that are not men of Peace, and Truth, in Gods Church, are not men of God.
They are Firebrarnds of Hell, that are always kindling the flames of
contention, and division in the Church of God.

3. They are taught to aim at the best end, viz. Gods glory, and their own
salvation. Carnal minds have carnal ends. A man's aims, discover much a man's
temper. Voluptuous men aim at pleasure, ambitious men at honor, covetous men
at gain and profit, etc. But a Saint of God makes Heaven and Happiness, and the
things of Eternity his aim, and his main design. These are spiritual ends, and
so speak the man to be spiritual. Now then to close all, those that are thus
taught of the Spirit of God, The best Lessons, to walk in the best way, and to
aim at the best ends; must needs have more comfort than those carnal wretches,
who live in ignorance, walk in error, and whose end is eternal destruction.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling. S. Th. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. Gilb. Episc. Land. a Sac.
Domest.
Ex Aed. Sab. Jul. 21. 1662.

