Die Jovis 24 Octobris 1678.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury be, and is hereby appointed to Preach before the
House of Peers, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, on Wednesday the Thirteenth
Day of November next; being the Day appointed by His Majesty for Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation, to implore the Mercy and Protection of God Almighty upon the
King's Majesty and His Kingdoms.

JO. BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.

A SERMON PREACHED to the House of Peers, November. 13th 1678.

Being the FAST DAY Appointed by the KING To Implore the Mercies of Almighty
GOD in the Protection of His MAJESTY'S Sacred Person, and His Kingdoms.

By WILLIAM Archbishop of Canterbury.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Robert Beaumont, 1678.

Die Jovis 14 Novembris 1678.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Thanks of this House be given to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for his
Pains in Preaching before the House of Peers, in the Abbey-Church Yesterday,
being the Day appointed by His Majesty for Solemn Fasting and Humiliation; and
that His Grace be desired to Print and Publish his Sermon then Preached.

JO. BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.

A SERMON Preached to the House of Peers.
PSALM Lvii. 1. In the Shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until these
Calamity be overpast.
WHat S. Hierom observed long since concerning this Book of Psalms, Titulos
esse Claves; that the Title is usually the true Key of David, to set open the
Psalm to us, and to let us in to the true Understanding of it; he learned
probably from a former Author, (with who is Writings he was in his younger years
much delighted) Orig. Philocal. p. 59
Origin I mean: Who in his Tomes upon the Psalms, discoursing of some
Obscurities in Holy Scripture, and the proper Remedies thereof, gives us yet a
more ancient Tradition, which he received (as he says) from a learned Jew;
That the whole Body of Scripture is like a great House, in which are several
Appartments, and therein many Rooms shut up, and in them again many Cabinets,
and Boxes locked down: Nor hangs the proper Key at every Door, but they lie
scattered here, and there, and counterchang'd; so that it requires some pains,
and skill to find them out, and apply them aright. Thus the Key of the
Prophetic Scripture lies in the Historical, where we often find both the
Occasion of the Prophecy, and the Event too; and that proves usually the best
Interpreter. Thus the Acts of the Apostles, which contein the Peregrinations,
and Gests of St. Paul, are a great Master-Key to open his Epistles, and to
unlock to us many things, hard otherwise to be understood in them. And thus in
the present Instance, David's History is the proper Key to David's Psalter; and
so the Books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles, the best, and most
authentic Commentary upon the Psalms.

For this now before us, lest we should mistake, the Spirit of God has hung
the Key at the Door, or at least pointed us whence to fetch it: and while the
Title dates it from the Cave, we are plainly directed to 1 Samuel xxiv. There we
find the holy Man in a great streit of Affliction; wandering like an Exile, or
Bandito in the Wilderness of Engedi; the few Men he had, straggling, and
shifting for themselves upon the Rocks of the wild Goats; implacable Saul in
the mean time with five times his Number so closely pursuing him, that he is
forced to take shelter in the Cave: And there being shut up from the Sight of
Heaven, and light of the Sun, and as it were buried alive in that obscure
Dungeon, surrounded with Danger on every side, and little Hope left him of
escaping with his Life; it is then that he sighs out his Al-taschith, (as this,
and the two following Psalms are entitled) Oh destroy me not utterly, (so the
Word signifies) but let me live to praise thy Name; it is then, that by a
vigorous Faith he flies to the tender Mercies of God, as to his only City of
Refuge: and reposing himself in the Bosom of the Divine Goodness by Acts of
Faith, and Devotion, and of perseverance in both, he does exactl, and precisely
that which We all are enjoined to do this Day: he implores the Mercies of God
in the Protection of himself, and in him of those that belong to him; Be
merciful unto me, O God, (says he) be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts
in thee; yea, in the shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until these
Calamities be overpast.

So that, the proper business of this Day being visibly stamped in great Letters
upon the Forehead of the Day, and that by the Hand of Sacred Authority it self;
and the Lines of the Text too running so parallel all along, and so
commensurate to those of the Day, (upon which Ground the whole Psalm was very
pertinently selected as one of the proper Psalms for the Office of the Day:) I
may hope in some Degree to discharge my Duty to both of them, by treating of
these two things; What God's Protection is; and What we are to do, that we may
be qualified, and prepared aright, successfully to implore the Mercy of that
Protection. In Order whereunto, I will consider the Text in a twofold Reference.

I. As it looks down from God to usward in gracious and powerful Protections:
and so it speaks our great Honor, and Happiness, the high, and glorious
Privilege of pious Kings, and their Kingdoms, that they are under the Shadow of
God's Wings.

II. As it looks up in another Aspect from Us to God again; and so it contains
our necessary, and indispensable Duty; and calls aloud for our suitable
Deportment; which is resolvedly to put our selves under the Divine Protection,
or to seek, and make our Refuge under the Shadow of his Wings.

I. I begin with the high and glorious Privilege of all holy Souls, but
especially of pious Kings, and their Kingdoms; They are under the shadow of
God's Wings. The Expression frequently occurs in Scripture, and may seem to
speak these three things, or some of them; which together will give you, I
think, the full Extent of the shadow of God's Wings, the adequate Importance of
this illustrious Metaphor.

(1.) Safeguard, and Defense from Calamities, that they come not. Or (2.)
Speedy Help, and Deliverance out of Calamities, when they are come. Or however
(3.) Comfort in the mean time, and Refreshment in Calamities, while they are
upon us.
(1.) The Privilege of Safety, and Protection from Calamities stands first in
our Method: intimated here in a threefold Expression; A Refuge, a Shadow, and
the shadow of Wings.

1.) And what is a Refuge, (which is the first,) but a place of Security,
either in regard of its secrecy to hide us, or its strength to defend us, to
which we fly, when Calamity threatens us? And such is God to his People; a
City of Refuge, an inviolable Sanctuary; an Altar of Mercy, to which we may
fly, and be safe, and from the Horns whereof no bold Calamity shall dare to
pluck us, without his special Commission. Or in another Reference, a place of
Refuge is a Covert from Storm, and Rain, Es. IV. 6. and as it follows there in
the same Verse,

2.) A Tabernacle for a Shadow too in the Daytime from the Heat, which is the
second Expression. The Emphasis whereof is far better understood in those
intemperate Climats, where the Sunbeams are scorching, and the Heats
insufferable. Nothing there more desirable, than a shady Grove, or a deep Grot,
the Sun never looks into, or the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Which
Protections, because the Pilgrim- Israelites wanted in the Wilderness, God
supplied it to them, by spreading a Cloud over them for a Covering in the
Daytime, Ps. CV. 39.
(as the Psalmist speaks,) and God was in that Cloud; so that for forty years
together they marched, and encampt under his shady Wings, I had almost said,
without a Metaphor. And still whenever the Sun of Persecution, Jac. I. 11.
or other Calamity arises upon us with burning Heat, God can exempt, whom he
thinks good, and send them times of Refreshing from the presence of the Lord:
so that, while the World is all on fire about them, they journey through that
torrid Zone, with their mighty Parasol, or Umbrella over their Heads, and are
all the while in the shade.

And yet every Shade is not a safe protection. Umbra aut Nutrix, aut Noverca
est, L. 17. c. 12.
says Pliny: And all the Naturalists tell us, that the shadow of some Trees is
unwholsom; of others deadly. Ay there is a shadow of Death too in Scripture
Language; and you have heard of the Shades of Hell it self. And therefore to
distinguish this benign, and saving protection from those black, and dismal
Shades, here is yet a further, and a higher Emphasis;

3.) It Is in the third place Umbra Alarm, a Shadow of Wings: An Expression
borrowed from Birds, and Fowls, that brood, and foster their young Ones under
them. The Wing of the Dam is both the Midwife, and the Nurse; it brings forth
the Chickens, and it brings them up too. So Providence is both the Womb, that
bare us, and the Paps, that give us suck. The Wing is not only, as the Shade, a
protection from the Heat; but a more universal Defense against all the
Injuries, and Inclemencies of the Air. Is it too hot? The Wing casts off a cool
Shade. Or is it too cold? The Wing affords a warm Covering. Are the Younglings
frighted with a Storm? The Wing is a ready Shelter. Does the Kite, or Hawk, the
Tyrants, and Freebooters of the Air, hover over and threaten? The Wing is a
safe Retreat. And thus in sacris Domini Defensionibus, as Cassian speaks; in
God, and his holy Protections we have All.

That our Troubles are not long since grown too hot for us, it is because He
cools, and allaies them. That our Comforts do not grow cold, and die away in
our Bosoms; it is because he warms, and reinforceth them. That we have heard it
bluster abroad for so many years together in a formidable Tempest, which has
drenched, and drowned so great a part of Christendom in Blood, and yet the
Storm has hitherto flown over us: That the Clouds have been gathering at home
too, and so long hung black over our Heads, and yet not powered themselves forth
in showers of Vengeance: That Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, and the Rest; that
Hell, and Rome, and their Partisans, our Enemies on all Hands, both foreign,
and domestic, have been so long confederate against us, saying, Come, and let
us root them out, that they be no more a People, that the Name of the Reformed
Church of England may be no more in Remembrance; that they have so often looked
grim, and four, and roared, and rampt upon us, and yet not been able to seize
us; to what can we justly ascribe all this, but to the gracious protections of
God's shady Wings spread over us?

It Is pity, Brethren, we are not more deeply apprehensive of it, since so it
is. We sit continually in the Lap, and Arms of Providence: She is at once our
Fortress, and our Storehouse: It Is to her we owe both our Defense, and
Supplies; our Safety, and our Abundance: That we ever had any good thing in
this World, whether Personal, or National, it is because we have sucked the
Breasts of her Consolations: And that we keep, and enjoy any thing, (while our
Soul is among Lions, while we dwell in the midst of cruel, and blood-thirsty
Men, as holy David complains a little below my Text;) it is because we sit under
the shadow of her Wings. And since we are for all this so overapt to forget
her, and to pride our selves in Bulwarks of our own projecting; God has seemed
oftentimes, and now again of late, to be about to dismantle all, and to teach
us this Lesson at the dearest Rate, if we will not learn it better cheap, That
we cannot be safe out of his protection; that the shadow of his Wings is our
best, nay our only Refuge: and that whether we take a Refuge for the protection
of Secrecy, or for the protection of Strength. Of which much might be said,
would the time permit it: But so much briefly of the first Privilege, that of
Safeguard, and protection from Calamities, that they come not upon us. I have
to the second;

(2.) If Calamities do come, (and who is wholly exempt from that common Tax,
and Tribute of Mortality?) the Expression speaks Assistance too, and timely
Deliverance out of them. Wings in the common Notion of the World signify
Speed, and Activity; (...), In (...). 17. 8. and 18. 10.
as Theodoret speaks; God's speedy, and efficacious Providence, and Appearance
in time of Need to deliver his People. It Is therefore, that we give the Winds
Wings, and the Angels too; as being the swift Messengers of God, the nimble
Mercuries of Heaven. It Is therefore too, that when God appears seasonably to
deliver his afflicted People, he is said in the Psalm to mount a Cherub, and to
fly, Ps. XVIII. 10.
or to come flying to them upon the Wings of the Wind, or to carry them off
into safety on the Wings of an Eagle. Birds do not only cover their young Ones
under their Wings within the Neast: If the Seat prove dangerous, they take them
up too on their Wings, and carry them off to a safer station.

Ye have seen, what I have done for you, (says God to the Jewish Nation) how I
bare you upon Eagles Wings, and brought you to my self. Ex. XIX. 4.
As if he had said, When you were in actual Bondage, I rescued you; not only
brooded you under my Wings in Egypt, and preserved you by my Providence, while
you were yet in the Egg; but I hatch^d you, as it were, even in the Iron
Furnaces of Memphis, into Political Life, and National Being; and then brought
you out safely, openly, triumphantly, (as the Eagle does her Young) and brought
you off too into a more prosperous Condition.

And may not God bespeak us too, the People of England, in the same language?
When we were enslaved at home, (and so in worse than Egyptian Slavery) and our
Pharaoh, and his proud Taskmasters made even our Lives bitter to us in hard
Bondage, in Mortar, and in Brick, to build up their own proud Babels; when they
had now killed, and also taken possession, and divided the Spoil, and said in a
Frolic of their lusty pride, We have devoured them, and there is no Hope for
them in their God: Then on the sudden, as an Eagle stirs up her Neast, and
fluttereth over her Young, and spreads abroad her Wings, (as Moses speaks in
his admirable Song) thus awakening, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 11.
and exciting their natural Activity, and emboldening them to use it to the
utmost; and when that will not do, takes them up her self, and bears them
away upon her own Wings: So here, The Lord alone did lead us, and there was no
Other with him; that is Moses's own Reddition: When our own Pinion proved too
weak, and all our faint Flutterings to no purpose; then by a Miracle of Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, he took us up to that gallant, and wonderful Flight, even
up to a higher pitch, than we durst look, and made us to ride upon the high
Places of the Earth, and set our Neast again amongst the Stars.

And now, when restless, and unquiet Men (the true Spawn of him, Rev. XII. 4.
whose Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the
Earth) would fain by their hellish Plots, and Contrivances bring us down again
from thence, even down to the very Ground, and lay all our Honor in the Dust:
When by their secret Machinations they are at Work on all hands to hurry us
back into the old Confusions; in Hope, that out of that disordered Mass they
may at length rear up a new World of their own; (But what a World? A World made
up of a new Heaven of Superstitions, and Idolatries; a new Earth too of Anarchy
first, and pretended Liberty, but of Tyranny insufferable at the next Remove:)
In such a dangerous State of Affairs as this, whether should we rather (nay
whether else can we) run for Help, and Deliverance, but under his protections,
the Stretching out of whose Wings fills the Breadth of thy Land, Es. VIII. 8.
o England! He can make all these Cockatrice Eggs, on which this Generation of
Vipers (that eat out the Bowels of their Mother) have sat so long abrood, windy
at last, and addle; and he will do it: So that out of the Serpent's Root shall
never come forth an Adder, to bite us, or a fiery flying Serpent, to devour us.
He will confound these Babel-builders, with their City, and their Tower, or
Temple, (their foreign Polity, and their strange Worship; their novel Modes,
and Models of Government in Church, and State) and scatter them abroad from
hence upon the Face of all the Earth. Like as a Dream, when one awaketh; so
shall he despise their Images, and their Imaginations too, and cause them to
vanish out of the City; and make the whole Bulk of their vast Contrivance to
consume away like a Snail, and become like the untimely Fruit of a Woman, which
shall never see the Sun. He that at first made all things with an Almighty
Word, said only, Let it be, and it was so; can with the same Facility unmake,
and annihilate those Worlds of Wickedness, which these great Architects of
Mischief have been so long projecting, and building up. It Is but for him to
say, It shall not prosper, or This shall not be; and behold the mighty Machin
cracks about their Ears, and sinks into Ruin, into Nothing; leaving no Effect
behind it more real or conspicuous, than a more firm, and lasting Establishment
of that, which God's own Right Hand has planted amongst us.

When the Earth at first was without Form, Genesis I. 2.
and void, and Darkness hovered over the Face of the Deep; the Spirit of God
(says the Text) moved upon the Waters. (...)
The Word in the Original (as St. Hierom tells us from the Hebrew Traditions)
implies, that the Spirit of God sat abrood upon the whole rude Mass, as Birds
upon their Eggs, Gr. Schol. on Aratus.
(...), (as a Greek Author speaks elegantly) and hatched the Chaos into World;
by degrees digesting, and in the mean time preserving, and susteining it by
kindly Heats, and vital Incubations. And to the like benign, and gracious
purposes does God still spread the Wings of his good Providence over his
People, and their Affairs in calamitous times, such as this is; When he may
seem to stretch out upon the Political World the Line of Confusion, and the
Plummet of Emptiness, ( Tohu, and Bohu, the very Words, which describe the
first Chaos,) as it is Es. XXXIV. 11. And if hereupon we put our selves (as we
ought) under the saving Influences of his Wings; he will either digest our
Confusions into greater Order, and Beauty than before; or at least support, and
cheer us, while we lie under them; which is the third, and last Privilege
implied in this Expression.

(3.) Comfort, and Refreshment in Calamities, while they are upon us. For the
Wing is not only the Retreat of Safety from Calamities, as in the first
particular; Nor only the Instrument of Deliverance, out of Calamities, as in
the second: It Is also the Seat of Comfort, and the Fountain of Refreshment,
when they lie heaviest upon us.

And here I might spend the Hour with much Delight; for the Prospect is fair,
and large before me. But I am sensible, that I have already staid too long upon
the first Head of Discourse propounded; and so perhaps complied too much with
the common Humor, which loves rather to be tickled, and amused with high
Privilege, than instructed in necessary Duty. I shall therefore make haste to
seize what remains of the Time, and improve it, to let you see, That All, I
have said hitherto, and the Much more I might have said, upon that first Head
of Privileges, signifies nothing at all, is all blank, and Cipher to them,
that go not on cheerfully to the Second, that of Duty.

II. They that would be safe under God's Wings, must not only please themselves
with the general Speculation, that Safety, and Protection is there to be had:
They must also make their Refuge there, they must put themselves under the
Shadow of those Wings by their special Act, and Deed; must deliberately choose,
and effectually place their last Resort there; and if they will partake the
Benefits, must comply with the Obligations of such a State. God is our Refuge,
and our Strength, says holy David, (...). LXVI. I.
most devoutly, and most Methodically too: For we must first make him our
Refuge by flying to him, before we can hope, that he will be our Strength. In
vain do they dream of God's saving Protections, that turn their Backs upon his
Precepts, and cast his Laws behind them. It Is true, God's Altars are our
Sanctuary; an inviolable Asylum in our Sufferings, and in our Sorrows, in our
Calamities, and in our Dangers, for our Ignorances, and for our Infirmities:
But are our Crimes too priviledg'd, and protected there? That were indeed to
turn God's Temple into a Den of Thieves, and Murderers, (the notorious Abuse of
the modern Sanctuaries;) and to set up the Wing of Abominations (spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet) even in the Holy Place. Nay but pluck them from mine
Altars, (says God) or stay them there, that sin presumptuously, and with a
high hand. God will not be so merciful to those, that offend of malicious
Wickedness, as to receive them, with all their Sins about them, under that
sacred, and saving Protection. The holy Dove broods not a Kite, or a Vulture:
They are Birds quite of another Feather. If in good earnest we would be
fostered, and cherisht under God's Wings; we must first be hatched into his
Likeness, and Similitude, be renewed after his Image, and be made partakers in
some Measure of the Divine Nature.

To hover no longer in Generalities; the fruitful Metaphor of the Text, as you
have distinctly seen it big with our Privilege; so to qualify us for that,
it is as remarkably pregnant with our Duty also. Among the Rest, it clearly
suggests to us in three noble Instances of our Duty so many apt, and proper
Qualifications, to fit, and prepare us for God's Wing. (1.) A pious Trust, and
Confidence in God. (2.) A fervent Devotion toward God, and his holy Worship in
his Temple. And (3.) a constant unwearied perseverance in both the former; for
it is Donec transierint, until these Calamities be overpast. And

(1.) For Trust, and Affiance in God, it is visible, That to fly under God's
Wings, and to make him our Refuge, and to trust in him, are parallel Phrases,
which expound one another; and differ only, as the same sense clad in Metaphor,
and stripped of it again. And therefore some Versions, both ancient, and modern,
translate the Text, Chald. Engl. Genesis
Under the shadow of thy Wings will I trust. 'Twere happy for us, were this
Duty of Trust in God but as visibly transcribed into our practice, as it is
originally legible in the Text. We all pretend high indeed, and put on a fair
Semblance here too; I believe in God is our daily Language: But, as one says
well, Non est strepitus Oris, sed Fervor, and Devotio Cordis: Lip-labor will
not serve the turn; it must go deeper, even to the Ground of the Heart. Would
we put in then for David's share in the Privilege, God's Mercy, and Protection
to our King, and to our selves? We must labor then for a Trust like David's:
Be merciful to me o God, (says he) for my Soul trusts in thee.

To bring you to the Test then; The Trust that may be trusted to, and that will
stand us in stead, when Calamities invade, or threaten us, must have these
three Properties: It Is founded, and prepared in Self Diffidence; It Is carried
on, and exercised in active Diligence; And lastly it is consummate in full, and
perfect Resignation.

First, It Is founded, and prepared in deep Self-Diffidence, and Distrust; in a
clear Abrenunciation of our selves, and all worldly Dependences. The Chickens
are weak; and helpless in themselves; and, as if they knew it too, stay not to
combat the Kite, nor stand the dreadful shock, when the Hawk hovers over, and
is ready to stoop upon them; but run nimbly under the Dam's Wing for shelter.
The very Instincts of Nature have taught all Weak things, to seek their Support
out of themselves, in some Retreat, where they may be safe. Ps. CIV. 18.
Thus the Firr-Trees are a Refuge for the Stork; the high Hills for the wild
Goats, and the Rocks for the Conies. The Hare has her Converts too, and the
Foxes their Holes or Dens. Even the weaker, and grovelling Plants, (as Vines,
and the like) have their Tendrils, certain pliant Strings, wherewith they
naturally clasp, and twine themselves about the Supporters, they are to climb
by. In fine, all Nature is wholly Adjective, and, as if 'twere conscious to it
self of its Inability to stand alone, is ever in busy quest of its proper
Substantive, that may uphold it. Man, as the only bad Grammarian, makes still
false Syntax, and false Construction; apt to seek his Refuge, where it is not to
be had: As if he were under that Curse upon David's Enemies, Psalm. cix. 10.
not only in case to beg his Bread, which he finds not at home, but to seek it
also out of desolate places.

Thus Jonah sits under his Gourd with overmuch Delight; 'till the Worm smites
it at the Root, and it withers. Esa. xxx. 3.
Rebellious Israel trusts in the shadow of Egypt (the Land shadowing with
Wings, as the Prophet speaks) and it proves their Confusion: And we have heard
of Cedars of Lebanon, that degraded themselves into the Protection of a
Bramble; till Fire came out of that Bramble, and devoured them. We laugh at the
Babel-builders, who designed a Tower up to Heaven, above the Reach of Divine
Vengeance, or any Deluge of Wrath, that could come on them. But he had Reason,
that said, Totus Mundus est plenus Turrium Babylonicarum: not only the Plains
of Shinar; the whole World is full of such Towers. We all are apt to build
Castles in the Air, some (...), or other, some City of Cuckows in the Clouds,
like that in the Greek Comedian. Aristoph.
We have all of us our Gourds, and our Brambles to trust in; apt to Canonize
our own Sanctity, and Integrity; to Idolize our own Strength, and Activity; to
Deifie our own Wit, and Policy.

But if in good earnest we look toward the Covert of God's Wings, and would put
in there, We must begin Negatively; first moult, and cast all our sick
Feathers, and clip the Wings of all our Carnal Confidences, upon which we are
apt to soar too loftily, before we can make good our Flight. Confringes
Ascellas (so the vulgar Latin reads that Text, Levit. 1. 17.) The Sacrifice of
Birds is not accepted, till the Wings be broken, that is, De Adorat. lib. 16.
(says S. Cyril of Alexandria) till our Pride be mortified. God will take us
off our false Dependences, and will have us clearly quit All (namely as to
Trust in any of them) and run naked under his Defense; and then we are fit for
his Wing. Say not then, this great Nation is a Wise, and an Understanding
People, We have Counsel, and Strength for the War; We are fenced, and moated in
from the rest of the World with the vast Ocean: our Island sits a Queen in the
Heart of the Four Seas; she shall dwell in safety alone, and know no sorrow.
Let not the Mighty thus glory in their Might, nor the Wise in their Wisdom; but
he that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

And of this Holy David stands here before us a great Example. He trusts not in
the Wings of his Army, but in the Lord of Hosts, and Battles; not in the shadow
of his Cave, but in the shadow of God's Wings; not in the height of his Rock,
but in the Rock of Ages. Though being a Man of War, he well understood the
grand Importance of a Castle well seated, and fortified; of a Mount, or Rock
inaccessible; of a Cave in that Rock capacious, and defensible (such as Strabo
tells us there were many in Palestine; and such were probably the Cave of
Adullan, and the strong Holds of Engedi, and the rest, which we meet with so
often in David's story:) yet severed, and abstracted from the divine
Protections, he slights all these, as Paperwalls, and Cobweb-fortifications:
And knowing he could not be safe on this side Omnipotence, he styles God almost
in every Psalm, his Rock, and his Castle, his Fortress, and his Strong-Hold,
his High-Tower, and the Hill of his Defense; that is the first property of his
Trust, it begins in great Self-diffidence: But

Secondly, It goes on in active Diligence. The Young one has its last Retreat
indeed under the Dam's Wing: Yet the little Wing it has of its own, it
imployes to bring it thither. The Eagle in Moses's Song, as I noted before, not
only bears its Eaglets on her own Wings; but stirs up her Nest too, and
provokes them first to do their uttermost.

Though David resolved well, Psalm. xliv. 6. -- xxxiii. 16.
I will not trust in my Bow; yet he used it sure. It was not Goliah's Sword,
that could save him; yet gladly he girt himself with it, when the High Priest
reached it him. There is no King, says he, that can be saved by the Multitude
of an Host; yet he refused not the Volunteers, that came to List themselves
under him. He fled from Saul with all Diligence into the Cave; though he had
still a Refuge beyond it. Though he sets up his Rest under God's Wings; Psalm.
lv. 6.
yet Oh, (says he) that I had the Wings of a Dove too, that I might fly away
to my Rest.

The Moral, and the Reddition of All is but thus much. We all of us have Wings
of our own too; Faculties, and Abilities, that must be used, (Why else were
they given us?) though they must not be trusted in. The most excellent Father
Paul of the Servi of Venice was Libelled in the Holy Office, See his Life.
(as they call it) for advising one that pretended to immediate Inspirations,
and Assistances, to use humane Means, and Industries, and so to expect God's
Blessing. But the Inquisitors were for once so wise, as to absolve him without
Examination.

Our Psalmist states the matter well. Psalm. xxxvii. 3-5.
Trust in the Lord, says he, but be doing Good too, and so verily thou shall
be fed. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and He shall bring it to pass: But walk
in it thy self; how is it else thy way? Commit the keeping of thy Soul, 1 Pet.
iv. ult.
(says the Apostle, and so, commend the keeping of the public too) to God:
But still (...), in well-doing, in doing thy Duty in thy Station in all the
instances of it.

In the Age of Miracles indeed, when the Sea divided, and suddenly turned green
Meadow; and when an Angel went forth, and dispatched so many Thousands in a
Night: well might the watchword be, Stand still and see the Salvation of God;
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall do nothing. But the season is
changed, and it is now, Come forth, and help the Lord against the Mighty; and
work out your own Salvation, (and so the Salvation of the Nation too) because
it is God that Works; that is St. Paul's Logic.

We must not presume to use our Lord, as Herod did; call for him, when we
please, to Work us a fine Miracle; neglect our Affairs, and leave them
embroiled and ruffled on purpose, that he may come down (...), to disentangle
them. The Glory of God descends not visibly now adays upon our Palaces, as of
old upon the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to rescue our Moses and Aaron from
being massacred by a desperate Knot of Mutineers: Nor does the Earth open her
Mouth any longer, to swallow up our Rebels and Traitors alive. It Is a Scepter
of ordinary Justice, not a Rod of Wonders, that fills the Hand of our
Governors. We must not expect, that a good Cause should work alone of it self
by Way of Miracle: Believe it, it must be prudently, and industriously managed
too, or it must at last miscarry.

For Instance, (the Instance of the present time:) The Devils of Sedition, and
Faction, of Treason, and Rebellion, those Familiars of Rome, and Rhemes, and S.
Omers, (the Jesuits I mean, that have so long possessed and agitated a
wretched part of this Nation;) will never go out from hence, and leave us at
quiet, no not by Prayer and Fasting only. Nay, the best Laws we have, the best
you can make, (if they be not steddily, and severely executed) will prove too
slight a Conjuration for these sturdy evil Spirits of Disobedience. There is
another and a better Flagellum Daemonum, than that of Hieronymus Mengis, and
his fellow Exorcists. Holy Water is a Trifle; and holy Words will not do it.
There is no such thing as Medicina per Verba: Words, and Talk will never cure
the Distempers of a Nation. Deaf Adders refuse all the Voice of the Charmer,
charm he never so wisely. If in good Earnest we would be rid of this Legion,
and say, as our Lord to the deaf and dumb Spirit, Go out, and enter no more;
(What shall I say? -- In short,) Solomon' s Rod for the back of Fools, Prove.
xix. 29.
that grow troublesome, or dangerous, (as it may be prepared, and managed) is a
very powerful and effectual Exorcism. Untamed Horses, and skittish Mules, that
will have no Understanding, are not edified at all by calm reasonings, and
Instructions, and meek Remonstrances; nor in any other method so well as by
David's Expedient; Psalm. xxxii. 9.
In Fraeno, and Camo; their Mouths must be kept in with Bitt and Bridle, that
it may not be possible for them to fall upon you; and so ye may be secure of
them.

But the fitting up of David's Bridle, and Solomon's Rod, and the right Use of
both, is the Business of another Place. I shall resume the general Thesis, and
so shut up this Particular. I say then; They trust not in God, they presume,
and tempt him, who work not together with him, but receive his Aids in vain,
and look, that He should bring about in extraordinary manner, what they take no
care of themselves; but lie flat upon their Backs looking upward, and will stir
neither Hand, nor Foot, to help themselves. Nay but Viriliter agite, and
conforabit Cor, Psalm. xxxi. 24.
as it is in the Psalm; play the men your selves, Do All that you can, or ought
to do, within your proper Sphere; and so God will strengthen your Hearts, all
ye, that put your Trust in the Lord. Wings as they are the Covert of Safety, so
also the Emblems of Diligence, and the Instruments of Activity: And as they
show us our Privilege, may teach us also this part of our Duty, -- to trust
only in God's Wings, but to use our own too; that is the progress of David's
Trust; It goes on in active Diligence.

Thirdly, It is consummate (as in the last Act) in clear, and perfect
Resignation to God's good pleasure in the Event, whatever it be. They trust not
in God entirely, and as they ought, that rely only on his Power, and dare not
submit to his Wisdom also; that would gladly engage Omnipotence on their side,
(and can you blame them?) but then they would manage it their own Way, and in
Methods of their own Contriving, and to Ends, it may be, far distant from what
God has appointed: As if he would work Journey-work under them, and leave them
to be Masters of the great Shop of the World. No; but as Luther said well, when
his Friend Melanchthon troubled himself overmuch at some cross Events; Desinat
Philippus esse Rector Mundi: It Is God alone, who sits in Heaven, and does
whatever pleases him. If we be not content with the Portion he allots us, but
will needs be carving for our selves elsewhere, or otherwise: or if we be not
satisfied with his Conduct of the Affairs of the World, but think with the
great Alphonso, that we could mend the Systeme: what is this but in Effect to
turn our Backs upon God, and to set up for our selves upon our own wretched
Stock, and implicitly at least to renounce the shadow of his Wings, and all the
privileges of it? Pulli non prospiciunt, says One: Young Birds have no
Designs, or Forecasts of their own, but are wholly under the Dams Conduct. And
if we are allowed to have any our selves, be they never so deeply laid, or so
wisely contrived; so skilfully managed, or so vigorously pursued; We must at
last entirely submit, and sacrifice them all to that Sovereign Wisdom, and
Power, which rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and orders them in all things
according to the good pleasure of his Will.

To sum up then this whole great Duty of Affiance in God, with all the parts,
and Branches of it: He trusts Regularly in God, that trusts in Nothing else
first: And yet secondly does every thing he can, or is obliged to do by his
Duty: And thirdly, when he has done All, sits down at last under the shadow of
God's VVings, and waits the Success in Faith, and Hope, with perfect
Resignation to God's wise and just Appointment in all things; That is the first
Duty implied in the Expression, a pious Trust, and Confidence in God. The

(2d) Is an ardent and flaming Devotion toward God, and his holy Worship, and
Service in his Temple: Under the shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge;
it is certainly an Allusion to the Holy of Holies, where was the Ark of the
Covenant, the Symbol of God's gracious presence; over which the Cherubim of
Glory stretched forth their VVings on high, Exodus xxv. 20.
and shadowed the Mercy-seat: Hebr. ix. 5.
Between which VVings was God's Dewlling Place, his Shekinah, or Majestatique
presence. And therefore when Ruth the Moabitess became Proselyte to the Jewish
Religion, and Worship; she is said to come to trust under the Wings of the God
of Israel, Ruth ii. 12.

There are also Alae Ecclesiarum, which we meet with in Church-writers; as we
corruptly call them, the Isles of Churches; and in the Gospel it self (...),
Pinacles, or (if we will render it close, and just) Wings of the Temple: From
the saving Covert and Protection whereof, as it is the Devil's Business to
tempt, and withdraw us, and so to cast us down from one of our noblest Heights,
and Defenses: So on the contrary, holy David's great Example here, and the
clear Importance of the Words of my Text, lead us directly thither (that is
the last, and most illustrious Resort of the Expression) and bring us up with
Boldness to seek, and make our Refuge even under the VVings of the Cherubim of
Glory.

And indeed, Where can we find on Earth so safe, or so comfortable a Retreat,
when Calamities assail, or threaten us, as here in the House of our God? Does
not his Cross stand over it on purpose, to direct us hither, when we are ready
to sink under the Burden of our own? When God's Judgments are abroad in the
World, and the Avenger of our Sins pursues us; More particularly, When the Land
is moved, and divided; when the Pillars thereof shake, and tremble, and the
Foundations are ready to be cast down; when all things are in Ferment, and in
Commotion round about us, and Men's Hearts ready to fail them for Fear, and for
looking after those things which are coming upon the Earth: Where should we
rather take Sanctuary, where can we more probably find Help, and Redress, than
at the Altar of the God of Mercy, and under the shadow of the Wings of his
Mercy-seat?

This was holy David's steady Resolve, when his Heart was overwhelmed, as he
speaks, Ps. lxi. 2. I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever; I will trust (or,
I will make my Refuge) in the Cover of thy Wings, v. 4th: And when his
Afflictions put him beside that Guard, set him at Distance from those happy
Opportunities, took him down from those blessed Heights: Yet still, even at the
lowest, Psalm. cxxi. 1.
I will lift up mine eyes, says he, to the Hills; (at least cast a long Look
toward Sion) from whence comes my Help. This was the Sting of all his Sorrows,
as it were the Calamity Royal he so groans under, almost in every Psalm; not
that Saul, or Absalom had driven him from his own, but from God's House. Though
the Holy Land was of no large Extent: Yet as if he had been banished to the
Antipodes; From the Ends of the Earth, says he, have I cried unto thee, Psalm.
lxi. 2. Though his Devotion consecrated every place he came into; turned the
Cave into a Chapel, and the Wilderness of Judah into Holy Ground; and I had
almost said, even Gath of the Philistines into a Holy City; (for we have Psalms
dated from every One of these;) Yet still he sighs, Oh restore me, Oh bring me,
Oh set me up upon the Rock that is higher than I: He means without Doubt the
Hill of Sion, the Pico of Jewry, where God's House was established upon the Tops
of the Mountains, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. ii. 2.

Men, and Brethren, you that make up the more popular part of this mixed
Audience; Let me freely speak to you of the Patriarch David, and of your
selves. Blessed be the Mercies of God, you lie under no such Restraint, or
Interdict, as he did: You are not banished into the Wilderness, nor shut up in
the Cave: The Doors of God's House stand open to you, if you please; and the
Wings of his Mercy are stretched out wide to invite, and receive you; would you
but come in, and put your selves under the shadow of them. Let it not be said,
that your Curiosity, or some worse Humor leads you quite another way: that you
are over-careful, and troubled about many things, which belong not to you,
while you neglect the one thing necessary, the great Duty of this, and of every
Day; namely to implore God's Mercy, and Protection upon the King, and his
Kingdoms, and his Direction, and Blessing upon the public Counsels. Let my
Counsel, I pray, be acceptable unto you. Study to be quiet, and to do your own
Business: and that lies not in the Court, or in the Palace, but here in the
Temple. It Is not to listen at the Doors of the two Houses of Parliament, or to
Eves-drop the Council Chamger; but to wait in your proper Stations with
Modesty, and Patience, what Avisoes, and Commands are sent you from thence, and
to comply with them. Instead of thronging, and pestering the Galleries, and
Avenues of those places, where Matters of State are upon the Table; what a
blessed Appearance were it in times of Danger, such as this is, to see the
Church Doors always open, and the great Stream, and Shole of People
continually flowing thither; and to find some of you always upon the Floor
there, Weeping between the Porch, and the Altar, and saying, Spare thy People,
Oh Lord, and give not thy Heritage to Reproach. Thou have brought up a Vine out
of Egypt: Thou have cast out the Heathen, and planted it. Let not the Wild Boar
out of the Wood root it up, nor the Wild Beast of the Field devour it. Let thy
Hand be upon the Man of thy right Hand, whom thou have made so strong for thy
self. Keep him, as the Apple of thine Eye. Hide him under the shadow of thy
Wings. Let his Days be many, and his Reign prosperous; and under his shadow
let both Church and State long flourish: And let them be confounded, and driven
backward as many as have Evil Will at Sion.

To furnish out an Office for such daily Devotions, it is but to take your
Psalter along with you in your Hand, which is full of them. But especially let
me commend to you that Decad of Psalms, which begins with the livth. and so on:
which may seem to have been put together on purpose for such an Occasion. This
would be indeed effectually to transcribe holy David's Copy, in this his
Exemplary, and ardent Devotion: which is the second Duty required in the Text,
to prepare us for the protection of God's Wing. There is but one more behind;
and that is

(3) Constant Perseverance in both the former. In the two former you have seen
holy David putting himself under the shadow of God's Wings, and making good his
Refuge there by Acts of Faith, and Devotion. And being once there, no storm
shall beat him off, No Discouragement shall drive him away, No delay shall
weary him out. If God kills him, it is all one, he will trust in him still, and
die in his Arms: For here he has set up his Rest, and Donec transierint, he is
steddily resolved; his Refuge is, and shall be here, till these Calamities are
overpast.

But here we must take heed of a great Mistake. There are, that hold the Donec
in the Text too hard, and stiff; are too punctual, and precise with God in it:
who will trust in him, it may be, and ply their Devotions just so long, as till
the Calamity be past: But then on the sudden their Trust grows feeble, and
their Devotion cold, and heartless: No sooner delivered, but like old Israel,
they forget God at the Sea, even at the Red Sea; (...).
-- Use him like Themistocle's Plane-trees, under which men run for shelter in
a Storm, but the Shower once over, they pluck off the Branches, turn their
backs, and away.

Nay, but there is in Scripture Language an infinite and an interminable Donec,
which never expires. Matthew. i. ult.
He knew her not, till she brought forth; Nay he never knew her. In spite of
Helvidius (...), (as the Greek Church style her) A Virgin before, and in, and
after the Birth of our Lord, and for ever. Ay, that is the Virgin-Soul indeed,
that keeps ever close to her heavenly Spouse: Not only runs under his Wings for
Shelter, when Calamities affright her, saying, Spread thy Skirt over me, and
then straies away again as soon as ever the flattering Calm, and Sunshine of
Prosperity tempts her abroad. As our Lord has given us an everlasting Donec;
Lo I am with you, says he, till the End of the World: (Not that he will leave
us then, but take us yet nigher unto himself, and so we shall ever be with the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17.
as the Apostle speaks:) So must we also have One for him of the same Latitude,
and Extension. For ever under the Shadow of his Wings; till this single
Tyranny, as in the Old Translation; till these Calamities, as in the New; or as
the Hebrew implies, till all, and every of our Calamities be overpast; Both
before, and in, and after Calamities, still under the Shadow of God's Wings.
While they last, it is In the Shadow of thy Wings will I trust: and when they
are past, it is In the Shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice; that is all the
Difference. As the Scenes shift, our Devotion must improve, and advance too;
till our Prayer be heightened into Praise, (as I trust ere long it will be) our
Hope swallowed in Enjoyment, and our Trust sublimated, and made to flower up
into Joy, and riumph: When the same God, that raised David from the Cave to the
Throne, shall translate us also from the Shadow of his Wings into the Light of
his Countenance: To the Beatifical Vision whereof He of his Mercy bring us, who
has so dearly bought it for us, Jesus Christ the Righteous: To whom with thee,
O Father, and God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed of us, and all the Creatures in
Heaven, and Earth, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, both now, and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

