A VINDICATION OF THE ANSWER TO SOME Late Papers Concerning the UNITY and
AUTHORITY OF THE Catholic Church, AND THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chismell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

A VINDICATION of the ANSWER to Some late Papers, etc.
IT was so tempting a piece of Honor, to appear as the Champion of the Royal
Papers, that I rather wonder that no Def. p. 1.
more, than that these, have showed themselves to the World, under so inviting
a Character. Which seems to have betrayed them into more than usual security;
presuming, I suppose, that they are to be looked on, as a sort of Heralds in
Controversis, whose bearing the Royal Arms, will keep them from being touched
themselves, though they bid defiance to others. But where Truth lies at stake,
every one has a Right to put in for it; and whose Game soever any Person
plays, those ought to carry it who have the best Cards to show: I mean, that in
Debates of this Nature and Consequence, other considerations ought to be so far
laid aside, that the strongest Reason should prevail. But lest I be again
thought to have a mind to flourish before I offer to pass; Page 2.
as the Champion speaks in his proper Language; I shall apply my self to the
Matter before us. Only taking notice that I am now glad to enter the Lists upon
even Ground. For although I thought I behaved my self with due Respect and
Decency before, yet I perceive the Measure of those things is so nice and
arbitrary, that it is very hard to escape Censures, where the Distance is so
great. But those who live in the Country may mean and intend as well to their
Prince, as those who live at Court, though they do not make so fine Legs, nor
are of so pleasing an Address.

The plain truth is; Controversy is quite another thing from Courtship and
Poetry. It is like a Trial at Law, which ought to depend on Evidence and Proof,
though the King himself be concerned in it. And as we must give Honor to whom
Honor, so Truth to whom Truth is due: and this without Respect of Persons; it
being a Case long since decided, That Truth is greater than the King.

If I thought there were no such thing in the World as true Religion, and that
the Priests of all Religions are alike, I might have been as nimble a Convert,
and as early a Defender of the Royal Papers, as any one of these Champions. For
why should not one who believes no Religion, declare for any? But since I do
verily believe not only that there is such a thing as true Religion, but that
it is only to be found in the Books of Holy Scripture, I have Reason to enquire
after the best means of understanding the sense of those Books, and thereby, if
it may be, to put an end to the Controversies of Christendom.

This was the noble design of the two Royal Papers; which are written with far
greater strenght, and spirit, and closeness, than these which are published in
Defense of them. But notwithstanding all their fair appearance, I could not be
convinced by the Reason contained in them, (and much less by the Defense of
them) Which I endeavored to represent as far as I could judge, with Modesty
and Civility. But if I have offended in any thing against the strict Rules of
good Manners, I hope I may be the more easily forgiven, since their Casuists
allow involuntary faults to be in their own nature venial.

The Method proposed by the Paper for ending Controversies, was by finding out
a Principle for doing it, as visible as that the Scripture is in Print. This I
could no^ but extremely approve, as a very satisfactory method of proceeding;
and the Consequence I said would be, that all Men of sense would soon give over
disputing; for none who dare to believe what they see, can call that in
Question.

The Author of the R^ply says, I mistook the meaning of the words, which he
says was this, That what ever Motives render it visible that a Page ^.
Book in Print is Scripture, i. e. the Word of God, the same or other Motives
are as powerful to render this other truth as visible, that none can be that
Church, but that which is called the Roman Catholic Church.

The Desender says, The Church is more visible than Scripture, because the
Scripture is seen by the Church; for which he brings S. Augustine 's Des. p. 2,
3.
Authority. And if by saying that the Scripture is in Print, be understood a
tking out of Question; then he denies it to be visible that the Scripture, is
in Print; because many Men do call Scripture in question at this day; and to
question whether the Book in print be Scripture, is manifestly to question
whether Scripture be in print.

The Words of the Royal Paper are plain, but these Interpretations of them so
forced and unnatural, that there needs no other confutation of them, but to
compare their confused Comment with the Text. It is as visible, as that the
Scripture is in Print; that is, it is a thing evident to sense; for so it is
that the Book called the Scripture or the Bible is in Print. Now what is it
which is affirmed in the Paper to be thus evident? viz. this Proposition, That
none can be that one Church which Christ has here on Earth, but that which is
called the Roman Catholic Church. But if it be certain (as I doubt not to make
it appear) that what is called the Roman Catholic Church, is but a Part of
that One Church which Christ has here on Earth, then the plain result of this
Proposition must be, that it is a thing evident to sense that a Part is the
Whole. Now this looked so oddly, that these Gentlemen were resolved that this
should not be the sense of the plain words; and therefore have endeavored to
put another sense, (if it may be called so) upon them. And if their Church can
but interpret Scripture at this rate, we are in a hopeful way to have a speedy
and happy end of Controversies.

As to the Consequence I drew from hence, that if Controversies could be
determined by a Principle as visible as that Scripture is in Print, all Men of
sense would soon give over disputing, for none who dare believe what they see
would call that in question; One says, The sooner the hetter. So say I too,
upon Des. p. 2.
good grounds. But what would then become of the Noble Science of Controversy?
The other says, That Catholics and Protestants Rep. p. 2.
are both Men of sense, and yet they dispute about the Scripture which is in
Print. And what then? This is to show that the Scriptures being in Print is one
thing, and the Authority of the Scripture is another. The one is a common
object of sense in which all are agreed; the other is liable to many Disputes,
and therefore could not be meant in the Papers.

But they have a notable Cavil against Men's believing what they see, because
Faith is of things not seen. This Cavil had been as good Des. p. 3.
against our Blessed Savior, when he said to Thomas, because thou Rep. p. 3.
have seen, thou have believed. I hope upon second thoughts, they will not tell
him, that this was improperly spoken, and not like a Schoolman. Call it what
you will, the single Question is, Whether your Church will allow us to Judge of
things according to the plain Evidence of Sense? One says, It is impossible
that any Man should be commanded not to believe what he sees. Believing Rep. p.
^.
here is the Judgment of the Mind upon the Representation of Sense; and will he
secure us that the Church can never require us to judge otherwise than
according to the Evidence of Sense? I wish he would make his words good, for I
assure him he would remove a terrible block out of our way. My Senses plainly
tell me, what I see and feel and taste is as much Bread after Consecration as
it was before; how then comes it to pass that my Judgment that it was Bread
before, was very good; but although there be the very same Evidence afterward,
without the least alteration to Sense, yet then I am to judge just contrary, i.
e. that it is not Bread, which I see and feel and taste just as I did before?

But he says, what is seen is only the form, shape and sigure of Bread and
Wine, and that they believe to be there. But alas! This does not reach to the
point. For the Question is not about external appearances, but about the
Judgment of the Mind upon the Evidence of Sense. I will make this matter
plainer, that they may know where the Difficulty lies. When Christ's Body
appeared to the Disciples after his Resurrection, there was no dispute among
them concerning the form, shape and figure of his body, but the doubt was,
whether from these they were to conclude that it was Christ's real Body or not?
If not, they could not believe from the Evidence of Sense that Christ's Body
was risen from the dead; if they were, let them tell us how Christ's Body comes
to be so much changed and to lose those essential properties of a body which it
once had and was judged by; and farther, what ground there is for us now not to
allow that Judgment of Sense which Christ himself appealed to, after the
Institution of the Sacrament? For if Christ had therein declared that our
Senses are not to be our Rule of judging concerning his Body; he would
certainly not have appealed so soon after to the Senses of his Disciples
concerning that very Body; and neither he nor his Disciples have given the
least intimation, that what we see and feel to be one body, we must believe to
be quite another which we can neither see nor feel.

Did not two Angels appear to Lot in the figure and shapes of Men; and the Holy
Ghost descend in the form of a Dove? And were they who saw them, to believe
according to the Evidence of Sense? I answer, that there is a great deal of
difference to be made between Invisible Powers appearing under bodily shapes,
and a natural, visible, palpable extended body losing the Properties of a body
abd becoming invisible, impalpable and indivisible; And withal there is a great
difference, between Spiritual Powers uniting the real particles of Matter into
a Body, and the making the Form, Figure, and Shape of a real Body to be where
there is no substance of a body. We do not pretend to judge by our Senses of
Invisible Substances under outward appearances; but of the Truth of a bodily
Substance by all the Appearances of a body, under all the Circumstances
necessary for the right judgment of Sense.

The other says, he knows of no Church which allows not People to believe all
they see. May we then believe that to be still Bread Def. p. 3, 4.
which we see to be so? No, he says, the What of a thing is not the Object of
Sense. I perceive then our Senses are very impertinent things; and only give an
account of the Circumstances and not of the Substances of things. But I pray
did not the Disciples perceive the What of Christ's Body by their Senses? How
do we know the What of any bodily Substance but by them? It is mere Collusion
to say our Senses do not judge of Substances; for our bare Senses judge of
nothing, but are the means of conveying the impressions or Representations
inward, whereby our Minds do pa^s Judgment upon things. And either we cannot
know the Substance of any thing sensible, or we must know the What of it (as he
speaks,) by our Senses.

We now come to the main business; which for the clearer proceeding I shall put
under three distinct Heads.

I. Concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church. II. Concerning the Authority
of it. III. Concerning the Reformation of the Church of England.
I. Of the Unity of the Catholic Church.
ANd here the point to be discussed, is, viz. Whether that which is called the
Roman Catholic Church, be that one Church which Christ has here on Earth?

(1.) The first thing I objected against it was, that a Part cannot be the
Whole; but that which is called the Roman Catholic Church is but a Part; and
therefore it cannot be the One Catholic Church of Christ here on earth.

Here, to prevent cavilling, I must declare that I meant not the Roman Diocese
or Province, but all the Churches which live in Communion with and Subjection
to the Bishop of Rome as Head of the Church; and look on it as necessary to
Salvation so to do. And this I still assert to be but a Part of the Catholic
Church and a corrupt one too.

The Author of the Defense says, all this Riddle of Part and Page ^.
Whole comes from my Inadvertence. How so? Because I confound the Roman Diocese
with the Roman Catholic Church. No, I assure him I did take it in their own
sense, for all that embrace the matters of Faith which are received in the
Roman Communion. And He need not fear my doing otherwise; for I intend to
discourse of no other Church but this; and this I deny, as so taken, to be the
One Catholic Church. Does not Catholic signify all the Parts? I am sure it
ought to do so; but I say it does not, when Roman is joined to Catholic; for
then it excludes all those from being Parts of the Catholic Church, which do
not join in the Roman Communion; and this I say is unreasonable. And here I
expected some Proof in so material a Point; but there is not a Word farther,
than that Catholic comprehends all; but I say again, Roman Catholic excludes
all that are not in its Communion. As suppose any one should say the German
Ocean is the whole Sea; and to prove it, should reason as this Gentlemen does;
Ocean is the whole Sea, is it not? And is it the less the Ocean, because German
is added to it? No; the Ocean is just as large as ever it was; but the adding
German to it restrains the sense of Ocean to it within certain bounds; and
excludes many parts of the great Ocean, which are without those limits. Just so
it is in adding Roman to Catholic; Catholic alone comprehends all the Parts of
the Church, but Roman added to it confines the Sense of it to those who embrace
the Faith received in the Roman Communion; and this excludes all other Parts of
the Catholic Church: and so makes a Part to be the Whole.

(2.) I objected farther, that if this had been the Catholic Church meant in
the Creeds, this limitation ought to have been expressed in the Creeds, and put
to Persons to be baptized; which being never done in the Roman Church it self,
I thence inferred that it did not believe it self to be the one Catholic
Church, which we profess to believe in the Creeds.

Here the Author of the Reply answers, that Catholic and Roman Page 5.
Catholic were in the Language of Antiquity one and the same thing; and this
point being never called in Question in the time when the Creeds were
published, there was no occasion to put Roman into the Creeds; no more than of
putting in Consubstantial with the Father till it was denied.

This were a substantial way of answering the Difficulty, if it would in any
measure hold. But I shall now prove just the Contrary to have been the Sense of
Authority by plain and undeniable Instances in matters of fact, in most of the
Ages of the Christian Church; from the very next to the Apostolical, down to
the Council of Trent. To which I shall only premise this, which I think no
Roman Catholic will deny me, viz. that the Roman Catholic Church does imply
Obedience to the Bishop of Rome as Supreme visible Head of the Church under
Christ. For Bellarmin and others, make not only Faith and Sacraments De Eccl^s
l. 3. c. 2.
necessary to the Being of the Church, but submission to l^wful Pastors, and
especially to the Pope as Christ's only Vicar upon Earth; and he places the
Essential Unity of the Catholic Church Ibid. c. 5.
in the Conjunction of the members, under Christ and h^s Vicar, as Head of the
Church. And from hence he excludes Schismatics out of the Catholic Church,
though they have Unity of Faith and Sacraments and Hope and Spirit. And the
Roman Catechism makes Catech. Romans Part. 1. c, 10. ^. 10.
Union with the Pope as visible Head of the Church necessary to the Unity of
the Catholi^ Church.

And the Proofs I bring shall not be from short or doubtful sentences, but from
remarkable passages and notorious Acts of the Church.

In the First Age of the Church the name Catholic was as little known, as the
Authority of the Roman Church; it not being once found in the Apostolical
Writings; for the Inscriptions of the Catholic Epistles are of latter times.
And if they were allowed to be Apostolical, they would be far from proving any
thing to this purpose, since the Roman Church is never mentioned in these
Epistles, unless under the name of Babylon; and I suppose they would not like
the Title of the Catholic Babylonish Church. But in all the directions of the
Apostles concerning Unity of Faith, there is not one which gives the least
intimation, that the Roman Church in any sense was to be the Rule or Standard
of Faith or Communion.

In the Second Age we find two remarkable Instances that the Communion of the
Catholic Church was not to be taken from Conjunction with the Bishop of Rome as
Head of it.

The first is from the Bishop of Rome's approving the Prophecies of Montanus,
Prisca and Maximilla. This would hardly appear credible, if Tertullian had not
expressly affirmed it; and he farther says that had it not been for Praxeas a
Heretic, he had taken them into the Tertul. c. Pra^^am c. 1.
Communion of the Catholic Church; and he prevailed with him to revoke his
communicatory Letters already past. What a Case had the Catholic Church been in
at this time, if the Bishop of Rome had been looked on as the Center of
Catholic Communion, and if he had not been better informed by Praxeas a
Heretic?

The second in the same Age is when Victor took upon him to excommunicate the
Eastern Bishops for not celebrating Easter at the same time they did at Rome.
If now the Eastern Bishops did own the Roman-Catholic and Catholic Church to be
the same, they must show it at such a time by their regard to the Pope's
sentence as Head of the Catholic Church: but they owned no such Authority he
had over them; and instead of it Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, with a Council
of No^a Collect. Council. Bal^^. p. 10.
Bishops joining with him about A. D. 197 wrote a smart Epistle to Victor,
wherein they let him know they would go on in their way, notwithstanding his
threats, and that it was better to obey God than Man. From whence it is
observable, That they followed their own judgment against the Pope's; and that
they believed the Pope required things of them so contrary to the Will of God,
that they resolved to disobey him. And his requiring their compliance was no
Argument of his Authority, but of his Us^rpation.

In the Third Age happened a famous contest between Stephen Bishop of Rome, and
the Eastern and African Bishops, about Re-baptizing Heretics. I meddle not now
with the Controversy it self, but with the Sense of those Bishops upon
occasion of it as to the Roman-Catholic Church. The Bishop of Rome did at least
threaten to Excommunicate the African Bishops. And if Firmilian may be
believed, he did actually Excommunicate the Asian Bishops How did these
Primitive Bishops behave themselves under this Sentence? They charge Stephen
with Insolence, Folly, Contempt of his Brethren, and breaking the Peace of the
Catholic V. Epist. Cypri. ep. 74, 75.
Church; and cutting himself off from the Unity of it. The words are,
abscindere se a Charitatis unitate, and alienum se per omnia fratribus facere.
Now I desire to know, whether these Bishops believed the necessary conjunction
of Roman and Catholic together? And whether Bishop of Rome were thought to be
the Center of Communion in the Catholic Church? It is plain, they made him the
Cause of the Schism, and thought themselves never the less in the Catholic
Church for being out of the Roman Communion.

In the Fourth Age the Government and Subordination of the Catholic Church was
established in the Council of Nice according to ancient Custom; but we read not
a word of the Roman Catholic Church there; or any Privilege or Authority the
Bishop of Rome had, but within his own Province, and such as the Bishops of
Antioch and Alexandria had in theirs. And when the Bishop of Rome in that Age
interposed to restore some Bishops cast out of Communion by the Eastern
Bishops, they declared against it as a violation of the Rules of the Catholic
Church; and this became the Occasion of the first Breach between the Eastern
and Western Churches. In the same Age Liberius, Bishop of Rome, joined with the
Eastern Bishops in casting Athanasius out of the Catholic Church, and
subscribed the Arian Confession of Faith; as both Hilary and S Jerome witness;
and it appears from his Seventh Epistle, and the old Lesson in the Roman
Breviary, 19 Kal. Sept. which has been since expunged for telling Tales

In the Fifth Age happened a greater breach ^etween the Bishops of Rome and the
Eastern Churches For Acacius the Bishop of Constantinople, not complying with
what the Bishops of Rome desired from him, was solemnly excommunicated by Fe^^
III. But notwithstanding this, the Emperor and Eastern bishops continued still
in his Communion; and they complained that the proceedings against him were
against the Rules of the Church, and savoured of great Pride, as appears by the
Epistles of Gel^sius, who succeeded Felix. And upon this a notorious Sc^^
happened, Epist. 4. 8.
which the Eastern Churches charged the Church of Rome with; and believed
themselves to be still in the Communion o^ the Catholic Church.

In the Sixth Age Vigilius Bishop of Rome gives an undeniable evidence of the
difference between Communion with the Catholic Church and with the Bishop of
Rome. When he went to Constantinople, upon Iustinian's Summons, about the three
Chapters, not only Fa^^. l. 4. c. 3.
the Church of Rome, but that of Africa, Sardinia, Istria, I^^yricum and
others, earnestly entreated him not to consent to the condemning them;
accordingly when he came to Constantinople he was so warm and zealous in the
Cause, that he forthwith excommunicates the Patriarch and his adherents; among
whom the Empress her self was one: But soon after he was so much mollified,
that he not only took off his Sentence, but privately agreed with the Emperor
to condemn the Three Chapters. Which was discovered to the Western Churches by
Rusticus and Sebasti^nus, who were then with him: Whereupon they cried out upon
him for prevaricating and betraying the Council of Chalcedon; and the African
Bishops not only condemned his Judgment, but excommunicated him and all that
consented to it; and so did the (...). (...). Po^^ Co^^. Ba^il X.
Bishops of Illyricum. Which Schism continued many years, as appears by the
Epistles of Pelagius II. and Gregory. Vigilius finding how the matter was
resented in the Western Churches, yields to a General Council; which the
Emperor Summoned at Constantinople; in the mean time he publishes an Edict
against the Three Chapters. Vigilius to recover his Credit with the Western
Bishops, denounces Excommunication against those that yielded to it; but the
Greeks despised his Censure, and immediately went to celebrate Divine Offices.
When the Council sat he refused to come; which they regarded not, but went on
and condemned the Three Chapters without him; but when the Council was ended he
complied with it; as now appears from the Authentic Acts lately published. Nova
Collect. Council. p. 1551.


Let any Man now judge, whether Communion with the Bishop of Rome were then
looked on a^ a necessary condition of being in the Catholic Church, either by
the Eastern or Western Churches.

In the Seventh Age there is a necessity to make a Distinction between the
Communion with the Bishop of Rome, and with the Catholic Church; because
Honorius then Bishop of Rome is condemned by the Sixth General Council, for
contradicting the Apostolical Doctrine, and the Definitions of Councils, and
for following the false Doctrines of Heretics. And the same Judgment is
confirmed by the Seventh and Eighth Councils, which are received for General in
the Church of Rome. And Leo I^. in his Epistle to the Emperor, wherein he
confirms the Sixth Council, expressly Anathematizes his Predecessor Honorius for
no less tha^ betraying the Catholic Faith. And in the Profession of Faith made
by every new Bishop of Rome (extant in the Diurnus) Honorius is Anathematized
by name. Was it then the Roman Catholic Church which joined in Communion with
Honorius?

In the Eighth Age the Bishop of Rome approved the Second Council of Nice; but
notwithstanding the Western Churches stiffly opposed it, as contrary to Faith;
which they could not have done, if at that time the Pope had been looked on as
the Head and Center of Catholic Communion.

In the Ninth Age happened the great breach between the two Patriarchs of Rome
and Constantinople, which in consequence engaged the Eastern and Western
Churches against each other. And although the restoring of Photius after the
death of Ignatius seemed to put an end to it; yet the difference increased
chie^ly upon two points, that of Jurisdiction and the Addition to the Creed,
made by the Western Church, which the Council under Photius did Anathematize;
and the whole Greek Church, with the Four Patriarchs, joined in it; as arguing
Imperfection in the Creed and the Tradition of their Forefathers. And upon
these two Points this Schism began; although Photius did charge the Latin
Church with other things; which made Nicolaus I. to employ the best Pens they
had to defend the Latins against the Greeks. One of which was Ratramnus lately
^ublished; who lived at that time; and Ratra^^. c. Graec. ap^d (...). Spicil.
To. 2. p. 3, 24, 27, 29, 53, 54, 60, 61, 62.
it is observable in him, That he supposes both to be still Parts of the
Catholic Church; and he often distinguishes the Latin Church or the whole Roman
Communion, from the Catholic Church; which he says, was extended from the East
to the West, from the North to the South.

In the Eleventh Age this Schism brake forth with greater violence, in the time
of Leo IX. and Michael Cerularius Patriarch of Constantinople. To the former
occasions of difference, a new one was added, never mentioned in Photius his
time, viz. the use of unleavened Bread in the Sacrament, by the Latin Church.
Of this, with other things, Michael Cerularius complained; the Pope sends Three
Nuntio's to Constantinople, who behaved themselves rudely and insolently
toward the Patriarch; as he shows in his Epistles to the Patriarch of Antioch,
published lately by Co^elerius; there he declares he would not treat with them
about Religion without Monument a Graec. To. 2. p. 138. n. 6. p. 164. n. 3, 4,
5.
the other Patriarchs; upon which they pronounced them obstinate, and proceeded
to Excommunicate the whole Greek Church for not complying with them. And the
Patriarch returned the kindness and Anathematized them. The Form of the
Anathema against the Greeks is printed with Humbertus; and the short of Ca^is.
A^tiq. Lect. To. 6. p. 197.
it is, whosoever contradicts the Roman See is to be excluded Catholic
Communion, and be made Anathema Maranatha.

This was plain dealing; but it was the Eleventh Age before things came to this
height. And yet in that very Anathema one of the Reasons assigned, was because
the Greeks like the Donatists con^^ned the Catholic Church to themselves. Page
196.


In the Thirteenth Age Innocent III. writes to the Greek Emperor Innocent.
III. Ep. l. 1. 353.
to bring the Greeks back to the Unity of the Church; the Patriarch of
Constantinople writes back again to know what he meant by it, and how he could
call the Roman Church, the One Catholic Lib. 2. 208.
Church, since Christians made but one Flock under their several Pastors,
Christ himself being Head over all. The Pope answers, The Church is called
Catholic two ways. 1. As it consists of all Ep. 209.
particular Churches, and so he grants the Roman Church is not the Catholic
Church, but a part of it, though the chief. 2. As it holds under it all
particular Churches; and so, he says, The Roman Church only is the Catholic
Church. And so he makes owning the Roman Church to be Mother and Mistress of
all Churches, as he there says, to be a necessary condition of Catholic
Communion. And thus it becomes the Roman Catholic Church. But this was a very
new notion of the Catholic Church, which in the Fathers of the Church was taken
in one of these two Senses.

1. With Respect to Faith; and so Catholic was the same with Sound and of a
right Faith, in opposition to the notorious Heresies of the First Ages. So it
was used by Ig^^tius, against the Heresies of that time, which denied Jesus to
be Christ; therefore, says he, Wherever Christ Jesus is, there is the (...).
c^ (...). p. ^.
Catholic Church. After him Polycarp is called by the Church of Sm^rna, Bishop
of the Catholic Church in Smyrna. So the Council of Antioch speaking of the
deposition of Pa^lus (...). l. 4. c. 14. L. 7. c. 24.
Samosatenus say, They must set another Bishop over the Catholic Church there.
^lemens Alexandrinus says, The Catholic Church is ancienter than Heresies;
that it has the Unity St^^. l. 7. p. 764, (...), 7^^5. (...). E^^. 1.
of the Faith, and subsists only in the Truth. Pacianus observes, That in those
Ages the Heretics went by other Names, but the sound Christians were known by
the Name of Catholics, which had been of very ancient us^ in the Church, though
not found in Scripture; as Fulgenti^s likewise observes. But Lactantius
Fulg^^t. Op. p. 6^. Lactant. In it. l. 4. c. ^lt. Sola (...) Catholi^ (...) qu^
^erum Cult^^ (...).
takes notice that the Heretics had gotten the trick of using that Name; and
then his Rule is to discern the true Catholic Church by the true Religion. For
he not only says before, That the Catholic Church is to be known by the true
Worship of God; but when he comes to lay down the Notes of the true Church, the
first of them is Religion. So I find in an old Lactantius, printed at Rome, A.
D. 1470. but, for what Reason I know not, it is le^t out in the latte^^
Editions. In the Conference between the Donatists and the Catholic Bishops,
both sides challenged the name of Catholics (...). Concii. p. 286.
to themselves; and the Roman Judge determined, It should belong to them who
were found to have Truth on their side. Pope Innocent III. in a Council at Rome
declares, That all the Churches in the World are called one from the Unity of
the Catholic Faith. And in the Canon before, he mentions Supplem. Council. Gall.
p. 14. Can. 6.
the Roman Church as distinct from the Catholic, but comprehended under it
while it adheres to the Catholic Faith. Which was not then understood to be
what the Roman Church declares to be so; but what was universally received in
the Church from the Apostles times, and was delivered in the Creeds to the
Persons to be admitted by Baptism into the Catholic Church.

2. With respect to Persons and Places. And so Catholic was first taken in
opposition to the Jewish Confinement of Salvation to themselves; and of Gods
appointed Worship to one Temple. So Ignatius faith, The church is one Body,
made up of Jews and Gentiles. Epist. ad Smyrn.
And the Church of Smyrna writes to all the Members of the Catholic Church in
all places: and the Council of Antioch writes Eus^b. l. 4. c. 14. l. 7. c. ^4.
Cyril^. Catech. 18. p. 220. (...). ^o. 2. p. ^^2. (...). in 1 Cor. 12. 27.
to the whole Catholic Church under Heaven. S. Cyril says, The Church is
called Catholic from its Universal spreading and teaching the whole Doctrine of
Christ to all sorts of Persons. Athanasius says, It is called Catholic,
because it is dispersed over the World. Theophylact says, The Catholic Church
is a Body made up of all ^hurches, whereof Christ is the Head. And the African
Bishops from the first beginning of the Dispute with the Donatists laid great
weight upon this, That the Catholic Church was to be taken in its largest
Extent; or else the Promises could not be fulfilled; as may be seen in Optatus,
who says, The Church is called Catholic, not only from its having the true
Opt. c. Par. l. 2. C^m inde dicta sit Catholica, quod sit rationabilis and
abique dissusa.
Faith, but from its being every where dispersed. And S. Augustine has written
whole Books to prove it. In the Conference with the Donatists, the Catholic
Bishops, and especially S. Augustine, plead, that they are called Catholics
because they hold communion with the whole World of Christians; and not with
th^se only of a particular Title or Denomination. Bal^z. Coll. Council. p. 287,
288.
For therein they made the Nos universo orbi Christiano communione cohaeremus.
n. 100.
Schism of the Donatists consist; not barely in a causeless Separation; but Et
appellantur and merito sunt Catholici ipsa sua communione no^^en testantes.
Catholon enim secundun tot^^m dicitur. Qui autem a toto s^paratus est, partem
^ue defendit ab uniniverso praecisam, non sibi u^^rpet hoc nomen, sed nobiscum
teneat veritatem. n. 101.
in confining the Catholic Church to themselves, who at best were but a Part of
it. And because the notion which Innocent III. gives, is liable to the same
charge, it cannot be excused from the same guilt.

Thus we have found the Author of this Notion of the Roman Catholic Church,
viz. for such as own the Supremacy of the Church of Rome, as he explains it
more fully in the same Epistle.

But yet this Notion of the Catholic Church was not Uniniversally received
after Innocent III. For in the Fifteenth Age, in the Council of Florence,
Cardinal Bessarion disputing with the Greeks about the Authority of the Roman
Church, Council. Florent. Sess. 9.
in making an Addition to the Creed, says, That how great soever the Power of
the Roman Church be, he grants it is less than that of a General Council, or
the Catholic Church. From whence it follows, that the Notion of the Catholic
Church cannot be taken from owning the Roman Church to be Mistress of all
Churches; for then the Catholic Church is bound to submit to the Decrees of the
Roman Church about Matters of Faith.

In the beginning of the same Age the Council of ^onstance met, and in the
Fourth Session declared, That a General ouncil represents the Catholic Church,
and has its Power immediately from Christ; and that in matters of Faith, Unity
of the church, and Reformation, all Persons, even Popes themselves are bound to
submit to it. And truly it was but necessary for them to take off from the
Popes Authority in matters of Faith, since they charge Ioh. XXIII. with no less
than frequent and pertinacious denying the Immortality of the Soul. Was not
this Man fit to be an Council Constant. Sess. 11. Council. Genesis To. 12. p. 87. De
Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 14.
Infallible Head of the Catholic Church, and the true Center of Christian
Communion? Bellarmin says, this Article was not proved, but only commonly
believed, because of the dissoluteness of his Life. But this is but a poor
defense; since this Article stands upon Record against him in all the Editions
of the Council of Constance; which I have compared; even that at Rome, said to
be collated with Manuscripts. And why should so scandalous an Article be
suffered to stand, unless there were such a consent of Copies that it could not
for shame be removed?

The Doctrine of the Council of Constance was confirmed by the Council of
Basil, and is to this day maintained by the Clergy of France, as appears by
their Declaration made A. D. 1682. From whence it follows, that the Church is
not called Catholic from relation to the Roman Church; but to the whole Body of
Christians: and that the Unity of it, is not to be taken from the respect it
bears to an external Visible Head which may sail, but to Christ as the
essential Head of the Church. This is the express Doctrine of the Cardinal de
Alliaco, Ioh. Major, Almain, Gerson and many others; and follows from the
Decree of the Council of Constance.

Thus I have briefly deduced the Sense of the Christian Church in this matter
from the Apostolical times; and that not merely from the sayings of particular
Men; but from public, solemn, and undoubted Acts of the Church. Which I have
the rather done, because the Defender says, we have no Antiquity on our sido
in this ^ause, but as much as since Luther. Des. p. 23.
I think I have produced a little more, and too much for him to Answer.

It is time now to consider what proof the Replier brings, that Catholic and
Roman-Catholic in the Sense of Antiquity were one and the same thing.

He produces the Testimonies of Tertullian and Cyprian, wherein the Church of
Rome is called the Catholic Church. Who Page 6.
doubts that in those days there was a Catholic Church at Rome? For every
particular Church which agreed in the Catholic Faith was then called the
Catholic Church of such a place. And innumerable Instances of this kind may be
gathered out of Antiquity; both as to the City of Rome, and other Cities as
well as that; and surely they were not all Catholic Churches in his Sense; when
he agrees there is but One Catholic Church; nay more, even Parochial Churches
were called Catholic, as he may find in ^otelerius. Not. in Mo^^. Gra^. To. ^.
p. 601.


S Ambrose's Testimony signifies no more, than that Satyrus coming into a Place
suspected for the Luciferian Schism, asked if the Bishop joined with the
Catholic Bishops, i. e. with the Roman Church. Which is no more than whether he
agreed with his own Church; for Satyrus was a Roman born. But this would prove
any other Church to be the One Catholic Church altogether as well as the Roman.

The Patriarch of Constantinople writes to Hormisda, that he would not
hereafter recite in the Diptychs the Names of those who were excommunicated by
the Apostolical See. And what follows? But he says, They were severed from the
Communion of the Catholic Church. And so were those excommunicated by the
Patriarch of Constantinople. But the words are, who do not in all things
consent with the Sea Apostolic; but the plain meaning is, of those who were
cast out of Communion, for the words are too, Sequestrates a Communione
Ecclesiae Catholicae. And does this prove the Roman Church to have any more
relation to the Catholic, than the Church of the meanest Bishop in the Catholic
Church?

As to the calling of Catholics Romanists by the Gothic Arians; that relates to
the Roman Empire, and not to the Roman Church.

And now let any impartial Reader judge whether the sense of Antiquity be not
admirably cleared by these passages, as to the making out Roman and Catholic to
be the same. But to proceed.

(3.) I said farther, that if the Roman Church believed it self to be the
Catholic Church, it must void the Baptism of those who are out of its
Communion; but since Baptism does enter persons into the Catholic Church, by
its own Confession, the Catholic Church which is owned in the Creeds, must be
of larger Extent than the Roman.

In Answer to this, they both tell me this point Reply p. 8. Defense p. 7.
has been overruled long ago by the Catholic Church; the Baptism of Heretics
being allowed to be good. But since it is granted, that Baptism does enter
Persons into that Catholic Church we believe in the Creeds, does it not
evidently follow, that the Catholic Church in the Creeds is larger than the
Roman Communion? For it takes in those which the other does not. Does not the
Catholic Church take in all that are admitted into the Catholic Church? but
many more by their own Confession are admitted into it than are of the Roman
Communion, and therefore it unavoidably follows, that the Roman Catholic
Church cannot be the Catholic Church believed in the two Creeds.

And although according to S. Augustine, the validity of Baptism depends on the
right form of words and not the good Disposition of him that administers; yet
Baptism where it is valid must have its due Effect, which is entering Persons
into the Catholic Church.

But say they, Does not Heresy, etc. cast them out of the Catholic Church?
Suppose it does, yet if Heresy do cast them out, they were in the Church till
they were cast out of it. Their being allowed to be in it does my business; let
them prove them cast out by Heresy when they please. But the Defender says, I
suppose what I should prove, and then Page 8.
prove it by means of that supposition.

Here I am to seek; for do I not prove from their own Supposition and not from
mine, that Baptism does enter persons into the Catholic Church? and therefore
from thence I prove, that themselves cannot believe the Catholic and Roman
Church to be all one; since they allow many multitudes to be entered into the
Catholic Church, which they deny to be of the Roman Church.

Yet he goes on, that such persons are not truly Members Page 9.
either of the Catholic or Roman-^atholic Church. No? then Baptism does not
admit Persons into the Catholic Church. Which is very new Doctrine, and fit
only for new Converts, and is directly contrary to the Roman Catechism, which
says, Baptism is the Gate by which we Catech. Romans Part 1. c. 10. n. 20.
enter into the Church. They were so far ^embers, says he, as Baptism could
make them. And that I hope was to make them Members of Christ's Body; or else
what becomes of the Council of Trent, which so expressly asserts, and that with
an Anathema, the Validity and Efficacy of the Sacraments in general? and of
Baptism in particul^^? And Se^^. 7. Can. 7, 8, 9.
there is a special Anathema against those who say that Children baptized are
not to be reckoned inter fideles, and I hope De Bapt. Can. 13.
those are Members of the Catholic Church. Is there Remission of sins,
Communion with the Holy Spirit granted out of the Catholic Church? yet these
are the Effects of Baptism, owned by all Persons in the Church of Rome; or else
they cannot themselves be of the Roman Communion. What is it then I pray to be
as much Members of the Church as Baptism could make them? What can make them
more Members than Baptism does? According to their own Doctrine. But they are
as far off the Roman Church as they are off the Catholic. Say you so? then no
more is requisite Page 10.
to make a Man a Member of the Roman church, than is necessary to his Baptism.
This great News, a^^ would be very welcome to the Christian World. I have h^^rd
of many Projects of Accommodation; but none seem to be like this. For then no
more is necessary to make us Members of the Roman Church than of the Catholic,
i. e. owning the Creed and our Baptismal Vow. Nay, hold there, says he, the
Profession of the Catholic Faith is necessary to make one a true Member of the
Roman-Catholic Church. This is the meaning of a whole Page, or else it has
none: Suppose this to be true; and it proves what I intend. For either this
Catholic Faith is the same which was required to Page ^.
Baptism, or not. If the same, then no more is required than owning the Creeds,
to make a Member of the Roman-Catholic Church; if not the same, then those who
are Members of the Catholic Church by Baptism, are not Members of the Roman
Catholic till a farther Profession of the Roman Faith; and consequently the
Catholic Church and the Roman-Catholic are not the same, since those may be
Members of the Catholic Church, who are not of the Roman-Catholic. Can any
thing be plainer?

And the Replier is so much a Gentleman, to own the Truth of it. For these are
his words, that Baptism enters Reply p. 8.
persons into the Catholic Church, who though they be out of the Communion of
the Roman Church, yet having the true form of Baptism are Members of the
Catholic Church. Therefore the Catholic Church and Roman-Catholic cannot be
the same. Which was all I intended to prove.

But he says, that as Baptism enters them into the Catholic Church, so
Heresy, Apostasy, or Infidelity casts them out; or else the old Heretics,
which he reckons up, were still Members of the Catholic Church. I answer, that
my Argument was not concerning the old Heretics, who rejected any Article of
the ^reed, which was delivered at Baptism, and the owning of it required in
order to it; but concerning the Roman-Catholic Church, which makes the owning
New Articles of Faith necessary in order to its Communion; and if this Church
reject any from its Communion who do own the Articles of the Creeds, it follows
from thence, that it is not the Catholic Church into which Persons are admitted
by Baptism.

But no Man if an Heretic, though baptized, can remain in the Church. If he be
convicted of renouncing the Creed, Page 9.
upon the owning whereof he was received to Baptism, he casts himself out of
the Church; for he does not stand to his Promise. If you mean that any thing
which the Roman-Catholic Church declares to be Heresy, casts a Man out of the
Catholic Church, I do utterly deny it, and I see no Reason brought to prove it.

(4.) I argued, that in a divided State of the Church there may be different
Communions, and yet both may remain Parts of the Catholic Church; for which I
instanced in the Excommunications of old about keeping Easter, and the
Differences between the Eastern and Western Churches; but to appropriate the
title of the One Catholic Church to any one of the divided Parties, so as to
exclude the rest, was to charge that Party with the Schism, as in the case of
the Novatians and Donatists; and consequently, to apply the One Catholic Church
to the Roman, was to make it guilty of the present Schism in the Christian
World.

Both the Defender and Replier behave themselves in their Answers to this, as
if they did not understand what I aimed at; and therefore run out into things
by the bye, as if they thought there were no difference between saying
something to a Book, and giving an Answer to it. What I can pick up, which
seems material, I will set down distinctly.

The Replier takes notice that I said, that before the Unhappy Divisions of the
Christian Church it had been no difficulty to have showed that one visible
Church which Christ had here upon Earth; to which he answers, that there were
Divisions in the Apostles Page 9, 10.
times, and the same Means which were then used to preserve the Unity of the
Catholic Church, did equally serve for after Ages and continue to this day, and
so the Unity of the Catholic Church is still as visible as ever it was. This in
few words I take to be the force of what he says. But certainly there was a
time when the Unity of the ^atholic church was a little more discernable than
now it is. Does not the Scripture tell us, the Multitude was of one heart and
one Soul? Are all Christians so at this day? I grant afterward there were
Schisms and Heresies in the Apostolical Churches. But the Apostles had an
Infallible Spirit, which they manifested by the Power of Miracles going along
with it, by which means the Heresies were laid open and the Schisms stopped.
But what were those Heresies? Such as contradicted the Articles of the Creed,
as about the Truth of Christ's Incarnation, and the Resurrection of the Dead
etc. and therefore the Apostles by the Assistance of that Infallible Spirit did
write Epistles to the Churches, to declare that which was to be the standing
Faith of all Ages; and by an unquestionable Tradition (in the Church of Rome)
they summed up these Fundamental Points of Faith in that which is therefore
called the Apostles Creed. This was therefore the Standard whereby to judge of
Faith and Heresy; and by this, they proceeded in the Ages succeeding the
Apostles. Afterward, some did not bare faced contradict the Articles of the
Creed, but broached such Doctrines as did by consequence overthrow them; as the
Arians by making a Creature God, the Nestorians and E^tychians denying in
effect the Truth of Christ's Incarnation; against these the General Councils
assembled and the Eastern and Western Churches joined in condemning them; not
from their own Authority as Supreme or Infallible Judges; but as the most
Authentic Witnesses of the true Apostolical Doctrine. And thus the Creed was
enlarged by general Consent through the whole Catholic Church, and that which
was called the Nicene Creed was made the standard of Catholic Communion.

But to prevent any Mischief by overcharging the Creed, the General Council of
Ephesus did absolutely forbid any farther additions Council Ephesians. Part 2. Act.
6. Chalcedon. Act. 5.
to be made to it, and the Council of Chalcedon ratified that prohibition. All
that they pretended to, was only to give the true Sense of the Articles therein
received about the Incarnation of Christ, and the same was declared by the
fifth and sixth General Councils; whereof the one was to clear the Council of
Chalcedon from favoring Nestorianism, and the other to show that the Humane
Nature in Christ was perfect, as to the Affections of the Soul as well as the
Body.

But after this, a mighty Breach happened between the Eastern and Western
Churches; and setting aside the different Customs in both (which might easily
have been composed) there were two things, which made this breach
irreconcilable.

1. The Western Churches taking upon them to make a New Addition to the Creed;
as to the Spirit's proceeding from the Son; without asking the Consent of the
Eastern Churches.

2. The Bishop of Rome's assuming to himself an Authority of Headship over the
Catholic Church. They did not deny him a Primacy of Order, as he had the first
Patriarchal See; but when he took upon him to exercise Jurisdiction in the
other Patriarchates as well as his own, and sent Legates for that purpose, they
rejected his Authority, and so the Breach continued.

But the Defender says, the Popes Supremacy, if his Memory fail him not, was
not so much as made a pretense till near 200 years after Des. p. 14.
the Schism began, nor any where more acknowledged than in Greece, nor by any
body more than by him that began the Schism. If his Memory fail him not, I am
sure, something else does. For nothing can be more notorious from the very
Epistles of the Popes on Occasion of this Schism, than that this was at the
bottom of all; whatever pretenses might be made use of sometimes to palliate
the matter. Let him but read the Epistles of Leo I. to Anatolius and concerning
him; the Epistles of Gregory I. about the title of Ecumenical Patriarch; the
Epistles of Nicolaus I. concerning Photius; of Leo IX. concerning Michael
Cerularius, and I think he will be of another Opinion; and that the
Controversy about Supremacy, to the Scandal of the Christian World, was the
true occasion of that dreadful Schism. But all the Eastern Churches I said
however different among themselves to this day, look on the Pope's Supremacy as
an Innovation to the Church.

To which the Replier says, the Eastern Churches were divided from the
Roman-Catholic Church by such Doctrines as are inconsistent with the Page 15.
Church of England which professes to hold with the four first General Councils.

I will not deny but the breach as to the Nestorians began on the account of
the Council of Ephesus; but whether the Christians under the Turk and Persians
in Asia are truly Nestorians is another Question: I think not, for this
Reason. In the beginning of this Century, the Patriarch of those Christians
called his most learned Men about him to consider what their Doctrine really
was, and how far they differed from the Roman Church about Christ; since the
Missionaries from thence, still charged them with Heresy: and they declared
the difference to be only in Words and the manner of explication. For however
they say that every Nature has a Person inseparable from it (by which they
mean no more than a Subsistence) yet from the Union of these two in Christ,
they hold that there is but one Persona they c^ll it, or One Son resulting from
the Union of both Natures. And as long as they hold a real Union of both
Natures and one Filiation (as they speak) resulting from it, it is beyond my
understanding that they should be guilty of the Nestorian Heresy. And this
account was given to Paul 5. by one sent from their Patriarch, and ordered to
be Printed by him at Rome. But is it not really a very hard Case for 300000
Families, (...).
who as is there said were under that Patriarch, to be excluded the Catholic
Church, and consequently from Salvation, for not right understanding the
Subtilties of the distinction between Nature and Person; as, whether
Subsistence can be separated from Individual Nature; or whether an Hypostatical
Union does imply that the Individual Nature does lose its own Subsistence? I
appeal to the Conscience of any good Christian, whether he thinks Christ and
his Apostles did ever make the knowledge of these things necessary to
Salvation; which the subtilest of their Schoolmen are never able to explain to
the capacities of the sar greatest part of Mankind.

The like may be said, as to those called Eutychians, I do not doubt but the
Confusion of both Natures in Christ was a Doctrine justly condemned by the
Council of Chalcedon, because he could not be true Man, if the Nature of Man
were lost in him; but I think there is no Reason to condemn those for that
Heresy, who declare they reject the Doctrine of Eutyches, and that they hold
two Natures in Christ making up one Personated Nature without mixture or
Confusion, as their Patriarch explained their Doctrine to Leonardus Abel Bishop
of Sidon, when Gregrory 13. sent his Nuncio into those parts, on purpose to
understand A^^^ Thom. a ^esa. l. 7. c. 14.
their Doctrines. And the latter Missionaries confirm the same thing; that they
do not deny two Natures in Christ, but say that two Natures are as parts making
up by their Union Philipp. a SS. Trinit. Itiner. Orient. l. 5. c. 5. (...).
Hist. S^^iet. Jesu. l. 6. 12. 123.
one Nature with a Person. And herein they say, Dioscorus, whom they follow,
differed from Eutyches. And must such infinite Numbers of this persuasion in
the Eastern and Western parts be excluded from the Catholic Church for not
knowing the difference between a Person resulting from the Union, of two
Natures; and one Nature without a Person arising from two Natures without
mixture or Confusion? A late Writer of the Roman Voyage du Mont. Li^an (...)
Da^dini Remarques s^r Chap. 2^. p. 383.
Communion is so ingenuous to acknowledge that the Heresies charged on the
Eastern Churches are imaginary and that they differ only in terms, from that
which is owned to be the Catholic Faith.

And Faustus Naironus has lately published a Book at Rome Diss^rt. de Origin,
Nomine and Religion? Ma^o^itar^m.
to prove that the Maronites have been all along good Catholics; although the
Popes in their Bulls from the time of Innocent III. have still charged them
with Heresy.

As to the Greeks, there is yet less Reason to charge them with Heresy; since
they adhere to the Four General Councils; and out of Zeal for the Decree of the
Council of Ephesus, will not allow the Addition which the Western Church made
to the Creed.

So that upon the whole matter, there is nothing to exclude the Eastern
Churches from being Parts of the Catholic Church, but denying the Popes
Supremacy.

But he tells us, some of these (if his Authors deceive him not) as the
Egyptians and Ethiopians have often made Overtures to the Pope for Page 15.
Peace and Communion, owning him for Supreme Head of the Church, provided only
they might not be obliged to renounce Eutyches and Dioscorus. I am extremely
afraid his Authors have deceived him, I wish he had named them that others
might beware of them. I suppose he means that which Baronius printed at the end
of his sixth Tome, of a solemn Embassy from the Patriarch of Alexandria and all
the Provinces of Egypt to own the Pope as Supreme Thom. a Jesu. de Council ^mn.
Gent. l. 7. c. 6.
Head of the Church; which was soon after found to be a mere cheat and
imposture. How far the Ethiopians are from owning the Popes Authority he may
find in Ludolphus, or Balthazar Tellez. It is true the Pope sent a Patriarch
into the East upon a Division among themselves; but after a while, he was
forced to withdraw to the remotest parts of Persia, and to leave their own
Patriarch in full Power. The Bishop of Sidon relates, what ill success he had
with the Patriarch of the Iacobites. And it is well known how soon the Greeks
returned to their old Opposition after the Council of Florence. I had therefore
Reason to say, that all the Churches of the East however different among
themselves agreed in rejecting the Pope's Supremacy, and to this day look on it
as an Innovation in the Church.

As to what he afterward speaks of their Blasphemies against Page 16.
the Divinity and Humanity of Christ, I now leave the World to judge of them;
and if they be true, all Men must condemn the Popes Missionaries for notorious
Liers; for the Judgment I make of them, is from the Relations they have given
us. And if these be true, I can by no means allow them to be excluded from
being Parts of the Catholic Church; and so that must be of far greater extent
than the Roman-Catholic Church. But to go on.

I observed that which I thought a material difference in the Schisms of the
Church, some I said were consistent with both Parties remaining in the Catholic
Church; for which I instanced in the Bishops of Rome Excommunicating the
Bishops of Asia, about Easter; and those of Asia and Africa about Re-baptizing.
Others were for excluding all out of the Church but themselves, as the
Novatians and Donatists.

The Replier tells me he does not think this difference at all material. For
what Reason? Because the Church is the last Tribunal Page II.
in all differences; and whosoever separates from her is to be reputed as a
Heathen or a Publican. It seems then the Bishops of Asia for not keeping Easter
with Pope Victor, were as very Heathens and Publicans as the Novatians and
Donatists. I hope this Gentleman after all, will not make the Church so severe
in all its Censures, to cut Men presently off from being Members of the
Catholic Church. I had learnt from S. Augustine, That Excommunications are A^g.
^. Donat. p. 6. Collat. c. 20.
sometimes used by way of Discipline to bring Persons to a sense of their
Fauits, and not to cut them off from the People of God. But suppose
Excommunications should always cut Persons off from the Catholic Church, is it
not to be supposed that they are just and reasonable? Suppose the matter does
not deserve it, or there be false suggestions, or a precipitate sentence; is it
really all one, if the Church happens to Excommunicate? But beside all this,
suppose one Bishop in the Church takes upon him to Excommunicate others for
little or no cause, and against the advice of his Brethren; which was the Case
of Victor about the Asian Bishops; must they be cut off from the Catholic
Church as effectually, as if they had been guilty of the greatest Heresy or
Schism?

But not to affix too severe a censure on the Replier, in the next Page he does
acknowledge a material difference; which he says Page 12, 13.
was, That the whole Church was not yet engaged, and till a Decision be made by
the whole Church, the Parts may Excommunicate each other, and remain Parts of
the Church still. Now this, in my Opinion, makes very much for me. For in this
divided state of the Christian World, the whole Church is not engaged as to any
Decision of the present differences; and therefore no Parts can be cut off by
other Parts from the Catholic Church. For, since the breaches of Christendom,
there has been no Representative of the Catholic Church; and is not like to
be; and so the divided Parts remain Parts of the Catholic Church still. The
Council of Trent was so far from it, that the famous Abbot of S. ^yprian called
Prejugbs legit. contre le Jan^^^^. p. 135.
it a Cabal of Schoolmen influenced by the Pope. And there is a great deal of
difference between the Decision of Schoolmen and of the Catholic Church.

I cannot but still think it material to observe, that in Schisms of the most
dangerous nature, the fault was laid on that Part which appropriated the Title
of the Catholic Church to it self, as in the Novatians and Donatists.

Here the Defender puts in his Exceptions; for he says, It sounds, as if I
would have that Title never rightly applied, but to those Page 14.
who do not challenge it; in likelihood because they have no pretense to it.
The insinuation is, as if I were willing any should be called the Catholic
church, but that which is. But in earnest, I am as much against any one Part
being called the Whole, as another. And from the Case of the Novatians and
Donatists I have learnt to charge the Schism on those, who at best being but a
Part challenge the Whole to themselves. But he cannot understand how it comes
to be Presumption, and a cause of Schism in one part of a Division to assume
it. I am very sorry for it, that he cannot understand it to be a presumption in
a Part, to call it self the Whole. He says, In a Division, it is not well
intelligible how more than one Part can bear it. I say it is not at all
intelligible how any Part can bear it. What thinks he of the Novatians and
Donatists? Was it not Presumption in them to arrogate the Title of the Catholic
Church to themselves? And were they not therefore guilty of the Schism?

In the ancient Church there were two sorts of Schisms, which I think it
material to observe.

1. A Factious Schism. 2. A Sacrilegious Schism.
(1.) A Factious Schism; when Men out of opposition to their lawful Governors,
in the Church set up separate Assemblies. Which by the Fathers are called
(...), as by S. Basil in his Epistle to Amphilochius, where he distinguishes
Heresy, Schism and unlawful Meetings. Heresy is against some necessary point
of Faith; Schism is a Separation from the Catholic Church about matters of
Discipline; And unlawful Assemblies are such as are set up against the Rules of
the Church. Those who were guilty of these were received upon due submission;
those who were guilty of Schism were to renounce their Schism; and those who
were guilty of Heresy, were to be rebaptized. This was S. Basil's Judgment,
and is followed by Balsamon, Zonaras and Arist^nus. And S. Basil himself says,
This was the Sense of the Fathers before him.

(2.) A Sacrilegious Schism is that which robs the Church of God of that which
belongs to it, i. e. which excludes all but their own Number from being true
Members of the Church. And this was the Schism charged on the Novatians and
Donatists. C. Parmen. l. 1. c. ult. l. 2. c. 1, 11. C. Cresom. l. 4. c. 10, 11.
This S. Augustine very often charges upon the latter, as a very high piece of
Schism; for, says he, while they confine the Church to their own Communion,
they are guilty of manifest Sacrilege, both against Christ and his church.

And whosoever follow their steps, and exclude any Parts of the Church from
being so, and confine the Church to their own Communion, they are guilty of the
same Sacrilegious Schism; which is of a higher nature than a mere Factious
Schism. But the Defender says, The Language of the World has always preserved
the Title of Catholic to one Part, and given the name of Sect or Part Page 14.
cut off to the other.

By the Language of the World, he must mean of that Part which excludes the
rest. Which he calls the World by the very same Figure by which a Part
challenges to be the Whole. But in consequence to this, for all that I can yet
see, these who were excluded out of the Catholic Church, must be taken in by
Baptism. And S. Cyprian, Firmilian, and S. Basil saw this well enough. I
confess it was after carried, That Heretics were to be distinguished, and
those only to be Rebaptized who renounced the Baptismal Faith, in Father, Son
and Holy Ghost. And the meaning, I suppose wa^, that nothing but that exclude
Persons out of the Catholic Church; and those Heretics whose Baptism was
allowed, were of an inferior sort; and by not disowning their Baptism, they
showed they looked on them only as corrupted Parts of the Church. And so did
the Councils of Nice and Arles; which did Council. Nic. c. 19. Arel. c. 8.
not utterly reject Re-baptization, but only of those who preserved the
Baptismal Faith. It was not therefore the Sense of the Ancient Church, that
upon every dissension in matters of Faith from the general Doctrine of the
Church, one Party must be excluded from the Catholic Church, and that Title
belong to the other.

But he proceeds, That this Presumption cannot be the Cause of Schisms, which
must happen before the Presumption.

This is very easily answered. For a breach there must be before; but the
Schism belongs to those who were the true Causes of the Breach. If therefore
any one Part assumes to it self the right of the whole, and requires the owning
it from all that join in Communion with it, this very act makes it justifiable
(not to separate from the Catholic Church) but not to join in Communion with
that Part on such unreasonable terms.

Well, says he, Suppose the dividing Parts do still continue Parts Page 11.
of the Catholic Whole; cannot the Roman-Catholic be that Whole, i. e. Suppose
there be many Parts, why may not one of them be the Whole? For still, the
Roman-Catholic is but a Part, though Catholic be the Whole; as though the Ocean
be the whole, yet the British, or Gallican, or Spanish, or Atlantic Ocean, is
but a Part of the Whole Ocean. I am ashamed to pursue so clear a point any
farther.

But he has one fetch behind still, viz. That it is one Faith Page 12.
which makes the Catholic Church one; if therefore the Roman Catholic Church be
a Part of this Catholic Whole, the other Parts must believe as she does, or
else they cannot be Parts.

I will endeavor to make this clear to him, and so end this Dispute.

The Church is a Society of Persons who own and profess the Christian Faith;
Therefore Faith is necessary to the very being of a Church; for unless they
believe the Christian Doctrine, they cannot be the Christian Church. This Faith
which is necessary to make them Christians, is to be embraced by all who are
Members of this Church; their entrance is by Baptism; the Faith is the Creed
delivered to those who are to be Baptized; which being universally received by
Christians, that makes the common Bond of Union in the Parts of this great
Body; and this is the One Faith of the Catholic Church.

But if he thinks the Roman-Catholic Church can make all its Decisions a Part
of this one Faith, he is extremely mistaken. As will more fully appear in the
following Discourse.

II. Of the Authority of the Catholic Church.
THE whole and sole design of the First Paper, as the Replier tells me, was to
evince this Point. That all Controversial Page 1.
P^ints of Faith, either about Holy Scripture, or other Subjects, do fall under
the Judgment and Decision of the Church. But, under Favor, that is not the
whole Design of it; for this implies no more than that the Church may, if it
pleases, decide them; but the Desi n is, to prove, That in all Matters of Faith
the Churches Authority is without farther Examination to be submitted to; so
that all that Christians have to do is but to enquire into Two things. 1. Where
the Church is. 2. Whether the Church has declared its Judgment or not.

And several things are objected in the Papers against the not submitting to
the Churches Judgment, viz. That every one will be his own Judge; which is not
allowed in common matters, much less in matters of Faith; that no such
Authority is given to every particular Man by Scripture; but the Churches
Authority is there established; and was owned in the Primitive Church in the
Creeds, and about the Canonical Books; and since the Church had once such a
Power, there is no reas^n to suppose it lost; but upon differences happening,
the Churches Judgment is to be submitted to.

This is the whole strength and force of the First Paper; and it is about a
Subject of the highest Importance, both as to the satisfaction of particular
Persons, and the Peace of the Christian World. And the clearing these. Two
Points will go a very great way toward the putting an end to Controversies. 1.
That in all Disputes we are to search no farther, but presently to yield to the
Judgment of the Church. 2. That the Roman-Catholic Church is that Church. How
far I am from being satisfied with the latter does already appear; I now set my
self to consider the other.

And here are these things necessary to be debated,

1. Whether Christ and his Apostles did establish such a standing Judicature in
the Church, to which all Christians were bound to submit in matters of Faith?

2. Whether the Primitive Church did own such a Judicature; And did accordingly
govern their Faith?

3. Whether it be an unreasonable thing to suppose the contrary, viz. That
Christ should leave Men to judge for themselves in matters which concern their
Salvation, according to the Scriptures?

(1.) Whether Christ and his Apostles did establish such a standing Judicature
in the Church to put an end to all Controversies which should arise about
matters of Faith? We do not Question but Christ might have done it if he had
pleased; and there is no doubt he foresaw all those Inconveniences which are
now objected against the want of it; But the point before us, is, Whether
Christ, who alone could do it, has declared this to be his Will and Pleasure?
We are then to consider, that this being a Point of so great Consequence, the
Commission for such a Court of Judicature in the Church ought to be delivered
in the plainest and clearest Words that may be; for otherwise this were to
beget Controversies instead of putting an end to them. When God under the Law,
established a Supreme Court of Appeal as to the differences which might arise
about the Law, he tells them where that Court should Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11.
fit, and commands the People to go up thither and hear their Sentence and
submit to it. This was a plain and clear declaration of the Will of God; and
they had no more to do but to go up to the Place which God did choose, viz.
Jerusalem. And there was never any dispute aft^rwards among the Israelites what
they were to do when Differences happened; for an Appeal lay to the Court of
Jerusalem, and the Sentence of that Court they were to stand to on pain of
Death. Our blessed Savior knew this Constitution among the Jews, when he
founded his Church; and if he had intended any such thing therein, he would not
have fallen short of the exactness of the Law in the things necessary in order
to the Establishment of it; i. e. he would not have failed to have told us, who
were to make up that Supreme Court, and where it was to Sit. For these things
were necessary to the end of it. Shall we then say that Christ was not yet
resolved where it should be? Or, that it was not fit to let it be known so
soon? But why not, when he made Promises to the Apostles of being with them to
the end of the World? There can be no pretense, why he should not then declare,
where the Supreme and standing Court of his Church was to be; which was in all
Ages to give Rules to the rest of the Church, and to Determine all Points of
Faith which came before them.

But did the Apostles Determine this matter after Christ's Ascension? If they
had done it, we must have yielded, because they had an Infallible Spirit: But
we find nothing like it in all their Writings. They mention Heresies often, and
damnable ones they saw creeping into the Church, they lamented the Schisms and
Divisions in the Churches of their own Planting, and used frequent and vehement
Exhortations to Peace and Unity. But why not a word of the Infallible Judge of
Controversies all this while? S. Paul wrote to the Church of Rome it self, and
even there mentions Dissensions that were among them, as well as Romans 15. 17.
in any other Church. What, could not he tell them they were to make Rules and
give Judgment for the whole Church? Did S. Paul envy this Privilege to S.
Peter's See, and therefore took no notice of it? That I suppose will not be
said of him, though he once withstood him to the face. But, how happen the rest
of the Apostles not to do it? Nay, how came S. Peter himself, writing for the
benefit of the whole Church, in a Catholic Epistle, never to give the least
intimation concerning it? These things make it appear incredible to me, that
Christ or his Apostles appointed any such thing; especially, when the Apostles
in their infallible Writings give such Directions to particular Christians as
they do; to prove all things, and to hold 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
fast that which is good; to try the Spirits whether they be of God o^ not.
What had they to do to try the Spirits, or to prove any thing themselves, if
the Judgment of the matters of Faith 1 S John. 4. 1.
were so given to the Church, that others without farther enquiry are bound to
submit to its Sentence? And if Christ and his Apostles knew nothing of such an
Infallible Judge; we have no Reason to hearken to any, who after their time
should pretend to it. For the Promise of Infallibility must be made by him; and
such a Commission can be derived only from the immediate Authority of Christ
himself.

But the Defender says, The Holy Scripture assures us that the Church is the
Foundation and Pillar of Truth. I confess, I cannot be assured from hence, that
the Church has such an Authority as is here pleaded for, suppose it be
understood of the whole Church. For how was it possible the Church at that time
should be the Foundation and Pillar of Truth, when the Apostles had the
Infallible Spirit, and were to guide and direct the whole Church? It seems
therefore far more probable to me, that those words relate to Timothy, and not
to the Church, by a very common Elleipsis, viz. how he ought to behave himself
in the Church of God, which is the House of the living God, as a Pillar and
Support of Truth: and to that purpose this whole Epistle was written to him; as
appears by the beginning of it, wherein he is charged not to give heed to
Fables, and to take care that no false Doctrine were taught at Ephesus. Now,
says the Apostle, If I come not shortly, yet I have written this Epistle that
thou may know how to behave 1 Timothy 3. 15.
thy self in the Church, which is the House of God, as a Pillar and Support of
Truth. What can be more natural and easy, than this Sense? And that there is
no Novelty in it appears from hence, that Gregory Nyssen expressly delivers this
to be Gr^g. Nyssen de ^ita. Mos. p. 226
the meaning; and many others of the Fathers apply the same Phrases to the
great Men of the Church. S. Basil uses Basil. Epist. 62. Chrysostom. Hom. 148.
To. 5. Theod. de Prove. Orat. 10. p. 441. Greg. Nazian. Ep. 38. Orat. 19. Epist.
29. Heins. in loc.
the very same Expressions concerning Musonius. S. Chrysosrom calls the
Apostles the immovable Pillars of the true Faith. Theodoret says concerning S.
Peter and S. John, That they were the Towers of Godliness, and the Pillars of
Truth. ^regory Nazianzen calls S. Basil, The Ground of Faith, and the Rule of
Truth: And elsewhere, The Pillar and Ground of the Church; which Titles he
gives to another Bishop at that time. And so it appears in the Greek Catena,
mentioned by Heinsius, S. Basil read these words or understood them so; when he
says, The Apostles were the Pillars of the New Jerusalem, as it is said, The
Pillar and Ground of the Church. I forbear more, since these are sufficient to
show that they understood this place as relating to Timothy, and not to the
Church.

As to what he brings of Scriptures not being of private I^terpretation; Page
17.
it is so remote from the Sense and Scope of the Place, which relates wholly to
Divine Inspiration, that this is a great Instance of that private
Interpretation which ought to be avoided, viz. of minding only the Words,
without regard to the Sense of Scripture.

It was said in the Papers, Tha^ Christ left his Power to his Church, even to
forgive Sins in Heaven; and left his Spirit with them, which they exercised
after the Resurrection.

It was farther answered, That all this makes nothing for the Roman-Catholic
Church not then in being, unless she were Heir-General to the Apostles; that
the ordinary Power of the Keys relates not to this matter; that the Promise of
the Spirit made to the Apostles, implied many Gifts not pretended to by this
Heir-General, as the Gift of Tongues, Spirit of Discerning, Prophecy,
miraculous Cures and Punish ments. If no more be understood of Divine
Assistance, that is promised as much to keep Men from Sin as Error; but the
Church of Rome pretends only to the latter; and yet it is granted too, that it
may err in matters of great Consequence to the Peace of the Christian World, as
in the Deposing Doctrine This is the Substance of the Answer; let us now see
what they Reply.

The force of what the Desender says is this, That though the Roman Church
were not then in being, yet as soon as it was, Dis. p. 33.
it was a part of the Catholic Church, to which the Promises were made; and
therefore the Roman-Catholic Church being the One Church of Christ, these
Promises must have their effect in her.

This is all I can make of it; though it cost me more pains to lay their things
together with an appe^^ance of strength, than to give an Answer to them.

The Roman Church it seems had not the Promises made to it; but as soon as it
was a Church, she was a Part of the Catholic Church. This is very intelligible.
Let us then go on. But how come the Promises made to the Catholic Church to
belong to the Roman-Catholic? How comes the Roman-Catholic to be the One Church
of Christ on Earth? But this is running forwards and backwards. And (...) g^od
is to be done, without supposing Roman and Catho^^^ to be terms equivalent.

He tells me, I am overhasty in removing the Power of working Page 33.
Miracles out of the Church. For, he says, God still works Miracles in the
Roman Church; and if I would put the whole issue on Miracles, he would
undertake the Proof.

There is nothing in this Case like working of Miracles among us, for our
satisfaction. For Miracles are a sign to unbelievers. But it is a pleasant
thing, that they should go about to convince us by those things, which they
laugh at one another for pretending to. I will give them an Instance past
contradiction. Did not the Iansenists pretend to a Miracle at Port Royal by one
of the Thorns of our Saviors Crown? And did not the Jesuits expose the very
pretense as idle and ridiculous? as appears by F. Annat's Book on that
Occasion. The late Author of the Prejudices against the Jansenists, upon
occasion of that Miracle, lays down some good (...) legit. c. le Jansenists, c.
10.
Rules for discerning true Miracles and false. (1.) That such Miracles are not
sufficient to convince, which may be effected by a created Power, unless they
be attested by such Miracles which can only be effected by a Divine Power; such
as Resurrection from the dead. (2.) We must not only attend to the Nature, but
to the End of Miracles; which, he P ag. 87.
says, is the true worship of God, and the love of Virtue. And by these Rules
I shall be content to examine all his Miracles, when ever he produces them.

The Assistance which Christ promised, he tells us, was to all his. Page 34.
Doctrine, and to all time.

But what a sad thing is it, that we have nothing but his bare saying for the
Proof of it! Never Man more needed Infallibility than this Defender does, when
he undertakes to prove it. What! Can Christ afford no Assistance to his Church
without Infallibility? What thinks he of the Assistance of Divine Grace? Does
that make all Infallible that have it? And is not that Assistance by virtue of
Divine Promises? Is this to ask which of the parts of his Promise he will not
perform? We doubt not he will perform all he has promised, but we desire to
see where he has made the Promise. We ask nothing unreasonable, and therefore
out of pity to our weakness, show these Promises of standing Infallibility to
us; and do not take it still for granted without proving it.

But the Replier says, The Promises of Christ imply whatever is necessary to
the Church for the support and government of her self to Rep. p. 22.
the Worlds end.

Is Infallibility then necessary for the Support and Government of the Catholic
Church? If not, then the Promises of Support and Government ^elate not to the
matter. But no less a Man than S. Augustine, frequently affirms, That the
Promises Aug. de Bapt. c. Donatis^ l. 3. c. 17, 18. l. 4. c. 18, 20. l. 5. c.
21. l. 6. c. 1, 3, 4, 14, 24, 2, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 40. l. 7. c. 12, 32, 43,
44. L. 2. c. 1. L. 7. c. 51.
made by Christ to the Church, are only made to good and not to bad Men in it;
and that the case of wicked Men in the Church, and of Heretics and
Schismatics out of it is alike; i. e. that both have true Sacraments, but
neither any right to the Promises. And this he does not assert by chance, but
it is the very Foundation of his Answer to the Donatists, in the Answer which
himself valued the most.

And he concludes with saying, That some are in the House of God, so as to be
that House of God which was built upon a Rock, and had th Promises made to it;
and these are the Saints dispersed over the World, and joined together in the
Communion of the same Sacraments; others are so in the House, as not to belong
to the Frame of it; but are as the Chaff among the Wheat; and are rather of the
House than any part of it. If this be good Doctrine in S. Augustine, what
becomes of all the Promi^es made to the Church, with respect to the External
Government and Support of it?

I might name multitudes of Places more, wherein he ^^Line^^.
argues, That wicked ^en do not belong to the One Church; and are not the Sp^se
of Christ: for Christ says to them, I know you not; and Her^^ticks, he says,
are but one sort of bad Men. If therefore the Promises of the Catholic Church
do not belong to one, neither can (...) other.

I had therefore Reason ^o ask, where God has ever promised to keep Men more
from Error than Sin? And how it comes to pass that very bad Men are allowed in
the Church of Rome to have this Pr^^^ise of Infallibility?

The Defender slides off from this to a matter he was better prepared to
Answer. But the Replier tells us of some of Rep. p. 23.
the Proph^ts who were great Sinners; I suppose he means Balaam and Caiaphas.
But however, this does not reach to the matter of the New Testament, wherein
doing the Will of God is John 7. 17.
laid down as the best means of knowing the Truth. But he offers at a Reason
why impeccability is not so necessary as Infallibility, because without this
the Church could not subsist; for if once she make shipwreck of her Faith, she
is no more a Church, an effe^ not so proper to Sin. There is a great difference
between absolute impeccability and notorious Offenders; the question I put was
not concerning perfect Saints, but great Sinners; why they should believe that
Christ would give an infallible Assistance to keep such Men from erring, when
notwithstanding the Assistance of Grace, they run on in a course of wickedness?
He says, One is necessary for the Church, and not the other. Then there may be
a holy Catholic infallible Church made up of none but great Sinners. And was
this such a Church as Christ purchased with his own Blood; and whom he re^^^med
from all impiety to be a peculiar People, zealous of good Works? If they say,
The Grace of God ill never fail to keep some from great Sins; why may not the
same hold as to great Errors? And that be as much as the Promises extend to.

B^t if the Church once makes Shipwreck of Faith, she is no more a Church.

How comes Faith to be separated from a good Conscience? I am sure S. Paul
joins them together. Is no Error consistent with the Being of a Church? Not an
Error about the Seat of Infallibility? Not an Error about the Immaculate
Conception? Nor about the Vision of God before the day of Judgment? Not about
the Son's being of the same substance with the Father? Not about Christ's
having a will proper to his humane Nature? Then there can be no such thing as
the Roman-Catholic Church in the opinion of those who are for personal
Infallibility of the Pope, since the Heads of their Church have erred about
these things. The true Church can never make shipwreck of that Faith which
makes her a true Church: But other kind of Errors cannot overthrow her being.

I urged farther, That notwithstanding the pretense to Infallibility, they
allow the Church may err in matters of Practice of the highest importance, as
about Deposing Princes and Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance; but not
about the least matter of Faith; which made it very suspicious to be rather a
politic device than a thing they really believed.

Here the Defender (I fear wilfully) mistakes my meaning; for he argues as if
he thought I were proving, That Def. p. 34, 35.
the Church of Rome has defined the Deposing Doctrine as a matter of Faith;
and great pains he takes to prove it has not. And all to no purpose. For I
insisted only, that in this point, they confessed their Church had grossly erred
as to a matter of Practice, though it had not expressly declared it as an
Article of Faith. I desire him to speak out; has it not erred notoriously as
to Practice in this matter? Whether they have made any such Declaration or not,
as to oblige all others of their Communion to embrace the Doctrine; it is
undeniably true, that their Popes and Councils have owned it and acted
according to it, to the mighty disturbance of the Peace of the Christian World.
Now the question I put was this, Since it is granted they have so notoriously
erred in matters of Practice, why should any believe them Infallible in Points
of Faith? i. e. that so many Popes, so many Councils, should act upon this
principle, as believing it to be true, and yet preserve their Infallibility in
not declaring it to be true. This I confess is an extraordinary thing; and the
Defender seems in earnest to think they were kept from it by an overruling
assistance of the Divine Spirit. Which is just as if a Man were set upon in the
Road by some pretending to be his Friends, who should take from him all that he
had, and afterward he should admire the Providence of God, that these Men
should not declare it lawful to do it. It is granted that so many Popes did
great Mischief to the World, and especially to Christian Princes, by acting
according to this Doctrine, and that they actually owned it in Councils, and
made Canons on purpose for it, but yet an overruling Assistance kept them from
making it a Point of Faith. They declared their own belief by their Practice
and Canons; they required the observance of them under pain of being cut off
from the Church if they did it not; and Gregory VII. Greg. 7. Epist. Reg. l. 4.
Ep. 2.
says, They cut themselves off who question this Power; but they were
deceived, notoriously deceived in this matter, yet they might be Infallible
still. Did not these Popes declare that to be Christ's Doctrine which is not?
But not Authoritatively. What I pray does this mean? Did they not declare this
Power by virtue of the Authority given them by Christ over the Church? And
declare those Excommunicate who did not obey their Sentence? Is not this
proceeding Authoritatively? Suppose the Popes had in the same manner declared
that Heretics should be Rebaptized; i. e. made Canons for it, and required
the observance of them; I desire to know whether this had not been
Authoritative declaring it, though they affixed no Anathema to those who held
the contrary? Is it possible for any Man to believe, that if there were such a
thing as Infallibility in the Guides of the Church, that Christ would suffer
them to run into such pernicious Errors, and in such an Authoritative manner,
and yet make good his Promise of keeping them from Error by not suffering them
to define this Doctrine as an Article of Faith? But this will appear to be a
very slender Evasion, if Men will reflect on the nature of the matter it self;
for it is about the exercise of the Pope's Power over Princes; and can it be
supposed that since they challenged it, they would ever suffer it to be debated
in Councils; but they would still have it pass as an inseparable Right of their
Supremacy derived from S. Peter. And all that they would allow in this Case, is
a bare Recognition; and that was made in the Councils of Lions and Lateran.

And the Deposing Power in the Church, was sufficiently owned in the Councils
of Constance and Trent.

But there are two sorts of Articles of Faith to be considered in the Church of
Rome.

1. Some are defined with an Anathema against Dissenters; and so we do not say
the Deposing Power is made an Article of Faith.

2. Some are received upon the common Grounds of Faith, though not expressly
declared. And whatever Doctrine being denied would overthrow them, may be
justly looked on as a Presumptive Article of Faith. As the denying the Deposing
Power must charge the Church of Rome Representative and Virtual with such acts,
as are utterly inconsistent with the Promises of Divine Assistance supposed to
be made to it. Therefore all those who sincerely believe those Promises to
belong to the Church of Rome so taken, must in consequence believe so many
Popes and Councils could not be so grossly mistaken in the Ground of their
Actings. And I find those who do now most contend that this Doctrine was never
defined, do yet yield, that both Popes and Councils believed it to be true, and
acted accordingly.

But if nothing will be allowed to be points of Faith, but what passes under
the Decision of Councils approved by the Pope as such, I pray tell me, which of
the General Councils determined the Popes Supremacy as a Point of Faith? Where
was the Roman Catholic Churches Infallibility defined? Are these Points of
Faith with you, or not? If they be, then there may be Points of Faith among you
which never passed any Conciliar Definitions; or such Authoritative Declaration
as the Defender means.

(2.) I now come to consider the Sense of the Primitive Church about this
matter of an Infallible Judge of Controversies. Which I am obliged to do, not
only because it is said in the Papers, That the Church exercised this Page 18.
Power after the Apostles; but because the Defender brings Tertullian as
rejecting the Scripture from being a sufficient Rule for Controversies; and S.
Augustine, as setting up the Authority of the Church above the Scripture in
matters of Proof.

But I confess two lame sayings of Fathers make no great impression on me. I am
for searching the sense of the Primitive Church in so weighty a Point as this,
after another manner; (but as briefly as may be) i. e. by the general Sense of
the Fathers of the first Ages about the Controversies then on foot, that I may
not deceive my self or others in a matter of this Consequence.

The point is, Whether according to the sense of the Primitive Church, when any
Controversy about Faith does arise, a Person be bound to submit to the
Churches Sentence as Infallible; or he be required to make use of the best
means he can to judge concerning it, taking the Scriptures for his Infallible
Rule?

Now to judge the Sense of the Primitive Church about this Point, there can be
no method more proper or convincing than to consider what Course the Christian
Church did take in the Controversies then started, which were great and
considerable. And if it had been then believed that Christ had left such an
infallible Authority in the Church to have put an end to them; it had been no
more possible to have avoided the mention of it, than if a great Cause in Law
were to be decided among us, that neither Party should ever take notice of the
Judges in Westminster Hall.

There were two very great Controversies in the Primitive Church, which
continued a long time under different Names; and we are now to observe what
method the Catholic Writers of the Church took for establishing the true Faith.

And these were concerning the Humanity, and the Divinity of Christ.

That concerning the Humanity of Christ begun very early; for S. John mentions
those who denied that Jesus was come in the Flesh; i. e. that he really took
our Nature upon him. 1 John 4. 3.
And this Heresy did spread very much after the Apostles times.

Ignatius made it a great part of the business of his Epistles to warn the
Churches he wrote to, and to arm them against it. And what way does he take to
do it? Does he ever tell them of the danger of using their own Judgment; or of
not relying on the Authority of the Church in this matter? I cannot find one
passage tending that way in all his Epistles. But instead thereof, he appeals
to the Words of our Savior in the Evangelist, Touch me, and see if I be a
Body, or a Spirit: his words are A^ (...). p. 3.
an incorporeal Demon; but it was usual with the ancient Fathers to repeat the
Sense of Places, and not the very Words. And a little after he says, That
these Heretics Page 4.
were not persuaded, neither by the Prophets, nor by the Law, nor by the
Gospel. And he advises the Church of Smyrna to attend to the Prophets, but
especially to the Page 6.
Gospel; in which the Passion and Resurrection of Christ are declared.

Irenaeus disputes warmly and frequently against this Heresy; and he appeals
to the Testimony of the Apostles I. (...). l. ^. c. 17, 18.
in their Writings; especially to the Gospels of S. John and S. ^a^thew; but
not omitting the other Gospels and the Epistles of S. Paul and S. John. And he
calls the Scriptures, The L. 1. 1. 4. 69.
immovable Rule of Truth; the L. 3. c. 1.
Foundation and Pillar of our Faith; and says, That L. ^. ^. 47. 4. 66.
they contain the whole Will of God. It is true, he makes use of Tradition in
the Church, to those who rejected the Scriptures; and he finds fault with those
who took words and pieces of Scripture to serve their turn; but he directs to
the right use of it, and does not seem to question the sufficiency thereof, for
the satisfaction of humble and teac^able minds in all the points of Faith,
which were then controverted.

Tertullian undertakes the same Cause in several Books and several ways. One is
by showing that the Opinion of the Heretics was novel; not being consistent
with the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles, as appeared by the unanimous
consent of the Apostolical Churches; which did all believe Christ had a true
and real Body. And this way he made use of, because those Heretics either
rejected, or interpolated, or perverted the Books of Scripture. But this way of
Prescription looked like Out-Lawing of Heretics and never suffering them to
come to a fair Trial. Therefore in his other Books he goes upon three
substantial Grounds. (1.) That the Books of Scripture do De Carut Christi, etc.
Marcion. etc. Valentin.
certainly deliver the Doctrine of the Christian Church concerning Christ's
having a true Body. (2.) That these Books of Scripture were not counterfeit,
nor corrupted and adulterated; but preserved genuine and sincere in the
Apostolical Churches. (3.) That the sense which the Heretics put upon the
Words of Scripture was forced and unreasonable; but the sense of the Church was
true and natural. So that Tertullian did conclude, that there was no way to end
this Controversy but by finding out the true sense of Scripture.

But the Author of the Defense brings in Tertullian, as Def. p. 18. D^
Praescript. c. 17.
representing all trial of Doctrine by Scripture, as good for nothing but to
turn the Brain or the Stomach; and that the issue is either uncertain or none.

I grant Tertullian has those words; but for Truths sake I wish he had not
left out others, viz. That those Heretics do not receive some Scriptures; and
those they do receive they add and alter as they please. And what, says he,
can the most skilful in Scriptures do with those who will defend or deny what
they think fit? With such indeed, he says, it is to little purpose to dispute
out of Scriptures. And no doubt he was in the right; for the Rule must be
allowed on both sides; or else there can be nothing but a wrangling about it.
The first thing then here, was to settle the Rule, and for this the Testimony
of the Apostolical Churches was of great use. But to imagine that Tertullian
rejected all trial of Doctrines by Scripture, is to make him to write to little
purpose afterward; when he combats with all sorts of Heretics out of
Scripture, as appears by his Books against Marcion, Praxeas, Hermogenes and
others. And Tertullian himself says, That if we bring Heretics only to
Scripture, they cannot stand. Not because Aufer denique Haereticis quae cum
Ethnicis sapiunt, ut de Scripturis solis quaestiones suas sistant, and stare
non poterunt. De Resur. Ca^nis, c. 3.
they went only upon Reason; but in the end of the same Treatise he says, They
made use of Scriptures too, but such as were to be confuted by other Haereses
autem sine aliquibus occasionibus Scripturarum audere non poterant; idcirco
pristina instrumenta quasdam materias illis videntur subministrasse, and ipsas
quidem iisdem literis revincibiles, c. 63.
Scriptures. And therefore he makes the Heretics to decline, as much as in
them lay, the Light of the Scriptures; which he would never have charged on
others, if he thought himself that Controversies could not be ended by
Lucifugae isti Scripturarum, c. 47.
them.

Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of the same Heresies, makes the Controversy to
consist chiefly about the Scriptures, whether they were to be embraced and
followed, or not. He Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. p. 755. (...). ib. and 757.
says. None of the Heresies among Christians had so darkened the Truth, but
that those who would might find it; and the way he advises to, is a diligent
search of the Scriptures; wherein the Demonstration of our Faith does consist;
and by which, as by a certain Criterion, we are to judge of the truth and
falsehood of opinions. Which he there insists upon at large. He speaks indeed of
the Advantage of the Church above Heresies, both as to Antiquity and Unity; but
he never makes the Judgment of the Church to be the Rule of Faith, as he does
the Scriptures.

In the Dialogue against the Marcionists, supposed to be Origen's, this
Controversy is briefly handled, the point is brought Orig. Dial. c.
Marcionist.. 4. p. 108. p. 101.
to the Sense of Scripture; as in that place, the Word was made Flesh; from
which, and other places the Catholic argues the Truth of Christ's humane
Nature; especially from Christ's appealing to the sense of his Disciples about
the Truth of his Body after the Resurrection. All his Demonstrations are out of
Scripture, and by the mere force of them he overthrows this Heresy. And it was
nothing but the clear Evidence of Scripture, without any Infallible Judgment or
Assistance of the Guides of the Church, which did at last suppress this
Heresy. For no Council was called about it, but as the Authority of the New
Testament prevailed, so this Heresy declined, and by degrees vanished out of
the Christian World. And it is observable, That the greatest and worst of
Heresies were suppressed, while no other Authority was made use of against them
but that of the holy Scriptures. So Theodoret takes notice, Y^od. ad he^^t.
Fab. Pr^ef. and l. 2. p. 218.
That before his time these Heresies by Divine Grace were extinct. So that the
Scriptures were then found an effectual means for putting an end to some of the
most dangerous Heresies which ever were in the Christian Church.

The other great Controversy of the first Age, was about the Divinity of
Christ; which begun with the Ebionites and Cerinthians, and was continued down
by succession, as appears by Theodoret's account of Heresies in his second
Book. Those who first embraced this Heresy rejected the whole New Testament,
and received only the Nazarene Gospel. But after a while Artemon had the
boldness to assert that the Apostles delivered the same Doctrine in their
Writings, and then the Controversy was reduced to the Sense of Scripture.
Paulus Samosatenus followed Artemon, as Photinus afterward followed him. But
Theodoret again observes, That all those Heresies against the Divinity of
Christ were in his time so extinct, that not so much as any remainders of them
were left; but says he, The true Doctrines of the Gospels prevail and spread
themselves over the World. And we may find what course was taken for putting an
end to this Controversy, by the management of it with Paulus Samosatenus. In
the fragment of an Epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria, we read the Testimonies
of Scripture which he produced against him; and more at large in the Epistle of
the Six Bishops to him; who makes use of the very same Places of Scripture
which are most applied to that purpose to this day. To which they only add,
That this had been the Doctrine of the Christian Church from the beginning; and
all Catholic Churches agreed in it. But here is no such thing thought of as
I^sallibility in the Guides of the Church; for there is great difference
between the consent of the Christian Church, as a means to find out the Sense
of Scripture, and the Authority of Church Guides declaring the Sense by virtue
of an Insallible Assistance; the one is but a Moral Argument, and the other is
a Foundation of Faith.

Theodoret further observes, That there was another set of Heresies Haeret.
Fab. l. 3. p. 226, 231.
distinct from the two former in the Primitive Church, which related chiefly to
matters of Discipline and Manners; and most of these, he says, were so far
destroyed, that there were none th^n left, who were Followers of Nicolas,
Nepos, or Patroclus, and very few Novatians, or Montanists, or Quartodecemans;
so that Truth had prevail^d over the World, and the Heresies were either quite
rooted out, or only some dry and withered Branches remained of them in remote
and obscure Places.

Which being affirmed by a Person of so much Judgment and Learning, as
Theodoret was, gives us a plain and evident Proof, that the Sense of Scripture
may be so fully cleared, without an Infallible Church, as to be effectual for
putting an end to Controversies.

And although we own a great Esteem and Reverence for the Four General Councils;
yet we cannot but observe, that Controversies were so far from being ended by
them, that they broke out more violently after them. As the Arian Controversy
after the Council of Nice; the Nestorian after that at Eph^sus; and these
Gentlemen believe that Heresy continues still in the East: the Eutychian
Controversy gave greater Disturbance after the Council of Chalced^n, than
before, and continued so to do for many Ages: Which is an Argument that the
Infallibility of Councils, or of the Guides of the Church, was not a Doctrine
then received in the Church.

But I proceed to show what means were used in the Primitive Church for putting
an end to Controversies. Of which we have a remarkable Instance in the Dispute
about Rebaptizing Heretics. This was managed between St. Cyprian and other
Bishops of Africa and Asia, on one side, and the Bishop of Rome on the other.
He pleaded Custom and Tradition: the other, That Custom without Truth was but
ancient Error; and that the matter St. Cyprian, Epist. 74, 75.
ought to be examined by Scripture; and many Reasons they bring from thence;
because Christ said in his Gospel, I am Truth; and the only way to prevent
Errors, is to have recourse to the Head and Fountain of Divine Tradition, i. e.
to the Holy Scriptures; which St. Cyprian calls the Evangelical and Apostolical
Tradition. So that we have the clear Opinion of the African Bishops, that this
Controversy ought to be decided by Scripture. But here the Replier says, That
Right stood for the Bishops of Rome, Reply, p. 13.
and a General Council determined the Point, and the whole Church came to an
Acquiescence. If the Council was in the Right, the Bishop of Rome was not; if
St. Cyprian represent his Opinion truly, and he says he did it in his own
Words, which are, Si quis a quacunque Haeresi venerit ad nos, nihil innovetur
nisi quod Traditum est. Now, no Council ever determined so, That whatsoever the
Heresy was, none should ^e Rebaptized. For the Councils of Arles and Nice both
disallowed the Baptism of some Heretics; and therefore, if the Council put an
end to the Controversy, it was by deciding against the Bishop of Rome, as well
as St. Cyprian.

The Donatists afterward made use of St. Cyprians Authority in this
Controversy, which gave occasion to St. Augustine, to deliver that noted
Sentence, concerning Scripture and Fathers, and Councils, viz That anonical
Scripture is to be preferred before any Aug. de Bapt. c. Donatill. l. 2. c. 3.
other Writings, for they are to be believed without Examination; but the
Writings of Bishops are to be examined and corrected by other Bishops and
Councils, if they see Cause; and lesser Councils by greater, and the greatest
Councils, by such as come after them, when Truth comes to be more fully
diservered. It is hardly possible for a Man to speak plainer against a stand^ng
infallible Judge in Controversies, than St. Augustine does in these Words,
wherein he neither limits his Words to matters of Fact, nor to Manners; but he
speaks generally, as to the Authority of the Guides of the Church compared with
Scripture. Which are entered in the Authentic De^r. Did 9. c 8.
Body of the Canon Law, approved and corrected at Rome, only that part which
relates to the correcting of Councils, is left out. But to make amends, G^atian
in another place, has with admirable Ingenuity, put the Popes Decretal
Epistles among the Did. 19. c. 6.
Can^nical Scriptures, and quotes St. Augustine for it too. But the Roman
Correctors were ashamed of so gross a Forgery, and confess St. Augustine never
thought of the Decretal Epistles, but of the Canonical Scriptures; but yet they
(...) itle stand for good Canon Law.

In the Controversy about the Church with the Donatists, St. Augustin's
constant appeal is to the Scrip^^; and he sets aside, not only particular
Doctors, hut the prete^^ to Miracles, and the Definitions of Councils. He does
not therefore appeal to Scripture, De unit. Ecel. c. 3. 416.
because ^hey (...) about the Church: but because he looked on the Testimonies
of Scripture, as clear enough to decide the point, as he often declares. And he
calls the plain Testimonies of Scripture, the support and strength of their
Cause. If he then thought that Scripture alone could put an end to such a
Controversy as that, no doubt he thought so as to any other. But we need not
mention his thoughts, for he declares as much: whether it be about Christ or
his Church, or any matter of Faith, he makes Scripture so far the Rule, that he
denouncess Anathema against those who deliver any other Doctrine than what is
contained in them. Nor does he c. Petil. Donar. l. 3. c. 6
direct to any Church Authority to manifest the Sense of Scripture, but leaves
all Mankind to judge of it, and even the Donatists themselves whom he opposed.
The same way he takes with Maximinus the Arian, He desires all other
Authorities may be laid c. Maxim. Arian. l. 3. c. 14.
aside, and only those of Scripture and Reason used. To what purpose, unless he
thought the Scripture sufficient to end the Controversy?

Against Faustus the Manichean, he says, The Excellency of the c. Faust. l.
11. c. 5.
Canonical Scripture is such, as to be placed in a Threne far above all other
Writings, to which every faithful and pious Mind ought to submit. All other
Writings are to be tried by them; but there is no doubt to be made of whatever
we find in them.

The same method he uses with the P^lagians, an advises them De Peccator. Merit
and remiss. l. 1. 22. De Nuptiis and Concupisc. l. 2. c. 33. De Great. and lib.
Arbitrio. c. 18.
to yield to the Authority of Scripture, which can neither deceive nor be
deceived. This Controversy, says he, requires a Judge; les Christ judge, let us
hear him speak. Let the Apostle judge with him, for Christ speaks in his
Apostle. And in another place, Let St. John sit judge between us.

And in general he says, We ought to Acquiesce in the Authority of Scripture;
and when any Controversy arises, it ought to be quietly ended In Psalm 67.
by Proofs brought from thence.

But St. Augustine is the Man, whom the Defender produces against Def. p. 18.
me; because against the Manicheans, he says, he believed the Scripture for
the sake of the Church; and to bring any proof out of Scripture against the
Church, does weaken that Authority, upon which he believed the Scripture, and
so he could believe neither. The meaning whereof is this, St. Augustine was
reduced from being a Manichean to the Catholic Church by many Arguments; and
by the Authority of the Church delivering the Books of Scripture, he embraced
the Gospel, which before he did not. Now, says he, You would make use of this
Gospel to prove Manichaeus an Apostle, I can by no means yield to this way. Why
so? Do not you believe it to be Gospel? Yes, says he; but the same reason
which moved me to embrace this Gospel, moved me to reject Manichaeus, and
therefore I have no reason to allow a Testimony out of it for Manichaeus. Not
that St. Augustine seared any proof that could be brought from thence; but he
begins with general Topics, as Tertullian did against the Heretics of his
time, before he came to close with them. And such was this which he here
produces. For in case Manichaeus his Name had been in the Gospel as an Apostle
of Christ's appointing, this Argument of St. Augustine had not been sufficient.
For there might be sufficient reason from the Churches Authority to embrace the
Gospel; and yet if the Scripture had been plain, he ought to have believed
Manichaeus his Apostleship, though the Church disowned it. As I will prove by
an undeniable Instance: Suppose a Jewish Proselyte to have argued just after
the same manner against Jesus being the Messiah; the Apostles go about to prove
that he was so, by the Testimony of the Prophets: No, says he, I can allow no
such Argument: because the same Authority of the Jewish Church which persuaded
me to believe the Prophets, does likewise persuade me not to believe Jesus to
be the Messiah. If it be so far from holding in this case, neither can it in
the other. For it proceeds upon a very feeble Supposition, that no Church can
deliver a Book for Canonical, but it must judge aright concerning all things
relating to it. Which unavoidably makes the Jewish Church infallible at the
same time it condemned. Christ as a Deceiver. But this was only a witty
velitation in St. Augustine, used by Rhetoricians, before he entered into the
Merits of the Cause. And it is very hard when such sayings shall at every turn
be quoted, against his more mature and well weighed judgment.

What noise is there made in the world with that one saying of his, I should
not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority os the Cathelick Church moved me?
And the Defender brings it to prove the Church more visible than Scripture.
Whereas, he means no more by it, but that the authority of the Church was
greater to him, than that De^ p. 2.
of Manichaeus. For he had been swayed by his authority to reject the Gospel;
and now he rejects that authority, and believes the Catholic Church rather
than him. And this does not make the Churches authority greater than Scripture,
but more visible than that of Manichaeus.

But if St. Augustin's Testimony here be allowed to extend farther, yet it
implies no more than that the constant, universal Tradition of the Scripture by
the Catholic Church, makes it appear credible to us. What can be deduced hence
as to the Churches Infallibility in interpreting Scripture, or the Roman
Churches authority in delivering it?

The Arrian Controversy gave a great disturbance to the Christian Church; and
no less a man than the Emperor Constantine thought there was no such way to
put an end to it, as to search the Scriptures about it; As he declared to the
Council of Nice at their meeting, as Theodoret says. It is true, he spoke to
the Guides of Theod. l. 1. c. 6.
the Church assembled in Council, but his words are remarkable, viz. That the
Books of Scripture do plainly instruct us what we are to believe concerning the
Deity, if we search them with peaceable minds. Methinks Bellarmine bestows no
great Complement on Constantine Bellar. de Ver. Dei, l 4. c. 11.
for this saying, when he says, He was a great Emperor, but no great Doctor.
This had been indeed saucy and scurrilous in others, but it was no doubt good
manners in him.

St. Hilary commends his Son Constantius, because he would have Hilar. l. 2. ad
Constant.
this Controversy ended by the Scriptures; and he desires to be heard by him
about the sense of the Scriptures concerning it; which he was ready to show,
not from new Writings, but from Gods Word.

Athanasius seems to question the usefulness of Councils in this matter,
because the Scripture of it self was sufficient to put an end to Athanas. de
Synodis Tom. 1. p. 873. Tom. 2. p. 197. Tom. 1. c. Great.
it. And elsewhere says, that it is plain enough to those who search for
Truth. And in general he asserts their sufficiency and clearness for the
discovery of Truth.

When a Controversy was raised in St. Basil's time about the Trinity, the best
Expedient that great man could think of for putting Basil. Epist. 80. Tom. 3.
Epist. 1, and 284
an end to it, was to refer it to the Scriptures. In another place he commends
it as the best way to find out Truth, to be much in the study of the
Scriptures; and says that the Spirit of God did thereby lead to all things
useful.

Epiphanius was well acquainted with all the Heresies of the Church, and the
best means to suppress them; and certainly he would never have taken such pains
to refute so many Heresies out of Scripture, if he had looked on the Church as
the Infallible Judge of Controversies. For he not only undertakes to give the
sense of Scripture for the ending of Controversies, but he supposes all Persons
capable of understanding it, that will apply themselves to it. Which he Haer.
75. p. 923 943, 989.
several times affirms in the consutation of his last Heresy.

I shall conclude with St. Chrysostom, who speaks to this purpose, to a person
so offended at the Sects and Heresies among Christians, that he did not know
whom or what to believe: ^he Scriptures, says Chrysostom. in Acta Apost. Hom. 33.
he are pla^ and true, and it is an easy matter to judge by them; if a man
agrees with the S^^iptures, he is a Christian; if not, he is out of that ^oll.
But men di^fer about the sense of Scripture. What, says he, h^ve ye not a
(...) and judgment? And after the answering several other Cav^ls, l^ concludes,
Let us submit to the Divine Law, and d^^ what is pleasing t^ that and that will
bring us to Heaven. And in another place, If ^e s^udy the Scriptures, we shall
understand both true In Joh. Hom: 53
Doctrine and a good li^e. And again, the Scriptures are the Door which k^^p
out Heretics, which establish our minds in the Truth, and suffer Ib Hom. 58
us not to be sedu^ed.

Thus I have given somewhat a clearer view of the sense of the Primitive Church
in this m^tter, than could be taken from two single passages of Tertullian and
St. Augustine; and I have been so far from swelling or enlarging this as far as
I could, that I have made choice only of these, out of many others which I
could have produced. But if these be not sufficient, a Volume will not
satisfy; which it were not hard to make on this Subject, out of the Fathers.

(3) It is time now to examine the Inconveniences alleged against Persons
judging of matters of Faith according to the Scriptures:

(1) That God Almighty would then leave us at Uncertainties, if he gave us a
Rule, and ^eft every one to be his own Judge; for that were to leave every
fantastical m^n to c^use as he pleases.

To this was answered, (1) That this Objection does not reach those of the
Church of Englan^, which receives the three Creeds, and embraces the four
General Councils, and professes to hold nothing contrary to any U^iversal
Tradition of the Church from the Apostles times. And that we have often offered
to put the Controversies between us and the Church of Rome upon that issue.

To this Answer the Replier says, That they do not charge our Church with not
prof^ssing these things, but for erring against her own Reply, p. 18
Prof^ssion, and deserting that Church to which all these Authorities bear
Testimony, and of which her Progenitors and first Reformers had been Members,
and from whose hands she received what soever she had, either of Scripture,
Creeds, Councils or Tradition, and consequently whose judgment she was bound to
follow.

Whether we act against our Profession or not, it is plain the Rule of our
Church does not by this Profession leave every one to follow his own fancy, and
to believe as he pl^ses. But wherein is it that we thus Act against our
Profession? Do we reject the ^reeds, Councils, and Universal Tradition in our
Deeds? Wherein? In deserting the Communion of the Church of Rome? And is the
necessity of that contained in the Creeds here received? In the ^our Councils?
^y Universal Tradition? For this I refer to the foregoing D^scourse about the
Unity of the Catholic Church. But we received these things from the Church of
Rome. So we do the old T^stament from the Jews, must we therefore hold
Communion still with them? Are we bound therefore to follow the Judgment of the
Jewish Chur^^? But I do not understand how we received these things from the
Authority of the Church of Rome. We received the Scriptures from Universal
Tradition derived from all the Apostolical ^hurches; and so the Creeds and
Councils; and such an Universal Tradition is the thing we desire; for the
Trent-Creed, our forefathers never knew or received as part of that Faith
without which there is no Salvation.

But here the Defender grows brisk, and says, All Heretics since the first
^our General Councils, may say the very same which I say for Def: p: 21:
the Church of England; and all before them the Equivalent. Arius, Macedonius,
Nestorius, and Entyches, might have said as much of the Cr^eds before them; and
all complain of the Villainous Fact^ns in the Church against them. My Plea for
the Church of England has justified them all. [The same thing is said in sewer
words by the Replier.] That this Plea justifies the Arrians, and condemns the
Nicene Reply, p. 19
Fathers, vindicates the Eutychians Nestorians, and Donatists, and confounds
all General Councils.

Lest therefore I should seem to betray the Church of England, instead of
defending it, I shall show the Reasonableness and Equity of this Plea, and its
great difference from that of the Ancient Heretics condemned by General
Councils, or the Ancient Church.

(1) The Ancient Heretics were condemned by that Rule of Faith which the
Church always received, v z. the Scriptures; but the Council of T^ent set up a
new Rule of Faith on purpose that they might condemn us for Heretics, viz. in
making Tradition equal with Scripture, which is directly contrary to the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church; as I have already showed. The method of
General Councils was to have the Books of Scripture placed in the middle of
them on a Table, as the Rule they were to judge by. Act Synodi Ephesians. p. 175.
Hist. Council. To. 1. p. 498.
And Richerius, a Doct^^ of the Scrbon, not only affirms the Custom, but says
it was for (...) Reason, That the Fathers of the Councils might be admonished,
that all things were to be examined by the standard of the Gospel.

Bellarmin affirms the Council of Nice, To have drawn its Conclusion Bell. de
Council. l. 2. c. 12.
out of Scriptures; and the same he affirms of the 6th General Council; and he
might as well have done it of the rest; their main design, being only to
establish the Doctrine of the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ. But the Case
of Councils came to be very different, when they took upon them to define other
matters for which they had no Color in Scripture (as the 2d Council of Nice
did, which was the first that went upon Tradition) and then the Christian
Church did not show such Respect to them; as was most apparent in the Case of
this Council of Nice, which was universally rejected in these Western parts,
(Rome excepted) as appears by the Council of Fran^ford, and the unexceptionable
Testimonies of Eghinardus, Hincmarus, and others. Would this have been a
sufficient Argument against Charlemaign and the Western Bishops, that they
joined in the Plea of the Ancient Heretics, and none were ever condemned by
the Church, but they made such complaints against the Proceedings of Councils,
as they did? It is certain that Leo Armenus in the East, as well as Charles,
Niceph. cum Leone Armeno Disput. ed. Combefis, p. 162.
and the Western Church, rejected that Council, as contrary to Scripture; which
shows that neither in the East or West, did they think themselves so tied up by
Definitions of Councils, proceeding in such a manner; but that they were at
full Liberty to examine, and if they saw Cause, to reject such Definitions.
While Councils did declare, that they intended to make use of no other Rule but
Scripture, and to deliver only the Sense of the Catholic Church from the
beginning, a great regard was to be showed to them: but when they set up
another Rule, the Christian Church had just Reason not to submit to their
Decrees. And to say, This is the Plea of all Heretics, is just as if an
innocent Person might not be allowed to plead not Guilty, because the greatest
Malefactors do the same. There must be some certain Rules whereby to proceed in
this matter: and this is the first We fix upon, That they proceed as the
Ancient Councils did according to Scriptures.

(2.) The Ancient Heretics were condemned by such Councils, as did represent
the Universal Church after another manner, than the Council of Trent did. I do
not say, There was ever such a General Council, as did fully represent the
Universal Church, which could not be done without Provincial Councils summoned
b^^ore in all parts of Christendom, and the De^^egation from them of such
Persons as were to deliver their Sense ^n the matter of Faith, to be debated in
the General Council; and I have Reason to question whether this were ever done.
But however, there is a very great difference in the Ancient Councils from the
modern, as to this point of Representing, for in them there was the Consent of
all the Patriarchs, and a general Summons for the Bishops from all parts to
appear. But in the Modern Councils, four Patriarchs, and the Bishops under
them, have been excluded; and the 5th has Summoned the Bishops under him to
meet together, and then has called this a General Council. Which is just as if
in the time of the Heptarchy, the King of Mercia should assemble the States
under him, and call the Convention of them, The Parliament of England. Thus in
the Council of Trent, the Pope Summons the Bishops that owned his Supremacy,
and had taken Oaths to him, to meet together, and would have this pass for a
General Council. When the Council met, and Cardinal Hosius was appointed
President in it; Stanistaus Orechovius, a warm and zealous Romanist, writes to
Hosius, That it would very much conduce to their Reputation and Interest, if
the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch, were Summoned to the Council,
because the Greeks and Armenians depended upon them: And he could not
understand how the Catholic Church could be Represented without them, nor how
the Council could be called Ecumenical. To which Hosivs Replied, That the Pope
being Ecumenical Patriarch, a Council called by him, was an Ecumenical
Council. Now this we say, is extremely different Hos. Oper. p. 373.
Quandoquidem solus ille vere dicitur and est Oecumenicus patriarcha, quod
Concilium ipsius est Auctoritate Congregatum, id vere dicitur oecumenicum.
from the Notion of an Ecumenical Council in the Ancient times, and overthrows
the Rights of other Churches, as they were settled by the Four General Councils;
and therefore the Case is very different as to being condemnd by General
Councils, and by the late Conventions assembled by the Popes Authority.

(3.) Themselves allow that some Councils may be, and ought to be rejected; and
therefore all our business is to enquire whether we may not with as much Reason
reject some Councils, as they do others. They reject the Council of Ariminum,
which together with that of S^leucia (which sat at the same time) make up the
most General Council we read of in Church History. For Bellarmin De Council. l.
1. ^. 6.
owns that there were 600. Bishops in the Western part of it. So that there
were many more Bishops assembled than were in the Council of Nice; there was no
Exception against the Summons, or the Bishops present; and yet the Authority of
this Council is rejected, because it was too much influenced by Constantius,
and his Agents. The 2d Council of Ephesus wanted no just Summons, no presence
of Patriarchs, or number of Bishops, yet this is rejected, because its
Proceedings were too Violent. The Councils of Constantinople against Images are
rejected; because, but one Patriarch was present in either of them. Now I
desire to know, whether it be not as lawful to except against other Councils,
as against these, supposing the Reasons to be the same; and greater Evidence to
be given in these latter Times, of the Truth of the Allegations. Besides, we
find they are divided in the Church of Rome, concerning their latter Councils:
Some say, The Councils of Pisa, Constance and Basil, were true General
Councils, and that the Council of Lateran under Leo X. was not so; others say,
That the former have not the Authority of General Councils, but the latter
has. Some say, That there have been 18. General Councils; so the Roman Editors
of the Councils, and others; but a great number of these are rejected by
others, who allow but 8. of the number, viz. those wherein the Eastern and
Western Bishops met. And so the Councils of Lateran and Trent, besides others,
are cut off. What becomes then of the Articles of Faith, defined by those
Councils? For they cannot be received on the account of their Authority.
However, we find this Objection lies equally against them, as against us. For,
do not both these differing Parties side with the Ancient Heretics, as much as
we do? For they except against the Supreme Judicature in the Church, and
decline the Judgment of these Councils, as much as those Heretics did the
Councils of their own Times.

These are therefore but ordinary T^picks, which may be reasonble or not, as
they are applied.

(2.) It was answered, That the way proposed, does not hinder men's believing as
they please, i. e. without sufficient Reason for their Faith; several Instances
were given: As, believing the Roman Church to be the Catholic, without any
color of Scripture, Reason or Antiquity; (as is now fully showed in the
foregoing Discourse) believing against the most convincing Evidence of their
own Senses. Believing the lawfulness of the Worship of Images can be reconciled
with Gods forbidding it; the Communion in one Kind with Christ's Institution;
and Praying in an unknow Tongue, with the 14 Chap^er of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians.

To this the Replier says only, that these are voluntary assumpti Repl. p. 8
ons without proof: and his saying so, needs no Answer.

The Defender shelters himself under the Catholic Church, and Def. p. 23
resolves not to put to Sea with the Answerer about these things. But he knows
very well, we utterly deny any of these to have been the practice of the
Universal Church according to Vincentius Lerinensis his Rules; by which we are
content to be tried. And although he seems to wish for such a trial, yet I know
a reason why they ought to decline it, because I am certain they can never make
it good in any one of them.

(2) The second Inconvenience objected was, That this would make the wisdom of
God fall beneath the discretion of prudent Lawgivers; who do not make Laws, and
leave every man to be his own judge as to right or wrong.

It was answered three ways:

(1) That there are Inconveniences on both sides, and one ought to be provided
against, as well as the other; sor as the people are not to be their own
Judges, so it may happen that an Usurper may pretend to the right of
Interpreting the Laws, only to justify his Usurpation.

(2) That the People are allowed in some sense to interpret the Laws, or else
they could never understand the duty they owe to their lawful King, and to
justify his Rights against all the pretenses of Usurpers.

To this the Replier says nothing, and the Defender says that which is next
to nothing to the first, and takes no notice of the second Answer; and I think
I therein tell him plainly enough, what I would be at. He says, I mean
receiving and holding the true faith by Def. p 24.
Usurpation. Nothing was farther from my thoughts. But I had thought it were
easy enough to know whom I meant, viz. such a one as pretends to an Infallible
Chair, which they cannot deny themselves to be the highest Usurpation, if he
cannot prove his Title by Scripture, as we are sure he cannot.

(3) That in this Case a Rule is given to direct persons in the way to Heaven,
and therefore must be capable of being understood by those who are to make use
of it for that end. Which being the greatest concernment to Mankind, they are
therefore obliged to search into it for their own Salvation; but we exclude not
the help of Spiritual Guides, and embrace the ancient Creeds of the Church.

To this the Replier answers two things:

(1) That an Infallible Guide is necessary to secure persons from wilful
Errors, which he says God has provided. From wilful Error! this is new
Doctrine indeed, that God has provided a remedy for wilful Error. Had not our
Savior himself an Infallible Spirit, and yet we do not read that ever he
secured men from wilful Error? or ever designed to do it. But suppose an
Infallible Judge could do this, he does not tell us where he is to be found, who
he is, and in what manner he does thus secure men, which are very necessary
Enquiries; and without being satisfied in all these points, we are still left
to be our own Judges, so far as concerns the way to Salvation; since at the day
of Judgment we must answer for our selves, than which there can be no greater
obligation to care and sincerity in judging. Suppose a man's life depends upon
the benefit of his Clergy, and one comes to him and tells him, You are an
ignorant man, and liable to great mistakes in reading, therefore I advise you
by no means to trust to your own skill in Reading, for it is a horrible dark
Letter, and many have been mistaken that were more Book learned than you;
therefore take my counsel, there is Mr. Ordinary who understands Book-learning
a thousand times better than you or I, trust him for the Reading, and no doubt
you will escape. Ay, Sir, says the man, all that is very true that you say,
but my life lies at stake; and how if Mr. Ordinary's Reading will not be
allowed by the Judge for mine, then I am a lost man past recovery; therefore I
am resolved to learn to read my self; and to that end I will make the best use
of his skill to instruct me beforehand that I may be able to answer for my
self. This needs no Application.

But I do not see how an Inf^^lible (...) should be necessary to particular
persons in order to (...) Salvation, upon the ^rinciples owned and received by
the greatest Divines in the Roman Church. Circa ea quae sunt de necessitate
salutis, sufficienter instruuntur ^ Spiritu sancto, 2, 2 Qu. 8 ar. 4 ad: 1:
Donum Intellectus nunquam se subtrahit sanctis circa ea quae sunt ^e^^^saria ad
salutem; ib; ad 3
For Aquinas determines that every one that has saving Grace, has likewise a
gift of understanding whereby h^ is ^ussiciently instructed in all things
necessary to Salvation, and that it is never withdrawn from them as to those
things. If this Doctrine hold good, I do not see any such necessity for persons
to look after an Infallible Guide, as there is to look after saving Grace.

Gulielmus Parisiensis says, That men's not looking after the way of Gul.
Parisiens. de Legibus c: 21 p: 57, 58:
Salvation themselves, is that which will d^mn them. And in case of difference
among Guides, if a man sincerely makes application to God, to know the Truth he
does not question but such is the mercy of God to keep such a one from
dangerous Error; or if he does suffer him to fall into Error with a good mind,
it shall not be imputed to him. It is a Doctrine generally received in the
Schools, That where ever God does Page: 59 D. Col. 1.
bestow his Grace, there goes along with it such a gift of understanding, as
keeps them from being deceived in the matters they believe in order to
Salvation. Henricus a Gandavo thus expresses it, That as Faith Henr. a Gand.
Sum. Art. 13. q. 4. n. 3.
makes the mind to rest on the Authority of the Scripture, so this gift of
understanding makes them perceive the Truth of what they are to believe. And
what need then such an Infallible Guide?

(2) He says, That ancient Creeds will not serve, unless there be a power in
the Church to make n^w decisions in matters of Faith.

This ought to have been a little proved. For in truth we are apt to think the
Faith once delivered to the Saints as suffi^ient to carry us to Heaven, as it
was in the Apostles times. A man is heir to a good Estate, which by many
Generations is derived down from his Ancestors, and he has the Original Deeds
in his hands; one comes to him and tells him, ^t is a very fine Estate you are
heir to, and it is a thousand pities you should want a good Title to it; I will
put you into a way to get it, if you will give up your musty old Deeds, and put
your self into the hands of such persons as I shall name to you, they shall
make you a new Settlement, and add several Parcels to your Estate which you had
not before. I am content, says the Heir, with my Ancestors Estate, and I will
never part with my old Deeds for all your new Settlements; for I am sure my
Ancestors would never deceive me; but I know not what designs you with your new
Settlements may have upon me, and therefore I pray let me alone with my old
Deeds.

The Defender here dances upon Ropes, he makes swift and quick Def. p. 26
motions, but he stands on a slender bottom, and he knows not whereon to fix,
but would seem ^o say something, but not enough to afford scope for an Answer.
That which he aims at, is, That unless a man by judging controversies by the
Infallible Rule, be able to come to an Infallible Determination, then
controversies will not be infallibly determined, if every man be left to be his
own Judge. And I am clearly of his mind. But the point is, whether such an
infallible determination of Controversies be the necessary way to Heaven? If a
man can judge well enough to carry him thither, that is as much as I am
concerned for at present.

But he goes on. Who can hope to he saved without pleasing God? P. 27.
and every body knows that without Faith it is impossible to please him. There
wants only one little thing to be added, and without an Infallible Judge of
Controversies, there can be no Faith. But this was forgotten.

But after all he says, I confess that Scripture is not the Rule of
Controversies. I pray why? for I take it not only to be the Rule, but to be the
only Rule. For, says he, they are not ended till one side or other be certain.
that then? is there no Rule that does not put an end to Controversies? Nay
their own Writers say a Rule, as a Rule cannot put an end to them, and
therefore a Judge is necessary. But I must answer such things as they bring.

In matters of good and evil, I said every man's conscience is his immediate
Judge, and why not in matters of truth and falsehood; unless we suppose men's
involuntary mistakes to be more dangerous than their wilful sins.

Here the Defender triumphs. How? says he, are we before we are aware come to
conscience at last? I heartily wish we were, t^^t would tend more to the ending
of controversies than an Infallible Judge.

But he wonders that in Disputes of Religion it should before we are aware come
to conscienoe at last. Good man! he was not aware that there was any thing of
conscience in the matter. Does he think it is only matter of interest we
contend about? so those who believe no Religion themselves, think all
controversies about Religion, to have nothing of conscience in them.

But after a long harangue, he says, Toat conscience can do no more P. 28.
than secure a man from being judged for sinning against his conscience: But if
it lead him to do ill things, or embrace a ^r^ng Faith, what can he answer for
the sin of having that conscience?

I grant where it is a sin to have such a conscience, the conscience does not
excuse the faults a man commits by it. But the Question we are upon is, whether
it is not a sin for a man to have such a conscience; and we are not upon the
point of an Erroneous conscience, but of an Infallible Judge of conscience in
matters of good and evil. And it is strange the Defender should not see this.
There is no question, but there are as disputable Points in Morality, as in
matters of Faith; and we think Men's committing Sin, is at least as dangerous to
their souls, as embracing what they call Heresy. Now I desire to know, why it
is not as necessary to have an infallible Guide in Manners, as in Faith? But,
if they think that Men may be let alone to judge as well as they can in such
matters, as their Salvation certainly depends upon, what monstrous
Inconvenience is it, if they use the same Liberty in matters of Speculation? I
would he had given some better Answer, that I might have had an occasion to
have enforced this matter. For in truth it seems to me, a very strange thing,
when I read in the New Testament, such terrible Denunciations against the
practice of Sin, and that men's happiness or misery depends so much on their
doing Good or Evil; and so very little said as to men's errors or mistakes of
Judgment (where there is a general Sincerity, as to a good Life, and a care to
please God) that so much weight should be laid on an infallible Judge in matters
of Controversy, and no care taken for an infallible Guide in matters of
Practice.

But I am to consider, that it tends more to the interest of some People to
swagger about an infallible Faith, than to secure the Practice of Virtue, and a
good Life, which yet is certainly the great design and concernment of the
Christian Religion, however it may seem to some, that an infallible Faith and
Church are all in all.

To show we do not allow every man to believe as he pleases, I said, We not
only allow the Assistance of spiritual Guides, and embrace the ancient Creeds;
but think no man ought to follow his own fancy, against Doctrines so
universally received from the Apostles times.

But all this signifies nothing to him, unless our Guides be Infallible; and he
says, They are plainly no Guides of Christ's appointing, who Def. p. 29.
teach any other Doctrine than he taught. Very well! Let this then be the Rule,
whereby we are to judge whether Guides are Infallible or not. But then have a
care of telling us we must believe what. Doctrine it was that Christ taught,
upon the word of these Infallible Guides, for by that Doctrine we are to judge
whether they be Infallible or not. The different methods of his Proceeding and
mine in this matter, will be best understood by this Comparison. A Man that
goes to enquire the way to a Place (he had a great desire to be at, but was
afraid of mistaking the way) of two Men, and how he should avoid the dangerous
passages in it; the one like a plain ho^^st Man, tells him there are
diffi^ulties in it, but he will give him a Book of the Roads, which acqu^ints
him with all the dangerous turnings he bids him look well to his Steps, and
observe the way he goes, and when he is to seek to ^e^rch his Book, and ask
such as understand the wav better th^n he does^ Alas! ^aith the other Man, this
is a very sad Direction to him, for his Book may be misunderstood, and the
Guides may mistake themselves with all their Care; but I will put him into an
infallible way, whereby he may avoid all the dangers. Ay Sir, says the
Traveller, you speak indeed to the purpose, I pray acquaint me with it. There
is, says he to him, at such a Hill, a Person, who by the help of Wings, not
only flies over all that dangerous passage, but carries all those safe, who
take hold of him: You have therefore no better way than to pinion your self to
him, and you will be safe But says the Traveller, how if he and I should
tumble down together, what would become of us both? Never fear that, says he:
But how should I help fearing of it? Have any that he carried thither, come
back and assured others of the safety of the passage? No. But how then? Why
says he, You are bound to believe what he says, for he affirms that he can do
it. But, says the Traveller, this is very hard I must venture Body and Soul
upon his skill and strength, and I must take his Word that he has both. This
seems very unreasonable to me, and therefore I am resolved to take the other
course, which tho it do not make such big boasts of it self, is much more
likely to be safe in the conclusion, having better Reason on its side, and
requiring a more constant care of my self, to which God has promised more of
his Grace and Assistance to secure me from all fatal mistakes of my way.

Where I mention Doctrines so universally received in the Christian Church from
the Apostles times, as those in the Creeds; The Defender makes a notable
Exception, As if, says he, any part of the universal Christian Doctrine were
lost, and all had not be^n always as universally retained as the Creeds. Then I
hope all the Points in Controversy between us and them* can be proved by as
clear and evident a Succession, as the Articles of the Creeds. If he can do
this, he will be a ^ampion indeed. I desire him to take his choice, either
Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church, or
which he pleases. I grant all true Christian Doctrine was universally retained,
as far as the Rule of it was so received; but if he means any of those
distinguishing points between us and them, when he comes to make it out, he
will be of another mind.

(3.) A third Inconvenience objected in the Papers, against the want of an
infallible Judge, was, That Scripture would be interpreted by Fancy; which is
the same thing as to follow Fancy.

To this it was answered.

(1.) That our Church owns the Creeds, Councils, Fathers, and Primitive Church,
more frankly than any other Church, and therefore cannot be suspected to leave
Scripture to be so interpreted.

The Replier says, We only pretend it, and do it not. That is to be Reply, p.
21.
proved, for bare saying it, will never convince us. But his proof is, because,
if we had done it, we had never deserted the Church of Rome; and our Answer is,
we therefore deserted the Communion of that Church, because She required owning
things from us, for which She had no Authority, either from Scripture, Creeds,
Councils or Fathers.

The Defender would have me answer directly, Whether it be not the same to
follow Fancy, as to interpret Scripture by it? As tho I were Def. p. 30.
examined at the Catechism, which requires all answers to be made by Yea or
Nay. I said enough to show the Question does not concern us; for we do not
allow Persons to interpret Scripture by Fancy. And withal. (2.) I asked some
other Questions to show, That those who pretend to Infallibity, may do things
as unreasonable as leaving Scripture to be interpreted by Fancy. And I have our
Saviors example for answering one question with another.

The Instances I gave, were these; The Church of Romes assuming to it self the
Power of interpreting the Rule, which concerns its own Power of interpreting;
which was to make it Judge in its own Cause, and to give it as great Power, as
if it made the Rule; and I further added, that Interest is as mischievous an
Interpreter of Scripture, as Fancy; and therefore, those who are so much
concerned, are not to be relied on, either in Councils, or out.

The Power of declaring Tradition is as Arbitrary a thing in the Church of
Rome, as interpreting Scripture by Fancy. There being no other Rule allowed by
it, but the Sense of the present Church.

The Replier, like a fair Adversary, gives his answer plainly; Reply. p. 21.
which consists in two things. (1.) That their Church gives no Sense of
Scripture, but what She received from Tradition of the foregoing Church, and so
he calls it Apostolical Tradition. But suppose there happen a Question, whether
it be so or not, must not all be resolved into the Authority of the present
Church, declaring what is Apostolical Tradition? And so it comes all to one.

(2.) He says, Tradition is public, and Fancy is private. But I say,
according to their Rules, Tradition is but public Fancy, and so Fancy in
particular Persons is a private Tradition; but whether public or private, if
it be equally Arbitrary, the Case is alike.

The Defender says, All this is besides the Business, and therefore slides off
as well as he can, with some slight touches, which deserve Def. p. 31.
no Answer.

(4.) If there be no infallible Judge, the Power of deciding matters of Faith
will be given to every particular man, for which no place can be showed.

The Answer was, That if by deciding matters of Faith, no more be meant, but
every man's being satisfied of the Reasons, why he believes one thing to be
true, and not another; that belongs to every man as he is bound to take care of
his Soul, and must give an account both to God and Man, of the Reason of his
Faith.

This, the Replier says, is bringing every Article of Faith to the Test of
Reply, p. 22.
ones own Reason; whereas Authority is the Correlative of Believing, and Reason
of Knowledge.

We do not pretend that every one that believes, should be able to judge from
mere Principles of Reason of the Credibility of the Doctrine proposed; it is
sufficient, if he finds it to be of Divine Revelation, by being contained in
Gods word. And it is not the Authority of the Church, but of Divine Revelation,
which Faith bottoms upon; the former is no more than an inducement to believe
those Books we call Scripture, to contain the word of God in them. But when we
find any Doctrine therein, we account that sufficient Reason for believing it.

The Defender finds no fault with our saying, We ought to be satisfied Def. p
32.
of the Reason why we believe; but the Question he puts, is, Whether there be
indeed any Reasons why they should believe besides the Authority of the Church?
He does not deny that particular Men ought to judge; but the meaning of the
Papers, he says, is, that they ought not to judge unreasonably.

Then we have no difference, for I assure him I never pleaded for men's judging
unreasonably. The Question then between us, is, Whether those who do not
believe upon the Infallible Authority of the Roman Catholic Church, Do judge
unreasonably? i. e. Whether there be equal Grounds to believe the Roman
Catholic Church Infallible, as there are to believe the Scriptures to be the
Word of God? We utterly deny the Roman Churches Infallibility to be necessary
to our believing the Scripture; for we receive that by an Universal Tradition
from all the Apostolical Churches; which is as clear for this, as it is wanting
for the other. And there^^re we must judge more reasonably. What follows about
the Infallibility promised to the Church, has been answered already.

As to the Canonical Book, I showed it was no Authoritative Decision by a Power
in the Church to make Books Canonical which were not so, but a mere giving
Testimony in a Matter of Fact, in which all parts of the Church are concerned;
and it depends as other Matters of Fact do, on the Skill and Fidelity of the
Reporters: And so far I own the truly Catholic Church to have Authority in any
Testimony, delivering down the Books of Scripture; but this proves no more
Infallibility in the Christian Church as to the Books of the New Testament,
than it does in the Jewish Church as to the Books of the Old Testament.

And thus much of the Authority of the Catholic Church in Matters of Faith.

III. Of the Reformation of the Church of England.
THere are so many Passages in the Papers relating to the Church of England, on
the Account of her Reformation, that I thought it the best Method of proceeding
to handle this Subject by itself. And there are these things charged upon it,
either in Terms or by Consequence, in the Papers, which as I am a Member of
this Church, I think my self bound to clear; for I could nor justify
continuing in her Communion, if she were justly liable to these Imputations.

1. That she has made a causless Breach in the Communion of the Catholic
Church.

2. That she has been the occasion of a World of Heresies crept into this
Nation.

3. That she has not sufficient Authority within her self, and yet denies an
Appeal to a higher Judicature.

4. That she contradicts her own Rule, viz. the Holy Scriptures.

5. That she subsists only on the Pleasure of the Civil Magistrate.

All these I shall examine with Care, and consider what has been said in
Defense of the Papers upon these Heads.

As to the charge of causless Breach in the Communion of the Catholic Church,
it lies in these Words, And by what Authority Men separate themselves from that
Church?

Which being spoken with respect to the Members of the Church of England, do
imply that they have made a Separation from the Communion of the Catholic
Church, and that they had no sufficient Authority for so doing, and therefore
are guily of Schism in it.

To the Question two Answers were given, 1. By distinguishing the truly
Catholic Church from the Roman Catholic: And a Distinction between these
being made out, (which is done in the first part of this Defense) It does not
follow that we have made a Breach in the Communion of the Catholic Church,
because we do not join in Communion with the Roman Catholic: This was
illustrated by the Example of a prosperous Usurper in a Kingdom, who challenges
a Title to the whole, by gaining a considerable part of it, and requires from
all the Kings Subjects within his Power, to own him to be rightful King;
whereupon the Question was put, Whether refusing to do it, were an Act of
Rebellion or of Loyalty? So in the Church, the Popes Authority over it, so as
to restrain Catholic Communion only to those who own it, is not only looked on
as an Usurpation by Us, but by all the Eastern Churches; and is in Truth
altering the Terms of Christian Communion from what they were in the truly
Catholic and Apostolic Church: Therefore since the Conditions required are
unreasonable, because different from them, what Breach has followed, is not to
be imputed to those who refuse these Terms, but to those who impose them; and
so the Guilt of it lies upon the Church of Rome, and not upon the Church of
England. This is the Substance of the Answer.

To which the Replier says, That the Eastern Churches cannot be Reply, p. 25.
parts of the Catholic Church, because they hold not the Apostolic Doctrine
contained in the Creeds and Councils owned by the Church of England. This has
been fully answered already. But he goes on, There were no other Churches then
in being, but those which were in Communion with the Church of Rome;
consequently the Church of England going out from them, separated her self from
the Catholic Apostolic Church.

And the Defender says, He expects I should show That truly Catholic Def. p.
39.
and Apostolic Church we held Communion with, when we separated from the
Roman. He desires to know where the men live, that people may go to them, and
learn of them, what their Faith is, etc.

In answer to this, I say, That there is no necessity for us to show any Church
distinct from others, which in all things we agreed with; because we hold all
particular Churches liable to Errors and Corruptions; and that the notion of
the Catholic Church may take in such Particulars from which we may see reason
to dissent: But we do not thereby exclude them from being parts of the
Catholic Church; but we say they are no Infallible Rule to us, and therefore
we ought to proceed by what the Church has received as an Infallible Rule, and
not by the Communion of other Churches. And supposing there were no particular
Church we did in all things join with, the Church of England might Reform it
self without separating from the Catholic Apostolic Church. For it was then
in the Case, particular Churches were in after the Councils of Ariminum and
Seleucia; for then the standard of Catholic Communion, set up by the Council
of Nice* was taken down; and the setting of it up again, was to oppose the
Consent of the Christian Church in the most General Council that ever
Assembled. I do not say, this Council obliged men to profess Arrianism; but
that it took away the Authority of the Nicene Creed in as valid a manner as the
Council by its Acts could do it; I ask then, by what Authority any particular
Church could set up the Nicene Faith; and if not, how it was possible to be
restored? And I desire to know in what Country the people lived, who then owned
the Nicene Faith against such a General Council? And where were the Churches in
being, which at that time adhered to it? But if in this Case the British
Church, tho alone, was bound notwithstanding such a general consent, to Reform
it self, and to restore the Authority of the Nicene Creed; the same Case it is,
when the Western Church was oppressed and hindered from Reforming Errors and
Abuses by the Usurpation and Tyranny of the Papal Faction; the Church of
England was then obliged to exercise its own Inherent Right, in bringing things
to the state they were in, in the time of the first General Councils. In
matters of Reformation, the main enquiries are, whether there be just Occasion,
and due Authority for it, and a certain Rule to proceed by; the last and least
important Question is, what Company we have to join with us in it? For there is
a Natural Right i^ every Church to preserve its own just Liberties, and
consequently to throw off such an Usurpation as that of the Popes was. And the
main Point in order to a Reformation, was casting off the Popes Power, as an
encroachment upon the Ancient and Canonical Privileges of the Western
Churches, which was done here by a General consent even of those Bishops, who
held in Communion with the Roman Church, as far as those could do who rejected
the Head of it. And this is the Fundamental Point as to the matter of Schism:
If the Pope, as Head of the Church, does influ^^ce Catholic Communion so far,
that it is necessary to Salvation to live in subjection to him, it will be very
hard to justify separation from that Body whereof he is the visible Head. But
if there be no Scripture, no Councils, no Universal Tradition for this, as the
Roman Catholic Bishops here declared in the time of H. 8. then there can be no
Schism in acting without Authority from him, or against his Authority. And
whether any other Church joined with ours or not, is no more material to the
justification of the Reformation, than the lawfulness of any one Counties
Acting for the Royal Family in the late times of Usurpation, did depend upon
the concurrence of others with it. What more commonly talked of, and magnified
in the Church of Rome, than the Reformation of the M^nastick Orders? And some
of the person^ have been Canonized who have done it; But in this Case, the
Governor of a Monastic Order, proceeding according to the Rules of his Order,
does a very justifiable thing, tho never another Monastry join with him in it;
because he only does his duty, and proceeds by the Rules which are received by
the whole Order. This, I say, was the Case of the Church of England in
Reforming according to Scripture, and the sense of the Primitive Church; and if
others joined, so much the better; if not, the Act justifies it self, and needs
not the concurrence of others to make it good.

(2.) The 2d Answer was, That there is a difference between voluntary
Separation, and that which is unavoidable, in case unreasonable conditions of
Communion be required.

The Defender pretends He can by no means understand this unavoidable Def. p.
39.
Separation; because tho Men be separated from the Communion of a Church, yet
they may continue of the same Faith if they please: but if they have another
Faith, they separate themselves, even supposing Usurpation, or whatever I would
have.

Now this seems very strange to me from a person who knows the Terms of
Communion with the Roman Church. Can any Man be a true Member thereof, who does
not own and profess to believe the Popes Supremacy, Transubstantiation, etc. Is
he not by the constitution of that Church required to believe all that the
Roman Church believes? But suppose men do not, and cannot for their hearts
believe as that Church believes; can they notwithstanding be Members of it? No,
he confesses a different Faith unavoidably casts them out. But then to believe
otherwise than the Roman Church believes, casts them out unavoidably. The
Question now is, who is the cause of this casting out, those who cannot believe
those Doctrines, or those who require the belief of them in order to communion?
If these Doctrines be evident in Scripture, or were defined by the four General
Councils, or are contained in the ancient Creeds, or can be clearly proved by
Universal Tradition, then we confess the blame falls on those who refuse; but
if none of those can be made appear to the satisfaction of a man's mind who
desires to search out Truth, then their separation is unavoidable, and there is
no reason to make it their voluntary act. But, says the Defender, a man's faith
is his own voluntary act. I grant that; but not a voluntary Def: p: 40:
cause of Separation: which two ought to be distinguished in this case. As in
the case of Usurpation, the owning the lawful King is a voluntary act; but if
an Usurper threatens to banish him if he does not abj^re him; upon whom must
the blame be laid, upon the man's voluntary act, or the Usurpers voluntary
imposing such a penalty on those who do nothing but what is just? The Defender
did not consider that the making such terms of communion was a voluntary act
too, and being a thing unreasonable and unjust, it leaves the blame upon the
imposers.

But he denies any such thing as Usurpation in the P^pe, because he has showed
by his reiterated Approbation of the Bishop of Meaux's Book, that he is content
with that submission and obedience, which the Holy Councils and Fathers have
always ta^ght the Faithful.

These are very fine words to deceive the unwary. But I pray tell us, who is to
declare what the Councils and Fathers have always taught the Faithful? Who is
to be Judge? Is not the Pope himself? For no Council will be allowed without his
Approbation and Confirmation. And is not this then a very pretty Artifice to
draw weak persons into a snare? For my part, I do not wonder at the Popes
Approbation of the Bishop of Meaux's Book, no more than I would at a Gentleman's
approbation of a fine spun Net when he goes a fishing, which is not so easily
discerned, and yet does as effectually catch the Game: Some there are still who
love to be deceived, and some have more arts of deceiving than others; and
those who gain most by it, will be sure to give them the greatest approbation.

The Defender proceeds: Suppose there were Usurpation, must people therefore
believe otherwise than they did before; as that there is no change of
Substance, no Purgatory, no more than two Sacraments, Page 41.
and the rest?

The Question about Faith is one thing, and about Separation is another. We are
now upon the latter of these; and in this case we are most concerned about the
Popes Authority, since he is looked on by you as the Head of the Catholic
Church, and the Center of Communion. If there were no such Usurpation, yet we
should never decline giving an account of the Reasons of our Faith, as to
Sacraments, Purgatory, or what you please of the Points in difference between
us. Which I neither desire to make greater or lesser, than really they are. For
there may be deceit both ways.

As to his renewing the Question, by what authority we separate? I answer, by
the same authority which makes it unlawful for us Def. p. 42.
to profess what we do not believe; and to practice what we believe God has
forbidden: This is just as if one should ask by what authority men are bound to
be honest and sincere; and to prefer Gods Laws before men's? For the Church of
Rome requires from the Members of her Communion, besides matters of Faith, such
acts of Worship, which, whatever they be, to those who believe as they do, must
be Idolatrous to those that believe as we do. For example, suppose in China
where they believe God to be the same with the World, that honor of the
Chinese (who on that account think they may lawfully give Divine Worship to
any part of the World) to be converted by the Missionaries, who tell them the
parts of the World cannot be God, for he is Infinite and Immutable, and Wise,
and Powerful, which the Parts of the World are not, and cannot be, and
therefore they cannot without Idolatry give Divine Worship to them; the
Mandarins require their giving the same Adorations that others do; they refuse
and say, Whatever you may do, who believe God and the World to be the same,
certainly it would be gross Idolatry in us, who believe the thing you worship,
to be nothing but dull insensible parts of the World. And if now it should be
asked, By what authority they separate? Is there not a plain answer, By the
authority of God himself, who requires Adoration to be given to himself alone?

But who shall be Judge, says the Defender? God himself will be Page 43.
Judge a^ the great Day, whether we will or not. And I think that is more to be
regarded, than putting an end to Controversies. If we be not sincere and
faithful to him and his service, if we do not act and judge with a regard to the
Judgment of that day, all the pretenses in the world of a Judge in
Controversies, then will stand in no stead. If we do use our careful endeavors
to know the will of God, and to do it, we have great reason to hope God will
show mercy to us; and then the Question will not appear of such wonderful
importance, Who shall be Judge here?

But we do not decline a reasonable Judgment in this world; we only desire our
Judges may be fair and equal, and such as God has appointed. And if those who
would judge for us, pretend that they have a Divine Commission, we desire to
know who shall be judge of this pretense? We have no reason to trust them; and
they will not trust us. So that here we are stopped at first, unless the
Commission be produced, which impowers those persons to judge, who challenge
such authority over our judgments. A general indefinite obscure Commission,
which may extend to all other Guides in the Church as well as to them, will by
no means be sufficient. Let us see whom Christ has appointed in his own words,
and we will submit; for we look on him as Supreme Judge and Legislator to his
Church; and if he has thought fit to appoint an Infallible Judge, we have done.
But we desire to know where he has done it? Has he granted any new Commission
from Heaven? No. Is it to be found in Scripture? Yes. But then I pray observe,
you tell us Scripture cannot be Judge in any Controversy, being ambiguous,
uncertain, general, mute, flexible, and what not? and because it cannot hear
Parties, nor give a decisive voice, it can by no means be a Judge of
Controversies. How then can the Scripture put an end to this Controversy, when
it can put an end to none? Are the Expressions in this matter so particular, so
clear, so peremptory, that we cannot mistake about the sense of them? If so,
then I perceive, notwithstanding all the hard words given it, Scripture may be
Judge as well as a Rule, because it is fitted to put an end to such a
Controversy, which is as doubtful as any; and why not as well to all the rest?
We are not then afraid of this Question, Who shall be Judge? But we desire to be
satisfied about it; and to know not only who has appointed him, but who he is,
whether the Pope in Cathedr^, or a General Council? For this is very material
for us to know, since even at this day you are far from being agreed about it.
The Assembly of the Clergy of France have solemnly declared within few years,
That they do not believe the Popes Judgment Cler. Gallica. Declaratio Prop. 4.
1682. Censura Hungarica. 24 Oct. 1682.
to be Infallible. The Clergy of Hungary have rejected and censured this
Declaration as absurd and detestable, and have forbidden any to read, hold or
teach the Doctrine, and own the Pope to be the only Infallible Judge of
Controversies. A Sorbon Doctor in his Notes on the Hungarian Censure, calls
this, the new Heresy of the Jesuits; on the other side, large Volumes have
been Printed to prove, that the right of judging infallibly, belongs only to
the Pope.

And now very lately comes out a Learned Book by another Doctor Tractat. de
Libertat. Eccles. Gallican. Leodii, 1684. Regale Sacerdotium Romano Pontifici
assertum. Auctore Eugenio Lombardo, 1684. De Antiqua Ecclesiae Dis^iplina
Dissert. 5. Auct. Lud. Ellies Du Pin, 1686.
of the Sorbon, to prove not only that the Popes Judgment is not Infallible,
but that it is a dangerous thing to believe it; and that no man ought to do it,
unless infallible proof be brought of it. But he proves at large, that not so
much as probable evidence can be brought for it, either from Scripture or
Tradition.

I pray now the Defender to tell me, Who is the Judge? Is the Pope Infallible or
not? It is easily answered I, or no. And it is necessary to be answered, if we
must know, Who is the Judge?

The common Evasion is, That you are agreed, that Popes and Councils together
are; but this is but an Evasion. For the Infallibility is by virtue of Divine
Promises, ^^d those must either relate to the Church as the subject of them or
to the Successors of St. Peter in their capacity as such. If to the former, the
Popes have nothing to do in it, but as included in the Church; if the latter,
the Councils have no Infallibility, but the Pope. To say the Council is
infallible, when confirmed by the Pope, is Nonsense. For, either it was
Infallible in its Decree, or not. If not, it can borrow no Infallibility from
the Popes subsequent Confirmation; but the Popes Judgment may be said to be
Infallible, but by no means the Councils. And Du Pin has proved, that there
cannot be two Seats of Infallibility; for Dissert. 5 c. ^ ss. 2.
wherever there is Infallibility, it can receive no addition or force from
another Infallibility; and whatever is Infallible, must be believed for it
self, and not depend on another Judgment. And therefore I again desire the
Defender to make no harangues about this matter, but to answer directly, Who is
the Judge? For we would sain be acquainted with this some body, as he speaks;
but I am afraid Page 44.
his some body of Infallibility, will prove a more pleasing dream than what he
charges me with in what follows.

I had given a fair account of the proceedings in England upon the Reformation,
how the search began, the Popes Authority to be discarded, and the Articles of
Religion to be drawn up, which ought not to be looked on as particular Fancies,
but the sense of our Church.

All this he calls a pleasing dream; I am sure the pretense of Infallibility is
so; but I related matter of fact, which he has no mind to meddle with, but he
runs again to his, Who shall be Judge? And concludes, that I think between
Churches there is none at all. I Page 45.
do think the Church of England in this divided state of the Catholic Church,
is under no Superior Judicature, but that it has sufficient power and
authority to reform abuses, and to declare Articles of Religion so as to oblige
its Members to Conformity; especially since it proceeds by such excellent
Rules, as the Holy Scriptures, the ancient Councils and Universal Tradition.
And I hope this may pass for a direct Answer.

The Replier takes another course besides this, for he makes use of these two
Topics against the Church of England: 1. That the Reply, p. 25 Page 27.
Church of Rome was in possession of all those Truths we rejected 2. That we
ought to bring positive Texts for our Negative Articles.

1. As to the Plea of Possession of all those Truths now questioned by us. This
were a pleasant thing for us to question them, if we owned they were Truths;
but he means only that he thinks them so. Well then, how is it their Church was
in possession of those Truths? Do they become Truths by their possession, or
only that they were Truths they were then possessed of? If so, he must first
prove them to be Truths, or the Possession signifies nothing And that is the
point I went upon, that no Possession gives a right to Truth; but the Church of
England had just reason to examine whether these were Truths or not; and upon
examination finding them to be otherwise, it had reason to reject them.

But to enforce this, he says afterward, That their Church had a thousand
years prescription here, and that their Religion came into this Reply, p. 40.
Nation with Christianity.

Although according to St. Cyprian's Rule, all this pr^ves no more than the
Antiquity of Error, unless the proof be made from Scripture, yet because this
goes a great way with some people, I do not only deny the truth of it, but
shall give evident proof to the contrary.

For I suppose it will not be questioned, that the Religion brought in here by
Augustine and his Companions, was the Religion of Gregory the Great; I shall
therefore compare the Doctrine of the Council of Trent with that of Gregory, in
some remarkable Paticulars, and show the great Difference between them as to
these things. 1. Scripture and Tradition.
Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares, That it receives Traditions
with an equal Veneration with Holy Scriptures, Sess. 4. AFfirms, That all
things which edify and instruct, are contained in the Volume of Scriptures, in
Ezekiel. Hom. l. 1. cap. 8. That Gods Mind is to be found in his Words, Regist.
Epist. l. 4. Ep. 40. That the Scripture is the Glass of the Elect, in Reg. l.
4. c. 10. in Job l. 2. c. 1. That to be born of God, is to love his Will
revealed in Scripture, in 1 Reg. c. 14 That Preachers are to instruct their
People in what they learn, out of the Holy Scriptures, Greg Sacram. in Consecr.
Episcopi. That the Staves being in the Rings on the sides of the Ark, do show
that Teachers should have the holy Scriptures in their hearts, that from thence
they may presently teach whatever is needful, de Cura Pastor, l. 2. c. 11.

2. Apochryphal Books.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, REckons the Maccabees among the
Canonical Books, Sess. 4. PLainly rejects them from being Canonical; for he
excuses taking an Example out of them, not being Canonical, Moral. in Job, l.
19. c. 13.

3. Merit of Good Works.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, ANathematizes those who deny good
Works to be truly meritorious of Grace and Eternal Life, Sess. 6. Can. 32.
DEnies the most sanctified Persons to procure Divine Wisdom by their Graces, in
Job l. 18. c. 26. Affirms, that the best Men will find no Merit in their best
Actions, Moral. l. 9. c. 2. That all human Righteousness will be found
unrighteousness, if strictly judged, Ib. l. 9. c. 11. That if he should attain
to the highest Virture, he should obtain eternal Life, not by Merits, but by
Pardon, Ib.

4. Auricular Confession.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares secret Conf^ssion of all
sins to be necessary in order to Remission and Absolution by the Priest, Sess.
14. c. 6, 7, 8. SPeaks of no other Confession than what was required in order
to the Reconciliation of those who had undergone public Penance, the Custom
whereof at Rome, is set down in Golasius his Sacramentary, p. 63. And Gregory
refers to the Custom then used, in his Sacramentary, p. 225. And there is no
Form of Absolution in either of them, but by way of Prayer to God, which is
different from a Sacramental, judicial Absolution, required by the Council of
Trent. He makes no Absolution true, but that which follows the judgment of God,
which he parallels with the loosing of Lazarus after Christ had raised him from
the Grave, Hom. 26. in Evangel.

5. Solitary Masses.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, ANathematizes those who say such
Masses wherein the Priest only communicates, are unlawful, and to be abrogated,
Sess. 22. Can. 8. FOrbids the Priest to ce ebrate alone, and says expressly it
ought not to he celebrated by one, because the People are to bear their share,
Greg lib. Capital. c. 7. apud Cassandr. Liturg. c. 33.

Transubstantiation.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares the Body of Christ to be in
the Eucharist under the Species of Bread, Sess. 13. Cap 1. ASserts the Body of
Christ after ^is Resurrection to be palpable, i. e. That it may be seen and
felt where it is, and that he proved this against Eutychius of Constantinople,
Moral. l. 14. c. 31. That asserts only the Species to remain after
Consecration, ib. c. 4. He frequently declares, That our Bodies as well as our
Souls, are nourished by the Eucharist, which cannot be done by more species;
for no Accidents can produce a Substance, Greg. Sacram. 16. Kal. Mart. in
Sexages. Hebd. 3. in Quadrag. Fr. 4.

7. Communion in one Kind.
Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares against the necessity of
Communion in both kinds, Sess. 13. Cap 13. AFfirms it to be the constant
practice for the People to receive in both. Sacram. in Quadrag. Fr. 3. 6 Kal.
Julii ad Comple^d. Hebd. 3. in Quadr. Sabbato. Miss Temp. Belli. Sexages. ad
Complend. Domin. in Ramis Palm. VI. Non. Julii ad Complend. VIII. Kal. Aug. ad
Compl. Kalend. Aug. ad Compl. The like may be observed in Gelasius his
Sacramentary, who declared it Sacriledg to do otherwise; as appears by the
known Canon, Comperimus. De Consecr. Did. 2. who was one of Gregory's
Predecessors, and not long before him.

8. Purgatory.
Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares that there is a Purgatory after
this Life, out of which Souls may be helped by the Prayers of the faithful,
Sess. 25. AFfirms, That at the time of Death, either the good or evil Spirit
seizes upon the Soul, and keeps it with it for ever without any change. Moral
in Job, l. 8. c. 8. ed. Basil. c. 9. ed Novae. That, in the day of death, the
just goes to Joy, and the wicked with the Apostate Angel is reprobated. Moral.
in Job, l. 12. c. 4. The Passages in his Dialogues, which seem to contradict
these, do not come up to the Council of Trents Purgatory; for they only speak
of a Purgation for light and venial sins, and not for the temporal pain of
mortal sins, Dial. 4. c. 39.
whose Guilt is remitted: But in the former places he plainly denies any change
of State after this Life; so that the Purgation he speaks of, must be
consistent with a State of Joy; and in that very place, he says, Persons shall
be at the day of Judgment, as they were when they went out of the World.

9. Masses for the Dead.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares, That they are intended for
those who are dead in Christ, not yet fully purged from their sins. Sess. 22.
C. 2. SUpposes those to be in a state of Bliss, for whom the Oblation was made
at the Altar, as appears by the Sacramentary IV. Kalend. Julii, where the
Oblation is first mentioned; and after follows, Deus qui animoe famuli tui
Leonis eternae beatitudinis praemia contulisti.

10. Worship of Images.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, DEclares, not only that Images are to
be placed in Temples, but to be worshipped there. Sess. 25. ALlows their being
in Temples, but denies any worship to be given to them. For he not only often
denies any Adoration to be given them; but he says, They are only for
Instruction; which excludes Relative Worship. Registr. Epist. l. 9. Ep. 9. l.
7. Ep. 110. The Epistle to Secundinus Gussanvillaeus in his late Edition of S.
Gregory, says, was not to be found in the most Ancient M S S.

11. Extreme Unction.
The Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, ANathematizes those who do affirm it
not to be a true and proper Sacrament, appointed by Christ for Remission of
Sins, and conferring Grace. Sess. 14. Can. 1, 2. MEntions the Unction then used
in order to the Recovery of sick Persons; and in the Prayer applies S. James
his Words that way; and then adds, Sana quoque quaesumus, omnium medicator ejus
Febrium, and cunctorum languorum cruciatus aegritudinemque, etc. Sacram. p.
253. And immediately before, in the Unction, these words are said, Per hanc
sacrati olei Unctionemprisinam and emmelioratem recipice mersaris sanitatem.
Ibid. And that it was not looked on as the last Sacrament, appears by things in
that Sacramentary: 1. The Eucharist was to be given after it: 2. It was to be
continued for seven days if there were occasion; and suscitabit eum Deus; which
shows that it was designed for bodily health.

12. Pope's Supremacy.
Council of Trent, Gregory the Great, OWned it from beginning to end; and
referred the Confirmation of its Decrees to the Pope, as Supreme Head of the
Church. DEclares the Headship of the Church to be peculiar to Christ. Registr.
Ep. l. 4. Ep. 36, 38. where he speaks not of an Essential Head, but of the
Fountain of Jurisdiction. He urges it as an inconvenience, If there were a Head
of the Church, the Church must err with him. Epist. 32. 36. Which Bellarmin
owns to be a true Consequence. De R. Po^t. l. 4. c. 5. He makes it the Pride of
Lucifer, and the forerunning of Antichrist, for one Bishop to set himself above
the rest. Ep. 36. Not to be the Sole Bishop; but to have all the rest in
subjection to him.



These things may be sufficient at present, to show how little ground there is
to say, That the Religion now owned in the Church of Rome, was brought in
hither with Christianity in the time of Gregory the Great.

(2.) The Replier says, We ought to bring positive Texts for our negative
Articles; as no Praying to Saints, no Purgatory, no Worship of Images, no
Transubstantiation, and the like; with which, he says, the 39 Articles are
stuffed. But why must we be obliged to bring Reply. p. 27.
Texts for the Negative? Because he says, we make these Articles of Faith.

To answer this, Let us suppose the Common Council of the City should agree to
make men swear that the Monument near London Bridge, is a living creature, and
should exclude all those from the City Privileges who do not; and that others
having examined the Monument, and found nothing but Stones and Iron, were
resolved to follow their Senses, and declare their minds, That upon due
consideration, they did judge the Monument to be no living creature; Would any
say, these men ma^e it an Article of their Faith, when they only rejected a
false proposition imposed upon the Faith of others? Why may not a Church
declare what it does not believe, as well as what it does? And when it declares
what it does not believe, does it make such declarations Articles of Faith? The
plain case is, Those of the Church of Rome impose things we think as hard and
unreasonable as the former Example: Our Church not only denies its belief of
them; but signifies it to its Members by a body of Articles which they are to
sign, to testify their consent: How does this come to make every one of these
Declarations an Article of Faith? They are only Articles of Agreement, and not
of Faith. And the difference between these may be easily understood. An Article
of Faith supposes a Divine Revelation, as the Replier yields; but if men offer
that for a Divine Revelation, which is not, the rejecting of that cannot be
called an Article of Faith; because there is no need of Revelation to declare
the other to be none, supposing there be a Rule to judge what is of Divine
Revelation, and what not. That Rule we say is the Holy Scripture, not
interpreted by Fancy, but by the Primitive Church; by this Rule so interpreted,
we reject Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Worship of Images,
Transubstantiation, etc. And why then should our rejecting them, be called so
many Articles of Faith? We own the Scripture for our Rule, and for our complete
and adequate Rule of Faith; and therefore it serves us both for what we are to
believe, and what we are not to believe. In positive Articles, we resolve our
Faith into Divine Revelation contained in Scripture; in Negative, the Article
of Faith is, That Scripture is our Rule; but from thence it is a necessary
Consequence of Reason. That we are not to believe any thing but what is
contained in Scripture, or may be deduced from thence. Which deductions being
within the force of the Rule, are not to be looked on as different from it; and
what can neither be proved by Scripture, nor by deductions from it, if our
Principle be allowed, we can never be blamed if we reject it. For otherwise we
should not act reasonably, nor agreeable to our own Principles.

But as to the Particulars mentioned, we do not merely reject them as not
contained in Scripture, but as repugnant to such Principles concerning Divine
Worship. Remission of Sins, the Nature of Christ's Body, etc. which are
evidently contained therein: But I go no further t^an the Replier leads me.

At the Conclusion of the first Paper, there was a suggestion, As tho the
Schism were raised by particular men, for their own Advantage.

It was answered, That the Advantage of the Clergy lay plainly on the other
side; which is yielded by the Replier; and yet he would have the Clergy byast:
What, byast against their Interest? For that is the point, Whether they got ot
lost by the Reformation? Reply, p. 28.
and besides other considerations, if there were so much Sacriledg committed by
it, as is said in one of the Papers, it is hard to suppose that they should
raise the Schism for their own Advantage. I am of the Defenders mind. That
matter of Interest ought not to be regarded in these things; but when that was
said to lie at the bottom of the Reformation, we had reason to consider on
which side lay the greater Advantage. Def. p. 46.


The 2d Charge is, That the Reformation has been ^he occasion of a World of
Heresies creeping into this Nation. With this the 2d Paper begins.

In answer it was said, That either this respects the several Sects of
Dissenters from the Religion established by Law, and then it seems hard,
considering a^ circumstances, to charge the Church of England with them; or it
takes in all that dissent from the Church of Rome, and so it is a charge on the
whole Church since the Reformation, as guilty of Heresy; which was a charge I
said could never be made good.

The Defender avoids the charge as to the Church of England; but the Replier in
plain terms owns it; saying, That establishment of a Religion by Law, cannot
protect it from being a Heresy; which I Reply, p. 29.
readily grant. And then he adds. Let him defend his own, and his work is done.
The best way to do that, is to consider first what Heresy is, and that I said
was an obstinate opposing some necessary Article of Faith; and then, how it
comes to be in the Power of the Church of Rome to define Heretical Doctrines,
so as that any Doctrine comes to be Heresy, by being contrary to its
Definitions?

He answers, By the same way the Church had Power in her General Councils, to
make Creeds, and to Anathematize Hereti^ks.

So that whatever Power the Catholic Church exercised in declaring Matters of
Faith, he challenges as of Right belonging to the Church of Rome, which wholly
depends on the first Point already discussed; viz. That the Roman and Catholic
Church are the same

But I shall now wave that, and consider, Whether if that were allowed, the
Church could now have the same Reason to declare the Points in difference to be
Heresies, as the Primitive Church had the Doctrines of the Trinity, and
Incarnation of Christ.

I am of opinion it cannot; and yet if it could, that alone is not sufficient
to charge Heresy upon us.

And in making out of both these, I shall argue from the Nature of Heresy, as
it is stated among their best Writers, who agree that there are three Things
necessary to make up the charge of Heresy. 1. The Nature of the Proposition.
2. The Authority of the Proponent. 3. The obstinacy of the Party.

1. The Nature of the Proposition; for it is allowed among them, that there is
a difference between a Proposition Erroneous in Faith, and Heretical. Inititur
enim Fides nostra Revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae qui Canonicos
libros scripserunt, non autem revelation si qua fuit aliis Doctoribus facta. 1.
q. 1. Ar^ 8 ad 2. 2. 2. q. 1 Art. 5. ad 2.


But for our better understanding this matter, I shall set down something very
pertinently observed by Aquinas and others.

1. Aquinas says, That Faith in us depends upon Divine Revelation, not such as
is made to any person, but that which was made to the Prophets and Apostles,
which is preserved in the Canonical Books; and therefore he says, the proofs
from Scripture are necessary and convincing; those from other Authorities are
but probable: Which is a Testimony of great Consequence in this matter; for
from hence it appears, that whatsover Article of Faith is made necessary to be
believed, must be proved from Scripture; and Heresy being an obstinate
opposing a necessary Article of Faith, there can be no Heresy, where the
Doctrine is not founded on Scripture: And elsewhere he makes the principles of
Faith to be the Authorities of the Scripture.

2. That all matters of Faith are not equally revealed in Scripture; For some,
he says, are principally designed, as the Trinity and 1. q. 32. art. 4
Incarnation; and these are directly against Faith; and to hold the contrary to
them, especially with obstinacy, is Heresy; but there are others which are
indirectly against Faith; from whence something follows which overthrows Faith;
as, for any one to deny that Samuel was the son of Helcanah, the consequence
would be, that the Scripture was false.

3. He makes a distinction between those who discern the Repugnancy, and
continue obstinate, and those who do not; not intending to maintain any thing
contrary to Faith; and in this case there may be an erroneous opinion in Faith,
without Heresy. So that an erroneous opinion lies in not attending to the
Consequence of that Opinion, as against Faith, and not maintaining it
obstinately. But he asserts it to be in the Churches Power to declare such an
opinion to be against Faith, and then he makes it Heretical to deny it: His
Instance is about the five Notions of the Trinity; and his Conclusion is, That
it cannot be Heretical in it self to have different Opinions about them, but it
is very hard to understand how the Church by its declaration can make the
holding one or the other opinion to be more or less repugnant to Faith. But
then the Reason of Heresy must be resolved into the Authority of the Church;
of which afterward; yet still Scripture is the Rule by which the Church is to
judge.

(4) That there are some things revealed in Scripture which immediately tend to
make mankind happy; and those are the Articles of Faith which all men are bound
to believe explicitly; other things are revealed 2. 2. q. 2. art. 5
by accident, or secondarily, as that Abraham had two Sons, that David was the
Son of Jesse. Now as to these latter points he says, That it is enough to have
an inward preparation of mind to believe all that is contained in Scripture;
and those things in particular as soon as they are known to be there. But we
believe all persons bound to search the Scriptures, that they may know what is
contained therein. However we gain this point hereby, that by their own
Doctrine, besides the Articles of Faith received on both sides, no other points
can become necessary, till they be made appear to us to be contained in
Scripture, otherwise it is sufficient for us to be ready to believe whatever is
contained therein. And consequently, we cannot be charged with Heresy for
rejecting them.

Alphonsus a Castro makes this distinction between Heresy and a De Haeret:
pu^it. l. 1. c. 3:
Proposition erroneous in Faith; That the former is against such a point of
Faith, as all men are bound to believe; but there are some Propositions, he
says, relating to Faith, wherein a man is under no obligation to believe
either part of the contradiction. But if he asserts either of them to be an
Article of Faith, and pronounces the other Heretical, he then errs in Faith,
and is become a Heretic. From whence I observe, that supposing any points in
Controversy, not to be so determined as to bring on men an obligation to
believe them, those who make them to be Articles of Faith, and condemn the
others for Heretics, are in so doing Heretics themselves.

Melchior Canus says, That although a Proposition be thought by wise men to be
a matter of Faith, yet if it be not plainly defined by the Church, Loc.
Theolog. l. 12. c. 11.
nor demonstrated by Reason, then the opposing of it is no Heresy, but
Erroneous Doctrine. Nay he says further, That if an Opinion do contradict a
point of Catholic Faith in the most probable and almost necessary opinion of
all wise men, yet if it do not manifestly contradict, it is barely Erroneous,
and not Heretical.

Suarez says, that Melchior Canus his Doctrine in this matter is Suarez de
Fide Disp. 19. Sect. 2 n. 13.
generally received. But he adds one thing more, viz. That in Heresy there
must be the highest opposition to immediate Revelation; but if it implies only
a repugnancy to a bare Catholic Truth, or Theological conclusion, it is
erroneous in Faith, but no Heresy. The highest opposition lies in three
things: 1. The Revelation must be immediate, and not deduced by consequence. 2.
That it must be most certainly and undoubtedly of Faith. 3. That the Erroneous
Proposition do most certainly and undoubtedly contradict it. For, says he, if
there be a defect in any one of these, it is not an Heretical Proposition.

These are the Principles laid down by their own Writers of greatest esteem.
And therefore if the Replier think fit to make good his Charge of Heresy
against the Church of England, he may from hence see what he has to do.

(1) He must prove the Points in Controversy to be of immediate Divine
Revelation; and not drawn from thence by Consequences and Suppositions.

2. That the Doctrine of our Church does in the highest, plainest, and most
certain manner contradict such Propositions of Faith.

And supposing it were possible for him to do the former; yet if their own
Expositor of the Articles of our Church may be believed, he can never do the
latter. For he endeavors to prove them capable of a Catholic sense. The five
first he allows for Catholic as they stand. The sixth about Canonical
Scripture, with St: Jerome's explication, is Catholic enough. The 7th, 8th,
first part of the 9th, and the whole 10th, are very Catholic. The four next he
examines. The 15th needs only a Gloss of St. Augustins. The 16th very good. The
17th Catholic, and so the 18th. The 19th only wants a Gloss, and so the 20th
and 21. The 22th he examines. 23d is allowed. The 24th being only against a
custom of the Church, he proves from Canus, can imply no Heresy; and yet he
thinks it capable of a good Gloss. The 25th he allows in the genuine sense of
it. The 26th and 27th are confessed to be the Doctrines of the Church, and all
the Fathers. Even the 28th against Transubstantiation he thinks may be glossed
into a good sense. The 29th is explained from S. Augustine. The 30th from Canus,
not to contain any Heresy. The 31th he says only opposes the common opinion.
The 32th capable of a (...) sense. 33, 34th agreeable to Scripture and
Antiquity. 35th (...) H^milies, passable. 36th about Ordination valid. 37th
agreeable to the French Opinion and practice. the Popes Jurisdiction may be
understood of Temporal. The two last he allows to be Catholic.

So that of 39 Articles, but five are reserved for examination, and of these,
the 11th he says, is about words; the 12 and 13 capable of a good sense; the
14th goes upon a mistake of their sense; the 22th determines nothing against
the true Faith. I do not go about to justify his Exposition; but I say, that
upon your own grounds, it shows that our Church cannot be justly charged with
Heresy. For if it be required that such Propositions as are Heretical must in
the highest and clearest manner contradict the Doctrines of Faith; and your own
Expositor grants they do not; then however you may think them Erroneous, yet
you cannot condemn them for Heretical.

(2) As to Heresy, a sufficient Proposition of the matters of Faith is
required. For they grant that the matters of Faith must be proposed in such a
manner as to induce an obligation to believe them, before any can be guilty of
Heresy in rejecting them. Therefore it is necessary for us to know what they
mean by a sufficient proposal. Suarez de Fide Disp. 19. Sect. 2. n. 8. ^^p. 4.
Sect. 2. n. 3.


S^arez yields this to be a necessary condition; and elsewhere discourses about
the nature of it. And there he shows, 1. That a sufficient Proposition of a
matter of Faith is not barely to deliver it as a Divine Trath, but it must be
done with such circumstances, that it may appear to be prudently credible, i.
e. so as to see such reason for it, as to put him beyond doubt or fear of the
contrary. 2. That it must appear evidently credible to be revealed by God, and
therefore certain and infallible. 3. That it must appear not only so, but
evidently more credible, than the Doctrine repugnant to it. 4. That according
to natural reason, the assent to it is to be preferred before the contrary
opinion. Now to make good the charge of Heresy against our Church, he must not
bring the Motives of Credibility for the Christian Faith in general, which are
owned on both sides; but as to those points which are asserted by them as
matters of Faith, and rejected by us. As for instance, Transubstantiation is
declared by them to be a matter of Faith; and it is denied by us; and they
charge us with Heresy for it. We say, it has never been proposed to us in
such a manner, as to make it appear to be a prudent judgment in us to believe
it, or that it was ever revealed by God or more credible than the contrary
opinion, in the judgment of Reason. Not any one of these things does appear to
us, but the contrary; for we can see nothing of the Credibility, but a great
deal for the evident Incredibility of it. How then can this matter of Faith be
said to be sufficiently proposed to us?

It may be said, all this is done by the Authority of the Church proposing it;
and if it be made evidently credible that you ought to believe the Church, then
we are Heretics for rejecting her Authority.

I answer, That if by the Churches Authority, be meant that of the Roman
Catholic Churches Infallible proposing matters of Faith to us, we are as far
to seek as ever and for our hearts we cannot find this made out with any degree
of Credibility. We have searched all your Grounds, examined your Motives,
weighed your Reasons, your miracles we have not seen) but we can meet with
nothing that should make it a prudent judgment for us to take all matters of
Faith upon trust from her. And if there be no Evidence of Credibility, there is
no sufficient proposal; and if there be not, there can be no obligation to
believe; and where that is not, there can be no Heresy in not believing,
according to the judgment of your greatest Divines.

(3) As to the charge of Heresy, there must be obstinacy in the party; which
they all make necessary to formal Heresy.

Aquinas quotes the noted passage of St. Aug^stin to this purpose, 2. 2. q. 11.
Art. 2. ad 3. Aug Epist. 162
That although men hold a false opinion, without pertinacious animosity,
especially if they derive it from their Parents; and do with diligence and
caution seek after the Truth; and are ready to lay it down when they have found
it, they are not to be recko^'d for Heretics.

And we do not think a better Plea can be made for us as to this charge, than
what is contained in these words of St. August^n. But here we must observe the
artifice of Aquinas. He saw this would never do their business against the
enemies of the Church of Rome, and therefore he pretends to give the Reason for
this, because they do not contradict the judgment of the Church; and so draws
the power of declaring Heresy to the Pope, as having the chief Authority in
the Church. Of whom St. Augustine says not a word. But however Aquinas himself
requires Obstinacy even in this case to make a Heretic. And the Obstinacy is
not placed by him in the mere resisting the Authority of the Church, but in the
manner of doing it.

Cajetan there affirms, that if there be no pertinacy in the Will, there is no
Heresy. So that if a man holds an opinion contrary to Faith in it self, and he
thinks he holds right, and does not intend to dissent from the Church, he is
not guilty of Heresy. And so Cajetan defines Pertinacy to be a consent to an
error in Faith, knowing it so to be.

Melchior Canus says, It is the general Opinion of Divines and Canonists, Non
est ergo haereticus nisi qui videns prudens doctrinam eligit Fidei contrariam.
Loc. 12. c. 9. Suarez de Fide Disc. 19. Sect. 3. n. 9.
that there can be no Heresy without Obstinacy. And no man is a Heretic, he
says, who does not, seeing and knowing, choose a Doctrine contrary to Fa^^h.

Suarez says, that all the Doctors are agreed, that Obstinacy is required to
Heresy; and that it is expressed in the Canon Law. So that I need to produce
no more to that purpose.

But the difficulty is, to know what they mean by Obstinacy. It is not hard to
understand what is meant by the word; for pertinax is one that is
over-tenacious, i. e. that holds an opinion, when he sees no ground for it, or
will yield to no Reasonable conviction; or that has not a desire to find out
Truth, and submit to it. And so it is plain St. Augustine understood it, in the
place before mentioned. And in another place, he makes it to lie in a man's
resisting the Catholic Doctrine made known to him, without which he did not
judge him a Heretic, De Bapt. c. Donat l 4 c. 16 De Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 51.
though he held Heretical Doctrine. And again he declares those to be Heretics
that contumaciously resist those that correct and instruct them, and will not
amend their wicked Doctrines, but go on to defend them These passages of St.
Augustine are entered in the Body of the C. 24. q 3. c. 29, 31.
Canon Law; and the Gloss there says, If one bolds Doctrines against Faith,
and be ready to be better instructed, he is no Heretic. The same Authorities
Ockam insists upon, and from them he declares Obstinacy Ockam Dialog l. 3. c.
3. etc. c. 6. ad fin.
to be so necessary, that without it no man can be a Heretic. And he concludes
from St. Augustine, that if a man be ready to yield to Truth when he finds it,
he is not guil^y of Obstinacy And he proves that such are no Heretics from
these Reasons: (1) Because Heretics are to be Excommunicated; but such by the
Canon Law are Cap. 8 C. 24. q 1. Schismae.
not to be ^xcommunicated. (2) Because they are ready to be better instructed
(3) Because many have erred and were not accounted Heretics on this account.
O^kam distinguishes a twofold Obstinacy: ^. 4. c. 2.
1. Internal. 2. External. Internal may be known, he says, by the^e Rules: 1.
If a man be not convinced by Miracles. 2. If he will rather question the truth
of the Christian Faith, than be convinced. 3. When he does not use means for
his own Conviction, but resolves to persist in his Errors, such a neglect
argues an obstinate mind.

External, of which he gives many instances, of which I shall mention some, as
(1.) If a man willingly says, or does something whereby C. 5, etc.
he discovers his disbelief of the whole Christian Faith (2) If he demes any
part of the old or new Testament (3.) If he holds the whole Christian Church to
have erred; which he by no means understands of any part of it assuming the
Titles of Catholic and Infallible to it self; for he says, some say, that
whatsoever Christ has promised to his C. 9.
Church, may be made good, if but one Person in it holds the true Faith; but he
declares that the (...) Faith may be preserved in a very few. (4.) If the
contrary Doctr^^ known to be universally received among Christians, as if one
should deny that Christ was crucified; and on this account, he charges (...)
22. with Heresy, for denying C. 10.
that the Souls of the Wicked are in Hell, and of the Saints in Heaven before
the day of Judgment (5.) If he refuses to be informed, being reproved by the
Learned. (6.) If he protests he will never alter his Opinion. (7.) If he
forbids reading the Scriptures, or preaching C. 27. C. 28. C. 29. C. 30.
Catholic Doctrine (8.) If a Pope commands an erroneous Opinion to be believed
as matter of Faith. (9.) If a man consents to such a Definition of the Pope,
and imposes it on others.

Joh. Gerson treats at large about the obstinacy which makes one a Heretic, in
several Discourses before the Council of Constance; and he follows St.
Augustins Doctrine in saying, That it consists in not seeking Gerson. To. 1. p.
408.
after Truth, and not obeying it when he has found it.

Melchior Canus, finds fault with the uncertain Marks of Obstinacy given by
others, and he resolves it at last into this, That a Man holds an Can. Loc. Th.
l. 12. c. 9.
Opinion, which he knows to be contrary to the Catholic Faith; but then he
requires, (1.) That he be certain that it belongs to it, and it is not enough
that learned Men say so. (2.) That he must know it by an infallible Authority.
For otherwise a man's persisting in his Opinion, may be great rashness and
presumption, but it is not Heresy. But in case a persons ignorance be such as
makes his Errors involuntary, it does excuse him from Heresy, because that is
not a voluntary Error.

Suarez, and others after him, in plain terms make the Obstinacy to lie in not
submiting to the Judgment of the Church; because, while a Disp. 14. de fide
Sect. 3. n. 10.
Man does yield to the Churches Authority, they account him no Heretic ^his is
indeed an Argument according to their way of declaring Heretics; but we are
now enquiring what that Obstinacy is, which does really make a man such. St.
Augustins opinion is reported by Aquinus, as the Reason of his Judgment, that
is adopted into the Body of the Canon Law: and therefore, that ought to be the
Standard, according to which they are to pronounce a Person obstinate. If Men
do not wi^h Diligence and Caution seek after Truth, and are not willing to
embrace it, when they find it, then they are to be accounted Heretics for
being obstinate. But St. Augustine goes no further; however Suarez would seem to
agree with him: But it is worth the while to consider his Doctrine about it.

(1.) He affirms, That it is not enough for one to be ready to submit N. 11.
to Gods Word, either written or unwritten; but the Submission must be with
respect to the Church, as proposing both to us.

(2.) That those who believe any Doctrine, because their Judgment Ibid.
tells them, it is the sense of Scripture; if they therein follow their own
Judgment, and not the sense of the Church, they are guilty of such an
O^stinacy, as makes Heretics.

(3) That it does not excuse, ^f he be willing to believe the Church, if N. 13.
he ^^es Reasons and Arguments to move him; for this, he says, is not to
believe the Churches Authority as Divine, but after a human manner, which may
consist with Obstinacy against the Church, as a Rule of Faith.

(4) That it is not yet necessary in order to this Obstinacy, to believe the
Church to have Infallible Authority, for then those must be excused from
heretical Obstinacy who denied it: but it is sufficient that the Church is
proposed as a true Church, whose Authority he is bound to submit to.

The short of all this matter is, If a Man resolve to believe as the Church
believes, a very small thing will excuse him from Heresy: but if not, nothing
according to Suarez will do it: unless it be Ignorance as to the Churches
proposing. And this is the modern notion of Heresy, which appears to me, to be
very unreasonable on these accounts.

(1.) Suppose a Person have a general Disposition of mind to believe whatever
is sufficiently proposed to him, as revealed by God, and believes sincerely
whatever he knows to be contained in Scripture. I would sain know whether this
Disposition of mind do not really excuse him from heretical Obstinacy? And yet
this is very consistent with doubting whether the Church be accounted as the
Proponent of matters of Faith.

(2.) Is it necessary in order to heretical Obstinacy, that the Person believes
the Proponent to be Infallible or not? If it be, then none can be convinced of
heretical Obstinacy, but such as reject the Churches Authority, when they
believe it Infallible; and then none of us can be charged with it; for we do
not believe the Churches Infallibility. If it be not necessary, then the
Churches Infallibility is not necessary to Faith; for i^ order to Heretical
Obstinacy, he must be convinced of resisting that which was necessary in order
to Fa^^h; from whence it will follow, that the Churches Infallibility is no^
equired as the Ground of Faith.

(3) Suppose a Person thinks himself bound in Conscience to believe those
Guides which God by his Providence has set over him; and he believes to be
sincere and honest: and these tell him, there is no ground to believe on the
Churches Authority, as being sounded neither in Scripture, nor Antiquity, nor
Reason, is not he excused hereby from Heretical Obstinacy?

(4.) Suppose he declares himself ready to believe the Churches Authority, if
it be sufficiently proposed to him; i. e. with such Reasons and Arguments as
are proper to convince him; but after all, he declares, that he cannot see any
such. And yet Aquinas affirms, No man can believe, unless he sees Reason why he
should (...). 2. ^ q l. art. 3.
How then can a man be liable to Heretical Obstinacy, because he only refuses
to believe, when he sees no Reason to believe?

(5.) Suppose he does believe that which the Church proposes, not merely upon
its Authority, but upon the Reasons which the Church offers; why must this man
be liable to Heretical Obstinacy, for believing upon the Churches Reasons? What
a wonderful nice thing is Heresy made? It seems by this rare Doctrine, it does
not excuse from Heresy to believe even Truth it self, if it be upon grounds of
Reason which the Church it self gives. But it must be taken merely from the
Churches Authority; and yet that very Authority must be believed on the grounds
of Reason, or the Motives of Gredibility.

(6.) Suppose a Person has used the best means he could to find out his
Obligation to believe on the Churches Authority, and after all, he cannot find
any such thing, what Obligation is he under to enquire farther; and from whence
does it arise? And if he be not under any, how can he be guilty of Herecial
Obstinacy, who is under no Obligation to search any farther? For Obstinacy must
suppose resisting some Obligation.

(7.) Suppose he be willing to believe on the Churches Authority, if that
Church be made appear to him to be the One Catholic Church of Christ, but when
he comes to examine this, he finds that he must exclude very great and
considerable Parts of the Catholic Church, to reduce the Authority of the
Catholic Church to that of the Roman Communion; how can it then be Heretical
Obstinacy not to suppose a Part to be the Whole?

(8.) Suppose he has overcome this, yet if he should mistake about the Seat of
Infallibility, is he not still as liable to the charge of Heretical Obstinacy,
because the true Reason of it is, that such a Person rejects that which God
has chosen as the proper means to propound matters of Faith to us: But if he
should be mistaken in the true Proponent, he is in as much danger of Heretical
Obstinacy still. As suppose a man takes a General Council, as representing the
Catholic Church, to be the only true Proponent of Faith; and therefore rejects
the Authority of the Pope in this matter, I desire to know, whether this be
Heretical Obstinacy, or not? If not, then rejecting the true Proponent, does
not make any liable to it: If it does, then there is Heretical Obstinacy in the
Church of Rome, as well as out of it. And so much in Answer to the Repliers
Charge of Heresy on the Church of England.

(3.) The next Charge relates to the Insufficient Authority of the Church of
England, and that on these Accounts:

(1.) In that it leaves every man to judge for himself.

(2.) Because she dares not use the true Arguments against Sects, for fear of
their being turned upon her self.

(3.) Because she denies an Appeal to an higher Judicature.

(1.) It is urged in the Papers, That among us every man thinks himself as
competent a Judge of Scripture, as the very Apostles.

It was answered, That every man among us does not pretend to an Infallible
Spirit, but all yield the Apostles had it. And by being a Judge of Scripture, if
no more be meant, than that every man must use his Understanding about it, that
was no more than was necessary in order to the believing the matters contained
in it: But if by being a Judge of Scripture, was meant, giving such a Judgment
as obliges others to submit to it, then it was denied, that every man among us
is allowed to judge of it. But yet we own the Authority of the Guides of the
Church, and a due submission to them; but we do not allow them to be as
competent Judges of Scriptures as the very Apostles.

This seems to me to be a full and clear Answer.

But the Replier offers some things against it.

(1.) That I suppose Men cannot be deceived in understanding the Repl. p. 31.
Scriptures; and consequently their Spirit is infallible.

I never said, or thought, that they could not be deceived; but I (...), they
must use their Understandings, to prevent being deceived, and must judge of the
sense of what they are to believe in the Scriptures, in order to their own
Salvation.

But he says, Whosoever uses his Understanding in opposition to the Churches
Tradition, makes himself a Judge indeed, but not to his own Salvation.

To make this matter clear, we must consider, That Matters of Faith necessary
to Salvation, are of another nature from Matters of Controversy concerning the
Sense of Scripture in doubtful places.

As to the matters necessary to Salvation to particular persons, we assert the
Scriptures to be so plain, and the Tradition of the Church as to the Creeds, so
well known and attested, that no man without gross and culpable neglect, can
mistake about them; but in case of invincible or unaffected ignorance, their
Errors shall not be laid to their charge, and so their mistakes shall not
hinder their Salvation: And herein we assert no more than we can justify, not
only from Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity, but from the best of their own
Writers, who assert,

1. That there are some Points of Faith necessary to be explicitly believed by
all in order to Salvation; for although they say there may be such invincible
ignorance of them, as may excuse from sin in not believing them; yet without
believing them, they are not capable of Salvation. As to the prima credibilia,
as Aquinas calls them, he determines, That every man is bound to believe them
explicitly, as much as he is bound to have Faith; but as to other things, a 2.
2. q. 5.
preparation of mind is sufficient to believe all contained in Scripture, and
so much explicitly, as is made plain to him to he contained therein. From
whence it follows, That by the Doctrine of the Schools, every man is to judge
what he is to believe; for his Words are, Quando hoc ei constiterit, when it is
made clear to him; and how can any thing be made clear to a man unless he be
the Judge of it?

2. That particular persons may certainly know what is sufficient to their
Salvation by the inward assistance of Divine Grace, without Loc. 2. c. 8.
Concedimus enim liberaliter doctrinam cuique in sua vita and stat^^ necessariam
illi fore perspectam and cognitam, qui fecerit voluntatem Dei.
depending on the Churches Infallibility. This follows from what is mentioned
before concerning the Divine Gifts which accompany Grace. And so much is owned
by Melchior Canus, as to what is necessary for every man as to his own state
and condition. So that the greatest Divines of the Roman Church do yield all we
contend for, as to the Matters necessary to Salvation.

The only Question is about Matters of Controversy raised in the Church
concerning the Sense of Scripture; and as to these they yield these material
Points:

(1) That an Implicit Faith as to what is contained in Scripture, is
sufficient; and that particular persons are bound to no more, till the Doctrine
be made clear to them, which appears from the words of Aquinas lately mentioned.

2. That particular Persons may disbelieve many things determined by the
Church, without sin. This Sancta Clara proves from Vega and others: and he
says himself, Their Ignorance in such cases, is either invincible, or at least
such as excuses from sin. And Deu^ Natura Gratia Probl. 15. p. 96
he farther says,

3. That it is the common opinion of the Schools, and of their Divines, That
Laymen erring with their Teachers, are excused from any fault, and as long as
it is out of obedience to their Teachers, it is rather P. 97.
a meritorious Act.

Let us now lay these things to the present Case, and all the Difficulty will
soon disappear.

As to the Matters of Salvation, they grant that God will not suffer those to
be deceived about them, who do sincerely seek after the knowledge of them.

As to Matters of Controversy, they are in no danger, if they trust their
Spiritual Guides.

And I asserted that we owned the Authority of Guides in the Church, and a due
submission to them.

But the Replier is not satisfied with this, for he says,

2. That no other submission is sufficient, but such as men lose I haven
without it. This is somewhat hard to understand: Does he in earnest think men
cannot go to Heaven without a blind Obedience to the Church? Is there no
allowance to be made for Ignorance, Education, reasonable Doubts? Is all other
submission to Authority in the Church merely ad Pompam? But this Gentleman did
not take time to consider the Doctrine of their own Schools about these
matters, for I cannot imagine he could be ignorant of it.

But the Defender seems to be wholly unacquainted with it, otherwise he could
not talk so crudely and unskilfully as he does, about men's Judgment in matters
that concern their Salvation. And Def. p. 49.
he may now see how far their own Divines allow particular persons to be
competent Judges about matters that relate to their own Salvation: and
therefore I need give him no other Answer, till he has better informed himself
about these things: but we have been upon such a Point as may in some measure
excuse him, but not those who ought to understand their own Doctrine better.

(2.) The next Argument to prove the Insufficient Authority of the Church of
England, was, That she dares not bring the true Arguments against the other
Sects, for fear they should be turned against themselves, and confuted by their
own Arguments.

To this it was answered, That the Church of England did wisely disown the
pretense of Infallibility, and made use of the best Arguments against Sectaries
from a just Authority, and the Sinfulness and Folly of the Sectaries refusing
to submit to it.

To take off the force of this Answer, two different Ways are taken.

(1.) The Replier says, The Argument is as forcible without Infallibility
Repl. p. 32.
as with it.

(2.) The Defender says, Authority signifies nothing in this Case Des. p. 51.
without Infallibility.

I shall consider them both, tho both cannot stand together.

(1.) The Replier goes upon this Ground; That the Church of England can never
justly charge Sectaries with Disobedience to Her, because they may as well cast
it in her Teeth, that she disobeyed her Mother Church, whether she were
Infallible or not.

But the Force of this depends upon a double Mistake.

(1.) That the Church of Rome has as much Authority over our Church, as the
Rulers of it have over the Members. Which ought not to have been supposed, but
substantially proved, since the Weight of the Cause depends upon it. But I see
nothing like a Proof produced.

(2.) That the Sectaries have as much reason to reject the Terms of Communion
required by our Church, as our Church had to reject those of the Church of
Rome. But this is as far from being proved as the other.

(2.) The Defender desires to be instructed, how such an Authority can be in a
Church without Infallibility? I hope he believes there may be Authority without
Infallibility; or else how shall Fathers govern their Children? But not in the
Church. Why so? Have not Bishops, out of Councils, Authority to rule their
Diocesses? Have they not a Provincial Synods Authority to make Canons, tho they
be not Infallible? What then is the meaning of this? He tells us soon after; To
say a Church is Fallible, is to say she may be deceived. There is no doubt of
that. And if she may be deceived her self, they may be deceived who follow her.
And if a Church pretends to be Infallible, which is not, she certainly deceives
those that follow her, and that without Remedy. But all this sort of Reasoning,
proceeds upon a false Suggestion, viz. That our Faith must be grounded on the
Chuach's Authority as the formal Reason of it. Which he knows, is utterly
denied by us, and ought to have been proved. We declare, the Ground of our
Faith is the Word of God; not interpreted by Fancy, but by the Consent of the
whole Christian Church from the Apostles Times. This is our Bottom, or if you
will, the Rock, on which our Church is built. This is far more firm and
durable, than a pretense to Infallibility; which is like a desperate Remedy,
which Men never run to, but when they see nothing else will help them. Had the
Church of Rome been able to defend her Innovations by Reason or Antiquity, she
had never thought of Infallibility. It is a much better expedient to keep Men
in Error, than to keep them from it; and tends more to save the Authority of a
sinking. Church, than the Souls of Men.

But he will not let the Church's Infallibility go thus; For he pretends to
prove, that if we take that away, we make Christianity the most unreasonable
Thing in Nature; nay, absolutely impossible. What! whether God has promised to
make the Church Infallible or not! We understand those who offer to prove the
Church Infallible by Scripture; but these Scientifical Men despise such beaten
Roads, and when they offer to demonstrate, fall short of the others
Probabilities. As will appear by examining his Argument: Faith requires an
assent to a thing as absolutely true; but a fallible Authority cannot oblige me
to a thing as absolutely true; Page 52.
and therefore this would be an Effect without a Cause; a downright
Impossibility; a flat Contradiction. I will match his Argument with another;
Faith is not an Assent to a thing as absolutely true, upon less than a Divine
Testimony; but the Church's Testimony is not Divine; and therefore to believe
upon the Church's Testimony, is an Effect without a Cause; a downright
Impossibility; a flat Contradiction.

Let him set one of these against the other, and see who makes Faith
unreasonable or impossible. But I will clear this Matter in few words. I grant
that Faith is an Assent to a thing as absolutely true; and that what is
absolutely true, is impossible to be false: I grant, that a mere fallible
Authority is not sufficient to produce an Act of Faith. But here I distinguish
the Infallible Authority of God revealing (into which my Faith is resolved, as
into the formal Reason of it) from the Authority of the Church conveying that
Revelation, which is only the Means by which this Revelation comes to be known
to us: As when a Man swears by the Bible, there is a difference between the
Contents of that Book by which he swears, and the Officers putting the Book
into his hands.

(3.) The Church of England is blamed, for allowing no Liberty of Appeals to a
higher Judicature.

The Question is, Whether this makes her no true Church; or not to have any
just Authority over her own Members?

The Replier says, She makes her self the last Tribunal of Spiritual Repl. p.
33.
Doctrine.

I know not where she has done so, since we own the Authority of Free and
truly General Councils, as the Supreme Tribunal of the Church upon Earth. And
accordingly receive the four first; which even S. Gregory the Great
distinguished from those that followed, as to their Authority and Veneration.

The Defender had a good mind to cut off the Church of England Def. p. 54.
from being a Church, because she has renounced Communion with the Church of
Rome; but his heart failed him: And I hope he will think better of it, when he
sees cause to prove a little more effectually, that the Church of Rome in its
largest extent is the Catholic Church.

He argues, That there must be such an Authority in a Church, which Page 55.
may give a final Sentence conclusive to the Parties, as the Judges do Temporal
Differences. But is it necessary for all Churches to have such a Power? then
there must be as many Supreme Courts as there are Churches. If not, we desire
to know where the Supreme Court is, and who appointed it? And where Christ has
ever promised to his Church a Power to end Controversies when they arise, as
effectually as Judges do Temporal Differences? For the freest and most General
Councils yet assembled, have not been so happy; and those we look on as the
most Venerable Authority to decide Differences in the Church.

But still our Church wants sufficient Authority, in his Opinion. Page 56.
Does it want Authority to govern its own Members? To Reform Abuses in a
divided State of the Catholic Church? To cast off an usurped Power, as it was
judged by the Clergy in Convocation, who yet concurred in other things with the
Church of Rome? I pray what Authority had the Gallican Church so lately to
declare against the Pope's Infallibility, and to reduce him in that respect to
the Case of an ordinary Bishop? If Absolute Obedience be due to him as Head of
the Church, what Authority have the Temporal Princes in other Countries,
sometimes to forbid, sometimes to restrain and limit the Pope's Bulls. This at
least shows, that there may be just Authority to examine and restrain the
Pope's Power. And I see no Reason, why the several Churches of Christendom may
not act as well against the Pretense of the Pope's Authority, as the Gallican
Church has done against his Infallibility; especially, since this Gentleman
has told us, that Authority without Infallibility, signifies nothing. And
those who think they may examine and reject his Dictates, may do the same by
his Authority, the one being as liable as the other.

It was said in the Papers, That no Country can subsist in Quiet, where there
is not a Supreme Judge, from whom there can be no Appeal.

The Answer was, That the natural Consequence was then, that every National
Church ought to have the Supreme Power within it self. But how comes Appeals to
a Foreign Jurisdiction to tend to the Peace and Quiet of a Church?

The Defender says; That a National to the whole Church, is but Page 57.
as a Shire to a Kingdom; and a very natural and consistent Consequence it is,
that every Shire should have a King.

One would think by such an Answer, this Defender is a mighty Stranger to the
ancient Polity of the Church. Did he never hear of the Power of Metropolitans
being settled by the Council of Nice for governing the Churches, and calling
Provincial Synods? Did he never hear of many other Canons relating to the Power
and Frequency of Provincial Synods? Did he never hear of the Decrees of the
Council of Ephesus, forbidding all Encroachments on the ancient Rights of
Churches? Did he never hear that Provincial Councils have declared Matters of
Faith, without so much as advising with the Bishop of Rome? As the African
Councils did in the Pelagian Controversy; and the Councils of Tolcdo, in the
Case of Arianism; which reformed the Spanish Churches, and made Canons by their
own Authority; which were confirmed by their Kings, Reccaredus and Sisenandus?
Did he never hear that it was good Doctrine among Cathol^ck Divines, That
particular Churches might take upon them to declare the true Catholic Faith?
And if so, they must judge what is so. Did he never hear, that in a divided
State of the Church, Errors and Abuses may be reformed by particular Churches?
And that this was owned and defended by great Men in the Church of Rome? if he
did not, he was very much unprovided for the handling such a Controversy; if he
did know these things, he ought not to have spoken with so much contempt of the
Power of Particular or National Churches.

And to assert their Authority, is very far from being like setting up a King
in every Shire; for this were the highest Dilloyalty to the King, who has a
just and unquestionable Authority over all the Shires. Let him prove that the
Pope has such a Monarchy over all particular Churches, before he make such a
Parallel again. But the way he takes is rather like making the Imperial Crown
of this Realm to be in subjection to a Foreign Power, because the Roman
Emperors once had Dominion here, and therefore this Kingdom could never recover
its own Rights.

But he says, A Foreign Jurisdiction is hardly sense with respect to Page 55.
the Church, for ^oris is out, and unless the ultimate Jurisdiction be out of
the Church, it cannot be said to be foreign. This is a shameful begging of the
Question, that what they call the Roman Catholic Church, is the Catholic
Church; for if it be not (which I hope I have sufficiently shown) then the
pretended and usurped Jurisdiction of the Roman Church over the Church of
England, is a Foreign Jurisdiction.

He adds, That it is impossible to re-settle the Church among us, without that
which we call Foreign Jurisdiction; because Dissentions in Page 58.
matters of Religion cannot otherwise be removed.

But suppose this Foreign Jurisdiction be the occasion of these Dissentions?
some maintaining (...) others asserting the Rights of our Church against it; Is
not (...) ^oreign Jurisdiction like to put an end to it? Yes certainly. For, if
all Parties submit, there will be no longer disputing. But our Question, as
yet, is, whether this be reasonable or not?

I complained of the Inconvenience of Appeals to a Foreign Jurisdiction. He
gives us a smart Answer, and says, That holds no comparison with the
Inconvenience of Heresy. As tho it were so plain Page 59.
a thing that we are guilty of Heresy, that it needed no manner of proof. Alas!
what need a Man prove that it is day when the sun shines? We are just as much
guilty of Heresy, as the good Bishop was, who, for denying the Antipodes, was
condemned by Pope Zach^^y. But it is a comfortable thing in a Charge of Heresy,
to find it no better proved.

He says, I mistook the matter of Appeals, and that it was not understood Page
59.
with respect to Causes, but to matters of Doctrine and Worship.

An Appeal must re^ate to a Superior Authority; and a constant Appeal to a
standing Authority; and whatever the pretense be, the Court of Rome will
challenge Supreme Jurisdiction, wherever the Pope is owned as Head of the
Church: And then all those Consequences will follow I mentioned before. If
other kind of Appeals were meant in the Papers, yet they must relate to an
Authority Superior to our Church; which we could wish had been more fully
expressed, that we might have known to whom the Appeal was to be made; whether
to a free General Council, which we never disowned; or to the Popes Authority,
which we yet see no cause to make our Appeals to, especially as to what
concerns his own Jurisdiction.

He pleads, That Supreme Power must be Judge in its own Cause; for no Authority
ought to be set up against the King, supposing a Question Page 52.
be started about his Prerogative.

I answer; This is a Case extremely different: for in matters of Prerogative,
the King's Supreme Power is not the Question; for his Right to the Imperial
Crown is, and ought to be out of dispute; but all the Question that can be
started, must relate only to the Exercise of his Power, in some particular
Cases, where former Laws made by the King's Consent, are supposed to limit it;
which the Courts of Judicature take Cognizance of, and so are a kind of Legal
Arbitrators between the King and his People.

But in the Case before us, the Jurisdiction it self, and the Right to exercise
any such Authority, is the very thing in Question. And I desire this Gentleman
to resolve me, whether in the late times of Usurpation this had (...) been good
Doctrine, that those who enjoy, or pretend to Supreme Power, are to be Judges
in their own Case? If so, then it had been impossible for Men to have justified
their Loyalty to the Royal Family, then very unjustly put out of possession. If
not, then there may be a pretense to Supreme Authority, where it is by no means
allowable for the Pretender to Judge in his own Cause.

As to his Appeal to the Catholic Church; we by no means reject it, provided
he mean the Church truly Catholic, as it comprehends Page 63.
the Apostolical Church in the first place; and then all other Christian
Churches, which from the Apostles times have delivered down the Catholic
Doctrine and Worship, which they received from them. But if he means that which
is called a Catholic Church, but is neither Catholic nor Apostolical; we beg
his pardon, if we allow no Appeal to it, since its Errors and Corruptions are
the great and just Cause of our Complaints.

He runs into a long Discourse about Church-Security, and his design is to show
there can be none without Infallibility. Page 64, 65.


Infallibility is no doubt a very good thing, but where is it to be had? Is it
not possible for Men both to be deceived and to deceive, with a pretense of
Infallibility? All that we desire is to see some Infallible Prooss of it;
without which all the talk about it does not end one Controversy, but beget
many. And this kind of Talk is, as if a Man were to advise with two Lawyers
about making a Purchase, but would fain be secure of a good Title; the one
desires to see all the Evidences that belong to the Estate, and after the
perusal of all, he tells him, that as far as he can possibly discern, the Title
is very good, and he would venture all he had upon it. He goes to another, and
tells him what the former had said to him. And was this all, says he? Would he
not say, it was impossible for you to be cheated? No. And will you venture your
Money without such Security? Why, says the Client, what would you have me to
do? I will tell you, says he, there is but one way in the World for you to be
safe. What is that, Sir. I should be glad to know it with all my Heart? I will
discover it to you, provided you follow my Counsel; and that is, to deal with a
Man who has such a Gift from Heaven bestowed upon him, that he never did, nor
ever can deceive you, and then it is impossible you should be cheated: for, all
these Deeds and Writings, and Lawyers, may deceive you; but if you deal with
such a Man, you are safe enough. I thank you, Sir, says the Client, for your
good Advice; but I pray, where is there such a Man to be found? For, if I
cannot find him out, I am just where I was before, and I must use the best
means I can, and rather trust to good Deeds and real Honesty, than wait for a
Chimerical Infallibliity.

It is alleged still, That without infallibility, we have not Judgment Page 65.
but Fancy.

And the Replier says, That in Competition with the Churches Authority Repl.
p. 34.
all is but Fancy.

The difference of these must depend upon the Reason we produce; and by that we
are still content the World should judge, so we understand those, who are
unprejudiced in it.

It was said in the Papers, That if the Fancies of those who are now for the
Church of England vary, they are ready, or (as the Desender says it ought to
be read) really to embrace or join with the next Congregation of People, whose
Discipline or Worship agrees with their Opinion at that time.

I will take his own Reading, which in my Opinion alters the matter very
little; for still it implies, That those of the Church of England have nothing
to hold them to it, but a present Fancy, and when that varies, they may as well
be of another Persuasion; for Fancy, we all know, is a very mutable thing.

But, to show that those of the Church of England are not so apt to vary their
Fancies or Opinions in these matters, I alleged their adhering to the Crown in
the times of Rebellion.

He answers, That my Zeal for the Church of England is wondrous Page 66.
unlucky. I am sorry if it prove so, since I unfeignedly design to serve her,
and therefore should be much more concerned, if I should do her Injury under a
pretense of Service. But wherein is it? He confesses, The Doctrine of our
Church is in this Point very Orthodox, and her Practice in the times of
Rebellion conformable to it. And what was the Practice of the Church then, but
the firmness of the Members of it? But many, he says, deserted Her and her
Doctrine in this Point at that time, so many that the Rebellion was
peradventure indebted for its success to those Deserters. But they were
Deserters still; and the Practice of the Church of England was agreeable to her
Doctrine, by his own Confession. How then comes this to show, that it is only a
variable Fancy which keeps Men to it? He says, If those who deserted her, had
ever adhered to her with a Persuasion, that they were obliged to believe what
sbe taught, they could not have deserted her in this Point, who always taught
Loyalty; and till they do so, there is no security of adhering to her.

This seems to me to be a wondrous unlucky Answer. For does Infallibility
secure a Church against Deserters? Have no Men, no Provinces, no whole Nations
deserted a Church which pretends to Infallibility? And since there may be such
Multitudes of Deserters, where ^^fallibility is challenged, what greater
Security can that give a^^inst them, more than our Church does? Nay, I think so
much the less, because the very pretense to Infallibility is suspicious and
hard to be made out, and every Error overthrows it. And I do not think the
Church of Rome did her self greater Mi^^hief, or ^ade more total Deserters by
any one thing, than by pretending to be Infallible. For, when such gross Errors
and Corruption; were complained of, that one of the Popes at that time
confessed them, and owned the necessity of a Reformation, when the Princes of
the Roman Communion called for it, and pressed it very hard by their
Ambassadors in the Council of Trent (as appears by the French Collection of
Memoires relating to it) when (...) all, no one thing, as to Doctrine or
Worship, could be redressed, it ^onvinced the World, that let things be as they
would, they would Reform nothing; this made the Breach irreconcilable. For,
till the Council of Trent was ended and confirmed, there was still hopes of
Reconciliation, upon a due Explication of some Points, Reforming Abuses, and
leaving School-Doctrines at liberty; but when they saw every thing defended,
and the Errors complained of, made Articles of Faith, and put into a New Creed,
there was no hopes of any Accommodation left. And all this was the blessed
Effect of pretending to Infallibility; for if one Error had been owned, there
had been no farther pretending to that.

It is some comfort however, that our Church is confessed to teach the Orthodox
Doctrine of Loyalty, and her Practice to be conformable in the worst of Times;
and so I hope it will always be. But it has been said by some Body, That we
had our Government and Ceremonies from his Church, our Doctrine from Luther and
Calvin; and that we had nothing peculiar to our Church, but our Doctrine of
Non-Resistance; and much good may it do us. And we hope we shall never fare the
worse for it. This might give occasion to enquire, Whether the Church which
pretends to be Infallible, does teach it so Orthodoxly or not? Or whether those
who do think themselves obliged to believe what she teaches, are thereby
obliged to the strictest Principles of Loyalty? But I forbear. It is sufficient
to my Purpose to show, that our Church does not only teach them, as her own
Doctrine; but which is far more effectual, as the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, and of the Primitive Church; which I think ought to have more force
on the Consciences of Men, than the pretense to Infallibility in any Church in
the World.

But all this while it is said, There is no firm Motive produced for adhering
to the Doctrine of our Church. And this is repeated over P. 67, 68.
and over: As though there could be any greater Motive in the World, than that
our Doctrine is no other than that of Christ and his Apostles. And unless you
prove this as to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, all your other Motives
signify nothing to the real satisfaction of any Man's Conscience. For it is
agreed on all hands, that our Religion is a revealed Religion; and that this
Revelation was made by Christ and his Apostles: and that this Revelation, as to
Matters necessary to Salvation, is contained in the Books of the New Testament.
What satisfaction then can it be to any Man's Conscience, to be told, such a
Church tells me this and that, and the other Point were the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles? As will appear by this short Representation. You pretend to
no new Revelations of Matter of Doctrine? No. You have the Books of this
Revelation? Yes. Are they not legible? Yes. But you cannot understand them. Let
me try; It is for God's sake I must believe, and therefore I cannot be
satisfied till I see his Word. What! will you not believe the Church which
delivers you the Word? I pray excuse me. A Man brings me a Letter from my
Father, about matter of great Consequence to me; he tells me, I need not look
into the Letter it self, for he was authorized by my Father to tell me his
Meaning: Although I believe he dealt faithfully in bringing me the true Letter; Do
you think I will trust him for the Meaning of it? No; I will open it, if it be
only to see, whether he had such Authority from him or not. And I know, if my
Father was pleased to write to me about Matters of such Importance, he would
write in such a manner that I might understand him; and if any Difficulties
arise in Point of Law, I will take the Advice of th^se who are most fit and
able to direct me. But after all, I must know what my Father would have me to
do from his own Words, and not from the Mouth of the Messenger. Or if he tells
me he has Authority to deliver other things by Word of Mouth, not contained in
the Letter, which I am equally bound to believe with what I can find in i^; can
any one think I will believe him, unless it appears by the Letter it self that
my Father gave him such Authority? Let him tell me never so much, how long he
has been my Father's Servant, and how faithful he has been to him, and how
much he has done and suffered for him, and what a number of Certificates he
can produce, from time to time, of his good Behavior; yet all this can give me
no satisfaction, as long as the Letter he brings is confessed to be my Father's
own Handwriting; and that it was purposely sent to direct me what I was to do
in a Matter that he knew to be of the greatest Concernment in the World to me.
Can I imagine one so wise and careful, should omit setting down in his own
Letter such important Things, and leave them to the dis^retion of one that may
either mistake his Meaning, or have some Interest to carry on different from
mine? And therefore all the fair Pretenses or Motives in the World, shall never
make me believe any thing to be his Mind for me to do, in a Matter which
relates to my Welfare, but what I find under his own Hand.

It is to very little purpose to quote S. Augustin's Motives about Page 67.
the Church* unless it be made appear that they belong only to the Church of
Rome; and that they prove the Church Infallible in all she teaches. Our Faith
depends on the Word of God, as it is contained in Scripture: thi^ Scripture is
conveyed down by the Church; but the Church still is but the Messenger which
bring^ the Letter, by which we are directed what to believe and practice in
order to Salvation.

We do by no means think the Word of God is made by writing, as he suggests;
but we are sure it is the Word of God which is Page 6^.
written, which we can never be of any Tradition. We do not look out for a
fallible Judge, to be sure to have an end of our Differences: But we hate to be
imposed on, by a pretense to an Infallible Judge, who instead of ending
Differences, makes more. We do not think it Judgment to affirm, that giving
Honor to God, is not giving Honor to God: But we have not such deep
Understandings to comprehend how God should be honored by the breaking his
Commandments.

It is not Judgment in our Opinion to think, That because only one could redeem
us, no Body besides can pray for us: But it is no great Wisdom and Judgment, if
God has appointed but one Advocate in Heaven, for us to appoint him more; or
to make our Addresses to our Fellow Creatures in Heaven, when he has commanded
us to do it to his Son. We do not believe that the Body and Blood of Christ can
now be separated, or he die again: But when Christ instituted a Sacrament to
set forth the shedding of his Blood, that it is mere Fancy to think his Blood
being in his Body, does answer the Ends of it. The Apostles no doubt understood
Christ's meaning in what he said, and have so well instructed his Church
therein, that we have no reason to believe he meant the substantial Change of
his Body, in the Institution of a Sacrament. Now on which side Judgment and
Reason lies, these very Instances discover. And we desire no greater Liberty in
these Matters, than to have our Judgments swayed by the strongest Reason; and
that I hope is not building on Sand. Page 70.


The Replier says; The Infallible Church is as visible as the Sun. We are then
wondrous unlucky indeed that cannot see it: I have often Repl. p. 36.
rubbed my Eyes, and looked over and over, where they tell me it is to be seen,
and I can yet see nothing like it; although I should be as glad to see it as
another. I have heard of a blind Man, who pretended to have such a sagacity
with his Fingers, that he could feel Colors; and he proceeded so far in it,
that some Vertuoso's believed him, and were ready to form a Theory of Colors
from the subtilty of the blind Man's Fingers; but before they had accomplished
it, the Trick was discovered. An Infallible Judge of all Controversies looks to
me just like it; He is to determine Controversies, not by seeing, but by a kind
of feeling. If he produces Reason, we may judge as well as he; if he does not,
he must feel them out; which is so different a way from the proceeding of the
rest of Mankind, that for my part, I must be content rather to grope in the
darkness of common Reason, than be directed by the Light of this invisible
Sunshine.

The Defender here comes in with his Dish and his Stand; which are Metaphors
somewhat too mean for such a Subject, and Page 71.
are apt to turn one's Stomach more than Repetition. The Question is, Whether
those who allow the use of our Judgments in the choice of a Church, have Reason
to find fault with it in other things; because the Difficulties about an
Infallible Church, are as great as about any other Point in Religion?

The Replier again says; The Church is a Noonday Light. Then, what Cimmerians
are we? Tully questioned. Whether some God, or Nature, or the Situation of the
Place, hindered a whole Nation that they could never see the Sun? But our Modern
Geographers put an end to this Dispute, telling us, there are no People in the
World who cannot see the Sun at some time or other. And we are apt to think, if
there were such a Sunshine of the Churches Infallibility, we should be able to
discern it, unless the Light of it may be thought to dazzle o^^ Eyes; for, we
are as willing to find it as they; but the Dis^^ (...) it are such as we cannot
conquer. And there need no Telescopes to find out the Sun.

But the Defender will not yield that there are any su^^ Difficulties about the
Church's Infallibility; for he has but o^^ thing to mind, and that no
Difficulty neither, where, or which the Church is. I hope when Page 75.
he has considered the former Discourses, he will not think it so easy a
matter to find out the Church he talks of, viz. One Infallible Catholic
Church.

But the Difficulties about Scripture are greater; as about the Canon,
Translation, and Sense of it.

The Question proceeds upon a Person who in earnest desires to satisfy himself
in this Matter; Whether in order to his Salvation, he must follow the
Directions of Scripture, or the Church? And I doubt not to make it appear, that
the Difficulties are greater about the Church than the Scripture. That which
deceives Persons is, that they rather consider the Difficulties after the
Choice, than before. It is very true, those who trust the Church, have no more
to do afterward, but to believe and do as she directs; for they are to examine
no farther, whether it be true or false, right or wrong, Virtue or Vice, which
is commanded; the Church is to be obeyed. But those who follow the Scripture,
must not only read, and weigh, and consider it well; but when Doubts arise,
must make fresh Applications to their Rule, and use the best Means for
understanding it, by Prayer, Meditation, and the Assistance of Spiritual
Guides. And this is far more agreeable to the Design of the Christian Religion,
as it was taught by Christ and his Apostles.

But the Difficulties of the Choice are now to be considered; and let us
consider what those are about the Church, and then compare them with those
about the Scripture.

If I choose a Church for my Infallible Guide in the Way to Heaven, to which
the Promises of Christ do belong, then there are these Difficulties, both which
I think impossible for my mind to get over.

(1.) I must exclude all other Churches in the Christian World from any share
in these Promises. And either I must condemn them without hearing them, or
examining the Grounds of their Exclusion, or I must be satisfied with the
Reason of it; which I cannot be, till I am certain that Church has justly shut
out all other Churches, and challenged the Promises to her self alone.

(2.) I must be satisfied that Christ did intend one standing Visible Church to
be my Director in the Way to Heaven. And for this purpose, I must examine all
the places of Scripture produced to that end, and be Judge of the clearness and
evidence of them, i. e. I must conquer the Difficulties about the Scripture, as
to Canon, Translation, and Sense, before I can be satisfied that I am to make
choice of a Church.

(3.) There is yet a harder Point to get over; Suppose a Church must be chosen:
why the Church of Rome rather than any other? What is there in the Promises of
Christ, which direct me to choose that Church and no other? Suppose I were born
in Greece, and there I was told, I must ^huse a Church for my Guide to Heav^n.
If it must be so, I will choose our own Greek Church; No, it must be the Church
of Rome. What Reason or Color is there for it? Is it said so in Scripture? No,
not expressly. But what Consequence from Scripture will make me do it? There are
Promises made to the Church. What then? Were not our Churches planted by the
Apostles? Have not we had a constant Succession of Bishop; in them? Have we not
four Patriarchs in our Communion, and you but one? For what imaginable Reason
then should you exclude our Chur^^es from any share in the Promises of Christ?

But now as to the Scripture, we are to consider;

1. That no more is necessary as to particular Persons than knowing the things
necessary to their Salvation; which are easy to be known, and are clearly
revealed in Scripture, if S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine may be b^lieved.

2. That what Difficulties are objected about the Scripture, must be all of
them resolved by him that believes the Church, (as is already observed) but the
Difficulties about the Church's Infallibility, do not concern him that relies
on Scripture.

3. That the general Consent of the Christian Church, is of far greater
Advantage for the satisfaction of a Man's Mind, than the Authority of any one
Church, as about the Integrity of the Copies, and the Canon of Scripture.

4. As to Translations, the Unlearned in all Churches must trust to those that
are Learned for the particular examination of them; but in general, a private
Person may be satisfied by these Con^^derations.

(1.) That Men will not go about to deceive others in a Matter wherein so many
are concerned; and in which it is so easy to discover any wilful Fraud.

(2.) That since the Divisions of Christendom, there are Parties still at watch
to discover the Faults committed by each other in a Work of so public a Nature.

(3.) That where a Translation has been reviewed with great care, after
several Attempts, there is still greater Security as to the goodness of it. And
this is the Case of the present Translation of our Church, which was with
wonderful care reviewed and compared with the Original Languages, by the
particular Direction of K. James I. and therefore deserves to be esteemed above
such a Translation, which was never made out of the Original (as to the Old
Testament) nor ever reviewed and corrected by it. Which is the Case of the
Vulgar Latin, and of such Translations which are made from it.

I had said, that the Scripture may be a Rule without the Church, but the
Church cannot without the Scriptures.

The Replier, like a fair Adversary, mentions that which looks like an
Objection, viz. That there was a Church before the Scriptures Repl. p. 37.
were written; and some Ages were passed before the Canon of Scripture was made
and owned by the Church.

To which I Answer; That when I said the Church cannot be a Rule without the
Scripture, it was upon the supposition, that the Canon of Scripture had been
long since owned by the Church, and that the Church derives its Infallibility
from the Promises contai^ed in the Scripture.

But the Defender goes another way to work; for, says he, The Scriptures, I
say, may be a Rule without the Church; that is, Dis. p. 72.
without Faithful; for a Congregation of them is a Church. What! in the Sense
now before us, as it is taken for a Guide! Is every Congregation of the
Faithful a Church in this Sense? Then, welfare the Independents. And this,
methinks, makes Infallibility sink very low.

I do not say, There could be no Church before Scripture; nor that they had
then no Rule of Faith; nor that the Church depends on writing; these are but
mean Objections; but I ^ill say, That where a Church challenges her Authority
by the Scripture, it can signify nothing without it. Which is so plain, that I
need not multiply words about it.

As to his Church-Security, we have considered it enough already; but it would
make one mistrust a Security which is so often offered.

I said, that suppose Infallibility be found in Scripture, there is yet a
harder Point to get over, viz. how the Promises relating to the Church in
general, came to be appropriated to the Church of Rome.

From hence he insers, That I have at last found the Promises of Page 73.
Infallibility to the Church there. Is not this a rare Consequence? Suppose I
should say, I know a Book of Controversy in the World, that has very little of
true Reasoning in it; but if it were to be found there, it does not reach to
the Point in hand. Does this imply that I affirmed in the latter part, what I
denied before? Is this finding out true Reasoning in the latter Period, which
was not to be found in the former? There may be true Reasoning, when it is not
to the purpose. So there might be Infallibility, and yet the Church of Rome not
concerned in it. Suppose the Church of Jerusalem, as the Mother Church, might
be Infallible by the Promises of Scripture; what would this be to the Church of
Rome? But I never said, or thought, that there were any Promises of
Infallibility made to any Church in Scripture: Pro^ises of Divine Assistance
and Indefectibility, I grant, are made to the Church in general: but these are
quite of another Nature from Promises of Infallibility, in delivering Matters
of Faith in all Ages. Yet if this were granted, the Church of Rome, as it takes
in all of her Communion, has no more reason to challenge it to her self, than
Europe has to be called the Face of the whole Earth.

As to his Sandy Foundation, I tell him in short, He that builds Page 74.
his Faith on the Word of God, builds on a Rock; and all other things will be
found but Sandy Foundations.

(4.) The next thing laid to our Charge is, That we draw our Arguments from
Implications, and far-fetched Interpretations, at the same time that we deny
plain and positive words.

In Answer to this; (1.) It was showed, that in many of the Points in
Difference, we have express words of Scripture for us. As, against the Worship
of Images, and giving Divine Worship to any but God: and for giving the
Eucharist in both kinds, and praying in a Language we understand.

The Defender would have me produce the very Words, to show that the Scripture
says No, to what their Church says I, or contrariwise. Page 75.


He talked much before, that we give the same Answer the old Heretics did; and
now I think he has matched them. Show us, say they, in Terms, the direct
contrary to our Propositions; where the Son was said to be Consubstantial to
the Father; or the Holy Ghost was a Divine Person; or the Blessed Virgin the
Mother of God; or that there are two Natures in Christ after the Union. Will
Reason and Consequences signify nothing, when founded on the Word of God?

But I need not this answer, for I assirm that the words of the first and
second Commandment, of the Institution of the Sacrament, Drink ye all of this;
of S. Paul 14. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, against Public Service
in an unknown Tongue, are so plain and evident, that there is no Command of
Scripture but may be avoided and turned another way as well as these. And
herein we go not upon our own Fancies, but we have the concurrent Sense of the
Christian Church in the best and most Primitive Ages, in every one of the
Points here mentioned.

And whether we are right as to the sense of the second Commandment; Page 38,
30.
and as to Divine Worship in general, as to Christ's Institution amounting to a
Command, as to St. Paul 's Discourse: Which the Replier insists upon, next to
the Scripture it self, and the Force contained therein; we appeal to the
Primitive Church, as the most indifferent Arbitrator between us.

(2.) I answered; That where words seem plain and positive, they may have a
Metaphorical or Figurative Sense; as when God has Eyes and Ears, etc. given
him; and the Rock was Christ. And so in the Words, This is my Body; it was a
Sacramental Expression, as the other was; and the other words are figurative,
when the Cup is said to be the New Testament in his Blood: and St. Paul,
notwithstanding those words, called it Bread after Consecration.

Here the Defender will not bite, the Light being too clear for him; but
descants upon denying plain words, and so runs clear Des. p. 76.
off from the Point, which seemed to be chiefly meant by the Paper.

But the Replier is a generous Adversary, and attacks what Rep^^. p. 35.
stands before him. He endeavors to show a Difference between God's having
Eyes and Ea^s, etc. and those words, This is my Body, as to the receding from
the literal Sense; because, says he, there is an implication of impossibility
in the one, but not in the other. But withal he grants, that if by This be
meant the Bread, it would have implied an equal impossibility.

I am very glad to see this Point brought to so fair an Issue: For, if I do not
prove by the general Consent of the Fathers, both of the Greek and Latin
Churches, that by This the Bread is meant, I dare promise to become hi^
Proscly^^.

(5.) The last Thing objected is, That our Church s^bsists only on the Pleasure
of the Civil Magistrate, who may turn the Church which way he pleases.

To this it was answered;

(1.) That the Rule of our Religion is unalterable, being the Word of God; tho
the Exercise of it be under the Regulation of the Laws of the Land.

(2.) That although we attribute the Supreme Jurisdiction to the King, yet we do
not question but there are inviolable Rights of the Church which ought to be
preserved against the Fancies of some, and the Usurpations of others.

The Replier Answers, That our Religion is built on private Interpretations
Repl. p. 41.
of Scripture established by Law; and therefore if the Law be mutable, the
Religion is mutable.

The Defender desires I would make it appear, that the Holy Scripture Dis. p.
78.
is such a Foundation, as makes the Protestant Church unalterable; for the
Letter of Scripture is common to all who bear the Name of Christians. And all
Alterations of Religion are made upon pretense of Scripture.

To give a clear and distinct Answer, I shall lay down these Propositions.

(1.) That although Humane Laws be alterable, yet the Divine Law is unchangeable,
and continues its Force on the Consciences of Men; so that no Humane Law can
make that lawful which God has sorbidden, nor that unlawful which he has
commanded. Whatever Change therefore may happen as to the Laws of Men, the Law
of God is still the same, and its Obli^ation cannot be taken off by any Laws of
Men. As suppose God has forbidden the Worship of Images, or of Saints, or of
any Creature, upon Supposition that it is not a Creature; no Law in the World
can make this lawful; because God's Authority is Superior and Antecedent to
Man's, and therefore cannot be superseded by an Act of Men. And this is one of
the Fund mentals of the Christian Religion, without which it could never have
been practiced, when the Laws of the Empire were against it. So, neither can
Humane Laws make that true which is against the Word of God, nor that false
which is agreeable to it. They can never make Transubstantiation a true
Doctrine* if it were nor so before; nor a Purgatory necessary to be believed,
unless it be proved from Scripture to be so. So that the Foundation of our
Religion, being the Word of God, and the Obligation of that on the Consciences
of Men, it must remain the same, tho Humane Laws be mutable. Howbeit, I do not
deny the Magistrates Power in making Laws for regulating the Public Exercise
of Religion. But as we have cause to thank God for the establishment of the
best Church in the Christian World by them among us; so we are unwilling to put
such Cases as the Defender does, when Page 80.
we enjoy our Religion as established by Law: And it would be interpreted to be
a mistrust of his Majesty's Gracious Promise to protect it.

(2.) Although the Letter of Scripture be liable to Misinterpretations and
Abuses, yet the true and genuine Sense of it may be understood; and then there
is a great disterence between false and mistaken Notions, and the proper Sense
of Scripture. This is very strange Reasoning, if Men will infer that there can
be no certainty as to the Sense of Scripture, because so many have
misinterpreted it. Is it any Argument that the Constitution of our Government
is not sirm; or that Loyal Subjects cannot be certain of their Duty, because
Men of ill Principles have run away with false Notions of a Fundamental
Contract, and Coordinate Power? Is there no Certainty in Law, because Judges
have been of different Opinions, and determined the same Cause several ways? Is
there no Principle of Certainty in the World, because Men have been imposed
upon, both by their Senses and Reason? If notwithstanding this, we must allow
that we may judge truly of some Things, (or else we must all turn Scepticks)
then we desire no more than to observe the same Rules and Caution in judging
the Sense of Scripture, which we do as to our judgment of other Matters. In
them we take notice of the Causes of Errors, the Circumstances of Things, the
Difference of Objects, the Nature of the Medium, and accordingly pass our
Judgment. And in Things too small for our view, or too remote, we make use of
Glasses to help us; but all this while Men do not reason so weakly in these
Matters. Do they say that some have been deceived by their Glasses and
Telescopes; therefore there is no certainty in any of them, and they must all
be laid aside; and whatever they talk of Spots in the Sun, and the unequal
Surface of the Moon, they are all Fancies and Chimera's of giddy Brains, and no
Men of sense can believe them? If Mankind do not argue at this rate in other
things, how come they to be so fatally unreasonable about the Scripture? The
Letter of Scripture, say they, is used for this Fancy, and the other Mistake,
and a third pleads it for downright Heresy: I very one thinks he has the
Letter of Scripture for him; and upon that he grounds his Faith. And what then?
The natural Consequence is, that every one would sain have Scripture of his
side. Does it really follow from hence that no Body has it? Or that there can
be no certainty who has it, and who has it not? But every one thinks he has
it. And what follows? Some or others must be deceived. I grant it; But who
shall tell who is deceived, and who not? I pray let me ask one Question; Are
you willing to be deceived, or not? Who is willing to be deceived? Every one
that will not take the pains to be undeceived, or to prevent being deceived.
What pains do you mean? Such honest Industry and Diligence which every one
ought to take, who pretends he searches for Truth in order to his Salvation.
And I dare affirm, such shall never want Means to attain certainty as to the
Sense of Scripture in what concerns their Salvation.

But suppose the Question be about Churches, how can the Church of England
assure Men that is the true Sense of Scripture which is delivered by it?

I Answer;

(3.) The Church of England has ofsered all reasonable Satisfaction to
Mankind, that it does follow the true Sense of Scripture.

And that by these ways;

1. By not locking up the Scripture from the view of the People, but leaving it
free and open for all Persons to judge concerning the Doctrines here taught.
Which argues a great assurance, that our Church is not afraid of any Opposition
to be found to the Word of God in the Articles of our Religion. And the
contrary is vehemently to be suspected, where Reading the Scripture is
forbidden the People, as it is in the Church of Rome, if the Popes Authority
signify any thing; for Clement the 8th, did revoke the Power of granting
Licenses, which was allowed by Pius the 4th. And I do not see how any Confessor
can justify his acting against the Pope's Authority.

2. By not pretending to deliver the Sense of Scripture on her own Authority.
If she did require her Members to depend wholly upon her Sense, without
examining themselves, that very thing would render her Authority suspicious
with all Inquisitive Men; who always mistrust where there is too much Caution.

3. By her constant appealing to the Primitive Church ever since the
Reformation, as the best Voucher for her keeping to the true Sense of
Scripture. And in truth, one of the greatest Controversies between our Church
and the Church of Rome, is not about the bare Letter of Scripture, but the best
Interpreter of it. Our Church still contending, that the sirst and purest Ages
of the Church, next to the Apostles Times, did certainly best understand the
Sense aad Meaning of Scripture; and the Church of Rome pretending, that the
giving the true Sense of Scripture, belongs to the present Catholic Church,
which they would be thought to be, against the plainest Evidence of Scripture
and Reason. As appears by the foregoing Discourses.

The Defender's Cavil against the Prayer at the end of the Answer, would have
held as well against Amen, if it had been added to it. But he was to answer
all, and therefore the very Prayer could not escape his Confutation, or at
least his putting an ill construction upon it; which was far from the Intention
of him that made it. Who thinks it a part of a good Christian, to be always a
Loyal Subject.

As to the summing up the Evidence in his Conclusion, I shall not follow him in
it, since I think the Cause so clear in the opening of it, that I shall leave
it as it is, to the Reader's Judgment.

An ANSWER to the DEFENSE of the THIRD PAPER.
I Have now done as to matter of Reason and Argument; the third Paper chiefly
relates to Matter of Fact: which, if I were mistaken in, even the brisk
Defender of it, does me that Right, to say, the Bishop of Winchester did
mislead me. For the whole Body of my Answer, he says, is in effect a
Transcript from the Bishop's Preface; that I purloin his Arguments, without
altering sometime so Des. p. 111.
much as the property of his Words. That I have quoted him five times only in
the Margin, and ought to have quoted him in almost every leaf of my Pamphet. In
short, if the Master had not eaten, the Man (saving Reverence) could not have
vomited. This is a Taste of the Decency and Cleanliness of his Style; especially
in writing for Princes and great Ladies, who are not accustomed to such a sort
of Courtship to others, in their Presence. But as course as the Complement is,
it clears me from being the Author of any Mistakes, and lays the blame on the
Bishop, who is not able to answer for himself. Yet, as if I had been the sole
Contriver and Inventer of all, he bestows those civil and obliging Epithets
upon me, of disingenuous, foul-mouthed, and shuffling; one of a virulent
Genius, of spiteful Diligence Page 85. 87. 88.
and Irreverence to the Royal Family; of subtle Calumny, and sly Aspersion; and
he adds to these Ornaments of Speech, that I have a Cloven Foot, and my Name is
Legion; and that my Answer is an Ib. 125.
infamous Libel, a scurrilous saucy Pamphlet. Is this indeed the Spirit of a
New Convert? Is this the Meekness and Temper you lvix
intend to gain Proselites by, and to convert the Nation? He tells us in the
beginning, that Truth has a Language peculiar to it self; I desire to be
informed whether these be any of the Characters of it? Page 85.
And how the Language of Reproach and Evil-speaking may be distinguished from
it? But Zeal in a new Convert is a terrible thing; for it not only burns but
rages, like the Eruptions of Mount AEtna, it fills the Air with noise and
smoke; and throws out such a Torrent of liquid Fire, that there is no standing
before it. The Answerer alone was too mean a Sacrifice for such a Hector in
Controversy. All that stands in his way must fall at his Feet. He calls me
Legion, that he may be sure to have number enough to overcome. But he is a
great Prosicient indeed, if he be such an Exorcist, to cast out a whole Legion
already. But he hopes it may be done without Fasting and Prayer.

If the People continue steadfast to their Religion, they are the Rabble; and
the only Friends I can perceive he allows us. My good Friends the Rabble in one
place, and in another, Our Author Page 92. 125.
knows he has all the common People of his side; What nothing of Honor, or
Dignity, or Wit, or Sense, or Learning left of our side? Not so much as a Poet,
unless it be Robbin Wisdom. I pray, Sir, 126.
when was it that all our Friends degenerated into the Rabble? Do you think
that Heresy, as you call it, does ipso facto degrade all Mankind, and turns all
Orders of Men, even the House of (...) Lordsit self, to a mere Rabble? If all
the common People be of our side, we have no Reason to be troubled at it; but
there is another thing of our side, which you like worse, and that is common
Sense; which is more useful to the World than School Divinity. But methinks he
should not be angry with the common People, when he takes such pains to prove,
That the Kingdom of Heaven is not only Page 95.
for the Wise and Learned; and that our Savior's Disciples were but poor
Fishermen; and we read but of one of his Apostles who was bred up 93.
at the feet of Gamaliel; and that poor People have Souls to save as precious
in the sight of God as the grim Logicians. Would not any one take this for an
Apology for the common People, rather than for the Duchess of York? Whose Wit
and Understanding put her far beyond the need of such a mean Defense? Could she
be vindicated in no other manner than by putting her into the rank of the
Persons of the meanest Capacities? But this is another part of the Decency of
this Defense. He had several pretty sayings, as he thought, upon this Subject,
and therefore out they come, without regarding the Reflection implied in them
on a Person of her Capacity as well as Dignity. And so h^ goes on in his Plea
for the Ignorant, i. e. for the common People, as I am resolved to understand
it. Must they be damned unless they can make a regular Approach to Page (...).
Heaven in Mood and Figure? Is there no entering there without a Syllogisin? or
ergotcering it with a Nego, Concedo, and Distinguo? This may pass for Wit and
Eloquence among those I think he pleads for. And so I am content to let it go
for the sake of my Friends, the common People. But this is somewhat an unusual
way of defending, to plead for those he professes to despise, and in such a
manner, as to reproach the Person he undertakes to defend.

From the Common People, we come to Church-M^n, to see how he uses them. And he
has soon found out a Faction among them, whom he charges with juggling
Designs: but Romantic ^eroes must be allowed to make Armies of a field of
Thistles, and to encounter Page 87.
Wind-mills for Giants. He would fain be the Instrument to divide our Clergy,
and to fill them with suspicions of one another. And to this end, he talks of
Men of a Latitudinarian Stamp: For it goes a great way toward the making
Divisions, to be able to fasten a Name of Distinction among Brethren: This
being to create Jealousies of each other. But there is nothing should make them
more careful to avoid such Names of Distinction, than to ob^^rve how ready
their common Enemies are to make use of them, to create Animosities by them:
Which has made this worthy Gentleman to start this different Character of
Churchmen among us; as tho there were any who were not true to the Principles
of the Church of England as by Law established: If he knows them, he is better
acquainted with them than the Answerer is; for he professes to know none such.
But who then are these Men of the Latitudinarian Stamp? To speak in his own
Language, they are a sort of Ergoteerers, who are for a Concedo rather than a
Nego. And now I hope they are well explained. Or, in other words of his, They
are, says he, for drawing the Non-conformists to their Party: i. e. they are
for having no Non-conformists. And is this their Crime? But they would take the
Headship of the Church out of the King's Hands. How is that possible? They
would (by his own description) be glad to see Differences lessened, and all
that agree in the same Doctrine, to be one entire Body. But this is that which
their Enemies fear; and this Politician has too much discovered: for then such
a Party would be wanting, which might be played upon the Church of England, or
be brought to join with others against it. But how this should touch the King's
Supremacy I cannot imagine. As for his desiring Loyal Subjects to consider this
matter; I hope they will, and the more sor his desiring it; and assure
themselves, that they have no cause to apprehend any juggling Designs of their
Brethren; who, I hope, will always show themselves to be Loyal Subjects, and
dutiful Sons of the Church of England.

The next he falls upon, is, the Worthy Answerer of the Bishop Page 88.
of Condom 's Exposition, and him he charges with picking up Stories against
him, and wraping them up with little Circumstances. How many Fields does he
range for Game, to sind Matter to sill up an Answer, and make it look big
enough to be considered? But that Author has so well acquitted himself in his
Defense, as to all the little Objections made against him, that I can do the
Reader no greater Kindness, than to refer him to it.

I must not say, the poor Bishop of Winchester is used unmercifully by him; for
he calls him that Prelate of rich Memory. As though, Page 97.
like some Popes, he had been considerable for nothing, but for leaving a Rich
Nephew. But, as he was a Person of known Loyalty, Piety, and Learning; so he
was of great Charity, and a public Spirit, which he showed both in his
Lifetime, and at his Death. Could nothing be said of him then but that Pr^late
of rich Memory? Or, had he a mind to tell us he was no Poet? Or, that he was
out of the Temptation of changing his Religion for Bread?

The Bishop of Worcester is charged with downright Prevarication, i. e. being
in his Heart for the Church of Rome, but for mean Reasons continuing in the
Communion of the Church of England. P. 104, 105, etc.
Therefore, says he, take him Topham. And now what can I do more 108, 109.
for the poor Bishop? The most he will allow him is, that he was a peaceable
old Gentleman, who only desired to possess his Conscience and his Bishopric in
Peace without Offense to any Man, either of the Catholic Church, or that of
England. Yet he has so much kindness left for the poor Bishop, that for his
sake he goes about to defend, that a Man may be a true Member of the Church of
England, who asserts both Churches to be so far Parts of the Catholic Church,
that Page 109.
there is no Necessity of going from one Church to another to be saved.

This is a very surprising Argument from a new Convert. Why might he not then
have continued still in the Communion of this Church, tho he might look on the
Church of Rome as part of the Catholic Church? The Reason I gave against it
was, that every true Member of this Church must own the Doctrine of it
contained in the Articles and Homilies; which charge the Church of Rome with
such Errors and unlawful Practices, as no Man who believes them to be such, can
continue in the Communion of that Church; and therefore he must believe a
Necessity of the forsaking of one Communion for the other; and that no true
Member of this Church can, with a good Cons^ience, leave this Church and
embrace the other.

Let us now see what a Talent he has at Ergoteering. If this be true, says
he, then to be a Member of the Church of England, one must assert that either
both Churches are not Parts of the Catholic, or that they are so Parts, that
there is a necessity of going from one to another. He would be a strange Member
of the Church of England, who should hold that both Churches are not Parts of
the Catholic; for then he must deny that Parts are Parts; for ev^ry true
Church is so far a Part of the Catholic Church. Therefore, I say, he must
hold, tho it be in some respects a Part of the Catholic Church; yet it may
have so many Errors and Corruptions mixed with it, as may make it necessary for
Salvation to leave it. The second, he says, is Nonsense. How Nonsense? He does
well to hope that Men may be saved that do not understand Controversy; nor
approach Heaven in Mood and Figure. A necessity of a Change, says he, consists
not with their being Parts; for Parts constitute one Whole, and leave not one
and another to go to or from. We are not speaking of the Parts leaving one
another; but of a Person leaving one Part to go to another. Suppose a
Pestilential Disease rage in one part of the City, and not in another; may it
not be necessary to leave one Part and go to the other, tho they are both Parts
of the same City, and do not remove from one to the other? But he says, with
great assurance, that necessity of Change makes it absolutely impossible for
both Churches to be parts of the Catholic. Which plainly shows, he never
understood the Terms of Communion with both Churches. For, no Church in the
World can lay on Obligation upon a Man to be dishonest, i. e. to profess one
thing, and to do another; which is Dissimulation and Hypocrisy. And no Church
can oblige a Man to believe what is false, or to do what is unlawful; and
rather than do either, he must forsake the Communion of that Church.

Thus I have given a sufficient taste of the Spirit and Reasoning of this
Gentleman.

As to the main Design of the Third Paper, I declared that I considered it, as
it was supposed to contain the Reasons and Motives of the Conversion of so
great a Lady to the Church of Rome.

But this Gentleman has now eased me of the necessity of further considering
it on that account. For he declares, That none of Page 90.
those Motives or Reasons are to be found in the Paper of her Highness. Which
he repeats several times. She writ this Paper, not as to the Ibid.
Reasons she had her self for changing, etc. As for the Reasons of Ibid.
it, they were only betwixt God and her own Soul, and the Priest with whom she
spoke at la^t.

And so my Work is at an end as to her Paper. For I never intended to ransack
the private Papers, or secret Narratives of great Persons. And I do not in the
least question the Relation now given, from so great Authority as that he
mentions of the Passages concerning Her; and therefore I have nothing more to
say as to what relates to the Person of the Duchess. Page 11^.


But I shall take notice of what this Defender says, which reflects on the
Honor of the Church of England.

(1.) The Pillars of the Church established by Law, says he, are to Page 94.
be found but broken Staffs by their own Concessions. What! is the Church of
E^gland Felo de se? But how, I pray? For after all their undertaking to heal a
wounded Conscience, they leave their Proselytes finally to the Scripture; as
our Physicians, when they have emptied the Pockets of their Patients, without
curing them, send them at last to Tunbridg Waters, or the Air of Montpellier.
As tho the Scripture were looked on by us as a mere Help at a dead Lift, when
we have nothing to say. One would think he had never read the Articles of the
Church of England; for there he might have seen, that the Scripture is made the
Rule and Ground of our Faith. And, I pray, whither should any Persons be
directed under Trouble of Mind, but to the Word of God? Can any thing else give
real Satisfaction? Must they go to an Infallible Church? But whence should they
know it to be Infallible, but from the Scriptures? So that on all hands,
Persons must go to the Scriptures if they will have Satisfaction. But this
Gentleman talks like a mere Novice as to Matters of Faith, as tho believing
were a new thing to him; and he did not yet know, that true Faith must be
grounded on Divine Revelation, which the Pillars of our Church have always
asserted to be contained only in the Scripture; and therefore whither can they
send Persons but to the Scripture? But it seem^ he is got no farther than the
Collier's Faith; he believes as the Church believes, and the Church believes as
he believes; and by this he hopes to be too hard for a Legion of Devils.

(2.) He says, We are Reformed from the Virtues of good Living, i. e. Page 98.
from the Devotions, Mortifications, Austerities, Humility and Charity, which
are practiced in Catholic Countries, by the Example and Precept of that lean
mortified Apostle St. Martin Luther.

He knows we pretend not to Canonize Saints; and he may know, that a very great
Man in the Church of Rome, once said, That the new Saints they Canonized, would
make one question the old Ones. We neither make a Saint nor an Apostle of
Martin Luther; and we know of no Authority he ever had in this Church. Our
Church was reformed by it self, and neither by Luther nor Calvin, whom he had
mentioned as well as the other, but for his lean and mortified Aspect. But
after all, Luther was as lean and mortified an Apostle as Bishop Bonner; but a
Man of far greater worth, and sit for the Work he undertook, being of an
undaunted Spirit. What a strange sort of Calumny is this, to upbraid our
Church, as if it followed the Example and Precept of Martin Luther? He knows,
how very easy it is for us to retort such things with mighty advantage; when
for more than an Age together, that Church was governed by such dissolute and
profane Heads of the Church, that it is a shame to mention them; and all this
by the confession of their own Writers. But as to Luther's Person, if his
Crimes were his Corpulency, what became of all the fat Abbots and Monks? But
they were no Apostles, or Reformers. I easily grant it. But must God choose
Instruments, as some do Horses, by their fatness to run Races. As to Luther's
Conversation, it is justified by those who best knew him, and are Persons of
undoubted Reputation, I mean, Frasmus, Melancthon, and Camerarius. And as to
Matters in dispute, if he acted according to his Principles, his Fault lay in
his Opinions, and not in acting according to them.

But whether our Church follow Luther, or not, it is Objected, that we have
reformed away the Virtues of good Living. God forbid. But I dare not think
there is any Church in the World, where the Necessity of good Living is more
earnestly pressed. But I confess we of the Church of England, do think the
Examples and Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, are to be our Rules for the
Virtues of good Living. And according to them, I doubt not, but there are as
great Examples of Devotion, Mortification, Humility and Charity, as in any
place whatsoever. But I am afraid this Gentleman's Acquaintance did not lie
much that way; nor does he seem to be a very competent Judge of the Ways of good
living, is he did not know how to distinguish between outward Appearances and
true Christian Virtues. And according to his way of judging, the Disciples of
the Pharisees did very much outdoe those of our Blessed Savior; as appears by
a Book we esteem very much, called the New Testament: but if I mention it to
him, I am afraid he should think I am like the Physicians, who send their
Patients ^ag. 101.
to Tu^bridg-Wells, or the Air of Montpellier.

(3.) That two of our Bishops, whereof one was Primate of all England,
renounced and condemned two of the established Articles of our Church.

But what two Articles were these? It seems they wished we had kept Confession,
which no doubt was commanded of God; and praying for the Dead, which was one of
the ancient things of Christianity. But which of our 39 Articles did they
renounce hereby? I think I have read and considered them, as much as this
Gentleman, and I can find no such Articles against Confession, and praying for
the Dead. Our Church, as appears by the Office of the Visitation of the Sick,
does not disallow of Confession in particular Cases, but the necessity of it in
order to Forgiveness in all Cases. And if any Bishop asserted this, then he
exceeded the Doctrine of our Church, but he renounced no Article of it. As to
the other Point, we have an Article against the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory,
Art. 22. but not a word concerning praying for the Dead, without respect to it.
But he, out of his great skill in Controversy, believes, that Prayer for the
Dead, and the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory, are the same. Whereas this relates
to the deliverance of Souls out of Purgatory, by the Suffrages of the Living;
which makes all the gainful Trade of Masses for the Dead, etc. but the other
related to the Day of Judgment, as is known to all who are versed in the
Writings of the Ancient Church. But this our Church wisely passes over; neither
condemning it because so ancient, nor approving it because not grounded on
Scripture, and therefore not necessary to be observed.

(4.) But his great spite is at the Reformation of this Church; which, he
says, was erected on the Foundation of Lust, Sacrilege, Page 1^2.
and Usurpation. And that no Paint is capable of making lovely the hideous Pa^.
117.
Face of the pretended Reformation.

These are severe Sayings, and might be requited with sharper, if such hard
Words, and blustering Expressions, had any good effect on Mankind. But instead
thereof, I shall gently wipe off the Dirt he has thrown in the Face of our
Church, that it may appear in its proper Colors.

And now this Gentleman sets himself to Ergoteering; and looks and talks like
any grim Logician, Of the Causes which produced it, Page 117.
and the Effects which it produced. The Schism led the way to the Reformation,
for breaking the Unity of Christ's Church, which was the Foundation of it; but
the immediate Cause of this, which produced the Separation of Hen. 8. from the
Church of Rome, was the refusal of the Pope to grant him a Divorce from his
first Wife, and to gratify his Desires in a Dispensation for a second Marriage.

Ergo, the first Cause of the Reformation, was the satisfying an inordina^e and
brutal Passion. But is he sure of this? If he be not, it is a horrible Calumny
upon our Church, upon King Henry the 8th, and the whole Nation, as I shall
presently show. No; he confesses he cannot be sure of it: For, says he, no Man
can carry it so high as the Original Cause with any certainty. And at the same
time he undertakes to demonstrate the immediate Cause to be Henry the 8s.
inordinate and brutal Passion. And afterward assirms as confidently as if he
had demonstrated it, That our Reformation was erected on the Foundations of
Lust, Sacrilege, and Usurpation. Yet, says he, the King only knew whether it
was Conscience or Love, or Love alone, which moved him to sue for a Divorce.
Page 117.
Then by his Favor, the King only could know what was the immediate Cause of
that which he calls the Schism. Well! but he offers at some Probabilities that
Lust was the true Cause. Is Ergoteering come to this already? But this we may
say if Conscience had any part in it, she had taken a long Nap of almost twenty
Years together before she awakened. Does he think that Conscience does not take
a longer Nap than this, in some Men, and yet they pretend to have it truly
awakened at last? What thinks he of late Converts? Cannot they be true, because
Conscience has slept so long in them? Must we conclude in such Cases, That
some inordinate Passion gives Conscience a jog at last? So that it cannot be
denied, he says, that an inordinate and brutal Passion, bad a great share at
least in the production of the Schism. How! cannot be denied! I say, from his
own words it ought to be denied, for he confesses none could know but the King
himself; he never pretends that the King confessed it; How then cannot it be
denied? Yea, how dare any one affirm it? Especially when the King himself
declared in a Solemn Assembly, in these words, says Hall, (as near, says he,
as I could carry them away) speaking of the dissatisfaction of his Conscience,
-- For this only Cause, I protest before God, and in the Word of a Prince, I
have asked Counsel of the greatest Clerks in Christendom; and for this Cause I
have sent for this Legate, as a Man indifferent, only to know the Truth, and to
settle my Conscience, and for none other Cause, as God can judge. And both then,
and afterward, he declared, that his Scruples began upon the French
Ambassador's making a Question about the Legitimacy of the Marriage, when the
Match was pr^posed between the Duke of Orleance and his Daughter; and he
affirms, That he moved it himself in Confession to the Bishop of Lincoln, and
appeals to him concerning the Truth of it in open Court. Sanders himself does
not Sand. de Schism. Angl. l. 1. p. 11.
deny that the French Ambassador (whom he calls the Bishop of Tarbe, afterward
Card. Grammont; others say it was Anthony Vesey, one of the Presidents of the
Parliament of Paris) did start this Difficulty in the Debate about this
Marriage of the King's Daughter; and he makes a set Speech for him, wherein he
says, That the King's Marriage had an ill Report abroad. But then he adds,
That this was done by the King's appointment, and that Card. Wolsey put him
upon it; but he produces no manner of Proofs concerning it, but only, that it
was so believed by the People at that time, who cursed the French Ambassador.
As tho the suspicious of the People were of greater Authority than the solemn
Protestation of the King himself.

But I think it may be demonstrated, as far as such things are capable of it,
from Sanders his own Story, that the King's first Scruples, or the jogging of
his Conscience, as our Author styles it, could not come from an inordinate
Passion to Ann Bolleyn. For he makes Card. Wolsey the chief Instrument in the
Intrigue. Let us then see what Accounts he gives of his Motives to undertake
it. He not only takes notice of the great Discontent he took at the Emperor
Charles V. the Queen's Nephew; but how studious he was upon the first
intimation of the King's Scruples, to recommend to him Page 9.
the Duchess of Alencon the King of France's Sister; and that Page 10.
when there were none present but the King, Wolsey, and the Confessor.
Afterward Wolsey was sent on a very splendid Ambassy into France, and had
secret Instructions to carry on the Match with the King of France's Sister. But
when he was at Calais, he received Orders from the King to manage other Matters
as he was appointed, but not to say a word of that Match. At which, says Page
15.
Sanders, he was in a mighty rage, because he carried on the Divorce for
nothing more, than to oblige the most Christian King wholly to himself by this
Marriage. How could this be, if from the beginning of his Scruples he knew the
King designed to marry Ann Bolleyn? But Sanders thinks to come off with saying,
That Wolsey knew of the King's Love, but he thought he designed her only for
his Concubine. But this is plainly to contradict himself; for before he said,
That Page 10.
Wolsey knew from the beginning whom he intended to marry. Besides, what Reason
could there be, if the King had only a design to corrupt her, that he should
put himself and the World to so much trouble to sue out a Divorce? For the
Divorce was the main Thing aimed at in all the Negotiations at Rome; other
Applications had been more proper, if his Design was only upon having her for a
Concubine. But she would not be corrupted. If this were the Reason, he must
again contradict himself, for he makes her a lewd vicious Woman. And it does
not ^eem so probable, if she had been such a Person as he des^ribes her, that
she would have put the King to so much trouble, and such a tedious method of
proceeding, by so many Forms of Law. But again, Sanders says, Page 18.
when she returned from France, and was at Court, she found out what Wolsey
designed. Which makes it evident, by Sanders his own words, that the Design of
the Divorce was before the thoughts of Ann Bolleyn. And it seems very probable,
that Card Wolsey might carry on a Public Design by it, to draw the King off
from the Emperor, and to unite him with France. And the Pope at that time being
highly displeased with the Emperor, he might think it no dissicult thing to
procure a Dispensation, the King of France's Interest being joined with our
King's. Some have written, That the Pope himself was in this Intrigue at first;
but seeing no Acworth. c. Sander. l. 2. ^. 14, 17.
Proof of i^, I dare not affirm it: It is sussicient for my purpose, that the
first Design was laid quite another way. I confess afterward, when Wolsey upon
his return from France, saw how things were like to go, he struck in with the
King's Humor, as appears by the Letters of Ann Bolleyn to him: But yet carried
himself so coldly afterward in the Matter of the Divorce, that it proved one
occasion of his Fall. Thuanus, being an Historian of great Judgment, saw the
inconsistencies of Sanders his Relations; and therefore concludes that Wolsey
was surprised with the Business of Ann Bolleyn, after he went into France,
having notice sent him by his Friends; and that Wolsey wholly aimed at the
French Match. Mezeray says, The Cardinal could not foresee the Love of Ann
Bolleyn, but his Design was to be reveaged on the Emperor; and he questions
whether the King were smitten with her, till Wolsey was sent into France; when
the King so unexpectedly forbad him to proceed in that Match, cum summo eras
dosore, as Sanders confesses. From all this we see plainly, that since Sanders
makes Card. Wolsey the Page 22.
great Contriver and Manager of this Business, the immediate Cause of the
Schism could not be the Love of Ann Bolleyn.

But we have other kind of Proofs concerning this Matter, besides Sanders his
Inconsistencies, and those shall be from some of the greatest and most a^live
Men of that Time, and some remarkable Circumstances.

The sirst is a Person of unquestionable Integrity, and accounted a Martyr for
his Conscience at that Time; I mean Sir Thomas More then Lord Chancellor; who
after he had delivered to the House of Commons the Original Papers of the
Universities in favor of the Divorce, he then sa^d, That all Men should
clearly perceive that the King has not attempted this Matter of Will and
Pleasure, as Strangers say, but only for the Discharge of his Conscience, and
the Security of the Succession to the Crown. Which was a Reason alleged by
the King himself; and seems to have been built on the Grounds which Charles the
5th assigned for breaking his Oath which he made to marry the Lady Mary, by the
first Article of the Treaty at Windsor. Lord Herbert owns that the Emperor, to
avoid the History of H. 8 p. 216.
Force of this Treaty, had alleged something against the Marriage between the
King and his Aunt: But another Author, who lived much nearer the Time, does
affirm, That when the Match was Servi Fidelis Responsio, etc.
debated in the Spanish Council, it was then said, That although the Match between
the King and his Brother's Relict were not yet disputed, yet if the King should
die without Issue Male, rather than the Kingdom should pass to Foreigners, the
English Nation would dispute the Validity of the Marriage. And to confirm this,
in Sir Henry Spelman's Manuscript-Register of the Proceedings of the Legatine
Court about the Divorce, subscribed by the three Notaries there present, the
Witnesses deposed, That at the time of the Marriage, the People said commonly,
that it was unfit one Brother should marry the other Brother's Wife. And
Archbishop Warham then upon Oath declared, That he told K. Henry the 7th, that
the Marriage seemed to him neither Honorable, nor well-pleasing to God. And he
confesses, the People then murmured at it, but that the murmuring was quieted
by the Pope's Dispensation. So that all the Satisfaction that was given about
it, arose from the Pope's extraordinary dispensing Power with the Laws of God.
Which was a thing vehemently opposed by many in the Church of Rome; and the
University of Bononia it self afterward declared, That the Match was
abominable, and that the Pope himself could not dispense with it; and this they
say was, after they had read Card. Cajetan 's Defense of the Marriage. The like
was done by the University of Padua; besid^s many others which I shall not
mention, and are easily to be seen.

So that the Succession to the Crown by this Match, must depend upon an
extravagant Power in the Pope, which the Roman Church it self never owned; and
the wisest Statesmen thought by no means sit to depend upon.

The notice of this Debate in the Spanish Council being sent over to Card.
Wolsey, seems to have been the first Occasion taken of starting the Question
about the Lawfulness of the King's Marriage; which Wolsey, out of a private
Grudg to the Emperor, as well as for other Reasons, was not wanting to carry
on, till he saw which way it was like to end. And the Pope himself was willing
enough to grant the Bull for the Divorce, till he made a secret Peace with the
Emperor: and it is easy to see that the Pope went forwards and backwards in the
whole Affair, merely as politic Considerations moved him. Which being fully
known to so discerning a Prince as Henry the 8th, it gave him just occasion to
question, whether that Authority were so Divine as was pretended, which in so
great a Matter did not govern it self by any Rule of Conscience, but by
Political Measures.

One remarkable Circumstance in this Matter ought not to be omitted, viz. That
the King's Agent at Rome sent him word, That the Pope's Advice was, that if the
King's Conscience were satisfied, (...) Herb. (...). 219.
he should presently marry another Wife, and then prosecute the Suit; and that
this was the only way for the King to attain his Desires. But the King refused
to do it. And when Card Wolsey sent a Message to the King to the same purpose:
the King replied, If the Bull be naught, let it be so declared; and if it be
good, it shall never be broken by any by-ways for me. And when he objected the
tediousness of the Suit, he answered, Since he had Patience eighteen Page 217.
Years, he would stay yet four or five more, since the Opinion of all the
Clerks of his Kingdom (besides two) were lately declared for him: Adding, That
he had studied the Matter himself, and Writers of it; and that he found it was
unlawful, DE JURE DIVINO, and undispensible.

Thus we have found the King himself declaring in Public and Private, his real
dissatisfaction in Point of Conscience; and that it was no inordinate Affection
to Ann Bolleyn which put him upon it: and the same attested by Sir Tho. More,
and the Circumstances of Affairs. I now proceed to another Witness.

The next is Bishop Bonner himself, in his Preface to Gardiner's Book of True
Obedience: For thus he begins; Forasmuch as there be some, doubtless, now at
this present, which think the Controversy between the King's Royal Majesty, and
the Bishop of Rome, consists in this Point, for that his Majesty has taken
the most excellent and most noble Lady Ann to his Wife; whereas in very deed,
notwithstanding, the Matter is far otherwise, and nothing so. So that if Bishop
Bonner may be believed, there was no such immediate Cause of the Schism, as the
Love to Ann Bolleyn. And withal he adds, That this Book was published, that the
World might understand what was the whole Voice and resolute Determination of
the best and greatest learned Bishops, with all the Nobles and Commons of
England; not only in the Cause of Matrimony, but also in defending the Gospel's
Doctrine, i. e. against the Pope's usurped Authority over the Church. Again, he
says, That the King's Marriage was made, by the ripe Judgment, Authority, and
Privilege of the most and principal Universities of the World; and then with
the Consent of the whole Church of England. And that the false pretended
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome was most justly abrogated; and that if there
were no other Cause but this Marriage, the Bishop of Rome would content
himself, i. e. if he might enjoy his Power and Revenues still; which, he says,
were so insupportable, that there lay the true Cause of the Breach: For his
Revenues here were near as great as the King's; and his Tyranny was (...) and
bitter, which he had exercised here under the Title of the Catholic Church,
and the Authority of the Apostles, Peter and Paul; when notwithstanding he was
a very ravening Wolf, dressed in Sheeps clothing, calling himself the Servant
of Servants. These are Bonner's words, as I have transcribed them, out of two
several Translations, whereof one was published while he was Bishop of London.

Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, in his Book, not only affirms the
King's former Marriage to be unlawful, and the second to be just and lawful;
but that he had the Consent of the Nation, and the Judgment of his Church, as
well as foreign Learned Men for it. And afterward he strenuously argues
against the Pope's Authority here, as a mere Usurpation.

And the whole Clergy not only then owned the King's Supremacy, (Fisher
excepted) but in the Book published by Authority, called, A Necessary Doctrine
and Erudition of a Christian Man, etc. The Pope's Authority was rejected as an
Usurpation, and confuted by Scripture and Antiquity. K. James I. declares, That
there was a General and Catholic Conclusion of the whole Church of England in
this Case. And when some Persons suspected, that it all came from the King's
Marriage, Bishop Bonner we see undertakes Apol. for the Oath of All^giance.
to assure the World it was no such thing.

The Separation was made then by a General Consent of the Nation, the King, and
Church, and People, all concurring: and the Reasons inducing them to cast off
the Popes Usurpation, were published to the World at that time. And those
Reasons have no relation at all to the King's Marriage; and if they are good,
as they thought they were, and this Gentleman says not a word to disprove
them, then the Foundation of the Disunion between the Church of Rome and Us,
was not laid in the King's inordinate Passion, but on just and sufficient
Reasons.

Thus it appears, that this Gentleman has by no means proved two parts of his
Assertion, viz. That our Reformation was erected on the Foundations of Last and
Usurpation.

But our grim Logician proceeds from Immediate and Original, to Concomitant
Causes; which; he says, were Revenge, Ambition, Page 118.
and Covetousness. But the Skill of Logicians used to lie in proving; but this
is not our Author's Talent, for not a word is produced to that purpose. If bold
Sayings, and confident Declarations will do the Business, he is never
unprovided; but if you expect any Reason from him, he begs your Pardon; he
finds how ill the Character of a grim Logician suits with his Inclination.
However, he takes a leap from Causes to Effects; and here he tells us, the
immediate Effects of this Schism, were Sacrilege, and a bloody Persecution, of
such as denied the King's Supremacy in Matters wholly Spiritual, ^id.
which no Layman, no King of Israel ever exercised.

What the Supremacy was, is best understood by the Book published by the King's
Order, and drawn up by the Bishops of that Time. By which it appears, that the
main thing insisted on was, rejecting the Pope's Authority; and as to the
positive Part, it lies in these things. 1. In Defending and Protecting the
Church. 2. In overseeing the Bishops and Priests in the execution of their
Office. 3. In Reforming the Church to the old Limits and pristine Estate of
that Power which was given to them by Christ, and used in the Primitive Church.
For it is out of doubt, says that Book, that Christ's Faith was then most pure
and firm, and the Scriptures of God were then best understood, and Virtue did
then most abound and excel: And therefore it must needs follow, that the
Customs and Ordinances then used and made, be more conform and agreeable unto
the true Doctrine of Christ, and more conducing unto the edifying and benefit
of the Church of Christ, than any Custom or Laws used or made by the Bishop of
Rome, or any other addicted to that See and usurped Power since that time.

This Book was published with the King's Declaration before it. And therefore
we have reason to look on the Supremacy to be taken as it is there explained.
And what is there now so wholly Spiritual, that no Layman, or King of Israel,
ever exercised in this Supremacy? But this Writer never took the pains to
search into these things, and therefore talks so at random about them.

As to the Persecutions that followed, it is well known that both sides blame
K. Hen. 8. for his Severity; and therefore this cannot be laid to the Charge of
his Separation. For the other Effect of Sacrilege, I do not see how this
follows from the Reformation: For although some Uses might cease by the
Doctrines of it, as Monks to pray the Dead out of Purgatory; yet there were
others to have employed the Church Lands about, as some of them were in
founding New Bishoprics, etc. And I have nothing to say in justification of
any Abuses committed that way; only that the King and Parliament could not
discern the difference between greater and lesser as to the Point of Sacrilege;
and since the Pope had showed them the way, by granting Bulls for the
dissolution of the lesser Monasteries, they thought, since the Pope's Power was
taken away, they might, with as little Sacrilege, dissolve the rest. I will
shut up this with the words of Archbishop Laud; But if there have been any
wilful and gross Errors, not so much in Opinion as Conference, (...) p. 156.
Fact, (Sacrilege too often pretending to reform Superstition) that is the Crime
of the Reformers, not of the Reformation, and they are long since gone to God
to answer it, to whom I leave them.

The Method I proposed for Satisfaction of Conscience about the Reformation,
was to consider, Whether there were not sufficient cause for it? Whether there
were not sufficient Authority? And whether the Proceedings of our Reformation
were not justifiable by the Rules of Scripture, and the Ancient Church? He
tells me, he may safely join issue with me upon all three Points, and conclude
in the Negative. But upon second thoughts, he finds he may much more safely let
it alone: And very Page 1. 2.
fairly would have me take it for granted, That the Church of Rome cannot err
in Matters of Faith; (for that he must mean by the Church there) and that our
Church has no Authority of Reforming her self; and that our Proceedings were
not justifiable according to the right interpretation of Scriptures by the
Fathers and Councils. But if I will not allow his Affirmations for Proofs, for
his part he will act the grim Logician no longer; and in truth, it becomes him
so ill, that he does well to give it over. When he will undertake to prove,
that the Church of Rome is the One Catholic and Infallible Church of Christ,
and answer what I have produced in the former Discourses, I will ease him of
any farther Trouble; for then I will grant that our Reformation cannot be
justified. But till then, I shall think it no want of Humility to conclude the
Victory to be on our side. And I would desire him not to end with such a
barefaced Assertion of a thing so well known to be false, viz. That there is
not one Original Treatise written by a Protestant, which has handled
distinctly, and by it seif, that Christian Virtue of Humility. Since within a
few Years (besides what has been printed formerly) such a Book has been
published in London. But he does well to bring it off with, at least that I
have seen or heard of; for such Books have not lain much in the way of his
Enquiries. Suppose we had not such particular Books, we think the Holy
Scripture gives the best Rules and Examples of Humility of any Book in the
World; but I am afraid he should look on his Case as desperate if I send him to
the Scripture, since he says, Our Divines do that, as Physicians do with their
Patients whom they think uncurable, send them at last to Tunbridg-Waters, or to
the Air of Montpellier.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Folio's, through mistake, are twice repeated, from Page 81, page 92,
inclusive.

PAge 7. line 26, for Authority, read Antiquity. Page 22. l. 39. f. Perso^a, r.
Parsopa. Page 23. l. 25. f. when, r. whom. l. 26. f. his, r. as. l. 32. f.
Western, r. Southern. Page 26. l. 5. f. S. Cyprian, r. San Lyran. Page 68. l.
32. r. Some of the Chinese. Page 78. l. 3. a whole line faulty, r. pristinam
and melioratam recipere (...) sanitate: Page 86. (2d.) l. 23. blot out not.
Page 93. l. 23. blot out both. Page 103. l. 14. f. House of the Lord, r. House
of Lords. Page 108. l. 20. f. satness, r. fitness. l. 28 f. dare not, r. do
not. Page 112. l. 37. f. eras, r. ejus. Page 116. l. 17. f. Declarations, r.
Declamations.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
THe History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By GILBERT BURNET, D.
D. in two Volumes. Folio.

The Moderation of the Church of England, in her Reformation, in avoiding all
undue Compliances with Popery, and other sorts of Pha^aticism, etc. By TIMOTHY
PULLER, D. D. Octavo.

A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 40.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB. BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury: Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop:
Collected and written by the same Hand. Octavo.

A LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined, by GILB. BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. Octavo.

The D^cree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Cas^ists. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongne.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church]. Quarto.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 80.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
representing the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. Quarto.

The Lay-Christian's Obligations to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 240.

A Vindication of the Answer to SOME LATE PAPERS concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Treatise written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHURCH of ROME,
touching TRANSUBSTANTIATION. Wherein is made appear, that according to the
Principles of THAT CHURCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. Quarto.


