A SERMON Preached at White Hall, February the 19th, 1685/6. Being the First
FRIDAY in LENT.

BY EDW. STILLINGFLEET, D.D. Dean of St. Paul's, And Chaplain in Ordinary to
His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXVI.

St. Luke xv. 18. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say to him,
Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee.


IN the foregoing Verse, we find the Prodigal Son so far awakened and come to
himself, as to be sensible of the Miserable Condition he had brought himself
into by his own folly and wickedness. But, before he came to this, there is a
Remarkable Turn in the course of his Life, set down by our Savior in the
beginning of this Excellent Parable. For, He was first very Impatient of being
under the Wise Conduct of his Father, and thought he could manage his own
affairs far more to his Contentment and Satisfaction, if he were but permitted
to use his Liberty, and were not so strictly tied up to the Grave and Formal
Methods of Living, observed and required in his Father's House. Which might
pass for Wisdom in Age, and be agreeable enough to such whose Life and Vigor
were decayed; and who were now to maintain their Authority over their Children
by seeming to be so much wiser than they: But it is a rare thing for Youth and
Age to agree in the opinion of Wisdom: For it is not the Care, the Experience,
the Judgment of a wise and tender Father, that can allay the Heats, or calm the
Passions, or overruled the Violent Inclinations of Youth; but whatever is cost
them afterward, some will be still trying the Experiment, whether it does not
more conduce to the happiness of Life to pursue their own Fancies and Designs,
than to hearken to another's Directions (though a Father's) whose Circumstances
are so much different from their own. Thus our Blessed Savior represents in
the Parable this young Prodigal, as weary of being rich and easy at Home, and
fond of seeing the Pleasures of the World: and therefore nothing would satisfy
him unless he were Entrusted with the Stock which was Intended for him, that he
might show the difference between his Father's Conduct and his own.

And this very soon appeared; for this hopeful Manager had not been long
abroad, but he wasted his substance with riotous living. And to make him the
more sensible of his Folly, there happened a more than ordinary scarcity, which
made his low and exhausted Condition more uneasy to him. But the Sense of
Shame was yet greater with him than that of his Folly; and whatever shifts he
underwent, he would by no means yet think of returning home; but rather chose
to submit to the meanest and basest employment in hopes to avoid the Necessity
of it. But at last, Reason and Consideration began to work upon him, which is
called, his coming to himself: and then he takes up a Resolution to go home to
his Father, and to throw himself at his Feet, to confess his fault ingenuously
and freely, and to beg pardon for his former Folly, in hopes of Forgiveness and
Reconciliation. I will arise and go to my Father, and say to him, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee.

Under this Parable, our Savior sets forth the state of a Sinner, (1.) In his
wilful degeneracy from God, his Father, both by Creation and Providence; his
uneasiness under his just and holy Laws; his impatience of being restrained by
them; his casting off the Bonds of Duty to him; and running into all kind of
Disorders without regard to God, or his own Soul. (2.) In the dissatisfaction
he found in his evil Courses; being very much disappointed in the great
Expectations he had in the Pleasures of Sin; wasting his health, interest,
reputation, estate, and above all, the Peace and Tranquillity of his Mind,
which was more valuable than any other Delight whatsoever, and he now found
impossible to be enjoyed in a course of Rebellion against his heavenly Father.
(3.) In the Conviction of his Folly upon due Consideration of what he had done;
which is Emphatically called Coming to himself; having before acted so much
below himself, and against himself; unworthy of the Relation he stands in to
God; of those Faculties he had bestowed upon him; and of those hopes and
expectations he might have had from him either as to this or another World.
(4.) In the Resolution he takes upon this Conviction, no longer to delay his
purpose of Repenting and Returning home, but to embrace the present opportunity
of doing it freely, heartily and ingenuously, I will arise and go to my Father,
etc.

Having formerly in this Place, and on a like Occasion considered the Prodigal
Son's coming to himself, I shall now pursue the Method of his Repentance in the
Resolution he here takes to arise and go to his Father, etc.

And therein I shall enquire into these things,

I. What Grounds a Sinner has to encourage him to Repent; or to form such a
Resolution in his Mind that he will arise and go to his Father, when he knows
he has so much provoked and offended him.

II. How necessary it is in order to true Repentance to form a fixed and steady
Resolution to go through with it, I will arise and go, etc.

First, What Grounds a Sinner has to encourage him to Repent; or to make
Application to his Father in order to Forgiveness, since he is convinced he
has so justly offended him. For, if we consider the Circumstances here
mentioned, he had no such Reason to hope to be received into Favor upon such
easy Terms, as are here expressed; For,

(1.) He had wilfully forsaken his Father's House, without any just Cause of
Complaint of and hard usage there.

(2.) He had embraced such a Course of Life, which he knew was displeasing to
him, living riotously and disorderly, in a way contrary to his Will.

(3.) He never thought of Returning home, till mere necessity forced him; till
Hunger and Poverty made him come to himself.

And what could be more disobliging to a Father, than such Circumstances as
these?

(1.) His Father never forced him from home, nor made his Condition uneasy
there. Our Savior here represents Almighty God, as dealing with Mankind like a
tender and indulgent Father, and not like a severe and hard Master; his Laws
being intended for our Good, and not for his own Advantage. There is no Duty of
ours toward God, or our selves, or others, but is founded on this Relation to
God as a Father to Mankind. Nothing can be more reasonable in general than that
the Father should order and direct his Children, and give such Rules which are
fitting for them to observe; And if we examine the particular Laws of Nature,
or the Dictates of Reason as to Good and Evil, we shall find them very
agreeable to God's Paternal Government.

What is the Duty of Prayer to God, but asking daily Blessing of our heavenly
Father? What is our Thanksgiving, but a solemn owning his Paternal Care and
Bounty toward us? And in these two, the main Duties of Natural Religion
consist. The Neglect whereof, is such a disrespect to our Heavenly Father, as
is not consistent with our believing him to be so. For, as God himself argues
in the Prophet, Malac. 1.6.
A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If then I be a Father,
where is mine honor? And if I be a Master, where is my Fear? God was a Father
by the Right of Creation and Providence: but he was a Master to the Jews in
respect of the Bondage of the Law; and as there was a Spirit of Bondage on that
account in them, which inclined them to a more servile Fear; so there ought to
have been a natural Spirit of Adoption toward God as their Supreme Creator and
Father; which should excite all men to such a dutiful Love, such a Reverential
Esteem, such a mixture of Awe and Kindness as is in Children toward their
Parents. Yea, it ought to be much greater than that can be supposed; because
the Distance is Infinite between God and us; and our Dependence more immediate
and necessary; and there is in him a Concurrence of all Perfections, which may
cause in us the highest Esteem, and the humblest Adoration. There is an
unquestionable Duty owing by Children to their earthly Parents, Heb. 12.9.
(...).
but how much rather (says the Apostle) ought we to be in subjection to the
Father of Spirits? The Fathers of our Flesh may be very Kind, but not Wise in
their Love; or Wise and not so Kind; or they may be both Wise and Kind, but not
Able to help their Children. They may love and pity, and pray for them, when
they are in Misery, or Sickness and Pain, but after all, they are unable to
relieve them; For the most indulgent Father, when his bowels yearn, and his
heart is ready to break at the sight of a Child lying under the Agonies of
Death, is not able to give a Moments Respite to the terrible Pangs, which he
can neither behold nor abate. But our heavenly Father has not only Infinite
Wisdom, but Infinite Kindness and Power; and where all these are joined
together, what Honor, what Love, what Fear is due unto him! Although there be
defects in their Parents, yet Children are still bound to obey them, and to
show a mighty regard and Reverence toward them; but here it is so much
otherwise, that if we could conceive our selves without this Relation to God,
yet his Perfections are so many, so great, so infinite, as to deserve and
require our utmost Veneration. The Prodigal Son could then have no Reason to
complain of the Duty which he owed to his Father.

And was it not fit for him to appoint the Orders of his Family, and to expect
that his Children should behave themselves therein, as became the Relation they
stood in to himself and to one another? That they should have a decent regard
to themselves in Sobriety, Temperance, Command of their Passions, and care of
their Words; That they should behave themselves toward their Brethren with
Sincerity, Kindness and Justice; which comprehend all the Duties we owe to one
another?

And what now was there in all this, that the Prodigal could have any Cause to
complain of, or that should make his Father's House so uneasy to him? But his
Father had just Cause to be provoked, when his Wise Counsels, and Prudent Care,
and Constant Kindness, and Righteous Government were so much slighted and
despised by a disobedient and ungrateful Son; who had so little Sense of his
Duty or his Interest as to be weary of being so well at home, and therefore
impatiently desiring to find out new methods of Living well, as he then
thought, when the best Orders of his Father's Family were become so displeasing
to him.

(2.) But what were these new and fine Contrivances for his own happiness? He
began to suspect his Wife Father did not allow his Children Liberty enough at
home, and that he concealed from him the great Mystery of the Happiness of
Life, and therefore concluded, that if he did give way to those Desires which
he found to be Natural, but his Father thought Unreasonable, he should enjoy
much more Pleasure and Satisfaction than he did at home. And being resolved
upon this, he gives way to those Inclinations he found strongest in himself,
denies himself no Pleasures of Life, accounts Virtue but a Name which sour and
morose Persons put upon their own humors; and Religion but a Device for Fools
to deceive themselves, and Knaves to deceive others by. And so he throws off
all checks and restraints upon himself, and never regards the Good or Evil of
what he does, for his Lusts are his Laws, and the satisfaction of them he now
looks upon as the only real Happiness of Mankind.

And could any thing be supposed more provoking to his Heavenly Father than
such a wicked and dissolute way of Living? So contrary to his Father's Will, to
his own Reason, Conscience, Interest, Reputation; and which soon brought him to
Shame and Misery?

(3.) But that which added yet more to the height of the Provocation was, that
he did not think of Returning home to his Father, upon the first apprehension
of his own Folly; But he resolved to undergo any difficulty, and submit to any
hardship, rather than do what was necessary in order to Reconciliation with
his Father.

How hard a Matter then is it to bring an habitual Sinner to Repentance! It is
not Easy to bring him to any due and serious Conviction of the Evil of his
doings; but it is far more difficult to change the inward Disposition of the
Mind, and to alter all the great Designs and Pleasures of Life. It is but a
mean Notion of Repentance which is apt to prevail in the World, as though it
implied no more than some Acts of Contrition for greater Sins, when the Habit
and Disposition remain the same. But true Repentance is the turn of the whole
Soul from the Love, as well as the Practice of Sin; and this is not a thing to
be done easily or suddenly; A Sinner will bear a great many Checks and Reproofs
of Conscience before he will part with his beloved Sins; he will struggle a
great while with himself; and endure many Conflicts between an awakened
Conscience and rooted lnclinations before the Penitent Sinner can assure
himself that his Repentance has had its due and effectual operation upon him.
For we see here nothing but extremity brought the Prodigal to himself, and made
him at last to resolve to arise and go to his Father, etc. Aelian. var, hist.
l. 9. c. 18.
As Themistocles said of the People of Athens, they did by him, as Men commonly
do by a great Tree, they run to it for shelter in a Storm, but care not how
they use it another Time; that is too true of Sinners with Respect to God; when
they can make a shift for themselves any other Way, they despise Religion; and
make God their Refuge only at a day of Extremity, but not their Choice, when
their Conditions please them.

But when the Prodigal Son had so slighted his Father, broken his Commands,
despised the advantages he had at home, and was so hardly brought to think of
returning thither, how came he now to be so encouraged in his Mind to arise and
go to his Father, and confess his fault with hopes of being forgiven after all
this?

We find no other Account here given, but that he was his Father, however he
had offended him; and therefore he was resolved he would arise and go to his
Father; as though there were charms and force enough in that word to answer all
Discouragements. Which being an Argument taken from the Bowels of Pity and
Compassion which a Father has toward a relenting Child, we must enquire, how
far this will hold with Respect to God, who is so infinitely above all the fond
Passions of Humane Nature, that it is a diminution to his Glory and Majesty to
be thought like to Mankind; And therefore his thoughts and ways are said to be
as far above ours as the Heavens are above the Earth? Is. 55.8, 9.


To clear this, we are to consider, not only that our Blessed Savior does
here lay the force and weight of the Parable upon the tenderness of a Father to
his Son; but that he elsewhere argues from it in such a manner as to convince
us that God has far greater Pity and Compassion toward Mankind when they make
due Applications to him, than Fathers can have toward their Children even when
they ask for necessary sustenance. Matt. 7.9, 10, 11.
What Man is there of you, whom if his Son ask bread, will he give him a stone?
Or, if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then being evil know
how to give good gifts unto your Children, How much more shall your Father
which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him? There have been
Philosophers so severe against the Passions of humane Nature, that they would
not allow any Pity or Commiseration toward others, whatever their Condition or
Relation were, but only acting according to Reason in supplying their Wants.
But the Christian Religion does far more reasonably allow such Passions in
Mankind as dispose them to do good to others, by fixing such an impression on
their minds of others Misery as does excite them to do what is fitting for
their Ease and Support. And Compassion is not, as some imagine, such a mean and
selfish Passion, as does arise only from the apprehension that we may suffer
the same things our selves, which we pity others for; but it is a generous
Sense of what others feel joined with a Readiness to help them according to our
Power. And in this Sense, our Savior not only allows it in Fathers toward
Children, but looks on it as necessary in humane Nature in order to the good
and advantage of Mankind; and therefore himself taking our Nature upon him is
said to be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities; Heb. 4.15.
5.2.
and to have compassion on the Ignorant, and on them that are out of the Way.

But although this be allowable in humane Nature, how can such a thing as
Compassion be attributed to the Divine Nature which is incapable of such
impressions and motions, which we are subject to?

And yet the Scripture is very full and clear in attributing Pity and
Compassion to Almighty God with Respect to his Creatures. The Psalmist says,
Ps. 103, 8.
The Lord is full of Compassion and Mercy; long-suffering, and of great
Goodness. St. James says, Jam. 5.11.
He is very Pitiful, and of tender Mercy. And in that wonderful Appearance to
Moses, when God himself declared his own Attributes, the greatest part consists
of his Kindness and Mercy toward Mankind; Exodus 3^.6, 7.
The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and Truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin. And the Psalmist uses the very same similitude of a Father's Pity to his
Children, Ps. 103.13.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
And when the Prophet speaks of God's thoughts and ways being so much above
Man's, it is for this end to prove thereby that God may show more pity to
Mankind, than they find in their hearts to show to one another. Let him return
unto the Lord, Is. 55.7.
and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon; For my thoughts are not your thoughts, etc. But setting aside all this,
the whole Scheme of the Gospel is drawn upon the Supposition of God's Pity and
Compassion toward Penitent Sinners; which is the Reason our Savior insists so
much on the Proof of it in this whole Chapter. Wherein we not only read of
Joy in Heaven at the Repentance of a Sinner; v. 7.10.
but the Compassion of God Almighty toward a Penitent Sinner is set forth with
all the tenderness of an Indulgent Father running into the embraces of his Son,
when he saw him at a distance coming toward him.

What now is the meaning of all this? Are we to conceive of God as one like to
our selves, who either do not see faults in those we love; or do not hate them,
as we should do; or are too apt to pass them over; or are at first, it may be,
apt to be angry upon a slight provocation, and then as easily made Friends upon
as little Reason as we were made Angry? But none of these things ought to enter
into our Minds concerning God with respect to the Follies of Mankind.

And in this Case, if we will form in our Minds right and true Conceptions of
the Divine Nature (as we ought to do) we must have a great Care lest we
attribute any thing to God, which looks like Weakness and Imperfection, as the
Motions and Changes of Passions do; therefore to understand his Pity and
Compassion, and Reconciliation to Penitent Sinners, we must first know what his
Anger and Displeasure against Sinners mean.

Some think that Epicurus did in earnest believe a God, Lact. de Ira Dei. c. 4.
but he was therefore forced to deny Providence, because he could not conceive
that the Government of the World could be managed without such resentments as
were inconsistent with the complete happiness of the Divne Being; and therefore
he rather chose to make him Careless and Easy, than Active and liable to
Passion. The Stoics attributed to God all that was Good and Kind and Obliging;
but would by no means endure that ever he should be said to be Angry or
Displeased; which Doctrine did in effect overthrow Providence with Respect to
Moral Actions, as much as the Epicureans. For if God did not regard the
difference of Men's Actions, but was equally kind to them whether they did Good
or Evil, such a Providence would have as little Influence on Men's Lives as if
there were none at all. We must then suppose, if we would uphold Religion and
Morality in the World, not only that there is a Providence, but that God has
a different regard to Men according to the Good or Evil of their Actions. The
Regard he has to Men for being Good and doing Good is called his Love, his
Kindness, his Good Will, his Grace and Favor; that which he has to things
that are Evil is called his Hatred; that which he has to Persons for doing
Evil is his Anger, Wrath, Displeasure, Indignation; according to the different
Nature and Circumstances of their Evil Actions.

But in order to the preventing any false or mean Apprehensions of the Divine
Nature, when the Passions of Mankind are attributed to it, we must consider
these two things;

(1.) That we must by no means attribute to God any thing that is unreasonable
in our Selves; such are all irregular Motions, which we call violent Passions,
arising from Surprise, Mistake, Inadvertency, Weakness, or corrupt Inclination.
But setting all these aside, the Original Passions of Mankind, which are
agreeable to Reason, are no other than what arise from an Inclination to what
we judge to be Good, and an Aversion from what we apprehend to be Evil; which
holds as to the Divine Nature.

(2.) That there is an observable Difference in the very Nature of some
Passions, which imply a Repugnancy in themselves to the Divine Perfections,
which others do not. For Love and Kindness, and Joy, and Inward Satisfaction
have nothing in them supposing their Object Good, but what agrees with the
Divine Nature; but the Passions contrary to these, as Envy, Ill Will and
Revenge are not only Repugnant as Passions, but in their own Nature; for God
cannot Envy the Good of his Creatures, nor bear Ill Will to them as such, nor
take Pleasure in their Torments. And of this Nature Anger properly taken is, as
it does imply a present Disorder and Disturbance within, from the Apprehension
of some Injury done or intended, with a Desire of Revenge on those who do it;
all which is inconsistent with the necessary Perfections of God; for they argue
Meanness, Imperfection and Mutability.

We must therefore fix on such a Notion of Anger as becomes the Almighty Wisdom
and Goodness; and that lies in,

(1.) A Displeasure against the Sinner on the account of his Sins; For God
cannot have any Complacency in those who displease him, as all Sinners do,
whether they design it or not.

(2.) A Will to Punish Sinners according to their demerits; which being
according to the Rules of Wisdom and Righteous Government, cannot be said to
argue an indecent Passion.

(3.) The Actual Execution of his Justice upon great Provocations. And so God
is said to be angry when he punishes; especially when he does it suddenly and
severely; As Men in their Passion are wont to do. But whatever God does in
this kind, he does it with the Wisdom and Temper of a Judge, and not with the
Fury or Passion of an Angry Being.

And there is nothing in all this unbecoming the Divine Nature, but very
agreeable thereto. And this is all which in strictness of Reason is understood
by God's being Angry with Mankind. For we must never imagine that God acts
according to sudden heats and Passions; but whatever he does is according to
the Counsels of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness.

I do not deny that the Scripture does represent Anger in God as if it were a
Passion raised upon great Provocation, and capable of being laid by Submission
and true Repentance. Thence we read, of God's Wrath waxing hot, Exodus 32.10.
of his Anger kindling against his People, Is. 5.26. Jon. 3.9.
and his turning away from his fierce Anger, and many such Expressions; but so
we read of the Fire of his Indignation, the Sword of his Wrath, the Stretching
forth of his Hand; which all grant are not to be literally understood. lf then
in these Expressions, the Perfections of the Divine Nature are to be our Rule,
according to which we must interpret them, because the literal sense implies an
incongruity to the Divine Perfections which are all wholly Spiritual; then from
the same Reason we must remove all Perturbations from it which are as
inconsistent with the absolute Perfection of it, as Eyes and Ears and Hands and
Feet are, although they are all mentioned in Scripture.

From whence we justly infer, that there is a wonderful Condescension to the
ordinary Capacities and common Apprehensions of Mankind in the Language of
Scripture, concerning the Divine Nature, which makes deeper impressions on
meaner understandings, and those who are* of finer thoughts will see Cause to
attribute only such a Sense of things relating to God, as is consistent with
his Infinite and Divine Perfections.

But what now shall we say to this Tenderness and Compassion of God toward
Penitent Sinners? Can he be moved by our Trouble and Sorrow and Acts of
Contrition for our Sins? If we be Righteous what does it profit the Almighty?
And if we be Evil, how can it hurt him? And if when we have Sinned, we Repent,
we do no more than is fitting for us; but why should we imagine the Great and
Wise God should have Compassion upon us, when we become sensible of our own
Folly? For when we sin against God, wilfully, deliberately, knowingly,
habitually, we do what lies in us to provoke him to Wrath and Indignation
against us; we reject his Wise Government, we slight his righteous Laws, we
prefer the pleasing our corrupt Inclinations and sensual Lusts before our
Heavenly Father. And what can be more provoking to him than to be so despised
by one who had his Being and all the Comforts of Life from him?

Suppose now such a Disobedient, Rebellious Son, as here in the Parable, be
made sensible of his folly, is his Father bound to receive him? Was it not his
own choice to go from him? If he has suffered by his Folly, he may thank
himself for it; and if his Father lets him alone in it, he has no Cause to
Complain.

But such was the tenderness of the Father toward his Repenting Son, that he
showed the greatest Compassion imaginable; for he did not stay at home
expecting his Son's solemn submission before his Family, but he ran toward
him, and fell upon his Neck, and kissed him.

What Conceptions now ought we to have of God's Compassion toward Penitent
Sinners answerable to all this? This I shall endeavor to clear in these
Particulars.

(1.) That God's hatred is not primarily against Persons who are his Creatures;
but against that which is Evil, which is none of his making; and against
Persons only so far as they are corrupted with Evil. Thou love
Righteousness, and hate wickedness, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 45.7.
God hates nothing for its own sake, but Sin; and for the sake of that he hates
all Workers of Iniquity.

(2.) There may be Good Will toward the Person of a Sinner at the same time
when God discovers the hatred of his Sins. I do not say, God takes any Pleasure
in him while he goes on in Sin, for that is against the Eternal Rules of
Righteousness in God; but that he may have so much Good Will toward him, as to
design to reduce him from his Evil Ways. And this every Father finds in himself
toward a disobedient Son; while he hates his evil Courses, yet he would make
use of the best Methods to bring him to himself, and to his Duty. And upon this
is grounded that Love and Kindness of God toward Mankind, Tit. 3.4.
in sending his Son to be our Savior, and all the Promises and Invitations
which are made to Sinners in the Doctrine of the Gospel.

(3.) It is very agreeable to Infinite Wisdom and Goodness for God to show
himself full of Pity and Compassion toward Penitent Sinners, i. e. so as to
forgive them their former Sins, and to receive them into his Favor. For Pity
and Compassion in God is to be judged, not according to the inward Motions we
find in our selves, but according to these Two things.

(1.) A readiness to do Good to his Creatures according to their Necessities.
Which being in general, is his Bounty and Goodness; but considered with Respect
to the Persons of Sinners, it is his Clemency, or readiness to forgive; and
with Respect to the Punishment they deserve by their Sins, it is his Mercy and
Pity: Which in us is Aegritudo ex Miseria alterius, and therefore called
Misericordia, because the Heart is touched with the Sense of another's Misery;
but we are not so to apprehend it in God; but that such is the Goodness of God
toward Repenting Sinners, that he is as willing to show Mercy as they are to
Repent.

(2.) God's Pity and Compassion lies in the proper Effects of it; which here in
the Case of the Prodigal were, passing by his former Extravagances, and
receiving him into as much Favor as if he had not gone astray. v. 24.32.
This is my Son was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found. Those who
think, they stand not in need of so much Pardoning Mercy as others do, are apt
to repine at the Favor showed to great Sinners when they Repent; And therefore
the Elder Brother could not bear the expressing so much kindness toward such a
disobedient Son, though now a Penitent. But that there is nothing disagreeing
to Infinite Wisdom and Goodness in such Compassion toward Penitent Sinners,
will more fully appear, if we consider,

(1.) That God is not bound to deal with Sinners according to the utmost Rigor
and Severity of his Justice. Because he is under no fatal Necessity; no
Superior Law; and therefore may act freely in the forgiving Offenders as seems
best to his Infinite Wisdom. The whole Race of Mankind is a perpetual Evidence
that God does not Act according to the Strictness of his Justice, for if he had
dealt with them after their Sins, or rewarded them according to their
Iniquities; their Spirits would have failed before him, and the Souls which he
had made; they had been long since destroyed from the face of the Earth, and
not suffered to continue in their Provocations. But God has not only forborne
Sinners long when he might justly have punished them; but he gives them many
real Blessings and Comforts of Life, freely and bountifully. Now if God deal so
Mercifully with Sinners while they continue such, is there not greater Reason
to suppose he will be far more so, when they cease to be such?

(2.) A Penitent Sinner does what in him lies to vindicate God's Honor. I do
not say, he can make satisfaction to Divine Justice; for that is impossible for
him to do; and God has provided for that by his own Son, whom he has made a
Propitiation for the Sins of the World. But a true Penitent takes all the Shame
and Dishonor to himself; he clears the Justice of God's Government, and the
Equity of his Laws, and owns himself guilty of unspeakable Folly in his
Disobedience. O how justly, says he, might God have taken me away in the midst
of my Sins, when my Conscience checked me for my Sins, and yet I had no heart
to repent of them! When I could not but see my danger, and yet was unwilling to
come out of it. I can never be sufficiently thankful for so great a Mercy as
his bringing me to my Self has been; I had gone on in the same secure, stupid,
senseless condition, that others lie in, if he had not thoroughly awakened me,
and roused me out of my Impenitent State. How dreadful had my Condition for
ever been, if my first awakening had been in the Flames of Hell? Nothing but
Infinite Goodness and Patience would have waited so long for the Repentance of
such an Offender as I have been. I have sinned so often, that I am ashamed to
think of the Number of my Transgressions; so deeply, that I am confounded at
the thoughts of them; so foolishly, that I am unworthy to be called thy Son,
who have acted so unlike thy Children (so the Prodigal Son here speaks to his
Father) And if thou would admit me but to the meanest Condition of thy
Servants, I shall ever esteem it as the greatest privilege of my Life, and
endeavor to serve Thee for the future, though in the lowest Capacity. Thus the
Repenting Prodigal goes on, v. 19. And in a suitable manner every true Penitent
behaves himself toward God with great Humility, and a deep Sense of his own
unworthiness; and is thereby rendered more capable of Divine favor. Jam. 4.6.
For God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. And therefore it
is very agreeable to Infinite Wisdom and Goodness to show pity toward a truly
Humble and Penitent Sinner; Ps. 51.17.
For a broken and contrite heart he will not despise.

(3.) If God were not so full of Compassion to Penitent Sinners, there would
have been no lncouragement for Sinners to Repent; but they must have sunk into
everlasting Despair. For if God should forgive none that sin, then all Mankind
must be condemned to Eternal Misery; for all have sinned; Romans 3.23. Eccl. 7.20.
and there is not a Just Man upon Earth who sins not; and so the best and
worst, and all sorts of Sinners must here suffer together; which would have
taken away all the Notion of any such thing as Mercy and Clemency in God
toward Mankind. But if we set bounds to it as to some particular kinds and
degrees of sinning; we limit that which is Infinite; we determine what we know
not, viz. how far God's Mercy does extend; we destroy the Power of Divine Grace
in Changing and Reforming the Worst of Men. But the Scripture has recorded
some remarkable Instances of great Sinners, who have been great Penitents, and
upon that have been pardoned (such as Manasses, and some others) that no
Penitent Sinner might be discouraged in the Work of Repentance. For a True
Penitent searching to the bottom, and setting all his Sins before him, with
their several Aggravations, can be kept from Despair by nothing less than the
Infinite Mercy of God to those who truly Repent.

(4.) Because there is nothing so provoking in Sin, as obstinate Impenitency,
and Continuance in it.

It is true, God hates all Sin for its own Sake; but not all equally; some Sins
being of a higher Nature than others are; being against plainer Light, stronger
Convictions, more easy Commands, stricter Obligations than others are; but yet
it is the Temper of a Sinner's Mind, which is most provoking, when Sins are
committed not through Infirmity, or sudden surprise, or a violent Temptation;
but habitually, knowingly, wilfully; especially when they are done in Contempt
of God and his Laws, and with an obstinate Resolution to continue in the
Practice of them. This is so provoking to God, that the chief Reason of the
severe Punishments of Sinners in another World is taken from thence; because
God hates obstinate and impenitent Sinners. Exodus 34.7.
And thus he will by no means acquit the Guilty. There is a Sin unto death,
says St. John, 1 John 5.16, 17.
and there is a Sin not unto death. There is a Sin unto death, which Christ
has said he will never pardon; Matt. 12.32.
and that is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; a Sin which none who do truly
own Christianity, are capable of committing.

But is there then no Sin unto death to them? Yes, it is possible for Men who
have clear Convictions in their minds of the Truth of the Gospel, to act so
plainly, and wilfully, and directly against it, as either to provoke God to
take them away by an extraordinary Judgment, and so it is properly a Sin unto
death; or to withdraw his Grace from them, and leave them to the hardness of
their own Hearts, and so it becomes a Sin unto a Spiritual death. But besides
these Cases; Every Wilful Sinner who adds Impenitency to his Sin, commits the
Sin unto death; because there is no other Condition of Pardon allowed by the
Gospel without True Repentance.

How infinite is the Goodness of God that excludes no Sinners from the Hopes of
Pardon who have a heart to repent sincerely of their Sins! And how just is God
in the final Punishment of those Sinners, who still go on in their Sins, and
refuse to Repent; after all the Invitations and Encouragements which are given
them to that End! Can we in Reason suppose that God should stoop lower toward
Sinners, than to offer them pardon of former Sins, if they do Repent; and to
tell them they must Expect no Mercy in another World if they do not Repent?

But suppose we are come thus far, that we are convinced we must Repent, what
course and method must we take in order to it? Of this briefly, and so to
conclude.

Secondly, I know no better than to follow the Example of the Prodigal Son
here: and in the first place to form a present, sincere, fixed and peremptory
Resolution of doing it; I will arise and go to my Father, etc. If we suffer
Convictions to cool upon our Minds, the force and spirit of them will soon be
gone. It has been of late observed by the strictest Enquirers into Nature,
that the beginnings of Life are very small, and hardly discernible. It is but
as a spark that appears, Harv. Exerc. 16, 17, 18.
and may easily be extinguished; but if it be encouraged by a continual heat, a
wonderful Alteration soon follows, and the distinct parts begin to be formed;
the first which is discerned is the Eye, but the Fountain of Life is in the
Heart; and when the course of the Blood is there settled, the other Parts come
to their due formation with greater quickness. This may be a Representation of
the first Beginnings of Spiritual Life, that which answers to the Eye is the
Conviction of the Mind, where the inward Change first appears; that which
answers to the Heart is Resolution, and when that is fixed, a mighty
Reformation will soon follow. But Spiritual Life as well as Natural is in its
first beginnings a very nice and tender thing, it may be easily stopped, and very
hardly recovered: It is therefore of very great concernment to keep up the
Warmth of our first Resolutions, and to improve them into a present Practice
agreeable thereto; as the Prodigal Son here did, who when he had Resolved upon
it, did accordingly arise and go to his Father, v. 20.

I do not think there are many Persons in the World who have Convictions upon
their Minds of the Evil of their Ways; but do Resolve at one time or other
before they die to Repent of their Sins, and to make their Peace with God. But
alas! these are Ova subventanea, they make a fair appearance, but there is no
principle of Life in them; or as St. Jude expresses it, Jud. v. 12.
they are Clouds without Water; of no Consistency, but carried about with
winds; hurried to and fro with the force and power of Temptations; and then
their Resolutions are like the Vapors St. James speaks of, Jam. 4.14.
which appear for a little Time, and then vanish away. Trees they are without
fruit, as St. Jude goes on, (...); not that make no show or appearance of
Fruit; but it has no such firmness and substance in it as to endure the
nipping Frosts, and so it drops off, and withers away. Just such are the
effects of faint and imperfect Resolutions, they never hold out long, and only
aggravate the Sins committed after them. For every such Sin is a plain sin
against Conscience; or else they would never have made any Resolution against
it. And those who continue to sin after Resolutions against their Sins, not
only lose all the Peace and Comfort of their Minds, but make it much harder
for them, either to make or trust their Resolutions again, and consequently to
be satisfied of the Sincerity of their Repentance.

If we would then lay a sure Foundation for the Satisfaction of our Minds in a
matter of such unconceivable Moment as the Truth of our Repentance is, let us
call our Selves to an Account as to this matter of the firm Purpose and
Resolution of our Minds. Have we strictly examined our Selves as to our
particular Sins? For there is no Age, no Employment, no Condition of Life but
has its Temptations belonging to it; which require not only our Care and
Consideration, but Resolution to keep us from them. But suppose we have been
overcome by the Sin which does so easily beset us; the Work is harder to
recover the Ground we have lost, than at first to maintain it; but if we have
sinned, we must Repent; and the sooner the better; but it is not to be done
without awakening the drousie and benumbed Faculties of our Minds, and
exercising the secret and hidden Powers therein. Not as though this were to be
done without the Grace of God preventing and assisting us; but because God
works in us to will and to do of his good Pleasure, we ought to Work out our
own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Let us then trifle no longer in a Work we can never do too well, nor too
soon; nor go about it with too much Resolution. It is the want of this, which
ruins such a Number of those who would fain go to Heaven, but have not Courage
and Resolution enough, to own their Repentance, and to break off their former
Sins: They are half Penitents; they are inwardly troubled for them, and wish
themselves able to withstand the next Temptation; but when it comes, they yield
and suffer themselves to be drawn away, Prove. 7.23.
as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his Life. Now
in such Cases, Resolution is not only a convenient and proper thing; but a
very Wise thing. For, when once a Resolution is found to be serious, and in
good earnest, the former Companions in Wickedness will leave off to solicit;
and if once a Penitent Sinner can endure to be despised, and exposed for a time
by Evil Men for owning his Repentance, he will find the other parts of his
Change grow more easy to him; and the Devil's Instruments in Tempting will be
like himself; i. e. they will give over Tempting when they see no hopes to
prevail. And let no Men ever complain that they want Power to break off their
former Sins, till they have tried what the strength of a Vigorous Resolution
will do. But because we have always Reason to suspect our selves, let us make
our Devout Applications to Almighty God to give us the Assistence of his Grace
through the only Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

THE END.

