A SERMON Preached before the KING, February the 15. 1683/4.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D.D. Dean of S. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
his MAJESTY.

Printed by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall, 1684.

Job xxiii. 15. When I consider, I am afraid of him.


THese Words were spoken by Job; not in his flourishing and prosperous state,
when that extraordinary character was given of him, That there was none like
him in the Earth, Job 1.8.
a perfect and an upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil; but, 2.3
after the Devil was permitted to try that malicious experiment upon him, viz.
whether the changing his outward condition, would not alter the inward
disposition of his mind, as to God and Religion. For he suggested, that nothing
but interest made him so religious, 1.9.
that all his Piety and Devotion was owing to the wonderful blessings of God
upon him; and if these were once removed, he would fly out into so much
impatience as to curse God to his face; 11.
i. e. to speak evil of his Providence, and renounce his service. And this
temptation prevailed so far on Job's Wife, that she became an Instrument to
carry on the Devils design, when she said to him, Job 2.9.
Do thou still retain thy integrity? Curse God and dye: As though she had
said, You see, what all your Religion is now come to, and what a condition the
Providence of God, on which you trusted so much, has brought you to; let them
serve God, that have ease and plenty, you have nothing left to do now, but in
spite of Providence, to put an end to such a miserable life. But as it was
observed of the old Heathen Oracles, that they had often a true meaning in
them, but it was commonly misapplied (the Devils own knowledge of future events
being but probable and conjectural) so here, it was a shrewd guess that so
sudden a change would have such an effect upon some person concerned in it: But
he was very much mistaken as to Job; who behaved himself with admirable
patience and submission to the Will of God, under all his severe afflictions;
insomuch, that he did not suffer an indecent expression to come from him, with
respect to God and his Providence: In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
foolishly. Job 1.22.


2.10
Which was no doubt a great disappointment to the Devil, who made account he
should by Jobs impatience have given a terrible blow to Religion, by making the
World believe, that it was nothing but a grave pretense of some men's seeming to
be better than their Neighbors. For if a man of so much Piety, as Job was
esteemed, should no sooner be pinched himself with affliction, but he would be
quarrelling at Gods management of things, the Devil would have inferred, that
he did plainly discover, how little influence, Religion had upon the minds of
those, who made the greatest show of it.

This had been a very dangerous snare in that Age, to the rest of mankind,
among whom the example of so great a Person, as Job was in the parts of Arabia
where he lived (as appears by the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans his unkind Neigbours)
did give a mighty reputation to the practice of Religion, Job 1.15, 17.
especially among such a wild and ungoverned People as the Arabs were. And in
truth, the World is never so kind to Religion, to give a fair interpretation of
the failings of those who pretend to it; but how unreasonable soever it be,
they will make Religion bear the blame of all their miscarriages who wear its
livery. And Job himself tells us, 21.14, 15.
there were such profane Persons then in the World, who despised and contemned
all Religion, as a vain impertinent, insignificant thing, Therefore they say
unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is
the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit shall we have if we pray
unto him? i. e. they understood or valued nothing but what made for their
present interest; and they were content to let God alone with the disposal of
another World, so they might secure this to themselves. But it was not only
then a seasonable vindication of Religion, that Job behaved himself with so
much patience under his great calamities; but it continues so to be as long as
the memory of his sufferings remains, which has lasted for so many Ages, that
some think the Book of Job the oldest Book in the World; (not in the supposed
translation into Hebrew, but in the Original Arabic or Syriac) and is now like
to be preserved, as long as the Christian Church endures; against which the
Gates of Hell will never be able to prevail.

But notwithstanding the general evenness of Job's temper, and his quiet
submission to Divine Providence, there were two things which touched him more
sensibly than all the other circumstances of his afflictions; and those were,

(1.) That God should seem so much displeased with him, as to single him out as
a mark to shoot at, when he was not conscious to himself of any such impiety to
deserve it, according to the common method of his Providence.

(2.) That his Friends should call in question his sincerity in Religion, and
suspect him guilty of Hypocrisy and secret Impiety; because they concluded
that such signal calamities could hardly fall upon any man, that was not guilty
of some such great crime toward God.

These were a trial of Jobs patience indeed; that those from whom he expected
the greatest comfort, should prove his forest Enemies; for if God were angry,
who could stand before him? and if he were false in his Religion, how could he
expect he should be his Friend? But in answer to both these, he owns his fear
of Gods displeasure, and denies the charge as to his secret Hypocrisy, and
both in these few words of the Text, When I consider, I am afraid of him.

These words may be understood,

I. With respect to his apprehension of Gods displeasure against him, Therefore
am I troubled at his presence, says he immediately before; not as though Job
were like those, Eliphaz speaks of in the foregoing Chapter, which said unto
God, 22.17.
Depart from us, or that he endeavored, as profane Persons do, to keep God out
of his thoughts as much as he could: for what could Job have done under all his
Troubles but for Gods presence to support him? And therefore he declares his
firm resolution never to let go his confidence in God whatever became of him;
Job 13.15, 16.
Though be slay me, yet will I trust in him. He also shall be my salvation; for
an hypocrite shall not come before him. But the Presence which troubled him,
was the great appearance of Gods displeasure; of which again he speaks, v. 24.
For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me. As though he had
said, All other considerations make no deep impression upon my mind; but I am
no more able to bear up under the sense of Gods anger, than the Wax is to
forbear melting before the Fire. And from this sense of his own utter inability
to stand before the Power of the Almighty, he elsewhere argues thus with him;
Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? 13.25
And will thou pursue the dry stubble? Man being as unable to resist the Divine
Power, as a leaf is to stand before a tempestuous Wind, or, the dry Stubble to
stop the rage of a consuming Fire.

But here are two things to be resolved to make this matter clear before I
proceed;

(1.) What it was made Job so afraid of God when he considered, seeing. he
insists so much upon his own Integrity?

(2.) What apprehension then ought we to have of God in our minds, when such a
one as Job said, When I consider, I am afraid of him.

(1.) What it was made Job so apprehensive of Gods anger that he was afraid of
him, when he pleads so much for his own Integrity toward God and Man? Does not
this seem to lessen the comfort and satisfaction of a good Conscience, when
such a one as Job was afraid of God? For, from whence comes all the peace of a
good Conscience, but from him? and what content can there be from him, the very
thoughts of whom make us afraid? To that I answer,

(1.) Mankind ought always to preserve an humble and awful apprehension of God
in their mind. And that from the sense of the infinite distance between God and
us; as he is our Maker, and we are his Creatures; as he is our Benefactor, and
we his Dependents; as he is our supreme Lord, and we his Subjects; as he
infinitely exceeds us in all the Perfections of his Nature. For, what are our
shallow and dark and confused conceptions of things, to his Divine Wisdom? by
which he comprehends all the differences of times at one view; and all the
Reasons and Connexions and Possibilities of things are open and naked before
him. What is all the power of Mankind, if it were gathered into one, in
comparison with that Divine Power, which gave a Being to the World, when it was
not; and rules, and governs, and orders all things in it, with greater ease
than we can move a finger? Job 37.18, 16.
It is by that, God has spread out the Skies, and balanced the Clouds, and
garnished the Heavens, 26.12, 7
and divided the Sea, and hanged the Earth upon nothing; as it is elegantly set
forth in this Book of Job. And therefore as Job says to his Friends, Shall not
his excellency make you afraid? 13.11.
and his dread fall upon you? 37.22.
For as Elihu speaks, With God is terrible Majesty: and therefore when we
consider, we have reason to be afraid of him.

(2.) The best of Mankind have guilt enough upon them to make them apprehend
Gods displeasure under great afflictions. Jobs Friends insist much upon this,
that God may see just cause to lay great punishments upon Men, although they
may not see it in themselves. For, if he charges his angels with folly, 4.18.
as Eliphaz speaks, and the Heavens are not clean in his sight; 15.15.16.
How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like
water? i. e. whose natural propensity to evil, is like that of the thirsty
Traveller to drink of the Brook that he meets in his way. But suppose some to
have much greater care to restrain their desires than others; yet says he,
What is man, that he should be clean? 14.
and he which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? i. e. to such a
degree as not to deserve afflictions from God. And after all the protestations
Job makes of his Integrity, he confesses, that there is so much natural and
contracted impurity in Mankind, that God may justly cast them into the Furnace
to purge and refine them. Job 14.4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. And, I have sinned,
7.20.
what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? For, 13.26.
thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities of
my youth. He could not deny but he had sinned enough to deserve Gods
displeasure: but according to the usual method of Providence, he could not but
think his Case very hard, to suffer so much for sins committed before he well
knew the nature or danger of his sins; for sins so long since repented of, and
forsaken (which is the only satisfactory sign of true repentance) and when so
many wicked men in the height of their impiety, and contempt of God and
Religion, go away here unpunished; whereas he had made it his business and
delight to serve him, as he speaks in this Chapter, My foot has held his
steps, 23.11.
his way have I kept and not declined; neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips: 12.
I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more than my necessary food. But after
all this, to find Gods hand so heavy upon him, made him sometimes complain in
the anguish and bitterness of his Soul; 7.11.20.
Why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?
And elsewhere, Job. 16.12.
I was at ease, he has broken me asunder; he has also taken me by my neck,
and shaken to pieces, and set me up for his mark. Nothing sunk his spirit, till
he thought God was displeased with him; and then his heart and courage failed
him; and he begged compassion from his hard-hearted Friends, Have pity upon me,
19.21.
have pity upon me, O ye my friends: for the hand of God has touched me. Which
makes good the observation of the Wise Man, Prove. 18.14.
That the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities; i. e. a Man's natural
courage will carry him through a great many troubles, but a wounded spirit who
can bear? i. e. when a Man's heart fails him, he becomes a burden to himself;
every thing adds to his trouble, and nothing can give him ease but what can
revive his Spirit. Now, no consideration in the World does so break in pieces
and confound and shatter the Spirit of a Man, like the apprehension of Gods
wrath and displeasure against him for his sins; which made Job cry out, like
one wounded in the most tender and incurable parts, 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit; the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

But after all this,

3. God may not be so displeased with such Persons as lie under great
afflictions, as they apprehend him to be. And this was the truth of Job's Case;
his sufferings were extraordinary, and such an unusal concurrence of so many
sad accidents, made him think he had great cause to apprehend an immediate hand
of God to be stretched out against him. But the main design of this Book, is to
show that all these afflictions were intended only as trials of his Patience,
and that God never loved him better than at this time, when he thought him so
much displeased with him; as he showed in the Conclusion. This is a very hard
thing for persons under great afflictions to believe, and it is not necessary
they should; nay, sometimes the apprehension of Gods displeasure against them
for their sins, is one of the most useful parts of afflictions: for without
this, they are apt either to inflame Men's minds with discontent and unruly
passions; or to stupefie them with the dull and heavy Opiates of Chance or
Necessity: but when afflictions are looked on as coming from Gods hand, this
rouses and awakens our minds, and makes us think it necessary to look about us,
to search and examine our ways, to find out the particular sins we have given
way to, which may have justly provoked God to show his displeasure against us.
As we have reason above all things, to be afraid of his anger; so it is our
Wisdom to apprehend the least change of his Countenance toward us, and to make
our Peace with him, and then we have no cause to fear any thing that may happen
to us: For the Wise God will then turn all our Crosses into such proper
Remedies for the Diseases of our Minds, that the sharpest afflictions will tend
more to the purging away our sins, and thereby to a more sound and healthful
state of our Souls, than all the sleeping Potions of the intoxicating pleasures
and vanities of this World would ever have done. For, Luxury and Epicurism,
with all the arts of heightning the Pleasures of Life, are things not more
delightful to sense than dangerous to Men's Souls. They are like too frequent
use of Spirits in a time of health, which weaken the force of Nature by raising
it too high. So that were it in the choice of a wise Man to have and enjoy as
much of this World as he pleased, he would see a necessity to restrain his
appetite, and to deny himself some of the lawful Pleasures of Life; were it
only to keep up the relish by variety; and by enjoying them less, to hope to
enjoy them longer. We have certainly then no reason to complain, if God think
fit to debar us at all times, any use of unlawful Pleasures, and an inordinate
use of any; since he leaves scope enough for the true contentment of Life; and
if at some times he judges it necessary to give us Physic as well as Food,
shall we not submit to his Will? For as Job says, Shall we receive good at the
hand of God, Job 2.10
and shall we not receive evil? as if he had said, Shall we think much that our
Father should be our Physician; that he who has been hitherto so kind to us to
please us, should now be so kind to undertake our Cure? Shall we complain that
our Physician does not humor our palates, when he designs our health? God
knows what is better for us, than we do for our selves; and that which seems
most evil at present, may turn to the greatest good. I confess afterward, Job
being either sowred by the malignity of his Distemper, or heated by the
impertinency or bitterness of his Friends Discourses (for if they had no
relation to his Case, they were impertinent; if they had, they were severe and
uncharitable) does break out sometimes into some expressions of impatience; but
these arose from the Clouds upon his mind, which made him then apprehend all
these afflictions to come from Gods wrath and indignation against him; the
thoughts of which he was not able to bear: but therein he was wholly mistaken,
and then only hit upon the truth of his Case when he said, When he has tried
me, 23.10.
I shall come forth as gold, i. e. more pure and refined, more bright and
glorious.

(4.) In the hardest condition good Men can be cast into, they have more
comfortable hopes toward God than other Men can have. Job was extremely
afflicted to think the best Friend he had in the World, and whom he desired to
please above all things, should become his Enemy, and set himself against him;
but he did not always think so, although his Friends represented his condition
to him in the blackest and most frightful manner, which startled him and made
him resent his sufferings with great bitterness, and express it with a kind of
horror; yet he soon recovered himself out of those Agonies, and kept up his
trust and confidence in God. And there were two things which supported him
under all his dismal apprehensions.

(1.) The reflections of a good Conscience in the discharge of his duty to God
and Man; and therefore he tells his Friends, after all their sharp reflections
upon him, Job 27.5, 6.
Till I dye, I will not remove my integrity from me; my righteousness I hold
fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
It was this which raised his Spirits, and made him stand his ground against the
opposition of his Friends, and the scorn of his Enemies: It was this, which
made him despise the meanness of those who courted, admired, and flattered him
in his former Greatness; but now despised and derided him, making him the
subject of their raillery and entertainments: Job 30.9.
And now I am their song, yea I am their byword; even theirs who but a little
before, as he at large describes it, kept their distance from him, made way for
him as he passed the streets, admired all he spoke as Oracles, 29.7, 8, 9, 10.
and all he did as the perfection of Wisdom and Virtue. But so wise a Man could
not be surprised to see flattery turned into scorn and derision; (for no Man
thinks to gain by his flattery, who has not a secret contempt of the person he
flatters) and so good a Man could not but forgive the unjust reproaches that
were cast upon him, as long as he had the inward satisfaction of his own
Integrity. And therefore he gives so ample an account of his whole Life and
Actions, both in his public and private capacities; Chapter 30. and 31.
not to boast of his Virtues, but to be a just vindication of his Innocence
under all their aspersions; and to let them see, that the comfort of a good
Conscience does not fail, when Friends do; and as the Wise Man speaks: Prove.
14.14.
When the backsliders in heart shall be filled with their own ways; a good man
shall be satisfied from himself.

(2.) The expectation of a future recompense; either in this World, as he
seemed to hope, or at least in another. Some think, that Job spoke as to this
Life, Job. 19.25.
when he said, For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the Earth; And though after my skin, worms destroy this
body, 26.
yet in my flesh I shall see God: and so the meaning of these Words is, though
at present his Case seemed desperate, and his Life past hope, the worms eating
through his skin; yet he had a secret hope, that God would at last redeem him
out of his troubles, and that very loathsome Carcass of his would hold out so
long as to see that Day. But the Christian Church has generally understood
them to refer to the Day of Resurrection, when he was certain that God would
reward his innocence and sincerity: And of a future state, it is plain he had
an undoubted expectation, when he says, What is the hope of the hypocrite,
27.8.
although he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? which shows the great
folly of Hypocrisy, which can never stand a man in stead beyond this World,
where he must leave all his Riches, and Honors, and Hopes, and Happiness
behind him; and the just expectation good Men had, that God would reward them
after this life, though they were sufferers in this. And therefore, although
Job had such dreadful apprehensions of God at present, yet he had very
comfortable hopes as to his future condition, when he calls God his Redeemer,
even the same of whom he here says, When I consider, I am afraid of him.

(2.) But if so good, so virtuous, so sincere a Man as Job, had such terrible
apprehensions of God, what can we wretched sinners think of him? if when he
considered, he was afraid of him; have not we reason when we consider, to sink
into despair? Can we appeal to God as to the sincerity of our hearts in his
fear and service, as Job did? Can we say with Job, that we have not gone back
from the commandment if his lips, but have esteemed the words of his mouth more
than our necessary food? Have we not rather cast his most just and reasonable
commandments behind our backs, and esteemed our vanities, our superfluities,
our debaucheries, our follies, above the words of his mouth? But if we have not
despised his Laws, yet we cannot say, as Job did, that our feet have held his
steps, his way have we kept and not declined; for our Consciences cannot but
condemn us for the breach of his Laws; and our sins, our great and manifold
sins bear witness against us. What apprehensions of God then may we entertain
in our minds, when even Job was afraid of him? I answer,

(1.) None ought to look upon God as so terrible, as to make them despair.

(2.) Men ought to have different apprehensions of God, according to the nature
and continuance of their sins.

(1.) None ought to look upon God as so terrible, as to make them despair. For
when our apprehensions of God are such as drive us from him, they overthrow the
great end of Religion, which is to bring God and Man nearer together. None
ought to exclude themselves from mercy, whom God has not excluded from it; and
God excludes none whom he invites to repent, with a promise of forgiveness, if
they do it; and the goodness and long-suffering, and forbearance of sinners, is
on purpose designed to lead them to Repentance. So that after all this, to
despair, is not only to reject the mercy which God offers, but to question his
truth and sincerity, to slight his Patience, to disparage his Goodness, and to
look upon him as a most revengeful and implacable Being; which is, to entertain
most dishonorable and unworthy thoughts of the best, the wisest, the most
merciful and compassionate Being in the World; who has proclaimed himself to
be a God merciful and gracious, Exodus 34.6, 7.
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, i. e. to all that truly
repent of them. So that when we consider, we have no reason to be so afraid of
him as to despair.

(2.) Men ought to have different apprehensions of God, according to the nature
and continuance of their sins. For as on the one side, Psalm. 103.14.
the Scripture assures us, that God knows our frame, and remembers that we
are dust; and therefore will make all just and reasonable allowances for the
unavoidable infirmities of Humane Nature, and all circumstances that abate the
wilfulness of our evil actions: so on the other side, at the same time when he
declared his infinite goodness, he adds, and that will by no means clear the
guilty; not of any kind of sin; for then none could escape, since all have
sinned, and therefore are become guilty before him: but the guilty are such, as
add impenitency and obstinacy to their sins; such as wilfully and
presumptuously, not only break, but contemn his Laws; not barely neglect their
duty, but despise it; such as are not merely cold and indifferent about
Religion, but are zealously concerned against it, and endeavor to expose it to
scorn and contempt. H. Grot. in loc.
For a very judicious Interpreter says, This severity of God here spoken of,
in visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, etc. is not to be
understood of all crimes, but of such as immediately concern the honor of the
Divine Majesty, such as Apostasy, Idolatry, and consequently Atheism and
Irreligion; which is a Plot against Heaven, an attempt to dethrone the Divine
Majesty, or to make his Government insignificant in the World. If faults are
justly aggravated among Men, not so much from other circumstances, as from the
dignity of the Person against whom they are committed, and from the tendency of
them: Will not the parity of reason so far hold, as to aggravate those sins
which are immediate offenses against the Divine Majesty, and which tend to
overthrow his Government of the World?

II. And so I come to the second sense of these Words, as they may be taken for
Jobs vindication of himself from the unjust charge of his Friends, as though he
were a secret Hypocrite, or a contemner of God and Religion, under a fair
outward show of Piety and Devotion. For, Eliphaz in plain terms, in the
foregoing Chapter, tells him, he was one of those who thought God was at too
great a distance to take notice of things upon Earth. Job 22.13, 14.
And thou say, how does God know? can he judge through the dark Cloud? Thick
Clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit
of Heaven. Which is in short, to charge him with denying the Providence of God;
and reckons him with those that said unto God, Depart from us; and what can the
Almighty do for them? Job 22.17*
i. e. with such as would have nothing to do with God or Religion, looking on
it as a foppish useless thing: but however, he gives him good counsel to repent
of his folly, and to apply himself yet to God; Acquaint now thy self with him,
21.
and be at peace, thereby good shall come to thee. 22.
Receive I pray thee the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine
heart: i. e. be persuaded to be Religious in good earnest, and to let the fear
of God make a deep impression upon your Soul, and you will find great benefit
and advantage by it. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up,
etc. 23.
Job finding his Friends so often letting fall expressions to this purpose, and
knowing no imaginable reason for it, but a groundless suspicion they had
entertained, because of his unusual sufferings, makes here in this Chapter a
solemn protestation of the mighty value and esteem he had for the Laws of God,
23.11, 12.
that he constantly observed them, and esteemed them more than his necessary
food. And to let them know that this was no sudden heat, he tells Eliphaz, that
the fear of God in him, came from the most weighty and serious consideration;
When I consider, I am afraid of him: as if he had said, I have spent many
thoughts about God and Religion, whether there be any just reason for Mankind
to apprehend and stand in awe of an infinite Being above them; and I do assure
you, the more I have fixed my thoughts upon this matter, and laid all things
before me, the deeper impression the fear of God has made upon me: or as some
render it, perpendo and paveo, I consider, and I fear him.

Wherein are two things implied.

I. That Men's disesteem of Religion does arise from want of Consideration.

II. That the more men consider, the more settled and fixed will their minds be
in the esteem and practice of Religion.

I. That Men's disesteem of Religion does arise from the want of Consideration.

Which will best appear, by examining the most common and prevailing reasons of
Men's disesteem of it; which are chiefly these two;

(l.) Their looking on Religion as a matter of mere interest and design,
without any other foundation.

(2.) The unaccountable folly and superstitious fears of Mankind; which makes
them think more to be in it than really is.

(1.) Looking on the whole business of Relion as a matter of interest and
design; first started by some great Politicians to tame and govern Mankind, and
ever since kept up by a company of Priests who lived upon the Cheat, and
therefore were bound to maintain, and to keep it up; which otherwise would sink
to nothing.

This is the worst can be said against Religion; and it is bad enough of all
reason, if it were true: and we should deserve all the scorn and contempt,
which such Men treat us with, if we were but accessory to so great a fraud and
imposture.

But is there such a thing as Reason among Mankind? Can we judge of what is
true and false; probable or improbable; certain or uncertain? Or must some
things be run down, without examining? and others taken up, without any other
color of reason, than because they serve to such a purpose?

For Gods sake, and for our own sake then, let us consider these things a
little better, before we pronounce against them; or entertain any doubt or
suspicion of them in our minds. And there is this great reason for it, that the
wisest, the best, the most considering, the most disinteressed Men have taken
the part of Religion, and been zealous Defenders of it; whereas on the other
side, the younger, the looser, the more debauched part of Mankind, have been
most inclined to Atheism and Irreligion.

But if we have not Reason of our side, we are content to give up the Cause,
and to be thought Deceivers (which goes very hardly down with an ingenuous
mind): and if on the other side, there be nothing found but false and
groundless suppositions, or unreasonable suspicions; I hope, Religion may be
fairly acquitted from being thought a mere contrivance of Politicians, and we
from being the Silver-smiths to this Diana.

(1.) Those who make Religion to be such a contrivance, must suppose that all
Mankind were once without any such thing as Religion. For, if some crafty
Politicians did first start the notion of an Invisible Being among the rude and
unthinking Multitude, the better to awe them into Obedience to Government; then
Mankind must have lived before those Politicians appeared, with as little sense
of God and Religion, and with as much security and ease, as to the thoughts of
another World, as the very Beasts that perish. If this were true, these
Politicians were so far from consulting the interest of Mankind, that they were
the greatest Enemies to it; by filling their minds with such unconquerable
fears, as rob them of that undisturbed Tranquillity which they enjoyed before.
But when and where did this race of Mankind live, whom these designing Men
first cheated into the belief of a Deity, and the practice of Religion? The
eldest Writings in the World, without all dispute, are those of the Holy
Scriptures; and among these, the Book of Job has been thought the most
ancient; for in all this Book we have not one word of the Law of Moses, or of
Circumcision; which makes it very probable to have been written before the
Children of Isreal's coming out of Egypt; (and some Arabic Writers think that
Job lived before Abraham; and others, Greg. Abulfurai. hist. Dynast. p. 13.
at least in the time of Jacob) however it be, this Book of Job gives an
account of the sense of Mankind about Religion very early; and by it we find
that the great, Hier. Trad. Hebr. in Genesis 22.
and wise, and understanding Men of the World, such as Job and his three
Friends were, (who as far as appears by the story, were all of them independent
Princes; such as were common then, and a long time after, in those parts about
Arabia) had a mighty sense of God and Providence, and the Duties of Religion
upon their minds. And they not only give an ample Testimony as to their own
times, but they appeal to all the Traditions of former times; Enquire I pray
thee, of the former Age, says one of Job's Friends, Job 8.8.
and prepare thy self to the search of their Fathers. For we are but of
yesterday, and know nothing. But what is it he appeals to Antiquity for, and
the observations of all former Ages? It was for this, viz. the bad condition of
all that were not sincere in Religion: So are the paths of all that forget God,
Job. 8.13.
and the hypocrites hope shall perish. And another of his Friends speaking of
the remarkable judgments of God upon the World, 22.15, 16.
says to Job, Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden;
which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overthrown with a flood?
i. e. the Men of the old World. And what was their great and provoking sin? A
contempt of God and Religion, Which said unto God, 17.
Depart from us; and what can the Almighty do for them? This is the oldest, and
truest, and severest instance of such a profane and irreligious temper, and the
great mischief it brought upon the World; which shows, that this is not the
original disposition of Mankind, but the monstrous degeneracy of it. But if
they are unsatisfied with the Testimony of Job's Friends, let them produce any
to be mentioned the same Day with it, which can pretend to give a truer account
of the Religion of the first Ages of the World: I do not mention Moses
(although his Authority be unquestionable) lest he should be thought one of
these Politicians, who inspired the People of Israel with the Principles of
Religion; but I the rather choose this instance of the free Princes of those
parts of the East, who were under subjection to no common Authority, yet were
so early possessed themselves with such firm Principles of Religion, and assure
us that all good Men had the same; and that they were slighted by none, but
such loose and profane wretches, whom God set up for the Monuments of his
Indignation.

(2.) Suppose we should allow that in a particular Nation, some great and wise
Man should think fit to reclaim a loose and barbarous People by the Principles
of Religion; how does this prove Religion to be false, or what does it signify
to the universal consent of Mankind? Is it any Argument that there is no
foundation in Nature for Justice, Charity, and common Humanity, because wise
Men have been put to use variety of methods to reduce Canibals to civility? And
it would be as good arguing against all Morality from thence, as against
Religion, because it was judged by wise Men a necessary instrument to civilize
Mankind. And as far as I can observe, Religion and Civility have risen and sunk
together. The Roman Orator made a bold Challenge, as to the then known World,
to name any Nation so barbarous, that they had no Religion among them. And
although the Romans knew but little of the habitable World in comparison of
what is now known; yet upon the whole matter, the new discoveries add force and
strength to the Argument; only with annexing this observation, That the more
improved and civilized any People have been, the more regard they have had to
Religion; the more ignorant, sottish, and barbarous they were, although they
were not wholly without Religion, yet it was in less esteem and honor among
them: and this observation will hold, as to all the Nations since discovered
both in the East and West Indies. But what a mighty number of Politicians must
spring out of the Earth at once, to scatter the seeds of Religion, in such a
manner, over all the face of the Earth? It is impossible that a few Men, though
never so subtle, never so experienced, should be able to captivate all Mankind
in so great a variety of Language, and distance of Countries. And such an
universal effect must have some common and universal Cause; which the invention
of a few crafty Men could never be.

(3.) But suppose this to have happened in some one unlucky Age, when the Earth
brought forth such a fruitful crop of Politicians; yet how comes it to pass,
since these have so long been laid in their Graves, the effect of this Policy
should still remain all the World over? For, every Age is apt to condemn the
Policy of the foregoing; and whether the Men of the present Age stand upon the
shoulders of the precedent or not, they are very apt to think they see farther
than they; how comes it then in so many Ages, as have passed since these deep
Politicians lived, that no other Persons have been able to lay open the
artifice of Religion so, as to free Mankind from the pretended slavery of it?
It cannot be said, that there were none to attempt it; for that were to own an
absolute consent of all Mankind as to Religion. And we know there were some
once at Athens, who set up with a design to overthrow Religion; but with so
very little success, whatever the Roman Poet boasts, that they were fain to be
very private in their meetings: and the City was so little moved with their
Discourses, that S. Paul says, Act. 17.22.
the Men of Athens, were in all things too superstitious. It cannot be said,
that there were none ready to join in such a design; for all bad Men had rather
there were no Religion at all; and their number is never small, and never
unwilling to carry it on: How comes it then after all, that Religion still
prevailed, and the fears of a Deity could not be shaken off, no not by the
greatest Politicians themselves, who thought they understood all the arts of
Government, as well as any that had been before them? Would not some of the
Roman Emperors, who had none to control them, have been glad to have eased
themselves of the fears of an invisible Power? But they found, after all their
strugglings, it was a thing not to be done; God and Conscience were so much too
hard for their loose reasonings set up against them, that where Men had shaken
off the love of Religion, they could not shake off the fears that follow the
contempt of it. But where Mankind have been imposed upon, when once the cheat
is discovered, all its force is for ever lost: for Men do not love to be
deceived, especially in matters that so very nearly concern them; so that if
Religion had been a trick of so long standing, assuredly it would have been
hooted out of the World long ago; and nothing would have been so ridiculous as
to pretend to it. But thanks be to God, the credit of Religion is not yet worn
out of the World; which can be owing to nothing but to those invincible
Reasons, on which it stands. For there has wanted nothing of wit or malice in
profane Persons, to undermine and blow up the reputation of it. But the
foundations on which it is built, are so firm and stable, and have endured the
violent shocks, and secret attempts of so many Ages, that as long as reason and
civility hold up in the World, we need not question but Religion will. If once
I begin to see Mankind cast off all the reins of Civil Government, and run wild
and savage, quitting all the conveniences and pleasures of Houses, and Lands,
and Cloths, to live naked in the Woods, and to feed on Roots and Acorns,
because they suspect that all Civil Government, was a crafty design of some
cunning Men to get above others; I may then begin to think that such suspicions
about Religion, may prevail upon Mankind to cast off the most reasonable
obligations to maintain the profession and the practice of it. For although the
Reasons on which Religion is grounded, be independent on Civil Authority, such
as the train of Causes, the Motion, Order, Beauty, usefulness of all the parts
of the Universe; which remain the same in all Ages, and under all Revolutions:
yet the Principles of Religion do really give so much strength and support to
Civil Government, that none who have a kindness to the one, can be Enemies to
the other; and they who suspect Religion to be an Imposture, will be as ready
to suspect all Government to be no better: the consequence whereof will be
nothing but Barbarism and Confusion.

(2.) But it may be said, that although the Principles of Religion in general,
are reasonable enough in themselves; and the things we observe in the World, do
naturally lead Men to own a Deity; yet when they reflect on the strange folly
and superstitious fear of Mankind, they are apt still to suspect, that Men
being puzzled and confounded, have frighted themselves into the belief of
Invisible Powers, and performing Acts of Worship and Devotion to them, as
appears by so many imaginary Deities among the Heathen; and the superstitions
which still prevail on so great a part of the World. But this way of reasoning
is just as if a Man should argue that there is no such thing as true Reason in
Mankind, because imagination is a wild, extravagant, unreasonable thing; or
that we never see anything when we are awake, because in our Dreams we fancy
we see things which we do not. We cannot deny the follies of Mankind about
Religion, either Ancient or Modern: but when was it given to all the World to
be wise? It were extremely to be wished, that nothing but pure and undefiled
Religion should obtain in the World; or at least, that the Christian World were
purged from the follies of Enthusiasm and Superstition. But alas! the more we
consider all the wilful errors, and involuntary mistakes, vicious Inclinations,
violent Passions, foolish Opinions, strange Prejudices, superficial Reasonings,
and obstinate Resolutions which we incident to Mankind, we shall see greater
reason to wonder, that there is so much true Religion in the World, than that
there is no more. Nothing but the strong impression God has made of himself on
the Souls of Men; nothing but a Divine Hand could have kept such a flame alive,
in the midst of so many contrary Winds of Men's different Passions and
Interests, and such a rough and tempestuous Sea, as the state of this World
has generally been with respect to true Religion. But if through the mercy of
God it fares better among us, as to outward circumstances (for which we ought
to be very thankful) let not Religion bear the blame of all the follies and
indiscretions of those who profess it. It is a hard Case, if the common
weaknesses of Humane Nature, and those faults which Men commit through the want
of Religion, shall be laid to the charge of it. But nothing is more apt to
incline Men of better understandings, to ill thoughts of Religion, than to see
it made use of, to serve bad purposes and designs, to cover ambitious projects;
and to draw in People the more easily into Faction and Rebellion; and while
they look on this side of the Picture, and see there nothing but the lamentable
spectacles of the mischiefs which have been done in the World under the
pretense of Religion, they are far from thinking those Politicians, that
invented it; it being so easily turned upon the Government, and being then so
dangerous to it. (Which is a farther Argument to me, that it could not be a
contrivance of such Men: for then there would have been no other Scheme of
Religion owned in the World, but that of the Leviathan, which being so great a
Novelty, it is a certain sign, that Religion was not framed merely to serve the
ends of Government.) But however, that only true and holy Religion which we
profess, is so far from giving any encouragement to seditious Practices, that
it is not possible to contrive a Religion, which we must adhere to whatever we
suffer for it, that should more effectually recommend the Duties of Quietness,
Patience, and submission to Authority, than the genuine Religion of our Savior
does. As long therefore as the Rules of our Religion are so plain and easy, so
reasonable, so useful and beneficial to Mankind, we ought not to lessen our
esteem of it, for the sake of any weak, or superstitious, or hypocritical
pretenders to it.

II. Having thus far showed, that Men's disesteem of Religion comes from the
want of Consideration, I now come to the last thing I designed, as the
Application of the rest, viz. That the more Men do consider, the more they will
esteem Religion, and apply themselves to the practice of it.

And now methinks, I may with greater assurance address my self to all sorts of
Persons, since all that I shall request, will lie in two very reasonable things,

1. To consider impartially what is fit for them to do in Religion.

2. To practice so much of Religion, as upon Consideration will appear fitting
to be done.

(1.) To consider impartially what is fit for them to do in Religion. I am not
going about to persuade you to leave your Estates and Employments, and to
retire your selves from the World, and to give up your selves wholly to
Devotion. For I do not deny but that they who serve their Prince and their
Country, and follow their lawful Employments, with an honest and conscientious
diligence, and neglect no necessary Duties of Religion, do carry on the great
ends of Religion, as well as those, whose time and occasions will give them
leave to devote themselves more to Fasting and Prayer. But let none think the
matters of Religion to belong to others, and that they have business of another
nature to attend upon, as though paying their duty to God, were fit only for
those who had nothing else to do. While Job was in the height of his
Prosperity, and was the greatest of all the men of the East; Job 1.3.
he tells his Friends how much he was employed in doing all the good he could
by works of Justice and Charity; 9.12, etc.
He was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and a father to the poor: and
the cause which he knew not, 1.13, etc.
he searched out; yet he esteemed the words of Gods mouth, or the means whereby
his Duty was made known to him, 23.12
more than his necessary food; he had his set times of offering sacrifice and
prayer to God; 1.5.
16.17.
and upon extraordinary occasions, he required his Children to prepare
themselves for the solemn Sacrifice by Fasting and Prayer; which is meant by
sanctifying them. 1.5.
So that not only constant Offices of Religion, but more solemn Acts of
Devotion at certain seasons, are not only agreeable to the ancient practice of
the Christian Church, but to the most ancient Principles of natural Religion,
as they were understood and practiced in the time of Job; who was so great a
Person in Gods esteem, that himself, who knew him best, gave that Character of
him, That there was none like him upon earth; and therefore we cannot follow a
better Example.

(2.) Let us then set our selves to practice all the known Duties of our
Religion, and the more we consider these things, we shall be more resolved to
do it.

(1.) That God infinitely deserves from us all the service we can do him.

(2.) That we cannot serve our selves better, than by faithfully serving him.

(1.) That God infinitely deserves from us all the service we can do him. Can a
man, Job 22.2.
says Eliphaz, be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself? i. e. he cannot: but yet if God expects and requires such service from
us, we have no reason to enquire farther; for we are certain all we can do,
falls infinitely short of the obligations he has laid upon us. For let us
consider, Was it not God who formed us in our Mothers Womb, and so curiously
framed and fashioned all the parts of our Bodies? Was it not He, that breathed
into us the breath of Life, that first set the Wheel in motion by the course of
the Blood, Eccl. 12.6.
and settled the Cistern in the Heart to receive and disperse it, and the
Pitcher at the fountain, to take it at its return from the Veins? Was it not
He, that fixed the golden Bowl in the Head that covers the Brain, and stretched
out the silver Cord of the Nerves over the whole Body, for the admirable use
and service of all the Parts? Was it not He, that endued us with those noble
Faculties of Understanding, Reasoning, Reflecting, Remembering, Discoursing with
others, and Governing our selves? Was it not He, that made all the Parts of the
World about us so serviceable and beneficial to us? Was it not He, that
preserved us from so many and great Dangers which we have been exposed to by
open Violence, and secret Conspiracies; by Fire, and Sword, and Plague; by
storms at Sea, and upon Land too? Was it not He, that has so often scattered
the Clouds, that threatened us, when the face of the Heavens gathered blackness,
and all things seemed to tend to confusion? Is it not He, who still wonderfully
continues our Peace and Plenty, amidst all the sad complaints, and miserable
condition of our Neighbors? yea, who continues our Laws, our Government, our
Religion amidst all the Fears and Conspiracies which have been among us? And
shall we think much to serve so Wise, so Merciful, so Gracious a God? Is it not
He, that has exercised so much patience, and long-suffering, and goodness
toward us in order to our Repentance? That still offers to us the most
unvaluable Blessings of the pardon of our Sins, and everlasting Happiness upon
our sincere Repentance? Yea, is it not He, that has given his own Son to dye
for our Sins, and exposed him to the Reproach and Pain of an accursed Death
upon the Cross, that he might be a Sacrifice of Atonement for us? And will not
all these Motives prevail with us to fear and serve him, who has deserved so
much more from us, than the service of our whole Lives, in the most perfect
Obedience, would make a requital for? Shall we then grudge him that proportion
of sincere Obedience, which he is not only willing to accept of, but has
promised to reward with a Crown of everlasting Glory? Which is the last thing
to be considered.

(2.) That in serving God faithfully, we do most effectually serve our selves,
and promote our own Interest. Men will praise thee, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
49.18.
when thou do well to thy self. Not, when thou pamperest thy Body, and
thereby layest a foundation for Lusts and Diseases; not, when thou heapest up
Riches, and know not who shall gather them; not, when thou give way to all
the Vanities and Follies of a deceitful World: but when thou take a just care
of thy true and lasting Interest. For as Job says, God looked on this as the
proper Wisdom of Mankind, Unto Man he said, Job 28.28.
The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. And
that is certainly our true Wisdom, whereby, we secure our best Friend in all
conditions, we disappoint our greatest Enemies, we lay the surest foundation
for Peace and Tranquillity in our Minds while we live, and a Blessed Eternity
when we dye. To which God of his Infinite Mercy bring us.

FINIS.

