Jovis 14. die Novembris, 1678.
Ordered,

THAT the Thanks of this House be returned to Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St.
Paul's, for his Sermon yesterday Preached before this House at St. Margarets
Westminster: And that he be desired to Print his Sermon.

And Coll. Titus is desired to give him the Thanks of the House, and to
acquaint him with the desire of this House to Print his Sermon.

Will Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached on the FAST DAY November 13. 1678.

AT St MARGARETS WESTMINSTER Before the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean^ St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Margaret White, for Henry Mortlock at the Ph(...) St.
Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1678.

1 Samuel 12. 24, 25. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your
heart: for consider how great things he has done for you.

But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King.


IT has been well observed by some, that those who look at a distance upon
humane asfairs are apt to think that the good or bad success of them depends
wholly upon the Wisdom and Conduct of those who manage them; others who look
nearer into them and discern the many intervening and unforeseen accidents
which often alter and disappoint the Counsels of men, are ready to attribute
the events of things rather to Chance than Wisdom: but those who have made the
deepest search and the strictest enquiry, have most firmly believed a Divine
Providence Psalm ^^ 17, 22.
which overrules all the Counsels and Affairs of men; and sometimes blasts the
most probable designs, sometimes prospers the most unlikely attempts, to let us
see that though there be many devices in men's hearts, yet the Counsel of the
Lord Prove. 19. 21.
that sh^^l stand. We live in an age not over prone to admire and take notice
of any remarkable instances of Divine Providence either in our preservation
from dangers or deliverances out of them; for so great is the security of some
men that they are unwilling to apprehend any danger till they fall into it, and
if they escape will hardly believe they were ever in it; and such is the
concernment of others to baffle all evidences of truth wherein their own guilt
is involved, that they all agree in robbing God of the honor of his Mercy, and
our selves of the comfort of his Protection. But blessed be that God who has
hitherto defeated all the secret, and subtle, and cruel designs of his and our
Churches enemies; and has given us the liberty and opportunity of this day to
meet together to implore the continuance of his favor and mercy toward us in
the preservation of His Majesty's person; for in praying for him we pray for
our selves, since our own welfare does so much depend upon His.

When we look back upon the History of this Church ever since the Reformation
of it, we may observe such a wonderful series of Divine Providence going along
with it, that we have the less reason to be discouraged with present
difficulties or disheartened with the fears of future dangers. What struglings
did it meet with in the Birth? And although it were therein like Jacob who took
hold of the heel of his Brother and at last obtained the blessing; yet the
Romish party got the start like Esau, and Genesis 25. 25.
came forth all red and hairy, full of blood and cruelty; and the old Dragon
cast out of his mouth a Flood of Fire to destroy our Church before it could
attain to its full growth and maturity. But after it not only survived these
flames, but enjoyed a firm establishment under the care and conduct of a wise
and cautious Government, what restless endeavors, what secret plots, what
horrid conspiracies, what foreign attempts, what domestic treasons were
carried on during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth? And yet, which is very
considerable, while she openly and heartily owned the Protestant Cause, it
pleased God to deliver her out of all her dangers, and to give her a long and a
prosperous Reign, when two of her Neighbor Princes were assasinated for not
being zealous enough in the Popish Cause though they professed to own and
maintain it. And it is but a very little time since you met together in this
place to celebrate the memory of a mighty deliverance which Both King and
Kingdom, and together with them our Church received from that never to be
forgotten conspiracy of the Gunpowder Treason in her Successors Reign. May we
not then take up St. Paul's argument, and say, Who has delivered us from so
great death, and does deliver, in whom we trust 2 Cor. 1. 10.
that he will yet deliver us?

Especially if we do not fail in the performance of that duty which God expects
from us in order to our own preservation, which is delivered by Samuel to the
people of Israel, in the words of the Text,

Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider
how great things he has done for you.

But if they would not hearken to this wise Counsel, but go on in their sins,
he tells them what the fatal consequence would be, not to themselves only, but
to their King too,

But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed both ye and your
King.

Which advice will appear to deserve our serious consideration this day, if we
either regard (1.) The Person who gave it. (2.) The Occasion of giving it. (3.)
The matter contained in it.

1. The Person who gave this Counsel to the People, Samuel; a Person of great
Wisdom, and long experience in Government; and therefore very able to judge
concerning the proper causes of a Nations Prosperity and Ruin. The People had
enjoyed a long and uninterrupted tranquillity while they followed his
directions. They had before been miserably harassed by the inroads of the
Philistines, discomfited in several battles, and at last the Ark of God it self
taken by their enemies and their leaders destroyed, at which sad news Eli who
had judged Israel forty years fell backwards and 1 Samuel 4. 11. v. 18.
so ended his days: while they were under the sense of their present miseries,
Samuel puts them into the most hopeful way for their deliverance, which was by
a Reformation of Religion among 7. 3.
them, by returning to the Lord with all their hearts, and putting away their
strange Gods, and preparing their hearts unto the Lord and serving him only;
and then, says he, he will deliver you out of the hands of the Philistines. The
miseries they felt and the dangers they feared made them own the true Religion
with more than usual courage: Then the Children of Israel did put away v. 4.
Baalim and Astaroth, and served the Lord only. But besides this, Samuel
appoints a public and solemn Fast of all Israel at Mizpeh; And Samuel said, v.
5.
Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the Lord. And they
gathered together to Mizpeh and v. 6.
drew water and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said
there We have sinned against the Lord. Mizpeh, a City in the confines of Judah
and Benjamin, as Masius and others observe, was the place Mas. in Jof. 18. 21.
where the States of Israel were wont to be assembled together upon any great
and important occasion; where there was a place on purpose for them to meet in,
and an Altar, and House of Prayer Drus. in Jud. 20. 1.
for the public Worship of God: and therefore it is said, Judge. 20. 1. The
Children of Israel gathered together from one end of the Land to the other,
unto the Lord in Mizpeh; and there the chief of all the Tribes of Israel
presented themselves in the Assembly of the People of God. And therefore Samuel
chooses this as the fittest place for them to fast and pray, and confess their
sins in, and to implore the Mercy of God to the Nation. We do not read in
Scripture of any more public and solemn Fast of the People of Israel kept with
greater signs of true humiliation than this at Mizpeh was; for the pouring out
of water was used among them either to represent their own desperate condition
without Gods help, that they were as water spilt upon the ground; or the
greatness of their sorrow for their sins, and the floods of tears, which they
shed for them. And to let mankind see what influence a General and serious
Fasting and Humiliation has upon the welfare of a Nation, we find from the day
of this Fast at Mizpeh the affairs of Israel began to turn for the better. For
the Philistines thought they had an advantage against the Israelites by this
general meeting, and hoped to surprise them while they kept their Fast in
Mizpeh; and made such an incursion 1 Samuel 7. 7.
upon them, as put them into a great consternation; and they came trembling to
Samuel, praying him that he would not cease to cry unto v. 8.
the Lord their God for them, that he would save them out of the hand of the
Philistines. Samuel prays, the Lord hears, Israel marches out of Mizpeh, pursues
the Philistines v. 9.
and smites them; and Samuel sets up a stone of remembrance, and calls it
Eben-Ezer, saying Hitherto v. 11.
has the Lord helped us. Yea from hence forward v. 12.
did God help them, for it follows, so the Philistines were subdued, and they
came no more into the Coast of Israel; and the hand of the Lord was against the
Philistines v. 13.
all the days of Samuel. Never any People had greater reason to be pleased
with a Governor than they had with Samuel; who managed their affairs with so
much wisdom and piety, with so much faithfulness and integrity, with so much
courage and constancy, with so much care and industry, with so much success and
prosperity. But people are apt to surfeit upon too much ease and plenty, and to
grow wanton with abundance of peace; they began to be weary of Samuels
Government, and secretly to wish for a change. And when men's discontents grow
ripe, there seldom wants a plausible occasion to vent them: Samuel was grown
old and could not go about v. 16.
from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, as he was wont
to do, but he fixed at his 1 Samuel 8. 2.
house in Ramah, and placed his Sons in Beersheba; these not following their
Fathers steps, were soon. accused of maladministration; and nothing v. 3.
would now satisfy the discontented Elders of Israel, but Samuel himself must
be discharged of his Government; For they gathered themselves together and came
to Samuel in Ramah; and said to him, Behold thou v. 4.
art old, and thy Sons walk not in thy ways; this was their pretense, but
their design was to alter the v. 5.
Government. Their plenty and prosperity had made them fond of the Pomp and
Grandeur of their neighbor Nations, and whatever it cost them, they were
resolved to have a King to judge them like all the Nations. Samuel tells them,
what inconveniences that more absolute form of Government of the From v. 10.
to v. 19. Jose. An. l. 6. c. 4. v. 19, 2c.
neighbor Nations would bring among them, as Josephus shows; all which
signified nothing to them; for it is said, nevertheless the people refused to
obey the voice of Samuel and said, Nay, but we will have a King over us, that
we also may be like all the Nations. It was not the Monarchical way of
Government that was so displeasing to God or Samuel; for their Government was
of that Form already, God himself being their King, and appointing such
Vicegerents as he thought fit to manage their affairs under him. So God
answered chapter 12. 13.
Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them. Not, as 8. 7.
though Kingly Government were inconsistent with Gods Sovereignty over his
people; for by him Kings Reign; and they are his Ministers to us for good, and
that Government is the most agreeable to his own; and to the primitive
institution of Government among men. But wherein then lay this great sin of the
Israelites in asking a King, when Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
God himself had provided by his Law that they should have a King when they
were settled in their own Land? And yet we find the Israelites at last confess,
We have added unto all our sins this evil to ask us a King. Their great fault
was, that they were 12. 19.
so impetuous and violent in their desires, that they would not wait for
Samuels decease whom God had raised up among them, and whose Government had
been so great a blessing to them; and therefore God looked on it as a rejecting
him more than Samuel, since he had appointed him; and they had no reason to lay
him aside for his Sons faults, but they made use of that only as a color for
their own self-willed humor and affectation of being like to other Nations.
However God commands 8. 7.
Samuel to yield to them; and he appoints another meeting at Mizpeh for this
purpose; where the 10. 17.
Person was chosen by lot; and at his solemn inauguration at Gilgal, Samuel
makes that speech unto 11. 15.
all Israel contained in this 12th Chapter; where of the words of the Text are
the conclusion; which make these words the more considerable,

2. In regard of the Occasion of them; being delivered by Samuel at so great a
solemnity in which he delivers up the Government into the hands of their King,
(1.) With a great protestation of his own integrity, with an appeal to their
own Consciences 12. 3.
concerning it, and they freely give a 4.
large testimony of it. (2) He upbraids them with their ingratitude toward God
time after time; that they were never contented or pleased with his Laws or the
Governors he raised up From v. 6, to 14.
amongst them; and now at last upon a sudden fright concerning Nahash the King
of Ammon, they were resolved they would have a King; and behold, says he, the
Lord has set a King over you. (3.) Notwithstanding their sin in so
unseasonable a demand, yet he tells them they might be happy under his
Government if they did sincerely keep to their established Religion and obey
the Laws of God. This he delivers,

(1.) More Generally, verse. 14, 15. If ye will fear the Lord and serve him, and
obey his voice, and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall
both ye and also the King that reigns over you, continue following the Lord
your God; i. e. God will protect and defend you. But if you will not obey the
voice of the Lord, but rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall
the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your Fathers. But this
being a matter of the greatest consequence to them, whereon the welfare of the
Nation did depend, he delivers it

(2.) More Emphatically; after the Thunder and Rain had affrightned and softened
their hearts; and they came praying to Samuel and confessing their v. 18, 19.
v. 20, 21.
sin to him; then he counsels them not to fear, if they did not forsake God;
and for his part, however they had disobliged him, he would not only continue
v. 23.
to pray for them, but give them the best advice and directions he could: But I
will teach you the good and the right way. And then these words immediately
follow, Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart, etc.

3. These words are most considerable for the Matter contained in them; which
lies in these three particulars,

(1.) The influence which continuance in sin has upon a Kingdoms ruin: but if
ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King.

(2.) The best means for the welfare and preservation of it, viz maintaining
and practicing the true Religion; Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth
with all your heart.

(3.) The great argument and encouragement here given for the doing it; for
consider how great things he has done for you.

The first of these will be the main subject of my present Discourse, viz. The
influence which continuance in sin has upon a Kingdoms ruin, If we believe
Moses and the Prophets, we cannot question the truth of this concerning the
People of Israel; for this is the main scope and design of their doctrine.
Moses assured them, that all the strength, and force, and combination of their
enemies should do them no prejudice as long as they obeyed the Laws of God; but
Lev. 26. from v. 3, to 14.
if they would not do his Commandments, but despise his Statutes and abhor his
Judgments, all v. 15.
the care and policy they could use would not be able to keep off the most
dismal judgments which ever befell a Nation, I will even appoint over you
terror, v. 16.
consumption and the burning Ague; that shall consume the eyes and cause sorrow
of heart; and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
And I will set my v. 17.
face against you, and you shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate
you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none pursues you. And if you
will not for all this v. 18.
hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven times more for your sins, so he
proceeds to the end of the Chapter, still rising higher and higher according to
the greatness of their provocations. And to the same purpose he speaks
throughout Deuteronomy. 28. promising great Blessings to their Nation upon obedience,
and horrible Curses, such as would make ones ears tingle to hear them, upon
their refractoriness and disobedience, The Lord shall send thee cursing,
vexation and rebuke, Deuteronomy. 28. 20.
in all that thou set thine hand unto for to do; until thou be destroyed,
and until thou perish quickly, because of the wickedness of thy doings,
whereby thou have forsaken me. To the same purpose all the Prophets speak, only
applying this general doctrine to the circumstances of their own times. If ye
be willing and obedient, Isa. 1. 39. 20.
says Isaiah, ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if ye refuse and rebel,
ye shall be destroyed with the sword, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
When the Prophet Jeremiah saw dreadful calamities coming upon his people, he
cries out, Thy way and thy doings have procured these Jer. 4. 18.
things unto thee, this is thy wickedness because it is bitter, because it
reaches unto thine heart. Ezekiel tells them there was no hope to escape being
destroyed, but by speedy and sincere Repentance, Repent and turn your selves
from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall Ezekiel. 18. 30.
not be your Ruin.

But here a material question may be asked, whether this connection between
their doing wickedly and being consumed were not by virtue of that Political
Covenant between God and the people of Israel which was peculiar to themselves?
and how far it may be just and reasonable to argue concerning the case of other
Nations, with whom God has entered into no such Covenant, as he did with them?

To make this clear, and to bring it nearer to our own case, I shall proceed in
this method.

1. To show, that God does exercise a particular providence with respect to the
state and condition of Kingdoms and Nations.

2. That according to the usual method of Providence their condition is better
or worse as the People are.

3. That there are some circumstances of sinning, which do very much portend
and hasten a Peoples ruin.

1. That God does exercise a particular providence with a respect to the state
and condition of Nations, i. e. as they are united into several and distinct
bodies, which are capable as such of being happy or miserable. For since
mankinds entering into society is both necessary and advantageous to them; and
God does not barely permit and approve, but dispose and incline men to it; and
has given them Laws to govern themselves by, with respect to society; it is
but reasonable to suppose that God should call men to an account in that
capacity; and to distribute rewards and punishments according to the nature of
their actions: which must either be done in this world, or it cannot be done at
all; for all those bonds are dissolved by death, and men shall not answer for
their sins by Kingdoms and Nations in another world, but every man shall give
account of himself unto God. Either therefore those societies as such shall go
wholly unpunished, or they must suffer according to them in this world; and
therefore here the case is very different from that of particular Persons. We
say, and with a great deal of Reason, that it is no disparagement to the
Justice of Gods Providence for good men to suffer, or for wicked men to escape
punishment in this Life, because the great day of recompense is to come,
wherein there will be a Revelation of the Righteous judgment of God: But that
will not hold as to Nations, who shall not suffer in communities then as they
have sinned here: and therefore it is more reasonable to suppose the rewards
and punishments of such shall be in this life according to the measure and
proportion of their sins. And of this we have suffient evidence in Scripture,
upon these accounts.

(1.) Because it charges guilt upon Nations as well as upon particular Persons.
As in the case of uncertain murder, If one be found slain in the Land, which
Deuteronomy. 21. 1.
the Lord thy God gives thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not
known who has slain him: the Elders of v. 7.
the next City were not only to protest their own innocence; but to use this
prayer, Be merciful O Lord, v. 8.
unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood
unto thy people of Isreal's charge. And v. 9.
the blood shall be forgiven them, so shall thou put away the guilt of innocent
blood from among you. Here we see the guilt of innocent blood goes farther than
the bare shedders of it, it lies upon the Nation till it be expiated; and the
Jews say, the soul of a person innocently murdered hovers up and down the Earth
crying for vengeance, till the guilty persons be found out and punished, and
then it ascends above to its place of rest. The guilt of innocent blood is
indeed a crying sin; it cries loud unto Heaven for vengeance, and nothing stops
its voice but the execution of it. And where that is not done, it leaves a
guilt upon the Land; for God himself has said it, Blood defiles the Land; and
the land cannot Numb. 35. 33.
be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that
shed it. This sin we see, is of such a malignant nature that it infects the
Land where it is committed, and lies upon it till it be expiated. But there are
other sins which contract a National guilt, when the Authority of a Nation,
either gives too much countenance and encouragement to the practice of them, or
does not take that care it ought to do to suppress and punish them. When men
daily and insolently break the Laws of God, and bid as it were defiance both to
them and to the Laws of men; when wickedness spreads like a leprosy, and
infects the whole body; when vices become so notorious that they are a reproach
and a byword to Neighbor Nations; these are the signs and tokens of National
guilt.

(2.) Because the Scripture tells us of a certain Measure to which the sins of
a Nation do rise before they are ripe for punishment. This was the reason given
why Abraham's Children must stay to the fourth Generation before they come to
the possession of the promised Land, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not
yet full. Where it is plain that God Genesis 15. 16.
does consider Nations as distinct bodies, the measure of whose sins is taken
after another manner than that of particular persons; but when once that
measure is completed, ruin and destruction is unavoidable; or at least, some
signal and extraordinary judgments falling upon them as the punishment of
their iniquities. Men may ask why the Canaanites in Joshua's time were dealt
with so severely, that nothing but utter extirpation would satisfy the Justice
of God against them? But God prevents that objection, by letting Abraham know
how much patience and long-suffering he used toward them; waiting till the
fourth Generation; and when their iniquities still increased, and every Age
added to the Guilt of the foregoing, the burden grew too heavy for them to bear
it any longer, and therefore they must sink under the weight of it. So our
Savior says to the Jews in his time, Fill Matthew. 23. 32.
ye up then the measure of your Fathers. Not as though God did punish any Age
beyond the desert of its own sins; but when the measure of their sins is filled
up, God does no longer forbear to punish them; and that seldom happens, but
when the sins of that time do exceed those of the foregoing Generations; as it
was in the case of the Jews when their City and Temple were destroyed.

(3.) Because it attributes the great Revolutions of Government to a particular
Providence of God, God is the Judge, or the supreme Arbitratour of the affairs
of the world, he pulls down one and sets up another. Which holds with
respect to Nations as Psalm 75. 7.
well as particular persons. Which does not found any right of Dominion, (as
some fancied till the argument from Providence was returned with greater force
upon themselves) but it shows that when God pleases to makes use of Persons or
Nations as the Scourges in his hand to punish a People with, he gives them
success above their hopes or expectations, but that success gives them no
right. And of this the Psalmist speaks when he adds, For in the hand of the
Lord there is a Cup and the Wine is red; v. 8.
it is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same; but the dregs thereof
all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out and drink them. It is called
by Isaiah, the Cup of Fury, and the Cup of Trembling, which God gives to Is.
51. 17.
Nations destined to ruin: which makes them like people intoxicated and
deprived of that apprehension of danger, of that judgment and consideration to
prevent it, which at other times they have. When a Nation is near some dreadful
calamity, as a just punishment of its sins, God takes away the wisdom of the
Wise, and the understanding of the Prudent, and the resolution of the men of
courage, that they all stand amazed and confounded, not knowing how to give or
take advice; but they are full of fears, and rather apt to quarrel with one
another than to consult the general good. This was just the state of Egypt when
God did purpose to execute his Justice upon it.

(1.) First, their courage failed them, And the heart of Egypt shall melt in
the midst of it; and the spirit Is. 19. 1, 3.
of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof. In that day shall Egypt be like unto
women; and it shall be afraid and fear, 16.
because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of Hosts, which he shakes over
it. It is a very ill sign when men want the spirit and vigor they were wont to
have; when they are daunted at the apprehension of every danger, and rather
meanly seek to save themselves by base arts and sordid compliances, than to
promote the common welfare. It is folly and stupidity not to apprehend danger
when there is cause for it, and to take the best care to prevent it; but it is
a fatal symptom upon a Nation when their hearts fail them for fear, that they
dare not do the duty which they owe to God, to their King, and to their
Country. God forbid that any should exceed the bounds of their duty to prevent
their fears, but when men want resolution to do that, they are in a lost
condition.

(2) Their Counsels were divided and infatuated: And I will set the Egyptians
against the Egyptians. The v. 2.
Princes of Zoan are Fools, the Counsel of the Wise Counselors 11.
of Pharaoh is become brutish; they have also seduced 13.
Egypt, even they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof. The Lord has
mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof, 14.
and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a reeling man
staggereth in his vomit, i. e. they know not what to fix upon, all their
Counsels being so uncertain, and the best taking no effect. But after all their
consultations, they advance not one step forward, but fall back just to the
same case they were in before; every one blaming another for want of success in
their designs. This is the deplorable state of a People when ruin and
desolation is near them.

But on the other side, when God raises up a Nation to be a Scourge to other
Nations, he inspires them with a new spirit and courage, unites their counsels,
removes their difficulties or carries them easily through them, and by a
concurrence of some happy circumstances gives them strange success beyond all
their hopes and expectations. Look over all the mighty Revolutions which have
happened in the Kingdoms and Empires of the World, and the more ye search and
consider and compare things together, the greater truth you will find in this
observation. When God designed to punish the Eastern Nations for their
transgressions, then the Babylonian Monarchy rose so fast and spread so far,
that nothing was able to stand before it. The combinations of the Kings of
Judah, and Edom, and Je. 27. 3.
Moab, and sire, and Sidon, and Egypt were but like the Withes which the
Philistines bound Sampson with, which he brake in sunder as a thread of Tow is
broken when it touches the fire. Judah drinks first of the Cup, and Ju. 16. 9.
she trembles and falls, and is carried into captivity; then follow, as God had
foretold by his Prophets, Jer. 25. from 18. to 26. Eze. 24. 2, etc. 30. 5. Nah.
3. 8, 9. Zeph. 2. 13.
the desolations of Tire, of Egypt, of Put and Lud, i. e. of Libya and
AEthiopia; and at last the Cup passes round, and Ninivehs turn comes to drink
deep of this Cup of Fury, and she was laid waste for returning to her sins
after Repentance.

And when the sins of Babylon called for vengeance, God raised up Cyrus, and
called him by his Name, long before he was born, and brought the Is. 45. 2, 3.
fierce Nations of the East to submit themselves to him: and when Babylon was
most secure, full of Wine and Jollity at an anniversary feast, he led Cyrus
into the City by a way they dreamed not of, and all the plagues which the
Prophets had foretold, came upon that people when they least expected them. It
was not the Courage and Spirit of Alexander with his Macedonian Army could have
made such sudden and easy conquests of the East; if God by his Providence had
not strangely made way for his success by infatuating the Counsels of Darius,
so as to give him those advantages against himself he could never have hoped
for. There is no such mighty difference in the wits and contrivances of men; no
such great advantages in military power and conduct; no such wonderful
disproportion in the courage, or wisdom, or educations of men; but when God
has pleased to let loose the most rude, and barbarous, and unexperienced
Nations in matters of War, upon the most flourishing Kingdoms, the most
disciplined Armies, the most fortified Cities, they have in spite of all
opposition overrun, overcome, and overthrown them. Who could have thought that
the cowardly Goths (as they were then esteemed) the barbarous Vandals, and the
despicable Hunns, could have made such havoc and devastations in the Roman
Empire, that in fifty years time, more of it was lost and destroyed by their
means, than had been gained in a thousand? It would make ones heart bleed to
read the miseries which all the parts of the Roman Empire suffered, where these
Barbarians prevailed; and yet they were despised and reproached by the Grave
and Wise Romans at the same time when they were Conquered and destroyed by
them; as Salvian who lived then, at Salvian. de Cub. Dei, l. 7.
large relates. But the best and wisest men could not but see an extraordinary
hand of God going along with them; and one of their greatest Generals found
himself carried on by such a mighty impulse, and met with such an unaccountable
success in all his undertakings, that he called himself Flagellum Dei, The
Scourge in Gods hand to chastise the wickedness and follies of men that called
themselves Christians, and did not live like such. Machiavel himself takes
notice of so strange a difference Disput. in Live. l. 2. c. 29.
in the Conduct and success of the Romans at different times, that he says,
they could hardly be imagined to be the same People; and after all his attempts
to find out other causes, he at last is forced to conclude that there is a
superior cause to the Counsels of men which governs the affairs of mankind,
which he calls Fate, and we much better, the Providence of God. Some learned
Physicians are of opinion H. Jordanus de eo quod in morbis est divinum.
Conring. Epist. 29.
that when diseases are not curable by common remedies, there is in them (...),
something divine, and therefore in such cases Divine Remedies are the most
proper and effectual: thus in the alterations of States and Kingdoms, there is
often a (...), a more than ordinary hand of God, in which cases the best means
we can use to prevent danger is by Fasting and Prayer, by true repentance and
speedy Reformation of our evil ways.

(4.) Because the Scripture still leaves hopes of Mercy to a People where they
have a heart to repent. I do not find by any declaration of Gods Will in
Scripture, that he has made any such peremptory decree concerning the ruin of
a Nation, but upon their repentance there is a way left to escape it; but
rather the contrary in those words of Jeremiah, At what instant I shall speak
concerning Jer. 18. 7, 8.
a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down and to
destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil which I thought to do unto them. And therefore
all threatenings of that kind are conditional as this in the Text is, But if ye
shall still do wickedly: which implies that if they did cease to do so, they
might be preserved, both they and their King. And where repentance has
intervened between the threatening and execution of judgment, God has showed
wonderful kindness either in stopping, removing, or deferring the severity of
judgments.

1. In stopping his hand when it has been lifted up, and just ready to strike.
We can desire no clearer instance in that case than that of Niniveh; a vast
Jonah 3. 3.
City (or rather a Country enclosed in Walls) full of all the delights of
Asia, and of the sins which usually attend them; to this City God sends a
Prophet to let them know how near they were to destruction, that they had but
forty days time to turn themselves in. This was a strange and unexpected alarm
to them, given by a strange Prophet after a peremptory manner to a people
unacquainted with such messages. How many objections would the Infidels and
Scepticks of our Age have made against such a Message as this? They would
rather have concluded the Prophet Mad, than have been persuaded to repent by
him. Yet so great was the apprehension they had of the just desert of their
sins, that the People of Nineveh believed God and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least: v. 5.
and they cried mightily to God, and turned from their v. 8. v. 10.
evil ways: And what then? Would God disparage the reputation of his Prophet,
and alter the sentence he had sent him so far to denounce against them? What
hopes had he given them of mercy if they repented? It appears they had nothing
but general presumptions, Who can tell, if God will v. 9.
turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not? Yet
sincere repentance being performed upon no greater assurance than this,
prevailed so with God, that he repented of the evil that he said he would do
unto them, and he did it not. O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and
Goodness of God! His Wisdom in leading them to repentance; his Goodness in for
bearing to punish after so great provocations. What encouragement does God
hereby give to others to repent, when Niniveh was rescued from the very brink
of destruction by it?

2. In removing his hand when it has struck. When David's vanity transported
him so far, that without any necessity he would know the Number of his People;
his heart did misgive him as soon as he had done it, and he confessed he had
sinned greatly in it; notwithstanding this God sends a plague among 2 Samuel 24.
10.
the People, which touched David to the quick, as a tender Father is most
sensibly punished in the loss of his Children; and then he cried, Lo I have
sinned, and I have done wickedly; but these Sheep what have they done? v. 17.
And when the Angel had stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it,
the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to the Angel It is enough, stay now
thy hand. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God; on them which fell
severity; but toward Jerusalem goodness. His severity was intended to make
people avoid a vain confidence in their own strength and numbers; his goodness
to let them see how ready he is to draw back his hand when men truly repent.

3. In putting by the stroke for the present, or deferring the execution of his
wrath. No King of Israel provoked God more than Ahab; for it is said of him,
that he did evil in the sight of the Lord above all 1 King. 16. 30.
that were before him; and that he sold himself to work wickedness in the sight
of the Lord. At last the Prophet 33.
Elijah meets him in Naboths Vineyard which he had 21. 25.
just taken possession of by fraud and violence; when Ahab saw such an
unwelcome Guest in that place, his guilt made him ready to start back, and to
say, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? The Prophet 20.
having this fair opportunity followed the blow he had given him so home, that
Ahab was not able to stand before him: for it is said, that when Ahab heard the
terrible judgments God denounced against him for his sins, he rent his
clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted, and in good v. 29.
earnest humbled himself before God; For so God himself owns that he did. I do
not say he continued good after this; but he now heartily repented for the
time; and for the time of repentance God enlarged his time of forbearance.
Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days.
Even a short repentance, when sincere, gains time, by a reprieve from
punishment. When the sins of a Nation are grown to a great height, and become
ripe for vengeance, the best Princes can obtain no more than not seeing the
evil in their own days, as in the case of Josiah who was an excellent Prince,
and a true lover of God and his Law, yet the people continued so hardened in
their sins, though under some show of Reformation; that the Prophetess told
him; behold I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants 2 King.
22. 16.
thereof, etc. But because his heart was tender, and he 19.
humbled himself before the Lord, he obtained that favor, that his eyes should
not see the evil which he would 20.
bring upon them. If the People had been as good as Josiah was, there is no
question, but even then God would have repented of the evil; but where there
was such an obstinate impenitency, that neither Gods Laws, nor the Prophets
threatenings, nor the Princes example could prevail upon them; all that his
humiliation could obtain, was only a putting it off for his own time; and we
have reason to think that their sins did hasten his end too; as sometimes the
sins of a people make the best of Princes to be taken away from them: and when
the ten Tribes were carried captive, their King Hoshea is said, not to have
done evil as the Kings of Israel 2 King. 17. 2.
that were before him. And to Judah after Josias his death, God punctually made
good this threatening in the Text, But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall
be consumed both ye and your King.

II. The second particular is, That according to the usual method of Providence
the state or condition of a People is better or worse according to the general
nature of their Actions. If they be good and virtuous, careful to please God,
just, sober, chaste, merciful, diligent observers of Gods Laws, and their own,
and dealing with other Nations according to the Laws of Nations, they will live
in a much more flourishing and happy condition; than a Nation can do where
Atheism, Profaneness, and all sorts of Wickedness abound: which I shall prove
two ways,

(1.) Absolutely, from the tendency of Religion and Virtue to promote the
Honor, the Peace, the Courage and safety of a People.

(2.) Comparatively, that Nations are more or less happy according to their
virtues and vices.

(1.) Absolutely, and that will appear, (1.) From the tendency of true Goodness
and Piety to promote a Nations Honor and Interest abroad. And no man is
ignorant how much Reputation brings of real advantage to a Nation; and that a
People despised are next to a People enslaved; and that it is impossible to
hold up honor and esteem in the world, where the reputation of Virtue is lost.

(2.) From its tendency to maintain peace and tranquillity at home; preventing
private quarrels, by justice, and honesty, and temperance, and chastity; and
public disturbances by avoiding idleness, and debauchery, and bad principles,
which are the great nurseries of Rebellion; and teaching men quietness,
patience, due government of themselves, and obedience not only for wrath, but
also for Conscience sake. Whereas loose principles, and bad practices, and
extravagant desires naturally dispose men to endeavor changes and alterations,
in hopes of bettering themselves by them; and the prevalency of Vice does
unhinge Government, and weaken the strength and sinews of it.

(3.) From the keeping up the spirits, and securing the safety of men. A good
Conscience makes a man dare to do his duty; but the sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites. Is. 33. 14.
These were men, says Grotius, who carried a fair show for the present, but
were inwardly prepared, if the King of Babylon got the better, to be of his
Religion, whatever it was. Such men who are false to God, and really of no
Religion at all, are full of thoughts and fears, not knowing what may happen;
they dare not own what they would be, for fear it ruin them at present; and
they dare not appear too much for what they seem to own, for fear of what may
come hereafter. If the Lord be God, says Elijah, then follow him; but if 1
King. 18. 21.
Baal, then follow him: No, say such men, if they durst speak their thoughts,
we desire to be excused at present, we find there is a contest between them,
and we do not yet know which will get the better, when we see that, you shall
know our minds. As Asinius Pollio told Augustus in his Wars with Antony he was
resolved to be praeda victoris, he would be of the Conquerors side. But men
that are sincere in any Religion, do hate and abhor such hypocritical
Dissemblers, and despise and spue them out for their nauseous lukewarmness; and
as men indeed of no Religion or Conscience, but for what serves to their
present ends. But observe in what a lofty strain the Prophet sets forth the
security and confidence which follows integrity. He that walks righteously
and speaks uprightly, he that despises v. 15.
the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding bribes, that
stops his ears from hearing of blood, and stops his eyes from seeing
evil. He shall dwell v. 16.
on high, his place of defense shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall be
given him, his waters shall be sure. These were very critical and doubtful
times which the Prophet speaks of, and many were secretly for complying with
the King of Assyria, as believing it as impossible to withstand his force, as
to dwell with everlasting burnings; the Prophet is so far from granting this,
that he tells them all their security lay in being just and honest, and doing
their duty, and then they would be as safe, as if they had constant provision
among the most inaccessible Rocks. It is observable concerning the Israelites,
that when they went about to secure themselves by subtle devices and
contrivances of their own, making leagues and confederacies with the King of
Egypt and other neighbor Princes, so often they were foiled, and baffled, and
overcome by their enemies; but when they put their trust in God, and committed
themselves to his protection, he preserved and delivered them from the greatest
dangers. I will not deny that there was something peculiar in their case,
having the Prophets directions; and to trust man's wisdom against Gods was
madness and folly in them. But setting that aside, as there is no security like
to Gods protection, so there is no reason to think that will be wanting to them
who do their duty sincerely and put their trust in him.

(2.) Comparatively; If we do compare several Nations together, we shall find
those to flourish most, and to be the most happy where men do most fear God and
work righteousness; where piety and virtue have the greatest countenance and
encouragement; and where vice and wickedness are the most discouraged and
punished.

This may seem a Paradox at first hearing to those who consider by what ways of
fraud and violence, of injustice and cruelty, of rapine and oppression, the
great and mighty Empires of the world have been raised and maintained; and how
little regard is showed to any rules of Honesty, Justice, or the Laws of
Nations in those Kingdoms and States which resolve to be great, and in spite
of other Nations to maintain their Greatness.

Yet notwithstanding this plausible objection, the truth of my assertion will
appear, if we understand it as we ought to do with these following Cautions.

1. That it is not to be understood of the largeness of dominion, or
superfluity of riches, but of the true happiness of living in society together;
which is by promoting the real good of all. To which the vastness of Empire,
and immensity of riches is by no means necessary, but a sufficiency both of
strength and treasure to defend it self in case of foreign enemies, and to
provide for the necessities and conveniences of all the Members of it. Those
who have best considered Arist. Pol. l. 4. c. 11.
these things, suppose that to be the most exact and perfect Idea of
Government, where all things are in a certain measure, and have a proportion to
each other so as most conduces to the true end of living; not to riot and
luxury, not to softness and effeminacy, not to pride and ambition, not to the
heaping up of riches without use and respect to a general good; but so as all
men may according to their conditions and circumstances enjoy what they have,
or can get, with the greatest comfort to themselves and their friends, and do
the most generous and virtuous actions.

2. That this is not to be understood of the private benefit of any particular
persons, but of the general good of all sorts and conditions of men. The
Eastern Monarchies have seemed to be the most happy and flourishing to those
who look at a distance upon them, and only observe the Pomp and Grandeur of
their Princes, without looking into the State and Condition of the People.
Aristotle observes, that the Eastern people had more wit and slavery Polit. l.
3. c. 14.
with it, the Northern had less quickness and more liberty, the Greeks lying
between both had their share in both. But the Eastern slavery has brought
Barbarism into Greece it self; and the Northern Liberty has so improved the
wits, and given such encouragement to the industry of men, that our people at
this day enjoy more benefit by the riches of the East, than those do among whom
they grow. Can we call them a happy people that see much riches and enjoy none;
having nothing which they can call their own, unless it be their slavery? That
is certainly the happiest condition of a people, where the Prince sits upon the
Throne of Majesty and Power, doing righteousness and showing kindness; and the
people sit every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, enjoying the
fruits of his own labors, or his Ancestors bounty: Where the People think it
their interest to support and obey their Prince; and the Prince thinks it his
interest to protect and defend his people. Happy is the People that is in such
a case; but above all, happy is that Psa. 144. 15.
People whose God is the Lord. For without his Blessing, the best Government,
the best Laws, the best Ministers can never preserve a Nations happiness; and
there is no reason to expect his Blessing, but in the ways of Piety and Virtue.

3. That it is not to be understood of sudden and surprising events, but of a
lasting and continued state. For when God has been highly provoked to punish
several Nations for their sins; he may give unexpected success to that Nation
by whom he designs to punish the rest; and when they have done that work, they
may then suffer more smartly for their own iniquities. Of this we have a
remarkable instance in Scripture; God designed to punish the Kingdoms of the
earth for their sins; to Jer. 25. 26.
this purpose he raises up Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, whom he therefore
calls his Servant; and v. 9. 11.
the first example of his severity was his own People; when this was done, then
follow the desolations of Egypt, of Phoenicia, Arabia, and other Countries in
so strange a manner, that some have called it the Age of the destruction of
Cities. But does the Marsh. Chr. Can. p. 556. Jer. 25. 15. v. 26.
King of Babylon think to escape himself? No, says the Prophet, the King of
Shesbach shall drink after them; his turn would come at last, when he had
accomplished the design God sent him upon in the punishment of others. Thus for
a time, a Nation may seem to flourish exceedingly, and be victorious over
others while they are as Scourges in Gods hand for the punishment of others,
and when that work is over may suffer most severely for their own sins.

4. It is to be understood of Persons under equal circumstances, when we
compare the condition of People with each other: not the Nobles of one Nation
with the Peasants of another, nor the Princes with the People; but every rank
and order of men with those of the same rank and condition.

And upon these terms, we need no other proof of the truth of this assertion,
than the instance in the Text of the People of Israel; which will best appear
by comparing the state of both Kingdoms after the Body of the People was broken
into the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The Kingdom of Israel by Jeroboams
Policy, and for Reason of State, fell off from the Worship of the true God, and
worshipped the Calves of Dan and Bethel. But did they prosper or succeed more
than the Kingdom of Judah? The ten Tribes had a much larger territory, yet the
Kingdom of Judah was stronger and flourished more, and continued longer, by 135
years, than the Kingdom of Israel did; and when they were carried into
Captivity, the ten Tribes were lost as to their name and interest among the
People of Assyria; but the two Tribes were restored after 70 years Captivity
under the Princes of the Line of David. If we compare the Kings of Israel and
Judah together; The Posterity of David was kept up among the Kings of Judah;
but there were nine Families in the Kingdom of Israel; and but one of them
lasted to the fourth Generation, and that was of Jehu, who did something
toward the Reformation of Religion. Of the eighteen Kings of Israel, but eight
escaped dying by the Sword: and it is easy to judge how miserable the state of
that People must be, under so many violent changes of Government. Among the
Kings of Judah those who were firmest to the true Religion prospered most, and
the Nation under them enjoyed the greatest peace, or received the greatest
deliverances, as in the days of Asa, Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah. If we compare
the times of the same Kings together, we shall find that while they adhered
firmly to God and Religion the Nation prospered exceedingly, as for a long time
under the Reigns of Solomon and Asa; but when in their old Age they began to
warp in their Religion and to decline in their Piety, nothing but trouble and
confusion followed. So true did they find the saying of Hanani to Asa, The eyes
of 2 Chro. 16. 9.
the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in
the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. But because he said, he
had done foolishly in not relying on the Lord, but on the King of Syria,
therefore, says he, from henceforth thou shall have wars. And from that time
his Government v. 10.
was uneasy both to himself and his People; when he had imprisoned the Prophet
for reproving him.

III. That there are some circumstances in the sins of a Nation, which do very
much portend and hasten its Ruin. As,

1. When they are committed after more than ordinary mercies received; such as
in reason ought to keep men most from the commission of them; as greater
knowledge of the Will of God than other People enjoy; more frequent warnings of
their danger than others have had; many and great deliverances which God has
vouchfafed; when none of these things, nor all of them together do move a
People to repent, they show an obstinate and incorrigible temper, and therefore
God may sooner proceed to punish them. God did not forbear to punish other
Nations for their transgressions, but he began with his own People. For lo I
begin to bring evil on the City which is called by Jer. 25. 29
my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? The destroying Angels in
Ezekiel, were to begin at the Sanctuary; Eze 9. 6 1 Pet. 4 17
Judgment, says St. Peter, must begin at the House of God. He draws the line
of his Justice parallel to that of his Mercy; and when every Mercy is put to
the account, and heightens the guilt, the fumm will soon rise so high to call
for execution. The Prophet Amos tells Damascus, and Gaza, and Tire, and Edom,
and Ammon, and Moab, that none of them shall escape being punished for their
transgressions; they need not doubt, the Rod would come time enough upon them;
but yet God would begin with his own Children: You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth, Amos
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Where God has given
wonderful marks of his kindness, and many deliverances time after time, and yet
they continue to do wickedly, there is the greater reason to expect sharper and
severer punishments.

2. When they are committed with more than ordinary contempt of God and
Religion. All Ages are bad enough; and every Age is apt to complain of it self,
as the worst of any; because it knows more ill of it self, than of the
foregoing. But yet there is a difference in the manner of sinning; sometimes
the stream of wickedness hides its head, and runs under ground, and makes
little noise, although it holds on the same course; at other times it seems to
break forth like a mighty torrent as though it would bear down all before it,
as though the fountains of the great Deep were broken up, and Hell were let
loose, and the Prisoners there had shaken off their chains and come up upon the
earth; When Atheism, Profaneness and all manner of Wickedness grow impudent
and barefaced; when men do not only neglect Religion, but reproach and contemn
it. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, shall not my soul be
(...). 5. 9, 29.
avenged on such a Nation as this? God did forbear his People of Judah beyond
what they could have expected, waiting for their amendment; but when they added
impudence to their obstinacy, when they made sport with the Prophets, and
turned their threatenings into songs of mirth and drollery, then the peremptory
decree came forth, and there was no hopes to escape. But they mocked the hro.
16.
messengers of God and despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against his People, till there was no remedy. There
still seemed to be some hopes left till they came to this temper. But when they
burlesqued the Prophet Jeremiahs words, and turned the expressions he used into
ridicule, Jer. 23. 34, 36.
crying in contempt, The burden of the Lord, which is called perverting the
words of the living God: when they turned Ezekiels words into pleasant songs,
Ezekiel. 33. 31. In canticum oris sui vertunt illos. Vul. Lat.
and made sport with Gods Judgments, no wonder he was so highly provoked. For
there can be no worse symptom to a people, than to laugh at the only means to
cure them; and if this once grow common, it must needs make their condition
desperate. For then it comes to Gods turn to mock and laugh too; Because I have
called and ye have refused, Pro. 1. 24.
I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught
all my Counsel, and would have none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your
calamity, 25. 26.
and mock when your fear comes. Woe be unto that people whom the Almighty takes
pleasure in punishing.

3. When there is an universal degeneracy of all ranks and conditions of men. I
do not mean such as is common to humane nature, but from the particular virtues
of their Ancestors, or a common practice of those vices which do most
frequently draw down the judgments of God, and make him to have a controversy
with a Land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, Hos. 4. 2, 3.
and committing Adultery, they braak out, and blood touches blood, therefore
shall the Land mourn. It was a strange degree of corruption the People of
Jerusalem were fallen to before God led them into Captivity; when the Prophet
Jeremiah used those expressions to them, Run ye to and fro in the streets of
Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1.
and see now and know, and seek in the broad places there of, if ye can find a
man, if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I
will pardon it. Could there ever be a fairer or kinder offer than this? But as
Isaiah expresses it, the whole head was Is. 1. 5, 6.
sick, and the heart faint; from the sole of the foot even unto the head there
is no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. It seems
a very strange passage in the Law of Leprosy, that if the Leprosy Lev. 13.
12, 13, 14.
covered all the flesh, the person was to be pronounced clean; but if any raw
flesh appeared, he was unclean: which it is very hard to understand, unless it
were that the power of infection was then gone. Such a state the People of
Jerusalem seemed to have been in, there was no room for infection left, the
plague of Leprosy had so over run them, that there was no sound part left in
the whole body.

Thus I have considered the influence which doing wickedly has upon the ruin
of a Nation, it remains now that I make Application of this to our own case.

We have been a People that have received wonderful Mercies and many signal
Deliverances from Gods hand. He has placed us in a rich and fruitful Land; and
has furnished us with so great plenty, that even that has been thought our
burden; has blessed us with such an increase of Trade, that our Merchants far
exceed those of Tire both in Riches and Number. Our Ships of Trade are like a
Valley of Cedars when they lie at home; and when they are abroad, they compass
the earth, and make the riches of the East and West Indies to meet in our
Streets. And since like the Prince of Tire, our seat is in the midst of the
Seas, God has thereby secured us from such sudden inroads and invasions of
foreign Enemies as many of our Neighbor Countries do groan under at this day:
where the miseries of War are felt before they are seen; and those who thought
themselves at ease and quiet, may be surprised in their Beds, and before they
are aware of it may themselves, and Families, and Goods, and Houses and Country
be all burnt and consumed together. But God has compassed us about with a deep
Sea and a large Channel, and given us such a powerful Navy as may be both a
Defense at home and a Terror abroad.

As to our Civil Constitution, if we consider the admirable Temper of our
Government, the Justice and Wisdom of our Laws, and the greatness of our
Liberties, we have no reason to envy the condition of any people upon earth.
And after all our intestine broils and confusions which our sins had brought
upon us, God was pleased in a most surprising manner, without War or bloodshed,
to our great satisfaction and the amazement of the world, to restore our
Sovereign to his Throne, our Church and People to their just Rights and
Liberties. And while our Neighbor Nations have lamentably suffered under all
the dismal effects of a lasting War, he has enlarged our Trade, continued our
Peace, and thereby increased our prosperity, after we had smarted under a
dreadful Fire and a raging Pestilence. Thus far all things tend still to make
us a happy Nation, if we did know and value our own happiness.

But that which above all other things should make us so, has been the great
Occasion of our Trouble, and is still of our Fears, and that is Religion. And
yet in this respect we have advantages above any other Nation in the Christian
World, having a Church reformed with so much Wisdom and Moderation as to avoid
the dangerous extremes on both sides. But even this has enraged our
Adversaries of the Roman Church, and made them the more restless to destroy it;
and to stick at no means which they thought might tend to its ruin. O Blessed
Jesus! that ever thy Holy Name should be assumed by Traitors and Murderers. or
that the promoting thy true Religion should be made the color for the most
wicked practices!

Not that the pure and peaceable Religion of Jesus Christ does sour and
imbitter the Spirits of Men toward each other, or dispose them to malice,
hatred, revenge and cruelty (some of the worst passions of humane nature) or to
the accomplishing their own ends by secret conspiracies and open violence, by
treachery and falsehood, by Murders and Assasinations, either on the Ministers
of Justice, or on the most merciful and best natured of Kings. But Be
astonished O ye Heavens, and tremble O Earth, that have brought forth such a
Generation of Vipers who are continually making their way through the Bowels of
their Mother, and as we have reason to believe have designed to destroy the
Father of their Country. If these be the kind embraces of one that pretends to
be the Mother Church, if this be the paternal affection of the Holy Father at
Rome, if this indeed be zeal for the Catholic Cause, if this be the way to
reconcile us to their Communion, have we not great reason to be fond of
returning into the Bosom of such a Church which may strangle us as soon as it
gets us within her Arms? But there are some whose concernment it is, to make
men believe there was no such dangerous plot intended; I meddle not with that
evidence which lies before you, but there is one notorious circumstance obvious
to all persons, and sufficient to convince any, which is the horrid Murder
actually committed on one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, in cold blood,
with great contrivance and deliberation. Do men imbrue their hands in blood for
nothing? Why no other Person, why at such a time, why in such a manner? There
was a Reason for all this; he had taken the examinations; he knew too much to
be suffered to live, and they hoped by his death to stifle his evidence, and to
affrighten others from searching too far; and they managed that matter so, as
though they had a mind to convince the World, they had no other end in taking
away his life, but to prevent a further Discovery. And they whom his Death does
not convince, neither would they be convinced, though he should rise again from
the Dead.

God forbid that we should charge such barbarous cruelties, such wicked
conspiracies, such horrid designs on all who live in the Communion of that
Church; but we must distinguish between the seduced party who are not thought
fit to be trusted with such things, for fear their Consciences check at them,
and their good nature disclose them; and the busy Active Faction, who are
always restless and designing, and act by such Maxims of Morality as the more
sober and modest Heathens would abhor. What has this Party of men been doing
among us this last hundred of years and more, but plotting conspiracies,
inflaming our differences, betraying our liberties, heightning our discontents,
and in short, undermining the Foundatior s both of our Government and Religion?
And shall such men always triumph that they are too hard for our Laws? and
that like the Canaanites and Jebusites to the Children of Israel, they will
still be as scourges in ^^r sides, and thorns in our eyes? If these things must
be, I hope Jos. 23. 13.
God designs it not to destroy us at last by them, but I am sure it does prove
and try us, whether we will hearken to the Commandments of the Lord, or to the
vain Traditions of Men.

God knows, I speak not these things out of any malice or ill will to the
Persons of any, for, that I may use St. Paul's words, My hearts desire and
prayer to God for them all is, that they might be saved. And although I cannot
bear them witness, yet my hopes are some even of these may think they have a
zeal for God in all this; but we are sure it is not according to knowledge.
Such a blind zeal as the Jews had, who when they killed the Apostles, thought
they did God good service. But it is so furious, so inhumane, so unchristian a
zeal, that it is charity to them, as well as necessary care of our own safety,
to keep them from a capacity of doing themselves and others mischief.

But before I conclude, the Text suggests to us three things, very pertinent to
the duty of this Day; which I shall briefly recommend to your consideration.

1. Matter of humiliation for our sins, as they have an influence upon the
Nations suffering.

2. Matter of Advice, Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, and with all
your heart.

3. Matter of encouragement, For, consider, what great things he has done for
you.

1. Matter of Humiliation for our sins. Which have been many and great, and
aggravated by all the Mercies and Deliverances which God has vouchsafed to us;
and therefore he may be justly provoked to punish us proportionably to the
measures of our ingratitude and disobedience. Let us lay our hands upon our
hearts this day, and seriously consider what requital we have made to the Lord
for all the benefits he has bestowed upon us? For the Light of his Truth, the
Purity of his Worship, the Power of his Grace, the frequency of his Sacraments,
the influences of his Spirit, and the continuance hitherto of our established
Religion, in spite of all opposition whatsoever. But have we not been guilty of
too much slighting that Truth, neglecting that Worship, resisting that Grace,
contemning those Sacraments, quenching that Spirit; and of too great coldness
and indifferency about matters of Religion? I do not fear that ever the Church
of Rome should prevail among us by strength of Reason, or force of Argument,
with all its specious colors and pretenses, unless it be among those who
understand neither one, nor the other Religion; but if men be loose in their
principles, and unconcerned about Religion in general, there will not be
courage and constancy enough to keep it out. I do much more fear Popery coming
in at the backdoor of Atheism and Profaneness; than under all its false and
deceitful pretenses of Universality and Infallibility. And this those have been
aware of, who have been so industriously sowing among us the seeds of
Irreligion; knowing, that if men be unconcerned as to all Religion, they will
never have the courage to oppose any; but will be sure to close with the
prevailing side. Next to this, I know no greater advantage that they take
against us, than from the unnatural heats and unchristian divisions which have
been among us. If men were wise they would consider, at least in this our day,
the things which do belong to our Peace. How can men answer it at the great
day, if in such a critical time as this is, they stand upon little niceties and
punctilios of Honor rather than Conscience, or upon keep up the interests of
their several Parties, and do not those things which themselves think they
lawfully may do toward an Union with us? I pray God, the continuance of these
breaches may not look like an argument of Divine Infatuation upon us. But what
can we say to that looseness and debauchery of manners, to that riot and
luxury, to that wantonness and profaneness, to that fashion of customary
swearing, and Atheistick Drollery, which have been so much and so justly
complained of among us? I hope there are many thousands at this day, in
England, whose souls abhor the abominations that are committed, and who mourn
in secret for them, and therefore our case may not be so desperate as that of
Jerusalem was. May we all this day so heartily repent of all these follies and
impieties, that the Cause of our Fears which our sins give us being removed, we
may hearken

(2.) To the matter of Advice here given, Only to fear the Lord and to serve
him in Truth, and with all our heart.

As though Samuel had said, Your hearts stand trembling still at the fear of
Gods judgments, when he does but lift up his voice in the Thunder, and show
his Power in the Rain; I will tell you, how your hearts may be at ease and
quiet from the fear of evil: Be faithful to God, maintain and practice the true
Religion, sincerely, diligently, constantly, universally, and never doubt his
protection of you, let your enemies be never so many, or your dangers never so
great. Nothing exposes men more to the Wrath and Vengeance of God, nor provokes
him more to leave a People to their own counsels, than false-heartedness in
Religion and Hypocrisy do. For the Hypocrite thinks to put a trick upon God
Almighty; and while he seems to carry it fair toward him, he is dealing
underhand for his own security another way: And God is then concerned in honor
to let the world see he will not be mocked; for he knows how to take the crafty
in their own devices; and very often brings to naught the most politic fetches
of self-designing men. For when men seek themselves and not the honor of God
or Religion, but are ready to betray what ought to be dearer than their lives,
for some mean and private interests of their own, they are oft-times so far
from compassing their ends, that they become the Scorn and Reproach of men. But
if men preserve their integrity, and hold fast to the thing that is right, they
preserve their honor, even among their enemies, and either escape troubles, or
have the comfort of a good Conscience under them, and however things happen to
them for a while, they are sure to have peace at the last

3. Lastly, Here is matter of encouragement. For consider what great things he
has done for you. When Jacob was sent into Egypt, and your Fathers cried unto
the Lord, then the Lord sent Moses and Aaron which v. 8.
brought our Fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place. When
their sins had brought them into great distresses afterward, and they cried
unto the Lord and confessed their sins, then the Lord raised up 9.
Jerubbaal and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and 10.
delivered you out of the hand of your enemies ^n every 11.
side, and you dwelled safe. Now consider, the same God who did those things,
can do as great for you still; for his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness are the
same, and therefore you have the greatest reason to put your trust in him at
all times, since he never for sakes them that seek him. Ps. 9. 10.


Blessed be God that we have this day a farther argument for us to fear and
serve him in truth, and with all our heart, by considering what great things he
has done for us. Many deliverances has he wrought for us time after time, for
which we ought still to be thankful, since we yet enjoy the benefit of them.
But the memory of former deliverances was almost worn out with many, and some
began to question whether such holy and innocent men as the Fathers of the
Society could be guilty of such horrid conspiracies; some were so persuaded of
their Loyalty, that the Vipers seemed to have changed their natures and to have
lost their teeth, and to be a very soft and innocent kind of Creatures. In
so much, that they were hardly brought to believe there could be a plot among
them, especially of so horrid a nature as this appears more and more to have
been, when such a viperous brood were suffered not only to lie quiet in the
Shade, but to sport themselves in the Sun, and to enjoy the freedom of their
own retreats. But God does bring to light the hidden things of darkness by such
ways as show his Providence, more than our prudence and foresight, that while
we have the comfort, he alone may have the glory of our deliverance. But yet
methinks we stand as it were upon the brink of a mighty Precipice, which is so
full of horror, that we tremble to look down from it; we are at present held up
by a strong hand, but as by one single thread, and can we then think our selves
secure from so great a danger?

Blessed be God for that Unanimity, that Zeal, that Courage, that Constancy You
have hitherto showed in the maintenance of our Church and Religion; but there
is so much yet to be done for a Firm Establishment of it to all Generations
(which now by his Majesty's Gracious Favor is put into Your hands) as calls
for all our Prayers, and your particular Care, lest if this opportunity be let
slip, You never have such another.

This seems to be an Honor reserved for this Parliament, as the Crown and
Glory of all your endeavors for the Public Good. Go on then, to raise up this
Monument to your Eternal Fame. This will not only make you beloved and esteemed
by the present Age, but this will endear your Memories to Posterity, and make
Ages to come rise up and call this a Happy Session.

But lest our sins should yet hinder us from so great a Blessing, We have great
reason to humble our selves before God this day, to bewail those sins which may
yet provoke him to punish us, and by Fasting and Prayer to implore his Mercy;
that he would go on to preserve his Majesty's Person from all violent attempts,
our Church and Religion from all the designs of its enemies, and deliver us all
from Unreasonable and Wicked Men.

FINIS.

