THE LOYAL SPEECH OF Sir Richard Stott RECORDER of the Ancient TOWN of BARWICK
upon TWEED.
SPOKEN To His Royal Highness the Duke of YORK, upon his Entrance into Barwick.
May it please your Royal Highness,
WE humbly and heartily congratulate your coming to this poor but Ancient Town,
a place more considerable for its situation then its fortune, yet happier now
then in former times when it was made a Butt for the two Kingdoms to shoot at:
Without our Walls (Great Sir) you may see those Hills, where that Royal blood
which runs (happily united) in your Princely veins, whilst it was divided
between your English and Scottish Ancestors, did contend for Empire and for
glory; and it is our happiness that this place which was once the utmost limits
of two great Kingdoms, is now the middle of our Sovereigns Dominions: We of
this Corporation were the most ungrateful of Subjects, and the unworthiest of
men, if we did not pay all Duty and Obeysanee to your Princely Person. Your
Royal Grandfather (whose Sacred Name you bear) was our Founder; He gave us
not only our Privileges (which are great) but our subsistence which supports
us: And he tells us plainly in his most munificent Charter, that he did it to
oblige us to pay the greater Duty and Loyalty to him, and his Posterity for
ever: Your Royal Father (the Mirror of Kings) was our Benefactor, and our
Gracious Sovereign has largely extended his Bounty to us, and we know that we
cannot better express our Duty and Loyalty to him, then in giving Testimony of
it to you (Great Sir) his only Brother. We have yet powerful motives from your
self: Your Noble and Heroic Actions have been the wonder of Europe, nor can
any Loyal heart forget how boldly and prodigally you ventured your Life for
the Honor and Prosperity of his Majesty and these Kingdoms, when in the Year
(63.) by the blessing of God upon your incomparable Valor and Conduct, you
overthrew and vanquished the Greatest Fleet that ever the Sea bore: Then it was
that you made Neptunes Trident bow and pay homage to the English Scepter. Let
the Ancient Romans tell us of their great Sea Fight at Actium, between Augustus
and Mark Anthony. Let our own Histories relate the famous Victory of your
Glorious Progenitor King Edward the 3. at Scluse. Let the Modern Histories of
Europe declare that Celebrated Victory of Don John of Austria at the Battle of
Lepanto, those must all strike sail, and veil to your Glorious Triumph. If we
search the Annals of Former Ages, we can find no thing like it; and it is more
then probable that the Times to come may not produce a Parallel. What shall we
then render to you (Great Prince) for such inimitable Actions and Merits? All
we can say is, that next after our Prayers for the long Life and Happy Reign of
our most Gracious Sovereign, we ardently wish all increase of Honor, Renown,
and Happiness to the Glorious JAMES his most Princely Brother.

FINIS.

