A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, March 7. 1678/9.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty.

Printed by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1679.

MATTHEW. X. 16. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.


IN the beginning of this Chapter we read of one of the greatest and most
improbable designs that ever was, viz. Christ's sending out his twelve Apostles
to convert and to reform the World. For, although the occasion of their first
Mission, was to prepare the Jewish Nation for entertaining the doctrine of the
Messiah, and therefore they are commanded to go to the lost sheep of the House
of Israel; and as they went to preach; saying, The v(...) v. 7
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; yet our Savior in his following discourse
mentions several things which cannot be applied to their first going abroad;
particularly, that which relates to their hard usage and bad entertainment from
the world; which we do not find they met with from the Jews upon this general
message, but rather the contrary: for which cause he bids them to provide
nothing for v. 9, 10, 11.
themselves, foreseeing that in all places there would be some that would be
ready to receive them kindly; and when the Seventy Disciples were sent upon a
like errand, they returned with joy, which such Luke 10. 17.
young beginners would hardly have done, if they had met with such sharp
persecutions then, which Christ here foretells his Apostles should suffer for
preaching the Gospel. Either therefore we must say that St. Matthew puts things
together by way of Common Place, as he seems to do the Miracles and Parables of
our Savior, without pursuing the Order of time, as S. Luke does, and so upon
occasion of Christ's sending out his Apostles sets down all that relates to
their Mission, although delivered at several times; or else that Christ himself
did now at first acquaint them with all the difficulties that should attend
their employment in preaching the Gospel to the world, and consequently thought
it necessary to give them at once their full instructions for their discharge
of so great a trust, and due behavior under so hard a service. A trust indeed
so great, a service so hard as to require the Wisdom of an Angel, and the
Innocence of Adam in Paradise; so many were the difficulties, so powerful were
the prejudices, so dangerous were the snares and temptations, which in all
places did hinder the success of so great a Work. We are apt to admire and
applaud the mighty conquests which men do make over some small parts of the
world, by the subtilty of their Wit, or by the force of their Arms, or by the
vastness of their Treasure; but in all these cases, there is nothing wonderful;
for the causes being supposed, there is at least a great probability the event
should follow: But for twelve inconsiderable persons, as to all outward
circumstances, without craft, without arms, without money, to undertake the
conquest of the world, by changing not only men's opinions as to Religion, but
which is far more uneasy, the hearts and lives of men; seems at first
appearance so unlikely a thing, that though none but very wise men could hope
to manage it, yet none who were thought so would ever undertake it. Yet no less
than this was the work which Christ sent abroad his twelve Apostles upon; and
he tells them, very little to their comfort, what hardship they were like to
meet with, to be betrayed by friends, persecuted by enemies v. 21, 22. 17.
and hated of all men for his names sake: yea so great would the rage and
malice and cruelty of men be against them, that he says in the beginning of
this verse, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves. What! to
be destroyed and devoured by them? No, but to turn those very Wolves into
sheep. But what powerful charms must they use to secure themselves from present
danger, and to work such mighty change? no other than those which our Savior
recommends in the words of the Text, Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and
harmless as Doves. Not as though we were to search all the properties of
Serpents and Doves to understand the meaning of these words, and to determine
the truth or falsehood of all the relations that are made concerning both of
them; but as Solomon chose the Ant for an example of diligence, so our Savior
designing to join Wisdom and Innocence together proposes the Serpent for one
and the Dove for the other; to let his Disciples understand that he allows them
so much Wisdom as is consistent with innocence, and persuades them to no more
simplicity than is consistent with Wisdom. For Wisdom without Innocence turns
into craft and cunning; and Simplicity without Wisdom is mere folly.

But the great difficulty lies in the joining these two together. For as the
world goes and is like to do, men will be apt to say, How can those be as wise
as Serpents, who must be as harmless as Doves? If all the world were agreed in
the practice of innocence, and men did not fare the worse for it, it might pass
for wisdom; but when they have to deal with others who will use all the Wisdom
of the Serpent, and are so far from being harmless as Doves, that they will
take all the advantages that men's innocence and simplicity gives them, it seems
hard to reconcile these two together. To what purpose, may some say, are men's
eyes bid to be open, when their hands are tied up? Had they not better be
without the Serpents sagacity and quickness of sight, than espy their dangers,
and not use the most likely means to prevent them? What does the simplicity of
the Dove signify, but to make them a more easy quarry for the birds of prey?
Simplicity, and innocence, and patience, which our Savior recommends under the
phrase of being harmless as Doves, are good lessons for another world, but what
do they signify in this, which is made up of nothing but artifice and fraud,
and wherein the great art and business of life seems to be overreaching and
deceiving one another? Those only seem to have the true subtilty of the Serpent
who can turn and wind themselves every way as makes most for their advantage;
Who by their soft and easy motions, by their artificial glidings and
insinuations get an interest great enough to mischief while they watch for an
opportunity to do it. As the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, 2 Cor.
11. 3.
i. e. say the Fathers by the familiarity and easiness Ramirez de Prado
Pentecont. c. 1.
of access which he had, playing as some fancy, about the Neck and Arms of Eve
in the state of Innocence. Those have the true subtilty of the Serpent who
creep into Houses and understand the secrets of persons and families; and so
know how to address, and how to keep in awe: who seem as harmless as Doves till
they have a fair opportunity of instilling their poison, and do the greater
mischief by being thought so innocent. Who have the dangerous teeth and the
double tongue, who can deny the Truth without lying, and forswear themselves
without perjury; who would sanctify the greatest villainies by their good
intentions; and when they are ravenous as Wolves, and as cruel as Vultures,
would yet be thought as harmless as Doves, or as innocent as a Child new born.

What now can simplicity and innocence, and meekness, and patience signify
against all this serpentine subtilty? And if you take away from the Serpent his
artificial motion and his poison, you leave him weak and contemptible, ready to
be trampled on by every passenger, having nothing to defend himself but his
skin and eye sight. And if you do allow his most natural properties, the
innocence of the Dove is a very unequal match for him if they be opposed, and
seem of so different natures that they can hardly be joined together in the
same subject.

And yet notwithstanding all these objections, it was certainly the design of
our Savior in these words,

1. To recommend the conjunction and union of these two to his disciples, being
wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.

2. To do it chiefly upon this consideration, that this would be the best means
to promote his Religion against all the arts and designs of men, as well as the
best security for themselves.

And therefore in the prosecuting this subject I shall endeavor these two
things,

1. To show wherein the conjunction of these two does consist. 2. That this is
the best means to promote the Christian Religion against all the mischievous
arts and devices of men.
1. Wherein the conjunction of these two does consist. It is no hard matter to
tell men how they may be wise as Serpents, viz. by foresight and caution, so as
to discern and prevent unnecessary dangers; not to run themselves foolishly and
vainly upon needless troubles, nor to draw persecutions upon themselves, when
they can decently and lawfully avoid them; not to give advantages to their
enemies by their weakness and indiscretion, nor a just occasion of offense to
any; but in all lawful things to endeavor to gain upon them, and by all acts
of kindness and charity to recommend our Religion to them. Neither is it hard
to tell wherein we must appear to be harmless as Doves, viz. by simplicity and
integrity of mind, by meekness and patience, by forgiving injuries, and bearing
persecutions as becomes Christians, by a holy, innocent, and unblameable
conversation: but the difficulty still lies in the conjunction and mixture of
both these; which as S. Chrysostom observes, is the thing which Christ Chrysostom.
in loc.
especially aims at, so as to make one virtue arise from both of them; as Greg.
Nazianzen said of Greg. Nazian. orat. 19.
his Father, that he neither suffered the Wisdom of the Serpent to degenerate
into cunning, nor the innocence of the Dove into indiscretion, but made up one
complete kind of virtue from the mixture of both together; and that I suppose
lies in these things, (1.) Integrity of Mind, (2.) Ingenuity, or fairness of
behavior; (3.) Meekness and Patience: and in the due practice of these
consists that prudent Simplicity which results from these two, being wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Which I shall make appear by showing, that men
cannot be harmless as Doves without them; and that they are so far from being
inconsistent with being wise as Serpents, that a great part of wisdom lies in
them.

1. Integrity of Mind; which is opposed to falseness and hypocrisy; and
therefore S. Paul joins simplicity and Godly sincerity together. We read of
some in Scripture who are said to have a double heart, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Psalm. 12.
2. Jam. 4. 8.
as well as a double tongue: they are (...), says S. James, men with two
Souls, one for God and another for the world; or rather none at all for God,
(since he must have all or none) but one to appearance and another in reality,
having quite other thoughts, intentions and designs than they make the world
believe. Some tell us that the Isid. Orig. l. 12. c. 4.
Serpent has no forked tongue, but through the quickness of its motion, and
suddenness of its vibration it appears to be so; men have but one heart and
mind, but they may use such artificial motions and sudden turnings, as to
appear to have more. But this is contrary to that integrity and simplicity
which Christ requires, and the Scripture every where so much extols, as to
place men's perfection and wisdom in it. Noah was said to be a Genesis 6. 9.
just man and perfect in his Generations, because he maintained his integrity
in a very corrupt and degenerate Age. Job is said to be a man perfect and Job
1. 1.
upright, one that fears God and escheweth evil: and in another place of Job,
the perfect and the wicked are 9. 22.
opposed: he destroys the perfect and the wicked; i. e. the good and the bad.
Mark the perfect man and behold Psalm. 37. 37.
the upright, says the Psalmist. The righteousness Prove. 11. 5.
of the perfect shall direct his way, says Solomon; but the wicked shall fall
by his own wickedness; and in the next words; The righteousness of the upright
shall deliver 6.
them, but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness. And if
Solomon's word may be taken, a man's integrity is his greatest wisdom; for
righteousness, 13. 6.
says he, keeps him that is upright in the way; but wickedness overthrows
the sinner. He that walks 10. 9.
uprightly, walks surely; but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.
And therefore he concludes that a man of understanding will walk uprightly. 15.
21.


All this seems a strange Paradox, and to come from such as are not versed in
business, nor acquainted with affairs of the world, or from those who are
resolved to maintain their hypothesis, though against the common sense of
mankind, as the Stoics of old who made their Wise man beautiful though never
so deformed, rich though ready to starve for poverty, and a Prince though sold
for a slave; just thus does it seem to some men to talk of the consistency of
Wisdom and Simplicity together, or to suppose those take the most prudent care
of their own interest, who are tied up to the strict rules of downright
honesty, and are resolved with Job to hold fast their integrity.

But that there is nothing absurd or unreasonable in this supposition, nothing
but what is true, and may be justified by the common sense and experience of
mankind will appear by these considerations.

1. That is the truest Wisdom of a man which does most conduce to the happiness
of life. For Wisdom as it refers to action lies in the proposal of a right end,
and the choice of the most proper means to attain it. Which end does not refer
to any one part of a man's life, but to the whole as taken together. He
therefore only deserves the name of a Wise Man, not that considers how to be
rich and great when he is poor and mean, nor how to be well when he is sick,
nor how to escape a present danger, nor how to compass a particular design; but
he that considers the whole course of his life together, and what is fit for
him to make the end of it, and by what means he may best enjoy the happiness of
it. I confess it is one great part of a wise man never to propose too much
happiness to himself here; for whoever does so, is sure to find himself
deceived, and consequently is so much more miserable as he fails in his
greatest expectations. But since God did not make men on purpose to be
miserable, since there is a great difference as to men's conditions, since that
difference depends very much on their own choice, there is a great deal of
reason to place true wisdom in the choice of those things which tend most to
the comfort and happiness of life.

2. That which gives a man the greatest satisfaction in what he does, and
either prevents or lessens or makes him more easily bear the troubles of life,
does the most conduce to the happiness of it. It was a bold saying of Epicurus,
That it is more d^sirable to be miserable by acting according to reason, than
to be happy in going against it; and I cannot tell how it can well agree with
his notion of felicity: but it is a certain truth, that in the consideration of
happiness, the satisfaction of a man's own mind does weigh down all the external
accidents of life. For, suppose a man to have riches and honors as great as
Ahoshuerus bestowed on his highest favorite Haman; yet by his sad instance we
find that a small discontent when the mind suffers it to increase and to spread
its venom, does so weaken the power of reason, disorder the passions, make a
man's life so uneasy to him, as to precipitate him from the height of his
fortune into the depth of ruin. But on the other side if we suppose a man to
be always pleased with his condition, to enjoy an even and quiet mind in every
state, being neither lifted up with prosperity, nor cast down with adversity,
he is really happy in comparison with the other. It is a mere speculation to
discourse of any complete happiness in this world; but that which does either
lessen the number, or abate the weight, or take off the malignity of the
troubles of life, does contribute very much to that degree of happiness which
may be expected here.

3. The integrity and simplicity of a man's mind does all this. (1.) It gives
the greatest satisfaction to a man's own mind. For although it be impossible for
a man not to be liable to error and mistake, yet if he does mistake with an
innocent mind, he has the comfort of his innocence when he thinks himself
bound to correct his error. But if a man prevaricates with himself and acts
against the sense of his own mind, though his conscience did not judge aright
at that time, yet the goodness of the bare act with respect to the rule, will
not prevent the sting that follows the want of inward integrity in doing it.
The backslider in heart, says Solomon, shall be filled Pro. 1^. 1^.
with his own ways, but a good man shall be satisfied from himself. The doing
just and worthy and generous things without any finister ends and designs,
leaves a most agreeable pleasure to the mind, like that of a constant health
which is better felt than expressed. When a man applies his mind to the
knowledge of his duty, and when he does understand it, (as it is not hard for
an honest mind to do, for as the Oracle answered the Servant Clem. Alex. Str. 4.
who desired to know how he might please his Master, If you will seek it, you
will be sure to find it,) sets himself with a firm resolution to pursue it,
though the rain falls, and the floods arise, and the winds blow on every side
of him, yet he enjoys peace and quiet within, notwithstanding all the noise and
blustering abroad; and is sure to hold out after all, because he is founded
upon a rock. But take one that endeavors to blind, or corrupt or master his
conscience, to make it serve some mean end or design; what uneasy reflections
has he upon himself, what perplexing thoughts, what tormenting fears, what
suspicions and jealousies do disturb his imagination and rack his mind? what
art and pains does such a one take to be believed honest and sincere? and so
much the more, because he does not believe himself: He fears still he has not
given satisfaction enough, and by overdoing it, is the more suspected. It is a
very unsatisfactory employment that man has who undertakes to persuade others
of the truth of that which himself at the same time knows to be false; for he
is not convinced by his own arguments, and therefore despises those that are,
and is afraid of those that seem to be; either he thinks them fools for
believing him, or that they only flatter and seem to believe when they do not;
and then he thinks his arts are understood and his credit lost, and fears while
he goes about to impose upon others, they may do the same by him. So that
unless he could see into the hearts of men, (which would be no very comfortable
sight to him) all his craft and subtilty must leave him under perplexity and
continual fear. But suppose that through overofficiousness he happens to take
some false step, and so fall into the disfavour of those whom above all he
desired to please; how miserable is that man's condition when he finds himself
forsaken of God, despised by men, and without any peace or contentment within?
(2.) Because integrity does more become a man, and does really promote his
interest in the World. It is the saying of Dio Chrysostom an Heathen Orator,
that Simplicity and Truth is a great and wise thing; but Cunning and Deceit is
foolish Dle Ch^rs. de regn. or. 1. p. 6.
and mean; For, says he, observe the beasts, the more courage and spirit they
have, the less art and subtilty they use; but the more timorous and ignoble
they are, the more false and d^ceitful. True Wisdom and Greatness of mind
raises a man above the need of using little tricks and devices. Sincerity and
honesty carries one through many difficulties which all the arts he can invent
would never help him through. For nothing does a man more real mischief in the
world than to be suspected for too much craft; because every one stands upon
his guard against him, and suspects plots and designs where there are none
intended; insomuch that though he speaks with all the sincerity that is
possible, yet nothing he says can be believed. And is this any part of true
Wisdom to lose reputation, upon which men's power and interest so much depends?
From hence the most artificial men have found it necessary to put on a guise of
simplicity and plainness, and make greatest protestations of their honesty when
they most lie in wait to deceive. If then the reputation of integrity be so
necessary, the main point to be considered as to wisdom is this, whether such
reputation can be sooner gained and longer held by mere pretending to
simplicity, or by the practice of it? He that only pretends to it, must act
otherwise than he designs, and yet is concerned to make others believe he does
not: but in this he puts a force and constraint upon himself which is uneasy
to any man, and he lets the vizard fall off sometimes when it is more observed
than he thinks, and then his countenance is taken at the greatest disadvantage,
and this is given out for the only true Copy. And while he keeps it on; it is a
hard matter to deceive all eyes; for it may be some bystanders have practiced
the same arts themselves, and they know the make and the fashion, and all the
several strings which help to keep it from falling off: and when the suspicion
grows strong, the laying aside the disguise will not be able to give
satisfaction. But he that walks uprigh(...) and Psalm. 15. 2.
works righteousness, and speaks the truth in hi(...)t, as the Psalmist
describes the practice of integrity, may possibly meet with such as will be
ready to condemn him for hypocrisy at first; but when they find he keeps to a
certain rule, and pursues honest designs, without any great regard to the
opinion which others entertain concerning him; then all that know him cannot
but esteem and value him; his friends love him, and his enemies stand in awe of
him. The path of the just, says Prove. 4. 18.
the Wise man, is as the shining light which shines more and more unto the
perfect day. As the day begins with obscurity and a great mixture of darkness,
till by quick and silent motions the light overcomes the mists and vapors of
the night, and not only spreads its beams upon the tops of the Mountains, but
darts them into the deepest and most shady Valleys: thus simplicity and
integrity may at first appearing look dark and suspicious, till by degrees it
breaks through the clouds of envy and detraction, and then shines with a
greater glory. Thus the Christian Simplicity was despised and reproached as
folly and obstinacy, and many hard censures and sharp persecutions did men
undergo for the sake of it for a long time, (as the most durable Kingdoms have
had the sharpest pangs and been the longest in the birth:) but at last
persecuted and despised innocence prevailed over all the craft and power of the
World. It was then the great glory of Christians that their enemies could
reproach them for nothing but their Religion; that they were in all other
things honest and good men, only they were Christians: and then true Religion
is most like to prevail in the world, when men's other virtues commend their
Religion, and not when zeal for their Religion is their only virtue. When
righteousness, and peace, and humility, and charity, and temperance, and
patience, and a constant integrity make men enquire after a Religion which
produces such fruits as these are, then it will appear that Apostles and
preachers of Religion are then wise as Serpents as to the promoting the honor
of their Doctrine, when by the innocence and simplicity of their lives they are
harmless as Dove^.

(3.) But suppose that troubles and persecutions do arise, what becomes of the
harmless Doves then; they are soon taken and easily destroyed, when those who
are only wise as Serpents may see many ways to escape danger, which the
innocent Doves dare not follow them in; what wisdom then can there be in so
much simplicity as makes suffering unavoidable?

This is the hardest part of the case, but that which our Savior does here
suppose, when he says, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents, etc. So that, if we cannot make out
this to hold in respect of sufferings, we must yield this counsel or advice of
Christ to his Disciples to be defective as to the main occasion of it. To this
therefore I answer in these particulars;

1. Our Savior does allow the wisdom of prevention as to all unnecessary
dangers; for otherwise he would never have bid his Disciples be wise as
Serpents, but only be as quiet as Sheep and as harmless as Doves. God forbid
that Christian simplicity should be taken in so ill a sense as to hinder us
from a just and necessary care of our own safety: and not only for the
preservation of our selves but of our Religion too. When we have liberty and
opportunity to do it, it is being stupid as Sheep, and careless as the Ravens
of their young ones, and not being only harmless as Doves, to neglect the doing
it. In such a case it is a violation of the duty we owe to God and to
Posterity, if we do not use all lawful endeavors for the preservation of our
selves and our Religion from all the attempts of wicked and unreasonable men.
But in case storms do arise after all our care, Christ does not seem to forbid
his Disciples making use of a present shelter till the storm be blown over; But
when they persecute you in this City, flee to another Mat. 10. 23.
And some say, the likeness to Doves is recommended in regard that its safety
lies chiefly in the quickness of its flight. But our Savior neither imposes a
necessity of suffering in all cases, nor allows a liberty of flying upon every
apprehension of danger, but leaves this matter to be determined according to
circumstances, as makes most for Gods honor, and his Churches good: i e.
herein to be wise as Serpents and harmless as Doves; by not exposing themselves
to needless dangers when they may be avoided with a good conscience, nor
declining any necessary duty for the sake of any trouble which may follow upon
it. There were some in the Primitive Church who thought it unlawful in any case
to avoid persecution, and Tertullian pleads their cause with many plausible
reasons; saying, that persecution is designed on purpose for Tertul. de fug. c.
1. etc. c. 6.
trial by God himself; that the allowance for flying was peculiar to the
Apostles case, not to avoid persecution, but for the more speedy propagation of
the Gospel; and some of the Christians were so far from flying that they ran
upon persecution and seemed ambitious of Chrysostom. hom. 40. in Iuv. and Max.
Martyrdom. S. Chrysostom says, it was one of the reasons Julian gave why he
would not openly persecute Christianity; because he knew the Christians gloried
in being Martyrs; and he would not humor them so much as to spread his Nets to
catch such silly Doves, that never minded the danger they fell into. But the
Christian Church never approved rash and indiscreet suffering, as much as it
encouraged all Christians to patience and courage and perseverance; for they
required not only a just cause, but a necessary occasion of suffering, and
blamed those who hastened their own destruction; for they observe Clem. Alex.
S^r. 4. p. 481.
that Christ himself made use of prudent caution when he knew the Jews had
designed to put him to death; for it is said, from thence forward he Joh. 11.
54.
walked no more publicly among the Jews. When the storm seemed to threaten the
leaders of the Church in such a manner that by their withdrawing Orig. in Job.
Tom. 31.
the People might probably enjoy more quiet, and not want help enough to
perform the necessary Offices, even the Bishops were allowed to retire; and
upon this ground S. Cyprian and C^pr. ^p. 14 Athan. ac^^ga.
Athanasius justified themselves: but when the case is common, when the
necessities of the Church require the presence of their Pastors, then the good
Shepherd must lay down his life for the Sheep, as S. Augustine has resolved
this case in his Epistle to Honoratus. Aug cp. 1^0
So that this whole matter belongs to Christian prudence, which is then most
needful and fit to be used, when the resolution of the case depends upon
particular circumstances; so as not to shun any necessary duty for fear of
danger, nor to run upon any unnecessary trouble to show our courage.

2. Since no wisdom is great enough to prevent all troubles of life, that is
the greatest which makes them most easy to be endured. If the Wisdom of the
Serpent could extend so far as to avoid all the calamities that mankind is
subject to, it would have a mighty advantage over the simplicity of the Dove;
but since the most subtle contrivers cannot escape the common accidents of
life, but do frequently meet with more vexations and crosses than innocent and
undesigning men do, we are then to consider, since the burden must be born,
what will make it sit most easily upon our shoulders: And that which abates of
the weight, or adds to our strength, or supports us with the best hopes, is the
truest wisdom. And who is he that will harm you, says S. Peter, if ye be
followers 1 Pet. 3. 13.
of that which is good? i. e. innocence is the best security against trouble
which one can have in this World; but since the World is so bad as that the
best may suffer in it, and for being such, yet that ought not to trouble or
affright them; But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; 14.
and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. But should it not
trouble a man to suffer innocently? yes, with a respect to others, but as to
himself he may more justly be troubled if he suffered justly. For nothing makes
sufferings so heavy to be born as a guilty Conscience: that is a burden more
insupportable to an awakened mind than any outward affliction whatsoever. Judas
thought himself to be wise as a Serpent, not only in escaping the danger which
he saw Christ and his Disciples falling into by the combination of the Priests
and Scribes and Pharisees against them; but in ingratiating himself with them
and making a good bargain for his own advantage: but the want of a Dove-like
innocence marred his whole design; and filled his conscience with such horror
as to make him own his guilt, and put an end to his miserable life. Whereas the
other Apostles whose chief care was to preserve their innocence as to any
wilful sins, though they had too much of the fearfulness as well as the
simplicity of Doves, till the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them; yet they
held out in the midst of fears and dangers, and came at last to rejoice in
their sufferings. And S. Paul tells A^t. 5. 41.
us what the cause of it was, For our rejoicing is this, the 2 Cor. 1. 12.
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world. See here, not only what peace and serenity, but what rejoicing follows
an innocent mind, and the Testimony of a good conscience! when all the arts of
fleshly Wisdom will be found vain and useless, affording no satisfaction to a
man's mind, when he looks back upon all of them, then sincerity and integrity of
heart will give a man the most comfortable reflections, and fill him with the
most joyful expectations. This enables a man to look back without horror, to
look about him without shame, to look within without confusion, and to look
forward without despondency. So that as the straight line is the shortest of
any; so upon greatest consideration it will be found that the upright and
sincere man takes the nearest way to his own happiness.

II. Prudent Simplicity implies the practice of Ingenuity; which is such a
natural freedom in our words and actions, that men may thereby understand the
sincerity of our mind and intention. Not that men are bound to declare all they
know to every impertinent enquirer, which is simplicity without prudence; but
in all cases wherein men ought to declare their minds, to do it without fraud
and dissimulation; and in no case to design to overreach and deceive others.
This is that simplicity of Conversation which our Savior requires when he
says, let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, i. e. you ought to
converse Mat. 5. 37.
with so much sincerity, that your bare affirmation or denial may be
sufficient, this being the proper use of speech that men may understand each
others minds by their words: for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil,
i. e. the wickedness of mankind and that distrust and suspicion which is
occasioned by it, is the reason they are ever put to make use of oaths to make
their Testimony appear more credible. And therefore nothing but such necessity
can justify the use of them; Oaths and Wars being never lawful but when they
are necessary. Some understand M(...) al(...). m^. (...) 12. S^ct. (...). p. 98.
the reduplication of those words, yea, yea, nay, nay, after a more emphatical
manner; viz. that our words must not only agree with the truth of the thing,
but with the conception and sense of our minds; and so the greatest candor and
sincerity is commanded by them. Truth was described of old, sitting upon an
Adamant, Themist. orat. 3.
with garments white as snow, and a light in her hand, to intimate that
clearness and simplicity and firmness that does accompany it; such as was most
remarkable in the primitive Christians; who abhorred any thing that looked like
dissimulation and hypocrisy, especially in what concerned their Religion. In
this they were plain and open, hearty and sincere, neither exasperating their
enemies by needless provocations, nor using any artificial ways of compliance
for their own security When the casting some few grains of incense on the
altar, and pouring out wine before the Emperors statue might have saved their
lives, they chose rather to dye than to defile their consciences with that
impure and Idolatrous Worship. To be dismissed after summons to the tribunal
without compliance was a scandal, and raised Euscb. l. 8. c. 3.
suspicions of some secret assurances given; to be proclaimed to have
sacrificed though they had not, and not to contradict it was great infamy; To
procure a certificate of sacrificing though they did not; or to pay fees to the
Officers to be excused from doing it, made them a sort of libellati, although
their names were never entered in the Heathen Rolls, and they were forced to
undergo Rigalt. ad Cypr. cp. 81.
severe penance before they were restored to the communion of the Church. So
much simplicity and singleness of heart was then supposed necessary to the
Christian profession. No directing the intention, no secret reservation, no
absolution either before committing the fact or immediately upon confession of
it, were ever heard of or allowed in those days of Christian innocence and
simplicity. If the Heathen Officers sought after Christians, they neither lied
to them, Aug. d^ Mend. c. 1^
nor betrayed their Brethren; but would rather endure torments themselves, than
expose others to them; for which reason S. Augustine highly commends the
resolution of Firmus an African Bishop, who rather chose to be tortured himself
than discover a Christian committed to his care, who was sought after for no
other reason, but because he was a Christian; and the Heathen Emperor himself
was so pleased with it, that for his sake he forgave the other person and
suffered him to enjoy his liberty. When the Christians were summoned before the
Heathen Tribunals, they used no shifting tricks or evasions, they concealed no
part in their minds of what was necessary to make what they spoke to be true;
they did not first peremptorily deny what they knew to be true, and then back
such a denial with horrid oaths and dreadful imprecations upon themselves, and
after all think to justify the doing so by virtue of some secret reservation
in their own minds. Is this becoming the simplicity and ingenuity of
Christians? Such may possibly think themselves Wise as Serpents in so doing,
but I am sure they are far from being innocent as Doves. But are there any who
go under the name of Christians, who own and defend such practices? I think
indeed scarce any who went under the name of honest Heathens ever did it. For
they did not only require constancy and fidelity in oaths and promises, but
simplicity an^ sincerity both in the making and keeping (...) them. They
condemned the Romans wh(...)t to avoid their oath by a trick, and (...)ck
Cicer. de Offic. l. 1. ^t 3.
to the Carthaginians: they mig(...)e constancy of Regulus in observing the
words of his oath as to his return, although very capable of a mental
reservation; and if he did not promise the Carthaginians to persuade the Roman
Senate to the Peace, he behaved himself with great sincerity as well as
constancy. When the King of Persia thought by a trick to avoid the Eutych.
Alex. To. 2. p. 119.
oath he had made to one of his Neighbor Princes, viz. That he would not pass
such a stone which was set up as a Boundary between them, and he took up the
stone and caused it to be carried before his Army; his Counselors told him
they feared such deceit would never prosper with him, because as the Prince
sent him word, Covenants are to be understood according to the plain meaning of
the p. 123.
words, and not according to any secret reservation.

Since then the very Heathens disallowed such artifices and frauds, are there
any worse than Heathens that justify and maintain them? Is not this rather an
artifice and fraud of their Adversaries to render them odious? But even in this
respect we ought to be harmless as Doves, and therein lies a necessary part of
Christian Ingenuity, in not charging on others more than they are guilty of.

I shall therefore fairly represent the doctrine held in the Church of Rome
about these matters, and leave you to judge how far it is consistent with
Christian Simplicity.

There are some things wherein the Divines of the Roman Church are agreed, and
some things wherein they differ.

The things wherein they are agreed are these.

1. That an Officious lie is but a venial sin. This they do not stick to
declare to be the common opinion of all their Divines. Ex communi-omnium
sententia, says Azorius, A lie that hurts nobody, but is intended for the
good of others is no mortal sin; and herein Azor. Ins^it. Moral. par. (...). l.
13. c. 1. (...). 2. Re^inald. prax. l. 24. sect. 5. n. 13.
all are agreed, says Reginaldus; because say they, where there is no other
fault but the mere falsity, it is not of its own nature and kind any mortal
sin; for a lie of it self is a harmless thing, or at least, says Lessius, the
hurt is not great that it does, and it is no Less. de just^ pure, l. 2. c. ^7.
d^b. 6. n. 40.
great matter whether men be deceived or not, if they do not suffer much by it;
and from hence he concludes it to be venial in its own nature. It is true, they
say an officious lie may become a mortal sin by accident, when it is confirmed
by an oath, when it is too public and scandalous and used by those from whom
the people expects Truth, as Bishops and Preachers and Religious men, says
Sayr. Not even in Sayr. Cl^. Reg. l. 11. c. 3. (...). 1^. N^va^. Man^^ ^8
(...). 2. (...). ^
them, says Navarr, unless the scandal be great, or their consciences tell
them they are mortal sins; or some other circumstances make it so. If it be in
matter of judicature; although the thing be small, yet I think a lie a mortal
sin, says Cajetan, because men are then bound to speak truth. That reason is
of no force at all, say Soto and Navarr, for that circumstance alone does Soto
de rat. tezendi ^e^r^r. memb. 2. qu. (...). Nava^. (...) supr. Bassae. The^^.
Pract. (...). peccat. 1. (...). 3. 8. Bell. de omiss. great. and stat. peccati,
l. 1. c. 13
not alter the nature of the sin. So that if a man tells never so many lies,
provided he intend to hurt no body by them, they do not make one mortal sin.
For that is a fixed Rule among the Casicists, that an infinite number of venial
sins do not amount to one mortal; and consequently though they have obliquity
in them, yet they do not put a man out of the Favor of God. But upon these
principles what security have men to invent and spread abroad lies, provided
they are intended for a good end in their own opinion? What sincerity is to be
expected, when the confessing a truth may do them injury; and the telling a lie
may do them good? For even Cajetan himself makes that only Cajet. in 2. 2. q.
110. a^^. 4.
a pernicious lie, when a man designs to do mischief by it. They cry out upon
it as a great scandal for any of us to say, they think it lawful to lie for the
Catholic cause; and in truth they do not say so in words; for they still say,
a lie is unlawful for any end whatsoever; but here lies the subtilty of it;
They grant it in general to be a fault, but such a venial, such an
inconsiderable fault, if it be for a good end; and they have so many ways to
expiate the guilt of venial sins; that the difference is very little as to the
practice of it, from making it no sin at all. And some think they had better
own downright Grot. de ju (...) belli and pa (...) l. 3. c. (...) n. 17.
lying, than make use of such absurd ways of evading it by mental
reservations; by which men may be truly said to affirm that which they do deny,
and to deny that which they do affirm. But notwithstanding this,

2. They are agreed, that in some cases, the which otherwise would be a lie, is
none by (...) help of a mental reservation. Let us not therefore do the
Jesuits so much injury to charge that upon them as their peculiar doctrine,
which is common to all their Divines and Casuists. And herein F. Parsons was in
the right, when he asserted, that the doctrine of Equivocation and mental
reservation Treatise tending to Mitigation. c. 7.. 2, 3.
has been received in the Roman Church for, four hundred years: only some have
extended the practice of it farther than others have done. But in the Case of
Confession they all agree without exception, says the same Author, that if a
man has confessed c. 10. 1.
a thing to a Priest, he may deny and swear that he never confessed it, without
being guilty either of a lie or perjury; reserving this in his mind, that he
has not confessed it so as to utter it to another. And I find the greatest
Genes. Scpulveda de rat. D^^endi testim. c. (...). B^rns c. AEq^v.. 28. n. 4.
p. 255. Hurtad^ Resolut. Moral. p. 449. Caram^. de restrict. mental. art. 13.
p. 360. Steph. a Sancto Paulo Theol. (...) tr. 5. disp. 5. aub. 7.. 3. n. 232.
enemies to the Use of Mental reservation in other cases, do allow it in this;
and do not barely allow it, but think a man bound in conscience to use it,
under grievous sin, says Parsons, when by no other means of silence,
diversion, or evasion the said secrecy can be concealed. I do not now meddle
with the inviolableness of the Seal of Confession, which I do not deny a great
regard ought to be had to, (where an obligation greater than that of keeping a
secret does not take it off, as where the Life of my Prince or the public
Safety are concerned) not from any Divine Institution, but from the baseness of
betraying a Trust: but I wonder how they came to think it to be no lie or
perjury in this Case, and yet to be so in any other? It is to no purpose to
allege other Reasons peculiar to this ase, for the single question is, whether
what a man keeps in his mind, can keep him from being guilty of a lie, or of
perjury in his words? If it cannot, then not in the case of Confession; if it
may, then a mental reservation will equally do it in any other Case. And
consequently no man who does allow it in this case, can on that account
disallow it in any other.

This Navarr very well saw, and therefore from Navarr. in c. human. a^res, qu.
1. n. 2, 3.
the allowance of it in this Case of Confession he de duces the lawfulness of
the use of it in all cases wherein a man is not bound to speak all he knows.
The common answer in this case is, Quare omnes qui fatentur quod Confessarius
vere ^icere potest, Ille hoc non est mihi confessus, subintelligendo ita ut
tenear prodere; cog^ntur profecto consiteri quod etiam alius quilibet qui non
tenetur aliquid dicere, vere poterit respondere illud sibi non esse dictum,
subintelligendo non esse ita ei dictum, ut teneatur id prod^^e. Cum igitur
omnes con^itcantur illud, nemo debet hoc negare. Nav. ib. n. 8.
that in confession the Priest does not know as man but as God; and therefore
when he is asked any thing as a man he may deny what he knows as God. But
Navarr at large shows the folly and absurdity of this Answer, because this does
not salve the contradiction, for to say he does not know is as much as to say
he does not any way know it; which is false if he does know it in any capacity:
and it is false that he does not know it as man, because he knows it as a
Priest, and as such he is not God but man. And the very Seal of Confession
discovers that it is made known to him as a Man, and with the consent of the
penitent a Priest may reveal what he heard in confession; and in other cases he
may make use of that knowledge as a man, without particular discovery. I do
not therefore wonder to see the stout and plain-hearted Defenders of the
lawfulness of this practice in other cases, to express so much astonishment at
the nicety and scrupulosity of those, who dispute against it as so dangerous
and pernicious a thing upon other occasions, when they think it so pious and
innocent in this. For, say they, If it be a lie to deny what a man knows, it is
not in the power of the Church or of God himself for Si enim est mendacium
inficiari quod noveris, non est in Ecclesiae, imo neque in ipsius Dei
potestate, quocunque tandem ex sine efficere, ut Sacerdos licite inficietur
quae novit, Emoner. Splendour verit. Moral. c. Barnes. c. 16. n. 3.
any end whatsoever to make it lawful for a Priest to deny what he knows. And
if it be not a lie in that Case, neither is it in any other.

But although none in the Roman Church are able to answer that argument, yet I
must do some of them that Justice, as to clear them from the owning the
allowance of this practice in other common cases upon the same ground. Yet I
fear upon strict enquiry we shall find that those do equivocate more who seem
to deny it, than those who openly assert it. For, although two persons of the
Roman Church seem wholly to reject it, except in the case of Confession; yet
the Genes. Sepulveda de not. dicendi Testimon.
one of them is charged with Emoncr. c. 13. p. 241.
singularity and suspicion of Here sie, and the Barns c. AEquivocat.
other with little less than Heresy and Apostasy; and their proceedings with
him show what esteem they had of him. After Fa. Barns had written his Book
against Equivocation, and otherways provoked the Jesuits, by order of the Pope
and by means of Albertus, he was seized on, and carried to Rome, and there died
mad in the Inquisition. V. Leodegar. Q^intin. Hoeduum advers. Th. Hurt^do p.
(...). where the Jesuit relates the story.
But most of their other Divines and Casuists do approve it in case of
Testimony and accusation. Soto V. Theophil. Ra^ sive Emoncrium adit. ad Disput.
n. 4, 5, 6.
does allow a Witness being examined about a secret crime to say, he does not
know any thing of it, although he were privy to it: and for this he quotes some
Divines of great Authority before him; as he might have done many others: but
he will not allow him to say he did not see the fact S^to de rat. reg. secret.
memb. 3. qi^. 3. ^^ncl. 4. Adrian. 6. quod l. 11. ad 2. princip. C. C. Sylvest.
v. Iu^am.
committed, nor that he heard nothing of it, because, says he, words of
knowledge seem to be restrained by judicial proceedings to that which a man is
bound to declare. But this ^ubtilty the latter Casuists will by no means admit
of, and allow denying the fact in any words; and say of him, that he was afraid
where no fear was. They therefore say, It is enough that a witness Cos^.
Philiarchus de O^^^c. Sacerd. (...). 1. p. 2. l. 3. c. 14. Navar. ubi supra
(...). 9. Sayr. Clav. Reg. l. 12. c. 17. n. 24.
answers to what ought to have been the intention of the Judge, whatever his
actual intention was; and therefore if a man supposes the Judge not to proceed
legally Sa^z de juram. l. 3. c. 10. n. 3.
against him, he may not only deny the fact he knows, but swear to that denial,
provided he keeps this in his mind that he denied any such fact which belonged
to the Judges conusance; or that he did not do it publicly, M^ de (...) in 4.
(...). disp. 2. Testis ver^ (...) Neseio quam vere sciat, quia testis non
tenetur respondere Iudici secundum suam iniquitatem, sed scundum id quod potest
ut Iudex, et secundum mentem quam debet habere, etiams^ (...) non habeat. Mich.
Salon. 2. 2. q. 69. art 2. controv. 11.
and in this case, say they, there is neither lie, nor per jury.

Others say, no more is necessary to avoid a lie, or perjury in such cases, but
only to understand the word of denial with this restriction so as to be bound
to tell you. And this is the common case which Parsons Q^o igitur (...) negat
(...), id i^ (...) debet, ut neget se non co^t tale crim^n de quo Iudex
interrogate debeat. Et idem est dicere, non feci hoc-crimen, ac si diceret non
(...) feci, quod varum est. Et cum haec responsio sit vera, nullum ^rit
peccatum, (...) intercedat (...). Lud. Carbo tr. de restit. q. 19. concl. 8.
and others speak of. If a man be examined upon oath whether he be a Priest or
not, they say, he may with a safe conscience deny it with that poor reservation
in his mind; and that is a known rule in this case among them that what a man
may truly say, he may truly swear. So that a Priest may Qua^s regulariter ad
(...) d^beat ^ranti juxta mentem ejus, fallit tamen ca doctrina, quando alia
mente quam debet adjuratur; tunc enim sufficit ut respondeat verum secundum
mentem and intentionem s^ ^n, licet falsum sit secundum mentem interrogantis,
and a ^^uranti^. Greg. Sayr. C^v. Reg. l. 12. c. 17. n. 21. etc. Parsons
Treatis. of ^i^^gat. c. 8. n. 20. 5^. 5^. c. 9. n. 2.
not only say, but swear he is none, and yet by this admirable art neither tell
a lie, nor forswear himself.

Some of later times being made sensible of the pernicious consequences of the
imputation of such doctrines and practices to their Church have endeavored to
qualify and restrain the Abuse of them. But upon due examination we shall find
this to be only a greater art to avoid the odium of these things and a design
to deceive us with the greater fineness. For they allow the same words to be
said either in oaths or Testimonies, i. e. a plain denial of what they know to
be true, but only differ from the other as to the way of excusing such a denial
from being a lie: which say they, depends on the circumstances of denying, and
not upon the reservation of the mind. So Malderus himself grants, that a guilty
person being examined upon M^. de ab^. c. Mental. c. 10. 1. p. 64.
a capital Offense, may deny the fact with this reservation, so as to be bound
to tell it; but then he says, the circumstances give that sense and not the
reservation in his mind. But says Emonerius (or rather a famous Jesuit under
that name) these circumstances E^^ner. splend^ e^i^ mo^^l^^. c. 16.
only limit the words to such a sense which they cannot otherwise bear, because
in such circumstances a man is not bound to declare what he knows, therefore,
says he, wherever there is a reasonable cause of concealing what a man knows,
such mental reservations are to be understood, and so there is the same liberty
allowed in practice.

Among the late Casuists none has seemed to have written with more pomp and
vanity against mental Restrictions than Caramuel; yet he not only allows a
Confessor to deny upon oath what he Caramuel Haplot^s sive de restrict.
mental. art. 13. p. 360.
heard in Confession; but in case of secret Murder that a man may with a good
conscience deny the Fact, though the Judge be competent and proceed according
to due form of Law. What way can this be excused from a lie, since he says, a
mental reservation will not do it? He has a fetch beyond this. A Judge is only
to proceed upon evidence; if there be no sufficient evidence against him, he
may persist in denying it, because it cannot be fully proved, and therefore his
denial, says he, is of such a fact which he can proceed upon, and what cannot
be proved is none in Law. These are the shifts of those who seem Qu^^ (...)
plen^ (...) non (...), infectu^^ civili^^ (...) virt^aliter est, hoc est
prudentura judicio and estimtione ita s^ (...), (...) non (...). At quae s^ta
non sunt negari possunt; ergo (...) qu^ s(...). C^. p. 302.
most to oppose the Iesuitical art of Equivocation; and inveigh bitterly
against it, as a thing wholly repugnant to the Truth of our words and the
sincerity of our minds, and that Candor and Simplicity which ought to be in
Christians.

But in my apprehension they had altogether as good take up with the dull way
of lying, or with the common artifice of equivocation and mental reservation,
as make use of such refinings as these.

But however, we gain this considerable advantage by them, that they do assure
us, that mental reservations are so far from excusing the words C(...) 2. 2.
(...). ^9. art. 7. ad 4.
spoken from being a lie, that they contain a premeditated lie; and so the sin
is the more aggravated by them; that all such propositions are in themselves
false, and designed only to deceive others, I^o (...) ipsa sa^ restrictione
convincitur non praecipitanter fuisse mentitus, sed quod^^ modo meditatus
fuisse mendaciu^ quod gravitatem peccati a^get. M^der. de a^su restr. meant. c.
10.. 2. p. 70. Ut quidvis li^^t falsissi, mum verum fieri po^^it restrictione
sola mentali. Id. p. 28. Caram^^l. lb. art. 2. concl. 4. p. 28.
and so all the effect and consequence of lying follow them; that there is
nothing so false but may be made true, nothing so true but may be made false by
this means. Caramuel gives a remarkable instance of this kind in some of the
Articles of the Creed; for by this way of mental reservation a man might truly
say, Christ was not born, understanding it secretly, at Constantinople. He did
not suffer, viz. at Paris. He was not buried, viz. in Persia. He did not rise
again, viz. in Japan. Nor ascended into Heaven, viz. from America: so that by
this blessed Art, the most abominable Heresies may be true doctrine; and the
most cursed lies prove precious Truths.

Besides, they confess that it takes away all confidence in men's words, and
destroys all sincerity of conversation, and the very inclination to speak
Truth: For as Th. ^^b. Stat. Morum Tom. 1. p. 17^. (...). p. 24. A^. I^. p.
(...). (...). c. 4. (...). (...). (...). ^. ^.
Malderus well observes, there is no reason men should not have the same
liberty in private conversation which is allowed them before an incompetent
Judge: and some Jesuits themselves grant, that if the common use of it be
allowed, there can be no security as to men's words, there being nothing so
false but it may be made true in this way. And no man can be charged with a lie
till they know his heart; nor the Devil himself in all his lying Oracles; who
surely had wit enough to make some secret reservation; and a very little will
serve for that according to Suarez, who says, (...) de R^^. To. 2. l. 3. c.
10. n. 4.
it is enough in the general, that a man intend to affirm or deny in some true
sense; although he know not what.

Since from their own Authors, we thus far understand the mischievous
consequence of these practices, it will not be amiss to set down briefly the
cases, wherein they are commonly allowed.

1. In general, Wherever there is a just and reasonable Cause for concealing
of Truth. For that is the most general rule they give in this case; where a man
(...) and ^ure l. (...). (...). 4^. (...) 4^.
is not bound to speak his whole mind, he may utter one half, and reserve the
other half of one entire proposition. Now a just and reasonable Cause with them
is declining of danger, or obtaining any advantage to themselves either as to
body, honor, or estate. In all such cases, they allow that a man may speak
what is simply false and swear to it too, provided that he Potest aliquis
jurare simpliciter falsum addendo aliquid mente, ex quo jurame^^um sit verum,
quoties intervenit justa causa. Iu^a causa esse potest necessitas, vel utilitas
ad salutem corporis, honoris, rerum familiarium, vel etiam qua^^lo injusta
interrogatio proponitur. Dian. part. 3. tr. 6. resol. 30. Sed juramentum cum
deficit sola discretio, non est peccatum mortale. Sanch. in sum. tom. 1. l. 3.
c. 6. n. 22. aliique.
hold something in his mind which makes it true. But if a man happen to do it
without just cause, what then? does he lie? does he forswear himself? by no
means. But he is guilty of Indiscretion: and is that all? then they tell him
for his comfort, that an oath that wants only discretion is no mortal sin.

2. If a man be barred the use of Equivocation, or mental reservation, that
does not hinder the using it, even in renouncing equivocation. Even Soto
himself says, that if a Magistrate requires from a person to speak Soto de
ration. tegend. secret. memb. 3. qu. 3. concl. 4.
simply all he knows of such a matter; i. e. without any reservation; a man may
still answer he knows nothing of it; i. e. with this reservation, to tell him.
But what if in particular, says he, he asks about a secret Murder; whether
Peter killed John, which he alone saw, does it not seem to be a lie for him to
say, he knows nothing of it? No, says he; for still the meaning is, so as he
is bound to tell. F. Parson speaks home to this point; Suppose, V. Barns c.
AEquivocat.. 20. n. 3. p. 174.. 22. n. 7.
says he, a Judge asks a man whether he does equivocate or not? He may answer,
Not, but with another equivocation. But if he still suspects he equivocates,
what then is to be done? he may deny it with another equivocation; and so,
toties quoties, as often as he asks, the other may deny and still with a
farther equivocation. Suppose a Priest, says Jacob. a Graffiis, be asked a
thing he heard in confession, may he deny that he knew it? Yes, says he, and
swear it too; because he knew it not as man. Iac. de Graff^s decis. aur^c l. 1.
c. 23. n. 3. Quando quis inique interrogat excludendo omnem aequivocationem,
posse interrogatum u^i aequivocatione apponendo aliquam particulam in mente,
per quam ver^m essiciatur juramentum. Bonacina To. 2. disp. 4. q. 1. punct. 12.
n. 5.
But suppose he be asked whether he knew it not as man, but as God? He may deny
it still, with another equivocation, i. e. not as God himself, but as his
Minister. What if a Judge, says Bonacina, be so unreasonable to bar all
equivocation? yet the respondent may equivocate still. And he cites several
others of theirs who defended this practice; and therefore Barns says, it is
so slippery a thing, that the faster you think to hold it, the sooner it gets
from you.

3. If a man be charged with a secret crime, which cannot be sufficiently
proved by Testimonies beyond all exception, he may safely deny it, though he
were guilty of it. If a man, says Lessius, can make any exception against the
Witnesses, or show Less. de justit. and jure, l. 2. c. 31. dub. 3. n. 8.
that it was a report spread abroad by men, that bore ill will to him, or that
there was some mistake in it, he is not bound to confess the truth, and
consequently he may deny it with a reservation. Nay, as long as the thing is so
secret, that a man may probably defend himself, and hope to escape, he may
persist in denying the fact; although the Judge do proceed according to due
Form of Law, says the same Lessius. It is no mortal sin to deny it, says
Filliucius. Not, though others be like to suffer for it, Filliuc. Mor. Quaest.
tr. 40. c. 9. n. 266. Sa Aphorism judicial. Actus, n. 3.
says Em. Sa; especially if the punishment be capital, says Filliucius and
others in him. But if a man does suspect whether the Judge does proceed
according to due form of Law, which depends upon his opinion of the proofs and
Witnesses brought against him, they make no question then, but he may deny the
fact by help of an easy reservation in his mind.

4. If a man has denied the Fact when he was bound to confess it in Court,
according to their rules, yet they will not allow that he is bound to confess
it before execution. Because says Navarr, confession to a Priest and
absolution by him is Navarr. Man. c. 25. n. 38. Dian. Sum. v. Reus n. 12. Iac.
de Graffiis, l. 3. c. 7. n. 17. Escobar tr. 6. ex. 6. n. 62. Azor. p. 3. l. 13.
c. 25. dub. 5. Sayr. Clav. Reg. l. 12. c. 17. Layman. l. 3. tr. 6. c. 5. n. 3.
Sa Aphor. de Reo. n. 5, 6. Bass. reus p. 5. n. 15.
sufficient for salvation. His Confessor ought not to put him upon it, says
Diana. Not unless it be clearer than Noonday that the Law compels them to it,
say others; i. e. that they have no kind of exceptions again the judicial
proceedings. Some thought they ought then to do it for the reputation of the
Judges who otherwise might suffer in the esteem of the People as condemning
innocent persons; but this is overruled by the generality of the later
Casuists, because the presumption is always on the side of the Judges, when
they proceed according to Law. But one of the latest Casuists has given an
excellent Reason against Imo pu^llanines and si ul^i ^^bentur si ea fate^^ntur.
Dicast illo de jura^ento d^sp. 2 dub. 12. n. 377.
public Confession, because I^go de Iust^t. and jure Tom. 2. Desp. (...). s^.
1. n. 19.
they are accounted Cowards and Fools that make it.

5. Where the Judge is supposed incompetent, they make no question of the use
of Equivocation and mental reservation in denying the crimes they are guilty
of. An incompetent Judge is one that wants lawful jurisdiction over the person;
as if a Layman pretend to judge one in Orders according to their doctrine of
exemption; or if a Heretic or excommunicated person take upon him to judge
good Catholics.

And thus they look on all our Judges as incompetent; of which, besides the
general charge of Heresy, we have this particular evidence. When the
unquietness of the Jesuits gave just occasion to those severe Laws which were
made after the Bull of Pius 5. several cases were proposed at G. Abb^t de
M^ndac. p. 41, 42. and in p^^f. p. 9. etc.
Rome for Resolution in order to the better conduct of their affairs here; and
among the rest this, Suppose an oath be required in an Heretical Court before
incompetent Judges (quales sunt omnes nunc in Anglia, as all are now in
England) how far does such an oath bind? The Answer is, no farther than the
Person that swears did intend it should: and he may either refuse the oath, or
he may Sophistice ju^ are and Sophistice respondre: he may swear and answer
with juggling and equivocation: and he that discovers any by virtue of his oath
commits a double sin. And in the Answers approved by Pius 5. our Judges are
declared incompetent; and our Courts of Judicature unlawful Courts; and
therefore no man by his oath is bound to conf^ss any thing to the prejudice of
the Catholic Cause; nor to answer according to the intention of the Judge, but
in some true sense of his own.

So that we not only see the doctrine and practice of equivocation approved by
the Holy Sec, but all legal Authority among us utterly rejected as having no
jurisdiction over them. And all who allow this practice do thereby discover
that what they call Heresy does take away the civil Rights and Properties of
men. For if Heresy makes out Judges incompetent, by necessary consequence it
must deprive the King of the right to his Throne, it must take away all the
obligation of our Laws, and the title every man has to his estate. Such
pernicious consequences do follow the wisdom of the Serpent, where it is not
joined with the innocence and simplicity of the Dove: and not only pernicious
to Government, but to themselves too when these arts are understood and
discovered; for what security can there be from the most solemn oaths, the most
deep and serious protestations of those persons who at the same time believe
that none of these things do bind them, but by some secret reserve they may
turn the sense quite another way than we imagined, and when they pretend the
greatest simplicity and seem to renounce all equivocation, may then equivocate
the most of all? If men had invented ways to fill the world with perpetual
jealousies and suspicions of their practices and intentions, they could never
have thought of any more effectual than these two, that Heresy, or differing
in opinion from them, deprives them of their civil rights, and that they may
deny what is true, and swear to what is false, and promise what they never mean
to perform by virtue of some secret reservation in their minds. How can they
live as fellow subjects with others who do not own the same Authority, the same
Laws, the same Magistrates, who look on all Heretics in a State of Usurpation,
and all judicial proceedings against them as mere force and violence, and
parallel the case of answering in our Courts with that of oaths and promises to
Thieves and Robbers? for upon these grounds all the bonds of Society Molan. de
side haeret. serve. l. 4. c. 8.
are dissolved where what they call Heresy prevails; and no obligation can lie
upon them by virtue of any Laws, or oaths, or promises. I do not say that
particular persons may not, upon common principles of honesty, make conscience
of these things: but I speak of what follows from these allowed principles and
practices among them, and what may be justly expected by virtue of them. How
can we be sure that any man means what he says, when he holds it lawful to
reserve a meaning quite different from his words? What can oaths signify to
the satisfaction of others; when it is impossible to understand in what sense
they swear? and when they pretend the greatest simplicity in renouncing all
arts, may then by allowance of their Casuists use them the most of all? But can
men upon sober reflections think it any Barns de AEquivocat.. 23. n. 2. p. 194.
part of true Wisdom to lose all the force of their oaths and promises with
those among whom they live? Will they never stand in need of being believed or
trusted? And then, if they desire it never so much, how can they recover any
credit with out plain disowning all such principles, and in such a way if such
can be found out, which is incapable of any mental reservation. Such kind of
Artifices can only serve for a time, but when once they are thoroughly
understood, they fall heavily upon those that use them. For although frost and
fraud may hold for a while, yet according to the true saying, they both have
dirty ends. The sum of what I have to say is this, That however Simplicity and
sincerity of conversation may in some particular circumstances expose men to
greater danger and difficulties than fraud and deceit may do; yet upon the
whole matter considering the consequences of both, it will be found much
greater Wisdom always to preserve the innocence of the Dove, than to use the
greatest subtilty of the Serpent without it. Which although it may seem to take
off from the fineness of the Serpents Wisdom, yet it adds very much to the
safety and soundness of it.

III. Prudent simplicity lies in the practice of Meekness and Patience. The
Serpent does not employ its subtilty only in defending it self and avoiding
dangers, but in watching its opportunity to do mischief, A^ist. hist. Anim. l.
1. c. 1. Genesis 49. 17.
being both revengeful and insidious: therefore we read of the Adder in the
path that lies undiscerned in the sands, that biteth the horse-heels so that
the rider shall fall backward. It does mischief secretly, spitefully and
artificially, by fit means and instruments. But Christ would have his Disciples
to be Wise to that which is good, but simple or harmless concerning evil; so S.
Paul explains these words of Romans 16. 19.
our Savior, Be ye wise as Serpents and harmless as Doves. Which although they
want no Gall, yet do not show that they have any, whatsoever usage they meet
with. Christ foretells his Disciples the injuries and reproaches they were like
to suffer under, that their condition was like to be no better than that of
sheep in the midst of Wolves; notwithstanding he would not suffer them to be
furious as wild beasts, or cruel and rapacious as the Birds of prey; but in
gentleness and meekness and patience to be as harmless as Doves. Not, as though
Christianity did forbid men the just and lawful ways of preserving themselves,
but it takes away all malice and hatred and revenge and cruelty out of men's
minds; it softens and sweetens and calms the tempers of men, and fills them
with Kindness Mat. 5. 44.
and Good Will even to their enemies, not being overcome with evil, but
overcoming evil with Good. Never Romans 12. 21.
any Religion in the world was such an enemy to all kind of Malice, Revenge and
Cruelty as the Christian; that which we call good nature seems to come very
near that Divine grace which S. Paul calls Charity, and does so admirably
describe and so highly extol above miraculous gifts and some of the greatest
graces. Charity suffers long 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6. 7.
and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not it self; is not puffed
up; does not behave it self unseemly; seeks not her own; is not easily
provoked; thinks no evil; rejoices not in iniquity but rejoices in the
truth; bears all things, believes all things: hops all things, endures
all things, i. e. in short, it hopes, believes, and does the greatest good; it
modestly bears and heartily forgives the greatest evil. And herein consists
that Dove-like temper, which Christ would have his disciples remarkable for.
Which however it may be despised and scorned by furious and self-willed men,
yet upon consideration it will be found a great part of the Wisdom of living.
Revenge is the pleasure only of weak and disorderly minds: for what real
satisfaction can another loss or pain give to any considering man? The only
pretense or color for it is the preventing more mischief coming on ones self;
and yet every act of revenge is a fresh provocation; so that either quarrels
must continue without end, or some body must think it their Wisdom to forgive
at last. And if so, I appeal to any man's understanding whether it were not
greater Wisdom to have prevented at first all the vexation and disquiet,
besides other inconveniences, which must needs follow a continued quarrel. If
any thing tend to make a man's life easy and pleasant to himself and others, it
is innocence and gentleness, and patience, and doing good and virtuous things,
whatever the world thinks of them.

And this was it which recommended the Christian Religion to the World, that
its great business and design was, to persuade the disobedient to the Wisdom
Luke 1. 17.
of the just; by laying aside all malice, and all guile, and bypocrisies, and
all evil speakings; not rendering evil for evil, 1 Pet. 2. 1. 3. 9. 2. 20,
or railing for railing; and if when they did will they suffered for it, by
taking it patiently; following therein the 21, 22, 23.
example of Christ himself, who did no sin neither was guile found in his
mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judged righteously. These are
the instructions of S. Peter, to the primitive Christians, and the ways he
judged most effectual to promote the honor of their Religion, among those who
were most apt to think and speak evil of it. And because that was a very
corrupt and a busy and factious age, especially in those Cities where the Jews
and Gentiles inhabited together, therefore he advises the Christians not only
to purity and innocence, but to a quiet submission to Authority, and however
the Jews looked on Heathen Government as 2. 11 12
a mere appointment of men; yet he commands them to submit to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it was the Imperial, the Proconsidar, or the
Praetorian power, 13,
not considering so much the Persons employed as the design of the Institution,
which was for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them 14,
that do well. For so is the Will of God, that with this sort of well-doing ye
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish 15.
men, who are apt to quarrel with Religion, especially when it appears new, as
that which gives occasion to many disturbances of the Civil Government. And
that there might be no color for any such cavil against Christianity, no
Religion that ever was, did so much enforce the duty of obedience as Christ and
his Apostles did, and that upon the greatest and most weighty considerations,
for conscience sake, for the Lords sake, for Romans 13. 5.
their Religions sake. For consider I pray, if the Doctrine of Christ had given
encouragement to faction and rebellion under pretense of it, if S. Peter
himself had taken upon him to dispose of Crowns and Scepters, or had absolved
Christians from their Allegiance, even to their greatest persecutors, what a
blot this had been upon the whole Religion, such as all the blood of the
Martyrs could never have washed off. For it would have made the condition of
Princes more precarious, and the duty of Subjects more loose and uncertain, and
all Nations that regarded their own peace and safety shie of entertaining a
Doctrine which would give so much countenance to Rebellion. And yet among all
the causes alleged for the persecution of Christians, this was never once
suggested, which would not have been omitted (if any such thing had been owned
by the Christians) by persons so jealous of their Power, as the Roman Emperors
were. It is an intolerable reproach to Christianity to impute their patient
submission to Authority to their weakness and want of force: which is all one
as to say, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
they would have resisted if they durst: this is not to make them harmless as
Doves, but to have too much of the subtilty of the Serpent, in pretending to be
innocent when they only wanted an opportunity to do mischief.

But the security the Christian Religion gave to Government was from the
principles and precepts of it, the design of its doctrine as well as the
practice of its followers. So that if their Religion were true, it did oblige
them to all acts of charity and kindness, to meekness and patience, to
peaceableness and a quiet and prudent behavior in all the changes of humane
affairs.

From what has been already said, it is no hard matter to understand the
Reason why our Savior gave such directions to his Apostles, and made choice of
such means to promote his Religion, because they would hereby see, that he sent
not his Apostles upon any ambitious or secular design, not to disturb
Governments upon pretense of setting up a new Monarchy in it either of Christ
or his pretended Vicar; but to prepare men for another World by the Love of God
and our Neighbor, by subduing our lusts and taking off our affections from
present things; and because he knew what persecutions would follow his
doctrine, he advises his Disciples neither to suffer as Fools, nor as
evildoers, but to be wise as Serpents and harmless as Doves.

Let no man then think our Religion weakens their understanding, or impairs
their discretion, or puts men upon doing foolish and imprudent things. As it is
founded on the best reason, so it brings men to the best temper, and governs
their actions by rules of the truest Wisdom; not only as it provides for the
most desirable end in another world, but even in this, it secures most the
honor, interest and safety of men; and if circumstances happen to be hard
here, it gives the highest assurance of an infinite and eternal recompense. But
if men under a pretense of zeal for Religion do wicked things, and carry on
treacherous and malicious designs, if instead of directing men's Consciences in
the ways of innocence and goodness, they teach them the art of putting tricks
on God Almighty, (as one called the Casuistical (...) Epist. Provinc. 3. Not. 3.
Divinity of the Jesuits) or the way of breaking his Laws by certain shifts
and evasions; if instead of meekness and patience they put men upon acts of
revenge and cruelty; if instead of promoting peace and tranquillity in the
world, they plot mischief and stir up faction and rebellion, we are sure whose
Disciples soever they pretend to be, they are none of Christ's; for although
they should not all be capable of being wise as Serpents, yet they are bound to
be harmless as Doves.

FINIS.

