A Word to the Well-Inclin'd OF ALL PERSUASIONS. Together with A Copy of a
Letter from William Penn to George Keith, upon his Arbitrary Summons and Unjust
Proceedings, at Turners-Hall, against the People Called Quakers.
THis following Paper is intended for an Answer to George Keith's Notice of
another Meeting at Turners-Hall, the 21. of the Month called April, School.
We hope that the Wise and Judicious of all Persuasions, will both Approve our
past Absence from such sort of Meetings, and our not Bowing to the like
Proceedings, since their Tendency being rather to Profane than to Promote
Piety and Charity, which ought to be the Chief End of all Truly Religious
Assemblies: Which being said, as an Advertisement to them that Read this Paper,
we now apply our selves to you chiefly, that frequent Turners-Hall on these
Occasions; since it is for your Sakes that we are Concerned, to take this
Public Notice of what is done there; that it may appear to you, and such as
may yet have a better Opinion of G. K. than he deserves, that we are in the
Right, not to gratify him in complying with such Public Meetings of Strife
and Confusion. And we must tell you freely, if you have any Just and Serious
Regard for the Honor of Religion in general, we cannot see how you can do less
than Discourage them, instead of Censuring us for declining them, and that for
these Reasons following.

1. That such Meetings are rarely to Edification, when even That is intended:
But these are manifestly for Abuse, and to stir up Levity and Prejudice against
us; and look more like a Bartholomew-Fair, or Stages of Buffoonry, than
Religious Assemblies; and as such, are understood and disowned by Impartial and
Sober People.

2. It is at the Instigation of a Man, who has, of late, breathed out
Revilings and Threatenings against us, since his Defection from his Ancient
Principles, Practice, and Society, and is now become, not only Ungrateful, but
Rude and Deceitful, as we have manifested in our Printed Answers to him,
Unanswered by him.

3. He began with Printing, and there we have followed him from step to step
hitherto, leaving nothing material Unanswered, which we take to be the fairer,
more substantial, and edyfying Method.

4. He is a Stray to this Day, that no known Religious Party Owns or lays Claim
to, that we know of; and therefore not of W^ight enough for our Notice, after
the Long-Suffering and Kind-Treatment we have expressed toward him, the
Persecution we have suffered from him, and the many Books that have been
written in Answer to his repeated and new-vampt Cavils against us.

5. His Offers were not, nor now is, for Meeting by Agreement of both Sides,
but for one upon his own Terms: He must Summons, Dictate and Impose, Time,
Place, Matter, and Judges also, or it will not do with him.

6. There could be no Reasonable and Just End proposed for such Meetings that
might induce our Compliance, all Circumstances considered, since there was no
Intimation of any Persons to be there, whose Tender Consciences wanted
Satisfaction from us. And as for the Vindication of our selves from such
Exceptions as are made against us, it has been fully done already in our
Printed Answers to him. Wherefore it must only have been to have gratified the
Envy and Levity of G. K. and a few other Prejudicate Persons: And we Value
Religion, our Public Liberty, and Reputations at another rate, than to expose
them after such an Ill and Trival manner.

But yet again, that you may farther see what a Man G. K. is, and how little
reason we have to take any more Notice of him, we Entreat you weigh these
following Considerations, etc.

1. There is no need that we Defend our selves against his Charges and
Exceptions, since himself has so often, and so well done it, when made by other
Enemies. Pray see his Books, i. e. Immediate Revelation, etc. those against R.
Gourdon, Scholars of Aberdeen, Baptists of London, and Priests and Professors
of New England and others.

2. And as he has repeatedly Vindicated our Doctrines as Scriptural,
Primitive, and Christian; so has he Pledged his Inward Sense to Vouch for us as
the People of God; at diverse times pleading his Inward Sense of God's presence
with him, in maintaining our Religion as Christian, and us as True Christians,
in walking up to it. After which, what is to be said for such a Man, or
what-more against him, with respect to his present Practices; For what greater
Evidence of Union, Satisfaction and Concurrence can any Man give, than to
declare, from an Inward Sense, given (as he said) by the Spirit of God, that we
are the People of God; Which he has often affirmed. And what greater Levity
and Enmity, than to run Counter to us, and to Rally and Excite all sorts of
Enemies against us, for only believing and adhering to the same Principles, and
Preaching the same, and no other Doctrines, than such as we Believed and
Preached, when he declared he had that Unity with us, and Inward Evidence for
us.

3. He has Endeavored to render us as a People Divided, and as if the better
part of us were with him, that he might expose them, the more, he chiefly
strikes at, while he is Divided from us, for we know not of one in the Three
Kingdoms, that was accounted in Unity with us at the time of his coming for
England, (which is now about Four Years) that does adhere to him;
notwithstanding the Clamor and Noise he has made, and the Dust he has raised
to cloud the Reputation of our Profession.

4. He Insinuates Mighty New Discoveries, to Vilify and Debase others, and as
such his Work is Entertained and Improved by some Busy and Restless
Adversaries; whereas in reality he is chiefly a Copy, not an Original, in that
he says little material, but what has been said already by other Public
Adversaries, many Years ago, and as often particularly Answered: So that here
is in substance, no new thing, but what our Bitter Opposers threw at us above
Twenty Years past, and which is now licked up by G. K. and again spit out at us
to his own Shame and Confusion.

5. But it seems the Force and Credit of this Pretended New Discovery, has been
his Antiquity amongst us, which we say is the Aggravation of his Folly or
Insincerity: For no Man of Common Sense can think, that one of his Pretentions
to Learning and Religion, should be Thirty Years, in finding out what the
Quakers were, or whether himself was a Quaker: Nor is it probable, That any Man
in his right Mind, would Embrace so Decry'd, so Despised, and so Suffering a
Persuasion, as the World knows ours has been, and yet be Ignorant of what he
Joined with, Preached up, Writ and Suffered for.

6. The Two Persons Living, whom he mostly Vilifies, viz. G. W. and W. P. were
his Orthodox Christians, and Dear Brethren, about Five Years past in America,
and then and there he urged the Orthodoxy of their Writings, to Justify
himself; though now he perversely pretends to prove the same G. W. and W. P.
Antichristian, etc. Wonder not therefore, Reader, if we think not this Man upon
Equal Terms with us, or our selves under the like Obligations to him, that we
might be toward a fair Adversary, who, after our many Meetings with him,
Patience toward him, and Pity for him, has turned the Deaf Ear, and suffered
his Pride, Passion, and Revenge, not only to render Fruitless all our Christian
Endeavors toward him, but to become the Epitomy and very Commonplace of all
the Malice of our preceding Adversaries.

We pray God Almighty, to make him truly sensible of that fearful Lapse he is
under, and of that Mystery of Iniquity that has wrought in him, to the
Overthrow of the Good State of Mind he once knew amongst us; and which he has
(since this grievous Revolt) acknowledged he once Enjoyed in Fellowship with
us, that so he may Repent, and receive Forgiveness for his Foul Prevarications,
both with God and Man.

Signed on the Behalf of those Concerned, by T. Story.

The Sustance of this foregoing Paper was delivered in Print at his Meeting at
Turners-Hall the last Year; and being sensible of the good Effect it then had
with Persons Unprejudicate; it is thought fit to Reprint it, adapted to the
present Occasion.

A Copy of a Letter from William Penn.
George Keith, Bristol, the 16th of the 2d Month, School.
IT is ^^me Surprise, thou should be unwilling, after thy many Summons and
Challenges, to meet me at a Select Meeting in my particular Case, when thou
seem by thy General Letter, to propose a Select one for us All, that thou
have Summoned to appear at Turners-Hall.

The Excuse thou give, Looks to me not so Candid as might have been expected
from a Man of thy pretenses, since what Injury thou supposest I have done,
might by the Report of such a Meeting have been Repaired, as Credibly as if a
greater Number of Witnesses. For if thou art only to be Righted, as publicly
as thou think thou were wronged, no less Number than what was there, if any
other Persons, or Place ought to satisfy thee. But when thou call to mind
how publicly thou have Staged and Condemned us, for the worst of Heretics,
without any Limitation of Number, or Regard to Qualifications of Persons, or
our Consent at all to such a Meeting, Citing us, Arraigning and Condemning us
not only Arbitrarily, but without a Copy of our Indictment; naming to us
neither the Subject of thy Exceptions, nor the Books out of which thou take
them, and less, the Passages attacked and oppugn'd by thee. But that which
augments my Wonder, is, That for all the Wrongs, thou have or may Commit
against me, thou think I ought to be satisfied with a Select Meeting of
equal Choice, in order to Right me. Now I cannot understand, why it is not as
Reasonable for me to propose a Select Meeting, equally Chosen, in order to hear
thy Exceptions against me, as for thee to propose such an one, after thou have,
in my Opinion, Injured me, in order to make me Satisfaction? Is not Prevention
better than the Difficulty of a Cure. But, would thou be willing we should
choose Arbitrators (as thou call them) for thee, as thou have done for us?
Or, would thou think us equal and fair (if we were to choose) to pick out
those that have pre-judg'd thy Case? That believe thee Erroneous, and that are
of a Church that has persecuted thee, and who are of the Sentiment, if not of
the Charity toward thee, that the Rattle-Snake Man is toward us. But by thy
last Letter it seems to me, as if thou did design not to have us present; and
indeed in thy former Letters also, by making the Conditions so unequal; or,
rather, in allowing us none at all, and so putting us beyond a possibility of
complying with thee. For who was ever thought a fair Adversary, that refused
the Persons charged any share about Time, Place, or Auditory? Or, a Copy of the
Matters to be exhibited against them? Should we treat all sorts of Adversaries
at this Rate, and every Party of Protestants one another, that have
Differences, and Controversies about them; what a state of Confusion and
Strife, as well as Injustice, would the Nation be in? But, I fear, thou car'st
not what thou do, to be revenged upon some of the People called Quakers; and,
indeed, upon all of them, and their Profession too, for their sakes, because
they could not dissemble with their own Consciences, in winking at thy
Proceedings; so unlike thy former Principles and Conduct, when thou were as
good a Man, and as much thy self, as thou have been since every jot. O, George
Keith! it is hard for thee to kick against all these Pricks! The Lord give thee
Repentance, that through a deep and effectual Sorrow, thou may be forgiven
thy very heinous Offenses, and be restored to the Flock of God, that thou art
so sadly gone astray from, if not too late. This is the fervent Desire of (I
think, I may say) the most evilly entreated of all thy old Friends, and yet thy
well-wishing Friend for all that,

William Penn.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street,
near the Market, School.


