Freedom. OR, The Description of the Excellent Civil Government of the Island
of JERSEY

PUBLISHED By James Stocall Esquire Colonel of a Regiment of the Trained Bands of
the said Island, consisting of 1500 men. Under the Government of the Honorable
Colonel Heane Governor thereof, for the service of the Commonwealth of
England.

printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for Robert Ibbitson. 1652.

To the Right Honorable, Lieutenant Genesis Fleetwood.
Noble Lieut. General,
SUch great multitudes of men are daily importuning you, with their
implorations of Your favor and assistance, that I still judge it more
expedient, and less troublesome, to present mine in writing, to your Honors,
to wait (as I desire this description of the Civil Government of Jersey may
do) for your best opportunity of consideration thereof. Truly Sir, now it has
pleased the Lord to bring me safe again here, from the reduction of that Isle,
I have thought it a part of my duty, having been bold to promise it you
heretofore; and having found you so cordial to bring that to pass, so ready,
diligent, and compassionate, to help our poor Countrymen out of their eight
years exile, and generally all the people of that place, out of a most
Tyrannical bondage; All which your Noble deeds are well known there. For your
Heroical Actions every where, for the Commonwealth, have made your care of
Mercy, and Justice, so highly famous, that it begat, in the poor Islanders,
strong hopes of your mediation toward the Parliament, for the Patronization of
their hitherto (since the Divine Commonwealth of Israel) unparalleld Freedom.

Michael Lempriere Esquire, the Bailly of that Jurisdiction, did lately send an
Account of the said Government, to the Parliament, also particularly the same
to the Counsel of State and to my Lord General; but while he was intending
one for your Honor, the sad news of the decease, of your Noble, and most
Christianly virtuous Lady, did cause him to forbear; judging it unfit to add
then trouble to your trouble by any importunity. I must acknowledge, the same
consideration has made me so much backward from presenting my self before
you, since my arrival; not any forgetfulness of the respects I do owe to
your Honor. It is true, you were at first in the Country; yet now, that I
hope, the Lord has been pleased to begin to stir up again, in your heart,
the power of that holy Spirit called the Comforter, to moderate your just
sorrow, in a measure according to his will; and that the public good of my
Country calls upon my Conscience, I must infringe somewhat the rules of
Civility, and importune you with these Lines, which are abrupt, because my
particular Obligations could not let me be free from sadness, when all honest
people suffer a loss, whereof you suffer the immediate affliction. In this
Description, which is not different from that sent by the said Bailly, but only
in few things, which he, for brevitie sake, omitted, and I have added; it being
true, that the true description of a thing must be like the same thing it
self; you will see a great excellence of Government, in respect of all other
Governments practiced, since the Commonwealth of Israel.

First, because the People does freely use to choose, and elect all their
Officers, except very few, which were some at the Kings, others at the Baillys
denomination.

Secondly, Because the Sufferers can procure the execution of our Laws against
any one that wrongeth them, at very small expenses, and indeed, ordinarily for
nothing; the Guilty being always sentenced to all the Charges, and Damages he
has caused.

Thirdly, Because the way and means to prosecute Justice in that Island is
plain, common, and easy, full of Humanity, Gravity, and Civility, and short,
without Circulations from Pilate to Herodes, and from Herodes to Pilate back
again; All in the natural Language of the Inhabitants nevertheless very
Majesticall, consequently terrible as much as possible to Evill-doers, and
comfortable to the lovers of Righteousness; the true use of the sword of
Magistracy.

Fourthly, because there is a sufficiency of Officers to do all Functions
requisite for the procuration, propagation, and preservation of the public
good, not only in necessaries, but in contingencies also; and that so
prudently, that every Parish, being divided into convenient Divisions, has in
each at least an Officer, which over-seeth it, and keeps the wicked in awe
so, that no Vagabond, or idle Fellow, can be lurking any where to commit vices,
and not be taken notice of presently, and prevented, or apprehended; the poor
and the sick visited constantly, and taken care of by due distributions from
the Treasure of the Parish, and otherwise. By this means also, all Orders, and
Ordinances of the Magistrate, Civil and Military, are ordinarily published,
and made known to the people with much ease, and without charges to the State,
at their very houses; which may be done in few hours all over the Country;
although there is used also a general way of Proclamations at the Market
place, in open Market time, and on Sundaies, immediately after Sermon, in their
Parochial Assemblies, so that in three hours all the people uses to be in a
Body, under their Arms, for their defense. After notice given so orderly, none
can plead cause of ignorance; Collections and Leavies of Men, or other things
whatsoever are by this means presently done, without charges to the State. A
good distribution is necessary, to govern well.

Fifthly, Because the Laws used in the said Government are very few, but
sufficient distinct, clear, short in Maxims, or Sentences, known of the very
poor silly Women, most of them very excellent; Those that are not so, may be
abrogated for future time, and better ones made in their room.

Lastly, No false Bargains, Sales, or Cheating conveyances can be made in that
Government.

Pray read it, compare it with all others, and I am confident, you will esteem
it worthy the consideration of every good Common-wealths-man; and pardon freely,

SIR, Your very much obliged, and sincere humble Servant JAMES STOCALL.
London, March, 1. 1651.
THE Description of the excellent Civil Government of the Island of JERSEY.
THe Island of Jersey is divided in twelve Parishes, every one of those
sub-divided into several Divisions called Vingtaines.

In each Parish, there is a Constable, a Centurion which is as the Constables
Deputy; as many Vingteniers, as there are Vingtaines, who are subordinate
Officers to the Constables, to execute those Warrants, which are sent them, by
him who receives them first, either from the Governor or Bailly, There are
besides those, other Officers called Sermentez, or Jurors to make up the number
of Twelve with the Vingteniers in each Parish. Those Twelve with the Constable,
make up a petty Jury, to indite, or free criminals, when they first present
them in Court. The Constable and these Officers have power to search out and
seize all manner of Malefactors whatsoever, every one in his Parish, and
present them to the Bailly, and Justices to receive condign punishment.

There are also two Procurors or Atturneys of the public Revenue and Treasure
of each Parish, which are accomptable to the Constable and those Officers,
which have the dispensation of the same, as they represent the parish.

Besides there it a Provost in every Parish, as the name signifies Warner, so
their Office is to Summon, or Warn any Parties, who have Suites in Law
together, to appear before the Bailly and Justices, who decide those
differences. Those Summons are in a very short and pithy form, either written
by the parties themselves, or any body else; Provided, that he that writes
them, must subscribe them. And the Provost warns the parties, in many causes
for nothing, in others, for a penny.

Moreover there is in every Vingtaine, one Sermente Juror, or sworn man for the
Highways and common-paths, to see them duly repaired, and in order.

All these Parochial Officers are elected and chosen by the Votes of all the
Parishioners, great, and small, poor, and rich; then presented to the Bailly,
who gives them Oath to exercise their several Functions.

The whole Island is generally ruled by the great Court (so called in relation
to inferior Courts, of which hereafter mention shall be made) held in a fair
Cobue, or Courthouse erected for that purpose: The Assembly there consists of
the Bailly, Twelve Jurates or Justices, the Kings Procurator or Attorney (so
called heretofore) the Kings Advocate or Solicitor heretofore; the Vicount, or
Sheriff; the Greffier, or Clerk of the Court; the Denuntiator, or
Under-Sheriffe; five or six Advocates, at the Ballys discretion, an Huissier or
Doorkeeper. The Bailly heretofore was nominated by the King, and had his
Patent under the Great Seal of England: He is the Head and President of the
Court, collects the voices of the Jurates and pronounces the Sentence,
according to their plurality, but if equality, then he has the casting voice.

The twelve Jurates, or Justices are chosen by the suffrages or voices
generally of all the Islanders, without exception, and sworn in the Court by
the Bailly. The Procurator, and Advocate were named by the King: their Offices
was to plead for the Kings Rights, and to see all manner of crimes punished:
They might also plead betwixt party and party. The Vicount was also nominated
by the King, his Office was, to arrest and imprison Debtors, after Judgment of
Execution given and never before, to seize goods, when he is so appointed to
do, by the Court, and to sell them at the Market place, on public days to
those who will give most, to be applied for the payment of Creditors, who may
redeem them fourteen days after; He takes Inventories of Orphans goods; and
sometimes sells them at Outcries, for their use and behoof; he is Clerk of
the Market, has the care of all sorts of Measures, for dry and liquid Wares;
He looks to the Watercourse of Rivolets and Brooks, with some Officers with
him, that all might be in good order, for the benefit of the Inhabitants; He is
also Crowner, and Crier of the Court. The Denuntiator has the like power in
the Vicounts absence, with many other cares conducing to the accommodation of
the Islanders. The Greffier or Clerk of the Court does inrole all the Sentences
pronounced by the said Bailly: And that sedente curia, in very fair
Register-Books, of which he has the keeping, as of all the ancient Records,
Archives, Privileges, Franchises, Liberties and Immunities heretofore granted,
to the Inhabitants, by the late Kings and Queens of England, under the Bailly,
who has that care from Superior Authority. The Advocates Offices are to plead
for parties, which they do for very small and easy Rates, viz, six pence, by
reason that the people of all Sorts and Sexes and upon all manner of Pleas may,
and do plead their own Causes, and have as much audience as the Advocates
themselves.

There is also another Officer of high concernment, in the Island, called L'
Enregistreur, or Register, who does Register all, and all manners of Deeds,
which pass under the common Seal of the Isle, as partitions of Lands, or
Wheat-Rents, either in Fee-Farme, or for ready money, Letters of Attorney,
Morgages, Bonds, etc. for three pence each. All which, are written in a
compendious manner, without Equivocations, or Lawyers Quiddities, and pass all
by Oath administered to the Parties, by the Bailly, in the presence of one or
more of the Jurates; neither to do or cause to be done any thing against their
Demises, upon pain of perjury; all written in our natural tongue; Neither are
the Deeds Authentiques, unless the Bailly and two Jurates, at least, are
signed in them, besides the Seal. Of this Seal the Bailly is keeper, but it is
sealed in a Bag, by some of the Justices under their seals, and not opened, but
in their presence: The Impresse of it is three Lions Passant, with an
Inscription bearing Sigillum Insulae de Jersey.

The nomination of the Greffier, Denuntiator, Register, Inferior Advocates,
Huissier, belongs to the Bailly.

The great Court is kept very solemn at their Assizes or opening of their
Courts in the beginning of the Terms: The Governor being present to answer
for those Lordships, that owe their Compearance or appearing at the said
Assizes, whereof there is a good number: Likewise all the Justices and Officers
of the Court, with the Provosts, and other Lords of Manors, which hold in
Capite, and other Frank-Tenants, which are duly called according to their
Ranks, And Fines set upon those which do not appear; And if they failed four
times together, their Lands were put in the Kings Possession.

They keep three sorts of Courts, (though with the same Judges, viz.) The Court
of Heritage, the Court of Cattle, and the Court of Remedies, or the Court
Extraordinary. In the first Court is treated of Inheritance, as partitions of
Lands between Co-Heires, and in fine of all differences, which do arise for
Lands, or any Rents that are for ever. The benefit of retyring of Inheritance
sold, is granted to the first of the kindred, that does claim it within a year.
In the second, called the Court of Cattle, first of all, Criminal Causes,
which are determined definitively without Appeal (except those of High
Treason, the cognizance of which, the King reserved to himself) but are judged
with the greatest Discretion and Favor that can be imagined. For first a
Malefactor being brought before the Judges, by the Constable and his Sermentez,
which make the petty Jury (before mentioned) if they have found the Malefactor
seized of any Goods, or vehement suspicions (after examination of Witnesses in
their presence, they having the freedom to refuse any of them, upon evidences
of hatred, or malice) either of Theft, Murder, or Witchcraft; then their
Verdict is, That they think in their Consciences they are guilty of the Fact,
which is called Indictment; whereupon the Parties so indict d are demanded,
Whether they will be tried by the Bench, or the Country? by the Bench is meant
the Bailly, and the twelve Justices, whereof there must be seven of them at
least of one opinion, to Condemn a man; by the Country is understood, an
Assembly of twenty four of the Accused's own Parish, and neighbor Parishes,
of sufficient able men, full of integrity, of those there must be twenty of an
unanimous voice, to make the Party Guilty, and this is the great Inquest.

In the second place in the same Court, called Cattle, is treated of Decrets,
for the most part; (which is) That in case a man be over-burdened with Debts,
and that his estate is not able to pay them; as soon as he is imprisoned for
any of them, he is freed of all his Creditors, if he comes to Court, and
affirms upon Oath, That he has not wherewithal to satisfy them, and
leaves them what inheritance he has to struggle amongst them, who shall enjoy
it? which is done very regularily; those who have purchased, or lent their
money, the last, are the loosers, and every man injoyeth according to the
priority of his Purchase, etc.

In the last Court, called, Extraordinary, is treated of Causes more trivial,
which concern only Movables, etc. Of the Court of Heritage, the last part of
the Court of Cattle, and Extraordinary, Appeals might be made to the King and
Counsel; For movables, not for under the value of twenty pounds Sterling, but
for matter of Inheritance, there is no limitation. Appeals must be made
immediately after Sentence given, yet sedente curia, and two sufficient
Sureties given within a sennight for the prosecution of them within the time
limited, which is; The said Appeals must be entered in the Book of Counsel
Causes within three months, and prosecuted within one year; and in case the
Appealant do not reverse the Sentence, and procure an Order from the Counsel
of Mal Juge, Bien Appelle, then he forfeits twenty Crowns to the Bailly.

There are likewise many inferior Courts held in the Island, by Seneschalls,
or Stewards, called Basses Courts, which is to say, low Courts, in respect of
the great and superior Courts; many of those Lordships do now belong to the
Commonwealth of England, others to some Gentlemen of the Isle. Of these
Stewards Courts Appeals might be made to the Bailly's Court.

Upon some extraordinary and Important occasion, which might conduce for the
good of the Inhabitants, an Assembly of the States was called, by the
Governor, or Bailly, this Assembly consisted of the said Governor, or his
Lieutenant; the Bailey, or his Lieutenant; the twelve Jurats; the twelve
Constables; who represented the Commons of the Country: and sometimes the
twelve Ministers, who by their turbulency and brouilleries, have made
themselves unworthy of that Assembly, and there fore may be very fitly desired,
they may be left out, with the Bishops.

Amongst the many good and wholesome local Customs Municipall Laws, and
others, whereof many are agreeing with the Mosaicall; one is very remarkable,
in the behalf of the oppressed (viz.) Le clam de Haro; which is, That if any
man, of what degree or quality soever pretends to be injured, or oppressed,
either by the greatest or lowest of this Isle, at the Acclamation three times
of this word Haro, with a loud voice (be it right, or wrong) the other party
must surcease, though he were upon never such urgent occasions; whether he were
at Cart, or Plough, felling, or lopping Trees, in a word, upon any occasion;
And he that is in fault of the Accuser or Accused is fined in ten Livers
Tournois. And if the Accused persists notwithstanding in his work, or
violence, he is also fined in the like sum, for his persisting. And likewise,
if any man is within the hearing of this call, and does not come to the
assistance of the oppressed, he is put to an Arbitrary Fine; And this is tried
at the Court of Cattle beforementioned amongst Crimes.

This is but a short Epitome of our Civil Government, as it has been, and we
hope shall be, until such, as would alter the same, to have their phansies
established, have given the Parliament greater Demonstrations of Policy, for
Freedom, and Liberty, Mercy, and Justice, then these are; more suitable they
cannot; Considered Jersey is inhabited, by Parishes, and the houses are built,
not in Towns or Cities, but scatteredly, upon the several Messuages and
Tenements of Lands; so that those Prerogatives of appointing some Officers,
which Kings had reserved to themselves, belonging now to the Parliament: there
is no need of change in the Form of the Civil Government of that Island: This
I grant, might be desired, that the right of having a Representor, or two in
Parliament, to the end of a stronger Union to this Nation, and of a speedier
expedition of Necessaries, from that Superior Power, unto our people, were for
the future allowed to Jersey and Guerneze, and that without diminution of their
Freedom, Liberties, and Privileges whatsoever, not repugnant to the safe and
well-being of the Commonwealth.

To conclude, I know I need not mention any other of our Laws here: For this
may be sufficient to munish, as by Information, all whom it concerns, against
any attempts that may be, or have been already made, to alter our freedom.
And by this Pattern men may judge of the rest of the piece of our Laws; for
Immoveables, as inheritance; for Movables, as Chattells; for Prevention, and
Pardon, and Punishment of Crimes; for Procreation; and Education, for Measures;
for Association, etc. they are but few. Nevertheless many circumstances, which
to describe them fully should be inserted, would require a greater Volume, then
the patience, or leisure of most men would permit them to take notice of.
Therefore I will only say this more, That once every third year, the Bailly
accompanied with the Justices, the Vicount, the Procuror, and Advocate, the
Constable and other the abovenamed Parish-Officers, does view all the Common
ways of each parish, and where he finds cause, does fine the owners of
Hedges, Trees, Walls, etc. Incombering the Way; or else the Sermentez for the
Waves.

Moreover all the Officers of this Government are to continue quam d use been
vesserint, as long as they do behave themselves well; and none of them longer,
for as soon as any one of them, is convicted of any Crime, as for example,
Bribe or the like, he is outed shamefully: our States having made bold many
times to suspend the Baillyes themselves upon like occasion, and to choose a
Judge Delegate in his place, notwithstanding his Pattent under the Great Seal.

Finally, There is such good Order in the administration of Justice, That when
any one has a Cause in Law, against any one of the Justices, that same Justice
must come down, and stand with his Peers, and party Accusant, at the Bar
amongst the people, so must the Bailly himself, in like occasion: Which has
therefore a Judge, chosen, appointed and sworn by the Bench, to be impartial,
in the Baillies causes. The people have always chosen the Justices and
Constables from amongst the best sort, and known honestest Gentlemen, and
respected them as their Fathers and Princes, honor being their rewards; except
that the Justices when they sign any Deeds, are to have two souces, or two
pences for their pain, if they will take them; the other Officers, they
respect also very much, and use to choose them from the best, and honestest sort
of the Yeomanry. The Lord of righteousness be pleased to lead us all into it;
according to these two Tests and Touch-stones of the equity or righteousness
of all Laws, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy understanding, and with all thy might, and thy
Neighbor at thy self. That is, doing nothing unto him, but what in the like
cause, thy conscience, thy inward knower and knowledge within thee, grants
absolutely, thou would have done to thy self. Amen.

FINIS.

