A SERMON Preached before the KING, JANUARY 30. 1668/9 Being the day of the
Execrable Murder OF King Charles I.

By Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Rector of St. Andrews Holborn, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the White-Hart in Westminster Hall. 1669.

JUDE V. II. And perished in the gainsaying of Corah.
AMong all the dismal consequences of that fatal day wherein the Honor of our
Nation suffered together with our Martyred Sovereign, there is none which in
this Place we ought to be more concerned for, than the Dishonor which was done
to Religion by it. For if those things which were then acted among us, had been
done among the most rude and barbarous Nations, though that had been enough to
have made them for ever thought so; yet they might have been imputed to their
ignorance in matters of Civility and Religion: but when they were committed not
only by men who were called Christians, but under a pretense of a mighty zeal
for their Religion too, men will either think that Religion bad which did give
encouragement to such actions, or those persons extremely wicked, who could
make use of a pretense of it for things so contrary to its nature and design.
And on which of these two the blame will fall, may be soon discovered, when we
consider that the Christian Religion, above all others, has taken care to
preserve the Rights of Sovereignty, by giving unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to make resistance Mat. 22. 21.
unlawful by declaring that those who are Romans 13. 2.
guilty of it shall receive to themselves damnation. But as though bare
resistance had been too mean and low a thing for them (notwithstanding what
Christ and his Apostles had said) to show themselves to be Christians of a
higher rank than others; they imbrue their hands in the blood of their
Sovereign for a demonstration of their Piety, by the same figure by which they
had destroyed men's Rights to defend their Liberties, and fought against the
King for preservation of his Person. But the actions of such men could not have
been so bad as they were; unless their pretenses had been so great, for there
can be no higher aggravation of a wicked action, than for men to seem to be
Religious in the doing of it. If the Devil himself were to preach sedition to
the world, he would never appear otherwise than as an Angel of Light: his
pretense would be Unity, when he designed the greatest Divisions; and the
preservation of Authority, when he laid the seeds of Rebellion. But we might as
well imagine that the God of this world (as the Devil is sometime called)
should advance nothing but Peace and Holiness in it, as that Christianity
should give the least countenance to what is contrary to either of them. Yet
the wickedness of men has been so great upon earth, as to call down Heaven it
self to justify their impieties; and when they have found themselves unable to
bear the burden of them, they would fain make Religion do it.

Such as these we have a description of in this short, but smart Epistle, viz.
men who pretended inspirations and impulses for the greatest villainies; who
believed it a part of their Saintship to despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities; who thought the Grace of God signified very little, unless it served
to justify their most wicked actions. These in all probability were the
followers of Simon Magus the Leviathan of the Primitive Church, (...). Epiphan.
haeres. 27. p. 105. ed. Petav.
who destroyed all the natural differences of good and evil, (...). (...).
(...) 24.. 5 p. 72.
and made it lawful for men in case of persecution, to forswear their Religion.
(...). Theodoret. haeret. f^b. l. ^. p. 193.
The great part of his Doctrine being that his Disciples need not be afraid of
the terrors of the Law, for they were free to do what they pleased themselves,
because Salvation was not to be expected by good works, but only by the Grace
of God: No wonder then, that such as these did turn the Grace of God into
lasciviousness: And when it proved dangerous not to do it, would deny their
Religion to save themselves. For they had so high opinions of themselves, that
they were the only Saints, that as (...). Epiph. har. 24.. 5.
Epiphanius tells us, they thought it the casting Pearls before Swine, to
expose themselves to danger before the Heathen Governors; by which they not
only discovered what a mighty value they set upon themselves, but what mean and
contemptible thoughts they had of that Authority which God had established in
the world.

But this they would by no means allow, for they thought all the Governments of
the world to be nothing else (...) Diabolo, qui nunquam omni^o quietus est,
immo (...) advers. haeres. l. 5. c. 24.
but the contrivance of some evil spirits to abridge men of that liberty which
God and nature had given them: And this is that speaking evil of Dignities
which they are charged with, not only by our Apostle here, but by S. Peter
before him. Although the phrase used by S. Peter, (...) may be taken (by the
use of the word (...) in the first of 2 Pet. 2. 10.
Maceabees) not for the bare contempt of Authority, expressed by reviling
language, but 1 Mac. 2. 6.
for an open resistance of it; which the other is so natural an introduction
to, that those who think and speak contemptibly of Government, do but want an
occasion to manifest that their actions would be as bad as their thoughts and
expressions are. And from hence (...) here in the words of the Text is made use
of to express one of the most remarkable seditions we ever read of, viz. that
of Corah and his Company against Moses and Aaron; whose punishment for it did
not deter these persons who went under the name of Christians, from joining in
seditious practices to the great dishonor of Christianity, and their own
ruin. For therefore the Apostle denounces a Woe against them in the beginning
of the verse, and speaks of their ruin as certain as if they had been consumed
by fire, or swallowed up by the earth, as Corah and his accomplices were; And
they perished in the gainsaying of Corah. In the verb (...), the Aorist, says
Crotius, is taken for the future, or present, and so implying that these
courses did tend to their misery and ruin, and would unavoidably bring it upon
them. If the evidence in history had been clear of the Carpocratians joining
with the Jews in the famous rebellion of Barchochebas, wherein such multitudes
of Christians as well as Heathens were destroyed in Africa, Egypt, and other
places, and the time V. David Ga^^. Chronol. p. 101.
of it had agreed with the time of writing this Epistle, I should then have
thought that this had been the Rebellion here spoken of; for all the Actors in
it were destroyed by the Roman Power, and some of the chief of them made
public examples of Justice for the deterring of others from the like
practices. But however this be, we find these persons here charged with a sin
of the same nature, with the gainsaying of Core, and a judgment of the same
nature, as the consequent of the sin; for they perished in the gainsaying, etc.
And therefore we shall consider the words,

1. As relating to the fact of Corah and his company.

2. As implying as great displeasure of God under the Gospel against the same
kind of sin, as he discovered in the immediate destruction of those persons who
were then guilty of it.

1. As relating to the fact of Corah and his company; and so the words lead us
to the handling,

1. The nature of the Faction which was raised by them.

2. The Judgment that was inflicted upon them for it.

1. For understanding the nature of the Faction, we must enquire into the
design that was laid, the persons who were engaged in it, the pretenses that
were made use of for it.

1. The design that was laid for that, and all other circumstances of the
story, we must have resort to the account that is given of it, Numb. 16. Where
we shall find that the bottom of the design was the sharing of the Government
among themselves, which it was impossible for them to hope for, as long as
Moses continued as a King in Jesurun, for so he is called, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. Him
therefore they intend to lay aside, but this they knew to be a very difficult
task, considering what wonders God had wrought by him in their deliverance out
of Egypt, what wisdom he had hitherto showed in the conduct of them, what care
for their preservation, what integrity in the management of his power, what
reverence the people did bear toward him, and what solemn vows and promises
they had made of obedience to him. But ambitious and factious men are never
discouraged by such an appearance of difficulties; for they know they must
address themselves to the people, and in the first place persuade them that
they manage their interest against the usurpation of their Governors. For by
that means they gain upon the peoples affections, who are ready to cry them up
presently as the true Patriots and defenders of their Liberties against the
encroachment of Princes: and when they have thus insinuated themselves into the
good opinion of the people; groundless suspicions, and unreasonable fears and
jealousies will pass for arguments and demonstrations. Then they who can invent
the most popular lies against the Government are accounted the men of
integrity, and they who most diligently spread the most infamous reports, are
the men of honesty, because they are farthest from being Flatterers of the
Court. The people take a strange pride, as well as pleasure, in hearing and
telling all the faults of their Governors for in doing so they flatter
themselves in thinking they deserve to rule much better than those which do it.
And the willingness they have to think so of themselves, makes them misconstrue
all the actions of their Superiors to the worse sense, and then they find out
plots in every thing, upon the people. What ever is done for the necessary
maintenance of Government, is suspected to be a design merely to exhaust the
people to make them more unable to resist. If good Laws be made, these are said
by factious men to be only intended for snares for the good people, but others
may break them and go unpunished. If Government be strict and severe, then it
is cruel and tyrannical, if mild and indulgent, then it is remiss and
negligent. If Laws be executed, then the peoples Liberties be oppressed; if
not, then it were better not to make Laws, than not to see them executed. If
there be Wars, the people are undone by Taxes; if there be Peace, they are
undone by Plenty. If extraordinary Judgments befall them, then they lament the
sins of their Governors, and of the Times, and scarce think of their own. If
miscarriages happen (as it is impossible always to prevent them) they charge
the form of Government with them, which all sorts are subject to. Nay, it is
seldom that Governors escape with their own faults, the peoples are often laid
upon them too. So here, Numb. 16. 14. Moses is charged with not carrying them
into Canaan, when it was their own sins which kept them thence. Yea, so partial
have the people generally been against their Rulers, when swayed by the power
of Faction, that this has made Government very difficult and unpleasing; for
what ever the actions of Princes are, they are liable to the censures of the
people. Their bad actions being more public, and their good therefore
suspected of design; and the wiser Governors are, the more jealous the people
are of them. For always the weakest part of mankind are the most suspicious;
the less they understand things, the more designs they imagine are laid for
them, and the best counsels are the soonest rejected by them. So that the
wisest Government can never be secure from the jealousies of the people, and
they that will raise a faction against it will never want a party to side with
them. For when could we ever have imagined a Government more likely to be free
from this, than that which Moses had over the people of Israel? He being an
extraordinary person for all the abilities of Government; one bred up in the
Egyptian Court, and in no mean degree of honor, being called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter, one of great experience in the management of affairs, of
great zeal for the good of his Country, as appeared by the tenderness of his
peoples interest in their deliverance
out of Egypt; one of great temper and meekness above all the men of the earth;
one who took all imaginable care for the good establishment of Laws among them;
but above all these, one particularly chosen by God for this end, and therefore
furnished with all the requisites of a good man, and an excellent Prince: Yet
for all these things a dangerous sedition is here raised against him, and that
upon the common grounds of such things, viz. usurpation upon the peoples
rights, arbitrary Government, and ill management of affairs; Usurpation upon
the peoples rights, v. 4. the Faction makes a Remonstrance asserting the
privileges of the people against Moses and Aaron, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the Congregation are holy every one of them, and the Lord is among
them; Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the
Lord: As though they had said, we appear only in behalf of the Fundamental
Liberties of the people both Civil and Spiritual; we only seek to retrench the
exorbitances of power, and some late innovations which have been among us; if
you are content to lay aside your power which is so dangerous and offensive to
Gods holy people, we shall then sit down in quietness; for alas it is not for
our selves that we seek these things (what are we?) but the cause of Gods
people is dearer to us than our lives, and we shall willingly sacrifice them in
so good a Cause. And when Moses afterward sends for the Sons of Eliab to come
to him, they peremptorily refuse all Messages of Peace, and with their men of
the sword mentioned, v. 2. They make votes of V. 12, 13.
non-Addresses, and break off all Treaties with him, and declare these for
their reasons, that he did dominando dominari, as some render it, exercise an
arbitrary and tyrannical power over the people, that he was guilty of breach of
the trust committed to him, for he promised to bring them into a Land flowing
with Milk V. 14.
and Honey, or give them inheritance of fields and vineyards, but he had not
done it, and instead of that only, deceives the people still with fair
promises, and so puts out their eyes that they cannot see into the depth of his
designs. So that now by the ill management of his Trust, the power was again
devolved into the hands of the people, and they ought to take account of his
actions. By which we see the design was under very fair and popular pretenses
to divest Moses of his Government, and then they doubted not but such zealous
Patriots as they had showed themselves, should come to have the greatest share
in it; but this which they most aimed at, must appear least in view, and only
Necessity and Providence must seem to cast that upon them, which was the first
true motive they had to rebel against Moses and Aaron.

2. The Persons who were engaged in it. At first they were only some
discontented Levites who murmured against Moses and Aaron, because they were
not preferred to the Priesthood, and of these Corah was the chief. R. Solomon
observes, that the reason of Corahs discontent, was, that Elizaphan the Son of
Vzziel, of the younger house to Izhar from whom Corah descended, was preferred
before him by Moses to be Prince over the Sons of Kohath. Corah Numb. 3. 3^.
being active and busy in his discontents, had the opportunity of drawing in
some of the Sons of Reuben, for they pitched their tents near each other, both
on the South Side of the Tabernacle Num^. 10. 3 ^^.
of the Congregation; and these were discontented on the account of their Tribe
having lost the privilege of Primogeniture. Thus what ever the pretenses are,
how fair and popular soever in the opposition men make to Authority, ambition
and private discontents are the true beginners of them: but these must be
covered over with the deepest dissimulation, with most vehement Protestations
to the contrary, nothing must be talked of but a mighty zeal for Religion, and
the public Interest. So Josephus tells us concerning Corah, that while he
Joseph. antiq. Jud. l. 4. c. 2.
carried on his own ambitious designs, with all the arts of sedition and a
popular eloquence, insinuating into the peoples minds strange suggestions
against Moses his Government, as being a mere politic design of his to enslave
the people of God, and advance his own family and interest, (...), he would
seem to regard nothing but the public good. If fair pretenses, and glorious
titles will serve to cheat the people into their own miseries, and the sad
effects of Rebellion; they shall never want those who will enslave them for the
sake of Liberty, undo them for the public good, and destroy them with designs
of Reformation. For nothing is more popular than Rebellion in the beginning;
nothing less in the issue of it. And the only true reason that it is ever so,
is from the want of wisdom and judgment in the generality of mankind, who
seldom see to the end of things, and hardly distinguish between the names and
nature of them, till their own dear bought experience has taught them the
difference. Sedition is of the nature, and has the inseparable properties of
Sin; for it is conceived with pleasure, brought forth with pain, and ends in
death and misery. Nothing enters upon the stage with a braver show and
appearance, but however prosperous for a time it may continue, it commonly
meets with a fatal end. But it is with this sin as to this world, as it is with
others as to the next; men when they are betrayed into them, are carried away
and transported with the pleasing temptations, not considering the unspeakable
misery that follows after them. So that what the Devils advantage is in order
to the ruin of men's souls, is the advantage of seditious persons over the less
understanding people; they both tempt with an appearance of good, and equally
deceive them which hearken to them. But as we still find, that notwithstanding
all the grave admonitions, the sober counsels, the rational discourses, the
persuasive arguments which are used to deter men from the practice of sin, they
will still be such Fools to yield to the Devils temptations against their own
welfare: So, neither the blessings of a continued Peace, nor the miseries of an
intestine War, neither the security of a settled Government, nor the constant
danger of Innovations will hinder men of fiery and restless spirits from
raising combustions in a Nation, though themselves perish in the Flames of
them. This we find here was the case of Corah and his company; they had
forgotten the groans of their captivity in Egypt, and the miracles of their
deliverance out of it, and all the faithful services of Moses, and Aaron; they
considered not the difficulties of Government, nor the impossibility of
satisfying the ambitious desires of all pretenders; they regarded not that God
from whom their power was derived, nor the account they must give to him for
their resistance of it: nothing but a full Revenge upon the Government can
satisfy them, by leaving no means unattempted for its overthrow, though
themselves be consumed by the fall of it. It were happy for Government if these
turbulent spirits could be singled out from the rest in their first attempts;
but that is the usual subtilty of such men, when they find themselves aimed at,
they run into the common herd, and persuade the people that they are equally
concerned with themfelves in the present danger, that though the pretense be
only against faction and sedition, the design is the slavery and oppression of
the People. This they manage at first by grave nods, and secret whispers, by
deep sighs, and extatick motions, by far fetched discourses, and Tragical
stories, till they find the people capable of receiving their impressions, and
then seem most unwilling to mention that which it was at first their design to
discover. By such arts as these Corah had prepared, as Joseph. Antiq. l. 4. c.
2.
Josephus tells us, almost the whole Camp of Israel for a popular tumult, so
that they were like to have stoned Moses before he was aware of it; and it
seems the Faction had gained a mighty interest among the people, when although
God so severely and remarkably punished the heads of it, yet the very next day
all the Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and
Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord. What Numb 16. 41
a mark of Gods people was sedition grown among them! When these men were
accounted Saints in spite of Heaven, and Martyrs, though God himself destroyed
them. They were men who were only sanctified by Rebellion: and showed no other
fruits of their piety but disobedience to Authority. But the danger had not
been so great, how loud soever the complaints had been, if only the ruder
multitude had been gained to the Favor of Corah and his party: For these
wanted heads to manage them, and some Countenance of Authority to appear under;
and for this purpose they had drawn to their Faction 250 Princes of the
Assembly, famous in the Congregation, V. ^.
men of Renown, i. e. Members ofthe great Council of the Nation. Whom Moses was
wont to call and advise with about the public Affairs of it; such who sat in
Comitiis Senatorum, as Paul. Fagius tells us, therefore said to be (...) such
as were called to the great Assembly which sat in Parliament at Number. 10. 2.
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, which was the place where they
met together. These were the Heads of the Tribes, and the Captains of
thousands, and the men of the greatest Fame and Authority among the People whom
Moses assembled together for advice and counsel, as often as he saw just
occasion for it. And as far as I can find were distinct from the great
Sanhedrin, which seemed to be rather a constant Court of Judicature which sat
to receive Appeals from Inferior Courts, and to determine such difficult
causes which were reserved peculiarly for it, as about the Apostasy of a whole
Tribe, the case of false Prophets, and the like. But these 250 men did far
exceed the whole number of the Sanhedrin; and the Heads of the Tribes, and the
Elders of Israel were summoned together upon any very weighty occasion, by
Moses both before and after the institution of the Sanhedrin. And now since the
Faction had gained so great strength by the accession of so great a number of
the most leading men among the People, we may expect they should soon declare
their intentions, and publish the grounds of their entering into such a
combination against Moses.

3. Which is the next thing to be spoken to; viz. the colors and pretenses
under which these persons sought to justify the proceedings of the Faction.
Which were these two,

1. The asserting the Rights and Liberties of the people in opposition to the
Government of Moses.

2. The freeing themselves from the encroachments upon their spiritual
Privileges, which were made by the Usurpations of Aaron and the Priesthood.

1. The asserting the Rights and Liberties of the people in opposition to the
Government of Moses. Is it a small thing, say they, that thou have brought us
up out of a Land that flows with Numb. 16. 13.
Milk and Honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? And before, their charge was, that Moses and Aaron
took too much upon them, in lifting up themselves above the Congregation of the
V. 3.
Lord. Which Josephus more at large explains, telling us that the great
accusation of Moses was, that out of his ambition and affectation Joseph. l. 4.
1, 2.
of Power, he had taken upon himself the Government of the people without their
consent, that he made use of his pretense of Familiarity with God only for a
Politic end, that by this means he debarred the people of that Liberty which
God had given them, and no man ought to take from them, that they were all a
Freeborn people, and equally the (...). Joseph. Ant. l 4. c. 2. p. ^04.
Children of Abraham, and therefore there was no reason they should depend upon
the will of a single Person, who by his Politic Arts had brought them to the
greatest necessities, that he might rule them the better; Wherefore Corah, as
though he had been already President of a High-Court of Justice upon Moses
their King, determines, that it was necessary for the Commonwealth, that such
enemies to the Public Interest should be discovered and punished; lest if they
be let alone in their Usurpations of Power, they declare themselves open
enemies when it will be too late to oppose them. There were then two great
Principles among them by which they thought to defend themselves.

1. That Liberty and a right to Power is so inherent in the People, that it
cannot be taken from them.

2. That in case of Usurpation upon that Liberty of the people, they may resume
the exercise of Power, by punishing those who are guilty of it.

1. That Liberty, and a right to Power, is inseparable from the people;
libertatis patrocinium suscipiunt, says Calvin, upon Corah and his company;
and I believe they will be found to be the first assertors of this kind of
Liberty that ever were in the world. And happy had it been for us in this
Nation, if Corah had never found any Disciples in it. For what a blessed
Liberty was this which Corah aimed at, viz. to change one excellent Prince, as
Moses was, for 250 Tyrants, besides Corah and the Sons of Reuben? What just and
equal liberty was it which Moses did deprive them of? It was only the Liberty
of destroying themselves, which all the power he had could hardly keep them
from. Could there be any greater Liberty than delivering them out of the house
of bondage? and was not Moses the great Instrument in effecting it? Could there
be greater Liberty than for their whole Nation to be preserved from all the
designs of their enemies, to enjoy their own Laws, and matters of Justice to be
duly administered among them? and had they not all these under the Government of
Moses? What means then this outcry for Liberty? Is it that they would have had
no Government at all among them, but that every one might have done what he
pleased himself? This indeed were a desirable Liberty, if a man could have it
alone: but when every one thinks that he is but one, though he be free; and
every one else is as free as he, but though their freedom be equal to his, his
Power is not equal to theirs; and therefore to bring things to a more just
proportion, every one must part with some power for a great deal of security.
If any man can imagine himself in such a state of confusion, which some
improperly call a state of nature; let him consider, whether the contentment he
could take in his own liberty and power to defend himself, would balance the
fears he would have of the injury which others in the same state might be able
to do him. Not that I think mere fear made men at first enter into Societies,
for there is a natural inclination in mankind to it, and one of the greatest
pleasures of humane life lies in the enjoyment of it. But what other
considerations incline men to, fear makes reasonable, though men part with some
supposed liberty for the enjoyment of it. So that the utmost liberty is
destroyed by the very nature of Govermment, and nothing can be more
unreasonable than for men to quarrel with Government for that, which they
cannot enjoy and the preservation of themselves together. Which alone makes the
desire of Power reasonable, and if the preservation of our selves in our rights
and properties may be had without it, all that the want of Liberty signifies,
is, that men have all the conveniences of Power without the trouble and the
cares of it. And if this be not a more desirable Liberty than the other, let
any rational man judge. The pretense of Liberty then in this sense against
Government, is, that men are Fools in taking the best care to preserve
themselves, that Laws are but instruments of Slavery, and every single man is
better able to defend himself, than the united strength of a people in Society
is to defend him. And this kind of Liberty we may justly think will be desired
by none but madmen, and beasts of prey. It follows then, that what Liberty is
inconsistent with all Government, must never be pleaded against any one sort of
it. But is there then so great a degree of Liberty in one mode of Government
more than another, that it should be thought reasonable to disturb Government,
merely to alter the form of it? Would it have been so much better for the
people of Israel to have been governed by the 250 men here mentioned, than by
Moses? Would not they have required the same subjection and obedience to
themselves, though their commands had been much more unreasonable than his?
What security can there be that every one of these shall not be worse in all
respects than him whom they were so wiling to lay aside; and if one be thought
troublesome, what Liberty and ease is there when their name is Legion? So that
the folly of these popular pretenses is as great as the sin in being persuaded
by them.

And it may be they have not thought amiss who have attributed a great part of
that disturbance of the Peace of Kingdoms, under a pretense of popular
Government, to an unjust admiration of those Greek and Roman Writers, who have
unreasonably set up Liberty in opposition to Monarchy. But some of the wisest
of them have given us a truer account of these things, and have told us, that
it was impossible the Roman State could have been preserved longer, unless it
had submitted to an Imperial Power; For the popular heats and Di^ Romans hist. l.
54.
factions were so great, that the annual election of Magistrates, was but
another name for a tumult; and as Dio goes on, the name of popular Government
is far more plausible, but the benefits L. 44. (...).
of Monarchy are far greater; it being much easier to find one good than many;
and though one be accounted difficult, the other is almost impossible. And as
he elsewhere well observes, the flourishing of a Commonwealth depends upon its
poverty; that being alone able to unite the minds of the Governors, who in a
plentiful state, not set about with enemies, will be grasping at their own
private interests, and fall naturally from thence into divisions and
animosities; but the flourishing of the Monarchy lies in the riches of it, the
Prince and the People having the same interest, and being rich or poor
together. So that we see the notion of Liberty, and exercise of power in
Government, is so far from being an inseparable property of the people, that
the proper notion of it is inconsistent with Government and that which lies in
the enjoyments of our Rights and Properties, is so far from being inconsistent
with Monarchy, that they are more advanced by that, than by any other way of
Government.

2. Another principle which tends to the subverting Government under a pretense
of Liberty, is, that in case of Usurpation upon the Rights of the People, they
may resume the exercise of Power, and punish the Supreme Magistrate himself, if
he be guilty of it. Then which there can be no principle imagined more
destructive to civil Societies, and repugnant to the very nature of Government.
For it destroys all the obligations of Oaths and Compacts, it makes the
solemnest bonds of obedience signify nothing, when the people shall think fit
to declare it: it makes every prosperous Rebellion just; for no doubt when the
power is in the Rebels hands, they will justify themselves, and condemn their
Sovereign. (And if Corah, Dathan and Abiram had succeeded in their Rebellion
against Moses, no doubt they would have been called the Keepers of the
Liherties of Israel.) It makes all Government dangerous to the persons in whom
it is, considering the unavoidable infirmities of it, and the readiness of
people to misconstrue the actions of their Princes, and their incapacity to
judge of them; it not being fit that the reasons of all counsels of Princes
should be divulged by Proclamations. So that there can be nothing wanting to
make Princes miserable, but that the people want Power to make them so. And the
supposition of this principle will unavoidably keep up a constant jealousy
between the Prince and his people: for if he knows their minds, he will think
it reasonable to secure himself by all means against their Power, and endeavor
to keep them as unable to resist as may be: whereby all mutual confidence
between a Prince and his People will be destroyed: and there can be no such way
to bring in an arbitrary Government into a Nation, as that which such men
pretend, to be the only means to keep it out. Besides, this must necessarily
engage a Nation in endless disputes about the forfeiture of Power into whose
hands it falls: whether into the people in common, or some persons particularly
chosen by the people for that purpose: for in an established Government
according to their principles, the King himself is the true representative of
the people; others may be chosen for some particular purposes, as proposing
Laws, etc. but these cannot pretend by virtue of that choice, to have the full
power of the people; and withal, whatever they do against the consent of the
people is unlawful; and their power is forfeited by attempting it.

But on the other side, what mighty danger can there be in supposing the
persons of Princes to be so sacred, that no sons of violence ought to come near
to hurt them? Have not all the ancient Kingdoms and Empires of the world
flourished under the supposition of an unaccountable power in Princes? That
has been thought by those who did not own a derivation of their power from
God, but a just security to their persons, considering the hazards, and the
care of Government which they undergo? Have not the people who have been most
jealous of their Liberties, been fain to have recourse to an unaccountable
power, as their last refuge in case of their greatest necessities? I mean the
Romans in their Dictators. And if it were thought not only reasonable, but
necessary then, ought it not to be preserved inviolable, where the same Laws do
give it by which men have any right to challenge any power at all? Neither does
this give Princes the liberty to do what they list; for the Laws by which they
Govern, do fence in the rights and properties of men; and Princes do find so
great convenience ease and security in their Government by Law, that the sense
of that will keep them far better within the compass of Laws, than the Peoples
holding a Rod over them, which the best Princes are like to suffer the most by,
and bad will but grow desperate by it. Good Princes will never need such a
curb, because their oaths and promises, their love and tenderness toward their
people, the sense they have of a Power infinitely greater than theirs, to which
they must give an account of all their actions, will make them govern as the
Fathers of their Country; and bad Princes will never value it, but will
endeavor by all possible means to secure themselves against it. So that no
inconveniency can be possibly so great on the supposition of this unaccountable
Power in Sovereign Princes, taking it in the general, and merely on the account
of reason, as the unavoidable mischiefs of that Hypothesis, which places all
power originally in the people, and notwithstanding all oaths and bonds
whatsoever to obedience gives them the liberty to resume it when they please:
which will always be when that Spirit of Faction and Sedition shall prevail
among them, which ruled here in Corah and his company.

2. Another pretense for this Rebellion of Corah, was, the freeing themselves
from the encroachments upon their spiritual privileges which were made by the
usurpations of Aaron and the Priesthood. This served for a very popular
pretense, for they knew no reason that one Tribe should engross so much of the
wealth of the Nation to themselves, and have nothing to do but to attend the
service of God for it. What, say they, are not all the Lords people holy? Why
may not then all they offer up incense to the Lord, as well as the Sons of
Aaron? How many public uses might those Revenues serve for, which are now to
maintain Aaron, and all the sons of Levi? But if there must be some to attend
the service of God, why may not the meanest of the people serve for that
purpose, those who can be serviceable for nothing else? Why must there be an
order of Priesthood distinct from that of Levites? why a High Priest above all
the Priests? what is there in all their office which one of the common people
may not do as well as they? cannot they slay the sacrifices, and offer incense,
and do all other parts of the Priestly office? So that at last they make all
this to be a Politic design of Moses only to advance his own Family by making
his Brother High Priest, and to have all the Priests and Levites at his
devotion, to keep the people the better in awe. This has always been the
quarrel at Religion, by those who seldom pretend to it, but with a design to
destroy it. For who would ever have minded the constant attendance at the
Temple, if no encouragements had been given to those who were employed in it?
Or is not Religion apt enough to be despised of it self, by men of profane
minds, unless it be rendered more mean and contemptible by the Poverty of those
who are devoted to it? Shall not God be allowed the privilege of every Master
of a Family, to appoint the ranks and orders of his own servants, and to take
care they be provided for, as becomes those who wait upon him? What a dishonor
had this been to the true God, when those who worshipped false Gods thought
nothing too great for those who were employed in the service of them? But never
any yet cried, but he that had a mind to betray his Master, to what purpose is
all this waste? Let God be honored as he ought to be, let Religion come in for
its share among all the things which deserve encouragement, and those who are
employed in the offices of it, enjoy but what God, and Reason, and the Laws of
their Country give them, and then we shall see it was nothing, but the
discontent and saction of Corah and his company which made any encroachment of
Aaron and the Priesthood any pretense for Rebellion.

But all these pretenses would not serve to make them escape the severe hand of
divine justice; for in an extraordinary and remarkable manner he made them
suffer the just desert of their sin, for they perished in their contradiction,
which is the next thing to be considered, viz.

2. The Judgment which was inflicted upon them for it. They had provoked
Heaven by their sin, and disturbed the earth by their Faction; and the earth,
as if it were moved with indignation against them, trembled and shook, as
Josephus says, like waves that are tossed with a mighty wind, and then with a
horrid noise it rends asunder, and opens its mouth to swallow those in its
bowels who were unfit to live upon the face of it. They had been dividing the
people, and the earth to their amazement and ruin divides it self under their
feet, as though it had been designed on purpose, that in their punishment
themselves might feel, and others see the mischief of their sin. Their
seditious principles seemed to have infected the ground they stood upon; the
earth of a sudden proves as unquiet and troublesome as they; but to rebuke
their madness, it was only in obedience to him who made it the executioner of
his wrath against them; and when it had done its office, it is said, that the
Numb. 16. 35.
earth closed upon them; and they perished from among the Congregation. Thus
the earth having revenged it self against the disturbers of its peace, Heaven
presently appears with a flaming fire, taking vengeance upon the 250 men, who
in opposition to Aaron, had usurped the Priestly office, in offering incense
before the Lord. Such a Fire, if we believe the same Historian, V. 3^.
which far outwent the most dreadful eruptions of AEtna or Vesuvins, which
neither the art of man, nor the power of the wind could raise, which neither
the burning of Woods nor Cities could parallel; but such a Fire which the wrath
of God alone could kindle, whose light could be outdone by nothing but the heat
of it. Thus Heaven and Earth agree in the punishment of such disturbers of
Government, and God by this remarkable judgment upon them has left it upon
record to all ages, that all the world may be convinced how displeasing to him
the sin of saction and sedition is. For God, takes all this that was done
against Moses and Aaron, as done against himself. For they are said to be
gathered together against the Lord, v. 11. to provoke the Lord, v. 30. And the
fire is said to come out from the Lord: v. 35. And afterward it is said of
them; This is that Dathan and Abiram, who strove against Moses and against
Numb. 26. 9.
Aaron in the company of Corah, when they strove against the Lord. By which we
see God interprets striving against the Authority appointed by him, to be a
striving against himself. God looks upon himself as immediately concerned in
the Government of the world; for by him Princes reign, and they are his
Vicegerents upon earth; and they who resist, resist not a mere appointment of
the people, but an Ordinance of God; and they who do so shall in the mildest
sense receive a severe punishment from Rom 13. 1. 2^
him. Let the pretenses be never so popular, the persons never so great and
famous; nay, though they were of the great Council of the Nation, yet we see
God does not abate of his severity upon any of these considerations.

This was the first formed sedition that we read of against Moses, the people
had been murmuring before, but they wanted heads to manage them: Now all things
concur to a most dangerous Rebellion upon the most popular pretenses of
Religion and Liberty; and now God takes the first opportunity of declaring his
hatred of such actions; that others might hear, and fear, and do no more so
presumptuously. This has been the usual method of divine Judgments; the first
of the kind has been most remarkably punished in this life, that by it they
may see how hateful such things are to God; but if men will venture upon them
not withstanding, God does not always punish them so much in this world,
(though he sometimes does) but reserves them, without repentance, to his
Justice in the world to come. The first man that sinned was made an example of
Gods Justice; The first world; the first public attempt against Heaven at
Babel after the plantation of the world again; the first Cities which were so
generally corrupted after the flood; the first breaker of the Sabbath after the
Law; the first offerers with strange fire; the first lookers into the Ark, and
here the first popular Rebellion and Usurpers of the office of Priesthood. God
does hereby intend to preserve the honor of his Laws; he gives men warning
enough by one exemplary punishment, and if not withstanding that, they will
commit the same sin, they may thank themselves if they suffer for it, if not in
this life, yet in that to come. And that good effect this Judgment had upon
that people, that although the next day 14000 suffered for murmuring at the
destruction of these men, yet we do not find that any Rebellion was raised
among them afterward upon these popular pretenses of Religion, and the Power
of the People. While their Judges continued (who were Kings, without the state
and title of Kings) they were observed with reverence, and obeyed with
diligence. When afterward they desired a King, with all the Pomp and Grandeur
which other Nations had (which Samuel acquaints them with, viz, the Officers
and Soldiers, (...)
the large Revenues he must have) though their King was disowned by God, yet
the people held firm in their obedience to him, and David himself, though
anointed to be King, persecuted by Saul, and though he might have pleaded
Necessity and Providence as much as any ever could, (when Saul was strangely
delivered into his hands,) yet we see what an opinion he had of the person of a
bad King, The Lord forbid that I should do 1 (...)
this thing against my Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand
against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord. And lest we should think it
was only his Modesty or his Policy which kept him from doing it, he afterward,
upon a like occasion declares, it was only the sin of doing it, which kept him
from it. For who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless? (...)
Not as though David could not do it without the power of the Sanhedrin, as it
has been pretended by the Sons of Corah in our age; for he excepts none; he
never seizes upon him to carry him prisoner to be tried by the Sanhedrin, nor
is there any foundation for any such power in the Sanhedrin over the persons of
their Sovereigns. It neither being contained in the grounds of its institution,
nor any precedent occurring in the whole story of the Bible, which gives the
least countenance to it: Nay, several passages of Scripture utterly overthrew
it, for how could Solomon have said, Where the word (...)
of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him, what do thou? If by
the constitution of their Government, the Sanhedrin might have controlled him
in what he said or did. But have not several of the modern Jews said so?
Granting that some have; yet so they have spoken many unreasonable and foolish
things besides; but yet none of these have said, that it was in the power of
the Sanhedrin to depose their Kings, or put them to death; all that they say
is, that in the cases expressed by the Law, if the Kings do transgress, the
Sanhedrin had the power of inflicting the penalty of scourging, which yet they
deny to have had any infamy in it among them. But did not David transgress the
Law in his murder and adultery? did not Solomon in the multitude of his wives
and Idolatry, yet where do we read that the Sanhedrin ever took cognizance of
these things? And the more ancient Jews do say, that the King was not to be
judged, as is plain in the (...)
Text of the Misna, however the Expositors have taken a liberty to contradict
it; but as far as we can find, without any foundation of reason: and R.
Jeremiah in Nachmanides, says expressly, That no creature may judge the King,
but the holy and blessed God alone. But we (...)
have an Authority far greater than his, viz. of David's in this case, who after
he has denied that any man can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed, and be guiltless: In the very next words he submits the judgment of
him only to God himself, saying, As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him,
or his day shall 1 ^^^m 26. 10.
come to die, or he shall descend into battle and perish. He thought it
sufficient to leave the judgment of those things to God, whose power over
Princes he knew was enough, if well considered by them, to keep them in awe. We
have now dispatched the first consideration of the words of the Text, as they
relate to the fact of Corah and his company.

2. We ought now to enquire, whether the Christian Doctrine has made any
alteration in these things; or whether that gives any greater encouragement to
faction and sedition than the Law did, when it is masked under a pretense of
zeal for Religion and Liberty. But it is so far from it, that what God then
declared to be displeasing to him by such remarkable judgments, has been now
more fully manifested by frequent precepts, and vehement exhortations, by the
most weighty arguments, and the constant practice of the first and the best of
Christians, and by the black character which is set upon those who under a
pretense of Christian Liberty did despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities, and follow Corah in his Rebellion, however they may please
themselves with greater light, than former ages had in this matter, they are
said to be such for whom is reserved the blackness Jude v. 13.
of darkness for ever. It would take up too much time to examine the frivolous
evasions, and ridiculous distinctions by which they would make the case of the
Primitive Christians in not resisting Authority, so much different from theirs
who have not only done it, but in spite of Christianity have pleaded for it.
Either they said they wanted strength, or courage, or the countenance of the
Senate, or did not understand their own Liberty; when all their obedience was
only due to those precepts of the Gospel, which make it so great a part of
Christianity to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and which the Teachers
of the Gospel had particularly given them in charge to put the people in mind
of. Tit. 3. 1.


And happy had it been for us if this Doctrine had been more sincerely
preached, and duly practiced in this Nation; for we should then never have seen
those sad times, which we can now no otherwise think of, than of the devouring
Fire, and raging Pestilence, i. e. of such dreadful judgments which we have
smarted so much by, that we heartily pray we may never feel them again: For
then fears and jealousies began our miseries, and the curse so often denounced
against Meroz, fell upon the whole Nation; When the Sons of Corah managed their
own ambitious designs against Moses and Aaron (the King and the Church) under
the same pretenses of Religion and Liberty. And when the pretense of Religion
was broken into Schisms, and Liberty into oppression of the people, it pleased
God out of his secret and unsearchable judgments to suffer the Sons of
Violence to prevail against the Lords Anointed; and then they would know no
difference between his being conquered and guilty. They could find no way to
justify their former wickedness, but by adding more: The consciousness of
their own guilt, and the fears of the punishment due to it, made them unquiet
and thoughtfull; as long as his life and presence did upbraid them with the
one, and made them fearful of the other. And when they found the greatness and
constancy of his mind, the firmness of his Piety, the zeal he had for the true
interest of the people, would not suffer him to betray his Trust for the saving
of his life; they charge him with their own guilt, and make him suffer because
they had deserved to do it. And as if it had not been enough to have abused the
names of Religion and Liberty before, they resolve to make the very name of
Justice to suffer together with their King: by calling that infamous company
who condemned their Sovereign, A High Court of Justice which trampled under
foot the Laws both of God and men. But lest the world should imagine they had
any shame left in their sins, they make the people witnesses of his Murder;
and pretend the Power of the People for doing that, which they did detest and
abhor. Thus fell our Royal Martyr a sacrifice to the fury of unreasonable men;
who either were so blind as not to see his worth, or rather so bad as to hate
him for it. And as God gave once to the people of the Jews a King in his Anger,
being provoked to it by their sins, we have cause to say, that upon the same
account he took away one of the best of Kings from us in his wrath. But blessed
be that God, who in the midst of judgment was pleased to remember mercy, in
the miraculous preservation, and glorious restoration of our Gracious
Sovereign; let us have a care then of abusing the mercies of so great a
deliverance to quite other ends than God intended it for, lest he be provoked
to say to us, as he did of old to the Jews, But if ye shall still do wickedly,
ye shall be consumed, both ye and your 1 Samuel 12. 25.
King. And if we look on this as a dreadful judgment, let us endeavor to
prevent it by a timely and sincere reformation of our lives, and by our hearty
supplications to God that he would preserve the person of our Sovereign from
all the attempts of violence, that he would so direct his counsels, and prosper
his affairs, that His Government may be a long and public Blessing to these
Nations.

FINIS.

