SERMONS Preached on several Occasions.

To which a DISCOURSE IS ANNEXED Concerning the TRUE REASON OF THE SUFFERINGS
OF CHRIST.

WHEREIN CRELLIUS his Answer to GROTIUS IS CONSIDERED.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, at the Sign of the
Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall.
1673.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Six SERMONS upon
AMOS IV. XI. I Have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord. page 1 PROVE. XIV. IX. Fools make a mock at
Sin. page 23 LUKE VII. XXXV. But Wisdom is justified of all her Children. page
42 ROMANS I. XVI. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the
Power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek. page 62 HEBREWS II. III. How shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation? page 79 HEBREWS XII. III. For, consider him that endured
such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in
your minds. page 97 JUDE V. II. And perished in the gainsaying of Corah. page
120 MATTHEW XXI. XLIII. Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruit; thereof. page
141 JOHN VII. XX XIX. But this spoke he of the Spirit which they that believe
on him should receive. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus
was not yet glorified. page 162 ISAIAH LVII. XXI. There is no peace, says my
God to the Wicked. page 178 II CORINTH. V. II. Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men. page 198 MATTHEW XVI. XXVI. For what is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall
he give in exchange for his soul? page 217
PART II. A Discourse concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of CHRIST.
CHAP. I. OF the Socinian way of interpreting Scripture. Of the uncertainty it
leaves us in as to the main articles of Faith, manifested by an Exposition of
Genesis 1. suitable to that way. The state of the Controversy in general
concerning the sufferings of Christ for us. He did not suffer the same we
should have done. The grand mistake in making punishments of the nature of
Debts; the difference between them at large discovered, from the different
reason and ends of them. The right of punishments in God, proved against
Crellius, not to arise from mere dominion. The end of punishment not bare
Compensation, as it is in debts; what punishment due to an injured person by
the right of Nature; proper punishment a result of Laws. Crellius his great
mistake about the end of Punishments. Not designed for satisfaction of Anger as
it is a desire of Revenge. Seneca and Lactantius vindicated against Crellius.
The Magistrates interest in Punishment distinct from that of private persons.
Of the Nature of Anger in God, and the satisfaction to be made to it. Crellius
his great arguments against satisfaction depend on a false Notion of Gods
anger. Of the ends of divine Punishments, and the different nature of them in
this and and the future state. page 239 CHAP. II. The particular state of the
Controversy, concerning the sufferings of Christ. The Concessions of our
Adversaries. The debate reduced to two heads: The first concerning Christ's
sufferings, being a punishment for sin, entered upon. In what sense Crellius
acknowledges the sins of men, to have been the impulsive cause of the death of
Christ. The sufferings of Christ proved to be a punishment, from Scripture. The
importance of the phrase of bearing sins. Of the Scape-Goats bearing the sins
of the people into the Wilderness. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2. 24.
vindicated against Crellius and himself. (...) never used for the taking away a
thing by the destruction of it. Crellius his sense examined. Isa. 53. 11.
vindicated. The argument from Matthew. 8. 17. answered. Grotius constant to
himself in his notes on that place. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7. cleared. Whether Christ's
death be a proper (...), and whether that does imply, that it was a punishment
of sin? How far the punishment of Children for their Fathers faults, are
exemplary among men. The distinction of calamities and punishments, holds not
here. That Gods hatred of sin could not be seen in the sufferings of Christ,
unless they were a punishment of sin, proved against Crellius. Grotius his
Arguments from Christ being made sin and a curse for us, defended. The liberty
our Adversaries take in Changing the sense of words. The particles (...), being
joined to sins and relating to sufferings do imply those sufferings to be a
punishment for sin. According to their way of interpreting Scripture, it had
been impossible for our doctrine to be clearly expressed therein. page 265
CHAP. III. The words of Scripture being at last acknowledged by our Adversaries
to make for us, the only pretense remaining is that our Doctrine is repugnant
to reason. The debate managed upon point of reason: The grand difficulty
enquired into, and manifested by our Adversaries concessions, not to lie in the
greatness of Christ's sufferings, or that our sins were the impulsive cause of
them, or that it is impossible that one should be punished for another faults:
or in all cases unjust: the cases wherein Crellius allows it, instanced. From
whence it is proved that he yields the main cause. The arguments propounded
whereby he attempts to prove it unjust for Christ to be punished for our sins.
Crellius his principles of the justice of punishments examined. Of the relation
between desert and punishment. That a person by his own consent may be punished
beyond the desert of his own actions. An answer to Crellius his Objections.
What it is to suffer undeservedly, Crellius his mistake in the state of the
question. The instances of Scripture considered. In what sense Children are
punished for their Parents sins. Ezec. 18. 20. explained at large. Whether the
guilty being freed from the sufferings of an innocent person makes that
punishment unjust or no? Crellius his shifts and evasions in this matter
discovered. Why among men the offenders are not freed in criminal matters
though the sureties be punished. The release of the party depends on the terms
of the sureties suffering, therefore deliverance not ipso facto. No necessity
of such a translation in criminal, as is in pecuniary matters. page 295 CHAP.
IV. The Death of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin. What the
expiation of sin was by the Sacrifices under the Law; twofold, Civil and
Ritual. The Promises made to the Jews under the Law of Moses, respected them as
a People, and therefore must be temporal. The typical nature of Sacrifices
asserted. A substitution in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, proved from
Lev. 17. 11. and the Concession of Crellius about the signification of (...)
joined with (...). Lev. 10. 17. explained. The expiation of uncertain murder
proves a substitution. A substitution of Christ in our room proved from Christ
being said to dye for us; the importance of that phrase considered. In what
sense a Surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Our Redemption by
Christ proves a substitution. Of the true notion of Redemption: that explained,
and proved against Socinus and Crellius. No necessity of paying the price to
him that detains captive, where the captivity is not by force, but by sentence
of Law. Christ's death a proper (...): and therefore the (...) attributed to it,
cannot be taken for mere deliverance. page 314 CHAP. V. The notion of a
sacrifice belongs to the death of Christ, because of the Oblation made therein
to God. Crellius his sense of Christ's Oblation proposed. Against him it is
proved, that the Priestly office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and
not to us. Expiatory Sacrifices did divert the wrath of God. Christ not a bare
Metaphorical High Priest. Crellius destroys the Priesthood of Christ by
confounding it with the exercise of his Regal Power. No proper expiation of sin
belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his Doctrine be true, Ephesians. 5. 2.
proves the death of Christ an Expiatory Sacrifice, and an Oblation to God. The
Phrase of a sweet smelling savor, belongs to Expiatory Sacrifices; Crellius
his gross notion of it. His mistakes about the kinds of Sacrifices.
Burnt-offerings were Expiatory Sacrifices both before and under the Law. A new
distribution of sacrifices proposed. What influence the mactation of the
Sacrifice had on Expiation. The High Priest only to slay the Sin-offering on
the day of Atonement; from whence it is proved, that Christ's Priesthood did not
begin from his entrance into Heaven. The mactation in Expiatory Sacrifices no
bare preparation to a Sacrifice, proved by the Jewish Laws, and the customs of
other Nations. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven,
or on Earth? Of the proper notion of Oblations under the Levitical Law. Several
things observed from thence to our purpose. All things necessary to a legal
Oblation, concur in the death of Christ: His entrance into Heaven has no
correspondency with it; if the blood of Christ were no sacrifice for sin. In
Sin Offerings for the People, the whole was consumed; no eating of the
Sacrifices allowed the Priests, but in those for private Persons. Christ's
exercise of Power in Heaven, in no sense an Oblation to God. Crellius, his
sense repugnant to the circumstances of the places in dispute. Objections
answered. page 329 CHAP. VI. That the effects of proper Expiatory Sacrifices
belong to the death of Christ, which either respect the sin or the person. Of
the true notion of expiation of sin, as attributed to Sacrifices. Of the
importance of (...), as applied to them. Socinus his proper sense of it
examined. Crellius his Objections answered. The Jews notion of (...). The
Sacrifices not bare conditions of pardon, nor expiated merely as a slight part
of obedience. Gods expiating sin, destroys not expiation by Sacrifice. The
importance of (...) and (...), relating to Sacrifices. Expiation attributed to
the Sacrifice of Christ, in the same sense that it was to other Sacrifices: and
from thence, and the places of Scripture which mention it, proved not to be
merely declarative. If it had been so, it had more properly belonged to his
Resurrection than his death. The Death of Christ not taken Metonymically for
all the Consequents of it; because of the peculiar effects of the death of
Christ in Scripture, and because Expiation is attributed to him antecedently to
his entrance into Heaven. No distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's
entrance into Heaven from his sitting at the right hand of God. The effects of
an Expiatory Sacrifice, respecting the person, belong to the death of Christ,
which are Atonement and Reconciliation. Of the signification of (...) and
(...). The Reconciliation by Christ's death, does not merely respect us, but
God; why the latter less used in the New Testament. A twofold Reconciliation
with God mentioned in Scripture. Crellius his evasion answered. The Objections
from Gods being reconciled in the sending his Son, and the inconsistency of the
Freeness of Grace with the Doctrine of Satisfaction answered, and the whole
concluded. page 355
TO THE Right Honorable ELIZABETH COUNTESS DOWAGER OF JOCELIN Late EARL of
Northumberland.
Madam,
AMONG the number of those who congratulate Your safe return into Your own
Country, wherein Your Ladyship is so justly beloved and esteemed by all that
honor Virtue and Goodness, Give me leave to express my Duty in an Address more
agreeable to my own Profession, than some perhaps will think it is to Your
Quality and Condition. Those I mean who measure their Greatness by their
contempt of Religion, and all that belong to it: Who know nothing of Wit or
Virtue beyond the Stage, or think the Leviathan contains in it the Whole Duty
of Man. The utmost these Persons will allow us whose Honor and Employment lies
in asserting the Truth of Religion, and persuading to the practice of it, is,
that we are men of a Profession, and speak for the things we are to live by. As
though Reason and Religion were such contemptible Wares, as scarce any would
enquire after, if it were not some men's Trade to put them off: and were of less
force in themselves, because it is our Duty and Interest to maintain them. Is
it any disparagement to a Prince to have Subjects obliged to defend his Honor,
and Servants to attend his Person? and must not what they say or do be at all
minded, because their own Interest is joined with his? Why then should Religion
suffer in the esteem of any, because she has servants of her own to defend her
Cause? As if it had always been a received Principle with mankind, that no man
is to be trusted in his own Profession. According to this the Lawyers ought to
preach, and the Divines plead Causes; because the one gets nothing by Divinity,
nor the other by Law; the Merchant should visit Patients, and the Physicians
attend the Committees of Trade; because it is dangerous trusting men in what
they are most concerned to understand. When once I see these persons for bear
to consult the Lawyers about settling their Estates, and Physicians for their
health, merely because they get by their Professions, I shall then think it is
something else besides a Pique at Religion, which makes them so ready to
contemn whatever is said by us in behalf of it, because, forsooth, it is our
Trade to defend it. I wish it were theirs as much to practice it; and then we
should not be troubled with removing these and such like prejudices against all
the Discourses of Religion, which are spoken and published by us. But in these
matters which we conceive to be of so high concernment to Mankind, we desire
nothing may be considered besides the force of reason, and weight of argument;
and surely none that own themselves to be men, will despise that, by whomsoever
it is brought. It is not every ridiculous story, or vulgar prejudice, or common
infirmities, or different opinions in smaller things, which ought to render
Religion ridiculous, or make the Practice of it be thought mean and
contemptible. But however they are resolved to think of Us, let not Religion
suffer for our sakes. Indeed if they did as truly love Religion as they despise
us, we might then have reason to suspect our selves; but when we suffer merely
upon her account, we have cause to rejoice in our dishonor; and ought to
suspect our selves if such persons did speak well of Us.

Madam, The main design of these following Discourses is to recommend the great
matters of Religion, from their Truth and Certainty, their Power and Efficacy,
the Benefit and Advantage, which comes by them: and to dissuade from the
Practice of Sin, from the folly and reproach, the present dissatisfaction and
suture punishment which attends it. If they may be of Use to the World, and any
ways serviceable to Your Ladyship in Your retirements, I have the end I aimed
at. And I have therefore presumed to dedicate them to Your Ladyship, not only
because of the great Obligations which I have to Your Self and Family, which
were first laid upon me, by that Excellent Person, the late Lord Treasurer,
Your Father; but likewise because You have so well followed so worthy an
Example in joining Greatness and Goodness together. Were it my design to
publish Your just and due Character, I should not need to find fault with the
Age to give the greater advantage to Your Virtue: All the harm I wish the Age,
is, that there were many more Persons of Your Condition, that did as little
need, and as much despise the meanness of Flattery. I am

Madam, Your Ladyships most obliged and humble Servant, ED. STILLINGFLEET.

SERMON I. Sermon. I.
A
B
At St. Margarets Westminster before the Honorable House of COMMONS. Octo. 10.
1666.
AMOS IV. XI. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom C
and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have
ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.


IT is but a very little time since you met D
together in this place to lament the remainders of a raging pestilence, which
the last year destroyed so many thousand inhabitants of the late great and
famous City: and now God has given us another sad occasion for our fa^^^ng and
humiliation, by suffering a devouring fire to break forth and consume so many
of her habitations. As though the infected air had been too kind and partial,
and like Saul to the Amalekites, had E
only destroyed the vile and refuse, and spared the greatest of the people; as
though the grave had surfeited with the bodies of the dead, and were loath to go
on in the execution of Gods displeasure; he has employed a more furious
Element, which by its merciless and devouring flames might in a more lively A
manner represent unto us the kindling of his wrath against us. And that by a
Fire, which began with that violence, and spread with that horror, and raged
with that sury, and continued for so long a time with that irresistible force;
that it might justly fill the beholders with confusion, the hearers of it with
amasement, and all of us with a deep and humble sense of those sins which have
brought down the judgments of God in so severe a manner in the midst of us.

For whatever arguments or reasons we can imagine that should compose the minds
of men to a sense of their own or B
others calamities, or excite them to an apprehension of the wrath of God as
the cause of them, or quicken them to an earnest supplication to him for mercy,
they do all eminently concur in the sad occasion of this days solemnity. For
if either compassion would move, or fear awaken, or interest engage us to any
of these, it is hard to conceive there should be an instance of a more
efficacious nature, than that is which we this day bewail; For who can behold
the ruins of so great a City, and not have his bowels of compassion moved
toward it? Who can have any sense of the anger of God discovered in it, and
not C
have his fear awakened by it? Who can (as we ought all) look upon it as a
judgment of universal influence on the whole Nation, and not think himself
concerned to implore the mercy of Heaven toward us? For certainly, howsoever
we may vainly flatter and deceive our selves, these are no common indications
of the frowns of Heaven; nor are they mee^ly intended as the expressions of
Gods severity toward that City which has suffered so much by them; but the
strokes which fall upon the head (though they light upon that only) are
designed for the punishment of the whole body. D


Were there nothing else but a bare permission of Divine Providence as to these
things, we could not reasonably think, but that God must needs be very angry
with us, when he suffers two such dreadful calamities to tread almost upon each
others heels; that no sooner had death taken away such multitudes of our
Inhabitants, but a Fire follows it to consume our habitations. A Fire, so
dreadful in its appearance, in its rage and fury, and in all the dismal
consequences of it (which we cannot yet be sufficiently apprehensive of) that
on that very account we may justly Lam. 2. 1.
lie down in our shame, and our confusion cover us: because E
God has Covered the daughter of Sion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down
from Heaven to earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in
the day of his anger. For such was the violence and fury of the flames, that
they have not only defaced the beauty of the City, and humbled the A
pride and grandeur of it; not only stained its glory, and consumed its
Palaces; but have made the Houses of God themselves a heap of ruins, and a
spectacle of desolation.

And what then can we propose to our selves as arguments of Gods severe
displeasure against us, which we have not either already felt, or have just
cause to fear are coming upon us without a speedy and sincere amendment? If a
Sword abroad and Pestilence at home, if Fire in our Houses and Death in our
Streets, if Foreign Wars and Domestic Factions, if a languishing State and a
discontented People, if the ruins of the City and B
poverty of the Country, may make us sensible how sad our condition at present
is, how much worse it may be (if God in his mercy prevent it not) we shall all
surely think we have reason enough this day to lay to heart the evil of our
doings which have brought all these things upon us, and abhor our selves,
repenting in dust and ashes. That would seem indeed to bear some analogy with
the present ruins of the City, and the calamities we lie under at this time;
but God will more easily dispense with the pompous shows, and solemn garbs of
our humiliation; if our hearts bleed within for our former impleties, C
and our repentance discovers its sincerity, by bringing us to that temper;
that, though we have done iniquity, we will do so no more. That is the true and
proper end, which Almighty God aims at, in all his Judgments: he takes no
delight in hurling the World into confusions, and turning Cities into ruinous
heaps, and making whole Countries a desolation: but when he sees it necessary
to vindicate the honor of his Justice to the World, he does it with that
severity that may make us apprehend his displeasure, and yet with that mercy
which may encourage us to repent and return unto the D
Lord. Thus we find in the instances recorded in the Text, when some Cities
were consumed by him; so that as far as concerned them, they were made like to
Sodom and Gomorrah: yet he does it with that kindness to the Inhabitants, that
they are plucked as firebrands out of the burning: and therefore he looks upon
it as a frustrating the design both of his Justice, and of his Mercy, when he
is fain to conclude with that sad reflection on their incorrigibleness; Yet
have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Thus ye see what the design and
scope of the words is, which I have read unto you, wherein E
we may consider,

1. The severity of the Judgment which God was pleased to execute upon them. I
have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

2. The mixture of his mercy in the midst of his severity, A
and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning.

3. The incorrigibleness of the people notwithstanding both. Yet have ye not,
etc. In the first we have Gods Rod lifted up to strike, in the second we have
Gods Hand stretched out to save, yet neither of these would make them sensible
of their disobedience; though their Cities were overthrown for their sakes,
though they themselves escaped not for their own sakes, but for his mercies
sake only whom they had so lighly provoked; yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord. I am sure I may say of the two former parts of the Text, as our
Savior B
does in another case, This day has this Scripture been fulfilled among you:
we have seen a sad instance of Gods severity, a City almost wholly consumed as
Sodom and Gomorah, and a great expression of his kindness, the Inhabitants
saved, as firebrands plucked out of the burning: O let it never be said that the
last part of the words is fulfilled too, Yet have ye not returned unto me, etc.
which, that it may not be, I shall first consider the severity of God in his
judgment this day and then discover the mixture of his kindness with it, and
the result of both will be the unreasonableness of obstinate C
disobedience after them.

1. The severity of the judgment here expressed: which, though we take it not
in reference to the persons of men, but t^ the Cities wherein they dwelt: as it
seems to be understood not only by the Original wherein the words relating to
persons are left out: but by the following clause, expressing their
preservation: yet we shall find the Judgment to be severe enough, in regard 1.
Of the nature and kind of it. 2. The series and order of it. 3. The causes
moving to it. 4. The Author of it. I have overthrown some of you, as D
God overthrew, etc.

1. The nature and kind of it: We can imagine nothing more severe when we
consider what it is set forth by, the most unparalleld Judgment we read of,
viz. the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a fire from Heaven. Although in
all circumstances the instance might not come up to the parallel, yet in
several respects there might be so sad a desolation, that any other example but
that might fall beneath the greatness and severity of it. And we may better
understand of how sad and dreadful a nature such a Judgment must be, if E
we consider it with relation to the suddenness and unexpectedness of it, to
the force and violence of it, and to all that sad train of circumstances which
attend and follow it.

1. The suddenness and unexpectedness of it; as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, i. e. when they least of all looked A
for such a desolation. For thus it was in the days of Lot (as our Savior
tells us) Luke 17. 28, 29.
they did eat, they drank, thy bought, thy sold, they planted, they builded;
but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from
Heaven, and destroyed them all. They were all immersed either in their
pleasures or in their business, they little thought of destruction being so
near them as it proved to be; Thus it was with the Jews in their first and
latter destruction both of their City and Country, they were as high and as
confident of the contrary as might be to the very last; nothing could persuade B
them that their Temple or their City should be burnt with Fire, till they saw
them staming before their eyes. Thus Josephus (...). de beil. Jud. l. 7. c. 14.
observes of his Countrymen, that in the midst of all their miseries they had
no kind of sense at all of their sins, but were as proud presumptuous and
arrogant, as if all things went well with them; and were like to do so. They
thought God could not possibly punish such a people as they were in such a
manner; they could easily have believed it of any other people but themselves:
but that God should punish his own people in Covenant with him, that Judgment
should begin at the house of God, C
that they who had loved to be called by his Name, should be made examples to
all other Nations; this seemed so harsh and incredible that by no means could
they entertain it. But God and Wise men too thought otherwise of them than they
did of themselves: they could not but see an outward show of Religion joined
with a deep and subtle hypocrisy; there being among them an heap of pride and
luxury, of fraud and injustice, of sedition and faction gilded over with a fair
show of greater zeal for God and his Glory: which that impartial Historian (as
one who knew them well) has described at large: and although D
they could not believe that such heavy Judgments should befall them, yet
others did not only believe, but tremble at the apprehensions of them.

Who among all the Citizens of London could have been persuaded, but the day
before the Fire brake out, nay when they saw the Flames for near a day
together, that ever in four days time, not a fourth part of the City should be
left standing? For when were they ever more secure and inapprehensive of their
danger than at this time? they had not been long returned to their Houses,
which the Plague had driven them E
from, and now they hoped to make some amends for the loss of their Trade
before; but they returned home with the same sins they carried away with them;
like new Moons, they had a new face and appearance, but the same spots remained
still: or it may be, increased by that scumm they had gathered in the A
Countries where they had been. Like Beasts of prey that had been chained up so
long till they were hunger-bitten, when they once got loose they ran with that
violence and greediness to their ways of gain, as though nothing could ever
satisfy them. But that which betrayed them to so much security, was their late
deliverance from so sweeping a Judgment as the Plague had been to the City and
Suburbs of it: they could by no means think, when they had all so lately
escaped the Grave, that the City it self should be so near being buried in its
own ruins; that the Fire which had missed their blood, should seize upon B
their houses; that there should be no other way to purge the infected air, but
by the Flames of the whole City. Thus when the Mariners have newly escaped a
wreck at Sea, the fears of which have a long time deprived them of their wonted
rest, they think they may securely lie down and sleep, till it may be another
storm overtake and sink them. We see then there is neither piety nor wisdom in
so much security when a great danger is over, for we know not but that very
security it self may provoke God to send a greater. And no kind of Judgments
are so dreadful and amazing, as those which come most unexpectly C
upon men; for these betray the succors which reason offers, they insatuate
men's councils, weaken their courage, and deprive them of that presence of mind
which is necessary at such a time for their own and the public interest. And
there needs no more to let us know how severe such a Judgment must be, when it
comes upon men in so sudden and unexpected a manner; but that is not all, for
the severity of it lies further,

2. In the force and violence of it: and surely that was very great which
consumed four Cities to nothing in so short a time, when God did pluere
Gehennam de Coelo as one expresses D
it, rained down Hellfire upon Sodom and Gomorrah. And this is that which some
think is called the Jude 7.
vengeance of eternal fire, which all those in Sodom and Gomorrah are said to
suffer; i. e. a Fire which consumed, till there was nothing left to be consumed
by it. Not but that those wicked persons did justly suffer the vengeance of an
eternal fire in another life, but the Apostle seems to set out and paint forth
to us that in the life to come, by the force and violence of that fire which
destroyed those Cities; and it would be harsh to say, that all who were
involved in that common calamity (who yet were innocent as E
to the great abominations of those places, viz. the Infants there destroyed)
must be immediately sentenced to eternal misery. But although God since that
perpetual monument of his justice in the destruction of those Cities has not
by such an immediate fire from Heaven consumed and razed out the very A
foundations of other Cities; yet at sometimes there are fires which break out
and rage with a more than ordinary violence, and will not yield to those
attempts for quenching them, which at other times may be attended with great
success. Such might that great fire in Rome be in Nero's time, which whether
begun casually, or by design (which was disputed then, as it has been about
others since) did presently spread it self with greater speed over the Cirque
(as the Tacit. A^. 15.
Historian tells us) than the Wind it self, and never left burning, till of
fourteen Regions in Rome, but four were left entire. Such might that be in the
Emperor B
Titus his time, which lasted three days and nights, and was so irresistible
in its fury, that the Historian tells us, it was certainly (...). Xiphil. in
Epit. Dion. in Tito. p. 227.
more than an ordinary fire. Such might that be in the same City in the time of
Commodus, which though all the art and industry imaginable were used for the
quenching it, yet it burnt, till it had consumed besides the Temple of Peace,
the fairest Houses and Palaces of the City, which on that account, the
Historians attribute to more than natural causes. Such (...). Herodian. in
Commod. hist. l. 1. p. 22. v. Xiphil. ad fin. Commodi.
might that be (which comes the nearest of any I have met with, to that Fire we
this day lament the effects of) I mean that C
at Constantinople, which happened Niceph. l. 15. c. 21.
A. D. 465. in the beginning of September; it brake forth by the water side,
and raged with that horrible fury for four days together, that it burnt down
the greatest part of the City, and was so little capable of resistance, that as
E^^gr. l. 2. cap 13.
Evagrius tells us, the strongest Houses were but (...), like so much dried
stubble before it; by which means the whole City was, as he calls it, (...), a
most miserable and doleful spectacle; so that as Ba^^^. Tom. 5. A. 465. 1.
Baronius expresses it, that city which before was accounted the wonder of the
world, was man like unto Sodom and Gomorrah. Such likewise D
might those two great Fires have been which have formerly burnt down great
part of the then City of London; but neither of them come near the dreadfulness
of this, considering how much bigger the habitations of the City were now, and
how much greater the riches of it then could be imagined at those times. How
great must we conceive the force of this Fire to have been, which having at
first gotten a head where there was little means of resisting it, and much fuel
to increase it; from thence it spead it self both with and against the wind;
till it had gained so considerable a force, that it despised all the resistance
E
could be made by the strength of the buildings which stood in its way; and
when it had once subdued the strongest and the tallest of them, it then roared
like the waves of the Sea, and made its way through all the lesser obstacles,
and might have gone on so far, till it had laid this City level with A
the ruins of the other, had not he who sets the bounds to the Ocean, and
says, thus far shall thou go and no farther, put a stop to it in those places
which were as ready to have yielded up themselves to the rage of it, as any
which had been consumed before.

3. The severity of it will yet more appear from all the dread full
circumstances which attend and follow it. Could you suppose your selves in the
midst of those Cities which were consumed by Fire from Heaven, when it had
seized upon their dwellings, O what cries and lamentations, what yellings and B
shriekings might ye then have heard among them! We may well think how dreadful
those were, when we do but consider how sad the circumstances were of the Fare
we mourn for this day. When it began like Sampson to break in pieces all the
means of resisting it, and carried before it not only the Gates, but the
Churches and most magnificent structures of the City, what horror and
confusion may we then imagine had seized upon the spirits of the Citizens; what
distraction in their Councils, what paleness in their countenances, what
pantings at their hearts, what an universal consternation might have been then C
seen upon the minds of men? But O the sighs and tears, the frights and
amasements, the miscarriages, nay the deaths of some of the weaker Sex at the
terror and apprehension of it! O the hurry and useless pains, the alarms and
tumults, the mutual hindrances of each other that were among men at the
beholding the rage and fury of it! There we might have seen Women weeping for
their children, for fear of their being trod down in the press, or lost in the
crowd of people, or exposed to the violence of the flames; Husbands more
solicitous for the safety of their Wives and Children, than their own; the
Soldiers D
running to their Swords, when there was more need of Buckets; the Tradesemen
loading their backs with that which had gotten possession of their hearts
before. Then we might have heard some complaining thus of themselves: O that I
had been as careful of laying up treasures in Heaven, as I have been upon
Earth, I had not been under such fears of losing them as now I am! If I had
served God as faithfully as I have done the world, he would never have left me
as now that is like to do. What a fool have I been which have spent all my
precious time for the gaining of that which may now be lost in an hours E
time! If these flames be so dreadful, what are those which are reserved for
them who love the world more than God! If none can come near the heat of this
Fire, who can dwell with everlasting burnings! O what madness then will it be
to sin any more wilfully against that God who is a consuming fire, A
infinitely more dreadful than this can be! Farewell then all ye deceitful
vanities: now I understand thee and my self better, O bewitching world, then to
fix my happiness in thee any more. I will henceforth learn so much wisdom to
lay up my treasures there where neither moths can corrupt them, not Thieves
steal them, nor Fire consume them. O how happy would London be, if this were
the effect of her flames on the minds of all her Inhabitants! She might then
rise with a greater glory, and her inward beauty would outshine her outward
splendor, let it be as great as we can wish or imagine. B


But in the mean time who can behold her present ruins, without paying some
tears as due to the sadness of the spectacle, and more to the sins which caused
them? If that City were able to speak out of its ruins, what sad complaints
would it make of all those impieties which have made her so miserable. If it
had not been (might she say) for the pride and luxury, the ease and delicacy of
some of my Inhabitants, the covetousness, the fraud, the injustice of others,
the debaucheries of the profane, the open factions and secret hypocrisy of
two many pretending to greater sanctity, my beauty had not been thus turned
into C
ashes, nor my glory into those ruins which make my enemies rejoice, my
friends to mourn, and all stand amazed at the beholding of them. Look now upon
me, you who so lately admired the greatness of my Trade, the riches of my
Merchants, the number of my people, the convenience of my Churches, the
multitude of my Streets, and see what desolations sin has made in the earth.
Look upon me, and then tell me whether it be nothing to dally with Heaven, to
make a mock at sin, to slight the judgments of God, and abuse his mercies, and
after all the attempts of Heaven to reclaim a people from their sins, D
to remain still the same that ever they were? Was there no way to expiate your
guilt but by my misery? Had the Leprosy of your sins so fretted in my Walls,
that there was no cleansing them, but by the flames which consume them? Must I
mourn in my dust and ashes for your iniquities, while you are so ready to
return to the practice of them? Have I suffered so much by reason of them, and
do you think to escape your selves? Can you then look upon my ruins with
hearts as heard and unconcerned as the stones which lie in them? If you have
any kindness for me, or for your selves, if you ever hope to see my E
breaches repaired, my beauty restored, my glory advanced, look on Londons
ruins and repent. Thus would she bid her Inhabitants not weep for her
miseries, but for their own sins; for if never any sorrow was like to her
sorrow, it is because never any sins were like to their sins. Not as though
they were only A
the sins of the City, which have brought this evil upon her, no, but as far as
the judgment reaches, so great has the compass of the sins been, which have
provoked God to make her an example of his justice. And I fear the effects of
Londons calamity will be felt all the Nation over. For, considering the present
languishing condition of this Nation, it will be no easy matter to recover the
blood and spirits which have been lost by this Fire. So that whether we
consider the sadness of those circumstances which accompanied the rage of the
fire, or those which respect the present miseries of the City, or the general B
influence those will have upon the Nation, we cannot easily conceive what
judgment could in so critical a time have befallen us, which had been more
severe for the kind and Nature of it, than this has been.

2. We consider it in the series and order of it. We see by the Text, this
comes in the last place, as a reserve, when nothing else would do any good upon
them: It is extrema medicina, as Hieron in loc.
St. Hierom says, the last attempt that God uses to reclaim a people by, and
if these Causticks will not do, it is to be feared he looks upon the wounds as
incurable. He had sent a famine before, C
v. 6. a drought, v. 7, 8. blasting and mildew, v. 9. the Pestilence after the
manner of Egypt, v. 10. the miseries of War in the same verse. And when none
of these would work that effect upon them, which they were designed for, then
he comes to this last way of punishing before a final destruction, he overthrew
some of their Cities as he had overthrown Sodom and Gomorrah. God forbid, we
should be so near a final subversion, and utter desolation, as the ten Tribes
were, when none of these things would bring them to repentance; but yet the
method God has used with us seems to bode very ill in case D
we do not at last return to the Lord. For it is not only agreeable to what is
here delivered as the course God used to reclaim the Israelites, but to what is
reported by the most faithful Hisiorian of those times of the degrees and steps
that God made before the ruins of the British Nation. For Gildas de Excid.
Brit.
Gildas tells us the decay of it began by Civil Wars among themselves, and high
discontents remaining as the consequents of them, after this an universal decay
and poverty among them; after that, nay during the continuance of it, Wars with
the Picts and Scots their inveterate enemies; but no sooner had they a little
breathing E
space, but they return to their luxury and other sins again; then God sends
among them a consuming Pestilence, which destroyed an incredible number of
people. When all this would not do, those whom they trusted most to, betrayed
them, and rebelled against them, by whose means, not only the Cities A
were burnt with Fire, but the whole Island was turned almost into one
continued flame. The issue of all which at last was, that their Country was
turned to a desolation, the ancient Inhabitants driven out, or destroyed, and
their former servants, but now their bitter enemies, possessing their
habitations. May God avert the Omen from us at this day. We have smarted by
Civil Wars, and the dreadful effects of them; we yet complain of great
discontents and poverty as great as them, we have inveterate enemies combined
abroad against us, we have very lately suffered under a Pestilence as great
almost as any we read of, B
and now the great City of our Nation burnt down by a dreadful Fire. And what
do all these things mean? and what will the issue of them be? though that be
locked up in the Councils of Heaven, yet we have just cause to fear, if it be
not our speedy amendment, it may be our ruin. And they who think that
incredible, let them tell me whether two years since, they did not think it
altogether as improbable, that in the compass of the two succeeding years,
above a hundred thousand persons should be destroyed by the Plague in London
and other places, and the City it self should be burnt to the Ground? And if
our fears C
do not, I am sure our sins may tell us, that these are but the forerunners of
greater calamities, in case there be not a timely reformation of our selves.
And although God may give us some intermissions of punishments, yet at last he
may, as the Roman Consul expressed it, pay us intercalatae poenae usuram, that
which may make amends for all his abatements, and give us full measure
according to that of our sins, pressed down, shaken together, and running over.
Which leads to the third particular.

3. The Causes moving God to so much severity in his Judgments, D
which are the greatness of the sins committed against him. So this Prophet
tells us, that the true account of all Gods punishments is to be fetched from
the sins of the people, Amos 1. 3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof: so it is said of Gaza, v.
6. of Tyrus, v. 9. of Edom, v. 11. of Ammon, v. 13. Moab, chapter 2. 1. Judah. v.
4. and at last Israel. v. 6. And it is observable of every one of these, that
when God threatens to punish them for the greatness of their iniquities, and
the multitude of their transgressions, (which is generally supposed to be meant
E
by the three transgressions and the four) he does particularly threaten to
send a fire among them to consume the Houses and the Palaces of their Cities.
So to Damascus, chap. 1. 4. to Gaza, v. 7. to Tyrus, v. 10. to Edom, v. 12. to
Ammon, v. 14. to Moab, chapter 2. v. 2. to Judah, v. 5. I will send a fire upon
Judah, A
and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem: and Israel in the words of the
text. This is a judgment then, which when it comes in its fury, gives us
notice to how great a height our sins are risen; especially when it has so
many dreadful forerunners, as it had in Israel, and has had among our selves.
When the red horse has marched furiously before it all bloody with the effects
of a Civil War, and the pale horse has followed after the other with Death
upon his back, and the Grave at his heels, and after both these, those come,
out of whose mouth issues fire, and smoke, and brimstone, it is then time for
the B
inhabitants of the earth, to repent of the work of their hands. But it is our
great unhappiness, that we are apt to impute these great calamities to any
thing rather than to our sins; and thereby we hinder our selves from the true
remedy, because we will not understand the cause of our distemper. Though God
has not sent Prophets among us, to tell us for such and such sins, I will send
such and such judgments upon you, yet where we observe the parallel between
the sins and the punishments agreeable with what we find recorded in Scripture,
we have reason to say, that those sins were not only the antecedents, but the
causes C
of those punishments which followed after them. And that because the reason of
punishment was not built upon any particular relation between God and the
people of Israel, but upon reasons common to all mankind; yet with this
difference, that the greater the mercies were which any people enjoyed, the
sooner was the measure of their iniquities filled up, and the severer were the
judgments when they came upon them. This our Prophet gives an account of,
Chap. 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Nations of the earth, therefore
will I punish you for your iniquities. So did God punish Tire and Damascus, as
well D
as Israel and Judah; but his meaning is, he would punish them sooner, he would
punish them more severely. I wish we could be brought once to consider what
influence piety and virtue has upon the good of a Nation, if we did, we should
not only live better our selves, but our Kingdom and Nation might flourish more
than otherwise we are like to see it do. Which is a truth has been so
universally received among the wise Men of all ages, that one of the Roman
Historians, though of no very severe life himself, yet imputes the decay of the
Roman State, not to Chance or Fortune, or some unhidden causes (which E
the Atheism of our Age would presently do) but to the general looseness of
men's lives, and corruption of their manners. And it was the grave Observation
of one of the bravest Scipio apud Aug d^ Civ. D. l. 1. c. 33.
Captains ever the Roman State had, that it was impossible for any State to be
happy, stantibus moenibus, ruentibus moribus, A
though their walls were firm, if their manners were decayed. But it is our
misery, that our walls and our manners are fallen together, or rather the
latter undermined the former. They are our sins which have drawn so much of our
blood, and infected our air, and added the greatest fuel to our flames.

But it is not enough in general to declaim against our sins, but we must
search out particularly those predominant vices, which by their boldness and
frequency have provoked God thus to punish us; and as we have hitherto observed
a parallel between the Judgments of Israel in this Chapter, B
and our own: So I am afraid we shall find too sad a parallel between their
sins and ours too. Three sorts of sins are here spoken of in a peculiar manner,
as the causes of their severe punishments, Their luxury and intemperance, their
covetousness and oppression, and their contempt of God and his Laws, and I
doubt we need not make a very exact scrutiny to find out these in a high degree
among our selves: and I wish it were as easy to reform them, as to find them
out.

1. Luxury and intemperance; that we meet with in the first verse, both in the
compellation, Ye Kine of Bashan, and C
in their behavior, which say to their Masters, bring and let us drink. Ye
Kine of Bashan, Loquitur ad Principes Israel and Optimates quosque december
Tribuum, says St. Hierom, he speaks to the Princes of Israel, and the chief of
all the ten Tribes; Those which are fed in the richest pastures, such as those
of Bashan were. Who are more fully described by the Prophet in this sixth
chapter. They are the men who are at ease in Sion, v. 1. they put far away from
them the evil day, v. 3. they lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the D
Calves out of the midst of the stall, v. 4. they chaunt to the sound of the
Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of Music like David. v. 5. they
drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they
are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. The meaning of all which is, they
minded nothing but ease, softness, and pleasure, but could not endure to hear
of the calamities which were so near them. Nothing but mirth, and jollity, and
riot, and feasting, and the evil consequences of these were to be seen or heard
among them. Their delicate souls were presently E
rufled and disturbed at the discourse of any thing but matters of Courtship,
address and entertainment. Any thing that was grave and serious, though never
so necessary, and of the greatest importance, ^^s put off, as Felix put off St.
Paul to a more convenient time: especially if it threatened A
miseries to them, and appeared with a countenance sadder than their own. These
were the Kine of Bashan, who were full of ease and wantonness, and never
thought of the day of slaughter, which the other were the certain forerunner
of. Symmachus renders it, (...), which others apply to the rich Citizens of
Samaria, I am afraid we may take it in either sense without a Soloecism. Bring
and let us drink, which as St. Hierom goes on, Ebrietatem significat in vino
and luxuria quae statum mentis evertunt, it implies the height of their luxury
and intemperance. It is observed by some, that B
our Prophet retains still the language of his education in the bluntness of
his expressions, the great men that lived wholly at their ease, in wantonness
and luxury, he styles like the heardsman of Tekoa, the Kine of Bashan. That he
thought was title good enough for such who seemed to have souls for no other
end, than the other had. And has not that delicata insania, as St. Austin
calls it, that soft and effeminate kind of madness taken possession of too many
among us, whose birth and education designed them for more manly employments?
Yea, what an age of Luxury do we live in, when instead C
of those noble characters of men from their virtue, and wisdom, and courage,
it is looked on among some as a mighty character of a person, that he eats and
drinks well: a character that becomes none so much as the Kine of Bashan in the
literal sense, for surely they did so, or else they had never been in so great
esteem among the heardsmen of Tekoa. A character which those Philosophers would
have been ashamed of, who looked upon no other end of humane life but pleasure;
but in order to that, they thought nothing more necessary than temperance and
sobriety; but whatever esteem they had then, D
they have lost all their reputation among our modern Epicures, who know of no
such things as pleasures of the mind, and would not much value whether they had
any faculties of the mind or no, unless it were for the contrivance of new
Oaths and debaucheries. But if this were only among some few persons, we hope
the whole Nation would not suffer for their madness: for scarce any Age has
been so happy, but it has had some Monsters in Morality as well as Nature. But
I am afraid these vices are grown too Epidemical; not only in the City, but the
Countries too; what mean else those frequent E
complaints (and I hope more general than the causes of them) that the houses
of great men in too many places are so near being public schools of
debauchery, rather than of piety and virtue, where men shall not want
instructers to teach them to forget both God and themselves; wherein sobriety
is A
so far from being accounted a matter of honor, that the rules of the Persian
civility are quite forgotten, and men are forced to unman themselves. I know
nothing would tend more to the honor of our Nation, or the advantage of it,
than if once these public excesses were severely restrained, I do not mean so
much by making new Laws, (for those generally do but exercise peoples Wits by
finding out new evasions) but by executing old ones.

2. Covetousness and oppression. You see what these great men in Samaria did
when they had any respite from their excesses, B
and intemperance, then woe be to the poor who come in their way; Which oppress
the poor, and crush the needy: v. 1. either by the hands of violence, or by
those arts and devices which either their honesty or poverty have kept them
from the knowledge of. And if there be not so much of open violence in our
days, the thanks are due to the care of our Magistrates, and the severity of
our Laws, but it is hard to say whether ever any Age produced more studious and
skilful to pervert the design of Laws, without breaking the letter of them,
than this of ours has done. Fraud and injustice is now managed with C
a great deal of artifice and cunning; and he thinks himself no body in the
understanding of the world, that cannot overreach his Brother, and not be
discovered: or however in the multiplicity and obscurity of our Laws cannot
find out something in pretense at least to justify his actions by. But if
appeal be made to the Courts of Judicature, what arts are then used either for
concealing or hiring witnesses, so that if their Purses be not equal, the
adverse party may overswear him by so much as his Purse is weightier than the
others. I heartily wish it may never be said of us, what the Orator once said
of D
the Greeks, Ci^cr. pro Flac^o.
Quibus jusjurandum jocus, testimonium ludus, they made it a matter of jest and
drollery to forswear themselves, and give false testimonies. But supposing men
keep within the bounds of justice and common honesty, yet how unsatiable are
the desires of men! they are for adding house to house, and land to land, never
contented with what either their Ancestors have left them, or the bountiful
hand of Heaven has bestowed upon them. Till at last it may be in the Prophets
expression for their covetousness, Heb. 2. 21.
the stone cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber answer it; E
i. e. provoke God to give a severe check to the exorbitant and boundless
desires of men, as he has done by this days calamity. Thus while the City
thought with Isa. 47. 7, 8, 11.
Babylon to sit as a Lady for ever, while she dwelt carelsly, and said I am,
and there is none else beside me; evil is come upon her, and A
she knows not from whence it comes, and mischief is fallen upon her, and she
has not been able to put it off, and desolation is come upon her suddenly,
which she did not foresee.

3. Contempt of God and his Laws. That we read of v. 4. where the Prophet
speaks by an Irony to them, Come to Bethel and transgress, etc. he knew well
enough they were resolved to do it, let God or the Prophet say what they
pleased. For these Kine of Bashan were all for the Calves of Dan and Bethel,
and some think that is the reason of the title that is given them. These great
men of Samaria thought it beneath B
them to own Religion any further than it was subservient to their civil
interests. They were all of Ieroboams Religion, who looked on it as a mere
politic thing, and fit to advance his own designs by. I am afraid there are
too many at this day who are secretly of his mind, and think it a piece of
wisdom to be so: Blessed God, that men should be so wise to deceive themselves,
and go down with so much discretion to Hell! These are the Grave and retired
Atheists, who, though they secretly love not Religion, yet their caution
hinders them from talking much against it. But there is a sort C
of men much more common than the other; the faculties of whose minds are so
thin and aerie, that they will not bear the consideration of any thing, much
less of Religion; these throw out their bitter scoffs, and profane jests
against it. A thing never permitted that I know of in any civilized Nation in
the world; whatsoever their Religion was, the reputation of Religion was always
preserved sacred: God himself (says Josephus) would not suffer the Jews to
speak evil of other Gods, though they were to destroy all those who tempted
them to the worship of them. And shall we suffer the D
most excellent and reasonable Religion in the world, viz. the Christian, to be
profaned by the unhallowed mouths of any who will venture to be damned, to be
accounted witty? If their enquiries were deeper, their reason stronger, or
their arguments more persuasive, than of those who have made it their utmost
care and business to search into these things, they ought to be allowed a fair
hearing; but for men who pretend to none of these things, yet still to make
Religion the object of their scoffs and raillery, does not become the gravity
of a Nation professing wisdom to permit it, much E
less the sobriety of a people professing Christianity. In the mean time such
persons may know, that wise men may be argued out of a Religion they own, but
none but Fools and mad men will be droll'd out of it. Let them first try
whether they can laugh men out of their Estates, before they attempt A
to do it out of their hopes of an Eternal happiness. And I am sure it will be
no comfort to them in another world, that they were accounted Wits for deriding
those miseries which they then feel and smart under the severity of: it will be
no mitigation of their flames that they go laughing into them; nor will they
endure them the better because they would not believe them. But while this is
so prevailing a humor among the vain men of this Age and Nation, what can we
expect but that God should by remarkable and severe judgments, seek to make
men more serious in Religion; B
or else make their hearts to ache, and their joints to tremble, as he did
Belshazzars, when he could find nothing else to carouse in but the Vessels of
the Temple. And when men said in the Prophet Zephany, chap. 1. 12. that God
neither did good nor evil, presently it follows, Zeph. 1. 13, 14, 15.
therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: the
day of the Lord is near, a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day
of wastness and desolation; as it is with us at this time. Thus we see how sad
the parallel has been not only in the judgments of Israel, C
but in the sins likewise which have made those judgments so severe.

4. The severity of the Judgment appears not only from the Causes, but from
the Author of it. I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. God challenges the execution of his Justice to himself, not only in
the great day, but in his judgment here in the world. Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? When God is
pleased to punish men for their sins, the excution of his justice is agreeable
to his nature now, as it D
will be at the end of the world. We all know that he may do it if he please,
and he has told us, that he does and will do it; and we know withal, that
without such remarkable severities, the world will hardly be kept in any awe of
him. We do not find that Love does so much in the World as Fear does, there
being so very few persons of tractable and ingenuous spirits. It is true of too
many, what Lact. l. 2 c. 11.
Lactantius observes of the Romans, Nunquam Dei meminerunt, nisi dum in malis
sunt, they seldom think of God, but when they are afraid of him. And there is E
not only this reason as to particular persons why God should punish them, but
there is a greater as to Communities, and Bodies of men; for although God
suffers wicked men to escape punishment here, as he often does; yet he is sure
not to do it in the life to come; but Communities of men can A
never be punished but in this World; and therefore the Justice of God does
often discover it self in these common calamities, to keep the World in
subjection to him, and to let men see that neither the multitude of their
Associates, nor the depth of their designs, nor the subtilty of their Councils
can secure them from the omnipotent arm of Divine Justice, when he has
determined to visit their transgressions with rods, and their iniquities with
stripes. But when he does all this, yet his loving kindness does he not utterly
take from them: for in the midst of all his Judgments B
he is pleased to remember mercy; of which we have a remarkable instance in the
Text, for when God was overthrowing Cities, yet he plucked the Inhabitants as
firebrands out of the burning: and so I come from the severity of God.

2. To the mixture of his mercy in it. And ye were as a firebrand plucked out
of the burning. That notes two things, the nearness they were in to the danger,
and the unexpectedness of their deliverance out of it.

1. The nearness they were in to the danger, quasi torris, C
cujus jam magna pars absumpta est, as some Paraphrase it; like a brand, the
greatest part of which is already consumed by Fire; which shows the difficulty
of their escaping. So Joshua is said to be a brand plucked out of the fire,
Zech. 3. 2. And to this St. Hierom upon this place, applies that difficult
passage, 1 Cor. 3. 15. they shall be saved, but so as by Fire, noting the
greatness of the danger they were in, and how hardly they they should escape.
And are not all the Inhabitants of this City, and all of us in the suburbs of
the other, whose houses escaped so near the flames, D
as Firebrands plucked out of the burning? When the fire came on in its rage and
sury, as though it would in a short time have devoured all before it, that not
only this whole City, but so great a part of the Suburbs of the other should
escape untouched, is (all circumstances considered) a wonderful expression of
the kindness of God to us in the midst of so much severity. If he had suffered
the Fire to go on to have consumed the remainder of our Churches and Houses,
and laid this City even with the other in one continued heap of ruins, we must
have said, Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous E
in all thy judgments. We ought rather to have admired his patience in sparing
us so long; than complain of this rigor of his Justice in punishing us at
last; but instead of that he has given us occasion this day with the three
Children in the fiery Furnace to praise him in the midst of A
the flames. For even the Inhabitants of London themselves who have suffered
most in this calamity, have cause to acknowledge the mercy of God toward them,
that they are escaped themselves; though it be (as the Jews report of Joshua
the High Priest, when thrown into the fire by the Chaldeans) with their clothes
burnt about them. Though their habitations be consumed, and their losses
otherwise may be too great, yet that in the midst of so much danger by the
flames, and the press of people, so very few should suffer the loss of their
lives, ought to be owned by them and us as a B
miraculous Providence of God toward them. And therefore not unto us, not unto
us, but to his holy Name be the praise of so great a preservation in the midst
of so heavy a Judgment.

2. The unexpectedness of such a deliverance; they are not saved by their own
skill and counsel, nor by their strength and industry, but by him who by his
mighty hand did pluck them as firebrarnds out of the burning. Though we own the
justice of God in the calamities of this day, let us not forget his mercy in
what he has unexpectedly rescued from the C
fury of the flames; that the Royal Palaces of our Gracious Sovereign, the
residence of the Nobility, the Houses of Parliament, the Courts of Judicature,
the place where we are now assembled and several others of the same nature,
with other places and habitations to receive those who were burnt out of their
own, stand at this day untouched with the fire (and long may they continue so)
ought chiefly to be ascribed to the power and goodness of that God, who not
only commands the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People, but whom
the winds and the flames obey. Although D
enough in a due subordination to Divine Providence can never be attributed to
the mighty care and industry of our most Gracious Sovereign, and his Royal
Holiness, who by their presence and encouragement inspired a new life and
vigor into the sinking spirits of the Citizens, whereby God was pleased so far
to succeed their endeavors, that a stop was put to the fury of the fire in
such places where it was as likely to have prevailed, as in any parts of the
City consumed by it.

O let us not then frustrate the design of so much severity E
mixed with so great mercy: let it never be said, that neither Judgments nor
Kindness will work upon us: that neither our deliverance from the Pestilence
which walks in darkness, nor from the flames which shine as the noonday, will
awaken us from that Lethargy and security we are in by our sins: but A
let God take what course he pleases with us, we are the same incorrigible
people still that ever we were. For we have cause enough for our mourning and
lamentation this day, (if God had not sent new calamities upon us) that we were
no better for those we had undergone before. We have surfeited with mercies,
and grown sick of the kindness of Heaven to us, and when God has made us smart
for our fullness and wantonness, then we grew sullen and murmured and disputed
against providence, and were willing to do any thing but repent of our sins,
and reform our lives. B
It is not many years since God blessed us with great and undeserved blessings,
which we then thought our selves very thankful for; but if we had been really
so, we should never have provoked him who bestowed those savours upon us in so
great a degree as we have done since. Was this our requital to him for
restoring our Sovereign, to rebel the more against Heaven? Was this our
thankfulness, for removing the disorders of Church and State, to bring them
into our lives? Had we no other way of trying the continuance of Gods goodness
to us, but by exercising his patience C
by our greater provocations? As though we had resolved to let the world see,
there could be a more unthankful and disobedient people than the Jews had been.
Thus we sinned with as much security and confidence, as though we had blinded
the eyes, or bribed the justice, or commanded the power of Heaven. When God of
a sudden like one highly provoked drew forth the sword of his destroying Angel,
and by it cut off so many thousands in the midst of us: Then we fell upon our
knees, and begged the mercy of Heaven, that our Lives might be spared, that we
might have D
time to amend them: but no sooner did our fears abate, but our devotion did so
too, we had soon forgotten the promises we made in the day of our distress, and
I am afraid it is at this day too true of us which is said in the Revelations
of those who had escaped the several plagues which so many had been destroyed
by. Rev. 9. 20.
And the rest of the men which were not killed by these Plagues, yet repented
not of the work of their bands. For if we had not greedily sucked in again the
poison we had only laid down while we were begging for our lives, if we had not
returned with as great fury and violence E
as ever to our former lusts, the removing of one judgment had not been as it
were only to make way for the coming on of another. For the grave seemed to
close up her mouth, and death by degrees to withdraw himself, that the Fire
might come upon the Stage, to act its part too A
in the Tragoedy our sins have made among us: and I pray God this may be the
last Act of it. Let us not then provoke God to find out new methods of
vengeance, and make experiments upon us of what other unheard of severities may
do for our cure. But let us rather meet God now by our repentance, and
returning to him, by our serious humiliation for our former sins, and our
steadfast resolutions to return no more to the practice of them. That, that much
more dangerous infection of our souls may be cured as well as that of our
bodies, that the impure flames which burn B
within may be extinguished, that all our luxuries may be retrenched, our
debaucheries punished, our vanities taken away, our careless indifferency in
Religion turned into a greater seriousness both in the profession and the
practice of it. So will God make us a happy and prosperous, when he finds us a
more righteous and holy Nation. So will God succeed all your endeavors for the
honor and interest of that people whom you represent. So may he add that other
Title to the rest of those you have deserved for your Countries good, to make
you Repairers of the breaches of the City as C
well as of the Nation, and Restorers of paths to dwell in: So may that City
which now sits solitary like a Widow, have her tears wiped off, and her beauty
and comeliness restored unto her. Yea, so may her present ruins, in which she
now lies buried, be only the forerunners of a more joyful resurrection. In
which, though the body may remain the same, the qualities may be so altered,
that its present desolation may be only the putting off its former
inconveniences, weakness, and deformities, that it may rise with greater glory,
strength and proportion: and to all her other qualities, may that of D
incorruption be added too, at least till the general Conflagration. And I know
your great Wisdom and Justice will take care, that those who have suffered by
the ruins, may not likewise suffer by the rising of it, that the glory of the
City may not be laid upon the tears of the Orphans and Widows, but that its
foundations may be settled upon Justice and Piety. That there be no complaining
in the Streets for want of Righteousness, nor in the City for want of Churches,
nor in the Churches for want of a settled maintenance. That those who attend
upon the service of God in them may never E
be tempted to betray their Consciences to gain a livelihood, nor to comply
with the factions humors of men, that they may be able to live among them. And
thus when the City through the blessing of Heaven shall be built again, may it
be a Habitation of Holiness toward God, of Loyalty toward A
our Gracious King and his Successors, of Justice and Righteousness toward
Men, of Sobriety, and Peace, and Unity among all the Inhabitants, till not
Cities and Countries only, but the world and time it self shall be no more.
Which God of his infinite mercy grant through the merits and mediation of his
Son, to whom with the Father and Eternal Spirit, be all Honor and Glory for
evermore. B
C
D
E


SERMON II. Sermon. II.
A
B
Preached before the KING, MARCH 13. 1665/9.
PROVE. XIV. IX. C
Fools make a mock at Sin.


WHEN God by his infinite Wisdom had contrived, D
and by a power and goodness, as infinite as his Wisdom, had perfected the
creation of the visible world, there seemed to be nothing wanting to the glory
of it, but a creature endued with reason and understanding, which might
comprehend the design of his wisdom, enjoy the benefits of his goodness, and
employ it self in the celebration of his power. The Beings purely intellectual
were too highly raised by their own order and creation, to be the Lords of this
inferior world: and E
those whose natures could reach no higher than the objects of sense, were not
capable of discovering the glorious perfections of the great Creator: and
therefore could not be the fit Instruments of his praise and service. But a
conjunction of both these together was thought necessary to make up A
such a sort of being, which might at once command this lower world, and be the
servants of him who made it. Not as though this great fabric of the world were
merely raised for man to please his fancy in the contemplation of it, or to
exercise his dominion over the creatures designed for his use and service: but
that by frequent reflections on the author of his being, and the effects of his
power and goodness he might be brought to the greatest love and admiration of
him. So that the most natural part of Religion lies in the grateful
acknowledgements we owe to that excellent and supreme Being, who B
has showed so particular a kindness to man in the creation and Government of
the world. Which was so great and unexpressible, that some have thought, it was
not so much pride and affectation of a greater height, as envy at the felicity
and power of mankind, which was the occasion of the fall of the Apostate
spirits. But whether or no the state of man were occasion enough for the envy
of the Spirits above; we are sure the kindness of Heaven was so great in it, as
could not but lay an indispensable obligation on all mankind to perpetual
gratitude and obedience. For it is as easy to suppose, that C
affronts and injuries are the most suitable returns for the most obliging
favors, that the first duty of a Child should be to destroy his Parents; that
to be thankful for kindnesses received, were to commit the unpardonable sin; as
that man should receive his being and all the blessings which attend it from
God, and not be bound to the most universal obedience to him.

And as the reflection on the author of his being, leads him to the
acknowledgement of his duty toward God, so the consideration of the design of
it, will more easily acquaint him D
with the nature of that duty which is expected from him. Had man been designed
only to act a short part here in the world, all that had been required of him,
had been only to express his thankfulness to God for his being, and the
comforts of it: the using all means for the due preservation of himself; the
doing nothing beneath the dignity of humane nature, nothing injurious to those
who were of the same nature with himself; but since he is designed for greater
and nobler ends, and his present state, is but a state of trial, in order to
future happiness and misery; the reason of good and evil is not to be taken
merely E
from his present, but from the respect, which things have to that eternal
state he is designed for. From whence it follows, that the differences of good
and evil are rooted in the nature of our beings, and are the necessary
consequents of our relation to God, and each other, and our expectations of a A
future life. And therefore according to these measures, the estimation of men
in the world has been while they did preserve any veneration for God or
themselves. Wisdom and folly was not measured so much by the subtilty and
curiosity of men's speculations, by the fineness of their thoughts, or the depth
of their designs, as by their endeavors to uphold the dignity of mankind; by
their piety and devotion toward God; by their sobriety and due Government of
their actions; by the equality and justice, the charity and kindness of their
dealings to one another. Wisdom was but another name for B
goodness, and folly for sin; then it was a man's glory to be religious; and to
be profane and vicious, was to be base and mean: then there were no Gods
worshipped because they were bad, nor any men disgraced because they were good.
Then there were no Temples erected to the meanest passions of humane nature,
nor men became Idolaters to their own infirmities. Then to be betrayed into
sin, was accounted weakness; to contrive it, dishonor and baseness; to
justify and defend it, infamy and reproach; to make a mock at it, a mark of
the highest folly and incorrigibleness. So the Wise man in the words of the
Text C
assures us, that they are Fools, and those of the highest rank and degree of
folly, who make a mock at sin.

It is well for us in the Age we live in, that we have the judgment of former
ages to appeal to, and of those persons in them whose reputation for wisdom is
yet unquestionable. For otherwise we might be born down by that spightful enemy
to all virtue and goodness, the impudence of such, who it is hard to say
whether they show it more in committing sin, or in defending it. Men whose
manners are so bad, that scarce any thing can be imagined worse, unless it be
the wit they D
use to excuse them with. Such who take the measure of man's perfections
downwards, and the nearer they approach to beasts, the more they think
themselves to act like men. No wonder then, if among such as these the
differences of good and evil be laughed at, and no sin be thought so
unpardonable, as the thinking that there is any at all. Nay, the utmost they
will allow in the description of Sin, is, that it is a thing that some live by
declaiming against, and others cannot live without the practice of.

But is the Chair of Scorners at last proved the only chair E
of Infallibility? Must those be the standard of mankind, who seem to have
little left of humane nature, but laughter and the shape of men? Do they think
that we are all become such fools to take scoffs for arguments, and raillery
for demonstrations? He knows nothing at all of goodness, that knows not A
that it is much more easy to laugh at it, than to practice it; and it were
worth the while to make a mock at sin, if the doing so would make nothing of
it. But the nature of things does not vary with the humors of men; sin becomes
not at all the less dangerous because men have so little Wit to think it so;
nor Religion the less excellent and advantageous to the world, because the
greatest enemies of that are so much to themselves too, that they have learnt
to despise it. But although that scorns to be defended by such weapons whereby
her enemies assault her, (nothing more unbecoming the Majesty B
of Religion, than to make it self cheap, by making others laugh) yet if they
can but obtain so much of themselves to attend with patience to what is
serious, there may be yet a possibility of persuading them, that no fools are
so great as those who laugh themselves into misery, and none so certainly do
so, as those who make a mock at sin.

But if our authority be too mean and contemptible to be relied on, in a matter
wherein they think us so much concerned (and so I hope we are to prevent the
ruin of men's souls) we dare with confidence appeal to the general sense of
mankind C
in the matter of our present debate. Let them name but any one person in all
the monuments of former ages, to whom but the bare suspicion of Vice was not a
diminution to an esteem that might otherwise have been great in the world. And
if the bare suspicion would do so much among even the more rude and barbarous
Nations, what would open and professed wickedness do among the more knowing and
civil? Humane nature retains an abhorrency of sin, so far that it is impossible
for men to have the same esteem of those who are given over to all manner of
wickedness, though otherwise of D
great sharpness of wit, and of such whose natural abilities may not exceed the
other, but yet do govern their actions according to the strict rules of
Religion and Virtue. And the general sense of mankind cannot be by any thing
better known, than by an universal consent of men, as to the ways whereby they
express their value and esteem of others. What they all agree on as the best
character of a person worthy to be loved and honored, we may well think is the
most agreeable to humane nature; and what is universally thought a
disparagement to the highest accomplishments, ought to be E
looked on as the disgrace and imperfection of it. Did ever any yet, though
never so wicked and prosane themselves, seriously commend another person for
his rudeness and debaucheries? Was any man's lust or intemperance ever reckoned
among the Titles of his honor? Who ever yet raised Trophies to his A
vices, or thought to perpetuate his memory by the glory of them? Where was it
ever known, that sobriety and temperance, justice and charity were thought the
marks of reproach and infamy? Who ever suffered in their reputation by being
thought to be really good? Nay, it is so far from it, that the most wicked
persons do inwardly esteem them whether they will or no. By which we see, that
even in this lapsed and degenerate condition of mankind, it is only goodness
which gains true honor and esteem, and nothing does so effectually blast a
growing reputation, as wickedness and B
vice.

But if it be thus with the generality of men, who were never yet thought to
have too much partiality toward goodness, we may much more easily find it
among those, who have had a better ground for the reputation of their wisdom,
than the mere vogue of the people. He who was pronounced by the Heathen Oracle,
to be the wisest among the Greeks, was the person who brought down Philosophy
from the obscure and uncertain speculations of Nature, and in all his
discourses recommended Virtue as the truest wisdom. And he among the C
Jews, whose 1 King. 4. 29, 30, 31.
soul was as large as the sand on the Sea shore, whose wisdom out-went that of
all the persons of his own or future Ages, writes a Book on purpose to persuade
men, that there is no real wisdom, but to fear God and keep his Commandments:
that sin is the greatest folly, and the meaner apprehensions men have of it,
the more they are infatuated by the temptations to it. But as there are degrees
of sinning, so there are of folly in it. Some sin with a blushing countenance,
and a trembling Conscience; they sin, but yet they are afraid to sin, but in
the act of it they condemn them D
selves for what they do; they sin, but with confusion in their faces, with
horror in their minds, and an earthquake in their Consciences: though the
condition of such persons be dangerous, and their unquietness shows the
greatness of their folly, yet because these twitches of Conscience argue there
are some quick touches left of the sense of good and evil, their case is not
desperate, nor their condition incurable: But there are others who despise
these as the reproach of the School of Wickedness, because they are not yet
attained to those heights of impiety which they glory in: such who have subdued
their E
Consciences much easier than others do their sins; who have almost worn out
all the impressions of the work of the Law written in their hearts; who not
only make a practice, but a boast of sin, and defend it with as much greediness
as they commit it: these are the men, whose folly is manifest to all A
men but themselves; and surely, since these are the men, whom Solomon in the
words of the Text describes,

(1.) By their character, as Fools, and,

(2) By the instance of their folly, in making a mock at sin; We may have not
only the liberty to use, but (1.) To prove, that Name of reproach to be due
unto them; and (2.) To show the reasonableness of fastening it upon them,
because they make a mock at sin.

But before I come more closely to pursue that, it will be necessary to
consider another sense of these words caused by B
the ambiguity of the Hebrew Verb, which sometimes signifies to deride and
scorn, sometimes to plead for, and excuse a thing with all the arts of
Rhetoric (thence the word for Rhetoric is derived from the Verb here used)
according to which sense, it notes all the plausible pretenses and subtle
extenuations which wicked men use in defense of their evil actions. For as if
men intended to make some recompense for the folly they betray in the acts of
sin, by the wit they employ in the pleading for them, there is nothing they
show more industry and care in, than in endeavoring to baffle their own
Consciences, C
and please themselves in their folly, till death and eternal flames awaken
them. That we may not therefore seem to beg all wicked men for Fool^, till we
have heard what they have to say for themselves, we shall first examine the
reasonableness of their fairest Pleas for their evil actions, before we make
good the particular impeachment of folly against them. There are three ways
especially whereby they seek to justify themselves; by laying the blame of all
their evil actions, either upon the fatal necessity of all events, the
unavoidable frailty of humane nature, or the impossibility of keeping the D
Laws of Heaven: But that none of these will serve to excuse them from the just
imputation of folly, is our present business to discover.

1. The fatal necessity of all humane actions. Those who upon any other terms
are unwilling enough to own either God or Providence, yet if they can but make
these serve their turn to justify their sins by, their quarrel against them
then cease, as being much more willing that God should bear the blame of
their sins, than themselves. But yet the very fears of a Deity suggest so many
dreadful thoughts of his Majesty, Justice, and E
Power, that they are very well contented to have him wholly left out; and then
to suppose Man to be a mere Engine, that is necessarily moved by such a train
and series of causes, that there is no action how bad soever that is done by
him, which it was any more possible for him not to have done, than for A
the fire not to burn when it pleases. If this be true, farewell all the
differences of good and evil in men's actions; farewell all expectations of
future rewards and punishments; Religion becomes but a mere name, and
righteousness but an art to live by. But it is with this, as it is with the
other arguments they use against Religion; there is something within, which
checks and controlls them in what they say: and that inward remorse of
Conscience, which such men sometimes feel in their evil actions (when
conscience is forced to recoil by the foulness of them) does effectually
confute their own hypothesis; B
and makes them not believe those actions to be necessary, for which they
suffer so much in themselves because they knew they did them freely. Or is it
as fatal for man to believe himself free when he is not so, as it is for him to
act when his choice is determined? but what series of causes is there that does
so necessarily impose upon the common sense of all mankind; It seems very
strange, that man should have so little sense of his own interest to be still
necessitated to the worst of actions, and yet torment himself with the thoughts
that he did them freely. Or is it only the freedom of action, C
and not of choice, that men have an experience of within themselves? But
surely, however men may subtly dispute of the difference between these two,
no man would ever believe himself to be free in what he does, unless he first
thought himself to be so, in what he determines? And if we suppose man to have
as great a freedom of choice in all his evil actions (which is the liberty we
are now speaking of) as any persons assert or contend for, we cannot suppose
that he should have a greater experience of it, than now he has. So that
either it is impossible for man to know when his choice is free; or if D
it may be known, the constant experience of all evil men in the world will
testify, that it is so now. Is it possible for the most intemperate person to
believe, when the most pleasing temptations to lust or gluttony are presented
to him, that no consideration whatever could restrain his appetite, or keep him
from the satisfaction of his brutish inclinations? Will not the sudden, though
groundless apprehension of poison in the Cup, make the Drunkards heart to ache,
and hand to tremble, and to let fall the supposed fatal mixture in the midst of
all his jollity and excess? How often have persons who have E
designed the greatest mischief to the lives and fortunes of others, when all
opportunities have fallen out beyond their expectation for accomplishing their
ends, through some sudden thoughts which have surprised them, almost in the
very act, been diverted from their intended purposes? Did ever any yet A
imagine that the charms of beauty and allurements of lust were so
irresistible, that if men knew before hand they should surely dye in the
embraces of an adulterous bed, they could not yet withstand the temptations to
it? If then some considerations, which are quite of another nature from all the
objects which are presented to him, may quite hinder the force and efficacy of
them upon the mind of man (as we see in Joseph's resisting the importunate
Caresses of his Mistress) what reason can there be to imagine that man is a
mere machine moved only as outward objects determine him? And if the
considerations B
of present fear and danger may divert men from the practice of evil actions,
shall not the far more weighty considerations of eternity have at least an
equal, if not a far greater power and efficacy upon men's minds, to keep them
from everlasting misery? Is an immortal soul and the eternal happiness of it so
mean a thing in our esteem and value, that we will not deny our selves those
sensual pleasures for the sake of that which we would renounce for some present
danger? Are the flames of another world such painted fires, that they deserve
only to be laughed at, and not seriously considered by us? C
Fond man! art thou only free to ruin and destroy thy self? a strange fatality
indeed, when nothing but what is mean and trivial shall determine thy choice!
when matters of the highest moment are therefore less regarded, because they
are such. Have thou no other plea for thy self, but that thy sins were fatal?
thou have no reason then to believe but that thy misery shall be so too. But if
thou ownest a God and Providence, assure thy self that justice and
righteousness are not mere Titles of his Honor, but the real properties of his
nature. And he who has appointed the rewards and punishments of the great D
day, will then call the sinner to account, not only for all his other sins,
but for offering to lay the imputation of them upon himself. For if the
greatest abhorrency of men's evil ways, the rigor of his Laws, the severity of
his judgments, the exactness of his justice, the greatest care used to reclaim
men from their sins, and the highest assurance, that he is not the cause of
their ruin, may be any vindication of the holiness of God now, and his justice
in the life to come; we have the greatest reason to lay the blame of all our
evil actions upon our selves, as to attribute the glory of all our good unto
himself E
alone.

2. The frailty of humane Nature: those who find themselves to be free enough
to do their souls mischief, and yet continue still in the doing of it, find
nothing more ready to plead for themselves, than the unhappiness of man's
composition, A
and the degenerate state of the world. If God had designed (they are ready to
say) that man should lead a life free from sin, why did he confine the soul of
man to a body so apt to taint and pollute it? But who art thou O man, that thus
find fault with thy Maker? Was not his kindness the greater, in not only
giving thee a soul capable of enjoying himself, but such an habitation for it
here, which by the curiosity of its contrivance, the number and usefulness of
its parts, might be a perpetual and domestic testimony of the wisdom of its
Maker? Was not such a conjunction of soul and body B
necessary for the exercise of that dominion which God designed man for, over
the creatures endued only with sense and motion? And if we suppose this life to
be a state of trial in order to a better, (as in all reason we ought to do)
what can be imagined more proper to such a state, than to have the soul
constantly employed in the government of those sensual inclinations which arise
from the body? In the doing of which, the proper exercise of that virtue
consists, which is made the condition of future happiness. Had it not been for
such a composition, the difference could never have been seen between C
good and bad men; i. e. between those who maintain the Empire of reason,
assisted by the motives of Religion, over all the inferior faculties, and such
who dethrone their souls and make them slaves to every lust that will command
them. And if men willingly subject themselves to that which they were born to
rule, they have none to blame but themselves for it. Neither is it any excuse
at all, that this, through the degeneracy of mankind, is grown the common
custom of the world; unless that be in it self so great a Tyrant, that there is
no resisting the power of it. If God D
had commanded us to comply with all the customs of the world, and at the same
time to be sober, righteous, and good, we must have lived in another age than
we live in, to have excused these two commands from a palpable contradiction.
But instead of this, he has forewarned us of the danger of being led aside by
the soft and easy compliances of the world; and if we are sensible of our own
infirmities, (as we have all reason to be) he has offered us the assistance of
his Grace and of that Spirit of his, 1 John 4. 4.
which is greater than the Spirit that is the World. He has promised us those
weapons E
whereby we may withstand the torrent of wickedness in the world, with far
greater success than the old Nicol. Damascen. de moribus gent. p. 9. Ed. Cragii.
Gauls were wont to do in the inundations of their Country, whose custom was to
be drowned with their arms in their hands. But it will be the greater folly in
us to be so, because we have not only A
sufficient means of resistance, but we understand the danger before hand. If
we once forsake the strict rules of Religion and goodness, and are ready to
yield our selves to whatever has got retainers enough to set up for a custom,
we may know where we begin, but we cannot where we shall make an end. For every
fresh assault makes the breach wider, at which more enemies may come in still;
so that when we find our selves under their power, we are contented for our own
ease to call them Friends. Which is the unhappy consequence of too easy
yielding at first, till at last the greatest slavery to sin B
be accounted but good humor, and a gentile compliance with the fashions of
the world. So that when men are persuaded, either through fear, or too great
easiness to disuse that strict eye which they had before to their actions, it
oft-times falls out with them, as it did with the Soldier in the Geta in
Appiano.
Roman History, who blinded his eye so long in the time of the Civil Wars, that
when he would have used it again, he could not. And when custom has by degrees
taken away the sense of sin from their Consciences, they grow as hard as (b)
Herodotus tells (a) Herod. Thal v. Synes. de laud Calvivitii. p. 77.
us the heads of the old Egyptians were by the heat of the C
Sun, that nothing would ever enter them. If men will with Nebuchadnezzar herd
with the beasts of the field, no wonder if their reason departs from them, and
by degrees they grow as savage as the company they keep. So powerful a thing is
Custom to debauch Mankind, and so easily do the greatest vices by degrees
obtain admission into the souls of men, under pretense of being retainers to
the common infirmities of humane nature. Which is a phrase, through the power
of selfflattery, and men's ignorance in the nature of moral actions, made to be
of so large and comprehensive a sense that the most D
wilful violations of the Laws of Heaven, and such which the Scripture tells us
do exclude from the Kingdom of it, do find (rather than make) friends enough to
shelter themselves under the protection of them. But such a protection it is,
which is neither allowed in the Court of Heaven, nor will ever secure the souls
of men without a hearty and sincere repentance, from the arrest of divine
justice; which when it comes to call the world to an account of their actions
will make no defalcations at all for the power of custom, or common practice of
the world. E


3. The Impossibility of the Command, or rather of obedience to it. When
neither of the former pleas will effect their design, but notwithstanding the
pretended necessity of humane actions, and the more than pretended common
practice of the World, their Consciences still fly in their faces, and rebuke A
them sharply for their sins, then in a mighty rage and fury they charge God
himself with Tyranny in laying impossible Laws upon the sons of men. But if we
either consider the nature of the command, or the promises which accompany it,
or the large experience of the world to the contrary, we shall easily discover
that this pretense is altogether as unreasonable as either of the foregoing.
For what is it that God requires of men as the condition of their future
happiness which in its own nature is judged impossible? Is it for men to Tit.
2. 12.
live soberly, righteously and godly in this world? for that was the end of B
Christian Religion to persuade men to do so: but who thinks it impossible to
avoid the occasions of intemperance, not to defraud, or injure his neighbors,
or to pay that reverence and sincere devotion to God which we owe unto him? Is
it to do as we would be done by? yet that has been judged by strangers to the
Christian Religion a most exact measure of humane conversation; Is it to
maintain an universal kindness and good will to men? that indeed is the great
excellency of our Religion, that it so strictly requires it; but if this be
impossible, farewell all good nature in the world; and I suppose C
few will own this charge, lest theirs be suspected. Is it to be patient under
sufferings, moderate in our desires, circumspect in our actions, contented in
all conditions? yet these are things which those have pretended to who never
owned Christianity, and therefore surely they never thought them impossible. Is
it to be charitable to the poor, compassionate to those in misery? is it to be
frequent in Prayer, to love God above all things, to forgive our enemies as we
hope God will forgive us, to believe the Gospel, and be ready to suffer for the
sake of Christ? There are very few among us but will say they do D
all these things already, and therefore surely they do not think them
impossible. The like answer I might give to all the other precepts of the
Gospel till we come to the denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and as to
these too, if we charge men with them, they either deny their committing them,
and then say they have kept the command; or if they confess it, they promise
amendment for the future; but in neither respect can they be said to think the
command impossible. Thus we see their own mouths will condemn them when they
charge God with laying impossible Laws on mankind. But if we enquire E
further then into the judgments of those (who it may be never concerned
themselves so much about the precepts of Christian Religion, as to try whether
they had any power to observe them or not); nay, if we yield them more (than,
it may be, they are willing to enquire after, though they ought A
to do it) viz. that without the assistance of divine grace, they can never do
it: yet such is the unlimited nature of divine goodness and the exceeding
riches of Gods Grace, that (knowing the weakness and degeneracy of humane
Nature when he gave these commands to men) he makes a large and free offer of
assistance to all those who are so sensible of their own infirmity as to beg it
of him. And can men then say the command is impossible when he has promised an
assistance suitable to the nature of the duty and the infirmities of men? If it
be acknowledged that some of the duties of Christianity B
are very difficult to us now; let us consider by what means he has sweetened
the performance of them. Will not the proposal of so excellent a reward, make
us swallow some more than ordinary hardships that we might enjoy it? has he
not made use of the most obliging motives to persuade us to the practice of
what he requires, by the infinite discovery of his own love, the death of his
Son, and the promise of his Spirit? And what then is wanting, but only setting
our selves to the serious obedience of them, to make his commands not only not
impossible, but easy to us? But our grand fault is, we make impossibilities C
our selves where we find none, and then we complain of them: we are first
resolved not to practice the commands, and then nothing more easy than to find
fault with them: we first pass sentence, and then examine evidences; first
condemn, and then enquire into the merits of the Cause. Yet surely none of
these things can be accounted impossible, which have been done by all those who
have been sincere and hearty Christians; and God forbid we should think all
guilty of hypocrisy, who have professed the Christian Religion from the
beginning of it to this day. Nay more than so, they have not D
only done them, but professed to have that joy and satisfaction of mind in the
doing of them, which they would not exchange for all the pleasures and delights
of the world. These were the men, who not only were patient, but rejoiced in
sufferings; who accounted it their honor and glory to endure any thing for the
sake of so excellent a Religion; who were so assured of a future happiness by
it, that they valued Martyrdoms above Crowns and Scepters. But God be thanked,
we may hope to come to Heaven on easier terms than these, or else many others
might never come thither, besides those who think E
to make this a pretense for their sin, that now when with encouragement and
honor we may practice our Religion, the commands of it are thought impossible
by them. Thus we have made good the general Charge here employed against wicked
men, in that they are called Fools, by examining the most A
plausible pretenses they bring for themselves.

I now come to the particular impeachment of their folly, because they make a
mock at sin. And that I shall prove especially by two things: 1. Because this
argues the highest degree of wickedness. 2. Because it betrays the greatest
weakness of judgment and want of consideration.

1. Because it argues the highest degree of wickedness. If to sin be folly, to
make a mock at it is little short of madness. It is such a height of impiety,
that few but those who are of very profligate consciences can attain to,
without a long custom B
in sinning. For Conscience is at first modest, and starts and boggles at the
appearance of a great wickedness, till it be used to it and grown familiar with
it. It is no such easy matter for a man to get the mastery of his conscience;
a great deal of force and violence must be used to ones self before he does it.
The natural impressions of good and evil, the fears of a Deity, and the
apprehensions of a future state are such curbs and checks in a sinners way,
that he must first sin himself beyond all feeling of these, before he can
attain to the seat of the scorners. And we may justly wonder how any should C
ever come thither, when they must break through all that is ingenuous and
modest, all that is virtuous and good, all that is tender and apprehensive in
humane nature, before they can arrive at it. They must first deny a God, and
despise an immortal soul, they must conquer their own reason, and cancel the
Law written in their hearts, they must hate all that is serious, and yet
soberly believe themselves to be no better than the beasts that perish, before
men can come to make a scoff at religion, and a mock at sin.

And who now could ever imagine that in a Nation professing D
Christianity, among a people whose genius enclines them to civility and
religion, yea among those who have the greatest advantages of behavior and
education, and who are to give the Laws of civility to the rest of the Nation,
there should any be found who should deride religion, make sport with their own
prosaneness, and make so light of nothing, as being damned? I come not here to
accuse any, and least of all those who show so much regard of religion as to be
present in the places devoted to sacred purposes; but if there be any such
here, whose consciences accuse themselves, for any degrees E
of so great impiety; I beseech them by all that is dear and precious to them,
by all that is sacred and serious, by the vows of their Baptism, and their
participation of the Holy Eucharist, by all the kindness of Heaven which they
either enjoy or hope for, by the death and sufferings of the Son of God, A
that they would now consider how great folly and wickedness they betray in it,
and what the dreadful consequence of it will be, if they do not timely repent
of it. If it were a doubt (as I hope it is not among any here) whether the
matters of Religion be true or no, they are surely things which ought to be
seriously thought and spoken of. It is certainly no jesting matter to affront a
God of infinite Majesty and Power, (and he judges every wilful sinner to do so)
nor can any one in his wits think it a thing not to be regarded, whether he be
eternally happy or miserable. Methinks then among B
persons of civility and honor, above all others, Religion might at least be
treated with the respect and reverence due to the concernments of it; that it
be not made the sport of Entertainments, nor the common subject of Plays and
Comedies. For is there nothing to trifle with, but God and his service? Is wit
grown so schismatical and sacrilegious, that it can please it self with nothing
but holy ground? Are profaneness and wit grown such inseparable companions,
that none shall be allowed to pretend to the one, but such as dare be highly
guilty of the other? Far be it from those who have C
but the name of Christians, either to do these things themselves, or to be
pleased with them that do them: especially in such times as ours of late have
been, when God has used so many ways to make us serious if any thing would
ever do it. If men had only slighted God and Religion, and made a mock at sin,
when they had grown wanton through the abundance of peace and plenty, and saw
no severities of Gods justice used upon such who did it; yet the fault had been
so great, as might have done enough to have interrupted their peace and
destroyed that plenty, which made them out of the greatness D
of their pride and wantonness to kick against Heaven: but to do it in despite
of all Gods judgments, to laugh in his face when his rod is upon our backs,
when neither Pestilence nor Fire can make us more afraid of him, exceedingly
aggravates the impiety, and makes it more unpardonable. When like the old
Tacit. de moribus German.
Germans we dance among naked swords, when men shall defy and reproach Heaven
in the midst of a Cities ruins, and over the graves of those whom the arrows
of the Almighty have heaped together, what can be thought of such but that
nothing will make them serious, but eternal misery? E
And are they so sure there is no such thing to be feared, that they never
think of it, but when by their execrable oaths they call upon God to damn them,
for fear he should not do it time enough for them? Thus while men abuse his
patience, and provoke his justice, while they trample upon his kindness, and A
slight his severities, while they despise his Laws and mock at the breaches of
them, what can be added more to their impiety? or what can be expected by such
who are guilty of it, but that God should quickly discover their mighty folly
by letting them see how much they have deceived themselves, since Gal 6. 7.
God will not be mocked, but Ephesians 5. 6.
because of these things the wrath of God will most certainly come upon the
children of disobedience. Which leads to the second thing wherein this folly is
seen.

2. Which is in the weakness of judgment and want of consideration, B
which this betrays in men. Folly is the great unsteadiness of the mind in the
thoughts of what is good and fitting to be done. It were happy for many in the
world, if none should suffer in their reputation for want of wisdom, but such
whom nature or some violent distemper have wholly deprived of the use of their
reason and understandings: But wisdom does not lie in the rambling imaginations
of men's minds (for fools may think of the same things which wise men practice)
but in a due consideration and choice of things which are most agreeable to the
end they design, supposing the end C
in the first place to be worthy a wise man's choice; for I cannot yet see why
the end may not be chosen as well as the means, when there are many stand in
competition for our choice, and men first deliberate, and then determine which
is the fittest to be pursued. But when the actions of men discover, that either
they understand or regard not the most excellent end of their beings, or do
those things which directly cross and thwart their own designs, or else pursue
those which are mean and ignoble in themselves, we need not any further
evidence of their folly, than these things discover. D


Now that those who make a mock at sin are guilty of all these, will appear; if
we consider whom they provoke by doing so, whom they most injure, and upon what
reasonable consideration they are moved to what they do.

1. Whom they provoke by their making a mock at sin; Supposing that there is a
Governor of the world, who has established Laws for us to be guided by, we
may easily understand, whose honor and authority is reflected on, when the
violations of his Laws are made nothing of. For surely if they had a just
esteem of his power and Sovereignty, they never durst E
make so bold with him, as all those do who not only commit sin themselves, but
laugh at the scrupulosity of those who dare not. When Dionysius changed Apollos
Cloak, and took off the Golden Beard of Aesculapius, with those solemn jeers of
the unsuitableness of the one to the Son of a beardless Father; A
and the much greater convenience of a cheaper garment to the other; it was a
sign he stood not much in awe of the severity of their looks, nor had any dread
at all of the greatness of their power. But although there be so infinite a
disproportion between the artificial Deities of the Heathens, and the Majesty
of him who made and governs the whole world; yet as little reverence to his
power and authority is showed by all such who dare affront him with such a
mighty confidence, and bid the greatest defiance to his Laws by scoffing at
them. What is there, the Sovereigns and Princes of the earth do more B
justly resent, and express the highest indignation against, than to have their
Laws despised, their persons affronted, and their authority contemned? And can
we then imagine, that a God of infinite Power and Majesty, the honor of whose
Laws is as dear to him as his own is, should sit still unconcerned, when so
many indignities are continually offered them, and never take any notice at all
of them? It is true, his patience is not to be measured by our fretful and
pevish natures, (and it is happy for us all that it is not) he knows the sinner
can never escape his power, and therefore bears the longer with him: C
but yet his lenity is always joined with his wisdom and justice, and the time
is coming when patience it self shall be no more. Is it not then the highest
madness and folly to provoke one whose power is infinitely greater than our own
is, and from the severity of whose wrath we cannot secure our selves one minute
of an hour? How know thou, O vain man, but that in the midst of all thy
mirth and jollity, while thou art boasting of thy sins, and think thou can
never fill up fast enough the measure of thy iniquities, a sudden fit of an
Apoplexy, or the breaking of an Aposteme, or any of the innumerable instruments
D
of death, may dispatch thee hence, and consign thee into the hands of divine
Justice? And wherewithal then will thou be able to dispute with God? Will thou
then charge his Providence with fol^y, and his Laws with unreasonableness? when
his greatness shall affright thee, his Majesty astonish thee, his Power disarm
thee, and his Justice pro ceed against thee: when notwithstanding all thy
bravado's here, thy own Conscience shall be not only thy accuser and witness,
but thy judge and executioner too: when it shall revenge it self upon thee for
all the rapes and violences thou E
have committed upon it here: when horror and confusion shall be thy portion,
and the unspeakable anguish of a racked and tormented mind shall too late
convince thee of thy folly in making a mock at that which stings with an
everlasting venom. Art thou then resolved to put all these things to the
adventure, A
and live as securely as if the terrors of the Almighty were but the dreams of
men awake, or the fancies of weak and distempered brains? But I had rather
believe that in the heat and fury of thy lusts thou would seem to others to
think so, than thou either do or can persuade thy self to such
unreasonable folly. Is it not then far better to consult the tranquillity of
thy mind here, and the eternal happiness of it hereafter, by a serious
repentance and speedy amendment of thy life, than to expose thy self for the
sake of thy sensual pleasures to the sury of that God whose justice is
infinite, and power B
irresistible? Shall not the apprehension of his excellency make thee now
asraid of him? Never then make any mock at sin more, unless thou art able to
contend with the Almighty, or to dwell with everlasting burnings.

2. The folly of it is seen in considering whom the injury redounds to by men's
making themselves so pleasant with their sins. Do they think by their rude
attempts to dethrone the Majesty of Heaven, or by standing at the greatest
defiance, to make him willing to come to terms of composition with them? Do
they hope to slip beyond the bounds of his power, C
by salling into nothing when they die, or to sue out prohibitions in the Court
of Heaven, to hinder the effects of Justice there? Do they design to out-wit
infinite Wisdom, or to find such flaws in Gods government of the World, that he
shall be contented to let them go unpunished? All which imaginations are alike
vain and foolish, and only show how easily wickedness baffles the reason of
mankind, and makes them rather hope or wish for the most impossible things than
believe they shall ever be punished for their impieties. If the Apostate
Spirits can by reason of their present restraint and expectation D
of future punishments be as pleasant in beholding the follies of men as they
are malicious to suggest them, it may be one of the greatest diversions of
their misery, to see how active and witty men are in contriving their own
ruin. To see with what greediness they catch at every bait that is offered
them, and when they are swallowing the most deadly poison, what arts they use
to persuade themselves that it is a healthful potion. No doubt, nothing can
more gratify them than to see men sport themselves into their own destruction,
and go down so pleasantly to Hell: when eternal flames become their first E
awakeners, and then men begin to be wise, when it is too late to be so: when
nothing but insupportable torments can convince them that God was in earnest
with them, that he would not always bear the affronts of evil men, and that
those who derided the miseries of another life, shall have leisure enough A
to repent their folly, when their repentance shall only increase their sorrow
without hopes of pardon by it.

3. But if there were any present selicity, or any considerable advantage to be
gained by this mocking at sin, and undervaluing Religion, there would seem to
be some kind of pretense, though nothing of true reason for it. Yet that which
heightens this folly to the highest degree in the last place is, that there can
be no imaginable consideration thought on which might look like a plausible
temptation to it. The covetous man, when he has defrauded his neighbor, and
used B
all kinds of arts to compass an Estate, has the fullness of his baggs to
answer for him, and whatever they may do in another world, he is sure they will
do much in this. The voluptuous man has the strong propensities of his Nature,
the force of temptation which lies in the charms of beauty, to excuse his
unlawful pleasures by. The ambitious man, has the greatness of his mind, the
advantage of authority, the examples of those who have been great before him,
and the envy of those who condemn him, to plead for the heights he aims at. But
what is it which the person who despises Religion, C
and laughs at every thing that is serious, proposes to himself as the reason
of what he does? But alas! this were to suppose him to be much more serious
than he is, if he did propound any thing to himself as the ground of his
actions. But it may be a great kindness to others, though none to himself; I
cannot imagine any, unless it may be, to make them thankful they are not
arrived to that height of folly; or out of perfect good nature, lest they
should take him to be wiser than he is. The Psalmists fool despises him as much
as he does Religion: for he only says it in his heart, there is no God; D
but this though he dares not think there is none, yet shows him not near so
much outward respect and reverence as the other does. Even the Atheist himself
thinks him a Fool, and the greatest of all other, who believes a God, and yet
affronts him and trifles with him. And although the Atheists folly be
unaccountable, in resisting the clearest evidence of reason, yet so far he is
to be commended for what he says, that if there be such a thing as Religion,
men ought to be serious in it. So that of all hands the scoffer at Religion is
looked on as one forsaken of that little reason, which might serve to uphold E
a slender reputation of being above the beasts that perish: nay, therein his
condition is worse than theirs, that as they understand not Religion, they
shall never be punished for despising it: which such a person can never secure
himself from, considering the power, the justice, the severity of that God, A
whom he has so highly provoked. God grant, that the apprehension of this
danger may make us so serious in the profession and practice of our Religion,
that we may not by slighting that, and mocking at sin, provoke him to laugh at
our calamities, and mock when our fear comes; but that by beholding the
sincerity of our repentance, and the heartiness of our devotion to him, he may
turn his anger away from us, and rejoice over us to do us good. B
C
D
E


SERMON III. A
B
Sermon. III.
Preached at WHITE HALL.
LUKE VII. XXXV. C
But Wisdom is justified of all her Children.


OF all the Circumstances of our Blessed Saviors appearance and preaching in
the D
World, there is none which, to our first view and apprehension of things,
seems more strange and unaccountable, than that those persons who were then
thought of all others to be most conversant in the Law and the Prophets, should
be the most obstinate opposers of him. For since he came to fulfill all the
Prophesies which had gone before concerning him, and was himself the great
Prophet foretold by all the rest, none might in humane probability have been
judged more likely to have received and E
honored him, than those to whom the judgment of those things did peculiarly
belong; and who were as much concerned in the truth of them as any else could
be. Thus indeed it might have been reasonably expected; and doubtless it had
been so, if interest and prejudice had not had a far more A
absolute power and dominion over them, than they had over the rest of the
people. If Miracles, and Prophesies, if Reason and Religion; nay, if the
interest of another World could have prevailed over the interest of this among
them; the Jewish Sanhedrin might have been some of the first Converts to
Christianity, the Scribes and Pharisees had been all Proselytes to Christ, and
the Temple at Jerusalem had been the first Christian Church. But to let us see
with what a jealous eye Power and Interest looks on every thing that seems to
offer at any disturbance of it, how much greater sway partiality and B
prejudice has upon the minds of men than true Reason and Religion; and how
hard a matter it is to convince those who have no mind to be convinced; we find
none more furious in their opposition to the person of Christ, none more
obstinate in their infidelity as to his Doctrine, than those who were at that
time in the greatest reputation among them for their authority, wisdom, and
knowledge. These are they, whom our Savior, as often as he meets with, either
checks for their ignorance, or rebukes for their pride, or denounces woes
against for their malice and hypocrisy: These are they who instead C
of believing in Christ persecute him; instead of following him seek to destroy
him: and that they might the better compass it, they reproach and defame him,
as if he had been really as bad as themselves. And although the people might
not presently believe what they said concerning him, yet that they might at
least be kept in suspense by it, they endeavor to fasten the blackest
calumnies upon him; and suit them with all imaginable arts to the tempers of
those they had to deal with.

If any appeared zealous for the present peace and prosperity D
of the Nation; and for paying the duty and obedience they owed to the Roman
Power, which then governed them: to them he is represented as a factious and
seditious person, as an enemy to Caesar, as one that intended to set up a
Kingdom of his own, though to the ruin of his Country: That it was nothing but
ambition and vain glory, which made him gather Disciples, and preach to
multitudes; that none could foretell what the dangerous consequences of such new
Doctrines might be, if not timely suppressed, and the Author of them severely
punished. Thus to the prudent and cautious, reason E
of State is pretended as the ground of their enmity to Christ. But to those
who were impatient of the Roman yoke, and watched for any opportunity to cast
it off; they suggest the mighty improbabilities of ever obtaining any
deliverance by a person so mean and inconsiderable as our Savior appeared A
among them: and that surely God who delivered their Forefathers of old from a
bondage not greater than theirs, by a mighty hand and outstretched arm, did
never intend the redemption of his people by one of obscure Parentage, mean
Education, and of no interest in the world. To the great men, they need no more
than bid them, behold the train of his followers, who being generally poor, the
more numerous they were, the more mouths they might see open, and ready to
devour the Estates of those who were above them. The Priests and Levites they
bid consider what would become of B
them all, if the Law of Moses was abrogated, by which their interest was
upheld; for if the Temple fell, it was impossible for them to stand. But the
grand difficulty was among the people, who began to be possessed with so high
an opinion of him by the greatness of his Miracles, the excellency of his
Doctrine, and the innocence of his Conversation, that unless they could
insinuate into their minds some effectual prejudices against these, all their
other attempts were like to be vain and unsuccessful. If therefore they meet
with any who were surprised by his Miracles, as well as ravished by his
Doctrine; C
when they saw him raise the dead, restore sight to the blind, cure the deaf
and the lame, and cast out Devils out of possessed persons, they tell them
presently that these were the common arts of Impostors, and the practice of
those who go about to deceive the people; that such things were easily done by
the power of Magic, and assistance of the evil Spirits. If any were admirers
of the Pharisaical rigours and austerities (as the people generally were) when
men's Religion was measured by the sowerness of their countenances, the length
of their Prayers, and the distance they kept from other persons; D
these they bid especially beware of our Saviors Doctrine; for he condemned
all zeal and devotion, all mortification and strictness of life, under the
pretense of Pharisaical hypocrisy; that he sunk all Religion into short
Prayers and dull morality; that his conversation was not among the persons of
any reputation for piety, but among Publicans and Sinners; that nothing
extraordinary appeared in his Life; that his actions were like other men's, and
his company none of the best, and his behavior among them with too great a
freedom for a person who pretended to so high a degree of holiness. E


Thus we see the most perfect innocence could not escape the venom of malicious
tongues; but the less it entered, the more they were enraged, and made up what
wanted in the truth of their calumnies, by their diligence in spreading them. A
As though their mouths indeed had ^^en open Sepulchers by the noysom vapors
which came out of them; and we may well think no less a poison than that of
Asp; could be under their lips, which so secretly and yet so mischievously
conveyed it self into the hearts of the people. The only advantage which malice
has against the greatest Virtue, is, that the greater it is, the less it takes
notice of all the petty arts which are used against it; and will not bring its
own innocence so much into suspicion as to make any long Apologies for it self.
For, to a noble and generous spirit, assaulted B
rather by noise and clamor, than any solid reason or force of argument,
neglect and disdain are the most proper weapons of defense: for where malice is
only impertinent and troublesome, a punctual answer seems next to a confession.
But although innocence needs no defense as to it self, yet it is necessary for
all the advantages it has of doing good to mankind, that it appear to be what
it really is; which cannot be done, unless its reputation be cleared from the
malicious aspersions which are cast upon it. And from hence it was that our
blessed Savior, though he thought it not worth the while to C
use the same diligence in the vindication of himself, which his enemies did in
the defamation of him; yet when he saw it necessary in order to the reception
of his Doctrine among the more ingenuous and tractable part of his auditors, he
sometimes by the quickness of his replies, sometimes by the suddenness and
sharpness of his questions, and sometimes by the plain force of argument and
reason, baffles his adversaries, so that though they were resolved not to be
convinced, they thought it best for the time to be quiet. This was to let them
see how easy it was for him to throw off their reproaches as D
fast as their malice could invent them; and that it was as impossible for them
by such weak attempts to obscure the reputation of his innocence, as for the
spots which Astonomers descern near the body of the Sun, ever to eclipse the
light of it. So that all those thinner mists which envy and detraction raised
at his first appearance, and those grosser vapors which arose from their open
enmity when he came to a greater height, did but add a brighter luster to his
glory, when it was seen that notwithstanding all the machinations of his
enemies, his innocence brake forth like the light, which shines more and E
more to the perfect day.

But it pleased God, for the trial of men's minds so to order the matters of our
Religion, that as they are never so clear, but men of obstinate and perverse
spirits will find something to cavil at; so they were never so dark and obscure
in the most A
difficult circumstances of them, but men of unprejudiced and ingenuous minds
might find enough to satisfy themselves about them. Which is the main scope of
our Savior in the words of the Text, (and shall be of our present discourse
upon them) but Wisdom is justified of all her Children. Where without any
further Explication, by Wisdom we understand the method which God uses in
order to the salvation of mankind; by the Children of Wisdom, all those who
were willing to attain the end by the means which God affords, and by
justifying, not only the bare approving it, but the declaring of that
approbation B
to the World by a just vindication of it from the cavils and exceptions of
men. Although the words are capable of various senses, yet this is the most
natural, and agreeable to the scope of what goes before. For there our Savior
speaks of the different ways wherein John Baptist and himself appeared among
the Jews, in order to the same end, v. 33. For John Baptist came neither eating
bread nor drinking wine, and ye say, he has a Devil. A very severe Devil
surely, and one of the strictest orders among them, that was so far from being
cast out by fasting and prayer, that these were his continual C
employment! But what could we have sooner thought than that those persons who
made the Devil the author of so much mortification and severity of live, should
presently have entertained Religion in a more free and pleasing humor; but
this would not taken either, for the Son of Man comes eating and drinking; i.
e. was remarkable for none of those rigours and austerities which they
condemned in John, and applauded in the Pharisees; and then presently they
censure him, as a gluttonous man, and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners, v. 34. i. e. the utmost excess that any course of life D
was capable of they presently apply to those who had no other design in all
their actions, than to recommend true piety and goodness to them. So impossible
it was by any means which the wisdom of Heaven thought fit to use, to persuade
them into any good opinion of the persons who brought the glad tidings of
salvation to them: and therefore our Savior, when he sees how refractory and
perverse they were, in interpreting every thing to the worse, and sensuring the
ways which infinite Wisdom thought fittest to reclaim them by, he tells them
that it was nothing but malice and obstinacy which was the E
cause of it; but if they were men of teachable spirits (who by an usual
Hebraism are called the Children of Wisdom) they would see reason enough to
admire, approve and justify all the methods of divine Providence for the good
of Mankind. For Wisdom is justified of all her Children. A


That which I mainly design to speak to from hence is, That although the wisest
Contrivances of Heaven for the good of Mankind are liable to the unjust cavils
and exceptions of unreasonable men, yet there is enough to satisfy any
teachable and ingenuous Minds concerning the wisdom of them. Before I come more
particularly to examine those which concern our present subject, viz. the life
and appearance of our Lord and Savior, it will take very much off from the
force of them, if we consider, that thus it has always been, and supposing
humane B
nature to be as it is, it is scarce conceivable that it should be otherwise.
Not that it is necessary or reasonable it should be so at all, any more than it
is necessary that men should act foolishly or inconsiderately; but as long as
we must never expect to see all men either wise or pious, either to have a true
judgment of things, or a love of Religion; so long we shall always find there
will be some, who will be quarrelling with Religion when they have no mind to
practice it. I speak not now of those who make a mere jest and scoff at
Religion (of which our Age has so many Instances) but of a sort of C
men who are of a degree above the other, though far enough short of any true
and solid wisdom; who yet are the more to be considered, because they seem to
make a slender offer at reason in what they say. Some pretend they are not only
unsatisfied with the particular ways of instituted Religion, any further than
they are subservient to their present interest (which is the only God they
worship) but to make all sure, the foundations even of Natural Religion it self
cannot escape their cavils and exceptions. They have found out an Index
Expurgatorius for those impressions of a Deity which are in D
the hearts of men; and use their utmost arts to obscure, since they cannot
extinguish those lively characters of the power, wisdom and goodness of God,
which are every where to be seen in the large volume of the Creation. Religion
is no more to them but an unaccountable fear; and the very notion of a
spiritual substance (even of that without which we could never know what a
contradiction meant) is said to imply one. But if for quietness sake, and it
may be to content their own minds as well as the World, they are willing to
admit of a Deity, (which is a mighty concession from those who have so E
much cause to be afraid of him) then to ease their minds of such troublesome
companions as their fears are, they seek by all means to dispossess him of his
Government of the World, by denying his Providence, and care of humane affairs.
They are contented he should be called an excellent Being, that A
should do nothing, and therefore signify nothing in the World; or rather,
then he might be styled an Almighty Sardanapalus, that is so fond of ease and
pleasure, that the least thought of business would quite spoil his happiness.
Or if the activity of their own spirits may make them think that such an
excellent Being may sometimes draw the Curtains and look abroad into the World,
then every advantage which another has got above them, and every cross
accident which befalls themselves (which by the power of self-flattery most men
have learnt to call the Prosperity of the wicked, and the sufferings of good B
men) serve them for mighty charges against the justice of Divine Providence.
Thus either God shall not govern the World at all, or if he do, it must be upon
such terms as they please and approve of, or else they will erect an High Court
of Justice upon him, and condemn the Sovereign of the World, because he could
not please his discontented subjects. And as if he were indeed arraigned at
such a bar, every weak, and peevish exception shall be cried up for evidence;
when the fullest and clearest vindications of him shall be scorned and
contemned. But this does not in the least argue the obnoxiousness of him C
who is so accused, but the great injustice of those who dare pass sentence;
where it is neither in their power to understand the reason of his actions, nor
if it were, to call him in question for his proceedings with men. But so great
is the pride and arrogance of humane Nature, that it loves to be condemning
what it cannot comprehend; and there needs be no greater reason given
concerning the many disputes in the world about Divine Providence, than that
God is wise, and we are not, but would fain seem to be so. While men are in the
dark they will be always quarrelling; and those who contend the most, D
do it that they might seem to others to see, when they know themselves they do
not. Nay, there is nothing so plain and evident, but the reason of some men is
more apt to be imposed upon in it, than their senses are; as it appeared in him
who could not otherwise confute the Philosophers argument against motion, but
by moving before him. So that we see the most certain things in the world are
liable to the cavils of men who employ their wits to do it; and certainly those
ought not to stagger men's faith in matters of the highest nature and
consequence, which would not at all move them in other E
things.

But at last it is acknowledged by the men who love to be called the men of wit
in this Age of ours, that there is a God and Providence, a future state, and
the differences of good and evil, but the Christian Religion they will see no
further A
reason to embrace than as it is the Religion of the State they live in. But if
we demand what mighty reasons they are able to bring forth against a Religion
so holy and innocent in its design, so agreeable to the Nature of God and Man,
so well contrived for the advantages of this and another life, so fully
attested to come from God by the Miracles wrought in confirmation of it, by the
death of the Son of God, and of such multitudes of Martyrs, so certainly
conveyed to us, by the unquestionable Tradition of all Ages since the first
delivery of it; the utmost they can pretend against it is, that it is B
built upon such an appearance of the Son of God which was too mean and
contemptible, that the Doctrine of it is inconsistent with the Civil Interests
of men, and the design ineffectual for the Reformation of the World. For the
removal therefore of these cavils against our Religion, I shall show,

1. That there were no circumstances in our Saviors appearance or course of
life, which were unbecoming the Son of God, and the design he came upon. 2.
That the Doctrine delivered by him is so far from being contrary to the Civil
Interests of the World, that it tends C
highly to the preservation of them. 3 That the design he came upon was very
agreeable to the Infinite Wisdom of God, and most effectual for the reformation
of Mankind.
For clearing the first of these, I shall consider, (1.) The Manner of our
Saviors appearance. (2.) The Course of his Life; and what it was which his
enemies did most object against him.

1. The Manner of our Saviors Appearance; which has been always the great
offense to the admirers of the pomp and D
greatness of the World. For when they heard of the Son of God coming down from
Heaven, and making his Progress into this lower world, they could imagine
nothing less, than that an innumerable company of Angels must have been
dispatched before, to have prepared a place for his reception; that all the
Sovereigns and Princes of the World must have been summoned to give their
attendance and pay their homage to him: that their Scepters must have been
immediately laid at his feet, and all the Kingdoms of the earth been united
into one universal Monarchy under the Empire of the Son of E
God: That the Heavens should bow down at his presence to show their obeisance
to him, the Earth tremble and shake for fear at the near approaches of his
Majesty; that all the Clouds should clap together in one universal Thunder, to
welcome his appearance, and tell the Inhabitants of the World what cause A
they had to fear him whom the Powers of the Heavens obey: that the Sea should
run out of its wonted course with amazement and horror; and if it were
possible, hide it self in the hollow places of the earth: that the Mountains
should shrink in their heads, to fill up the vast places of the deep; so that
all that should be fulfilled in a literal sense, which was foretold of the
coming of the Messiah, Luke 3. 5, 6.
That every Valley should be filled, and every Mountain and Hill brought low;
the crooked made straight, and the rough ways smooth, and all flesh see the
salvation of God. Yea, that the Sun for a B
time should be darkened, and the Moon withdraw her light, to let the Nations of
the Earth understand that a Glory infinitely greater than theirs did now appear
to the World. In a word, they could not imagine the Son of God could be born
without the pangs and throws of the whole Creation; that it was as impossible
for him to appear, as for the Sun in the Firmament to disappear, without the
notice of the whole World. But when instead of all his pomp and grandeur he
comes incognito into the World, instead of giving notice of his appearance to
the Potentates of the Earth, he is only discovered C
to a few silly Shepherds and three wise men of the East; instead of choosing
either Rome or Jerusalem for the place of his Nativity, he is born at Bethleem
a mean and obscure Village: instead of the glorious and magnificent Palaces of
the East or West, which were at that time so famous; he is brought forth in a
Stable, where the Manger was his Cradle, and his Mother the only attendant
about him: who was her self none of the great persons of the Court, nor of any
fame in the Country; but was only rich in her Genealogy, and honorable in her
Pedigree. And according to the D
obscurity of his Birth was his Education too: his youth was not spent in the
Imperial Court at Rome, nor in the Schools of Philosophers at Athens, nor at
the feet of the great Rabbis at Jerusalem: but at Nazareth, a place of mean
esteem among the Jews, where he was remarkable for nothing so much as the
Virtues proper to his Age, Modesty, Humility and Obedience. All which he
exercises to so high a degree, that his greatest Kindred and acquaintance were
mightily surprised when at 30. years of age, he began to discover himself by
the Miracles which he wrought, and the Authority which E
he spoke with. And although the rays of his Divinity began to break forth
through the Clouds he had hitherto disguised himself in, yet he persisted still
in the same course of humility and self-denial; taking care of others to the
neglect of himself; feeding others by a Miracle, and fasting himself, A
to one: showing his power in working miraculous Cures, and his humility in
concealing them: Conversing with the meanest of the people, and choosing such
for his Apostles, who brought nothing to recommend them but innocence and
simplicity. Who by their heats and ignorance were continual exercises of his
Patience in bearing with them, and of his care and tenderness in instructing
them. And after a life thus led with such unparalled humility, when he could
add nothing more to it by his actions, he does it by his sufferings; and
compleats the sad Tragedy of his Life by a most shameful and B
ignominious Death. This is the short and true account of all those things
which the admirers of the greatness of this world think mean and contemptible
in our Saviors appearance here on earth. But we are now to consider whether so
great humility were not not more agreeable with the design of his coming into
the World, than all that pomp and state would have been which the Son of God
might have more easily commanded than we can imagine. He came not upon so mean
an errand, as to dazzle the eyes of Mankind with the brightness of his Glory, to
amaze them by the terribleness of his Majesty, C
much less to make a show of the riches and gallantry of the World to them: But
he came upon far more noble and excellent designs, to bring life and
immortality to light, to give men the highest assurance of an eternal happiness
and misery in the World to come, and the most certain directions for obtaining
the one, and avoiding the other: and in order to that, nothing was judged more
necessary by him, than to bring the vanities of this World out of that credit
and reputation they had gained among foolish men. Which he could never have
done, if he had declaimed never so much against the vanity of D
worldly greatness, riches and honors, if in the mean time himself had lived
in the greatest splendor and bravery. For the enjoining then the contempt of
this world to his Disciples in hopes of a better, would have looked like the
commendation of the excellency of fasting at a full meal, and of the
conveniences of Poverty by one who makes the greatest have to be rich. That he
might not therefore seem to offer so great a contradiction to his Doctrine by
his own example; he makes choice of a life so remote from all suspicion of
designs upon this world, that though the foxes E
had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, yet the Son of Man, who was the
Lord and Heir of all things, had not whereon to lay his head. And as he showed
by his life how little he valued the great things of the World, so he
discovered by his death how little he feared the evil things of A
it: all which he did with a purpose and intention to rectify the great
mistakes of men as to these things: That they might no longer venture an
eternal happiness for the splendid and glorious vanities of this present life;
nor expose themselves to the utmost miseries of another world, to avoid the
frowns of this. From hence proceeded that generous contempt of the World, which
not only our Savior himself, but all his true Disciples of the first Ages of
Christianity were so remarkable for; to let others see they had greater things
in their eye than any here, the hopes of which they would not part with for all
that this B
world thinks great or desirable. So that considering the great danger most men
are in, by too passionate a love of the^e things, and that universal and
infinite kindness which our Savior had to the Souls of men; there was nothing
he could discover it more in as to his appearance in the world, than by putting
such an affront upon the greatness and honor of it, as he did by so open a
neglect of it in his life, and despising it in his death and sufferings. And
who now upon any pretense of reason dare entertain the meaner apprehensions of
our Blessed Savior, because he appeared without the pomp and greatness C
of the world, when the reason of his doing so was, that by his own humility
and self-denial he might show us the way to an eternal happiness? Which he well
knew how very hard it would be for men to attain to, who measure things not
according to their inward worth and excellency, but the splendor and
appearance which they make to the world: who think nothing great but what makes
them gazed upon; nothing desirable but what makes them flattered. But if they
could be once persuaded how incomparably valuable the glories of the life to
come are above all the gayeties and shows of this; they D
would think no condition mean or contemptible, which led to so great an end;
none happy or honorable which must so soon end in the grave, or be changed to
eternal misery. And that we might entertain such thoughts as these are, not as
the melancholy effects of discontent and disappointments, but as the serious
result of our most deliberate enquiry into the value of things, was the design
of our Savior in the humility of his appearance, and of that excellent
Doctrine which he recommended to the World by it. Were I to argue the case with
Philosophers, I might then at large show from the free acknowledgements E
of the best and most experienced of them, that nothing becomes so much one who
designs to recommend Virtue to the World, as a real and hearty contempt of all
the pomp of it, and that the meanest condition proceeding from such a principle
is truly and in it self more honorable, than living A
in the greatest splendor imaginable. Were I to deal with the Jews, I might
then prove, that as the Prophecies concerning the Messiah speak of great and
wonderful effects of his coming, so that they should be accomplished in a way
of suffering and humility. But since I speak to Christians, and and therefore
to those who are persuaded of the great kindness and love of our Savior in
coming into the World, to reform it, and that by convincing men of the truth
and excellency of a future state, no more need be said to vindicate the
appearance of him from that meanness and contempt, B
which the pride and ambition of vain men is apt to cast upon it.

2. But not only our Saviors manner of Appearance, but the manner of his
Conversation gave great offense to his enemies, viz. That it was too free and
familiar among persons who had the meanest reputation, the Publicans and
Sinners; and in the mean time declaimed against the strictest observers of the
greatest rigours and austerities of life. And this no doubt was one great cause
of the mortal hatred of the Pharisees against him, though least pretended, that
even thereby C
they might make good that charge of hypocrisy which our Savior so often
draws up against them. And no wonder, if such severe rebukes did highly provoke
them, since they found this so gainful and withal so easy a trade among the
people, when with a demure look and a sour countenance they could cheat and
defraud their Brethren; and under a specious show of devotion could break their
fasts by devouring Widows houses, and end their long Prayers to God with acts
of the highest injustice to their Neighbors. As though all that while, they
had been only begging leave of God to do all D
the mischief they could to their Brethren. It is true, such as these were, our
Savior upon all occasions speaks against with the greatest sharpness, as being
the most dangerous enemies to true Religion: and that which made men whose
passion was too strong for their reason abhor the very name of Religion, when
such baseness was practiced under the profession of it. When they saw men offer
to compound with Heaven for all their injustice and oppression, with not a
twentieth part of what God challenges as his due; they either thought Religion
to be a mere device of men, or that these men's hypocrisy E
ought to be discovered to the World. And therefore our Blessed Savior, who
came with a design to retrieve a true spirit of Religion among men, finds it
first of all necessary to unmask those notorious hypocrites, that their
deformities being discovered, their ways as well as their persons might be the
better A
understood and avoided. And when he saw by the mighty opinion they had of
themselves, and their uncharitableness toward all others, how little good was
to be done upon them, he seldom vouchsafes them his presence; but rather
converses with those who being more openly wicked were more easily convinced of
their wickedness, and persuaded to reform. For which end alone it was that he
so freely conversed with them, to let them see there were none so bad, but his
kindness was so great to them, that he was willing to do them all the good he
could: And therefore this could be no B
more just a reproach to Christ, that he kept company sometimes with these,
than it is to a Chyrurgion to visit Hospitals, or to a Physician to converse
with the sick.

2. But when they saw that his Greatness did appear in another way, by the
authority of his Doctrine, and the power of his Miracles, then these wise and
subtle men apprehend a further reach and design in all his actions: Viz. That
his low condition was a piece of Popularity, and a mere disguise to ensnare the
people, the better to make them in love with his Doctrine, and so by degrees to
season them with Principles C
of Rebellion and disobedience: Hence came all the clamours of his being an
Enemy to Caesar, and calling himself, the King of the Jews, and of his design
to erect a Kingdom of his own, all which they interpret in the most malicious
though most unreasonable sense. For nothing is so politic as malice and ill
will is; for that finds designs in every thing; and the more contrary they are
to all the Protestations of the persons concerned, the deeper that suggests
presently they are laid, and that there is the more cause to be afraid of them.
Thus it was in our Blessed Saviors case; it was not the greatest care D
used by him to show his obedience to the Authority he lived under, it was not
his most solemn disavowing having any thing to do with their civil Interests,
not the severe checks he gave his own Disciples for any ambitious thoughts
among them, not the recommending the doctrine of Obedience to them, nor the
rebuke he gave one of his most forward Disciples for offering to draw his sword
in the rescue of himself, could abate the fury and rage of his enemies, but at
last they condemn the greatest Teacher of the duty of Obedience as a Traitor,
and the most unparalled example of innocence as a Malesactor. E
But though there could be nothing objected against the life and actions of our
Blessed Savior, as tending to sedition and disturbance of the Civil Peace, yet
that, these men (who were inspired by malice, and prophesied according to their
own interest) would say, was because he was taken away in A
time, before his designs could be ripe for action, but if his doctrine tended
that way, it was enough to justify their proceedings against him. So then, it
was not what he did, but what he might have done: not Treason but Convenience
which made them take away the life of the most innocent person: but if there
had been any taint in his doctrine that way, there had been reason enough in
such an Age of faction and sedition to have used the utmost care to prevent the
spreading it. But so far is this from the least ground of probability that it
is not possible to imagine a Religion which aims less B
at the present particular interests of the embracers of it, and more at the
public interests of Princes than Christianity does, as it was both preached
and practiced by our Savior and his Apostles.

And here we have cause to lament the unhappy fate of Religion when it falls
under the censure of such who think themselves the Masters of all the little
arts whereby this world is governed. If it teaches the duty of Subjects, and
the authority of Princes, if it requires obedience to Laws, and makes men's
happiness or misery in another life in any measure to depend C
upon it; then Religion is suspected to be a mere trick of State, and an
invention to keep the world in awe, whereby men might the better be molded
into Societies, and preserved in them. But if it appear to enforce any thing
indispensably on the Consciences of men, though humane Laws require the
contrary; if they must not forswear their Religion, and deny him whom they hope
to be saved by, when the Magistrate calls them to it, then such half-witted men
think that Religion is nothing but a pretense to Rebellion, and Conscience only
an obstinate plea for Disobedience. But this is to D
take it for granted that there is no such thing as Religion in the World; for
if there be, there must be some inviolable Rights of Divine Sovereignty
acknowledged, which must not vary according to the diversity of the Edicts and
Laws of men. But supposing the profession and practice of the Christian
Religion to be allowed inviolable, there was never any Religion, nay, never any
inventions of the greatest Politicians, which might compare with that for the
preservation of civil Societies. For this in plain and express words tells all
the owners of it, that they must live in subjection and obedience; Romans 13. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
E
not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake; that they who do resist receive
unto themselves damnation, and that because whosoever resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God. Than which it is impossible to conceive
arguments of greater force to keep men in obedience to Authority; for he that A
only obeys because it is his interest to do so, will have the same reason to
disobey when there is an apprehension that may make more for his advantage. But
when the reason of obedience is derived from the concernments of another life,
no hopes of interest in this world can be thought to balance the loss which
may come by such a breach of duty in that to come. So that no persons do so
dangerously undermine the foundations of civil Government, as those who
magnify that to the contempt of Religion; none so effectually secure them as
those who give to God the things that are Gods, and by doing so, B
are obliged to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. This was the
Doctrine of Christianity as it was delivered by the first author of it; and the
practice was agreeable, as long as Christianity preserved its primitive honor
in the world. For, so far were men then from making their zeal for Religion a
pretense to rebellion, that though Christianity were directly contrary to the
Religions then in vogue in the world, yet they knew of no other way of
promoting it, but by patience, humility, meekness, prayers for their
persecutors, and tears when they saw them obstinate. So far were they then from
somenting C
suspicions and jealousies concerning the Princes and Governors they lived
under, that though they were generally known to be some of the worst of men as
well as of Princes, yet they charge all Christians in the strictest manner, as
they loved their Religion and the honor of it, as they valued their souls and
the salvation of them, that they should be subject to them. So far were they
then from giving the least encouragement to the usurpations of the rights of
Princes under the pretense of any power given to a head of the Church: that
there is no way for any to think they meant it, unless we suppose D
the Apostles such mighty Politicians, that it is because they say nothing at
all of it; but on the contrary, bid every soul be subject to the higher powers;
though an Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, whatever he be, as the Fathers
interpret it. Yea so constant and uniform was the doctrine and practice of
Obedience in all the first and purest ages of the Christian Church, that no one
instance can be produced of any usurpation of the rights of Princes under the
pretense of any title from Christ, or any disobedience to their authority,
under the pretense of promoting Christianity, through all those times E
wherein Christianity the most flourished, or the Christians were the most
persecuted. And happy had it been for us in these last ages of the World, if we
had been Christians on the same terms which they were in the Primitive times;
then there had been no such scandals raised by the degeneracy A
of men upon the most excellent and peaceable Religion in the world, as though
that were unquiet and troublesome, because so many have been so who have made
show of it. But let their pretenses be never so great to Infallibility on one
side, and to the Spirit on the other, so far as men encourage faction and
disobedience, so far they have not the Spirit of Christ and Christianity, and
therefore are none of his. For he showed his great wisdom in contriving such a
method of saving men's souls in another world, as tended most to the
preservation of the peace and B
quietness of this; and though this wisdom may be evil spoken of by men of
restless and unpeaceable minds, yet I will be still justified by all who have
heartily embraced the Wisdom which is from above, who are pure and peaceable as
that Wisdom is, and such, and only such are the Children of it.

3. I come to show, That the design of Christ's appearance was very agreeable to
the infinite Wisdom of God; and that the means were very suitable and effectual
for carrying on of that design for the reformation of Mankind. C


1. That the design it self was very agreeable to the infinite Wisdom of God.
What could we imagine more becoming the Wisdom of God, than to contrive a way
for the recovery of lapsed and degenerate Mankind? who more fit to employ upon
such a message as this, than the Son of God? for his coming gives the greatest
assurance to the minds of men, that God was serious in the management of this
design, than which nothing could be of greater importance in order to the
success of it. And how was it possible he should give a greater testimony of
himself, and withal of the purpose he came D
about, than he did when he was in the world? The accomplishment of Prophesies,
and power of Miracles showed who he was; the nature of his Doctrine, the manner
of his Conversation, the greatness of his Sufferings, showed what his design
was in appearing among men: for they were all managed with a peculiar respect
to the convincing mankind, that God was upon terms of mercy with them, and had
therefore sent his Son into the world, that he might not only obtain the pardon
of sin for those who repent, but eternal life for all them that obey him. And
what is there now we can imagine so E
great and desirable as this, for God to manifest his wisdom in? It is true,
we see a great discovery of it in the works of Nature, and might do in the
methods of Divine Providence if partiality and interest did not blind our eyes;
but both these, though great in themselves, yet fall short of the contrivance A
of bringing to an eternal happiness man who had fallen from his Maker, and was
perishing in his own folly. Yet this is that which men in the pride and vanity
of their own imaginations either think not worth considering, or consider as
little as if they thought so; and in the mean time think themselves very wise
too. The Jews had the wisdom of their Traditions which they gloried in, and
despised the Son of God himself when he came to alter them. The Greeks had the
wisdom of their Philosophy which they so passionately admired, that whatever
did not agree with that, though infinitely more certain B
and useful, was on that account rejected by them. The Romans, after the
conquest of so great a part of the World, were grown all such Politicians and
Statesmen, that few of them could have leisure to think of another world, who
were so busy in the management of this. And some of all these sorts do yet
remain in the World, which makes so many so little think of, or admire this
infinite discovery of divine Wisdom: nay, there are some who can mix all these
together, joining a Jewish obstinacy, with the pride and self-opinion of the
Greeks, to a Roman unconcernedness about the matters of C
another life. And yet upon a true and just enquiry never any Religion could be
found, which could more fully satisfy the expectation of the Jews, the reason
of the Greeks, or the wisdom of the Romans, than that which was made known by
Christ, who was the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. Here the Jew might
find his Messiah come, and the Promises fulfilled which related to him, here
the Greek might find his long and vainly looked for certainty of a life to
come, and the way which leads to it, here the Roman might see a Religion
serviceable to another world and this together. Here are Precepts D
more holy, Promises more certain, Rewards more desirable than ever the wit or
invention of men could have attained to. Here are Institutions far more pious,
useful and serviceable to mankind, than the most admired Laws of the famous
Legislators of Greece or Rome. Here are no popular designs carried on, no vices
indulged for the public interest, which Solon, Lycurgus and Plato are charged
with. Here is no making Religion a mere trick of State, and a thing only useful
for governing the people, which Numa and the great men at Rome are liable to
the suspicion of. Here is no wrapping E
up Religion in strange figures and mysterious nonsense, which the Egyptians
were so much given to. Here is no inhumanity and cruelty in the sacrifices
offered, no looseness and profaneness allowed in the most solemn mysteries, no
worshipping of such for Gods who had not been fit to live if they A
had been men, which were all things so commonly practiced in the Idolatries of
the Heathens. But the nature of the Worship is such as the minds of those who
come to it ought to be, and as becomes that God whom we profess to serve, pure
and holy, grave and serious, solemn and devout, without the mixtures of
superstition, vanity or ostentation. The precepts of our Religion are plain and
easy to be known, very suitable to the nature of Mankind, and highly tending
to the advantage of those who practice them, both in this and a better life.
The arguments to persuade men are the most B
weighty and powerful, and of as great importance as the love of God, the death
of his Son, the hopes of happiness, and the fears of eternal misery, can be to
men. And wherein is the contrivance of our Religion defective, when the end is
so desirable, the means so effectual for the obtaining of it?

2. Which is the next thing to be considered. There are two things which in
this degenerate estate of man are necessary in order to the recovery of his
happiness; and those are Repentance for sins past, and sincere Obedience for
the future: C
now both these the Gospel gives men the greatest encouragements to, and
therefore is the most likely to effect the design it was intended for.

1. For Repentance for sins past. What more powerful motives can there be to
persuade men to repent, than for God to let men know that he is willing to
pardon their sins upon the sincerity of their Repentance, but without that,
there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery
indignation? that their sins are their follies, and therefore to repent is to
grow wise: that he requires no more from men, D
but what every considerative man knows is fitting to be done whenever he
reflects upon his actions: that there can be no greater ingratitude or
disingenuity toward the Son of God than to stand at defiance with God when he
has shed his blood to reconcile God and Man to each other: that every step of
his humiliation, every part of the Tragedy of his life, every wound at his
death, every groan and sigh which he uttered upon the Cross, were designed by
him as the most prevailing Rhetoric, to persuade men to forsake their sins,
and be happy: that there cannot be a more unaccountable folly, than by E
impenitency to lose the hopes of a certain and eternal happiness for the sake
of those pleasures which every wise man is ashamed to think of: that to
continue in sin with the hopes to repent, is to stab a man's self with the hopes
of a cure: that the sooner men do it, the sooner they will find their minds at A
ease, and that the pleasures they enjoy in forsaking their sins, are far more
noble and manly than ever they had in committing them: but if none of these
arguments will prevail with them, perish they must, and that unavoidably,
insupportably, and irrecoverably: And if such arguments as these will not
prevail with men to leave their sins, it is impossible that any should.

2. For Holiness of Life: For Christ did not come into the World, and dye for
us, merely that we should repent of what is past, Titus 2. 12.
by denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, but B
that we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. And
what he does expect, he has given the greatest encouragements to perform: by
the clearness of his precepts, the excellency of his own example, the promise
of his Grace, and the proposition of eternal rewards and punishments, whereby
he takes off all the objections men are apt to make against obedience to the
Commands of Christ: the pretense of ignorance, because his Laws are so clear;
the pre tence of impossibility by his own example; the pretense of infirmity by
the assistance of his Grace; the pretense of the unnecessariness C
of so great care of our actions by making eternal rewards and punishments to
depend upon it. Let us then reflect upon the whole design of the Gospel, and
see how admirably it is suited to the end it was intended for, to the condition
of those whose good was designed by it, and to the honor of the great
contriver and manager of it. And let not us by our impenitency and the
unholiness of our lives, dishonor God and our Savior, reproach our Religion,
and condemn that by our lives which we justify by our words. For when we have
said all we can, the best and most effectual vindication D
of Christian Religion is to live according to it: But oh then how unhappy are
we that live in such an Age wherein it were hard to know that men were
Christians, unless we are bound to believe their words against the tenor and
course of their actions! What is become of the purity, the innocence, the
candor, the peaceableness, the sincerity and devotion of the Primitive
Christians! What is become of their zeal for the honor of Christ, and
Christian Religion! If it we^e the design of men, to make our Religion a
dishonor and reproach to the Jews, Mahumetans, and Heathens, could they E
do it by more effectual means than they have done? Who is there that looks
into the present state of the Christian World, could ever think that the
Christian Religion was so incomparably beyond all others in the world? Is the
now Christian Rome so much beyond what it was while it was Heathen? Nay, A
was it not then remarkable in its first times for justice, sincerity, contempt
of riches, and a kind of generous honesty, and who does not (though of the same
Religion, if he has any ingenuity left) lament the want of all those things
there now? Will not the sobriety of the very Turks upbraid our excesses and
debaucheries? and the obstinacy of the Jews in defense and practice of their
Religion, condemn our coldness and indifferency in ours? If we have then any
tenderness for the honor of our Religion, or any kindness for our own Souls,
let us not only have the Name, but let us lead the lives of B
Christians; let us make amends for all the reproaches which our Religion has
suffered by the faction and disobedience of some, by the Oaths and Blasphemies,
the impieties and profaneness of others, by the too great negligence and
carelessness of all, that if it be possible, Christianity may appear in its true
glory, which will then only be, when those who name the Name of Christ depart
from iniquity, and live in all manner of holy conversation and godliness. C
D
E


SERMON IV. A
B
Sermon. IV.
Preached at WHITE HALL.
ROMANS I. XVI. C
For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
THese words are uttered by one who was himself D
a remarkable instance of the truth of the Doctrine contained in them, Viz. of
that Divine Power which did accompany the Gospel of Christ. For what can we
imagine else should make him now not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, who not
long before was not ashamed to persecute all those who professed it? One, whose
spirit was fermented with the leaven of the E
Pharisees, and enraged with fury against all who owned the name of Christ, is
of a sudden turned quite into another temper, to the confusion of those who
employed him, and the amazement of them whom he designed to persecute. Nay, so
great was the change which was wrought in him, that from a Bigot of the Jewish
Religion he becomes an Apostle of the Christian, and from breathing flames
against the Christians, none more ready than he to undergo them for Christ. If
he had only given over his persecution, it might have been thought, that he had
merely run himself out of breath, and grown weary of his former fury, (as
greater persons than he did afterward) but to retain the same fervor of
spirit in preaching Christ, which he had before in opposing him, to have as
great zeal for making Christians, as he had for destroying them, must needs
proceed from some great and unusual B
cause. Whilst the Jews thought he had too much learning and interest to
become their enemy, and the Christians found he had too much rage and fury to
be their friend, even then when they least expected it, instead of continuing
an Instrument of the Sanhedrin for punishing the Christians, he declared
himself an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ. And that no ordinary one
neither; for such was the efficacy of those divine words, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me, that they not only presently allay his former heat, but
quicken and animate him to a greater zeal for the honor of him C
whom he had persecuted before. And the faster he had run when he was out of
his way, the greater diligence he used when he found it, there being none of
all the followers of Christ who out-stript him in his constant endeavors to
advance the Christian Religion in the World. And if an unwearied diligence to
promote it, an uncessant care for preserving it, an universal concern for all
who owned it, and an undaunted spirit in bearing the affronts and injuries he
underwent for it, be any persuasive arguments of the love a man bears to his
Religion, there was never any person who made a D
clearer demonstration than St. Paul did of the truth of his Religion, and his
sincerity in embracing it. For his endeavors were suitable to the greatness of
his spirit, his care as large as the Horizon of the Sun of righteousness, his
courage as great as the malice of his enemies. For he was neither afraid of the
malice of the Jews, or of the Wisdom of the Greeks, or of the Power of the
Romans, but he goes up and down preaching the Gospel in a sphere as large as
his mind was, and with a zeal only parallel with his former fury. He encountered
the Jews in their Synagogues, he disputed with the E
Greeks in their most famous Cities, at Athens, Corinth, Ephesus, and
elsewhere, and everywhere raising some Trophies to the honor of the Gospel;
nothing now remained but that he should do the same at Rome also. And for this
he wants not spirit and resolution, for he even longed to be there, verse. 11. A
n^y, he had often purposed to go thither, but waited for a convenient
opportunity, v. 13. But while God was pleased otherwise to dispose of him, he
could not conceal the joy which he had for the ready entertainment of the
Christian Religion by those to whom he writes, and that their says was grown
as famous as the City wherein they dwelt. v. 8. First, I thank my God through
Jesus Christ, for you all, that your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole
World: and he further manifests the greatness of his affection to them, that
without ceasing he made mention of them always in his Prayers, v. 9. B
And among the rest of the blessings he prayed for, for himself and them; he
was sure not to forget his coming to them, v. 10. Not out of an ambitious and
vainglorious humor that he might be taken notice of in that great and
Imperial City, but that he might be instrumental in doing them service as he
had done others, v. 11. 13. And to this end he tells them, what an obligation
lay upon him to spread the Doctrine of Christ in all places and to all persons,
v. 14. I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, to the wise and to
the unwise. So that neither the wisdom of the Greeks, nor the C
the ignorance of the Babarians could hinder St. Paul from discovering to them
the contrivances of infinite wisdom; and the excellent methods of divine
Goodness in order to men's eternal welfare. And although Rome now thought it
self to be the seat of Wisdom, as well as Empire and Power, yet our Apostle
declares his readiness to Preach the Gospel there too, v. 15. for which he
gives a sufficient reason in the words of the Text; for I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God to Salvation, etc. Wherein we have
considerable these two things, 1. The Apostles boldness D
and freeness in declaring the doctrine of Christ, For I am not ashamed, etc.
2. The ground of it in the following words, for it is the Power of God to
Salvation, etc.

1. The Apostles boldness and freeness in declaring the doctrine of Christ. It
was neither the gallantry of the Roman Court, nor the splendour of the City, not
the greatness of her Power, or wisdom of her Statesmen could make St. Paul
entertain the meaner opinion of the doctrine he hoped to preach among them. Had
Christ come (...), with a great deal of pomp and state into the World, subduing
Kingdoms E
and Nations under him; had St. Paul been a General for the Gospel instead of
being an Apostle of it, the great men of the World would then allow he had no
cause to be ashamed either of his Master, or of his employment. But to preach a
crucified Savior among the glories and triumphs of A
Rome, and a Doctrine of so much simplicity and contempt of the world among
those who were the Masters of it, and managed it with so much art and cunning;
to persuade them to be followers of Christ in a holy life, who could not be
like the gods they worshipped, unless they were guilty of the greatest
debaucheries, seems to be an employment so liable to the greatest scorn and
contempt, that none but a great and resolved spirit would ever undertake it.
For when we consider after so many hundred years profession of Christianity,
how apt the greatness of the world is to make men ashamed of the B
practice of it; and that men aim at a reputation for wit by being able to
abuse the Religion they own; what entertainment might we then think our
Religion met with among the great men of the Age it was first preached in, when
it not only encountered those weaker weapons of scoffs and raillery, but the
strong holds of interest and education? If our Religion now can hardly escape
the bitter scoffs, and profane jests of men who pawn their souls to be
accounted witty, what may we think it suffered then, when it was accounted a
part of their own Religion to despise and reproach ours? If in the Age we C
live in, a man may be reproached for his piety and virtue, that is, for being
really a Christian, when all profess themselves to be so, what contempt did
they undergo in the first Ages of the Christian World, when the very name of
Christian was thought a sufficient brand of infamy? And yet such was the
courage and magnanimity of the Primitive Christians, that what was accounted
most mean and contemptible in their Religion, viz. their believing in a
crucified Savior, was by them accounted the matter of their greatest honor
and glory. For though St. Paul only says here that he was not D
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, yet elsewere he explains that (...) which is
contained in these words, when he says, God forbid that I should glory in any
thing, save in the Cross of Christ, by whom the World is crucified to me, and I
unto the World. Gal. 6. 14. i. e. Although he could not but be sensible how
much the world despised him, and his Religion together, yet that was the great
satisfaction of his mind, that his Religion had enabled him to despise the
World as much. For neither the pomp and grandeur of the World, nor the smiles
and flatteries of it, no nor its frowns and severities E
could abate any thing of that mighty esteem and value which he had for the
Christian Religion. For in his own expression, he accounted all things else but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil. 3. 8.
Which words are not spoken by one who was in despair of being taken notice A
of for any thing else, and therefore magnifies the Profession he was engaged
in; but by a person as considerable as most of the time and Nation he lived in
both for his birth and education. So that his contempt of the World was no
sullen and affected severity, but the issue of a sober and impartial judgment;
and the high esteem he professed of Christianity was no fanatic whimsey, but
the effect of a diligent enquiry, and the most serious consideration. And that
will appear,

2. By the grounds and reasons which St. Paul here gives B
why he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, 1. From the excellent end it
was designed for, and that is no less than salvation. 2. From the effectualness
of it in order to that end, it is the Power of God to Salvation. 3. From the
necessity of believing the Gospel by all who would attain that end; to every
one that believes, the Jew first and also to the Greek.

1. From the excellent End it was designed for, the recovery and happiness of
the souls of men, both which are employed in the term salvation. For,
considering the present condition of humane Nature, as it is so far sunk
beneath it self, and kept C
under the power of unruly passions; whatever tends to make it happy, must do
it by delivering it from all those things which are the occasions of its
misery. So that whatever Religion should promise to make men happy, without
first making them virtuous and good, might on that very account be justly
suspected of imposture. For the same reasons which make the acts of any
Religion necessary, viz. that we may please that God who commands and governs
the World, must make it necessary for men to do it, in those things which are
far more acceptable to him than all our sacrifices of what kind soever, which
are D
the actions of true virtue and goodness. If then that accusation had been
true, which Celsus and Julian charged Christianity with, viz. that it indulged
men in the practice of vice, with the promise of a future happiness
notwithstanding; I know nothing could have rendered it more suspicious to be a
design to deceive Mankind. But so far is it from having the least foundation of
truth in it, that as there never was any Religion which gave men such certain
hopes of a future felicity, and consequently more encouragement to be good, so
there was none ever required it on those strict and severe terms which
Christianity E
does. For there being two grand duties of men in this world, either toward
God in the holiness of their hearts and lives, or toward their Brethren, in a
peaceable carriage among men (which cannot be without justice and sobriety)
both these are enforced upon all Christians, upon no meaner A
terms than the unavoidable loss of all the happiness our Religion promises.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. Heb. 12. 14. This is then the grand design of Christianity, to make men
happy in another world, by making them good and virtuous in this: It came to
reform this world that it might people another; so to purify the souls of men,
as to make them meet to enjoy the happiness designed for them. This is that
great Salvation which the Gospel brings to the world. Heb. 2. 3. and thence it
is called the Word of Salvation, Acts 13. 26. the way of salvation, Acts 16.
17. B
the Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. So that though Christianity be of
unspeakable advantage to this world, there being no Religion that tends so much
to the peace of men's minds, and the preservation of civil Societies as this
does; yet all this it does by way of subordination to the great end of it,
which is the promoting men's eternal happiness. And the more we consider the
vast consequence and importance of this end to mankind, the greater reason we
shall find that St. Paul, had why he should not be ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ. For can we imagine any end more noble that any doctrine can aim at than
this? C
Supposing the common principles of all Religion to be true, viz. the Being of
God, and Immortality of our Souls, there can be nothing more becoming that God
to discover, or those Souls to be employed about, than the way to a blessed
immortality. And if we admire those discourses of the Heathen Philosophers,
wherein they speak more darkly and obscurely concerning those things, what
admiration does the Gospel deserve, which has brought life and immortality to
light? If we commend the virtuous Heathens, who according to those short and
obscure notices which they had of God and themselves, D
sought to make the world any thing the better for their being in it, what
infinitely greater esteem do those blessed Apostles deserve, who accounted not
their own lives dear to them that they might make even their enemies happy? If
those men's memories be dear to us who sacrifice their lives and fortunes for
the sake of the Country they belong to, shall not those be much more so who
have done it for the good of the whole world? Such who cheerfully suffered
death while they were teaching men the way to an eternal life, and who
patiently endured the flames if they might but give the greater light to the
world by them. E
Such who did as far out-go any of the admired Heroes of the Heathens, as the
purging the World from sin is of greater consequence than cleansing an Augaean
Stable from the filth of it, and rescuing men from eternal flames is a more
noble design than clearing a Country from Pirates and Robbers. Nay, most A
of the Heathen Gods who were so solemn^y worshipped in Greece and at Rome,
owed their (...) to such flen^er benefits to mankind; that sure the world was
very barbarous or hugely grateful when they could think them no less than Gods
who found out such things for men: If a Smiths forge, and a Woman's distaffe, if
teaching men the noble arts of fighting and cheating one another were such rare
inventions, that they only became some of the most celebrated Deities which the
grave and demure Romans thought fit to worship; sure St. Paul had no cause to
be ashamed of his Religion among them, who B
had so much reason to be ashamed of their own; since his design was to
persuade them out of all the vanities and fooleries of their Idolatrous
Worship, and to bring them to the service of the true and ever living God, who
had discovered so much goodness to the world in making his Son a propitiation
for the sins of it. And was not this a discovery infinitely greater and more
suitable to the nature of God, than any which the subtilty of the Greeks, or
wisdom of the Romans could ever pretend to concerning any of their Deities?
Thus we see the ex cellent end of our Religion was that which made St. Paul so
far C
from being ashamed of it; and so it would do all us too, if we did understand
and value it as St. Paul did. But it is the great dishonor of too many among
us, that they are more ashamed of their Religion than they are of their sins If
to talk boldly against Heaven, to affront God in calling him to witness their
great impieties by frequent oaths, to sin bravely and with the highest
confidence, to mock at such who are yet mo^e modest in their debaucheries, were
not to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, we might find St. Paul's enough in
the Age we live in, and it would be a piece of gallantry to D
be Apostles. But this is rather the utmost endeavor to put Religion out of
countenance, and make the Gospel it self blush and be ashamed, that ever such
boldfaced impieties should be committed by men under the profession of it, as
though they believed nothing so damnable as Repentance and a Holy life, and no
sin so unpardonable as Modesty in committing it. But to use St. Paul's language
when he had been describing such persons himself, Hob. 6. 9. We are persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany that salvation the Gospel was
designed for, though we thus speak. For certainly nothing can argue E
a greater meanness of spirit, than while wicked and profane persons are not
ashamed of that which unavoidably tends to their ruin, any should be shy of
the profession and practice of that which conduces to their eternal happiness.
What is become of all that magnanimity and generous spirit which the Primitve A
Christians were so remarkable for, if while some are impudent in sinning,
others are ashamed of being or doing good? If we have that value for our
immortal souls, and a future life, which we ought to have, we shall not trouble
our selves much with the Atheistical scoffs and drollery of profane persons,
who while they deride and despise Religion, do but laugh themselves into
eternal misery. And thus much for the first ground of St. Paul's confidence,
viz. The excellent end the Gospel was designed for.

2. The effectualness of it in order to that end. It is the B
power of God to salvation. Wherein two things are employed.

1. The inefficacy of any other doctrine for that end. 2. The effectualness of
the Gospel in order to it.
1 The inefficacy of any other Doctrine for this end of promoting the eternal
salvation of Mankind. If the world had been acquainted with any doctrine before
which had been sufficient for the purposes the Gospel was designed for, there
would have been no such necessity of propagating it among men; nor had there
been reason enough to have justified the Apostles in exposing themselves to so
great hazards for the preaching of C
it. If the notion of an eternal God and Providence, without the knowledge of a
Savior, had been sufficient to reform the World, and make men happy; it had
not been consistent with the wisdom or goodness of God to have employed so many
persons, with the loss of their lives, to declare the Doctrine of Christ to the
World. So that if Christianity be true, it must be thought necessary to
salvation, for the necessity of it was declared by those who were the
instruments of confirming the truth of it. I meddle not with the case of those
particular persons who had no means or opportunity to know Gods revealed D
will, and yet from the Principles of Natural Religion did reform their lives,
in hopes of a future felicity (if any such there were) but whether there were
not a necessity of such a Doctrine as the Gospel is to be discovered to the
world, in order to the reformation of it? For some very few persons either
through the goodness of their natures, the advantage of their education, or
some cause of a higher nature, may have led more virtuous lives than others
did; but it is necessary, that what aims at the general good of Mankind, must
be suited to the capacities of all, and enforced with arguments which E
may prevail on any but the most obstinate and wilful persons. But when we
consider the state of the World at that time when Christianity was first made
known to it, we may easily see how insufficient the common Principles of
Religion were, from working a reformation in it, when notwithstanding them
mankind A
was so generally lapsed into Idolatry and Vice, that hardly any can be
instanced in in the Heathen World, who had escaped both of them. And there was
so near an affinity between both these, that they who were engaged in the rites
of their Idolatry, could hardly keep themselves free from the intan glements of
vice; not only because many of their villainies were practiced as part of their
Religion, (and there was little hopes certainly of their being good, who could
not be Religious without being bad) but because the very Gods they worshipped
were represented to be as bad as themselves. And could they take B
any better measure of Virtue, than from the actions of those whom they
supposed to have so divine an excellency in them, as to deserve their
adoration? So that if there were a design of planting wickedness in the world
(which need not be, for it grows fast enough without it) it could not be done
more successfully than by worshipping those for Gods, who did such things which
good men would abhor to think of. And yet this was the state of the world
then, when the Gospel was preached, and not only of the more rude and barbarous
Nations, but of the most civilized and knowing people, as the C
Romans themselves; as our Apostle at large proves in the remainder of this
chapter, wherein he shows, that though they had means enough of knowing the
Eternal God and Providence, yet they were so fallen into Idolatry, and the most
vicious practices, that there was no means of recovering them, but by a fuller
discovery both of the justice and goodness of God.

I know it will be here objected, that though the generality of men were bad
then (as when were they otherwise) yet the Heathens had a kind of Apostles
among them, viz. the Philosophers, who sought to amend the manners of men by
the D
moral instructions they gave them, so that if men were bad, it was not for
want of good counsel, but for not observing it, which is all (they say) we have
to say for our selves, when we are charged with the great debaucheries of the
Christian world.

To which I answer, That our business is not now to enquire whether there has
not been an incomparably greater advantage to the world by Christianity, in the
reforming men's lives, than ever was by any of the Heathen Morals; but whether
these, taking them in the fairest dress, were so sufficient for E
the bringing men to eternal happiness, that there needed not any such Doctrine
as Christianity be published for that end? And there are two great things we
may charge the best of their discourses with an insufficiency in, for the
accomplishment of this end, which are Certainty, and Motives, or the want of
Arguments A
to believe, and Encouragements to practice.

1. They were destitute of sufficient certainty; for what a man ventures his
eternal state upon, he ought to be well assured of the truth of it. But how was
it possible for the World to be reformed by such wise Apostles (if they must be
called so) who were perpetually disputing among themselves about those things
which were the most necessary foundations of all Virtue and Religion? As though
the best Arguments they had to prove their Souls immortal, was because their
disputes about them were so. And those seemed among them to gain the B
greatest reputation for wit, who were best able to dispute against common
Principles; and they managed their business with greatest advantage, who only
showed the weakness of others principles, but established none of their own;
which was an unavoidable consequence of the way they proceeded in, for offering
at no such way of proof as Christianity does, they rather taught men to
dispute, than to live eternally. Besides, their discourses were too subtle and
intricate for the common capacities of men; how long might a man live before an
Entelechia would make him know the nature of his soul the better, C
or an (...) persuade him to believe its immortality? Insomuch that it is hard
to determine, whether the arguments used by them, did not rather hinder assent,
than persuade to it? and it seems probable that the honest minded, illiterate
Heathens believed those things more firmly than the greatest Philosophers. For
plain truths lose much of their weight, when they are rarefied into subtilties,
and their strength is impaired when they are spun into too fine a thread. The
arguments which must prevail with Mankind, must be plain and evident, easy and
yet powerful. The natural sense of good and evil in men is D
oft-times dulled by disputes, and only awakned by a powerful representation of
an infinite being, and a future Judgment: and that by such a way of proof as
all persons are equal Judges of the truth and validity of it; such as the
Resurrection of Christ is in the Gospel.

2. But let us suppose the arguments certain and suitable, yet what sufficient
motives or encouragements could they give to lead a holy and virtuous life, who
after all their endeavors to persuade others, remained so uncertain themselves
as to a future happiness? So Tully tells us of Socrates himself when he was E
just dying, That he told his friends, that only the Gods knew whether it was
fitter for men to live or die, but he thought no man did. And although some
would excuse this as his usual way of disputing, yet of all times one would
think it was fittest for him then to declare his mind in the most express
terms, not A
only for the full vindication of himself, but for the comfort and
encouragement of his friends. We are sure, Christianity proceeds on those
terms, that if a future happiness be supposed uncertain, it declares expressly
there can be no sufficient reason given for men to part with the conveniences
of this present life; nay, it supposes the best men to be the most miserable of
all others, if there be not a future reward, 1 Cor. 15. 19. -- 32. Again, what
probability was there they should ever persuade the World to virtue and
goodness, when the severest of the Philisophers, made it lie in things so
repugnant to humane B
nature, as goodness is agreeable to it. As when they made it an equal fault
for a man to be angry, and to murder his Sovereign; and that all passions are
to be destroyed, that pain and grief are nothing, that virtue in all conditions
is a sufficient reward to it self. Which are so contrary to the common sense of
mankind, that the only way to persuade men to believe them, is first to
persuade them they are not men. So that he was certainly the wisest man among
the Heathens, who concluded, that we ought to expect a higher Master to teach
us these things, and to acquaint us with the happiness of a future life. C
And hereby an answer may be given to Porphyries grand objection against
Christian Religion, viz. If it were so necessary for the good of Mankind, why
was it so long before it was discovered? Because God would thereby discover the
insufficiency of all the means the wit of man could find out to reform the
world, without this. That not only the Jews might see the weakness of that
dispensation they were under, but the Gentile world might groan with an
expectation of some more powerful means to goodness than were yet among them.
For when Philosophy had been so long in its height, and had so little influence
D
upon Mankind, it was time for the Sun of righteousness to arise, and with the
softening and healing influence of his beams to bring the World to a more
virtuous temper.

And that leads to the Second thing employed, which is the peculiar efficacy of
the Gospel for promoting men's salvation, for it is the Power of God to
salvation, and that will appear, by considering how many ways the power of God
is engaged in it. These three especially. 1. In confirmation of the Truth of
it. 2. In the admirable Effects of it in the World. 3. In the diviue Assistance
which is promised to those who embrace it. E


1. In confirmation of the Truth of it. For the World was grown so uncertain,
as to the grand foundations of Religion, that the same power was requisite now
to settle the World, which was at first for the framing of it. For though the
Precepts of Christian Religion be pure and easy, holy and suitable to A
the sense of mankind, though the Promises be great and excellent,
proportionable to our wants and the weight of our business, though the reward
be such that it is easier to desire than comprehend it, yet all these would but
seem to baffle the more the expectations of men, unless they were built on some
extraordinary evidence of divine power. And such we assert there was in the
confirmation of these things to us, not only in the miraculous birth of our
Savior, and that continual series of unparalled miracles in his life, not
only in the most obliging circumstances of his death; nor only in the large
effusion of divine B
gifts upon his Apostles, and the strange propagation of Christian Religion by
them against all humane power; but that which I shall particularly instance in,
as the great effect of divine power, and confirmation of our Religion, was his
Resurrection from the dead. For, as our Apostle says, Romans 1. 4. Christ was
declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the dead. No way of evidence could be more suitable to
the capacities of all, than this, it being a plain matter of fact; none ever
better attested than this was, not only by the unanimous consent of all the C
witnesses, but by their constant adhering to the truth of it, though it cost
almost all of them their lives; and no greater evidence could be given to the
World of a divine power, since both Jews and Gentiles agreed in this, that such
a thing could not be effected but by an immediate hand of God. So far were they
then from thinking a resurrection possible by the juice of herbs, or an
infusion of warm blood into the veins, or by the breath of living Creatures, as
the great martyr for Atheism would seem from Pliny to persuade us; when yet
certainly nothing can be of higher concernment to those who believe not another
life, D
than to have tried this experiment long ere now; and since nothing of that
nature has ever happened since our Saviors resurrection, it only lets us know
what credulous men in other things the greatest Infidels as to Religion are.
But so far were they at that time from so fond an imagination, that they
readily yielded, that none but God could do it, though they seemed to question
whether God himself could do it or no. As appears by the Apostles
Interrogation, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead? Act. 26. 8. This was therefore judged on both sides to
be a matter of so great importance, E
that all the disputes concerning Christian Religion were resolved into this,
Whether Christ were risen from the dead? And this the Apostles urge and insist
on, upon all occasions, as the great evidence of the truth of his Doctrine, and
this was the main part of their Commission, for they were sent abroad to be A
witnesses of his Resurrection. Which was not designed by God as a thing
strange and incredible to puzle mankind with, but to give the highest assurance
imaginable to the World of the truth and importance of Christianity. Since God
was pleased to employ his power in so high a manner to confirm the certainty of
it.

2. Gods power was seen in the admirable effects of Christian Religion upon the
minds of men: which was most discernable by the strange alteration it soon made
in the state of the world. In Judea soon after the death of Christ, some of his
Crucifiers become Christians, 3000. Converts made at one Sermon of St. B
Peter's, and great accessions made afterward both in Jerusalem and other
places. Yea in all parts of the Roman Empire, where the Christians came, they
so increased and multiplied, that thereby it appeared that God had given a
Benediction to his new Creation suitable to what he gave to the first. So that
within the compass of not a hundred years after our Saviors death, the World
might admire to see it self so strangely changed from what it was. The Temple
at Jerusalem destroyed, and the Jews under a sadder dispersion than ever, and
rendered incapable of continuing their former Worship of God there: the Heathen C
Temples unfrequented, the Gods derided, the Oracles ceased, the Philosophers
puzzled, the Magistrates disheartened by their fruitless cruelties, and all this
done by a few Christians who came and preached to the World Righteousness,
Temperance, and a Judgment to come, whereof God had given assurance to the
World, by raising one Jesus from the dead. And all this effected not by the
power of Wit and Eloquence, not by the force and violence of rebellious
subjects, not by men of hot and giddy brains, but by men sober, just, humble
and meek in all their carriages, but withal such as might never have been heard
of in the D
world, had not this Doctrine made them famous. What could this then be imputed
to less than a Divine Power, which by effectual and secret ways carries on its
own design against all the force and wit of men. So that the wise Gamaliel, at
whose feet St. Paul was bred, seemed to have the truest apprehensions of these
things at that time, when he told the Sanhedrin, If this counsel, or this work
be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
least happily ye be found to fight against God. Act. 5. 38, 39.

3. In the Divine Assistance which is promised to those who E
embrace it: in which respect it is properly the power of God to salvation; and
therein far beyond what the Philosophers could promise to any who embraced
their opinions. For, the Gospel does not only discover the necessity of a
Principle superior to Nature, which we call Grace, in order to the fitting our
souls for A
their future happiness, but likewise shows on what terms God is pleased to
bestow it on men, viz. on the consideration of the death and passion of our
Lord and Savior. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing
of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Christ our Savior,
Titus. 3. 5. There being nothing in humane nature which could oblige God, to
give to Mankind that assistance of his grace whereby they are enabled to work
out this salvation the Gospel is designed for, with fear and trembling. The
whole B
tenor of the Gospel importing a divine power which does accompany the
preaching of it, which is designed on purpose to heal the wounds, and help the
weakness of our depraved and degenerate nature. Through which we may be kept to
salvation: but it must be through Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

3. Which is the last particular of the words; the necessity of believing the
Gospel in order to the partaking of the salvation promised in it; it is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek. An easy way of salvation, if no more were required to men's
happiness but a C
fancy and strong opinion which they will easily call Believing. So there were
some in St. Augustin's time, I could wish there were none in ours, who thought
nothing necessary to salvation but a strong Faith, let their lives be what they
pleased. But this is so repugnant to the main design of Christian Religion,
that they who think themselves the strongest Believers, are certainly the
weakest, and most ungrounded. For they believe scarce any other proposition in
the New Testament, but that Whosoever believes shall be saved. If they did
believe that Christ came into the world to reform it, and D
make it better, that the wrath of God is now revealed from Heaven against all
unrighteousness, as well as that the just by Faith shall live, that the design
of all that love of Christ, which is shown to the World, is to deliver them
from the hand of their enemies, that they might serve him in righteousness and
holiness all the days of their lives, they could never imagine, that salvation
is entailed by the Gospel on a mighty confidence or vehement persuasion of what
Christ has done and suffered for them. And so far is St. Paul from asserting
this, that as far as I can see, he never meddles with a matter of that nicety, E
whether a single act of Faith be the condition of our justification as it is
distinguished from Evangelical obedience, but his discourse runs upon this
subject; whether God will pardon the sins of men upon any other terms than
those which are declared in the Christian Religion, the former he calls Works,
and the A
latter Faith.

I know, the subtilty of later times has made St. Paul dispute in the matter
of justification, not as one bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, but of the Master
of the Sentences; but men did not then understand their Religion at all the
worse because it was plain and easy; and, it may be, if others since had
understood their Religion better, there would never have needed so much
subtilty to explain it, nor so many distinctions to defend it. The Apostle
makes the same terms of justification and of salvation, for as hesaith
elsewhere, Rom 5. 1.
We are justified by Faith, B
he says here, the Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes; if therefore a single act of Faith be sufficient for one, why not for
the other also? But if believing here be taken in a more large and
comprehensive sense, as a complex act relating to our undertaking the
conditions of the Gospel; why should it not be taken so in the subsequent
discourse of the Apostle? For we are to observe, that St. Paul in this Epistle
is not disputing against any sort of Christians that thought to be saved by
their obedience to the Gospel from the assistance of divine grace; but against
those who thought the Grace and indulgence C
of the Gospel by no means necessary in order to the pardon of their sins, and
their eternal happiness. Two things therefore the Apostle mainly designs to
prove in the beginning of it: First, the insufficiency of any other way of
salvation besides that offered by the Gospel; whether it were the light of
Nature which the Gentiles contended for, but were far from living according to
it; or that imaginary Covenant of Works, which the Jews fancied to themselves
(for it will be a very hard matter to prove that ever God entered into a
Covenant of Works with fallen Man, which he knew it was impossible for him to
observe) bu^t hey D
were so highly opinionated of themselves, and of those legal observations
which were among them, that they thought by virtue of them they could merit so
much favor at Gods hands, that there was no need of any other sacrifice, but
what was among themselves to expiate the guilt of all their sins. And on that
account they rejected the Gospel, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 1^. 3
that they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God. Against these therefore the Apostle proves, that if they hoped for
happiness upon such strict terms, they laid E
only a foundation of Romans 3 27.
boasting if they did all which God required, but of misery if they did not;
for then, Gal. 3. 1^.
Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing written in the Law to do
it. i. e. if they sailed in any one thing, then they must fail of all their
hopes; but such a state of persection being impossible to A
humane Nature; he shows, that either all mankind must unavoidably perish, or
they must be saved by the Grace and Favor of God, which he proves to be
discovered by the Gospel: and that God will now accept of a hearty and sincere
obedience to his will declared by his Son; so that all those who perform that,
though they live not in the nice observance of the Law of Moses, shall not need
to fear the penalty of their sins in another life. Which is the second thing he
designs to prove, viz. That those who obeyed the Gospel, whether Jew or Greek,
were equally capable of salvation by it. Romans 3. 29
For, says he, is God B
the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Tes, of the Gentiles
also: because both Jew and Gentile were to be justified upon the same terms, as
he proves afterward. So that Gods justifying of us by the Gospel, is the
solemn declaration of himself upon what terms he will pardon the sins of men;
that is, deliver them from the penalties they have deserved by them. For the
actual discharge of the person is reserved to the great day; all the
justification we have here is only declarative from God, but so as to give a
right to us, by virtue whereof we are assured, that God will not only not
exercise his utmost C
rigor, but show all favor and kindness to those who by belief of the Gospel
do repent and obey. God does now remit sin as he forbears to punish it; he
remits the sinner as he he assures him by the death of Christ he will not
punish upon his repentance; but he fully remits both, when he delivers the
person upon the trial of the great day, from all the penalties which he has
deserved by his sins. So that our complete justification and salvation go both
upon the same terms, and the same Faith which is sufficient for one, must be
sufficient for the other also. D


What care then ought men to take, lest by misunderstanding the notion of
Believing, so much spoken of as the condition of our salvation, they live in a
neglect of that holy obedience which the Gospel requires, and so believe
themselves into eternal misery. But as long as men make their obedience
necessary, though but as the fruit and effect of Faith, it shall not want its
reward: for those, whose hearts are purified by Faith shall never be condemned
for mistaking the notion of it; and they who live as those that are to be
judged according to their works, shall not miss their reward, though they do
not think E
they shall receive it for them. But such who make no other condition of the
Gospel but Believing, and will scarce allow that to be called a Condition,
ought to have a great care to keep their hearts sounder than their heads, for
their only security will lie in this, that they are good though they see no A
necessity of being so. And such of all others I grant have reason to
acknowledge the irresistible power of Divine Grace, which enables them to obey
the will of God against the dictates of their own judgments. But thanks be to
God, who has so abundantly provided for all the infirmities of humane Nature,
by the large offers of his Grace, and assistance of his Spirit, that though we
meet with so much opposition without, and so much weakness within, and so many
discouragements on every side of us; yet if we sincerely apply our selves to do
the will of God, we have as great assurance as may be, that B
we shall be kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation. C
D
E


SERMON V. Sermon. V.
A
B
Preached at WHITE HALL.
HEBREWS II. III. C
How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?


WHen the wise and eternal Counsels of Heaven concerning the salvation of
Mankind by D
the death of the Son of God, were first declared to the World by his own
appearance and preaching in it; nothing could be more reasonably expected, than
that the dignity of his Person, the authority of his Doctrine, and the
excellency of his Life, should have persuaded those whom he appeared among, to
such an admiration of his Person, and belief of his Doctrine, as might have led
them to an imitation of him in the holiness of his life and conversation. For
if either the worth of the Person, or the Importance of the Message might
prevail E
any thing toward a kind and honorable reception among men; there was never
any person appeared in any degree comparable to him, never any Message declared
which might challenge so welcome an entertainment from men, as that was which
he came upon. If to give Mankind the highest assurance A
of a state of life and immortality, if to offer the pardon of sin, and
reconciliation with God upon the most easy and reasonable terms, if to purge
the degenerate World from all its impurities by a Doctrine as holy as the
Author of it; were things as becoming the Son of God to reveal, as the Sons of
men to receive: nothing can be more unaccountable than that his person should
be despised, his Authority slighted, and his Doctrine contemned. And that by
those whose interest was more concerned in the consequence of these things,
than himself could be in all the affronts and injuries he underwent from men:
For the more B
the indignities, the greater the shame, the sharper the sufferings which he
did undergo, the higher was the honor and glory which he was advanced to: but
the more obliging the instances of his kindness were, the greater the salvation
that was tendered by him, the more prevailing the motives were for the
entertainment of his Doctrine, the more exemplary and severe will the
punishment be of all those who reject it. For it is very agreeable to those
eternal Laws of Justice by which God governs the world, that the punishment
should arise pro portionably to the greatness of the mercies despised: and C
therefore although the Scripture be very sparing in telling us what the state
of those persons shall be in another life who never heard of the Gospel; yet
for those who do, and despise it, it tells us plainly, that an eternal misery
is the just desert of those to whom an eternal happiness was offered, and yet
neglected by them. And we are the rather told of it, that men may not think it
a surprise in the life to come; or that if they had known the danger, they
would have escaped it; and therefore our Blessed Savior, who never mentioned
punishment but with a design to keep men from it, declares it frequently, that D
the punishment of those persons and places would be most intolerable, who have
received, but not improved the light of the Gospel: and that it would be more
Mat. 11 23.
tolerable, for the persons who had offered violence to Nature, and had
Hellfire burning in their hearts by their horrid impurities, than for those
who heard the Doctrine, and saw the Miracles of Christ, and were much the
worse, rather than any thing the better for it. But lest we should think that
all this black scene of misery was only designed for those who were the Actors
in that doleful Tragedy of our Saviors sufferings: we are told by those who
were E
best able to assure us of it, that the same dismal consequences will attend
all the affronts of his Doctrine, as if they had been offered to his own
person. For it is nothing but the common flattery and self-deceit of humane
nature, which makes any imagine, that though they do not now either believe or
obey A
the Gospel; they should have done both, if they had heard our Savior speak as
never man spoke, and seen him do what never man did: For the same disposition
of mind which makes them now slight that Doctrine which is delivered to them by
them that heard him, would have made them slight the Person as well as the
Doctrine, if they had heard it from himself. And therefore it is but reasonable
that the same punishment should belong to both; especially since God has
provided so abundantly for the assurance of our Faith, by the miraculous and
powerful demonstration of that divine spirit which did accompany those who were
the first publishers of this Doctrine to the B
world. And therefore the Author of this Epistle, after he has in the words of
the Text declared, that it is impossible to escape, if we neglect the great
salvation offered us by the Gospel; in the following words he gives us that
account of it, that at first it began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed to us by them that heard him: God also bearing them witness both with
signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according
to his own will. So that the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, falling upon
the Apostles, and the many signs and wonders which were wrought by them, were
the great testimony C
of God to the world, that these were the persons employed by himself to
declare that Doctrine whereon the eternal salvation of Mankind did depend. And
since we have so lately acknowledged the truth of this testimony which God gave
to the Apostles, by the solemn celebration of that glorious descent of the Holy
Ghost upon them on the day of Pentecost, that which naturally follows from it
is, the great care we ought to take lest we be found guilty of neglecting that
great salvation which is offered to us in that Doctrine which was attested in
so eminent a manner by God himself; and that from the consideration D
of our own danger; for how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?
wherein are three things considerable:

1. The care God has taken to make us happy, by offering so great salvation to
us. 2. The care we ought to take in order to our own happiness, not to neglect
the offers which God has made us. 3. The unavoidable punishment which those do
incur who are guilty of this neglect. How shall we escape?
I need not tell this Auditory how forcible the Negative is, which is expressed
by such an interrogation which appeals to E
the judgment of all who hear it, and so relies not upon the bare authority of
the speaker, but upon the plain evidence of the thing, which others were judges
of as well as himself. As though he had said, if you slight and disesteem the
Gospel of A
Christ, upon whatever grounds ye do it, if either through too great an opinion
of the wisdom of this world you despi^e it as vain and useless, if through too
mean an opinion of the excellency of Christianity, you reject it either as
uncertain in its Theory, or impossible in its practice; or if through too great
a love of the pleasures of sin, or a secure and careless temper of mind, you
regard not the doing what Christianity requires to make you happy; think with
your selves, what way you can find to escape the wrath of God; for my part, I
know of none; for if God were so severe against the violation of a far meaner B
institution, viz. of the Law of Moses, insomuch that every contempt and
disobedience did receive a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape who
neglect so great salvation? or as the Apostle elsewhere argues to the same
purpose. Heb. 10. 28, 29.
He that despised Moses Law died without mercy under two or three witnesses, of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace? This is a sad subject, but I am afraid too necessary to be
spoken to in C
the Age we live in; wherein men seem to be inapprehensive of the danger of
inwardly despising the Religion they prosess to own, and the neglecting of that
which they hope to be saved by. It is strange that it should be so, but much
more strange that men should think to do so, and not be called to an account
for it. It is not only the gross and open sinner that defies Heaven, and by his
oaths and blasphemies dares God to show his Power and Justice upon him, but the
slye and self-deceiving hypocrite that hates Religion while he thinks he loves
it; that in his heart contemns it, but is afraid to know that he does so, that
ought to D
be possessed with a truer sense of Religion, and a greater dread of the issue
of the contempt or neglect of it. There is some appearance of ingenuity in an
open enmity; but none so dangerous as that which hides it self under the
disguise of friendship. In our Saviors time there were several sorts of those
who showed their disesteem of him, some that were so enraged against him, that
they contrive all ways for his disgrace and punishment, others could hear him
with patience, Mark 4. 19.
but the cares of this World, the deceitfulness of Riches, and the lust of
other things choked and stifled all good apprehensions of him, E
that they became weak and ineffectual. And those were guilty of making light
of the marriage feast because of other business which they had to mind, Matthew.
22. 5. as well as those who offered all the injuries and affronts to his
servants that invited them, v. 6. And as it was in the days of our Savior, so
it is now; A
some were eating and drinking, minding nothing but the vain and sensual
pleasures of the world; some were buying and selling, so busy in this world,
that they had no leisure to think of being happy in another, some were deriding
and blaspheming; but all these too wise, or too vain, or too profane to mind
the offers of eternal salvation. I wish we could say it were otherwise now,
that a sensual and voluptuous, an easy and a careless life in some, that
ambition and the restless pursuit after the honor and riches of the world in
others, that a profane wit, and a contempt of all that is serious in those that
think themselves B
too great to be Religious, did not enervate the force of Christianity upon
their minds, and make them all though upon different grounds agree in the
neglect of their own salvation. But is the case of such men grown so desperate
that noremedy can work upon them? has the love of sin and the world so far
intoxicated them, that no reason or consideration whatever can awaken them?
have they hardened themselves against all the power of divine Truths with a
resolution as strong as death, and as cruel as the grave whither they are
going? Will neither the love of happiness, nor the fear of misery, their own C
interest, and the wisdom of avoiding so great a danger, the dread of the
Majesty and Power of God, and the horror of the great day, prevail at least so
far on men to consider, whether these things be true or no; and if they be,
what unspeakable solly it is to neglect them? And the better to make that
appear, I shall prove these following things:

1. That God by the Gospel has taken so great care of men's happiness, that
nothing but a gross neglect can make them miserable. 2. That nothing can be
more unreasonable, than when God D
has taken so much care of it, men should neglect it themselves. 3. That it is
very just for God to vindicate himself against so gross a neglect, by the
severe punishments of the life to come.
1. That God by the Gospel has taken so great care of men's salvation, that
nothing but a gross neglect can make them miserable. For, whatever the mind of
man can imagine necessary in order to its own happiness, in its present fallen
and degenerate condition, is abundantly provided for by the Gospel E
of Christ. For, man was so wholly lost as to his own felicity, that among the
ruins and decays of his Nature, he could not pick up so much as the perfect
image and Idea of his own happiness; when he reflects upon himself, he finds
himself such a consused mass of folly and weakness, that he can never imagine A
that so noble a design should have its groundwork laid upon so course a
Being. And rather than believe the foundation of his happiness to be within
himself, there is nothing so vain and trifling without him, but he is ready to
fall down before it, and cry out, Here I place my selicity. Sometimes he
admires the brave shows, and the Pomp and Gallantry of the World, and thinks
nothing comparable to a glorious outside, and a great train of attendants:
sometimes he raises himself, and flutters upon the wings of a popular Air, till
a cross blast comes and leaves him in the common rout: sometimes his eyes are
dazzled B
with the glory of the more refined and solid pieces of that Earth out of which
he was framed, and thinks it reasonable, that the softness of flesh and blood,
should yield to the impressions of silver and gold; sometimes he even envies
the pleasures of the Brutes, and if it were possible would outdo them in their
grossest sensualities: sometimes again he slatters himself, and then adores his
own imperfections, and thinks his Passions, Honor; and his Profaneness Wit. So
far is vain man from making himself happy, that the first step to it, is to
make him understand what it is to be so. But supposing that the true C
image of his happiness should drop down from Heaven; and by the place from
whence it fell, should conclude where the thing it self is to be found; yet
this were only to make him more miserable, unless he withal knew how to come
thither. He is sure not to climb up to it by the tops of the highest mountains,
nor to be carried thither upon the wings of a mighty wind, he has no fiery
Chariots at his command to ascend with to the Glories above: but only he that
makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, is able to
preserve the souls of men from vanishing into the soft air, and to conduct them
to the D
Mansions of eternal Bliss. It is he only that can make them capable of the
Joys of another life, by purging them from the stains and the pollutions of
this. And therefore without his grace and favor ever to hope for the happiness
of Heaven, must be by fancying a Heaven to be there, where there is no God. So
that it is necessary, that the Proposals of this salvation must come from the
Author of it, and that with such arguments as may persuade men of the truth of
it, and with such motives as may encourage men to accept of them. Now the
Gospel of Christ affords us all these things which are necessary to our E
happiness, there we have the most agreeable and settled notion and Idea of it,
the most large and free offers of divine goodness in order to it, the greatest
assurance that these things did immediately proceed from God, and the most
encouraging motives to accept of these offers in order to that great salvation A
which is tendered to us.

1. We have the most agreeable and settled notion of true happiness: not such a
mean and uncertain thing which lies at the mercy of the continual vicissitudes
and contingencies of this present state, but that which is able to bear up the
mind of man against all the troubles of this life, and to carry him to a Region
beyond them all, where there is a fullness of joy without an allay of sadness
after it, and ever-flowing rivers of pleasures that need no dams to make them
rise higher, nor falls to make their motion perceived. Our Blessed Savior
never flatters his B
followers with the expectation of a felicity in this life; Contentment is the
most he has promised them, and that they may enjoy, if they follow his
directions, let this world be what it will, and do what it pleases with them.
He never tells his Disciples they may have satisfaction here if they lie upon
their beds of down with their heads full of tormenting cares, that the pleasure
of humane life lies in the gratifications of the senses, and in making what use
they can of the world; he never deceives them with the promise of so poor a
happiness as that which depends upon health, friends, prosperity, and having C
our own wills. No, but he tells them of a more noble and generous felicity;
that will preserve its own state and grandeur in spite of the world; a
happiness consistent with loss of Estate, loss of Friends, with affronts and
injuries, with persecutions, and death it self. For, when our Savior begins to
discourse of happiness, what another kind of strain does he speak of it in,
than any of those Philosophers who have so much obstructed the happiness of
man's life by their voluminous writings and contentions about it. Here we meet
with no Epicurean softness, which the sense of true Virtue carried the minds of
the more noble D
Heathens above; no rigid and incredible Stoical Paradoxes, that make men only
happy by the change of names; no Aristotelean supposition of a prosperous life
for Virtue to show its power in; but here the only supposition made, is that
which lies in a man's own breast viz. true goodness, and then let his condition
be what it will, his happiness is consistent with it. For those above all other
persons whom our Savior calls Blessed, in the beginning of that excellent
Abstract of Christianity, his Sermon on the Mount, are, not the rich and great
men of the world, but those who to the poverty of their condition add that E
Matthew. 5. 3.
of their spirits too, by being contented with the state they are in; not
those, who are full of mirth and jollity, that laugh away one half of their
time, and sleep the rest; but they who are V. 4.
in a mournful condition, either by reason of their own sorrows, or out of
compassion to others, or out of a general sense of their A
own imperfections, or the inconstancy of our present state: Not those, who are
ready enough to give, but unable to bear affronts, that think the lives of men
a sacrifice small enough for any words of disgrace which they have given them;
but V. 5.
the meek and patient spirit, that is neither apt to provoke, nor in a rage and
madness when it is; that values the rules of Christianity above all the
barbarous Punctilioes of Honor. Not those, who are as impetuous in the pursuit
of their designs, and as eager of tasting the fruits of them, as the thirsty
Traveller in the sands of Arabia is of drinking the waters of a pleasant
Spring: B
but such who make V. 6.
righteousness and goodness their meat and drink that which they hunger and
thirst after, and take as much pleasure in as the most voluptuous Epicure in
his greatest dainties: Not those, whose malice goes beyond their power, and
want only enough of that to make the whole World a Slaughterhouse, and account
racks and torments among the necessary instruments of governing the World; V. 7.
but such, who when their enemies are in their power, will not torment
themselves by cruelty to them, but have such a sense of common humanity, as not
only to commend pity and good nature to those above them, but C
to use it to those who are under them. Not those whose hearts are as full of
dissimulation and hypocrisy, as the others hands are of blood and violence,
that care not what they are, so they may but seem to be good: but such whose
inward integrity and V. 8.
purity of heart, far exceeds the outward show and profession of it: who honor
Goodness for it self, and not for the Glory which is about the head of it. Not
those, who never think the breaches of the world wide enough till there be a
door large enough for their own interests to go in at by them; that would
rather see the world burning, than one peg be taken out D
of their Chariot-wheels: but such who would sacrifice themselves, like the
brave V. 9.
Roman, to fill up the wide gulf which men's contentions have made in the world;
and think no Legacy ought to be preserved more inviolable than that of Peace,
which our Savior left to his Disciples. Lastly, not those, who will do any
thing rather than suffer, or if they suffer it shall be for any thing rather
than V. 10, 11, 12.
righteousness, to uphold a party, or maintain a discontented faction; but
such, who never complain of the hardness of their way, as long as they are sure
it is that of Righteousness; but if they meet with reproaches E
and persecutions in it, they welcome them, as the harbingers of their future
reward, the expectation of which makes the worst condition not only tolerable
but easy to them. Thus we see what kind of happiness it is, which the Gospel
promises; not such a one as rises out of the dust, or is A
tossed up and down with the motion of it; but such whose never-failing fountain
is above, and whither those small rivulets return, which fall down upon Earth
to refresh the minds of men in their passage thither; but while they continue
here, as the Jews say of the water that came out of the rock, it follows them
while they travel through this wilderness below. So that the foundation of a
Christians happiness is the expectation of a life to come, which expectation
having so firm a bottom, as the assurance which Christ has given us by his
death and sufferings, it has power and influence sufficient to bear up B
the minds of men, against all the vicissitudes of this present state.

2. We have the most large and free offers of divine Goodness in order to it.
Were it as easy for Man to govern his own passions, as to know that he ought
to do it; were the impressions of Reason and Religion as powerful with Mankind
as those of Folly and Wickedness are, we should never need complain much of the
misery of our present state, or have any cause to fear a worse to come. There
would then be no condition here but what might be born with satisfaction to
ones own mind; and the life of one day led according to the principles C
of virtue and goodness would be preferred before a sinning Immortality. But we
have lost the command of our selves, and therefore our passions govern us; and
as long as such furies drive us, no wonder if our ease be little. When men
began first to leave the uncertain speculations of Nature, and found themselves
so out of order, that they thought the great care ought to be to regulate their
own actions; how soon did their passions discover themselves about the way to
govern them! And they all agreed in this, that there was great need to do it,
and that it was impossible to do it without the principles D
of Virtue; V. Lud. Vi^. ad S. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 1.
for never was there any Philosopher so bad, as to think any man could be happy
without Virtue; even the Epicureans themselves acknowledged it for one of their
established Maxims, that no man could live a pleasant life without being good:
and supposing the multiplication of Sects of Philosophers about these things as
far as Varro thought it possible to 288. (although there never vere so many,
nor really could be upon his own grounds) yet not one of all these but made it
necessary to be virtuous, in order to being happy, and those who did not think
virtue to be desired for it self, yet made it a necessary E
means for the true pleasure and happiness of our lives. But when they were
agreed in this, that it was impossible for a vicious man to enjoy any true
contentment of mind: they fell into nice and subtle disputes about the names
and order of things to be chosen, and so lost the great effect of all their A
common principles. They pretended great cures for the disorders of men's lives,
and excellent remedies against the common distempers of humane nature, but
still the disease grew under the remedy, and their applications were too weak
to allay the fury of their passions. It was neither the order and good of the
Universe, nor the necessity of events, nor the things being out of our power,
nor the common condition of humanity, no nor that comfort of ill natured men,
as Carneades called it, the many companions we have in misery, that could keep
their passions from breaking out when a great occasion was presented B
them. For he who had read all their discourses carefully, and was a great man
himself, I mean Cicero, upon the death of his beloved daughter, was so far from
being comforted by them, that he was fain to write a consolation for himself,
in which the greatest cure (it may be) was the diversion he found in writing
it. But supposing these things had gone much farther, and that all wise men
could have governed their passions as to the troubles of this life (and
certainly the truest wisdom lies in that). Yet what had all this been to a
preparation for an eternal state, which they knew little of, and minded less?
All C
their discourses about a happy life here, were vain, and contradicted by
themselves; when, after all their rants about their wise man being happy in the
bull of Phalaris, etc. they yet allowed him to dispatch himself if he saw
cause, which a wise man would never do, if he thought himself happy when he did
it. So that unless God himself had given assurance of a life to come, by the
greatest demonstrations of it in the death and resurrection of his Son; all the
considerations whatever could never have made mankind happy. But by the Gospel
he has taken away all suspicions and doubts concerning another state, D
and has declared his own readiness to be reconciled to us upon our
repentance, to pardon what has been been done amiss, and to give that divine
assistance whereby our wills may be governed, and our passions subdued, and
upon a submission of our selves to his wise Providence, and a sincere obedience
to his Laws, he has promised eternal salvation in the life to come.

3. God has given us the greatest assurance that these offers came from
himself; which the Apostle gives an account of here, saying, that this
salvation began at first to be spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him, God E
also bearing them witness by signs and wonders, etc. Wherein we have all the
satisfaction which the minds of reasonable men could desire as to these things:
It might be justly expected, that the messenger of so great news to the World
should be no mean and ordinary person; neither was he, for the honor A
was as great in the person who brought it, as the importance was in the thing
it self: No less than the Eternal Son of God came down from the Bosom of his
Father, to rectify the mistakes of Mankind, and not only to show them the way
to be happy, but by the most powerful arguments to persuade them to be so. Nay,
we find all the three persons of the Trinity here engaged in the great work of
man's salvation; it was first spoken by our Lord, God also bearing them witness,
and that with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. So that not only the
first revelation was from God, but the testimony to confirm B
that it was so, was from him too; there being never so clear an attestation of
any divine truths as was of the Doctrine of the Gospel. From whence it follows,
that the foundation whereon our Faith stands, is nothing short of a divine
testimony, which God gave to the truth of that revelation of his will; so vain
are the cavils of those who say, we have nothing but mere probabilities for our
Faith, and do interpret that manner of proof which matters of fact are capable
of, in a sense derogatory to the firmness of our Christian Faith. As though we
made the Spirit of God a Paraclete or Advocate in the worst C
sense, which might as well plead a bad as a good cause. No, we acknowledge,
that God himself did bear witness to that doctrine delivered by our Lord, and
that in a most signal and effectual manner, for the conviction of the world, by
those demonstrations of a divine power which accompanied the first Preachers of
salvation by the Gospel of Christ. So that here the Apostle briefly and clearly
resolves our Faith; if you ask, Why we believe that great salvation which the
Gospel offers? the answer is, Because it was declared by our Lord, who neither
could nor would deceive us: If it be asked, How we know D
that this was delivered by our Lord? he answers, because this was the constant
Doctrine of all his Disciples, of those who constantly heard him, and conversed
with him. But if you ask again, how can we know, that their testimony was
infallible, since they were but men, he then resolves all into that, that God
bare witness to them by signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of
the Holy Ghost. And those persons whom these arguments will not convince, none
other will. Who are we, that should not think that sufficient which God himself
thought so! who are we, that dare question E
the certainty of that which has had the Broad Seal of Heaven to attest it!
Can any thing make it surer than God himself has done? and can there be any
other way more effectual for that end, than those demonstrations of a divine
power and presence which the Apostles were acted by? Those A
that cavil at this way of proof, would have done so at any other, if God had
made choice of it: and those who will cavil at any thing, are resolved to be
convinced by nothing; and such are not fit to be discoursed with.

4. Here are the most prevailing motives to persuade them to accept of these
offers of salvation. There are two passions, which are the great hinges of
Government, viz. men's Hopes and Fears, and therefore all Laws have had their
sanctions suitable to these two in Rewards and Punishments: now there was never
any reward which gave greater encouragement to B
hope, never any punishment which made fear more reasonable than those are
which the Gospel proposes. Will ever that man be good, whom the hopes of Heaven
will not make so? or will ever that man leave his sins whom the fears of Hell
will not make to do it? What other arguments can we imagine should ever have
that power and influence on mankind, which these may be reasonably supposed to
have? Would you have God alter the methods of his Providence, and give his
rewards and punishments in this life? but if so, what exercise would there be
of the patience, forbearance and goodness of God toward C
wicked men? must he do it as soon as ever men sin? then he would never try
whether they would repent and grow better? or must he stay till they have come
to such a height of sin? then no persons would have cause to fear him, but such
who are arrived at that pitch of wickedness: but how then should he punish
them? must it be by continuing their lives, and making them miserable? but let
them live, and they will sin yet further: must it be by utterly destroying
them? that to persons, who might have time to sin the mean while, (supposing
annibilation were all to be feared) would never have power enough to deterr D
men from the height of their wickedness. So that nothing but the misery of a
life to come, can be of force enough to make men fear God, and regard
themselves; and this is that which the Gospel threatens to those that neglect
their salvation, which it sometimes calls Mat. 25. 41.
everlasting fire, sometimes Mark 9. 44.
the Worm that never dies, sometimes 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
the wrath to come sometimes 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
everlasting destruction, all enough to fill the minds of men with horror at
the apprehension; and what then will the undergoing it do? Thence our Savior,
reasonably bids men, Mat. 10 28.
not fear them that can only kill the body, but are not able to E
kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul
in hell. Thus the Gospel suggests the most proper object of fear, to keep men
from sin, and as it does that, so it presents likewise the most desirable
object of hope to encourage men to be good; which is no less than a happiness
that is easier A
to hope to enjoy than to comprehend; a happiness infinitely above the most
ambitious hopes and glories of this world; wherein greatness is added to glory,
weight to greatness, and eternity to them all; therefore called 2 Cor. 4. 17.
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Wherein the Joys shall be
full and constant, the perception clear and undisturbed, the fruition with
continual delight and continual desire. Where there shall be no fears to
disquiet, no enemies to allarm, no dangers to conquer, nothing shall then be,
but an uninterrupted peace, an unexpressible Joy, and pleasures for evermore.
And what could be ever B
imagined more satisfactory to minds tired out with the vanities of this world,
than such a repose as that is? What more agreeable to the minds and desires of
good men, than to be eased of this clog of flesh, and to spend eternity with
the fountain of all goodness, and the spirits of just men made perfect? What
more ravishing delight to the souls that are purged, and Rev. 7. 14
made glorious by the blood of the Lamb, than to be singing Hallelujahs to him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever? How poor and low
things are those which men hope for in this world, compared with that great
salvation, which the Gospel C
makes so free a tender of? What a mean thing is it to be great in this world,
to be honorable and rich, i. e. to be made the object of the envy of some, the
malice of others, and at last it may be, an instance of this worlds vanity; and
after all this to be for ever miserable? But O the wisdom of a well-chosen
happiness, that carries a man with contentment and peace through this life, and
at last rewards him with a Crown of everlasting felicity. Thus we see the
Gospel proposes the most excellent means to make men happy, if they be not
guilty of a gross neglect of it; and if they be, that is their own act, and
they must thank none but themselves if they be miserable. D


2. But I pray, what reason can be given, since God is so tender of our
happiness, that we should neglect it our selves? which is the next thing to be
spoken to. There are three sorts of things we think we have reason to neglect:
Such as are too mean, and unworthy our care, such as are so uncertain, that
they will not recompense it, such as our own Interest is not at all concerned
in; but I hope there are none who have an immortal soul, and the use of their
understandings, can ever reckon their salvation under one of these. E


1. Is it too mean an employment for you to mind the matters of your eternal
welfare? Is Religion a beggarly and contemptible thing, that it does not become
the greatness of your minds to stoop to take any notice of it? Has God lost
his honor so much with you, that his service should be the object A
of men's scorn and contempt? But what is it which these brave spirits think a
fit employment for themselves, while they despise God and his Worship? Is it to
be curiously dressed, and make a fine show, to think the time better spent at
the Glass than at their Devotions? These indeed are weighty employments, and
fit in the first place to be minded, if we were made only to be gazed upon. Is
it merely to see Plays, and read Romances, and to be great admirers of that
vain and frothy discourse which all persons account wit but those which have
it? This is such an end of man's life which no Philosopher ever thought of. B
Or is it to spend time in excesses and debaucheries, and to be slaves to as
many lusts as will command them? This were something indeed, if we had any
other name given us but that of Men. Or lastly, is it to have their minds taken
up with the great affairs of the World, to be wise in considering, careful in
managing the public interest of a Nation? This is an employment, I grant, fit
for the greatest minds, but not such which need at all to take them off from
minding their eternal salvation. For the greatest wisdom is consistent with
that, else Religion would be accounted folly, and I take it for C
granted; that it is never the truly wise man but the pretender that entertains
any mean thoughts of Religion. And such a one uses the public Interest no
better than he does Religion, only for a show to the world, that he may carry
on his own designs the better. And is this really such a valuable thing for a
man to be contented to cheat himself of his eternal happiness, that he may be
able to cheat the world, and abuse his trust? I appeal then to the Consciences
of all such who have any sense of humanity; and the common interest of mankind,
setting aside the considerations of a life to come, whether to be just and
sober, D
virtuous and good, be not more suitable to the design of humane Nature, than
all the vanities and excesses, all the little arts and designs which men are
apt to please themselves with? And if so, shall the eternal happiness which
follows upon being good, make it less desirable to be so? No surely, but if
God had required any thing to make us happy, which had been as contrary to our
present Interest as the Precepts of Christianity are agreeable to it; yet the
end would have made the severest commands easy, and those things pleasant
which tend to make us happy. E


2. Are these things so uncertain, that they are not fit for a wise man to be
solicitous about them? if they will come with a little care, they will say,
they are destreable, but too much will unfit them for greater business? But do
men believe these things to be true or not, when they say thus? if they be
true, why need they A
fear their uncertainty? if they be certain, what pains and care can be too
great about them? since a little will never serve to obtain them. Let but the
care and diligence be proportionable to the greatness of the end, and the
weight of the things, and you never need fear the want of a recompense for all
your labor. But suppose you say, if you were fully convinced of their
certainty you would look more after them. What hinders you from being so
convinced? Is it not a bad disposition of mind which makes you unwilling to
enquire into them? examine things with a mind as free as you would have it,
judge seriously according to B
the reason of things, and you will easily find the interests of a life to come
are far more certain, as well as more desirable than those of this present
life. And yet the great uncertainty of all the honors and riches of this
world, never hinder the covetous or ambitious person from their great
earnestness in pursuit of them. And shall not then all the mighty arguments
which God himself has made use of to confirm to us, the certainty of a life to
come, prevail upon us to look more seriously after it? Shall the unexpressible
love of the Father, the unconceiveable sufferings of the Son of God, and the
miraculous descent C
and powerful assistance of the Holy Ghost have no more impression on our
minds, than to leave us uncertain of a future state? What mighty doubts and
suspicions of God, what distrusts of humane Nature, what unspeakable
ingratitude, and unaccountable folly lies at the bottom of all this
uncertainty? O fools, and slow of heart to believe, not only what the Prophets
have spoken, but what our Lord has declared, God himself has given testimony
to, and the Holy Ghost has confirmed!

3. But is not your Interest concerned in these things? Is it all one to you
whether your souls be immortal or no? whether D
they live in eternal felicity, or unchangeable misery? Is it no more to you,
than to know what kind of Bables are in request at the Indies, or whether the
customs of China or Iapan are the wiser, i. e. than the most trifling things,
and the remotest from our knowledge. But this is so absurd and unreasonable to
suppose, that men should not think themselves concerned in their own eternal
happiness and misery, that I shall not show so much distrust of their
understandings to speak any longer to it.

3. But if notwithstanding all these things our neglect still continues, then
Heb. 10. 27.
there remains nothing but a fearful looking E
for of judgment, and the fiery indignation of God. For there is no
possibility of escaping if we continue to neglect so great salvation. All hopes
of escaping are taken away, which are only in that, which men neglect; and
those who neglect their only way to salvation, must needs be miserable. How can
that man A
ever hope to be saved by him whose blood he despises and tramples under foot?
What grace and favor can he expect from God, who has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace? That has cast away with reproach and contempt the greatest
kindness and offers of Heaven. What can save him that resolves to be damned,
and every one does so, who knows he shall be damned, if he lives in his sins,
and yet continues to do so? God himself, in whose only pity our hopes are, has
irreversibly decreed that he will have no pity upon those, who despise his
goodness, slight his threatenings, abuse his patience, and sin the more because
he B
offers to pardon. It is not any ^elight that God takes in the miseries of his
Creatures, which makes him punish them; but shall not God vindicate his own
honor against obstinate and impenitent sinners? He declares before hand, that
he is far from delighting in their ruin, and that is the reason he has made
such large offers, and used so many means to make them happy; but if men
resolve to despise his offers, and slight the means of their salvation, shall
not God be just without being thought to be cruel? And we may assure our
selves, none shall ever suffer, beyond the just desert of their sins, for
punishment as the C
Apostle tells us in the words before the Text, is nothing but a just
recompense of reward. And if there were such a one proportionable to the
violation of the Law delivered by Angels; how shall we think to escape who
neglect a more excellent means of happiness, which was delivered by our Lord
himself? If God did not hate sin, and there were not a punishment belonging to
it, why did the Son of God die for the expiation of it? and if his death were
the only means of expiation, how is it possible that those who neglect that,
should escape the punishment not only of their other sins, but of that great
contempt of the means of D
our salvation by him? Let us not then think to trifle with God, as though it
were impossible a Being so merciful and kind, should ever punish his Creatures
with the miseries of another life: For, however we may deceive our selves, Gal.
6. (...), 8.
God will not be mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap; for
he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

I shall only propound some few Considerations, to prevent so great a neglect
as that of your salvation is.

1. Consider, what it is you neglect, the offer of Eternal Happiness, E
the greatest kindness that ever was expressed to the World, the foundation of
your present peace, the end of your beings, the stay of your minds, the great
desire of your Souls, the utmost felicity that humane Nature is capable of. Is
it nothing to neglect the favor of a Prince, the kindness of Great A
Men, the offers of a large and plentiful Estate; but these are nothing to the
neglect of the favor of God, the love of his Son, and that salvation which he
has purchased for you. Nay, it is not a bare neglect, but it implies in it a
mighty contempt not only of the things offered, but of the kindness of him who
offers them. If men had any due regard for God or themselves, if they had any
esteem for his love, or their own welfare, they would be much more serious in
Religion than they are. When I see a person wholly immersed in affairs of the
World, or spending his time in luxury and vanity, can I possibly think that B
man has any esteem of God or of his own Soul? When I find one very serious in
the pursuit of his Designs in the World, thoughtful and busy, subtle in
contriving them, careful in managing them; but very formal, remiss and
negligent in all affairs of Religion, neither inquisitive about them, nor
serious in minding them; what can we otherwise think, but that such a one does
really think the things of the World better worth looking after, than those
which concern his eternal salvation. But consider, before it be too late, and
repent of so great folly. Value an immortal Soul as you ought to do, think what
Reconciliation C
with God, and the Pardon of sin is worth, slight not the dear Purchase which
was bought at no meaner a rate than the Blood of the Son of God, and then you
cannot but mind the great salvation which God has tendered you.

2. Consider, on what terms you neglect it, or what the things are for whose
sake you are so great enemies to your own salvation. Have you ever found that
contentment in sin or the vanities of the World, that for the sake of them, you
are willing to be forever miserable? What will you think of all your
debaucheries, and your neglects of God and your selves, when D
you come to die? what would you give then (if it were in your power to redeem
your lost time) that you had spent your time less to the satisfaction of your
sensual desires, and more in seeking to please God? How uncomfortable will the
remembrance be of all your excesses, oaths, injustice and profaneness, when
death approaches, and judgment follows it? What peace of mind will there then
be to those who have served God with faithfulness, and have endeavored to work
out their salvation, though it has been with fear and trembling? But what
would it then profit a man to have gained the whole World, and to E
lose his own soul? Nay, what unspeakable losers must they then be, that lose
their Souls for that which has no value at all, if compared with the World.

3. Consider, what follows upon this neglect, not only the loss of great
salvation; but the incurring as great damnation for A
it. The Scripture describes the miseries of the life to come, not merely by
negatives, but by the most sensible and painful things. If destruction be
dreadful, what is everlasting destruction? if the anguish of the soul, and the
pains of the body be so troublesome, what will the destruction be both of Body
and Soul in Hell? If a Serpent gnawing in our bowels be a representation of an
insupportable misery here, what will that be of the Worm that never dies? if a
raging and devouring fire, which can last but till it has consumed a fading
substance, be in its appearance so amazing, and in its pain so violent, what
then B
will the enduring be of that wrath of God, which shall burn like fire, and yet
be everlasting? Consider then of these things, while God gives you time to
consider of them; and think it an inestimable mercy that you have yet time to
repent of your sins, to beg mercy at the hands of God, to redeem your time, to
depart from iniquity, to be frequent in Prayer, careful of your Actions, and in
all things obedient to the will of God, and so God will pardon your former
neglects, and grant you this great salvation. C
D
E


SERMON VI. Sermon. VI.
A
B
Preached on GOOD-FRYDAY before the Lord Mayor, etc.
HEBREWS XII. III. C
For, consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.
IT has never yet been so well with the D
World, and we have no great reason to hope it ever will be so; that the best
of things, or of men, should meet with entertainment in it, suitable to their
own worth and excellency. If it were once to be hoped, that all Mankind would
be wise and sober, that their judgments would be according to the truth of
things, and their actions suitable to their judgments; we might then
reasonably E
expect that nothing would be valued so much as true goodness, nothing so much
in contempt and disgrace as impiety and profaneness. But if we find it much
otherwise in the Age we live in; we have so much the less cause to wonder at
it; because it has been thus, in those times we might have thought A
would have been far better than our own. I mean those times and ages, wherein
there were not only great things first spoken and delivered to Mankind, but
examples as great as the things themselves; but these did so little prevail on
the stupid and unthankful world, that they among whom the Son of God did first
manifest himself, seemed only solicitous to make good one Prophesic concerning
him, viz. That he should be despised and rejected of men. And they who suffered
their malice to live as long as he did, were not contented to let it dye with
him; but their fury increases as the Gospel does: and wherever it had B
spread it self, they pursue it with all the rude clamors, and violent
persecutions which themselves or their factors could raise against it. This we
have a large testimony of, in those Jewish Christians to whom this Epistle was
written; who had no sooner embraced the Christian Religion, but they were set
upon by a whole army of persecutions. Heb. 10. 32. But call to remembrance the
former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of
afflictions. As though the great enemy of souls, and therefore of Christians,
had watched the first opportunity to make the strongest impression upon C
them, while they were yet young and unexperienced; and therefore less able to
resist so sharp an encounter. He had found how unsuccessful the offer of the
good things of this World had been with their Lord and Master; and therefore
was resolved to try what a severer course would do with all his followers. But
the same spirit by which he despised all the Glories of the World, which the
Tempter would have made him believe he was the disposer of; enabled them with a
mighty courage, and strange transports of joy, not only to bear their own share
of reproaches and afflictions, but a part of theirs who D
suffered with them, v. 33, 34. But lest through continual duty, occasioned by
the hatred of their persecutors, and the multitude of their afflictions; their
courage should abate, and their spirits saint; the Apostle finds it necessary,
not only to put them in mind of their former magnanimity; but to make use of
all arguments that might be powerful with them, to keep up the same vigor and
constancy of mind in bearing their sufferings, which they had at first. For he
well knew, how much it would tend to the dishonor of the Gospel, as well as to
their own discomfort; if after such an early proof of a E
great and undaunted spirit, it should be said of them, as was once of a great
Roman Captain, Ultima Primis cedebant; that they should decline in their
reputation as they did in their years; and at last sink under that weight of
duty which they had born with so much honor before. Therefore, as a Genetal A
in the Field, after a sharp and fierce encounter at first, with a mighty
resolution by his Soldiers; when he finds by the number and fresh recruits of
the enemy, that his smaller forces are like to be born down before them; and
through mere weariness of fighting are ready to turn their backs, or yield
themselves up to the enemies mercy; lie conjures them by the honor they have
gained, and the courage they had already expressed, by their own interest, and
the example of their Leaders, by the hopes of glory, and the fears of
punishment, that they would bear the last shock of their enemies force, and
rather B
be the Trophies of their Courage than of their Triumphs: so does our Apostle,
when he finds some among them begin to debate, whether they had best to stand
it out or no; he conjures them, 1. By the remembrance of their own former
courage, whereby they did bear as sharp trials as these could be, with the
greatest cheerfulness and constancy; and what could they gain by yielding at
last, but great dishonor to themselves, that they had suffered so long to no
purpose, unless it were to discover their own weakness and inconstancy. 2. By
the hopes of a reward which would surely follow their faithfulness; C
v. 35, 36. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the
will of God, ye might receive the promise: and the time will not be long ere ye
come to enjoy it, v. 37. but if ye draw back, you lose all your former labors,
for he who alone is able to recompense you, has said, that if any man draw
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, v. 38. and then from the example
of himself, and all the genuine followers of Christ, but we are not of them who
draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul,
v. 39. D
But lest these examples should not be enough to persuade them; he conjures
them by the name of all those who were as eminent for the greatness of their
minds as the strength of their Faith; who have despised the frowns as well as
the smiles of the world; and were not discouraged by the severest trials from
placing their confidence in God, and their hopes in a life to come; and all
this done by persons who had not received the Promise: Heb. 11. 39. and could
there be a greater disparagement to the clearness of that light we enjoy above
them, if we only grew fainter by it? And therefore in the beginning of this
Chapter E
he encourages them by that army of Martyrs which had gone before them, by that
Cloud of witnesses which did both direct and refresh them, that they would lay
aside every thing which was apt to oppress or dishearten them, but especially
their sinful fears, which they were so easily betrayed by, and so run with
patience A
the race that was set before them, v. 1. But, says he, if none of these will
prevail with you, there is an example yet behind, which ought above all others
to heighten your courage, and that is, of the Captain of your salvation, the
author and sinisher of your faith, under whom you serve, and from whom you
expect your reward; and as Caesar once said to his Soldiers, when he saw them
ready to retreat out of the field, Videte quem, and quo loco Imperatorem
deserturi estis. Remember what kind of General you forsake, and in what place
you leave him: one whom you have vowed your lives and your service to, one who B
has thought nothing too dear, which was to be done for your good, one that
will be ready to reward the least service you can do for him, one that is ready
to assist you to the utmost in what you undertake, one that has already
undergone far more for your sakes, than ever you can do for his; therefore,
Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest
ye be weary, and faint in your minds.

In which words we have represented to us, the unparalled example of courage
and patience under sufferings, in our Lord and Savior; and the great influence
that it ought to have on C
all those who are called by his Name, that they would not dishonor so
excellent a pattern of enduring sufferings, by weakness or dejection of mind.
Christianity is a Religion which above all others does arm men against all the
contingencies and miseries of the life of man: yea, it makes them serviceable
to the most advantageous purpo^es that the greatest blessings can be designed
for. It raises the minds of men higher than barely to consider, the common
condition of humane nature, the unavoidableness of such things which are out of
our own power, and the unreasonableness of tormenting our selves about the D
things which are so, and that most men's conditions in the world as to their
contentment, depends more upon their minds, than their outward circumstances;
though these are things very fit for us as men to consider and make use of; yet
they do not reach to that height, which the consideration of a life to come,
and the tendency of all our sufferings here to the inhancement of our future
glory may raise us to. Especially considering not only the weight of the
arguments in themselves, but the force they receive from the example of him,
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, E
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. By which mighty
instance we find, that the sufferings of this life are so far from being
inconsistent with the joys of another, that he who is (...). 1^.
the Captain of salvation, was made perfect through sufferings, and therefore
none of his followers have A
cause to be dejected under them. But that we may the better understand the
force of this argument, we shall consider,

1. What those things were which he endured. 2. From whom he suffered them, it
was the contradiction of sinners against himself. 3. In that Way and manner he
underwent them. 4. For what ends he did it. And when we have considered these,
we shall see the influence this example of Christ's sufferings ought to have
upon our constancy and patience: which will be the most useful improvement of
it to us. B

1. What those things were which Christ endured; which are here comprehended
under those words, the contradiction of sinners. It is agreed by the best
Expositors, both Greek and Latin, that under this phrase of the contradiction
of sinners, the whole history of our Saviors sufferings is comprehended. All
the injuries, reproaches, false accusations, all the cruelties, indignities,
and violence, which were offered him, from the time of his public appearance
to his expiring upon the Cross, being undergone by him, by the malice of
unreasonable men, may be called the contradiction of sinners. For the sense of
this word C
extends as well to actions as words; and the sum of all that which our Savior
suffered from them, may be reduced under these heads. 1. The ill entertainment
of his Doctrine. 2. The disparagement of his Miracles. 3. The violence offered
to his Person.

1. The ill entertainment of his Doctrine; which must needs seem very strange
to those who do not consider what a difficult access the clearest reason has
to the minds of such who are governed by interest and prejudice. Though all the
Prophesies concerning the Messiah were fulfilled in him; though D
the expectations of the people were great at that time concerning the
appearance of him that was to redeem his people; though all the characters of
time, place, and person, did fully agree to what was foretold by the Prophets;
though his Doctrine were as becoming the Son of God to reveal, as the sons of
men to receive; though the unspot^ed innocence of his life were so great, as
made him weary of his own that betrayed him: yet because he came not with the
pomp and splendour which they expected, they despise his Person, revile his
Doctrine, persecute his followers, and contrive his ruin. What E
could have been imagined more probable, than that the Jewish Nation, which had
waited long in expectation of the Messiah coming, should have welcomed his
approach with the greatest joy, and received the Message he brought with a
kindness only short of that which he showed in coming among them? A
Was it nothing to be eased of that heavy burden of the Ceremonial Law, which
neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear? and that God was willing to
exchange the chargeable and troublesome service of the Temple, for the more
reasonable and spiritual Worship of himself? Was it nothing to have the
Promises of a Land which now groaned under the weight of its oppressions,
turned into those of an eternal state of bliss and immortality? and to change
the Lamps of the Temple, for the glorious appearance of the Sun of
Righteousness? Was it nothing to have an offer of Peace and Reconciliation with
B
God made them, after they had suffered so much under the sury of his
displeasure? Was a mere temporal deliverance by some mighty Conqueror from the
subjection they were in to the Roman Power, so much more valuable a thing, than
an eternal redemption from the powers of Hell and the Grave? Are the pomps and
vanities of this present life, such great things in Gods account, that it was
not possible for his Son to appear without them? Nay, how unsuitable had it
been for one who came to preach humility, patience, self-denial, and contempt
of the world, to have made an ostentation of the C
State and Grandeur of it? So that either he must have changed his Doctrine, or
rendered himself liable to the suspicion of seeking to get this world by the
preaching of another. And if his Doctrine had been of another kind, he might
have been esteemed a great person among the Jews, but not the Son of God, or
the promised Messiah, in whom all Nations of the Earth should be blessed. Which
surely they would never have thought themselves to have been, in one, who must
have subdued the neighbor Nations to advance the honor of his own. But since
the Son of God thought fit to appear in another manner D
than they expected him, they thought themselves too great to be saved by so
mean a Savior. If he had made all the Kingdoms of the Earth to have bowed
under him, and the Nations about them to have been all tributaries to them; if
Jerusalem had been made the Seat of an Empire as great as the World it self,
they would then have gloried in his Name, and entertained whatever he had said,
whether true or false, with a wonderful Veneration. But Truth in an humble
dress meets with few admirers; they could not imagine so much Power and Majesty
could ever shroud it self under so plain a disguise. E
Thus Christ 1 John 11.
came to his own, and his own received him not. Yea, those that should have
known him the best of all others; those who frequently conversed with him, and
heard him speak as never man spoke, and saw him do what never man did, were yet
so blinded by the meanness of his Parentage and A
Education, that they baffle their own Reason, and persist in their Infidelity,
because they knew the place and manner of his breeding; the names of his Mother
and his Brethren and Sisters; Matt. 13. 55, 56.
are they not all with us? whence then has this man all these things? As
though, Is not this the Carpenters Son, had been sufficient answer to all he
could say or do.

2. The disparagement of his Miracles. Since the bare proposal of his Doctrine,
though never so reasonable, could not prevail with them to believe him to be
the Son of God, he offers them a further proof of it by the mighty works which
were B
wrought by him. And though the more ingenuous among them were ready to
acknowledge, John 3. 2.
that no man could do the things which he did, unless God were with him: yet
they who were resolved to hear and see, and not understand; when they found it
not for their credit, to deny matters of fact so universally known and
attested, they seek all the means to blast the reputation of them that may be.
Sometimes raising popular insinuations against him, that he was a man of no
austere life, a friend of Publicans and sinners, one that could choose no other
day to do his works on, but that very day wherein God himself C
did rest from his; and therefore no great regard was to be had to what such a
one did. When these arts would not take, but the people found the benefit of
his Miracles, in healing the sick, curing the blind and the lame, feeding the
hungry; then they undervalue all these in comparison with the wonders that were
wrought by Moses in the Wilderness. If he would have made the Earth to open her
mouth, and swallow up the City and the power of Rome; if he would have fed a
mighty Army with bread from Heaven, in stead of feeding some few thousands with
very small Provisions; if in stead of raising one Lazarus D
from the Grave, he would have raised up their Sampsons, and their David's,
their men of spirit and conduct, whose very presence would have put a new life,
into the hearts of the people; if in stead of casting out Devils, he would have
cast out the Romans, whom they hated the worse of the two: if he would have set
himself to the cure of a distempered State, instead of healing the maladies of
some few inconsiderable persons: if instead of being at the expense of a
Miracle to pay tribute, he would have hindered them from paying any at all;
then a Second Moses would have been too mean a title for him, E
he could have been no less than the promised Messiah, the Son of God. But
while he employed his power another way, the demonstration of it made them hate
him the more; since they thought with themselves what strange things they would
have done with it for the benefit of their Country; and therefore A
express the greatest malice against him, because he would not employ it as
they would have him. From thence, they condemn his Miracles as only some
effects of a Magical skill; and say, he dispossessed the lesser Devils by the
power of him that was the Prince among them. So unworthy a requital did they
make for all the mighty works which had been done among them; Which, as our
Savior says, Mat. 11. 21.
if they had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sack cloth and ashes.

3. But although all this argued a strange spirit of contradiction B
in them to all the designs for their own good; yet the malice from whence that
rose, would not stop here; for as they had long contrived his ruin, so they
watched only an opportunity to effect it. Which his frequent presence at
Jerusalem seemed to put into their hands, but his reputation with the people
made them fearful of embracing it. Therefore they employ their Agents to deal
privately with one of his Disciples who might be fittest for their design; and
to work upon his covetous humor by the promise of a reward, to bring him to
betray his Master with the greatest privacy into their hands. C
This Judas undertakes, knowing the place and season of his Masters
retirements, not far from the City, where they might with the greatest secrecy
and safety seize upon his person. Which contrivance of theirs our Savior was
not at all ignorant of; but prepares himself and his Disciples for this great
encounter. He institutes his solemn Supper, to be perpetually observed in
remembrance of his death and sufferings, after which he discourses admirably
with his Disciples, to arm them against their future sufferings; and prays that
most divine Prayer, St. John 17. which he had no sooner finished, D
but he goes with his Disciples to the usual place of his retirement in a
Garden at the foot of the Mount of Olives. And now begins the blackest Scene of
sufferings that ever was acted upon humane Nature. Which was so great, that the
Son of God himself expresses a more than usual apprehension of it; which he
discovered by the Agony he was in, in which he sweat Luke 22 44
drops of blood; by the earnestness of his Prayer, falling upon his knees, and
praying thrice, saying, Mat 26. 39
O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not as
I will, but as thou will. Surely, this Cup must needs E
have a great deal of bitterness in it, which the Son of God was so earnest to
be freed from. If there had been nothing in it but what is commonly incident to
humane Nature, as to the apprehensions of death or pain, it seems strange, that
he who had the greatest innocence, the most perfect charity, the A
freest resignation of himself, the fullest assurance of the reward to come,
should express a greater sense of the horror of his sufferings, than thousands
did, who suffered for his sake. But now was the hour come wherein the Son of
God was to be made a Sacrifice for the sins of men; wherein he was to bear our
griefs, and carry our sorrows, when he was Isa 53 4, 5.
to be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; now Mat.
26. 38.
his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death; for now Luke 22. 53.
the hour of his enemies was come, and the power of darkness. And accordingly
they improve it; they B
come out against him as a Malefactor, with swords and staves, and having
seized his Person, being betrayed into their hands by one of his Disciples,
they carry him to the High Priests house, where his professed enemies presently
condemn him of Mat. 26. 66, 67.
Blasphemy, and not content with this, they express the greatest contempt of
him, for they spit in his face, they buffet him, and smite him with the Palms
of their hands, they mock him, and bid him prophecy who it was that smote him;
so insolent was their malice grown, and so spightful was their indignation
against him. And so fearful were they, lest he should C
escape their hands, that the very next morning early, they send him bound to
the Roman Governor, to have the sentence pronounced against him, to whom they
accuse him of Sedition and Treason; but Pilate upon examination of him
declares, Luk 23. 4.
he found no fault in him; which made them heap more unreasonable calumnies
upon him, being resolved by what means soever to take away his life. Nay, the
price of the blood of the Son of God was fallen so low with them, that they
preferred the life of a known seditious person, and a Murderer before him. And
when Pilate being unsatisfied, asked still, D
Mat 27. 23
what evil he had done? they continue their importunity without any other
answer but Crucify him and making up what wanted in Justice and Reason in the
loudness of their clamors. And at last seeing the sury and madness of the
people, with the protestation of his own innocence as to his blood, he delivers
him up to the people; and now he is stripped, and scourged, and mocked, with a
Crown of Thorns, a Scarlet Robe, and a Reed in his hand: all the indignities
they could think of, they put upon him. But though it pleased them, to have him
exposed to all the ignominies imaginable, yet nothing would satisfy E
them but his blood; and therefore he is led forth to be crucified, and though
so lately scourged and weakened by his sorrows, yet he is made to carry his own
Cross (at least through the City) for no other death could satisfy them, but
the most ignominious, and painful. And when he was brought A
to the place of Crucifixion, they nail his hands and feet to the Cross, and
while he was hanging there, they deride and mock him still, they devide his
garments before his face, give him Gall and Vinegar to drink, and the last act
of violence committed upon him, was the piercing of his side, so that out of
his Pericardium issued Joh. 19. 34.
both water and blood. Thus did the Son of God suffer at the hands of
unreasonable men; thus was the blood of that immaculate Lamb split by the hands
of violence; and he who left the bosom of his Father, to bring us to glory, was
here treated as if he had been unworthy to live B
upon the Earth.

2. But that which yet heightens these sufferings of Christ, is to consider,
from whom he suffered these things, it was from sinners; which is as much as to
say, from men, if the word were taken in the largest sense of it; for all have
sinned; but being taken by us in opposition to othermen, so it implies a
greater height of wickedness in these than in other persons. But this is not
here to be considered absolutely, as denoting what kind of persons he suffered
from, but with a particular respect to the nature of their proceedings with
him, and the obligations C
that lay upon them to the contrary. So that the first shows the injustice and
unreasonableness of them; the second, their great ingratitude, considering the
kindness and good will which he expressed toward them.

1. The Injustice and unreasonableness of their proceedings against him. It is
true indeed, (what Socrates said to his wife, when she complained that he
suffered unjustly, What, says he, and would you have me suffer justly?) it is
much greater comfort to the person who does suffer, when he does it unjustly
but it is a far greater reflection on those who were the causes of D
it. And that our Blessed Savior did suffer with the greatest injustice from
these men, is apparent from the falseness and weakness of all the accusations
which were brought against him. To accuse the Son of God for Blaphemy, in
saying, he was so, is as unjust as to condemn a King for treason, because he
says he is a King: they ought to have examined the grounds on which he called
himself so; and if he had not given pregnant evidences of it, then to have
passed sentence upon him as an Impostor and Blasphemer. If the thing were true,
that he was what he said, the Son of God, what horrible guilt was it in E
them, to imbrue their hands in his blood? and they found he always attested
it, and now was willing to lay down his life to confirm the truth of what he
said. This surely ought at least to have made them more inquisitive into what
he had affirmed; but they allow him not the liberty of a fair trial, they
hasten A
and precipitate the sentence, that they might do so the execution. If he were
condemned as a false Prophet; (for that seems to be the occasion of the
Sanhedrim meeting to do it, to whom the cognizance of that did particularly
belong) why do they not mention what it was he had foretold, which had not come
to pass; or what reason do they give why he had usurped such an Office to
himself? If no liberty were allowed under pain of death for any to say, that
they were sent from God, how was it possible for the Messiah ever to appear,
and not be condemned? for the expectation of him was, that he B
should be a great person immediately sent from God, for the delivery of his
people. And should he be sent from God, and not say that he was so? for how
then could men know that he was? So that their way of proceeding with him,
discovers it self to be manifestly unjust, and contrary to their own avowed
expectations. Neither were they more successful in the accusation of him before
Pilate; why did not the witnesses appear to make good the charge of sedition
and treason against him? where were the proofs of any thing tending that way?
Nay, that which abundantly testified the innocence of our C
Savior, as to all the matters he was accused of, was that the Roman
Governor, after a full examination of the cause, declares him innocent, and
that not only once but several times; and was fully satisfied in the
Vindication he made of himself, so that nothing but the fear of what the Jews
threatened, viz. accusing him to Caesar (a thing he had cause enough otherwise
to be afraid of) which made him at last yield to their importunity. But there
was one circumstance more which did highly discover the innocence of Christ,
and the injustice of his sufferings, which was Iuda's confession and end; the
man who D
had betrayed his Lord, and had received the wages of his iniquity; but was so
unquiet with it, that in the time when his other Disciples durst not own him,
he with a great impetus returns to them with his Money, throws it among them
with that sad farewell to them all, Mat. 27. 4.
I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. What could have
been said more for his Vindication at this time than this was, by such a person
as Judas, one who had known our Savior long, and had been the fittest
instrument, if any guilt could have been fastened upon him, to have managed the
accusation against him; but E
the anxiety of his mind was too great for what he had done already, to live to
do them any longer service; for either his grief suffocated him, or his guilt
made him hang himself; for the words will signify either. Neither can it be
said by any modern Jews, that all the testimony we have of these things A
is from his own Disciples; but that certainly they had some greater matter to
accuse him of; which we now have lost. For how is it possible to conceive, that
a matter so important as that was, should be lost by those of their own Nation,
who were so highly concerned to vindicate themselves in all places, as soon as
the Gospel was spread abroad in the World? For the guilt of this blood was
every where by the Christians charged upon them; and their prodigious
sufferings afterward were imputed wholly by them to the shedding of that blood
of Christ, which by a most solemn imprecation they had said, should B
be upon them and their Children. Besides, how comes Celsus, who personates a
Jew opposing Christianity, to mention no other accusations against him but
those recorded in the Gospel; and Orig. c. Cells. l. 3. p. 123.
Origin challenges him or any other person to charge him with any action which
might deserve punishment. And which is very observable, Porphyrie, one of the
most inveterate enemies of Christianity, and that took as much pains to write
against it as any, and had more learning to do it with, yet in his Book of the
Philosophy of Oracles, as August. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 23.
St. Augustine tells us, quotes an Oracle wherein were these words C
concerning Christ, And what became of him after his death? it says, that his
Soul was immortal, Cur ergo damnatus est? responait Dea: corpus quidem
debilitantibus tormentis semper oppositum est, anima autem piorum coelasti s^ai
insidet.
Viri pietate praestantissimi est illa anima, and that it was the soul of a
most excellent person for piety; and being then asked, why he was condemned?
the answer only is, that the body (of the best) is exposed to weakening
torments, but the Soul rests in heavenly habitations. So that on no account can
this contradiction appear to be otherwise than an act of great injustice and
cruelty, and therefore must needs be the contradiction of sinners.

2. This contradiction of theirs to Christ was an act of high D
Ingratitude. It was a sharp but very just rebuke which the Jews received from
our Savior, when they were once ready to stone him; Joh. 10. 32.
Many good works have I showed you from my Father, for which of those works do
you stone me? The very same might have been applied to his Judges and accusers;
when they were about to crucify him. For what was his whole Life after he
appeared publicly, but a constant design of doing good? His presence had far
more virtue for the curing all bodily distempers, than the Pool of Bethesda
among the Jews, or the Temples of Aesculapius among the Gentiles. What wonders E
were made of very small things done by other persons, as the cure of a blind
Man by Vespasian! when such multitudes of far more certain and considerable
cures, can hardly keep up the reputation of any thing extraordinary in him. But
though his kindness was great to the bodies of men, where they were fit A
objects of pity and compassion; yet it was far greater to their souls, that
being more agreeable to the design of his coming into the World; for the other
tended to raise such an esteem of him as might make him the more successful in
the cure of their Souls. And to show, that this was his great business,
wherever he comes, he discourses about these things, takes every opportunity
that might be improved for that end, refuses no company he might do good upon,
and converses not with them with the pride and arrogance of either the
Pharisees or Philosophers, but with the greatest meekness, humility and B
patience. How admirable are his more solemn discourses, especially that upon
the Mount, and that wherein he takes leave of his Disciples! How dry and
insipid are the most sublime discourses of the Philosophers compared with
these! how clearly does he state our Duties, and what mighty encouragements
does he give to practice them! how forcibly does he persuade men to self-denial
and contempt of the world! how excellent and holy are all his Precepts! how
serviceable to the best interest of men in this life and that to come! how
suitable and desirable to the souls of good men are the rewards he promises! C
what exact rule of Righteousness has he prescribed to men, in doing as they
would be done by! with what vehemence does he rebuke all hypocrisy and
Pharisaism! with what tenderness and kindness does he treat those that have any
real inclinations to true goodness! with what earnestness does he invite, and
with what love does he embrace all repenting sinners! with what care does he
instruct, with what mildness does he reprove, with what patience does he bear
with his own disciples! Lastly, with what authority did he both speak and live,
such as commanded a reverence, where it did not beget a love! And yet D
after a life thus spent, all the requital he met with, was to be reproached,
despised, and at last crucified. O the dreadful effects of malice and
hypocrisy! for these were the two great enemies which he always proclaimed
open war with; and these at first contrived, and at last effected his cruel
death. What baseness, ingratitude, cruelty, injustice, (and what not?) will
those two sins betray men to, when they have once taken possession of the
hearts of men! for we can find nothing else at the bottom of all that wretched
conspiracy against our Savior; but that his doctrine and design was too pure
and holy for them; E
and therefore they study to take him away who was the author of them.

3. We consider, in what way and manner, our Savior underwent all these
sufferings; and this as much as any thing is here propounded to our
consideration. For it is not only who, A
or what, but in what manner he endured the contradiction of sinners, that we
ought to consider, to prevent fainting and dejection of mind. So another
Apostle tells us, Pet 2. 21. 22, 23.
that Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judged righteously. He uses none of those ranting
expressions which none of the patientest persons in the world were accustomed
to; of bidding them laugh in Phalaris his Bull; and when they were B
racked with pains, to cry out, Nil agis dolor: he tells them not, that it is
their duty to have no sense of torments, and to be jocund and pleasant when
their flesh is torn from them, or nailed to a Cross; if this be any kind of
fortitude, it is rather that of a Gladiator than of a wise man or a Christian.
The worst of men either through a natural temper of body, or having hardened
themselves by custom, have born the greatest torments with the least expression
of grief under them. And Panaetius, one of the wisest of the Stoics, is so far
from making insensibleness of pain the property of a wise man, that he makes it
not the property C
of a man. The inferior Creatures are called Brutes from their dullness and
insensibleness, and not merely from want of reason, any further than that one
follows from the other: P^i^. Not. Hist. l. 11. 37.
bruta existimantur animalium quibus cor durum riget, says Pliny, those
animals are called Brutes which have the hardest hearts: and the nearer any of
them approach to the nature of man, the more apprehensive they are of danger,
and the more sensible of pain; thence Scali^. hist. a^i^. l 2 sect. 133.
Scaliger says of the Elephant, that it is maximabellua, sed non maxim bruta,
though it be the greatest beast, it is the least a Brute. Stupidity then D
under sufferings can be no part of the excellency of a man; which in its
greatest height is in the Beings the most beneath him. But when danger is
understood, and pain felt, and Nature groans under it, then with patience and
submission to undergo it, and to conquer all the strugglings of Nature against
it, that is the duty and excellency of a Christian. If to express the least
sense of grief and pain, be the highest excellency of suffering, the Macedonian
boy that suffered his flesh to be burnt by a Coal, till it grew offensive to
all about him, without altering the posture of his arm, lest he should disturb
Alexanders E
sacrifice, out-did the greatest Philosophers of them all. Possidonius his
pitiful rant over a fit of the Gout, so highly commended by Pompey and (...).
l. 2.
Tully; O pain, it is to no purpose; though thou be troublesome, I will
never confess thou art evil; falls extremely short of the resolution of the
Macedonian boy, A
or any of the Spartan Youths, who would not in the midst of torments so much
as confess them troublesome. And what a mighty revenge was that, that he would
not confess it to be evil, when his complaint that it was troublesome, was a
plain argument that he thought it so. It is not then the example of Zeno or
Cleanthes, or the rules of Stoicism, which Dionysius Heracleotes, in a fit of
the Stone complained of the solly of, that are to be the measures of patience,
and courage in bearing sufferings; but the example and Precepts of our Lord and
Savior, who expressed a great sense of his sufferings, B
but withal the greatest submission under them. When Aab. Miraus i^ (...) i^a
Lips^i p. 60.
Lipsius lay a dying, and one of the bystanders knowing how conversant he had
been in the Stoics writings, began to suggest some of their Precepts to him,
Vana sunt ista, said he, I find all those but vain things; and beholding the
Picture of our Savior near his bed, he pointed to that, and cried, haec vera
est patientia: there is the true pattern of Patience. For, notwithstanding that
Agony he was in immediately before his being betrayed, when he sees the
Officers coming toward him, he asks them whom they seek for? and tells them, I
am he; which C
words so astonished them, Joh. 18. 6.
that they went back, and fell upon the ground: thereby letting them understand
how easy a matter it was for him to have escaped their hands; and that it was
his own free consent, that he went to suffer, for he knew certainly before
hand, the utmost that he was to undergo, and therefore it was no unreasonable
impetus, but a settled resolution of his mind to endure all the contradictions
of sinners. When he was spit upon, mocked, reproached and scourged, none of all
these could draw one impatient expression from him. The malice and rage of his
enemies did not at all provoke him; unless D
it were to pity and pray for them. And that he did, with great earnestness in
the midst of all his pains: and though he would not plead for himself to them,
yet he pleads for them to God; Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do. How much more divine was this, than the admired Theramenes among the
Greeks, who being condemned to dye by the thirty Tyrants, when he was drinking
off his cup of Poison, said, he drank that to Critias, one of his most bitter
enemies, and hoped he would pledge it shortly. Socrates seemed not to express
seriousness enough at least, when he bid one of E
his friends, when he was dying, offer up a Cock to Aesculapius for his
deliverance. Aristides and Phocion among the Greeks came the nearest to our
Saviors temper, when one prayed, that his Country might have no cause to
remember him when he was gone, and the other charged his Son, to forget A
the injuries they had done him; but yet by how much the greater the person and
office was of our Blessed Savior, than of either of them, by how much the
cruelty and ignominy, as well as pain was greater which they exposed him to, by
how much greater concernment there is to have such an offense pardoned by one
that can punish it with eternal misery, than not revenged by those, who though
they may have will, have not always power to execute; so much greater was the
kindness of our Savior to his enemies, in his Prayer upon the Cross, than of
either of the other, in their concernment for B
that ungrateful City, that had so ill requited their services to it. Thus when
the Son of God was oppressed, and afflicted, Isa. 53. 7.
he opened not his mouth, but only in Prayer for them, who were his bitter
enemies; and though nothing had been more easy than for him to have cleared
himself from all their accusations, who had so often baffled them before; yet
he would not now give them that suspicion of his innocence, as to make any
Apology for himself; but committed himself to God that judges righteously, and
was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers was
dumb, so he C
opened not his mouth. And the reason thereof was, he knew what further design
for the good of mankind was carrying on by the bitterness of his passion, and
that all the cruel usage he underwent, was that he might be a sacrifice of
atonement so the sins of the World. Which leads to the last thing propounded to
our consideration.

4. Which is, the causes why God was pleased to suffer his Son to endure such
contradiction of sinners against himself. I know it is an easy answer to say,
that God had determined it should be so, and that we ought to enquire no
further: but D
sure such an answer can satisfy none who consider, how much our salvation
depends upon the knowledge of it, and how clear and express the Scripture is in
assigning the causes of the sufferings of Christ. Which though as far as the
instruments were concerned in it, we have given an account of already, yet
considering the particular management of this grand affair by the care of
divine Providence, a higher account must be given of it, why so divine and
excellent a person should be exposed to all the contempt and reproach
imaginable, and after being made a sacrifice to the tongues and rods of the E
people, then to dye a painful and ignominious death? So that allowing but that
common care of divine Providence, which all sober Heathens acknowledged, so
transcendent sufferings as these were, of so holy and innocent a person, ought
to be accounted for, in a more than ordinary manner; A
when they thought themselves concerned to vindicate the Justice of Gods
providence in the common calamities of those who are reputed to be better than
the generality of Mankind. But the reasons assigned in that common case will
not hold here, since this was a person immediately sent from God upon a
particular message to the World, and therefore might plead an exemption by
virtue of his Embassage from the common Arrests and troubles of humane nature.
But it was so far otherwise, as though God had designed him on purpose to let
us see how much misery humane nature can undergo. Some B
think themselves to go as far as their reason will permit them; when they tell
us, that he suffered all these things to confirm the truth of what he had said,
and particularly the Promise of Remission of sins, and that he might be an
example to others, who should go to Heaven by suffering afterward, and that he
might, being touched with the feeling of our infirmities here, have the greater
pity upon us now he is in Heaven. All these I grant to have been true and
weighty reasons of the sufferings of Christ, in subordination to greater ends,
but if there had been nothing beyond all this, I can neither understand why he
should C
suffer so deeply as he did, nor why the Scripture should insist upon a far
greater reason more than upon any of these? I grant, the death of Christ did
confirm the truth of his Doctrine, as far as it is unreasonble to believe that
any one who knew his Doctrine to be false, would make himself miserable to make
others believe it; but if this had been all intended, why would not an easier
and less ignominious death have served? since he who would be willing to die to
confirm a falsehood, would not be thought to confirm a truth by his death,
because it was painful and shameful. Why, if all his sufferings were D
designed as a testimony to others, of the truth of what he spoke, were the
greatest of his sufferings, such as none could know the anguish of them but
himself, I mean his Agony in the Garden, and that which made him cry out upon
the Cross: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why were not his Miracles
enough to confirm the truth of his Doctrine? since the Law of Moses was
received without his death, by the evidence his Miracles gave that he was sent
from God; since the Doctrine of remission of sins had been already delivered by
the Prophets, and received by the People of the Jews; E
since those who would not believe for his Miracles sake, neither would they
believe though they should have seen him rise from the Grave, and therefore not
surely because they saw him put into it. But of all things, the manner of our
Saviors sufferings seems least designed to bring the World to the A
belief of his Doctrine, which was the main obstacle to the entertainment of it
among the men of greatest reputation for wisdom and knowledge. For it was 1
Cor. 1. 23
Christ crucified, which was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness. Had the Apostles only preached that the Son of God had appeared
from Heaven, and discovered the only way to bring men thither, that he assumed
our Nature for a time to render himself capable of conversing with us, and
therein had wrought many strange and stupendous miracles, but after he had
sufficiently acquainted the World with the nature of B
his doctrine, he was again assumed up into Heaven; in all probability, the
doctrine might have been so easily received by the world, as might have saved
the lives of many thousand persons, who dyed as Martyrs for it. And if it had
been necessary that some must have dyed to confirm it, why must the Son of God
himself do it? when he had so many Disciples who willingly sacrificed their
lives for him, and whose death would on that account have been as great a
confirmation of the truth of it as his own. But if it be alleged further, Quod
caet^^a etiam foede^a c^so a^imali ali ^o s^ciri, and sa^g^i^^ ejus co^fir^ ari
solerent. Crell. c. Grot. ad cap. 1. p. 29.
that God now entering into a Covenant with man for the pardon of sin, C
the shedding of the blood of Christ was necessary as a federal rite to confirm
it. I answer, if only as a federal rite, why no cheaper blood would serve to
confirm it but that of the Son of God? We never read that any Covenant was
confirmed by the death of one of the contracting parties; and we cannot think
that God was so prodigal of the blood of his Son, to have it shed only in
allusion to some ancient customs. But if there were such a necessity of
alluding to them, why might not the blood of any other person have done it?
when yet all that custom was no more, but that a sacrifice should be offered,
and D
upon the parts of the sacrifice divided, they did solemnly swear and ratify
their Covenant. V. Hei^s. not. ad Sil. p. 9. 10.
And if this be yielded them, it then follows from this custom, that Christ
must be considered as a sacrifice in his death; and so the ratification of the
Covenant must be consequent to that oblation which he made of himself upon the
Cross. Besides, how incongruous must this needs be, that the death of Christ
the most innocent person in the World, without any respect to the guilt of sin,
should suffer so much on purpose to assure us, that God will pardon those who
are guilty of it? May we not much rather E
infer the contrary, considering the holiness and justice of Gods nature; if he
dealt so severely with the green tree, how much more will he with the dry? If
one so innocent suffered so much, what then may the guilty expect? If a Prince
should suffer the best subject he has, to be severely punished, could ever A
any imagine that it was with a design to assure them that he would pardon the
most rebellious? No; but would it not rather make men afraid of being too
innocent, for fear of suffering too much for it? And those who seem very
careful to pre^erve the honor of Gods Justice, in not punishing one for
another faults, ought likewise to maintain it in the punishing of one who had
no fault at all to answer for. And to think to escape this by saying, that to
such a person such things are calamities, but no punishments, is to revive the
ancient exploded Stoicism, which thought to reform the diseases of B
Mankind by mere changeing the names of things, though never so contrary to the
common sense of humane nature: which judges of the nature of punishments by the
evils men undergo, and the ends they are designed for. And by the very same
reason that God might exercise his dominion on so innocent a person as our
Savior was, without any respect to sin as the moving cause to it, he might lay
eternal torments on a most innocent Creature (for degrees and continuance do
not alter the reason of things) and then escape with the same evasion, that
this was no act of injustice in God, because it was C
a mere exercise of Dominion. And when once a sinner comes to be persuaded by
this that God will pardon him, it must be by the hopes that God will show
kindness to the guilty, because he shows so little to the innocent; and if this
be agreeable to the Justice and Holiness of Gods nature, it is hard to say what
is repugnant to it. If to this it be said, that Christ's consent made it no
unjust exercise of Dominion in God toward him: it is easily answered, that the
same consent will make it less injustice in God to lay the punishment of our
sins upon Christ, upon his undertaking to satisfy for as; for then the D
consent supposes a meritorious cause of punishment; but in this case the
consent implies none at all. And we are now enquiring into the reasons of such
sufferings, and consequently of such a consent; which cannot be imagined but
upon very weighty motives, such as might make it just in him to consent, as
well as in God to inflict.

Neither can it be thought that all the design of the sufferings of Christ, was
to give us an example and an encouragement to suffer our selves; though it does
so in a very great measure, as appears by the Text it self. For the hopes of an
eternal reward E
for these short and light afflictions, ought to be encouragement enough, to go
through the miseries of this life in expectation of a better to come. And the
Cloud of Witnesses, both under the Law and the Gospel, of those who have
suffered for righteousness sake, ought to make no one think it strange, A
if he must endure that, which so many have done before him, and been crowned
for it. And lastly, to question whether Christ could have pity enough upon us
in our sufferings, unless he had suffered so deeply himself; will lead men to
distrust the pity and compassion of Almighty God, because he was never capable
of suffering, as we do. But the Scripture is very plain and full (to all those
who rack not their minds to pervert it) in assigning a higher reason than all
these of the sufferings of Christ, viz. That 1 Pet. 3. 18.
Christ suffered for sins, the just for the unjust; that Isa. 53. 10.
his soul was made an offering for sin, and that the B
Lord therefore as on a sacrifice of atonement, V. 6.
laid on him the iniquities of us all: that, through the eternal Spirit, Heb.
9. 14. V. 27.
he offered himself without spot to God, and did appear to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself; that he was made a propitiation for our sins; that, 1
John 2. 2, 4, 10.
he laid down his life as a price of Redemption for Mankind; that, 1 Timothy 6. 2.
through his blood we obtain Redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, which in
a more particular manner is attributed 1 Cor. 6. 20.
to the blood of Christ, as the procuring cause of it. That he dyed Ephesians. 1. 7.
Col. 1. 14.
to reconcile God and us together; and that Romans 3. 24, 25.
the Ministry C
of Reconciliation, is founded Romans 5. 10.
on Gods making him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: and that we may not think that all this
Reconciliation respects us and not God; he is said 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.
to offer up himself to God; and for this cause to be a Mediator of the New
Testament, and Heb. 9. 14, 15.
to be a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people: Heb. 2. 17.
and every High Priest, taken from among men is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God; not appointed by God in things merely tending to the good of
men; which D
is rather the Office of a Prophet than a Priest. So that from 5. 1.
all these places it may easily appear, that the blood of Christ is to be
looked on as a sacrifice of Atonement for the sins of the World. Not as though
Christ did suffer the very same which we should have suffered, for that was
eternal death as the consequent of guilt in the person of the Offender, and
then the discharge must have been immediately consequent upon the payment, and
no room had been left for the freeness of remission, or for the conditions
required on our parts; But that God was pleased to accept of the death of his
Son, as a full, E
perfect, sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the
World; as our Church expresses it; and in consideration of the sufferings of
his Son, is pleased to offer pardon of sin upon sincere repentance, and eternal
life upon a ^y obedience to his will. Thus much for the things we are to
consider A
concerning the contradiction of sinners which Christ endured against himself.

Nothing now remains, but the influence that ought to have upon us, lest we be
weary and faint in our minds. For which end I shall suggest two things.

1. The vast disproportion between Christ's sufferings and ours. 2. The great
encouragement we have from his sufferings, to bear our own the better.
1. The vast Disproportion between Christ's sufferings and B
our own. Our lot is fallen into suffering times; and we are apt enough to
complain of it. I will not say it is wholly true of us, what the Moralist says
generally of the complaints of men, Non quia dura sed quia molles patimur; that
it is not the hardness of our conditions so much as the softness of our spirits
which makes us complain of them. For I must needs say, this City has smarted
by such a series and succession of judgments which few Cities in the world
could parallel in so short a time. The Plague has emptied its houses, and the
fire consumed them; the War exhausted our spirits, and it were well if Peace C
recovered them. But still these are but the common calamities of humane
nature, things that we ought to make account of in the World; and to grow the
better by them. And it were happy for this City; if our thankfulness and
obedience were but answerable to the mercies we yet enjoy: let us not make our
condition worse by our fears; nor our fears greater than they need to be: for
no enemy can be so bad as they. Thanks be to God our condition is much better
at present than it has been; let us not make it worse by fearing it may be so.
Complaints will never end till the World does; and we may imagine D
that will not last much longer; when the City thinks it has trade enough, and
the Country riches enough. But I will not go about to persuade you that your
condition is better than it is, for I know it is to no purpose to do so; all
men will believe as they feel. But suppose our condition were much worse than
it is; yet what were all our sufferings compared with those of our Savior for
us? the sins that make us smart, wounded him much deeper; they pierced his
side, which only touch our skin, we have no cause to complain of the bitterness
of that Cup which he has drunk off the dreggs of already. We lament E
over the ruins of a City, and are revived with any hopes of seeing it rise out
of the dust; but Christ saw the ruins that sin caused in all mankind, he
undertook the repairing them, and putting men into a better condition than
before: And we may easily think what a difficult task he had of it; when he
came A
to restore them who were delighted in their ruins, and thought themselves too
good to be mended. It is the comfort of our miseries, (if they be only in this
life) that we know they cannot last long; but that is the great aggravation of
our Saviors sufferings, that the contradiction of sinners continues against
him still. Witness, the Atheism, I cannot so properly call it, as the
Antichristianism of this present Age; wherein so many profane persons act over
again the part of the Scribes and Pharisees; they slight his Doctrine, despise
his Person, disparage his miracles, contemn his Precepts, and undervalue B
his Sufferings. Men live as if it were in defiance to his holy Laws; as though
they feared not what God can do, so much as to need a Mediator between him and
them. If ever men tread under foot the Son of God, it is when they think
themselves to be above the need of him; if ever they count the blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing, it is not only when they do not value it as they
ought, but when they exercise their profane wits upon it. Blessed Savior! was
it not enough for thee to bear the contradiction of sinners upon Earth; but
thou must still suffer so much at the hands of those whom thou dyedst for, that
C
thou might bring them to Heaven? was it not enough for thee to be betrayed
on Earth, but thou must be defied in Heaven? Was it not enough for thee to
stoop so low for our sakes, but that thou should be trampled on because thou
did it? was the ignominious death upon the Cross too small a thing for thee
to suffer in thy Person, unless thy Religion be contemned, and exposed to as
much shame and mockery as thy self was? Unhappy we, that live to hear of such
things! but much more unhappy if any of our sins have been the occasion of
them: If our unsuitable lives to the Gospel have opened the mouths of D
any against so excellent a Religion. If any malice and revenge, any humor and
peevishness, any pride or hypocrisy, any sensuality and voluptuousness, any
injustice, or too much love of gain, have made others despise that Religion
which so many pretend to, and so few practice. If we have been in any measure
guilty of this, as we love our Religion, and the honor of our Savior, let us
endeavor by the holiness and meekness of our spirits, the temperance and
justice of our actions, the patience and contentedness of our minds, to recover
the honor of that Religion which only can make us happy, and our E
Posterity after us.

2. What Encouragement we have from the sufferings of Christ, to bear our own
the better; because we see by his example that God deals no more hardly with
us, than he did with his own Son, if he lays heavy things upon us. Why should
we A
think to escape, when his own Son underwent so much? if we meet with
reproaches, and ill usage, with hard measure, and a mean condition, with
injuries and violence, with mockings and affronts, nay with a shameful and a
painful death, what cause have we to complain, for did not the Son of God
undergo all these things before us? If any of your Habitations have been
consumed, that you have been put to your shifts where to lodge your selves, or
your Families; consider, that Mat. 8. 20.
though the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, yet the Son
of Man had not whereon to lay his head. If your condition B
be mean and low, think of him, Phil. 2. 6, 7.
who being in the form of God, took upon him the form of a servant; and 2 Cor.
8. 9.
though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that through his
poverty ye might be made rich. If you are unjustly defamed and reproached,
consider what contumelies and disgraces the Son of God underwent for you. If
you are in pain and trouble, think of his Agony and bloody sweat, the nailing
of his hands and feet to the Cross, to be a sacrifice for the expiation of your
sins. Never think much of undergoing any thing, whereby Romans 8. 29.
you may be conformable to the Image of the Son of God, knowing C
this, V. 17.
that if ye suffer with him, ye shall also be glorified together. And you have
never yet set a true estimate and value upon things, if you V. 18.
reckon the sufferings of this present. life worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed. Which Glory ought always to bear up our minds
under our greatest afflictions here; and the thoughts of that, will easily
bring us to the thoughts of his sufferings, who Heb. 9. 12.
by his own blood purchased an eternal redemption for us. Therefore, consider
him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be
weary, and faint in your minds. D


E
SERMON VII. Ser. VII.
A
B
Preached before the KING, JANUARY 30. 1668/9. C

JUDE V. II. And perished in the gainsaying of Corah.
AMong all the dismal consequences of that D
fatal day wherein the Honor of our Nation suffered together with our Martyred
Sovereign, there is none which in this Place we ought to be more concerned for,
than the Dishonor which was done to Religion by it. For if those things which E
were then acted among us, had been done among the most rude and barbarous
Nations, though that had been enough to have made them for ever thought so; yet
they might have been imputed to their ignorance in matters of Civility and
Religion: but when they were committed not A
only by men who were called Christians, but under a pretense of a mighty zeal
for their Religion too, men will either think that Religion had, which did give
encouragement to such actions, or those persons extremely wicked, who could
make use of a pretense of it for things so contrary to its nature and design.
And on which of these two the blame will fall, may be soon discovered, when we
consider that the Christian Religion, above all others, has taken care to
preserve the Rights of Sovereignty, by Mat 22. 21.
giving unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to make resistance
unlawful by declaring B
Romans 132.
that those who are guilty of it shall receive to themselves damnation. But as
though bare resistance had been too mean and low a thing for them
(notwithstanding what Christ and his Apostles had said) to show themselves to
be Christians of a higher rank than others; they imbrue their hands in the
blood of their Sovereign for a demonstration of their Piety, by the same figure
by which they had destroyed men's Rights to defend their Liberties, and fought
against the King for preservation of his Person. But the actions of such men
could not have been so bad as they were; unless their pretenses C
had been so great, for there can be no higher aggravation of a wicked action,
than for men to seem to be Religious in the doing of it. If the Devil himself
were to preach sedition to the world, he would never appear otherwise than as
an Angel of Light: his pretense would be Unity, when he designed the greatest
Divisions; and the preservation of Authority, when he laid the seeds of
Rebellion. But we might as well imagine that the God of this world (as the
Devil is sometime called) should advance nothing but Peace and Holiness in it,
as that Christianity should give the least countenance D
to what is contrary to either of them. Yet the wickedness of men has been so
great upon earth, as to call down Heaven it self to justify their impieties,
and when they have found themselves unable to bear the burden of them, they
would sain make Religion do it.

Such as these we have a description of in this short, but smart Epistle, viz.
men who pretended inspirations and impulses for the greatest villainies; who
believed it a part of their Saintship to despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities; who thought the Grace of God signified very little, unless it served
to justify E
their most wicked actions. These in all probability were the followers of
Simon Magus the Leviathan of the Primitive Church, (...). Epiphan. haeres. 27.
p. 105. ed. Petav.
who destroyed all the natural differences of good and evil, (...). Epiph.
haer. s. 24 (...). 5. (...). 72.
and made it lawful for men in case of A
persecution, to forswear their Religion. (...). Theo^oret. haeret. sab. l. 1.
p. ^93.
The great part of his Doctrine being that his Disciples need not be afraid of
the terrors of the Law, for they were free to do what they pleased themselves,
because Salvation was not to be expected by good works, but only by the Grace
of God: No wonder then, that such as these did turn the Grace of God into
lasciviousness: And when it proved dangerous not to do it, would deny their
Religion to save themselves. For they had so high opinions of themselves, that
they were the only Saints, that as (...). Epiph. her. 24. sect. 5.
Epiphanius tells us, they thought it the casting Pearls before Swine, B
to expose themselves to danger before the Heathen Governors; by which they
not only discovered what a mighty value they set upon themselves, but what mean
and contemptible thoughts they had of that Authority which God had established
in the world.

But this they would by no means allow, for they thought C
all the Governments of the world to be nothing else Ad ^atem ergo g^ntiu^n,
t^m regnum positum est a ^o: sed not a Diatolo, qui nunquam omnino ^^i^tus est,
immo ui acc i^sas quid m g^^te^ (...) i^ tra^quil^o a^ere. Iren. advers. haer.
l. 5. c 24
but the contrivance of some evil spirits to abridge men of that liberty which
God and nature had given them: And this is that speaking evil of Dignities
which they are charged with, not only by our Apostle here, but by St. Peter
before him. Although the phrase used by 2 Pe^ 2 10.
St. Peter, (...) may be taken (by the use of the word (...) in the first of 1
Mac. 2. 6.
Maccabees) not for the bare contempt of Authority, expressed by reviling
language, but for an open resistance of it; which the D
other is so natural an introduction to, that those who think and speak
contemptibly of Government, do but want an occasion to manifest that their
actions would he as bad as their thoughts and expressions are. And from hence
(...) here in the words of the Text is made use of to express one of the most
remarkable seditions we ever read of: viz. that of Corah and his Company
against Moses and Aaron; whose punishment for it did not deter these persons
who went under the name of Christian, from joining in seditious practices to
the great dishonor of Christianity, and their own ruin. For E
therefore the Apostle denounces a Woe against them in the beginning of the
verse, and speaks of their ruin as certain as if they had been consumed by
fire, or swallowed up by the earth, as Corah and his accomplices were; And they
perished in the gainsaying of Corah. In the verb (...), the Aorist, says A
Grotius, is taken for the future, or present, and so implying that these
courses did tend to their misery and ruin, and would unavoidably bring it upon
them. If the evidence in history had been clear of the Carpocratians joining
with the Jews in the famous rebellion of Barchochebas, wherein such multitudes
of Christians as well as Heathens were destroyed in Africa, Egypt, and other
places, and the time of it had agreed with the time V. David Ca^^. C^ol. p. 101.
of writing this Epistle, I should then have thought that this had been the
Rebellion here spoken of; for all the Actors in it were destroyed by the Roman
Power, and some of the chief B
of them made public examples of Justice for the deterring of others from the
like practices. But however this be, we find these persons here charged with a
sin of the same nature, with the gainsaying of Core, and a judgment of the
same nature, as the consequent of the sin; for they perished in the gainsaying,
etc. And therefore we shall consider the words.

1. As relating to the fact of Corah and his company. 2. As implying as great
displeasure of God under the Gospel against the same kind of sin, as he
discovered in the C
immediate destruction of those persons who were then guilty of it.
1. As relating to the fact of Corah and his company; and so the words lead us
to the handling.

1. The nature of the Faction which was raised by them. 2. The Judgment that
was inflicted upon them for it.
1. For understanding the nature of the Faction, we must enquire into the
design that was laid, the persons who were engaged in it, the pretenses that
were made use of for it.

1. The design that was laid for that, and all other circumstances D
of the story, we must have resort to the account that is given of it, Numb.
16. Where we shall find that the bottom of the design was the sharing of the
Government among themselves, which it was impossible for them to hope for, as
long as Moses continued as a King in Iesurun, for so he is called, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
Him therefore they intend to lay aside, but this they knew to be a very
difficult task, considering what wonders God had wrought by him in their
deliverance out of Egypt, what wisdom he had hitherto showed in the conduct of
them, what care for their preservation, what integrity E
in the management of his power, what reverence the people did bear toward
him, and what solemn vows and promises they had made of obedience to him. But
ambitious and factious men are never discouraged by such an appearance of
difficulties; for they know they must address themselves to the people, and in
the first place persuade them that they manage A
their interest against the usurpation of their Governors. For by that means
they gain upon the peoples affections, who are ready to cry them up presently
as the true Patriols and defenders of their Liberties against the encroachment
of Princes: and when they have thus insinuated themselves into the good opinion
of the people; groundless suspicions, and unreasonable fears and jealousies
will pass for arguments and demonstrations. Then they who can invent the most
popular lies against the Government are accounted the men of integrity, and
they B
who most diligently spread the most infamous reports, are the men of honesty,
because they are farthest from being Flatterers of the Court. The people take a
strange pride, as well as pleasure, in hearing and telling all the faults of
their Governors; for in doing so they flatter themselves in thinking they
deserve to rule much better than those which do it. And the willingness they
have to think so of themselves, makes them misconstrue all the actions of their
Superiors to the worse sense, and then they find out plots in every thing,
upon the people. What ever is done for the necessary maintenance of C
Government, is suspected to be a design merely to exhaust the people to make
them more unable to resist. If good Laws be made, these are said by factious
men to be only intended for snares for the good people, but others may break
them and go unpunished. If Government be strict and severe, then it is cruel
and tyrannical, if mild and indulgent, then it is remiss and negligent. If Laws
be executed, then the peoples Liberties be oppressed; if not, then it were
better not to make Laws, than not to see them executed. If there be Wars, the
people are undone by Taxes; if there be Peace, they are undone D
by Plenty. If extraordinary Judgments befall them, then they lament the sins
of their Governors, and of the Times, and scarce think of their own. If
miscarriages happen (as it is impossible always to prevent them) they charge
the form of Government with them, which all sorts are subject to. Nay, it is
seldom that Governors escape with their own faults, the peoples are often laid
upon them too. So here, Numb. 16. 14. Moses is charged with not carrying them
into Canaan, when it was their own sins which kept them thence. Yea, so partial
have the people generally been against their E
Rulers, when swayed by the power of Faction, that this has made Government
very difficult and unpleasing; for what ever the actions of Princes are, they
are liable to the censures of the people. Their bad actions being more public,
and their good therefore suspected of design; and the A
wiser Governors are, the more jealous the people are of them. For always the
weakest part of mankind are the most suspicious; the less they understand
things, the more designs they imagine are laid for them, and the best counsels
are the soonest rejected by them. So that the wisest Government can never be
secure from the jealousies of the people, and they that will raise a faction
against it will never want a party to side with them. For when could we ever
have imagined a Government more likely to be free from this, than that which
Moses had over the people of Israel? He being an extraordinary person B
for all the abilities of Government; one bred up in the Egyptian Court, and in
no mean degree of honor, being called the the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, one of
great experience in the management of affairs, of great zeal for the good of
his Country, as appeared by the tenderness of his peoples interest in their
deliverance out of Egypt; one of great temper and meekness
above all men of the earth; one who took all imaginable care for the good
establishment of Laws among them; but above all these one particularly chosen
by God for this end, and therefore furnished with all the requisites of a good
man, C
and an excellent Prince: yet for all these things a dangerous sedition is here
raised against him, and that upon the common grounds of such things, viz.
usurpation upon the peoples rights, arbitrary Government, and ill management of
affairs; Usurpation upon the peoples rights, v. 4. the Faction makes a
Remonstrance asserting the privileges of the people against Moses and Aaron,
Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy every one of
them, and the Lord is among them; Wherefore then lift you up your selves above
the Congregation of the Lord: As though they had said, we appear D
only in behalf of the Fundamental Liberties of the people both Civil and
Spiritual; we only seek to retrench the exorbitances of power, and some late
innovations which have been among us; if you are content to lay aside your
power which is so dangerous and offensive to Gods holy people, we shall then
sit down in quietness; for alas it is not for our selves that we seek these
things (what are we?) but the cause of Gods people is dearer to us than our
lives, and we shall willingly sacrifice them in so good a Cause. And when Moses
afterward sends for the Sons of Eliah to come to him, they peremptorily E
refuse all Messages of Peace, and with their V. 12, 13
men of the sword mentioned, v. 2. They make votes of non-Addresses, and break
off all Treaties with him, and declare these for their reasons, that he did
dominando dominari, as some render it, exercise an arbritary and tyrannical
power over the people, A
that he was guilty of breach of the trust committed to him, for he promised V.
14.
to bring them into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, or give them
inheritance of fields and vineyards, but he had not done it, and instead of
that only, deceives the people still with fair promises, and so puts out their
eyes that they cannot see into the depth of his designs. So that now by the ill
management of his Trust, the power was again devolved into the hands of the
people, and they ought to take account of his actions. By which we see the
design was under very fair and popular pretenses to divest Moses B
of his Government, and then they doubted not but such zealous Patriots as they
had showed themselves, should come to have the greatest share in it; but this
which they most aimed at, must appear least in view, and only Necessity and
Providence must seem to cast that upon them, which was the first true motive
they had to rebel against Moses and Aaron.

2. The Persons who were engaged in it. At first they were only some
discontented Levites who murmured against Moses and Aaron, because they were
not preferred to the C
Priesthood, and of these Corah was the chief. R. Solomon observes, that the
reason of Corahs discontent, was, that Elizaphan the Son of Uzziel, of the
younger house to Izhar from whom Corah descended, was preferred before him by
Moses to be Prince over the Sons of Numb. 3. 30.
Kohath. Corah being active and busy in his discontents, had the opportunity
of drawing in some of the Sons of Reuben, for they pitched their tents near
each other, Number 2. 10. 3. 29.
both on the South side of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and these were
discontented on the account of their Tribe having lost the privilege of
Promogeniture. Thus what D
ever the pretenses are, how fair and popular soever in the opposition men make
to Authority, ambition and private discontents are the true beginners of them:
but these must be covered over with the deepest dissimulation, with most
vehement Protestations to the contrary, nothing must be talked of but a mighty
zeal for Religion, and the public Interest. So Joseph. a^ti^. I^d. l. 4.
(...). 2.
Josephus tells us concerning Corah, that while he carried on his own ambitious
designs, with all the arts of sedition and a popular eloquence, insinuating
into the peoples minds strange suggestions against Moses his Government, as
being a mere politic E
design of his to enslave the people of God, and advance his own family and
interest, (...), he would seem to regard nothing but the public good. If fair
pretenses, and glorious titles will serve to cheat the people into their own
miseries, and the sad effects of Rebellion; they A
shall never want those who will enslave them for the sake of Liberty, undo
them for the public good, and destroy them with designs of Reformation. For
nothing is more popular than Rebellion in the beginning; nothing less in the
issue of it. And the only true reason that it is ever so, is from the want of
wisdom and judgment in the generality of mankind, who seldom see to the end of
things, and hardly distinguish between the names and nature of them, till their
own dear bought experience has taught them the difference. Sedition is of the
nature, and has the inseparable properties of Sin; for it is B
conceived with pleasure, brought forth with pain, and ends in death and
misery. Nothing enters upon the stage with a braver show and appearance, but
however prosperous for a time it may continue, it commonly meets with a fatal
end. But it is with this sin as to this world, as it is with others as to the
next; men when they are betrayed into them, are carried away and transported
with the pleasing temptations, not considering the unspeakable misery that
follows after them. So that what the Devils advantage is in order to the ruin
of men's souls, is the advantage of seditious persons over the less
understanding C
people; they both tempt with an appearance of good, and equally deceive them
which hearken to them. But as we still find, that notwithstanding all the grave
admonitions, the sober counsels, the rational discourses, the persuasive
arguments which are used to deter men from the practice of sin, they will still
be such Fools to yield to the Devils temptations against their own welfare: So,
neither the blessings of a continued Peace, nor the miseries of an intestine
War, neither the security of a settled Government, nor the constant danger of
Innovations will hinder men of fiery and restless spirits from D
raising combustions in a Nation, though themselves perish in the Flames of
them. This we find here was the case of Corah and his company; they had
forgotten the groans of their captivity in Egypt, and the miracles of their
deliverance out of it, and all the faithful services of Moses, and Aaron; they
considered not the difficulties of Government, nor the impossibility of
satisfying the ambitious desires of all pretenders; they regarded not that God
from whom their power was derived, nor the account they must give to him for
their resistance of it: nothing but a full Revenge upon the Government can
satisfy E
them, by leaving no means unattempted for its overthrow, though themselves be
consumed by the fall of it. It were happy for Government if these turbulent
spirits could be singled out from the rest in their first attempts; but that is
the usual subtilty of such men, when they find themselves aimed at, they A
run into the common herd, and persuade the people that they are equally
concerned with themselves in the present danger, that though the pretense be
only against faction and sedition, the design is the slavery and oppression of
the People. This they manage at first by grave nods, and secret whispers, by
deep sighs, and extatick motions, by far fetched discourses, and Tragical
stories, till they find the people capable of receiving their impressions, and
then seem most unwilling to mention that which it was at first their design to
discover. By such arts as these Corah had prepared, as Ios^^h a^ti^. l. 4. c. 2.
Josephus tells B
us, almost the whole Camp of Israel for a popular tumult, so that they were
like to have stoned Moses before he was aware of it; and it seems the Faction
had gained a mighty interest among the people, when although God so severely
and remarkably punished the heads of it, yet the very next day all the
Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron,
saying, Numb. 16. 41.
Te have killed the people of the Lord. What a mark of Gods people was sedition
grown among them! When these men were accounted Saints in spite of Heaven, and
Martyrs, though God himself destroyed them. They C
were men who were only sanctified by Rebellion: and showed no other fruits of
their piety but disobedience to Authority. But the danger had not been so
great, how loud soever the complaints had been, if only the ruder multitude had
been gained to the Favor of Corah and his party: for these wanted heads to
manage them, and some Countenance of Authority to appear under; and for this
purpose they had drawn to their Faction 250 Princes of the Assembly, V. 2.
famous in the Congregation, men of Renown, i. e. Members of the great Council
of the Nation. Whom Moses was wont to call and D
advise with about the public Affairs of it; such who sat in Comitiis
Senatorum, as Paul. Fagius tells us, therefore said to be (...) such as were
called to the great Assembly which sat in Numb. 10. 2.
Parliament at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, which was the
place where they met together. These were the Heads of the Tribes, and the
Captains of thousands, and the men of the greatest Fame and Authority among the
People whom Moses assembled together for advice and counsel, as often as he saw
just occasion for it. And as far as I can find were distinct from the great
Sanhedrin, E
which seemed to be rather a constant Court of Judicature which sat to receive
Appeals from Inferior Courts, and to determine such difficult causes which
were reserved peculiarly for it, as about Apostasy of a whole Tribe, the case
of false Prophets, and the like. But these 250 men did far exceed the whole A
number of the Sanhedrin; and the Heads of the Tribes, and the Elders of Israel
were summoned together upon any very weighty occasion, by Moses both before and
after the institution of the Sanhedrin. And now since the Faction had gained so
great strength by the accession of so great a number of the most leading men
among the People, we may expect they should soon declare their intentions, and
publish the grounds of their entering into such a combination against Moses.

3. Which is the next thing to be spoken to, viz. the colors and pretenses
under which these persons sought to justify the B
proceedings of the Faction. Which were these two,

1. The asserting the Rights and Liberties of the people in opposition to the
Government of Moses. 2. The freeing themselves from the encroachments upon
their spiritual Privileges, which were made by the Usurpations of Aaron and
the Priesthood.
1. The asserting the Rights and Liberties of the people in opposition to the
Government of Moses. Numb 6. 13.
Is it a small thing, say they, that thou have brought us up out of a Land that
flows with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except C
thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us? And before, their charge was,
V. 3.
that Moses and Aaron took too much upon them, in lifting up themselves above
the Congregation of the Lord. Which Joseph. l. 4. 1, 2.
Josephus more at large explains, telling us that the great accusation of Moses
was, that out of his ambition and affectation of Power, he had taken upon
himself the Government of the people without their consent, that he made use of
his pretense of Familiarity with God only for a Politic end, that by this
means he debarred the people of that Liberty which God had given them, and no
man ought to D
take from them, that they were all a (...). Ioseph^^ A^^. l. 4. c. 2. p. 104.
Freeborn people, and equally the Children of Abraham, and therefore there was
no reason they should depend upon the will of a single Person, who by his
Politic Arts had brought them to the greatest necessities, that he might rule
them the better; Wherefore Corah, as though he had been already President of a
High-Court of Justice upon Moses their King, determines, that it was necessary
for the Commonwealth, that such enemies to the Public Interest should be
discovered and punished; lest if they be let alone in their Usurpations of
Power, they declare themselves E
open enemies when it will be too late to oppose them. There were then two
great Principles among them by which they thought to defend themselves.

1. That Liberty and a right to Power is so inherent in the A
People, that it cannot be taken from them. 2. That in case of Usurpation upon
that Liberty of the people, they may resume the exercise of Power, by punishing
those who are guilty of it.
1. That Liberty, and a right to Power, is inseparable from the people;
libertatis patrocinium suscipiunt, says Calvin, upon Corah and his company;
and I believe they will be found to be the first assertors of this kind of
Liberty that ever were in the world. And happy had it been for us in this
Nation, if Corah had never found any Disciples in it. For what B
a blessed Liberty was this which Corah aimed at, viz. to change one excellent
Prince, as Moses was, for 250 Tyrants, besides Corah and the Sons of Reuben?
What just and equal liberty was it which Moses did deprive them of? It was only
the Liberty of destroying themselves, which all the power he he had could
hardly keep them from. Could there be any greater Liberty than delivering them
out of the house of bondage? and was not Moses the great Instrument in
effecting it? Could there be greater Liberty than for their whole Nation to be
preserved from all the designs of their enemies, to enjoy C
their own Laws, and matters of Justice to be duly administered among them? and
had they not all these under the Governof Moses? What means then this outcry
for Liberty? Is it that they would have had no Government at all among them,
but that every one might have done what he pleased himself? This indeed were a
desirable Liberty, if a man could have it alone: but when every one thinks
that he is but one, though he be free; and every one else is as free as he, but
though their freedom be equal to his, his Power is not equal to theirs; and
therefore to bring things to a more just proportion, every D
one must part with some power for a great deal of security. If any man can
imagine himself in such a state of confusion, which some improperly call a
state of nature; let him consider, whether the contentment he could take in his
own liberty and power to defend himself, would balance the fears he would have
of the injury which others in the same state might be able to do him. Not that
I think mere fear made men at first enter into Societies, for there is a
natural inclination in mankind to it, and one of the greatest pleasures of
humane life lies in the enjoyment of it. But what other considerations E
incline men to, fear makes reasonable, though men part with some supposed
liberty for the enjoyment of it. So that the utmost liberty is destroyed by the
very nature of Government, and nothing can be more unreasonable than for men to
quarrel with Government for that, which they cannot enjoy and the A
preservation of themselves together. Which alone makes the desire of Power
reasonable, and if the preservation of our selves in our rights and properties
may be had without it, all that the want of Liberty signifies, is, that men
have all the conveniences of Power without the trouble and the cares of it. And
if this be not a more desirable Liberty than the other, let any rational man
judge. The pretense of Liberty then in this sense against Government, is, that
men are Fools in taking the best care to preserve themselves, that Laws are but
instruments of Slavery, and every single man is better able to defend himself, B
than the united strength of a people in Society is to defend him. And this
kind of Liberty we may justly think will be desired by none but madmen, and
beasts of prey. It follows then, that what Liberty is inconsistent with all
Government, must never be pleaded against any one sort of it. But is there then
so great a degree of Liberty in one mode of Government more than another, that
it should be thought reasonable to disturb Government, merely to alter the form
of it? Would it have been so much better for the people of Israel to have been
governed by the 250 men here mentioned, than by Moses? C
Would not they have required the same subjection and obedience to themselves,
though their commands had been much more unreasonable than his? What security
can there be that every one of these shall not be worse in all respects than
him whom they were so willing to lay aside; and if one be thought troublesome,
what Liberty and ease is there when their name is Legion? So that the folly of
these popular pretenses is as great as the sin in being persuaded by them.

And it may be they have not thought amiss who have attributed a great part of
that disturbance of the Peace of Kingdoms, D
under a pretense of popular Government, to an unjust admiration of those Greek
and Roman Writers, who have unreasonably set up Liberty in opposition to
Monarchy. But some of the wisest of them have given us a truer account of these
things, and have told us, that it was impossible the Roman State could have
been preserved longer, unless it had submitted to an Dio. Romans hist. l. 54.
Imperial Power; for the popular heats and factions were so great, that the
annual election of Magistrates, was but another name for a tumult; and as Dio
goes on L. 44. init.
the name of popular Government is far more plausible, but the E
benefits of Monarchy are far greater; it being much easier to find one good
than many; and though one be accounted difficult, the other is almost
impossible. And as he elsewhere well observes, the flourishing of a
Commonwealth depends upon its poverty; that being alone able to unite the
minds of the Governors, who in a plentiful state, not set about with enemies, A
will be grasping at their own private interests, and fall naturally from
thence into divisions and animosities; but the flourishing of the Monarchy lies
in the riches of it, the Prince and the People having the same interest, and
being rich or poor together. So that we see the notion of Liberty, and exercise
of power in Government, is so far from being an inseparable property of the
people, that the proper notion of it is inconsistent with Government and that
which lies in the enjoyments of our Rights and Properties, is so far from being
inconsistent with B
Monarchy, that they are more advanced by that, than by any other way of
Government.

2. Another principle which tends to the subverting Government under a pretense
of Liberty, is, that in case of Usurpation upon the Rights of the People, they
may resume the exercise of Power, and punish the Supreme Magistrate himself, if
he be guilty of it. Than which there can be no principle imagined more
destructive to civil Societies, and repugnant to the very nature of Government.
For it destroys all the obligations of Oaths and Compacts; it makes the
solemnest C
bonds of obedience signify nothing when the pleople shall think fit to
declare it: it makes every prosperous Rebellion just; for no doubt when the
power is in the Rebels hands, they will justify themselves, and condemn their
Sovereign. (And if Corah, Dathan and Abiram had succeeded in their Rebellion
against Moses, no doubt they would have been called the Keepers of the
Liberties of Israel.) It makes all Government dangerous to the persons in whom
it is, considering the unavoidable infirmities, of it, and the readiness of
people to misconstrue the actions of their Princes, and their incapacity D
to judge of them; it not being fit that the reasons of all counsels of Princes
should be divulged by Proclamations. So that there can be nothing wanting to
make Princes miserable, but that the people want Power to make them so. And the
supposition of this principle will unavoidably keep up a constant jealousy
between the Prince and his people: for if he knows their minds, he will think
it reasonable to secure himself by all means against their Power, and endeavor
to keep them as unable to resist as may be: whereby all mutual confidence
between a Prince and his People will be destroyed: and E
there can be no such way to bring in an arbitrary Government into a Nation, as
that which such men pretend, to be the only means to keep it out. Besides, this
must necessarily engage a Nation in endless disputes about the forfeiture of
Power into whose hands it falls: whether into the people in common, or A
some persons particularly chosen by the people for that purpose: for in an
established Government according to their principles, the King himself is the
true representative of the people; others may be chosen for some particular
purposes, as proposing Laws, etc. but these cannot pretend by virtue of that
choice, to have the full power of the people; and withal, whatever they do
against the consent of the people is unlawful; and their power is forfeited by
attempting it.

But on the other side, what mighty danger can there be in supposing the
persons of Princes to be so sacred, that no sons B
of violence ought to come near to hurt them? Have not all the ancient Kingdoms
and Empires of the world flourished under the supposition of an unaccountable
power in Princes? That has been thought by those who did not own a derivation
of their power from God, but a just security to their persons, considering the
hazards, and the care of Government which they undergo? Have not the people who
have been most jealous of their Liberties, been fain to have recour'e to an
unaccountable power, as their last refuge in case of their greatest
necessities? I mean the Romans in their Dictators. And if it were C
thought not only reasonable, but necessary then, ought it not to be preserved
inviolable, where the same Laws do give it by which men have any right to
challenge any power at all? Neither does this give Princes the liberty to do
what they list; for the Laws by which they Govern, do fence in the rights and
properties of men; and Princes do find so great convenience ease and security
in their Government by Law, that the sense of that will keep them far better
within the compass of Laws, than the Peoples holding a Rod over them, which the
best Princes are like to suffer the most by, and bad will but grow desperate by
D
it. Good Princes will never need such a curb, because their oaths and
promises, their love and tenderness toward their people, the sense they have
of a Power infinitely greater than theirs, to which they must give an account
of all their actions, will make them govern as the Fathers of their Country;
and bad Princes will never value it, but will endeavor by all possible means
to secure themselves against it. So that no inconveniency can be possibly so
great on the supposition of this unaccountable Power in Sovereign Princes,
taking it in the general, and merely on the account of reason, as the
unavoidable E
mischiefs of that Hypothests, which places all power originally in the people,
and notwithstanding all oaths and bonds whatsoever to obedience gives them the
liberty to resume it when they please: which will always be when that Spirit of
Faction and Sedition shall prevail among them, which ruled A
here in Corah and his company.

2. Another pretense for this Rebellion of Corah, was, the freeing themselves
from the encroachments upon their spiritual privileges which were made by the
usurpations of Aaron and the Priesthood. This served for a very popular
pretense, for they knew no reason that one Tribe should engross so much of the
wealth of the Nation to themselves, and have nothing to do but to attend the
service of God for it. What, say they, are not all the Lords people holy? Why
may not then all they offer up incense to the Lord, as well as the Sons of
Aaron? B
How many public uses might those Revenues serve for, which are now to
maintain Aaron, and all the sons of Levi? But if there must be some to attend
the service of God, why may not the meanest of the people serve for that
purpose, those who can be serviceable for nothing else? Why must there be an
order of Priesthood distinct from that of Levites? why a High Priest above all
the Priests? what is there in all their office which one of the common people
may not do as well as they? cannot they slay the sacrifices, and offer incense,
and do all other parts of the Priestly office? So that at last they make all C
this to be a Politic design of Moses only to advance his own Family by making
his Brother High Priest, and to have all the Priests and Levites at his
devotion, to keep the people the better in awe. This has always been the
quarrel at Religion, by those who seldom pretend to it, but with a design to
destroy it. For who would ever have minded the constant attendance at the
Temple, if no encouragements had been given to those who were employed in it?
Or is not Religion apt enough to be despised of it self, by men of profane
minds, unless it be rendered more mean and contemptible by the Poverty of those D
who are devoted to it? Shall not God be allowed the privilege of every Master
of a Family, to appoint the ranks and orders of his own servants, and to take
care they be provided for, as becomes those who wait upon him? What a dishonor
had this been to the true God, when those who worshipped false Gods thought
nothing too great for those who were employed in the service of them? But never
any yet cried, but he that had a mind to betray his Master, to what purpose is
all this waste? Let God be honored as he ought to be, let Religion come in for
its share among all the things which deserve encouragement, E
and those who are employed in the offices of it, enjoy but what God, and
Reason, and the Laws of their Country give them, and then we shall see it was
nothing, but the discontent and faction of Corah and his company which made any
encroachment of Aaron and the Priesthood any pretense A
for Rebellion.

But all these pretenses would not serve to make them escape the severe hand of
divine justice; for in an extraordinary and remarkable manner he made them
suffer the just desert of their sin, for they perished in their contradiction,
which is the next thing to be considered, viz.

2. The Judgment which was inflicted upon them for it. They had provoked
Heaven by their sin, and disturbed the earth by their Faction; and the earth,
as if it were moved with indignation against them, trembled and shook, as
Josephus B
says, like waves that are tossed with a mighty wind, and then with a horrid
noise it rends asunder, and opens its mouth to swallow those in its bowels who
were unfit to live upon the face of it. They had been dividing the people, and
the earth to their amazement and ruin divides it self under their feet, as
though it had been designed on purpose, that in their punishment themselves
might feel, and others see the mischief of their sin. Their seditious
principles seemed to have infected the ground they stood upon; the earth of a
sudden proves as unquiet and troublesome as they; but to rebuke their madness,
it was C
only in obedience to him who made it the executioner of his wrath against
them; and when it had done its office, it is said, Numb. 16. 33.
that the earth closed upon them; and they perished from among the
Congregation. Thus the earth having revenged it self against the disturbers of
its peace, Heaven presently appears with a flaming fire, taking vengeance upon
the 250. men, who in opposition to V. 35.
Aaron, had usurped the Priestl office, in offering incense before the Lord.
Such a Fire, if we believe the same Historian, which far outwent the most
dreadful eruptions of Aetna or Vesuvius, which neither the art of D
man, nor the power of the wind could raise, which neither the burning of Woods
nor Cities could parallel; but such a Fire which the wrath of God alone could
kindle, whose light could be outdone by nothing but the heat of it. Thus Heaven
and Earth agree in the punishment of such disturbers of Government, and God by
this remarkable judgment upon them has left it upon record to all ages, that
all the world may be convinced how displeasing to him the sin of faction and
sedition is. For God takes all this that was done against Moses and Aaron, as
done against himself. For they are said to be gathered E
together against the Lord, v. 11. to provoke the Lord, v. 30. And the fire is
said to come out from the Lord: v. 35. And afterward it is said of them; Namb.
16. 9.
This is that Dathan and Abiram, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in
the company of Corah, when they strove against the Lord. By A
which we see God interprets striving against the Authority appointed by him,
to be a striving against himself. God looks upon himself as immediately
concerned in the Government of the world; for by him Princes reign, and they
are his Vicegerents upon earth; and they who resist, resist not a mere
appointment of the people, but Romans 13. 1, 2.
an Ordinance of God; and they who do so shall in the mildest sense receive a
severe punishment from him. Let the pretenses be never so popular, the persons
never so great and famous; nay, though they were of the great Council of the
Nation, yet we see God does not B
abate of his severity upon any of these considerations.

This was the first formed sedition that we read of against Moses, the people
had been murmuring before, but they wanted heads to manage them: Now all things
concur to a most dangerous Rebellion upon the most popular pretenses of
Religion and Liberty; and now God takes the first opportunity of declaring his
hatred of such actions; that others might hear, and fear, and do no more so
presumptuously. This has been the usual method of divine Judgments; the first
of the kind has been most remarkably punished in this life, that C
by it they may see how hateful such things are to God; but if men will venture
upon them notwithstanding, God does not always punish them so much in this
world, (though he sometimes does) but reserves them, without repentance, to his
Justice in the world to come. The first man that sinned was made an example of
Gods Justice; The first world; the first public attempt against Heaven at
Babel after the plantation of the world again; the first Cities which were so
generally corrupted after the flood; the first breaker of the Sabbath after the
Law; the first offerers with strange fire; the first lookers into the D
Ark, and here the first popular Rebellion and Usurpers of the office of
Priesthood. God does hereby intend to preserve the honor of his Laws; he gives
men warning enough by one examplary punishment, and if notwithstanding that,
they will commit the same sin, they may thank themselves if they suffer for it,
if not in this life, yet in that to come. And that good effect this Judgment
had upon that people, that although the next day 14000. suffered for murmuring
at the destruction of these men, yet we do not find that any Rebellion was
raised among them afterward upon these popular pretenses of Religion, E
and the Power of the People. While their Judges continued (who were Kings,
without the state and title of Kings) they were observed with reverence, and
obeyed with diligence. When afterward they desired a King, with all the Pomp
and Grandeur which other Nations had (which Samuel acquaints A
them with, viz. 1 Samuel 8. 11.
the officers and Soldiers, the large Revenues he must have) though their King
was disowned by God, yet the people held firm in their obedience to him, and
David himself, though anointed to be King, persecuted by Saul, and though he
might have pleaded Necessity and Providence as much any ever could, (when Saul
was strangely delivered into his hands,) yet we see what an opinion he had of
the person of a bad King, 1 Samuel 24. 6.
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing against my Master the Lords
Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of
the Lord. And lest we should think B
it was only his Modesty or his Policy which kept him from doing it, he
afterward, upon a like occasion declares, it was only the sin of doing it,
which kept him from it. 1 Samuel 26. 9.
For who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless? Not as though David could not do it without the power of the
Sanhedrin, as it has been pretended by the Sons of Corah in our age; for he
excepts none; he never seizes upon him to carry him prisoner to be tried by the
Sanhedrin, nor is there any foundation for any such power in the Sanhedrin over
the persons of their Sovereigns. It neither being contained in the C
grounds of its institution, nor any precedent occurring in the whole story of
the Bible, which gives the least countenance to it: Nay, several passages of
Scripture utterly overthrow it, for how could Solomon have said, Eccles. 8. 4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him, what
do thou? If by the constitution of their Government, the Sanhedrin might have
controlled him in what he said or did. But have not several of the modern Jews
said so? Granting that some have; yet so they have spoken many unreasonable and
foolish things besides; but yet none of these have said, that it was in D
the power of the Sanhedrin to depose their Kings, or put them to death; all
that they say is, that in the cases expressed by the Law, if the Kings do
transgress, the Sanhedrin had the power of inflicting the penalty of scourging,
which yet they deny to have had any infamy in it among them. But did not David
transgress the Law in his murder and adultery? did not Solomon in the multitude
of his wives and Idolatry, yet where do we read that the Sanhedrin ever took
cognizance of these things? And the more ancient Jews do say, Tit. Sanbed c. 2.
that the King was not to be judged, as is plain in the Text of the Misna,
however E
the Expositors have taken a liberty to contradict it; but as far as we can
find, without any foundation of reason: and R. Jeremiah in Nachman. in Deuteronomy. p.
196.
Nachmanides, says expressly, That no creature may judge the King, but the holy
and blessed God alone. But we have an Authority far greater than his, viz. of
David's in A
this case, who after he has denied that any man can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless: In the very next words he submits
the judgment of him only to God himself, saying, 1 Samuel 26. 10.
As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or
he shall descend into battle and perish. He thought it sufficient to leave the
judgment of those things to God, whose power over Princes he knew was enough,
if well considered by them, to keep them in awe. We have now dispatched the
first, consideration of the words of the Text, as they relate to the fact of
Corah and his company. B


2. We ought now to enquire, whether the Christian Doctrine has made any
alteration in these things; or whether that gives any greater encouragement to
faction and sedition than the Law did, when it is masked under a pretense of
zeal for Religion and Liberty. But it is so far from it, that what God then
declared to be displeasing to him by such remarkable judgments, has been now
more fully manifested by frequent precepts, and vehement exhortations, by the
most weighty arguments, and the constant practice of the first and the best of
Christians, and by the black character which is set upon those C
who under a pretense of Christian Liberty did despise dominion, and speak evil
of dignities, and follow Corah in his Rebellion, however they may please
themselves with greater light, than former ages had in this matter, they are
said to be such Jude v. 13
for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. It would take up too
much time to examine the frivolous evasions, and ridiculous distinctions by
which they would make the case of the Primitive Christians in not resisting
Authority, so much different from theirs who have not only done it, but in
spite of Christianity have pleaded for it. Either they said they D
wanted strength, or courage, or the countenance of the Senate, or did not
understand their own Liberty; when all their obedience was only due to those
precepts of the Gospel, which make it so great a part of Christianity to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, and which the Teachers of the Gospel had
particularly given them in charge Tit. 3. 1.
to put the people in mind of.

And happy had it been for us if this Doctrine had been more sincerely
preached, and duly practiced in this Nation; for we should then never have seen
those sad times, which we can now no otherwise think of, than of the devouring
Fire, and raging E
Pestilence, i. e. of such dreadful judgments which we have smarted so much
by, that we heartily pray we may never feel them again: For then fears and
jealousies began our miseries, and the curse so often denounced against Meroz,
fell upon the whole Nation; When the Sons of Corah managed their own A
ambitious designs against Moses and Aaron (the King and the Church) under the
same pretenses of Religion and Liberty. And when the pretense of Religion was
broken into Schisms, and Liberty into oppression of the people, it pleased God
out of his secret and unsearchable judgments to suffer the Sons of Violence to
prevail against the Lords Anointed; and then they would know no difference
between his being conquered and guilty. They could find no way to justify
their former wickedness, but by adding more: The consciousness of their own
guilt, and the fears of the punishment due to it, made them unquiet B
and thoughtful, as long as his life and presence did upbraid them with the
one, and made them fearful of the other. And when they found the greatness and
constancy of his mind, the firmness of his Piety, the zeal he had for the true
interest of the people, would not suffer him to betray his Trust for the saving
of his life; they charge him with their own guilt, and make him suffer because
they had deserved to do it. And as if it had not been enough to have abused the
names of Religion and Liberty before, they resolve to make the very name of
Justice to suffer together with their King: by calling that infamous company C
who condemned their Sovereign, A High Court of Justice which trampled under
foot the Laws both of God and men. But lest the world should imagine they had
any shame left in their sins, they make the people witnesses of his Murder;
and pretend the Power of the People for doing that, which they did detest and
abhor. Thus fell our Royal Martyr a sacrifice to the fury of unreasonable men;
who either were so blind as not to see his worth, or rather so bad as to hate
him for it. And as God gave once to the people of the Jews a King in his Anger,
being provoked to it by their sins, we have cause to say, that upon the D
same account he took away one of the best of Kings from us in his wrath. But
blessed be that God, who in the midst of judgment was pleased to remember
mercy, in the miraculous preservation, and glorious restoration of our
Gracious Sovereign; let us have a care then of abusing the mercies of so great
a deliverance to quite other ends than God intended it for; lest he be provoked
to say to us, as he did of old to the Jews, 1 Samuel 12. 25.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King. And if we look on this as a dreadful judgment, let us endeavor to
prevent it by a timely and sincere reformation of our lives, and E
by our hearty supplications to God that he would preserve the person of our
Sovereign from all the attempts of violence, that he would so direct his
counsels, and prosper his affairs, that His Government may be a long and
public Blessing to these Nations.

SERMON VIII. Ser. VIII.
A
B
Preached at GUILD HALL Chapel. JUNE 9. 1671. C

MATTHEW XXI. XLIII. Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. D



THE time was now very near approaching, wherein the Son of God was to suffer
an accursed death by the hands of ungrateful men: and to let them see that he
laid no impossible command upon men when he bid them Matthew. 5. 44.
E
love their enemies, he expresses the truest kindness himself toward those who
designed his destruction. For what can be imagined greater toward such, whose
malice was like to end in nothing short of their own ruin, than by
representing to them the evils they must suffer, to dissuade A
them from that, which they intended to do? But if neither the sense of their
future miseries, nor their present sins will at all abate their fury or assuage
their malice, nothing is then left for kindness to show it self by, but by
lamenting their folly, bemoaning their obstinacy, and praying God to have pity
upon them, who have so little upon themselves. And all these were very
remarkable in the carriage of our Blessed Savior toward his most implacable
enemies: he had taken care to instruct them by his doctrine; to convince them
by his miracles, to oblige them by the first offers of the greatest mercy; but
all these B
things had no other effect upon them, than to heighten their malice, increase
their rage, and make them more impatient till they had destroyed him. But their
stupidity made him more sensible of their folly, and their obstinacy stirred up
his compassion toward them, in so much that the nearer he approached to his
own sufferings, the greater sense he expressed of theirs. For he was no sooner
come within view of that bloody City, wherein he was within few days to suffer
by, as well as for the sins of men; but his compassion breaks forth, not only
by his weeping over it; but by that passionate expression, which is C
abrupt only by the force of his grief: Luke 19. 41, 42.
If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day the things which
belong unto thy peace! but now they are bid from thine eyes. And when he was
within the City, he could not mention the desolation which was to come upon it
for all the righteous blood which had been spilt there, but he presently
subjoyns, Matthew. 23. 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings and ye would not?
what words D
could more emphatically express the love and tenderness of Christ toward his
greatest enemies than these do? especially considering that he knew how busy
they were in contriving his sufferings, while he was so passionately lamenting
theirs. And when their malice had done its utmost upon him, and they saw him
hanging upon the Cross and ready to yield up his last breath, he imploys the
remainder of it in begging pardon for them, in those pathetical words Luke 21.
34.
Father, forgive them for they know not what they do. By all which we see, that
what punishments soever the Jewish nation underwent afterward E
for the great sin of crucifying the Lord of life, were no effect of mere
revenge from him upon them, but the just judgment of God which they had drawn
upon themselves by their own obstinacy and wilful blindness.

And that they might not think themselves surprised, when A
the dreadful effects of Gods anger should seize upon them, our Savior as he
drew nearer to the time of his sufferings gives them more frequent and serious
warnings of the sad consequence of their incorrigibleness under all the means
of cure which had been used among them. For they were so far from being amended
by them, that they not only despised the remedy, but the Physicians too; (as
though that were a small thing) they beat, they wound, they kill those who came
to cure them: but as if it had not been enough to have done these things to
servants, (to let the world see how dangerous it is to attempt the B
cure of incorrigible sinners) when God sent his own Son to them, expecting
they should reverence him, they find a peculiar reason for taking him out of
the way, V. 38.
for then the inheritance would be their own. But so miserably do sinners
miscarry in their designs for their advantage, that those things which they
build their hopes the most upon prove the most fatal and pernicious to them:
When these persons thought themselves sure of the inheritance by killing the
Son, that very sin of theirs, not only put them out of possession, but out of
the hopes of recovering what interest they had in it before. For C
upon this it is that our Savior here says in the words of the Text,
Therefore say I unto you, that the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you and
given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

Which words, are the application which our Savior makes of the foregoing
parable concerning the vineyard, which it seems the Chief Priests and
Pharisees, did not apprehend themselves to be concerned in, till he brought the
application of it so close to them; so that then they find they had condemned
themselves, when they so readily passed so severe a sentence D
upon those husbandmen, who had so ill requited the Lord of the Vineyard for
all the care he had taken about it, that instead of sending him the fruits of
it, they abuse his messengers, and at last murder his Son. When therefore
Christ asks them, V. 40.
When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes, what will he do unto those
husbandmen? They thought the case so plain, that they never take time to
consider, or go forth to advise upon it, but bring in a present answer upon the
evidence of the fact. V. 41.
They say unto him, he will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let
out his Vineyard E
to other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
Little did they think what a dreadful sentence they passed upon themselves and
their own nation in these words: little did they think that hereby they
condemned their Temple to be burned, their City to be destroyed, their Country
to A
be ruined, their Nation to be Vagabonds over the face of the earth; little did
they think that herein they justified God in all the miseries which they
suffered afterward, for in these words they vindicate God and condemn
themselves, they acknowledge Gods Justice in the severest punishments he should
inflict upon such obstinate wretches. Our Savior having gained this confession
from them, and so made it impossible for them to start back in charging God
with injustice in punishing them; he now applies it to themselves in these
words, which I suppose, ought immediately to follow the 41. verse. B
Therefore say I unto you the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, etc.
Wherein we have,

1. The greatest judgment which can ever befall a people, which is the taking
away the Kingdom of God from them. 2. The greatest mercy can ever be vouchsafed
to a nation, which is Gods giving his Kingdom to it. And give it to a nation,
etc.
In the judgment we consider the cause of it, therefore say I unto you, etc.
which is either, more general as referring to all going before, and so it makes
the taking away the C
Kingdom of God to be the just punishment of an incorrigible people, or more
particular as referring to the sin of the Jews in crucifying Christ, and so it
makes the guilt of that sin to be the cause of all the miseries, which that
nation has undergone since that time.

In the later part we may consider the terms upon which God either gives or
continues his Kingdom to a nation, and that is, bringing forth the fruits
thereof.

We consider the former with a particular respect to the state of the Jewish
nation. And therein, 1. The greatness of D
their judgment employed in those words the Kingdom of God, etc. 2. The
particular reason of that judgment which was crucifying the Son of God.

1. The greatness of the judgment which befell the Jewish nation after imbruing
their hands in the blood of Christ. And that will appear if we take the Kingdom
of God in that double notion in which it was taken at that time. 1. It was
taken by the Jews themselves for some peculiar and temporal blessings, which
those who enjoyed it had above all other people. 2. It was taken by our Savior
for a clearer manisestation E
of the will of God to the world, and the consequence of that in the hearts of
good men; and all the spiritual blessings which do attend it. So that the
taking away the Kingdom of God from them must needs be the heaviest judgment
which could befall a people, since it implies in it, the taking away all A
the greatest temporal and spiritual blessings.

1. We take it in the notion the Jews themselves had of it; and in this sense
we shall make it evident that the Kingdom of God has been taken from that
people in accomplishment of this prediction of our Savior. For they imagined
the Kingdom of God among them to consist in these things especially,
Deliverance from their enemies, A flourishing state, The upholding their
Religion in Honor, chiefly in the pompous worship of the Temple. Now if
instead of these things, they were exposed to the fury of their enemies so as
never B
any nation besides them were, if their whole Polity was destroyed so as the
very face of Government has ever since been taken from them; if their Religion
has been so far from being upheld, that the practice of it has been rendered
impossible by the destruction of the Temple, and the consequences of it, then
the Jews themselves cannot but say, that in their own sense the Kingdom of God
has been taken from them.

1. They make the Kingdom of God to consist in a deliverance of them from their
enemies. For this was their great quarrel at our Savior that he should pretend
to bring the C
Kingdom of God among them, and do nothing in order to their deliverance from
the Roman Power. They either were such great admirers of the Pomp and Splendour
of the world, or so sensible of their own burdens and the yoke that was upon
them, that they could not be persuaded that God should design to send his
Kingdom among them for any other end but their ease and liberty. They
apprehended the Crown of Thorns which was put upon our Saviors head was the
fittest representation of the nature of his Kingdom; for they looked upon it as
the mere show of a Kingdom, but the reality was nothing but D
affliction and tribulation; and this was a doctrine they thought of all others
the least needful to be preached to them, who complained so much of what they
underwent already. They took it for the greatest contradiction to talk of a
Kingdom among them, as long as they were in subjection to the Roman Governors.
But if Jesus of Nazareth had raised an army in defense of their liberty, and
had destroyed the Romans, they would never have enquired farther concerning
Prophesies, or Miracles, this had been instead of all others to them, and then
they would willingly have given him that title, which E
was set up only in derision as the Elogium of his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth
King of the Jews: But we see how justly God dealt with them soon after, when
they crucified the Son of God because he preached another Kingdom than they
dreamed of, God suffers this very pretense of a temporal Kingdom to A
be the occasion of the ruin of the whole Nation. For upon that it was that
they denied subjection to the Romans, for they were for no other Kingdom but
only Gods, ((...), to acknowledge no other King but God, was the pretense of
the War:) upon which arose that desperate Faction of the Zealots, who like so
many Firebrands scattered up and down among them, soon put the whole Nation
into Flames. And from this time there never was a more Tragical story either
acted or written than that is of the miseries which this people underwent. For
if ever there were the marks of divine B
vengeance seen in the ruin of a Nation, they were in that. For they were so
far from harkening to the counsel of their wisest men, that the first thing
they made sure of, was the destruction of them. Wisdom was but another name for
Treason among them: and there needed no other evidence to take away the lives
of any but to say that they were rich and wise. When they had thus secured
themselves (as they thought) against the danger of too much Wisdom, by the
removal of all such, who at least did not counterfeit madness and folly by
joining with them; then they began to suspect one another, C
and three Factions at once break forth at Jerusalem, who seemed to be afraid
the Romans should not destroy them fast enough, for in the several parts of the
City where they were, they were continually killing one another: and never
joined together but when they saw the Romans approaching their Walls, least
they should take that work out of each others hands. By all means they were
resolved to endure a seige, and as a preparative for that, they burnt up all
the stores almost of provision which were among them: whence ensued a most
dreadful Ios. (...) l. 6. c. 11. p. 932.
famine, so great, that it was thought reason enough to take D
away the life of a man, because he looked better than his neighbors, they
thereby suspecting he had some concealed provisions. They brake into the houses
of such whom they imagined to be eating, and if they found them so, they either
forced the meat out of their mouths, or choked them with attempting to do it.
It was no news then for a Woman to forget her sucking Child, so as not to have
compassion upon the Son of her Womb: for the story is remarkable in Lib. 7. c.
8.
Josephus, of a Mother that not only eat part of her Son, who sucked at her
breast, but when the smell had tempted some to E
break in upon her and take part with her, and were struck with horror at the
sight of it, What, says she, will you show your selves more tender than a
Woman, or more compassionate than a Mother! It was no news to see Parents and
Children destroying one another for a piece of bread, to see the streets A
and tops of houses covered with the bodies of those who dropped down for want of
food, in so much that the stench of their carcases soon brought a Plague among
them: which and the Famine raged together with that violence, that when there
was no possibility of burying their dead, they threw them over the Walls of the
City, and Titus beholding the incredible numbers of them lift up his hands to
Heaven and cried (...), that it was none of his doing. For he used all possible
means to prevent the ruin of the City and Temple as well as the destruction of
the People: but all to no B
purpose, for now the time of Gods vengeance was come, yea the full time of his
wrath was come. So that Titus often confessed, he never saw such an instance of
divine vengeance upon a people, that when their Enemies designed to save them,
they were resolved to destroy themselves. And Philost. v. Apollo^. l. 6. cap.
14.
Philostratus tells us, that when the neighbor Provinces offered Titus a
Crown, in token of his conquest of Iudaea, he utterly refused it with this
saying, that he had nothing to do in the glory of that action, for he was only
the instrument of Gods vengeance upon the Jews. Which we may easily believe, if
C
we consider almost the incredible number of those who were destroyed at that
time, 1100000 reckoned in that number in the time of eight months siege, and
90000 carried away captive, which might have been thought incredible, but for
one circumstance, which is mentioned by their own Historian, that at the time
of the siege Jerusalem was filled with Jews coming from all parts to the
solemnity of the Passover, where they were shut up asin a Prison: and their
Prison made their place of Execution. Yea so prodigious were the calamities
which besel this people not only at Jerusalem, but at Caesarea, Antioch, D
Scythopolis, Alexandria and almost all the Cities of Syria, that Eliazer, one
of the heads of the Faction, when he saw they could not hold out against the
Romans at Massada, persuaded them all to kill one another by this argument Ios.
p. 990.
that it was now apparent that God from the beginning of the War had designed
their destruction, and they had better be the executioners of his vengeance
themselves than suffer the Romans to be so. Upon which they all miserably
destroyed each other: who were the last who opposed the Roman Power. E


What shall we say then to these things? Have we any ground to suspect the
truth of the story as either made by Christians in hatred of the Jews, or
improved mightily to their disadvantage? Not so certainly, when all the
circumstances are related by Jewish and Roman Writers, who had no kindness A
at all for Christians. Or shall we say there was nothing extraordinary in all
this, but that the Jews were a wild and seditious people that destroyed
themselves and their nation? but it is evident they were not always so; they
had been a people that had flourished with the reputation of wisdom and
conduct, and had great success against their enemies. And the Romans themselves
at this time acknowledged they never saw a people of a more invincible spirit
and less afraid of dying than these were. But all this turned to their greater
prejudice; and they who had been so famous in former ages for miraculous B
deliverances from the power of their enemies, were now not only given up into
their hands, but into those which were far more cruel, which were their own.
What then can we imagine should make so great an alteration in the State of
their affairs now, but that God was their friend then and their enemy now? He
gave then success beyond their Counsels, and without preparation; now he blasts
all their designs, divides their counsels, and makes their contrivances end in
their speedier ruin. Now they felt the effect of what God had threatened long
before, Hos. 9 12.
Woe be unto you when I depart from you. Now C
their strength, their wisdom, their peace, their honor, their safety were all
departed from them. Whereby we see how much the welfare of a Nation depends
upon Gods Favor and that no other security is comparable to that of true
Religion. The Nation of the Jews, was for all that we know never more numerous,
than at this time, never more resolute and courageous to venture their lives,
never better provided of fortified Towns and strong places of retreat and all
provisions for War; but there was a hand writing upon the Wall against them,
Mean, Tekel, Peers, God had weighed them in the balance and D
found them too light, he divides their Nation and removes his Kingdom from
them and leaves them to an utter desolation. Neither can we say this was some
present infatuation upon them, for ever since all their attempts for recovering
their own land, have but increased their miseries and made their condition
worse than before. Witness that great attempt under Barchocebas in the time of
Adrian, in which the Jews themselves say there perished double the number of
what came out of Egypt i. e. above 1200000 men. After which they were not only
wholly banished their land, but forbid so much as to look on E
the place where the Temple had stood, and were fain to purchase at a dear
rate, the liberty of weeping over it; Hie^o^. in Zeph. 1.
ut qui quondam emerant sanguinem Christi, emant lachrymas suas; as St. Hierom
speaks; i. e. that they who had bought the blood of Christ were now fain to buy
their own tears. It would be A
endless to pursue the miseries of this wretched people in all ages ever since;
the slavery, disgrace, universal contempt, the frequent banishments,
confiscations of estates, constant oppressions which they have labored under.
So that from that time to this, they have scarce had any estates, but never any
Country which they could call their own. So that St. Augustine has truly said,
Aug. in Psalm. 58.
the curse of Cain is upon them, for they are vagabonds in the earth, they have
a mark upon them, so that they are not destroyed and yet are in continual fear
of being so. God seems to preserve that miserable Nation in being, to be B
a constant warning to all others, to let them see what a difference in the
same people the Favor or Displeasure of God can make, and how severe the
judgments of God are upon those who are obstinate and disobedient.

2. They make the Kingdom of God to consist in the flourishing of their State,
or that Polity which God established among them. He was himself once their
immediate Governor and therefore it might be properly called his Kingdom: and
after they had Kings of their own their plenty and prosperity did so much
depend on the kindness of heaven to them, that C
all the days of their flourishing condition might be justly attributed to a
more than ordinary providence that watched over them. For if we consider how
small in comparison the extent and compass of the whole land of Judea was,
being as Saint Hierom says, (who knew it well,) but 160. miles in length from
Dan to Beersheba, and 46. in breadth from Ioppa to Bethlehem; if we consider
likewise the vast number of its inhabitants, there being at 1 Chronicles. 15. 5, 6.
David's numbering the people 1500000. fighting men who ought not to be reckoned
above a 4th part of the whole, and Benjamin and Levi not taken D
in, if we add to these, the many rocks, mountains and deserts in this small
country, and that every 7. years the most fertile places must lie fallow, we
may justly wonder how all this number of people should prosper so much in so
narrow a territory. For although we ought not to measure the rules of Eastern
diet by those of our Northern Climates, and it be withal true that the number
of people add both to the riches and plenty of it, and that the fertile places
of that land were so almost to a miracle, yet considering their scarcity of
rain and their Sabbatical years, we must have recourse to an immediate E
care of heaven which provided for all their necessities and filled their
stores to so great abundance that 1 Kings 5. 11.
Solomon gave to King Hiram every year 20000. measures of wheat, and twenty
measures of oil: every one of which contained about 30. bushels. And God
himself had particularly promised to A
give them the former and the latter rain, and that they might have no occasion
to complain of their Sabbatical years Lev. 25. 21.
every sixth year should afford them fruit for 3. years. By which we see their
plenty depended not so much upon the fat of their land, as upon the dew and
blessing of heaven. And if we farther consider them as environed about with
enemies on every side, such as were numerous and powerful, implacable and
subtle, it is a perpetual wonder (considering the constitution of the Jewish
nation) that they should not be destroyed by them. For all the the males being
obliged strictly by the Law B
to go up three times a year to Jerusalem (we should think against all rules
of Policy to leave the country naked) it seems incredible that their enemies
should not overrun the Country, and destroy their Wives and Children at that
time. But all their security was in the promise which God had made; Exodus 34.
24.
neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before
the Lord thy God thrice in the year. And to let us see that obedience to God is
the best security against the greatest dangers, we never read of any invasion
of that Country in one of those times, nor of any miseries they suffered C
then; till the last and fatal destruction of Jerusalem when God had taken
away his Kingdom from them. And with that, their whole Polity fell; for never
since have they been able to maintain so much as the face of Government living
in subjection, if not in slavery in all parts of the world. So that whether we
mean the succession of power in Iudahs tribe, or the seat of power in the whole
nation, or the distinction and superiority of that tribe above the rest, by the
Scepter which was not Genesis 49. 10.
to depart from Judah till Shiloh came; we are sure in every one of these
senses, it is long since departed from it. For neither D
have any of the Posterity of David had any power over them, nor was it
possible they should, considering that all Government is taken from them, and
the very distinction of tribes is lost among them, they having never had any
certain Genealogies since the destruction of the Temple. I know what vain
hopes, and foolish fancies, and incredible stories they have among them; of
some supreme power, which they have in some part of the world but they know not
where. Sometimes, they talk of their mighty numbers at Bagdad, and the officers
of their own nation which are set over E
them: but had they not so in Egypt, and were they ever the less in captivity
there? Sometimes they boast of their Schools in those Eastern parts, such as
Pombeditha, Sura, and Neharda, and the authority the Rabbis have over them;
but this is just as the Orator said of Dionysius the Tyrant of A
Syracuse, that he loved Government so well, that when he was not suffered to
govern men there, he went to govern boys at Corinth, Cic. Tusc. 3.
usque eo imperio carere non poterat. But these are tolerable in comparison
with the incredible fictions of the 4. Tribes in the East, hemmed in by a vast
and unpassable ridge of mountains on every side, but when the famous Sabbatical
River runs, which for 6. days bear's all before it with a mighty torrent, and
carries stones of such incredible bigness that there is no passing over it: but
because the admirable nature of that River is, Eldad. Danita apud Buxtorf. v.
Sabbation. Praef. in Cos^. l'Empereur in Benjam. p. 206. 207.
that it keeps the Sabbath and D
rests all that day, we might have thought it had been possible to have had
some intercourse with them on that day; but to prevent this they tell us, that
as the water goes off, flames of fire come in the place of it and hinder all
access to them. But these are things which a man must be a Jew first before he
can believe: and what will not they believe rather than Christ is the Son of
God! For Spes Israel. sect. 19. p. 64.
Manasse ben Israel has had the confidence in this age to say that the sand
taken out of the Sabbatical River and preserved in a Tube does constantly move
for 6. days, and rests punctually from the beginning of the Sabbath C
to the end of it. Which is the less to be wondered at since in all his book of
the hope of Israel, he eagerly contends for the incredible fiction of Montezini
of the flourishing condition of the Jews at this day in some parts of America;
but the Salvo is translated thither too, for there is a mighty River which
hinders any from access to them. By all which we see how vain all their
attempts are to preserve any reputation of that power and Government wherein
they made so great a part of the Kingdom of God among them to consist.

3. That which they thought gave them the greatest title to D
the being Gods peculiar people, was the solemn worship of him at the Temple.
But what is become of all the glory of that now? where are all the pompous
Ceremonies, the numerous sacrifices, the magnificent and solemn Feasts, which
were to be constantly observed there? how is it then possible for them to
observe the Religion now which God commanded them; since he likewise forbid the
doing these things any where, but in the Place which himself should appoint. So
that they are under an unavoidable necessity of breaking their Law; if they do
them not, they break the Law which commands them to be done, E
if they do them, they break the Law which forbids the doing them in any other
place but at the Temple at Jerusalem. And this I am apt to think, was one of
the greatest grounds among them after the destruction of the Temple of their
setting up traditions above the written Law; for finding A
it impossible to keep the written Law, if they could gain to themselves the
Authority of interpreting it, they were not much concerned for the Law it self.
And this is one of the strongest holds of their infidelity at this day. For
otherwise we might in reason have thought, that their infidelity would have
been buried in the ashes of their Temple; when they had such plain predictions
that the Messiah was to come during the second Temple, that the prediction of
Christ concerning the destruction of this Temple was so exactly fulfilled, that
all attemps for the rebuilding of it were vain and fruitless. Of all which B
none promissed so fair as that in Iulians time, who out of spite to the
Christians, and particularly with a design to contradict the prophecy of our
Savior gave all encouragement to the Jews to build it, he provided at his own
charge all materials for it, and gave command to the Governor of the Province
to take particular care in it; and the Jews with great joy and readiness set
about it; but when they began to search the ground in order to the laying the
Foundations, the earth round about trembles with a horrible earthquake, and the
flames of a sudden break out, which not only consumed the undertakers C
but a great multitude of spectators, and the materials prepared for the
building: In so much that an universal astonishment seized upon them, and the
rest had rather leave their work, than be consumed by it. This we have
delivered to us; not by persons at a great distance of time from it, but by
such who lived in the same age. Orat. 2. c. Iud.
(...), we are all witnesses, (says St. Chrysostom.) of the truth of these
things; not by one or two, but the concurrent Testimony of the writers of that
age. Not only by Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 4. in Act. hom. 41. Nazian. Orat. 2. in
Julian. Ambr. Ep. 29. Theod. Impr. Russia. l. 1. c. 38. 39. Socrat. l. 3. c.
20. Sozom. l 5. c. 22. Theod. l. 3. c. 17. Amm. Marcell. Hist. l. 23. init.
St. Chrysostom. But Gregorius Nazianzenus, Ambrose, Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomen,
D
Theodoret. And lest all these should be suspected of partiality, because
Christians, we desire no more to be believed concerning it, than what is
recorded by Ammianus Marcellinus a Heathen Historian of that time, who was a
soldier under Julian in his last expedition, and he asserts the substance of
what I have said before. And what a strange difference do we now find in the
building of a third and a second Temple? In the former, though they met with
many troubles and difficulties, yet God carried them through all and prospered
their endeavors with great success. Now they had all humane encouragements E
and God only opposes them, and makes them desist with the loss of their
workmen and materials, and perpetual dishonor to themselves, for attempting to
fight against God in building him a Temple against his will. From which we see
that in all the senses the Jews understood the Kingdom A
of God, it was remarkably taken from them within so many years after Christ
the true Passover was slain by them, as had passed from their first Passover
after their going out of Egypt to their entrance into Canaan.

The difficulty will be far less and the concernment not so great as to the
Jews, to prove that the Kingdom of God in the sense our Savior meant it for
the Power of the Gospel, was taken from them. For the event it self is a clear
proof of it. In stead of that therefore I shall now prove that this taking away
the Kingdom of God from them, was the effect of their sin in crucifying B
Christ. Therefore I say etc. To make this clear I shall proceed by these
following steps.

1. That it is acknowledged by the Jews themselves that these great calamities
have happened to them for some extraordinary sins. For to these they impute the
destruction of the City and Temple, their oppressions and miseries ever since,
and the deferring the coming of the Messiah. For some of them have confessed
Tit. Sanhed. c. 11. sect. 31.
that all the terms prefixed for the coming of the Messiah are past long ago
but that God provoked by their great sins has thus long deferred his
appearance, and suffered C
them in the mean while to lie under such great calamities.

2. The sin ought to be looked on as so much greater by how much heavier and
longer this punishment has been, than any inflicted upon them before. For if
God did in former captivities punish them for their sins, when they were
brought back again into their own land after 70. years; we must conclude that
this is a sin of a higher nature which has not been expiated by 1600. years
captivity and dispersion.

3. The Jews have not suffered these calamities for the same sins for which
they suffered before. For then God charged D
them with Idolatry as the great provoking sin; and it is very observable that
the Jews were never freer from the suspicion of this sin than under the second
Temple, and particularly near their destruction. They generally pretended a
mighty zeal for their Law, and especially opposed the least tendency to
Idolatry; in so much that they would not suffer the Roman Ensigns to be
advanced among them because of the Images that were upon them; and all the
History of that time tells us of the frequent contests they had with the Roman
Governors about these things: and ever since that time they have been perfect
haters E
of Idolatry, and none of the least hindrances of their embracing Christianity
has been the infinite scandal which has been given them by the Roman Church
in that particular.

4. It must be some sin, which their Fathers committed and continues yet
unrepented of by them to this day. Their Fathers A
committing it, was the meritorious cause of the first punishment, their
Children not repenting of it, is the cause why that judgment lies still so
heavy upon them. And now what sin can we imagine this to be, but putting to
death the true Messiah; which they will acknowledge themselves to be a sin that
deserves all the miseries they have undergone; and it is apparent that in all
this long captivity they never have had the heart to repent of the sin of
crucifying Christ, other sins they confess and say they heartily repent of, but
why then has not God accepted of their repentance and brought them back into B
their own Land; according to the promises he long since made unto their
Fathers? Which is a certain argument it is some sin as yet unrepented of by
them which continues them under all their sufferings; and what can this be but
that horrid sin of putting to death the son of God, with that dreadful
imprecation which to this day has its force upon them His blood be upon us and
our Children? and this sin they are so far from repenting of, that they still
justify their Fathers in what they did, and Blaspheme Christ to this day in
their prayers, where they think they may do it with safety. And to all this we
may add C
that the ensuing calamities were exactly soretold by that Christ whom they
crucified, and if no other argument would convince them that he was at least a
Prophet, yet the punctual accomplishment of all his predictions ought to do it:
as will appear by comparing Matt. 24. 3.
Matthew. 24. With the series of the story. And it is observable that the very
place where our Savior foretold these things viz. the Mount of Olives, was the
first wherein the Roman Army encamped before Jerusalem. And as they had
crucified the Son of God, and put the Lord of glory to open shame, mocking and
deriding him in his sufferings; so when the D
Romans came to revenge his quarrel upon them, they took the captive Jews and
crucified them openly in the view of the City, 500. oft-times in a day, (...)
in different forms for sport sake as Joseph. (...). l. 6. c. 12.
Josephus tells us who was then in the Roman camp; and withal adds, their
numbers were so great that these was no room left for the crosses to stand, or
wood enough to make crosses of. And they who had bought the blood of the Son of
God for 30. pieces of silver had this sin of theirs severely punished, when
such multitudes of the Jews (2000 in one night) had their bowels ripped up by the
E
Roman Soldiers in hopes to have found the gold and silver there, which they
were supposed to have swallowed. And what greater argument can we have to
believe that such judgments fell upon them upon the account of their sin in
crucifying Christ, than that they were so punctually foretold so long before, A
and had all things so exactly answering in the accomplishment of them? For
when Christ spoke those things the Jews thought their destruction as incredible
as that he was the Messiah; but what greater evidence could there be to them
that he was so, than that God did so severely avenge his blood upon them, and
continues to do it for their unbelief and impenitency to this very day.

But it may be some will say, what are all these things to us, we are none of
those who crucified Christ or justify the doing it; Thanks be to God, the
Kingdom of God is not taken from us, B
but we enjoy what was taken from them. To which I answer. If we really were
what we pretend to be, these things are of great consequence to be considered
by us.

1. For is it nothing to us to have so great an argument of the truth of our
Religion, as the sufferings of the Jews to this day is for the sin of
crucifying Christ? As often as we think of them we ought to consider the danger
of infidelity, and the heavy judgments which that brings upon a people. We may
take some estimate of the wrath of God against that sin, by the desolation of
the Country, and the miseries of the inhabitants C
of it. When you think it a small sin to despise the Son of God, to revile his
doctrine, and reproach his miracles, consider then what the Jews have suffered
for these sins. As long as they continue a people in the world, they are the
living monuments of the Vengeance of God upon an incorrigible and unbelieving
nation. And it may be one of the ends of Gods dispersing them almost among all
nations, that as often as they see and despise them, they may have a care of
those sins which have made them a byword and reproach among men, who once were
a nation beloved of God and feared by men. See what it is to D
despise the offers of grace, to reproach and ill use the Messengers of it who
have no other errand but to persuade men to accept that Grace and bring forth
the fruits thereof. See what it is for men to be slaves to their own lusts,
which makes them not only neglect their own truest interest but that of their
nation too. If that had not been the fundamental miscarriage of the rulers of
the Jewish nation at the time of our Savior, they would most readily have
entertained him and saved their land from ruin. See what it is for a people to
be high in conceit of themselves and to presume upon Gods favor E
toward them. For there never was a nation more self opinionated as to their
wisdom, goodness, and interest with God than the Jews were when they began
their war: and the confidence of this made them think it long till they had
destroyed themselves. See what it is to be once engaged too far in a bad cause,
A
how hard it is though they suffer never so much for it afterward, for them to
repent of it. We might have thought the Jews when they had seen the destruction
of Jerusalem would have come off from their obstinacy; but how very few in
comparison from that time to this, have sincerely repented of the sins of their
Forefathers in the death of Christ. See how hard a matter it is to conquer the
prejudices of education, and to condemn the most unjust actions of those when
we come to understanding, whom from our infancy we had in veneration. For it is
in great measure because they were their Ancestors, that B
the Jews to this day are so hardly convinced they could be guilty of so soul a
sin as crucifying the Messiah.

2. Is it nothing to us what they have suffered, who enjoy the greatest
blessings we have, by their means, and upon the same terms which they did. For
to them at first were committed the Oracles of God, we enjoy all the excellent
and sacred records of ancient times from them, all the prophecies of the men
whom God raised up and inspired from time to time among them. By their means we
converse with those great persons, Moses, David, Solomon and others, and
understand their C
wisdom and piety by the writings which at this day we enjoy. By them we have
conveyed to us, all the particular prophesies which relate to the Messiah,
which point out the Tribe, the place, the time, the very person he was to be
born of. By their means we are able to consute their infidelity, and to confirm
our own faith. Therefore we have some common concernment with them, and ought
on that account to be sensible of their miseries. Is it nothing then to you
that God has dealt so severely with them, from whom you derive so great a part
of your Religion? But if that be nothing, consider the D
terms upon which you enjoy these mercies you have; and they are as the latter
clause of the text assures us, no other than the bringing forth the fruits
thereof. If we prove as obstinate and incorrigible as they, God may justly
punish us, as he has done them. It is but a Vineyard that God lets us, it is
no inheritance; God expects our improvement and giving him the fruits of it, or
else he may justly take it away from us and give it to other Husbandmen. Let us
never flatter our selves in thinking it impossible God should make us as
miserable and contemptible a people as he has done the Jews; but we may E
be miserable enough and yet fall short of them. Have we any such promises of
his favor as they had? how great were their privileges while they stood in
favor with God above all other nations in world? Romans 9. 4, 5.
But we see, though they were the first and the natural branches, they are
broken off by unbelief, A
and we stand by faith. Nothing then can be more reasonable than the
exhortation of the Apostle, Romans 11. 20.
be not high minded but fear. Boast not of your present privileges; despise
not those who are broken of, for consider, if God spared not the natural
branches, we ought to take heed, lest he also spare V. 21.
not us.

3. Is it nothing to us what the Jews suffer, since our sins are in some senses
more aggravated than theirs were? For though there can be no just excuse made
for their wilful blindness, yet there may be much less made for ours. For what B
they did against him was when he appeared in the weakness of humane flesh, in
a very mean and low condition, before the great confirmation of our faith, by
his resurrection from the dead; But our contempt of Christ is much more
unpardonable, not only after that, but the miraculous consequences of it, and
the spreading and continuance of his doctrine in the world, after the
multitudes of Martyrs and the glorious. Triumphs of our Religion over all the
attempts of the persecutors and betrayers of it; after the solemn vows of our
Baptism in his name, and frequent addresses to God by him, and celebrating the
memory C
of his death and passion. What can be more mean, and ungrateful, what can show
more folly and weakness than after all these to esteem the blood of Christ no
otherwise than as of a common malefactor, or at least to live as if we so
esteemed it? Nay we may add to all this, after so severe an instance of Gods
vengeance already upon the Jews; which ought to increase our care, and will
therefore aggravate our sin. What the Jews did they did as open and professed
enemies, what we do we do as false and perfidious friends, and let any man
judge which is the greater crime, to assault an enemy, or to betray a D
Friend.

4. Can this be nothing to us who have so many of those Symptoms upon us which
were the forerunners of their desolation? Not as though I came hither like the
son of Anani in the Jewish story, who of a sudden, 4. years before the war,
cried out in the Temple, a voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice
from the 4. Winds, Woe to Jerusalem, Woe to the Temple, Woe to all this people,
and this he continued crying says Josephus for 7. years and 5. months, till at
last being upon the Walls of the City, he cried Woe to my self also, E
and immediately a stone come out from one of the Roman Engines and dispatched
him. God forbid we should be so near a desolation as they were then; but yet
our Symptoms are bad, and without our repentance and amendment God knows what
they may end in. There were these following remarkable forerunners A
of desolation in the Jewish state, I am afraid we are too much concerned in.

1. A strange degeneracy of all sorts of men from the virtues of their
Ancestors. This Josephus often mentions and complains of and that there was no
sort of men free; from the highest to the meanest, they had all degenerated not
only from what they ought to be, but from what their Ancestors were. And there
can be nothing which bodes worse to a people than this does; for the decay of
virtue is really the loss of strength and interest. And if this be not among us
at this day in one B
sense, it must be in another, or else there would never be such general
complaints of it as there are. It is hard to say that there has ever been an
Age, wherein vice, such as the very Heathens abhorred, has been more confident
and daring than in this; wherein so many have not barely left virtue, but have
bid defiance to it; and are ashamed of their Baptism for nothing so much as
because therein they renounced the Devil and all his works; These are the
Zealots in wickedness as the Jews were in faction. The flaming sword, the voice
in the Temple, the terrible Earthquakes, were not greater Prodigies in nature C
among them, than men are in Morality among us, nor sadder presages of future
miseries.

2. A general stupidity and inapprehensiveness of common danger: every one had
a mighty zeal for his little party and faction he was engaged in, and would
venture his life for that, never considering that by this means there was no
more left to do, for the Romans, but to stand by and see them destroy one
another. I pray God that may be never said of the Romans in another sense
concerning this Church of ours. We cannot but be sensible how much they are
pleased at our divisions and D
they have always hay and stubble enough, not only to build with, but thereby
to add fuel to our flames. How happy should we be if we could once lay aside
our petty animosities and all mind the true interest of our Church and the
security of the Protestant Religion by it, which ought to be dearer to to us
than our lives! But that is our misery, that our divisions in Religion have
made us not more contemptible, than ridiculous to foreign nations, and it
puzleth the wisest among our selves to find out expedients to keep us from
ruining one of the best Churches of the Christian world. E


3. An Atheistical contempt of Religion: for Josephus who was apt enough to
flatter his Countrymen; tells us there never was L. 5. c. 16.
(...) a more Atheistical Generation of men than at that time, the leaders of
the factions were; for they contemned the Laws of men and mocked at the Laws of
A
of God; L. 5. c. 2. P. 887.
and derided the Prophetic Oracles as fabulous impostures: they would allow no
difference of sacred and profane, for they would drink the wine of the
sacrifices promiscuously, and anoint their heads commonly with the sacred oil;
in a word they owned no distinction of good and evil, P. 986.
but thought the greatest wickedness to be good to them. To say there is such a
Generation of men among us, is to foretell our ruin more certainly than Comets
and the most dreadful presages do: For this is a sort of madness which seldom
seizes upon a people, but when they are past cure, and therefore B
are near their end.

4. Spiritual pride. This was very remarkable in the people of the Jews, in a
time when they had as little reason for it, as any people in the world. They
still looked on themselves as Gods chosen and peculiar people, his darlings and
his delight, and thought that Gods honor and interest in the world were
mightily concerned in their preservation. If they should be destroyed, they
could not imagine what God would do for a people to serve him; for all but
themselves they looked on with a very scornful pity, and thought that God hated
them because C
they did. They had the purity of his ordinances, in his house of prayer; and
the society of the faithful among themselves: whereas all others they thought,
served God only with their own inventions, or placed their Religion in dull
morality. They were the people who maintained his cause, and ventured their
lives and estates for it, and therefore God was bound in faithfulness to defend
them, and he must deny himself if he did destroy them. It seems strange to us,
that a people rejected by God for their horrible Hypocrisy, should claim such
an interest in him, when they were marked out for destruction by him; D
but such is the bewitching nature of spiritual pride and Hypocrisy, that it
infatuates the minds of men to their ruin; and flatters them with their
interest in the Promises, till God makes good his threatenings and destroys
them. Never any people thought they had a richer stock of promises to live on
than they; ancient promises, to Abraham Isaac and Jacob, full promises, of
favor, protection, and deliverance from enemies; particular promises made to
them and to no other people in the world. Besides these, they had mighty
experiences of Gods kindness toward them, undoubted experiences, E
not depending on the deceitful workings of fancy; but seen in very strange and
wonderful deliverances; frequent experiences, throughout the whole History of
their nation: and peculiar experiences being such vouchsafements to them, which
God communicated to none but his chosen people. Add to these, A
that they had at this time a wonderful zeal for the true worship of God as
they thought; they regarded no persecution or opposition, but thought it their
glory and honor to sacrifice themselves for the cause of God and his people.
And yet all this while, God was the greatest enemy they had; and all their
pretenses signified nothing to him who saw their unsusserable pride and
loathsome Hypocrisy through those thin vails they had drawn over them, to
deceive the less observing sort of men by. Other sins that are open and public
God preserves the Authority of his Laws by punishing of them, but these B
spiritual sins of pride and Hypocrisy, he not only vindicates his Authority
over the consciences of men, but the infiniteness, of his wisdom and knowledge
in their discovery, and his love to Integrity and inward holiness in the
punishment of them. And therefore these sins are more especially odious to God
as incroaching upon his highest and most peculiar attributes; thence he is said
to resist the proud, as though he made an attempt upon God himself; and he
loathes the Hypocrite in heart, as one that mocks God as well as deceives men.
The first tendency to the destruction of this nation of the Jews was the C
prevalency of the Pharisaical temper among them, which was a compound of pride
and Hypocrisy; and when the field was overrun with these tares, it was then
time for God to put in his sickle and cut them down. God forbid, that our
Church and the Protestant Religion in it should be in danger of destruction,
for that would be a judgment beyond fire and sword and plague, and any thing
we have yet smarted by; that would be the taking away the Kingdom of God from
us, and setting up the Kingdom of darkness, that would be not only a punishment
to our own Age, but the heaviest curse next to renouncing D
Christianity, we could entail upon posterity. But however though God in mercy
may design better things for us, we cannot be sufficiently apprehensive of our
danger, not so much from the business of our enemies, as those bad Symptoms we
find among our selves. When there is such monstrous pride and ingratitude among
many who pretend to a purer worship of God than is established by Law, as
though there were little or no difference between the Government of Moses and
Aaron and the bondage of Egypt. O England, England what will the Pride and
unthankfulness of those who profess Religion E
bring thee to! Will men still prefer their own reputation or the interest of a
small party of Zealots, before the common concernments of our faith and
Religion? O that we did know at least in this our day, the things that belong
to our peace! but let it never be said that they are hid from our eyes. But if A
our common enemy should enter in at the breaches we have made among our
selves, then men may wish, they had sooner known the difference between the
reasonable commands of our own Church, and the intolerable Tyranny of a foreign
and usurped power: between the soft and gentle hands of a mother, and the Iron
sinews of an Executioner; between the utmost rigor of our Laws, and the least
of an Inquisition. If ingratitude were all, yet that were a sin high enough to
provoke God to make our condition worse than it is, but to what a strange
height of spiritual pride are those arrived, who ingross B
all true god iness to themselves? as though it were not possible among us to
go to heaven and to Church together. As though Christ had no Church for 1500.
years and more, wherein not one person can be named who thought it unlawful to
pray by a prescribed form. As though men could not love God and pray sincerely
to him, that valued the peace and order of the Church above the heats and
conceptions of their own brains. Where differences proceed merely from
ignorance and weakness, they are less dangerous to themselves or others: but
where there is so much impatience of reproof, such contempt C
of superiors, such uncharitable censures of other men, such invincible
prejudices and stiffeness of humor, such scorn and reproach cast upon the
public worship among us; What can such things spring from but a root of
bitterness and spiritual pride? I speak not these things to widen our
differences or increase our animosities they are too large and too great
already, nor to condemn any humble and modest dissenters from us; but I despair
ever to see our divisions healed, till Religion be brought from the Fancies to
the hearts of men; and till men instead of mystical notions and unacccountable
experiences, D
in stead of mis-applying promises and misunderstanding the spirit of prayer,
instead of judging of themselves by mistaken signs of Grace, set themselves to
the practice of humility, selfdenial, meekness, patience, charity, obedience
and a holy life and look on these as the greatest duties and most
distinguishing characters of true Christianity. And in doing of these there
shall not only be a great reward in the life to come; but in spite of all
opposition from Atheism, profaneness, or superstition, we may see our divisions
cured and the Kingdom of God, which is a Kingdom of peace and holiness to abide
and E
flourish among us.

SERMON IX. Sermon. IX.
A
B
Preached at WHITE HALL. WHITSUNDAY 1669. C

JOHN VII. XXXIX. But this spoke he of the Spirit which they that believe on
him should receive. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus
was not yet glorified.


WHat was said of old concerning the first creation D
of the world, that in order to the accomplishment of it Genesis 1. 2.
the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, is in a sense agreeable
to the nature of it as true of the renovation of the world by the doctrine of
Christ. For whether by that we understand E
a great and vehement mind, as the Jews generally do; or rather the Divine
power manifesting it self in giving motion to the otherwise dull and unactive
parts of matter; we have it fully represented to us in the descent of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost: For that came upon A
them, Acts 2. 2.
as a rushing mighty wind and inspired them with a new life and motion, whereby
they became the most active instruments of bringing the world out of that state
of confusion and darkness it lay in before, by causing the glorious light of
the Gospel to shine upon it. And left any part should be wanting to make up the
parallel, in the verse before the text, we read of the Waters too which the
Spirit of God did move upon, and therefore called not a dark Abyss, but flowing
rivers of living water. V. 38.
He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living B
water: Not as though the Apostles like some in the ancient Fables were to be
turned into fountains and pleasant Springs; but the great and constant benefit
which the Church of God enjoys by the plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit
upon them, could not be better set fotth than by rivers of living water flowing
from them. And this the Evangelist in these words, to prevent all cavils and
mistakes, tells us was our Saviors meaning; But this spoke he of the Spirit
which they that believe on him should receive. And lest any should think that
our Blessed Savior purposely affected to speak in strange C
metaphors, we shall find a very just occasion given him for using this way of
expression from a custom practiced among the Jews at that time. For in the
solemnity of the feast of Tabernacles, especially in the last and great day of
the Feast mentioned v. 37. after the sacrifices were offered upon the Altar,
one of the Priests was to go with a large Golden Tankard L' Empereur in
Middoth. p. 67. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabb. v. (...) Hackspan. disp. Philolog. p. 488.
Tremel. in not. ad Sir. N.
to the fountain of Siloam, and having filled it with water, he brings it up to
the watergate over against the altar, where it was received with a great deal
of pomp and ceremony, with the sounding of the Trumpets and rejoicing of the
people D
which continued during the libation or pouring it out before the Altar; after
which followed the highest expressions of joy that were ever used among that
people; insomuch that they have a saying among them, that he that never saw the
rejoicing of the drawing of water, never saw rejoicing in all his life. Of
which several accounts are given by the Jews, some say it had a respect to the
later rain which God gave them about this time, others to the keeping of the
Law, but that which is most to our purpose is, that the reason assigned by one
of the Rabbis in the Jerusalem v. Buxtorf.
Talmud is Esai. 12. 3.
because of the E
drawing or pouring out of the Holy Ghost according to what is said, with joy
shall ye draw water out of the wells of Salvation. By which we see that no
fairer advantage could be given to our Savior to discourse concerning the
effusion of the Holy Ghost, and the mighty joy which should be in the Christian
A
Church by reason of that, than in the time of this solemnity; and so lets them
know that the Holy Ghost represented by their pouring out of water was not to
be expected by their rites and ceremonies but by believing the doctrine which
he preached: and that this should not be in so scant and narrow a measure as
that which was taken out of Siloam which was soon poured out and carried away
but out of them on whom the Holy Ghost should come, rivers of living waters
should flow; whose effect and benefit should never cease as long as the world
it self should continue. So that in the words of the B
text we have these particulars offered to our consideration.

1. The effusion of the Spirit under the times of the Gospel; but this spoke he
of the spirit which they that believe on him should receive. 2. The nature of
that effusion represented to us by rivers of living waters flowing out of them.
3. The time that was reserved for it; which was after the glorious ascension of
Christ to Heaven: For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified.
1. The effusion of the spirit under the times of the Gospel; C
by which we mean those extraordinary gifts and abilities which the Apostles
had after the Holy Ghost is said to descend upon them. Which are therefore
called Heb 2. 4.
signs and wonders, and diverse gifts of the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 12. 6. 11.
and the operations of the Spirit; of which we have a large enumeration given
us in that place.

The two most remarkable which I shall insist upon and do comprehend under them
most of the rest, are, the power of working miracles whether in Healing
diseases or any other way; and the gift of tongues either in speaking or
interpreting; they D
who will acknowledge that the Apostles had these, will not have reason to
question any of the rest. And concerning these I shall endeavor to prove,

1. That the things attributed to the Apostles concerning them, could not arise
from any ordinary, or natural causes. 2. That they could not be the effects of
an evil, but of a holy and divine spirit; and therefore that there was really
such a pouring out of the spirit as is here mentioned.
1. That the things attributed to the Apostles could not arise from any merely
natural causes. It is not my present business E
to prove the truth of the matters of fact, viz. that the Apostles did those
things which were accounted miracles by those who saw them or heard of them;
and that on the day of Pentecost they did speak with strange tongues; for these
things are so universally attested by the most competent witnesses viz. A
persons of the same age whose testimony we can have no reason to suspect; and
not only by those who were the friends to this Religion, but the greatest
enemies Jews and Heathens; and by all the utmost endeavors of Atheistical men
who have not set themselves to disprove the testimony, but the consequence of
it, (by saying that granting them true they do not infer the concurrence of a
divine spirit) that on the same grounds any person would Question the truth of
these things, he must question the truth of some other things, which himself
believes on the same or weaker grounds than these are. Supposing B
then the matters of fact to be true, we now enquire whether these things might
proceed from any merely natural causes, which will be the best done by
examining the most plausible accounts which are pretended to be given of them.
And thus some have had the confidence to say, that whatever is said to be done
by the power of miracles in the Apostles might be effected by a natural
temperament of body, or the great power of imagination; and that their speaking
with strange tongues might be the effect only of a natural Enthusiasm, or some
distemper of brain. C


1. That the power of miracles might be nothing but a natural temperament or
the strength of imagination.

1. An excellent natural temper of body they say may do strange and wonderful
things, so that such a one who has an exact temperament may walk upon the
waters, stand in the air, and quench the violence of the fire; and by a strange
kind of sanative contagion may communicate healthful spirits, as persons that
are infected do noisome and pestilential. These are things spoken with as much
ease and as little reason, as any of the calumnies against Religion, which are
so boldly uttered D
by men who dare speak any thing as to these things but reason, and do any
thing but what is good.

1. But can these men after all their confidence produce any one person in the
world, who by the exquisiteness of his natural temper has ever walked upon the
waters, or poised himself in the air, or kept himself from being singed in the
fire? If these things be natural how comes it to pass that no other instances
can be given but such as we urge for miraculous? We say indeed that Matthew. 14.
29.
Christ walked on the Sea, but withal we say this was an argument of that
divine power in him, which E
as Job says, Job. 9. 8.
alone spreads out the heavens and treads upon the waves of the Sea: We say
that 2 Kings 2. 11.
Elijah was carried up into Heaven by a Chariot of fire and a whirlewind; but
it was only by his power, Psalm. 104. 4.
who makes the winds his messengers, and flames of fire his Ministers, as some
render A
those words of the Psalmist: We say that the three Children were preserved
Dan. 3. 25, 26.
in the fiery furnace, that they had no hurt; and even Nebuchadnezzar was
hereby convinced, that he was the true God, which was able to preserve his
servants from the force of that devouring element which was therefore so much
worshipped by those Eastern people because it destroyed not only the men but
the Gods of other nations. But is this enough to satisfy any reasonable men
that these things were done by natural causes; because they were done at all?
For that is to suppose it impossible there should be miracles; which is to say B
it is impossible there should he a God; which is an attempt somewhat beyond
what the most impudent Atheists pretended. But in this case nothing can be
reasonably urged but common experience to the contrary; if these were things
which were usually done by other causes there would be no reason to pretend a
miraculous power: but we say it is impossible that such things should be
produced by mere natural causes, and in this case there can be no confutation
but by contrary experience. As we see the opinion of the Ancients concerning
the uninhabitableness of the the torrid Zone, and that there were no Antipodes,
C
are disproved by the manifest experience to the contrary of all modern
discoverers. Let such plain experience be produced, and we shall then yield the
possibility of the things by some natural causes, although not by such an exact
temperament of body, which is only an instance of the strong power of
imagination in those who think so whatever that may have on others. Such a
temperament of body as these persons imagine, considering the great inequality
of the mixture of the earthy and aerial parts in us, being it may be as great a
miracle it self, as any they would disprove by it. D


2. But supposing such a temperament of body to be possible, how comes it to be
so beneficial to others, as to propagate its virtue to the cure of diseased
persons? We may as well think that a great beauty may change a Black by osten
viewing him, or a skilful Musician make another so by sitting near him, as one
man heal another because he is healthful himself. Unless we can suppose it in
the power of a man to send forth the best spirits of his own body and transfuse
them into the body of another; but by this means that which must cure another
must destroy himself. Besides the healthfulness of a person lies much E
in the freedom of perspiration of all the noxious vapors to the body; by
which it will appear incredible that a man should preserve his own health by
sending out the worst vapors and at the same time cure another, by sending out
the best.

3. Supposing we should grant that a vigorous heat and a A
strong arm may by a violent friction discuss some tumor of a distempered body;
yet what would all this signify to the mighty cures which were wrought so
easily and with a word speaking and at such great distance as were by Christ
and his Apostles? Supposing, our Savior had the most exact natural temper that
ever any person in the world had; yet what could this do to the cure of a
person above twenty miles distance? for so our Savior cured the Son of a
Nobleman who lay sick at Capernaum, when himself was at Joh 4. 46, 53.
Cana in Galilee? So at Matthew. 8. 6, 13.
Capernaum he cured the Centurions servant at his own house without going
thither. Thus we find the Apostles curing B
though Acts 5. 15. 19. 12.
they did not touch them; and that not one or two but multitudes of diseased
persons. And nothing can be more absurd than to imagine that so many men should
at the same time work so many miraculous cures by virtue of a temperament
peculiar to themselves: for how come they only to happen to have this
temperament and none of the Jews who had all equal advantages with them for it?
Why did none of the enemies of Christ do as strange things as they did? How
come they never to do it before they were Christians, nor in such an
extraordinary manner till after the day of Pentecost? C
Did the being Christians alter their natural temper and infuse a sanative
virtue into them which they never had before? Or rather was not their
Christianity like to have spoiled it if ever they had it before; by their
frequent watchings, fastings, hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, stripes
and imprisonments, racks and torments? Are these the improvers of an excellent
constitution? if they be, I doubt not but those who magnify it in them, would
rather want the virtue of it, than be at the pains to obtain it. D


2. But what a natural temper cannot do, they think the power of imagination
may: and therefore in order to the enervating the power of miracles, they
mightily advance that of imagination: which is the Idol of those who are as
little Friends to reason in it as they are to Religion. Any thing shall be able
to effect that, which they will not allow God to do: nay the mostextravagant
thing which belongs to humane nature shall have a greater power than the most
holy and divine spirit. But do not we see, say they, strange effects of the
power of imagination upon mankind? I grant we do, and in nothing E
more than when men set it up against the power of God: yet surely we see far
greater effects of that in the world than we do of the other. The power of
imagination can never be supposed to give a being to the things we see in the
world; but we have the greatest reason to attribute that to a divine and A
infinite power; and is it not far more rational that that which gave a Being
to the course of nature should alter it when it pleases, than that which had
nothing to do in the making of it. So that in general, there can be no
competition between the power of God and the strength of imagination as to any
extraordinary effects which happen in the world. But this is not all; for there
is a repugnancy in the very nature of the thing that the power of imagination
should do all those miracles which were wrought by Christ or his Apostles. For
either they must be wrought by the imagination of the Agent or B
of the Patient: if of the Agent, then there can be no more necessary to do the
same things than to have the same strength of imagination which they had; what
is the reason then that never since or before that time were so many signs, and
wonders wrought as there were then by the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord?
If Peter and John cured the lame man by the strength of imagination; why have
no persons ever since cured those whose welfare they have as heartily desired
as ever they could do his? Certainly if imagination could kill men's enemies,
there would never need Duels to destroy them, nor C
Authority to punish such as do it: and if it could cure Friends, there would
need no Physicians to heal and recover them and death would have nothing to do,
but with persons that were wholly Friendless. If they say, that persons are not
sufficiently persuaded of their own power; and therefore they do see little
good; let any of those who contend the most for it attempt the cure when they
please of any the most common infirmity of mankind; and if they cannot do that,
let them then persuade us they can do miracles by that, which they cannot cure
the toothache by. But here they will say, the imagination D
of the Patient is necessary in order to a miracle being wrought upon him: not
such I am sure as Christ and his Apostles wrought, who not only healed the lame
and the blind, but raised the dead; and what power of imagination do they
suppose in Lazarus when he had lain four days in the Grave? and however they
think of the soul they must in this case allow this power of imagination to be
immortal. So that were there no other arguments but that of raising the dead
that demonstrates it impossible that what Christ or his Apostles did, did
depend on the strength of Fancy in those on whom they wrought E
their miracles.

Object. But, say they, did not Christ and his Apostles require believing first
in all persons that had miracles wrought upon them; and why should this be, but
because the strength of imagination was required to it. And is it not expressly
said, A
that Christ could not do any mighty works among his own country men because of
their unbelief; by which it appears that the efficacy of his miracles did
depend on the faith of the persons. To which I answer,

Answ. 1. That Christ did not always require faith in the person on whom he
wrought his miracles; for then it had been impossible he should ever have
raised any from the dead; which we are sure he did. And did not Act. 10. 9, 12.
St. Paul raise Eu^ychus from the dead? and can any think so absurdly as that
faith was required from a dead man in order to his resurrection? B
So that the greatest miracles of all others were wrought, where there was no
possibility of believing in those on whom they were wrought.

2. When in miraculous cures believing was required it was to show for what end
those miracles were wrought, viz. to confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel by
them: they did not work miracles to be admired by the people as Simon Magus
would have done; the Apostles had no such intolerable vanity to be cried up for
Gods, though they did such great things; not like that Caesar of the Atheists
as some call him, who concludes C
one of his Dialog. 54. Doemoniacis.
Dialogues with that horrible piece of vanity (to say no more of it) aut Deus
es aut Vaninus, and Pomponatius his Master before him had said Pomponat. de
Incantat. c. 4. p. 53.
Philosophi sunt Dii terrestres, (and you must be sure to reckon him in the
number;) but how was it possible for these men to discover more their mean
thoughts of a Deity than by making him to be as despicable as themselves? What
boasting and ostentation would these men have made of themselves, if they could
have done but the thousand part of what the Apostles did? But they were men did
as far excel all such in all true virtue and real D
excellency as they did in that miraclous power which God had given them. If
they required men to believe whom they cured, it was that they might cure both
body and soul together: but sometimes they cured persons whom they saw not: as
the Acts 19. 11, 12.
hankerchiefs from St. Paul at Ephesus cured the diseased when they were
carried to them. But generally they took all opportunities to convey the
Doctrine of Christianity into the minds of those, out of whose bodies they cast
either diseases or Devils. But is it not said that Christ could do no mighty
works among them because of their unbelief, and the power of E
his disciples could not be greater than his own? To which I answer,

1. It is no where said in the Scripture that Christ could do no miracles at
all among them because of their unbelief: for in one place it is said, Mark 13.
58.
And he did not many mighty works A
there because of their unbelief. He did miracles enough to convince them; but
when he saw their obstinacy, he would not cast away any more upon them. And in
that other place where it is said, Matthew. 6. 5.
that he could there do no mighty work, it is presently added, save that he
laid his hands upon a few sick folk and healed them. And what absurdity is
there that Christ should do no extraordinary miracle among them, among whom he
saw that himself and his miracles were both equally contemned. It is not the
method of divine goodness to bestow the largest kindnesses at first; those who
improve the beginnings B
of savor shall have more, but those who despise the first may justly be
rejected from any farther kindness.

2. When it is said that he could not, that expression does not imply any
impossibility in the thing but a deliberate resolution to the contrary, so it
is used Acts 4. 20. Act. 4 20.
For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. Who questions
but there was a possibility in the thing, that they might have held their
peace? but it was a thing which upon great deliberation they had resolved not
to do. So Revel. 2. 2.
thou can not bear them which are evil; and 2 Cor. 13.
we can do C
nothing against the truth; but for the truth. From which it appears that this
can be no prejudice to the power of Christ in working miracles, but only shows
his just resolution not to do it, considering the contempt wherewith he had
been entertained among them.

2. It is pretended by those men who set themselves to undervalue those
miraculous gifts which the Apostles had, that the gift of tongues might be only
the effect of an Enthusiastic heat, or some distemper of their brains, as men
in a high Fever are apt to speak such things and words, which while they D
are in health they could never do. But that such unreasonable imaginations do
more argue a distempered brain, than any thing we assert concerning these
divine persons will easily appear from these considerations.

1. That no violent heat whatsoever can form a new language to a man which he
never knew before. If language had been natural to man there might have been
some reason for it; but that we all know to be an arbitrary thing: and as well
might a blind man paint with an exact difference of colors, or one write
plainly who could never read, as any E
person by the mere heat of his Fancy speak suddenly in a tongue which he
never learnt. There have been some who have said Vania. Dial. 54. p. 407.
that the mind of man has naturally all kinds of languages within it self, and
it wants nothing but some mighty heat to stir men up to speak in any kind of
them. A
But we are to take notice that those things are accounted wit when spoken
against Religion, which would have been nonsense and contradictions if spoken
for it. And certainly nothing could be more absurdly said, than for the same
men to make all the imaginations we have of things to come in by our senses,
and yet to say that the mind of man can have those things in it, which he never
learnt or heard. If this supposion were true we might invert that saying of
Act. 26. 24.
Festus to St. Paul much learning has made thee mad; for then madness or that
which is the next to it, a great heat of brain, would B
make men the most learned. If this were true, there would be a much easier way
of attaining to speak in the languages of all nations than that which many take
to gain a very few of them: for the heightening of Fancy either by Wine, or a
degree of madness would inspire men with skill in tongues to a miracle.

2. But supposing such a thing possible, which is far from being so, yet it is
very remote from our present case; for the Apostles made it manifest to all
persons that they were far enough from being inspired with the vapors of wine
or touched C
with any Enthusiastic madness. They spoke with strange tongues, but in such a
manner as convinced great numbers of their hearers of the excellency of that
doctrine which was delivered by them. As St. Paul answered Festus, Act. 26. 25.
I am not mad most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and
soberness; so they did not speak incoherent and insignificant words which
madness makes men do, nor any mean and trivial things, merely for ostentation
of their gifts, but they spoke though with diverse tongues, Act. 2. 11.
the great or wonderful things of God: So their auditors confessed with
admiration. D
These are not the effects of Wine or Madness as St. Peter at large proves,
against the unreasonable cavils of some V. 13.
who mocked and said they were full of new wine. Which he does with so great
success that the same day 3000 persons disowned V. 41.
their former course of life and embraced Christianity. Surely, madness was
never more infectious, never made men more wise and sober, than this did, if
the Apostles were acted only by that. When was there ever better and more
weighty sense spoken by any, than by the Apostles after the day of Pentecost?
With what reason do they argue, with what strength E
do they discourse, with what a sedate and manly courage do they withstand the
opposition of the Sanhedrin against them? they never fly out into any
extravagant passion, never betray any weakness or fear: but speak the truth
with boldness and rejoice when they suffer for it. It could be no sudden heat
which acted them on the day of Pentecost, for the same Spirit A
and power continued with them afterward: they lived and acted by virtue of
it, so that their life was as great a miracle, as any that was wrought by them.
Their zeal was great but regular, their devotion servent and constant, their
conversation honest and prudent, their discourses inflaming and convincing, and
the whole course of their lives breathed nothing but glory to God, and good
will toward men. If they are called to suffer for their Religion, with what
constancy do they own the truth, with what submission do they B
yield to their persecutors, with what meekness and patience do they bear their
sufferings! If differences arise among Christians, with what care do they
advise, with what caution do they direct, with what gentleness do they
instruct, with what tenderness do they bear with diffenters, with what
earnestness do they endeavor to preserve the peace of the Christian Church!
when they are to plant Churches, how ready to go about it, how diligent in
attending it, how watchful to prevent all miscarriages among them! When they
write Epistles to those already planted, with what Authority do they teach, C
with what Majesty do they command, with what severity do they rebuke, with
what pity do they chastise, with what vehemence do they exhort, and with what
weighty arguments do they persuade all Christians to adorn the doctrine of God
their Savior in all things! So that such persons who after all these things
can believe that the Apostles were acted only by some extravagant heats may as
easily persuade themselves that men may be drunk with sobriety, and mad with
reason, and debauched with goodness. But such are fit only to be treated in a
dark room, if any can be found darker than their understandings D
are.

2. But yet there may be imagined a higher sort of madness than these men are
guilty of. viz. That when men are convinced that these things could not be done
by mere Mechanical causes, then they attribute them to the assistance of
Spirits, but not to the holy and divine, but such as are evil and impure. A
madness so great and extravagant, that we could hardly imagine that it were
incident to humane nature, unless the Scripture had told us that some had thus
blasphemed the son of man, and either had or were in danger of blaspheming the E
Holy Ghost too. And this is properly blaspheming the Holy Ghost, (which was
not given, as our text tells us, till after Christ's ascension) when men
attribute all those miraculous gifts which were poured out upon the Apostles in
confirmation of the Christian doctrine to the power of an unclean Spirit. A
For so the Evangelist St. Luke, when he mentions the Luke 12. 10.
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost which shall not be forgiven immediately
subjoyns; their bringing the Apostles to the Synagogues and Magistrates and
Powers; and adds, that the Holy Ghost, (even that which they so blasphemed in
them) should teach them in that same hour what they ought to say. I deny not
but the attributing the miraculous works of Christ who had the Holy Spirit
without measure, to an evil Spirit was the same kind of sin; but it received a
greater aggravation after the resurrection of Christ from the dead, and the
miraculous B
effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. For now the great confirmation
was given to the truth of all that Christ had said before; he had some times
concealed his miracles and forbid the publishing of them: and to such he
appeared but as the son of man, of whom it is said 1 Cor. 2. 8.
that had they known him they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: and
St. Peter more expressly; Act. 3. 17.
and now Brethren I wot that through ignorance you did it as did also your
Rulers. But now since his resurrection and ascension when God by the effusion
of the Holy Ghost has given the largest and fullest Testimony to the C
doctrine of the Gospel; if men after all this shall go on to blaspheme the
Holy Ghost, by attributing all these miracles to a Diabolical power, then there
is no forgiveness to be expected either in this world, or the world to come,
Because this argues the greatest obstinacy of mind, the highest contempt of
God, and the greatest affront that can be put upon the Testimony of the holy
Spirit; for it is charging the Spirit of truth to be an evil and a lying
Spirit. By which we see what great weight and moment the Scripture lays upon
this pouring out of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles, and what care men ought to D
have how they undervalue and despise it, and much more how they do reproach
and blaspheme it. They might as well imagine that light and darkness may meet
and embrace each other, as that the infernal Spirits should employ their power
in promoting a doctrine so contrary to their interest? For Heaven and Hell
cannot be more distant, than the whole design of Christianity is from all the
contrivances of wicked Spirits. How soon was the Devil's Kingdom broken, his
Temples demolished, his oracles silenced, himself baffled in his great design
of deceiving mankind when Christianity prevailed in the E
world? Having thus far asserted the truth of the thing viz. that there was
such an effusion of the Holy Spirit, now come to consider.

2. The nature of it as it is represented to us by Rivers of living waters
flowing out of them that believe: by which we A
may understand

1. The plenty of it called Rivers of waters. 2. The benefit and usefulness of
it to the Church.
1. The plentifulness of this effusion of the Spirit; there had been some
drops, as it were, of this Spirit which had fallen upon some of the Jewish
nation before; but those were no more to be compared with these rivers of
waters, than the waters of Siloam which run softly, with the mighty River
Euphrates. What was the Spirit which Bezaleel had to build the Exodus 31. 3.
Tabernacle with, if compared with that Spirit which the B
Apostles were inspired with for building up the Church of God? what was that
Exodus 28 3.
Spirit of Wisdom which some were filled with to make garments for Aaron, if
compared with that Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation which led the Apostles into
the knowledge of all Truth? What was that Spirit of Courage which was given to
the Judges of old, if compared with that Spirit which did convince the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment? What was that Spirit of Moses which
was communicated to the 70. elders, if compared with that Spirit of his son,
which God has shed abroad in the hearts of his C
people? What was that Spirit of prophecy, which inspired some Prophets in
several ages, with that Act. 2. 16, 17.
pouring out of the Spirit upon all flesh; which the Apostle tells us was
accomplished on the day of Pentecost? But these Rivers of Waters though they
began their course at Jerusalem upon that day, yet they soon overflowed the
Christian Church in other parts of the world. The sound of that rushing mighty
wind was soon heard in the most distant places: and the fiery tongues inslamed
the hearts of many who never saw them. These gifts being propagated into other
Churches, and many other tongues D
were kindled from them as we see how much this gift of tongues obtained in the
Church of Corinth: And so in the History of the Acts of the Apostles, we find
after this day how the Holy Ghost fell upon them which believed, and what
mighty signs and wonders were done by them.

2. The benefit and usefulness of this effusion of the Spirit; like the Rivers
of Waters that both refresh and enrich, and thereby make glad the City of God.
The coming down of the Spirit was like Isa. 44. 3.
the pouring water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground*
Now Isa. 41. 18.
God opened E
the Rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys; that the
poor and needy who seek water might be refreshed, and they whose tongues failed
for thirst might satisfy themselves with living water. These are some of the
lofty expressions whereby the Courtly Prophet Isaiah sets forth the great A
promise of the spirit; none better befitting the mighty advantages the Church
of God has ever since enjoyed by the pouring out of the spirit than these. For
the fountain was opened in the Apostles, but the streams of those Rivers of
living water have run down to our Age: not confined within the banks of Tiber,
nor mixing with the impure waters of it; but preserved pure and unmixed in that
sacred doctrine contained in the Holy Scripture. Within those bounds we confine
our faith, and are not moved by the vain discourses of any who pretend to
discover a new Fountain head to these waters at Rome; and B
would make it impossible for them to come down to us through any other Channel
but theirs. But supposing they had come to us through them, have they thereby
gotten the sole disposal of them, that none shall taste but what and how much
they please? and must we needs drink down the filth and mud of their Channel
too? As long as they suffer us to do what Christ has commanded us to do, viz.
John7. 37. Revel. 22. 17.
to take of these waters of life freely we do our own duty and quarrel not with
them. But if they go about to stop the passage of them, or adulterate them with
some foreign mixture, or strive with us as the Herdsmen of C
Gerar did with Isaac's Herdsmen saying the Genesis 26. 20.
Water is ours, then if the name of the well be Esek, if contentions do arise,
the blame is not ours; we assert but our own just right against all their
encroachments. For as Isaac pleaded V. 18.
that he only dug again the wells of water which they had dug in the days
of Abraham his Father, and although the Philistines had stopped them after the
death of Abraham, yet that could be no hindrance to his right, but he might
open them again, and call their names after the names by which his Father had
called them. So that is the substance of our Plea, we pretend D
to nothing but to clear the passage which they have stopped up and was left
free and open for us in the time of the Apostles and Fathers; we desire not to
be imposed upon by their later usurpations: we plead for no more but that the
Church of God may have the same purity and integrity which it had in the
primitive times, and that things may not only be called by the names by which
the Fathers have called them; but that they may be such as the Fathers have
left them. But otherwise let them boast never so much of the largeness of their
stream, of the Antiquitity of their Channel, of the holiness of their waters, E
of the number of their Ports and the riches of their trading; nay and let them
call their stream by the name of the Ocean too (if they please), yet we envy
them not their Adma^ and Pharpar and all the Rivers of Damascus, so we may sit
down quietly by these living waters of Jordan. We are contented with the A
miracles which the Apostles wrought without forging or believing new ones; we
are satisfied with the gift of strange tongues which they had, we know no
necessity now of speaking much less of praying in an unknown tongue: we believe
that Spirit infallible which inspired the Apostles in their holy writtings and
those we acknowledge, embrace and I hope are willing to dye for: But if any
upstart Spirit pretend to sit in an infallible chair, we desire not to be
brought under bondage to it, till we see the same miracles wrought by virtue of
it, which were wrought by the Apostles to attest their infallibility. B


3. The last thing to be spoken to, is, the season that this effusion of the
Spirit was reserved for, which was after the glorious ascension of Christ to
Heaven. This was reserved as the great Donative after his Triumph over
Principalities and Powers, when he was ascended up on high he sends down the
greatest gift that ever was bestowed upon mankind viz. this gift of his Holy
Spirit. Hereby Christ discovered the greatness of his purchase, the height of
his Glory, the exercise of his Power, the assurance of his Resurrection and
Ascension: C
and the care he took of his Church and People; by letting them see that he
made good his last promise to them of sending them another Comforter who should
be with them to assist them in all their undertakings, to direct them in their
doubts, to plead their cause for them against all the vain oppositions of men.
And he should not continue with them for a little time as Christ had done, but
he should abide with them for ever i. e. so as not to be taken from them as
himself was, but should remain with them, as a pledge of his love, as a
Testimony of his truth, as an earnest of Gods favor to them now, and their D
future inheritance in heaven; for he should comfort them by his presence,
guide them by his counsel, and at last bring them to glory.

Nothing now remains but that as the occasion of our rejoicing on this day does
so much exceed that of the Jews at their ceremony of pouring out the water; so
our joy should as much exceed in the nature and kind of it the mirth and
jollity which was then used by them. With what joy did the Israelites when they
were almost burnt up with thirst in the wilderness cast of the pleasant streams
which issued out of the E
rock? 1 Cor. 10. 4.
that rock says the Apostle was Christ and the gifts of the Spirit are that
stream of living water which flows from him, and shall not we express our
thankfulness for so great and unvaluable a mercy? Our joy cannot be too great
for such a gift as this so it be of the nature of it i. e. a spiritual A
joy. The Holy Ghost ought to be the Fountain of that joy which we express for
Gods giving him to his Church. Let us not then affront that good Spirit, while
we pretend to bless God for him let us not grieve him by our presumptuous sins,
nor resist his motions in our hearts by our wilful continuance in them. The
best way we can express our thankfulness is by yielding up our selves to be
guided by him in a holy life, and then we may be sure our joy shall never end
with our lives, but shall be continued with a greater fullness for ever more. B
C
D
E


SERMON X. Sermon. X.
A
B
Preached at WHITE HALL. MARCH 2. 1669. C

ISAIAH LVII. XXI. There is no peace, says my God to the Wicked.


IF we were bound to judge of things only D
by appearance, and to esteem all persons happy who are made the object of the
envy of some and the flattery of others, this text would seem to be a strange
Paradox, and inconsistent with what daily happens in the word. For what
complaint has been more frequent among men almost in all ages, than that peace
and E
prosperity has been the portion of the wicked, that their troubles have not
been like other men's, that none seem to enjoy greater pleasures in this world
than they who live as if there were no other? The consideration of which has
been a matter of great offense to the weak, and of surprise to the wisest; A
till they have searched more deeply into the nature of these things (which the
more men have done the better esteem they have always had of divine providence)
and from thence have understood that the true felicity of a man's life lies in
the contentment of his own mind, which can never arise from any thing without
himself, nor be enjoyed till all be well within. For when we compare the state
of humane nature with that of the beings inferior to it, we shall easily find
that as man was designed for a greater happiness than they are capable of; so
that cannot lie in any thing which he enjoys in common B
with them, (such as the pleasures of our senses are) but must consist in some
peculiar excellencies of his being. And as the capacity of misery is always
proportionable to that of happiness; so the measure and the kind of that must
be taken in the same manner that we do the other. Where there is no sense of
pleasure there can be none of pain; where all pleasure is confined to sense,
the pain must be so too; but where the greatest pleasures are intellectual, the
greatest torments must be those of the mind. From whence it follows that
nothing does so much conduce to the proper happiness of man, as that C
which does the most promote the peace and serenity of his mind: nothing can
make him more miserable than that which causes the greatest disturbance in it.
If we can then make it appear that the highest honors, the greatest riches,
and the softest pleasures can never satisfy the desires, conquer the fears,
nor allay the passions of an ungoverned mind, we must search beyond these
things for the foundations of its peace. And if notwithstanding them there may
be such a sting in the conscience of a wicked man, that may inflame his mind to
so great a height of rage and fury, which the diversions of the world D
cannot prevent, nor all its pleasures cure: we are especially concerned to fix
such a notion of man's happiness which either supposes a sound mind or else
makes it so; without which all the other things so much admired can no more
contribute toward any true contentment than a magnificent Palace, or a
curiously wrought bed to the cure of the Gout or Stone. All which I speak, (not
as though I imagined any state of perfect tranquillity or complete happiness
were attainable by any man in this present life: for as long as the causes are
imperfect the effect must be so too: and those Philosophers who discoursed E
so much of a happy state of life did but frame Ideas in Morals as they did in
Politics, not as though it were possible for any to reach to the exactness of
them, but those were to be accounted best which came the nearest to them:) but
I therefore speak concerning a happy state of life for these two reasons. A


1. That though none can be perfectly happy, yet that some may be much more so
than others are, i. e. they may enjoy far greater contentment of mind in any
condition than others can do; they can bear crosses, and suffer injuries with a
more equal temper; and when they meet with vicissitudes in the world they
wonder no more at it, than to see that the wind changes its quarter, or that
the Sea proves rough and tempestuous which but little before was very even and
calm. They who understand humane nature have few things left to wonder at; and
they who do the least wonder, are the least surprised; and they B
who are the least surprised are the least troubled; and those are the happiest
men as this world goes, who meet with fewest troubles in it. The Italians have
a shrewd Proverb, that there is less money, less wisdom, less honesty in the
world than men generally make account of; I will not stand to maintain the
truth of it, but the less men believe of these things, the less they are
deceived, and the less they are deceived the less they are troubled. For no
troubles are greater than those which are the most unexpected; none are so
unexpected as those which come upon men who are only undeceived by their own
experience: C
For they undergo a great deal of trouble to gain a little wisdom whereas a
true judgment and consideration of these things before hand, keeps the mind of
man more steady and fixed amidst all the contingencies of humane affairs. By
which we see that wisdom of it self has a great influence upon the quiet and
peace of man's mind and the happiness of his life: but if we add to that the
inseparable property of true wisdom, viz. patience and submission to the Will
of God upon the consideration of his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, he must be
strangely blind that cannot discern a greater peace and serenity D
following these two in the minds of men, than where folly and irreligion
reign. Thus far then we have gained, that Wisdom and Piety tend very much to
the lessening the troubles of a man's life; and therein lies the far greatest
part of the happiness of this imperfect State. For it is a vain thing to expect
in so open a condition as we live in here that no cross winds should blow upon
us; but if they only shake our branches and make our leaves fall, as long as
the root holds firm and the body entire, the former beauty and glory will
return again. It can be no disparagement to the most skilful Pilot, to have his
E
Vessel tossed upon a tempestuous Sea, but to escape with little damage when he
sees others sink down and perish, shows the great difference which wisdom gives
in the success, where the dangers are equal and common. So that not only some
men may meet with fewer troubles in the world than others do; but A
supposing they meet with the same, some are far more happy in passing through
them than others are. And this is the fairest sense I know can be given of
those otherwise extravagant speeches of the Philosophers of old, concerning the
Wise man being happy in the Bull of Phalaris, or under the greatest racks and
torments, not as though they could be so senseless to imagine that any man
could be as happy in his torments as out of them; but that taking him in the
same State with another man who wants that constancy of mind which he has, he
may be said to be happy in respect of the other. By which B
we see that although no state of life can be said to be completely happy, yet
some may be much nearer than others can be. Which was necessary to be premised
in order to the right understanding the design of our following discourse:
which is to show.

2. That some course of life to any man who considers what he does, is utterly
inconsistent with a state of Peace and Tranquillity; I mean the course of Sin
and Wickedness. So the Prophet assures us from the mouth of God himself: in the
words of the text. There is no peace says my God to the Wicked. Which words
are spoken on purpose by the Prophet, to show C
how much the wickedness of men does hinder them from enjoying that peace and
happiness which they might have had without it; for in the foregoing words he
represents God as showing great pity to the scattered remainders of a broken
and distressed people; though he had punished them severely for their sins, and
banished them out of their native country, yet he promises them, that those
who put their trust in him should possess the land and again inherit his holy
mountain. v. 13. and therefore speaks that the way might be cast up and D
prepared for their return, and every impediment taken out of the way, v. 14.
for the high and lofty one who inhabits eternity; will again dwell in his high
and holy place, viz. at Jerusalem (so the words may be understood, for the
Hebrew verb is future) but especially with those who were humbled for their
sins, who are here called the humble and contrite ones. v. 15. For God would
not always contend with them, for he knew they were not able to stand before
him; v. 16. and although his punishment of them was just for their sins, v. 17.
yet God took notice of their repentance and would therefore E
heal their breaches, and conduct them back again to their own land, and
thereby give so great an occasion of joy and triumph, that by it he is said to
restore comforts to those who mourned for the calamities they lay under. (...).
18. yea he would grant them so much inward peace and outward prosperity, that A
they should far and near join in their praises to God for it; and therefore he
is said to create the fruit of the lips peace, peace, etc. But all this while
they must have a care of deceiving themselves, though God did restore them to
their own land with abundance of joy and peace, in expectation that the
remembrance of their former calamities and the present blessings they enjoyed
would make them abhor the sins which had provoked God to punish them; yet if
they should return to their wickedness again, or continue in it after so great
mercies, they would soon find that their wickedness would overthrow B
their peace, and nothing but discontent and trouble would follow upon it; as
the natural product of it. For like the troubled Sea that is tossed up and down
with violent and impetuous winds, fomes and rages, one wave beating against
another, and the effect of all this commotion is nothing but casting upon the
neighbor shore a greater burden of unprofitable mire and dirt: such would the
effect of their wickedness be among them, v. 20. it would make them restless
and unquiet in themselves, having no one certain motion but tossed up and down
with every contrary blast of wind, and producing nothing by all these various C
agitations but unprofitable counsels and unsuccesful designs. But lest the
Prophet should be supposed to speak all this out of discontent and passion, he
confirms what he had said from the mouth of God in these few but smart words of
the Text. There is no peace, says my God to the wicked.

The words we see are general and indefinite, both as to the nature of the
peace here mentioned, and the notion of Wickedness employed; and therefore I
shall handle them in their due extent by showing that no one kind of true peace
is consistent with any sort of prevailing wickedness: whether by peace we D
mean the peace a man has with himself in the tranquillity of his mind; or the
peace which men have in society with one another. In either of these senses it
will appear true, that there is no peace to the wicked.

1. Taking peace, for the tranquillity of a man's mind; in order to which it is
necessary for a man to have some certain foundation to build his peace upon,
and that he be secured from those things which will overthrow it; both which
show it impossible for a wicked man to have any true peace in his mind, because
he can have no certain grounds to build it upon; E
and those things do accompany his wickedness, which will certainly overthrow
it:

1. A Wicked man can have no certain foundations for his peace. By which I do
not mean any contracted dullness, or brutish stupidity, which if we will call
peace the most insensible A
parts of the creation do infinitely exceed us in it; but such a composure and
settlement of our minds, which arises from a due consideration of things; and
differs as much from the former temper as a vigorous and healthful state of
body does from the dull effects of a Lethargy. And such a peace as this no
wicked man can ever have but upon one of these suppositions.

Either (1.) That Wickedness is but a mere name of disgrace set upon some kind
of actions, but that really there is no such a thing as sin, or the differences
of good and evil; or B
else,

(2.) Supposing there is such a thing as sin, it is ridiculous to believe there
ever should be such a punishment of it as men are affrighted with;

(3.) Or Lastly, supposing there be a punishment of sin to come, it is madness
to abstain from the present pleasures of sin for the fear of it. These being
only the imaginable grounds a wicked man can have any peace in his mind from; I
shall particularly show the falseness and the folly of them.

1. That there is no such thing as Sin or Wickedness in the C
world, and that the differences of good and evil are merely arbitrary things,
and that those are names only imposed upon things by the more cunning sort of
men to affright men from the doing some actions, and to encourage them to do
others. But what a miserable case are those in, who can never enjoy any
contentment in themselves unless all the differences of good and evil be
utterly destroyed! We should conclude that man's condition desperate, who
believes it impossible for him to have any ease in his mind, unless he could be
transformed into the shape of a beast, or petrified into the hardness of a
rock. These D
are things not utterly impossible, but yet they are possible in so remote a
degree that it is all one to say, he can have no ease, as to say, that he
expects it only upon those terms: But it is utterly inconsistent with the
supposition of humane nature, or a being endued and acting with reason, to make
all things equally good or evil. For what does reason signify as it respects
the actions of men, but a faculty of discerning what is good and fitting to be
done, from what is evil and ought to be avoided? And to what purpose is such a
faculty given us, if there be no such difference in the nature of things? Might
not E
men with equal probability argue that there is no such thing as a difference
in the things about which life and sense are conversant, as in those wherein
reason is imploved? With what impatience would those men be heard who should
assert that there is no such thing as a difference in the qualities of meats A
and drinks, but that they do all equally tend to the preservation of life,
that it is pedantical and beneath a Gentleman to talk of any such thing as
Poisons, that will so suddenly and certainly destroy men's lives, and that these
are things which none talk of or believe besides those whose trade is either to
kill or cure men? With how much wit and subtilty might a man argue upon these
things, that it is impossible for any man to define what the nature of poison
is, or in what manner it destroys the life of man, that men have conquered the
malignity of it by use, and that the same things which have been B
poison to some, have been food and nourishment to others? But notwithstanding
all these plausible arguments, none of these brave spirits dare venture the
experiment upon themselves: and yet these (only changing the terms) are the
very same arguments used against the natural differences of good and evil; viz.
the difficulty of defining or setting the exact bounds of them, and the
different customs or apprehensions of men in the world concerning the things
which are called good and evil. If we proceed farther to the objects of sense;
how ridiculous would those persons appear that should with a mighty confidence C
go about to persuade men, that the differences between light and darkness,
between pleasure and pain, between smells and tastes and noises are but
fantastic and imaginary things? Who would ever believe that those are men of
the most excellent sight to whom light and darkness are equal: (for others who
pretend not to so much wit, are wont to call such persons blind.) Or that those
have the most exquisite sense, that feel no difference of pain and pleasure,
(which was wont to be thought the sign of no sense at all.) And surely the
persons I am now arguing against, love their palats too well, to admire D
those who can discern no difference of tastes; and would be well enough
contented to be thought deaf if they could put no distinction between the
pleasant sound of vocal or instrumental Music, and the harsh jarring of two
saws drawn cross each other. Thus it appears that nothing would make men more
ridiculous than to explode and laugh at the difference that there is in the
means of life and the objects of sense: let us now proceed higher. Dare any man
say there is no such thing as reason in man, because there appears so little of
the truth of it in men, and so much of the counterfeit of it in Bruits? or that
E
there is no such thing as a difference of Truth and fashood, because they are
so commonly mistaken for one another? What reason then imaginable can there be,
that there should not be as wide a distance in the matters of our choice, as in
the objects of our sense and understanding? Is it that we have natural A
faculties of sense and perception, but not of choice? that, every one is able
to resute by his constant experience, that finds a greater liberty in his
choice, than in his perception. The reason of which is wholly unintelligible,
unless a difference be found in the nature of the things proposed to his
choice; that some have a greater excellency and commendableness in them, more
agreeable to humane nature, more satisfactory to the minds of those who choose
them, than others are. And must all this difference be destroyed, merely
because all men are not agreed, what things are good and what evil? We call
goodness the B
beauty of the soul; and do men question whether there be such a thing as
beauty at all, because there are so many different opinions in the world about
it? Or is deformity ever the less real because the several nations of the world
represent it in a color different from their own? Those arguments then against
the natural differences of good and evil must needs appear ridiculous, which
will be granted to hold in nothing else but only the thing in question. And yet
in the midst of all the ruins and decays of humane nature, we find such
evident footsteps and impressions of the differences of good and evil in the
minds C
of men, which no force could extinguish, no time could deface; no customs
could alter. Let us search the records of ancient times, and enquire into the
later discoveries of nations, we shall find none so barbarous and brutish as
not to allow the differences of good and evil; so far as to acknowledge, that
there are some things which naturally deserve to be praised, and others which
deserve to be punished. Where as if good and evil were merely names of things,
there can be no reason assigned, why praise and honor should necessarily
belong to some things and infamy and disgrace to follow others. If the D
things themselves be arbitrary, the consequences of them would be so too. But
is it possible to imagine that any man should deserve to be punished as much
for being true to his trust, as for betraying it; for honoring his Parents as
for destroying them; for giving to every one their due, as for all the arts of
injustice and oppression? Is it possible for men to suffer as much in their
esteem, for their fidelity, temperance, and chastity, as they always do for
their falseness, intemperance, and lasciviousness? How comes the very name of a
lie to be a matter of so much reproach and dishonor, that the giving of it is
thought an injury E
so great as cannot be expiated without the satisfaction of the givers blood,
if it be in it self self so indifferent a thing? Nay, I dare appeal to the
consciences of the most wicked persons, whether they are so well pleased with
themselves, when they come reeking from the satisfaction of their lusts, and
sodden A
with the continuance of their debaucheries, as when they have been paying
their devotions to God, or their duties to their Parents, or their respects to
their Country or Friends? Is there not (whether they will or no,) an inward
shame, and secret regret and disquiet following the one, and nothing but ease
and contentment the other? What should make this difference in those persons
who love their vices far more than they do the other? and if it were possible
for them would bring virtue more out of countenance than sin is: yet after all
their endeavors, though vice has the stronger interest, virtue B
has the greater Reverence. Thus considering humane nature as it is, we find
indelible characters remaining upon it of the natural differences of good and
evil; but then if we consider it with a respect to the Maker of it, that will
cast a clearer light upon them, and make those characters appear more
discernible. For nothing can be more absurd than to imagine a creature owing
its being, and all it has to the bounty of a Being infinite in all
Perfections, and yet not to be obliged to give all honor, worship and service
to it. To rip up the bowels of a Mother to whom a man owes his coming into the
world; to assassinate C
a Prince, to whom he owes all the honors and riches he has in it; are crimes
of so black a nature, that the worst of men can hardly be supposed to commit
them, nor the worst of Devils to defend them: But to blaspheme God and to
deride his service seems to have a much greater malignity in it, in as much, as
our obligations to his honuor and service, are much greater than they can be to
any created Being. But if there be no natural differences of good and evil,
even this must be accounted an indifferent thing, as well as the former: and
what safety can there be in conversing with those men, whom no D
bonds of Religion, Nature, or Gratitude can tie? Let us, if it were possible
suppose a Society of men constituted of such who make all things equally good
and evil in their own nature, what a monstrous Leviathan would they make among
them? no Religion, no Law, no Kindness, no Promises, no Trust, no Contracts
could ever oblige them not to do any thing which they thought might be done
with safety. By which it appears that these principles are so inconsistent with
humane Nature, and all the bonds of Religion and Duty, that whoever owns them
must suppose mankind more savage than the beasts E
of prey, he must renounce his reason, destroy all Religion, and disown a
Deity. For if there be a God, we must be inviolably bound to observe and obey
him; and the very notion of a God implies a being infinitely perfect; and if
there be such perfections in God, they cannot but be so in their own nature, A
and if they be so in their own nature they must in their degree be so in us as
well as in him; so that if goodness, holiness and righteousness be absolute
perfections as they are in God, they must be perfections so far as they are in
us; and the contrary must be imperfections; which makes the differences of good
and evil so far from being arbitrary, that those things which agree to the
perfections of God as well as his will must needs be good, and those which are
repugnant to them must needs be evil. The result of all is, that if a wicked
man can have no peace in his mind, without overthrowing the differences B
of good and evil, he can have no peace without the greatest violence offered
to God, to nature, and himself, and if this be the way to Peace let his Reason
judge.

2. The second foundation which a wicked man must build his peace upon is, that
supposing there be such a thing as sin, yet that men have no cause to disturb
themselves with the fears of so great a punishment to follow after, as that
which sinners are afrighted with. But what security can a sinner have against
the fears of punishment when his conscience condemns him for the guilt of his
sins? Is it that God takes no notice at all of C
the actions of men, that he will not disturb his own eternal peace and
happiness by observing all their follies? So some of old imagined, who
pretended that out of mere kindness to the Deity they gave him his Quietus est,
and took from him as much as in them lay, the care and government of the world:
but it was really a greater kindness to their lusts which made them do it, and
makes many now a days so willing upon the same frivolous pretenses to exclude
the providence of God out of the world, for can any man who considers what God
is think his providence inconsistent with his happiness? If we speak of D
such weak and imperfect beings as the wisest of mankind are, it might not a
little contribute to their peace to be eased of the cares of Government. But
the reason of that is because all things cannot be foreseen by them before they
happen, nor well managed when they do, whence come oversights and
disappointments and consequently all the uneasy effects of these. But when we
speak of God, we speak of a being infinitely Wise and Powerful, from whom
nothing can be hid, and whom nothing can resist: and what can be imagined more
easy than for a conjunction of infinite Wisdom and Power, to contrive E
and manage all the affairs of the world? If therefore wicked men could suppose
that God could not know what they did, or could not punish them if he knew it,
they might indulge themselves in greater security: but to suppose his Wisdom so
great that he cannot but know their actions, and his Power so irresistible,
that it is impossible for them to stand before him when A
he designs to punish, to flatter themselves with the hopes of impunity is an
extravagant piece of folly and madness. Or is it then, that though God does
take notice of their actions, he will not be so much displeased as to punish
them? but this is as repugnant to the Justice and holiness of God, as the other
was to his Wisdom and Power. Will not the righteous God who has made Laws to
govern mankind see to the execution of them? for if he did not hate sin why did
he so strictly forbid it? if he does hate sin, he will severely punish it. Nay B
has he not been severe already in the execution of his judgments upon the
world for sin? what did Adam and his posterity suffer for the first sin? what
did the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, the people of the Jews suffer for their
wickedness? And is not he the same God still? Is his hand shortened that he
cannot strike, or does his heart fail that he dare not punish? Surely of all
nations we have no cause to think so, and of all Ages; not in this of ours;
wherein we have smarted so much by the just displeasure of God against our
sins. But where then lies the sinners hope? Is it at last, that though God may C
sometimes punish men in this life for their sins he will never do it in that
to come? If he could have said it was impossible he should do it, and proved it
sufficiently, there might have been some ground for his security, but that is
impossible he should ever do; but to hope he will not do it when he has
declared that he will, is instead of bringing peace to his own mind to set God
at variance with himself. For nothing can be more plainly revealed, more
frequently inculcated, more earnestly pressed than Romans 2. 5, 6, 8, 9.
that there is a day of wrath to come, wherein the righteous judgment of God
shall be revealed; and wherein D
God will render to every man according to his deeds: wherein tribulation, and
anguish and wrath shall be upon every soul of man that does evil; wherein the
secrets of all hearts and actions shall be disclosed, when the graves shall be
opened, John 5. 29
and they that have done good shall come forth to the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation. For the Lord Jesus
himself even he who dyed for the salvation of all penitent sinners, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
7, 8, 9.
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel E
of Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of his power. Then shall that dreadful
sentence be passed upon all impenitent sinners, Matthew. 25. 41.
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Which words are so full of horror and astonishment as might not only
disturb the sinners peace A
and security, but awaken him to such a sense of his sins, as to loath, abhor
and forsake them, and thereby fly from the wrath to come.

3. But after all this, is it possible to suppose, that any should think their
present pleasures would countervail all the miseries of another life? which is
the last imaginable foundation for a sinners peace, while he continues in his
wickedness. The most professed Epicureans that ever were, made this one of
their fundamental maxims, that no pleasure was to be chosen, which brought
after it a pain greater than it self: on which B
account they made temperance and sobriety necessary to a pleasant life,
because excesses and debaucheries leave far more of burden than of ease behind
them. But what would these men have said, if they had believed the intolerable
anguish of a tormented mind, the racks of an enraged conscience, the fire of
everlasting vengeance to be the consequent of all the pleasures of sin? they
must upon their own principles have concluded that none but madmen and fools
would ever venture upon them. And that not only because the after pain would C
so much exceed the present pleasure; but because the fears of that pain to
come must abate proportionably of the pleasure which might otherwise be
enjoyed. Suppose a man certainly knew that upon the pleasing his palate with the
most excellent wine, and gratifying his appetite, with the most delicate food
he must be racked with the stone, and tormented with the Gout as long as he
should live; can we imagine such a person could have any pleasure in his mind
(whatever his palate had) in the emjoyment of them while he did consider the
consequent of them. But what are these miseries compared with the insupportable
D
horror of a conscience laden with guilt, sunk under despair, having a
gnawing worm and unquenchable flames; the wrath of an almighty God, and the
fury of his vengeance to encounter with, without the least hopes of conquering?
I do not now ask, what the sinner will then think of all his Atheism and
Infidelity when the greatness of his misery shall convince him that it is an
Almighty hand which lays it upon him; nor what pleasure he can have in the
thoughts of his former excesses, when not one drop can be procured for the
mitigation of his flames? nor what satisfaction those lusts E
have given him, the very thoughts of which pierce his soul, and if it were
possible would rend him in pieces with the torment of them? but that which I
demand is, what peace of mind a sinner can have in this world who knows not how
soon he may be dispatched to that place of torment? can he bind the hands A
of the Almighty, that he shall not snatch him away till he does repent? or can
he reverse the decrees of heaven, or suspend the execution of them? can he
abrogate the force of his Laws, and make his own terms with God? can he
dissolve the chains of darkness with a few deathbed tears, and quench the
flames of another world with them? O foolish sinners who has bewitched them
with these deceitful dreams! will heavengates fly open with the strength of a
few dying groans? will the mouth of hell be stopped with the bare lamentation of
a sinner? Are there such charms in some penitent words extorted B
from the fear of approaching misery, that God himself is not able to resist
them? Certainly there is no deceit more dangerous, nor I fear more common in
the world, than for men to think that God is so easy to pardon sin, that
though they spend their lives in satisfying their lusts; they shall make amends
for all by a dying sorrow and a gasping repentance. As though the unsaying what
we had done, or wishing we had done otherwise since we can do it no longer,
(for that is the bottom of all putting off repentance to the last) were
abundant compensation to the justice of God, for the affronts of C
his Majesty, contempt of his Laws, abuse of his patience, and all the large
indictments of wilful and presumptuous sins, which the whole course of our
lives is charged with. The supposal of which makes the whole design of Religion
signify very little in the world.

Thus we have examined the foundations of a sinners peace, and found them very
false and fallacious:

2. we are now to show that those things do accompany a sinners course of life
which certainly overthrow his peace; which are these two. 1. The reflections of
his mind. 2. The D
violence of his passions.

1. The reflections of his mind, which he can neither hinder nor be pleased
with. No doubt if it were possible for him to deprive himself of the greatest
excellency of his being, it would be the first work he would do, to break the
glass which shows him his deformity. For as our Savior says John 3. 20.
every one that does evil hates the light lest his deeds should be reproved;
not only the light without which discovers them, but that light of conscience
within, which not only shines but burns too. Hence proceeds that great
uneasiness which a sinner feels E
within as often as he considers what he has done amiss, which we call the
remorse of conscience; and is the natural consequent of the violence a man
offers to his reason in his evil actions. It was thought a sufficient
vindication of the innocence of two Brothers by the Roman Judges, when they
were accused A
for Parricide; that although their Father was murdered in the same room where
they lay, and no other person was found on whom they could fasten the suspicion
of it, yet in the morning the door was open and they fast asleep. For as the
Orator says, Pro Sextioc. 23.
no man can imagine, that those who had broken all the Laws of God and nature
by so great an act of wickedness could presently sleep upon it: for they who do
such things can neither rest withoutcare, nor breath without fear. We are not
to believe, says he, the fables of the Poets, as though wicked men were
haunted and terrified with the burning torches of B
the furies; but every man's wickedness is the greatest terror to himself, and
the evil thoughts which pursue wicked men are their constant and domestic
furies. It would be endless to repeat what force the more civil Heathens, have
given to conscience either way, as to the peace which follows innocence, and
the disquiet which follows guilt. Which they looked on as the great thing which
governed the world, De N. Deorum. l. 3.
qua sublata jacent omnia as the orator speaks, without which all things would
be in great disorder, for these punishments they are sure not to escape, De
leg. l. 1.
though they may do others; and these C
they thought so great and weighty that upon this ground they vindicated divine
providence as to the seeming prosperity of wicked men, thinking it the most
unreasonable thing in the world, to call those persons happy who suffered under
the severe lashes of their own consciences. If there were such a force in the
consciences of those who had nothing but the light of nature to direct them,
how much greater weight must there be when 2 Cor. 5. 11.
the terrors of the Lord are made known by himself, Romans 1. 18.
and the wrath of God revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men?
I know that wicked men D
in the height of their debaucheries pretend to be above these things, and are
ready to laugh at them as the effects of a strong spleen and a weak brain: but
I appeal to their most sober thoughts, when the steams of wine are evaporated,
and the intoxication of evil company is removed from them, when in the deep and
silent night, they revolve in their minds the actions of the foregoing day;
what satisfaction they then take in all the sinful pleasures they have pursued
so eagerly? but especially; when either their lusts have consumed their bodies,
or the vengeance of God has overtaken them; when death E
begins to seize upon their vitals, and themselves not wholly stupefied through
the power of their sins or their disease, let then, if it were possible, any
represent the fears, the horror and astonishment which the consciences of
wicked men labor under in remembrance of their evil actions. How mean and poor
A
would they leave themselves if with all their honors and riches they could
purchase to themselves, a reprieve from death and from the miseries which
follow after it? what would they then give for the comfort of a good
conscience, and the fruit of a holy, righteous, and sober life? with what
another sense of Religion do men whose minds are awakened speak then, in
comparison of what they did in the days of their mirth and jollity? Neither is
this to take them at the greatest disadvantage, as some of them have been ready
to say; for I suppose their minds as clear then as at any time, and so much the
clearer, B
because freed from the impediments of such freedom of their thoughts at
another time; for the same thoughts would have possessed them before, only the
pleasures and the hopes of life diverted their minds from them, but now the
nearness of the things they feared, and the weight and consequence of them make
them more diligently examine and impartially consider them. But that
demonstrates the great misery of a sinners State; that what cures the other
greatest troubles of our life does the most increase his, which is the exercise
of reason and consideration, that allays the power of griefs, that eases the C
mind of vain fears, that prevents many troubles and cures others, that governs
other passions and keeps them in their due bounds; but this is it which of all
things does the most increase the trouble of a wicked man's mind; for the more
he considers, the worse he finds his condition; and while he finds his
condition so bad, he can never enjoy any peace in his mind.

2. The violence of his passions: those a wicked man has lost the command of,
or else he could never be a wicked man, and whosoever is under the power of any
unruly passion forseits all his peace by it. For what peace can ever be
expected in such D
a State of violence and usurpation, where the calm government of reason is
cast off as an unnecessary burden, and every passion under the pretense of
liberty sets up for an arbitrary power? Nay* what confusion and disorder must
needs follow, where the powers of the mind, which ought to keep all in order,
are themselves in subjection to their own slaves: and none ever govern so ill
as those which ought to obey. How serene and quiet is the mind of a man where
the superior faculties preserve their just authority? How composed is his
temper, how moderate his desires, how well governed his fears! But where E
once that authority is lost, how extravagant is the rage of men, how unruly
their lusts, how predominant their fears! What peace had Xerxes in his mind
when in stead of conquering his foolish passion, he challenged mount Athos into
the field, and no doubt would have run fast enough if he had seen A
it moving? What pleasure was it to see that mighty Monarch whip the Sea in a
rage, as though the waves had been under his discipline, and would run the
faster for the fear of his rod? What harm had the hair of his head done to that
man who pulled it off with the violence of his passion, as though as the
Philosopher told him, baldness would assuage his grief? Was ever Varus the
nearer to restoring his Legions for Augustus knocking his head against the wall
in a rage about the loss of them? What injury did Neptune suffer, when he
displaced his image in the Circenstan games, because he had an B
ill Voyage at Sea? What height of madness and folly did that modern Prince's
rage betray him to, who, as the French Mora list says, Montagne. Ess. l. 1. c.
4.
having received a blow from heaven, swear to be revenged on Almighty God, and
for 10. years space forbid all public exercise of devotion toward him? I
instance in these things to let us see there is nothing so ridiculous, nothing
so absurd, nothing so irreligious but a violent passion may betray men to. And
if such things ever break forth into actions, what may we conceive the inward
disturbance is, where the outward show (which usually dissembles the inward
passion), C
betrayed so much rage and disorder; for where such flames break out, what
combustion may we conceive within? But it is not only this kind of passion
which is so great an enemy to the peace of a man's mind, but when his desires
are restless, and his fears unconquerable, and this is the case of every wicked
man. His lusts inflame him and the means he uses to quench them inrage them
more; his ambition grows greater as his honor does; and there is no hopes of a
cure, where the disease thrives under the remedy; his love of riches is
necessary to maintain his honor and feed his lusts; and where passions so D
great, so many, so different all increase by being gratified what disturbance
and confusion follows? But supposing that vices in men may agree (as the Devils
in Hell do) to the destruction of men's souls; yet what security can a wicked
man have against the power of his fears? and we all know no passion disquiets
more than that does. And how many sorts of fears possess a sinners mind? fears
of disappointments, fears of discovery, and fears of punishment, but supposing
he could master all the rest and the fears of punishment as to this life too;
yet the fears of that to come is sufficient to rob him of any peace in his
mind, E
and impossible to be overcome by him. For no sound reason can be given against
his fears, but the strongest arguments in the world to confirm them. Nay the
greatest grounds of others comforts are the strongest foundations for his
fears, as the belief of a God, and Providence, and a life to come: A
And what can give that man peace, whom the very thoughts of the God of peace
does disturb so much? That is the first kind of Peace we have showed to be in
consistent with a course of wickedness, which is the peace and tranquillity of
a man's own mind.

2. Taking this peace for an outward peace, and so these words not in respect
of every person in particular and that peace which belongs to him as such, but
as they are joined together in community; so they imply that nothing undermines
our civil peace and the prosperity of a nation so much as prevailing B
wickedness does. So that although mighty deliverances were given the people of
the Jews in a very strange and unexpected manner, when God raised up Cyrus his
servant, a man from whom no kindness was expected, and made him the great
instrument of settling the people in their land under their own lawful Princes,
and restored the true worship of God among them, yet if they grew wanton in the
days of their prosperity, and forgot the God who delivered them, they must
expect a return of Calamities again upon them; for there is no Peace says my
God to the wicked. i. e. This is the method of his C
providence, and the way he uses in governing the world; while Religion and
virtue flourish among them, they may hope for peace and prosperity; but if
those decay and sin and wickedness prevail, no other arts imaginable will
secure a lasting peace, or an abiding tranquillity. All other ways are but
tricks and devices, and there are many of them in the hearts of men, but the
Counsel of the Lord that shall stand against them all; and that Counsel he has
declared himself by the mouth of another Prophet, Jer. 18. 9, 10.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a Kingdom to
build and D
to plant it, if it do evil in my sight that it obey not my voice, then will I
repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them. Thus we find it was
in this people of the Jews, upon their first return from captivity they showed
some zeal toward the rebuilding the Temple and settling the worship of God
there; but this fit did not hold them long, they soon fell back to their former
sins and disobedience to the Laws of God, upon this they brake out into greater
schisms and factions in matters of Religion than ever were known among them
before; for then the Pharisees fell into a separation under a pretense of E
greater sanctity and severity of life, and these by their show of zeal gained
a mighty interest among the people; so great that the Princes stood in awe of
them: then the Sadducees (who were most part Courtiers as Josephus tells us)
out of opposition to the other looked on Religion as a mere political A
institution, cried out against faction and popularity, and questioned at least
whether there were any Spirits or life to come. And what peace followed upon
these things? very little among themselves we may be sure by the heats and
animosities that were continually among them; the issue of which was, the
Temple was profaned by Antiochus, rifled by Pompey; their own Princes deposed
and Usurpers ruled over them; and when the Son of God himself could not reclaim
them, their Temple, nation, and government were all involved in one common
ruin. Thus we see how these words of B
the Prophet were fulfilled upon this people.

But some have been ready to say that Gods proceedings with the Jews ought not
to be drawn into an example to any other nations, because his dealings with
them were peculiar, and by virtue of a particular Covenant which God made with
them, which he has not done with any other nation in the world. This objection
were of great force, if God himself had not in the words before mentioned,
declared the same concerning any other nation or Kingdom, and if the instances
were not as remarkable in other people as in that of the Jews. If we search C
the monuments of former ages, and consider the strange revolutions which have
happened in the mighty emipres and Kingdoms of the world; we shall find no one
circumstance more considerable in them than this, that the nations which God
has made use of for a scourge to others have been remarkable for nothing so
much, as for the virtues opposite to the most prevailing vices among those who
were overcome by them. Thus when the Chaldean Monarchy fell, the Persians who
were the sword in Gods right hand, were eminent for nothing more than their
great temperance and frugality, while the Babylonians D
perished by their luxury and effeminacy. And when the Persian Monarchy
degenerated into the same vices, the Macedonians were raised up to be the
executioners of Gods wrath upon them, because they were at that time freer than
any other people from those softening and destroying vices. And when the
Persian luxury had infected their conquerours the severe Discipline and virtue
of the Romans made them more successful in subduing the remainders of the
Grecian Empire, than their courage and number could. And when the Romans
themselves (after a long time of Gods forbearance with E
them, and several respites from punishment by the virtue and conduct of such
excellent Princes as Antoninus and Alexander Severus in the Heathen, and
Constantine and Theodos^us in the Christian Empire) fell into as great a
degeneracy of manners as any we ever read of, then did God let loose (as it
were) the A
Goths and Vandals and other barbarous nations out of their several dens who
seemed to be designed rather to destroy than to conquer. So sudden, so
numerous, so irresistible in most places were the incursions they made. But
what was it which gave them so strange success? was it their long practice and
skill in military affairs? No, they were rude and unexperienced: was it their
mighty courage? No, they were despised by the Romans as great cowards, and
begged for peace when it was denied them. But as Sal. l. 7. p. 161. etc.
Salvian tells us who lived in those times and knew the manners of both sides,
the Goths and Vandals B
were of a very severe chastity, among whom fornication was punished sharply,
and adultery a crime scarce heard of; whereas all manner of uncleanness and
licentiousness did abound among the Romans, who yet were then called
Christians. The Goths were devout and pious, acknowledging divine providence,
making their solemn supplications to God before their victories, and returning
him the praise of them afterward; but the Romans were fallen into that degree
of irreligion and Atheism that nothing was more common among them than to droll
upon Religion. P. 166.
A nostris omnia ferme C
religiosa ridentur, as Salvian speaks: they thought all things managed by
chance or fate and ascribed very little to God. And where these sins abounded
most, they were carried up and down as by a divine instinct, as they confessed
themselves, and where they conquered, P. 168.
as he particularly speaks of the Vandals in Africa, they purged all the stews
of uncleanness, and made so great a reformation by the severity of their Laws,
that even the Romans themselves were chaste among them. Thus we see how those
great and mighty Empires have been broken to pieces by the weight of their D
impieties falling upon them.

May the consideration then of these things move us in time to a reformation of
our lives, before our iniquities grow full and ripe for vengeance. We have seen
many revolutions, and God knows how many more we may see; if that should be
true of us, which the same Author says of the Romans in the midst of all their
changes Sola tantum vitia perdurant, their vices remained the same still.
Thanks be to God, that things have a fairer appearance at present than they
have had, and never so good a time to amend as now: but if men flatter
themselves E
with present security, and their sins increase as their fears abate, the
clouds which seem dispersed may soon gather again, and the face of the Heavens
will change if we do not.

And if it be not in our power to reclaim others from their sins, let us
endeavor to preserve the honor of our Church by amending our own, and
convince our enemies by living A
better than they. And give me leave to say, and so I conclude, that among all
the expedients which have been thought of for the peace of this Church and
Nation, that of leaving off our sins, and leading virtuous and exemplary lives,
will at last prove to be the most successful. B
C
D
E


SERMON XI. Sermon. XI.
A
B
Preached at WHITE HALL. MRRCH 27. 1672. C

II CORINTH. V. II. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.


IF ever any Religion was in all respects accomplished D
for so noble a design as the reformation of mankind, it was the Christian,
whether we consider the Authority of those who first delivered it, or the
weight of the arguments contained in it, and their agreeableness to the most
prevailing E
passions of humane nature. Although the world was strangely degenerated before
the coming of Christ; yet not to see great a degree, but that there were some
who not only saw the necessity of a cure, but offered their assistance in order
to it; whose attemps proved the more vain and fruitless, because A
they labored under the same distempers themselves which they offered t^ cure
in others; or the method they prescribed was mean and trivial, doub^ful and
uncertain, or else too nice and subtle to do any great good upon the world. But
Ch^istianity had not only a mighty advantage by the great holiness of those who
preached it; but by the clearness and evidence, the strength and efficacy of
those arguments which they used to persuade men. The nature of them is such,
that none who understand them can deny them to be great, their clearne^s such,
that none that hear them can choo^e but understand B
them, the manner of recommending them such, as all who understood themselves
could not but desire to hear them. No arguments can be more proper to mankind
than those which work upon their reason and consideration, no motives can stir
up mo^e to the exercise of this than their own happiness and misery; no
happinoss and misery can deserve to be so much considered as that which is
eternal. And this eternal state is that which above all other things the
Christian Religion delivers with the greatest plainnes, confirms with the
strongest evidence, and enforces upon the consciences of men with the C
most powerful and persuasive Rhetoric. I need not go beyond my text for the
proof of this, wherein we see that the Apostles sesign was to persuade men i.
e. to convince their judgments to gain their affections; to reform their
lives; that the argument they u^ed for this end was no less than the terror of
the Lord, not the frowns of the world nor the fear of men, nor the malice of
Devils; but the terror of the Almighty, whose Majesty makes even the Devils
tremble, whose power is irresisistible, and whose wrath is insupportable. But
it is not the terror of the Lord in this world, which he D
here speaks of, although that be great enough to make us as miserable as we
can be in this State: but the terror of the Lord which shall appear at the
dreadful day of judgment of which he peaks in the verse before the text. V. 10.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. This is the terror here meant which relates to our final and
eternal State in another world, when we must appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, etc. And of this he speaks, not out of Poetical Fables, ancient E
traditions, uncertain conjectures, or probable arguments but from full
assu^ance of the truth of what he delivers, Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord we persuade men. In which words we shall consider these particulars.

1. The argument which the Apostle makes choice of to persuade men, A
which is, the terror of the Lord. 2. The great assurance he expresses of the
truth of it, knowing therefore the terror of the Lord. 3. The efficacy of it
in order to the convincing and reforming mankind; knowing therefore etc. we
persuade men.
1. The argument the Apostle makes choice of to persuade men by, viz. the
terror of the Lord. In the Gospel we find a mixture of the highest clemency and
the greatest severity, the richest mercy and the strictest justice, the most
glorious rewards and intolerable punishments; accordingly we find God B
therein described as a tender Father, and as a terrible Judge, as a God of
peace, and as a God of vengeance, as an everlasting happiness and a consuming
fire; and the Son of God as coming once with great humility, and again with
Majesty and great glory; once, with all the infirmities of humane nature and
again with all the demonstrations of a Divine power and presence: once, as the
Son of God to take away the sins of the world by his death and passion; and
again, as Judge of the world with flaming fire to execute vengeance on all
impenitent sinners. The intermixing of these in the doctrine C
of the Gospel was necessary in order to the benefit of mankind by it, that
such whom the condescension of his first appearance could not oblige to leave
off their sins, the terror of his second may astonish when they foresee the
account that will be taken of their ingratitude and disobedience; that such who
are apt to despise the meanness of his birth, the poverty of his life, and the
shame of his death, may be filled with horror and amazement when they consider
the Majesty of his second coming in the clouds Jud. v. 15.
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly, not only
of their ungodly D
deeds, but of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him. And we shall easily see what great reason there is that this
second coming of Christ to judgment should be called the terror of the Lord,
if we consider,

1. The terror of the preparation for it. 2. The terror of the appearance in
it. 3. The terror of the proceedings upon it. 4. The terror of the sentence
which shall then be passed.
1. The terror of the preparation for it; which is particularly E
described by St. Peter in these words, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
But the day of the Lord will come as a Thies in the night, in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
servent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
This day will come as a Thief in A
the night, by way of surprise, when it is not looked for, and that makes it so
much the more dreadful. A lesser calamity coming suddenly does astonish more,
than a far greater which has been long expected; for, surprisals confound men's
thoughts, daunt their Spirits, and betray all the succors which reason offers.
But when the surprise shall be one of the least astonishing circumstances of
the misery men fall into, what unconceivable horror, will possess their minds
at the app^ehension of it? What confusion and amazement may we imagine the soul
of that man in, whom our Savior speaks of B
in his parable, who being pleased with the fullness of his condition Luke 12.
19, 20.
said to his soul, soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine
ease, eat, drink and be merry; but God said to him, thou fool this might thy:
soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be that thou have
provided? Had God only said, this night shall thy burns be burnt, and thy
substance consumed to ashes which thou have laid up for so many years, that
would have caused a strange consternation in him for the present, but he might
have comforted himself with the hopes of living and getting more. C
But, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; O dreadful words! O the
tremblings of body, the anguish of mind, the pangs and convulsions of
conscience which such a one is tormented with at the hearing of them! What sad
reflections does he presently make upon his own folly? And must all the mirth
and ease I promised my self for so many years; be at an end now in a very few
hours? Nay, must my mirth be so suddenly turned into bitter howlings, and my
ease into a bed of flames? Must my soul be thus torn away from the things it
loved, and go where it will hate to live and can never dye? D
O miserable creature! to be thus deceived by my own folly, to be surprised
after so many warnings, to betray my self into everlasting misery? fear,
horror and despair have already taken hold on me and are carrying me, where
they will never leave me.

These are the Agonies but of one single person whom death snatches away in the
midst of his years, his pleasures and his hopes: but such as these the greatest
part of the world will fall into when that terrible day of the Lord shall come.
Luke 17. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
For as it was in the days of Noe; so shall it be also in the E
day of the Son of Man; they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were
given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the Ark; and the flood
came and destroyed them all; Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they
did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they A
builded, but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstome from Heaven and destroyed them all: even thus shall it be in the day
when the Son of Man is revealed. Chapter 21. 35.
For as a snare shall it come on all them, that dwell on the face of the whole
earth: If some of the e expressions seem to relate to the unexpected coming of
Christ to judgment upon Jerusalem, we are to consider that was not only a
forerunner but a figure of Christ's coming to judge the world. And that may be
the great reason why our Savior mixeth his discourses of both these so much
together as he B
does: for not only the judgment upon that nation was a draught, as it were,
in little of the great day, but the symptoms and forerunners of the one were
to bear a proportion with the other: among which the strange security of that
people before their destruction was none of the least. And the surprise shall
be so much the more astonishing when the day of the Lord shall come upon the
whole world, as the ter^or and consequents of that univerial judgment shall
exceed the overthrow of the Jewish Polity.

But supposing men were aware of its approach and prepared C
for it; the burning of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, though so frightful
a spectacle to the beholders of it, was but a mean representation of the terror
that shall be at the conflagration of the whole world. When the Heavens shall
pass away with a great ^oise, or with a mighty force as some interpret it, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, i. e. when all the fiery bodies in
the upper regions of this world, which have been kept so long in an even and
regular course within their several limits, shall then be let loose again, and
by a more rapid and violent motion shall put the world into D
confusion and a flame together. For then the present frame of things shall be
dissolved, and the bounds set to the more subtle and active parts of matter
shall be taken away, which mixing with the more gr^ss and earthy shall sever
them from each other and by their whirling and agitation set them all on sire.
And if Rev. 6. 13.
the Stars falling to the earth were to be understood in a literal sense, none
seems so probable as this, that those ethereal fires shall then be scattered
and dispersed thoughout the universe, so that the earth and all the works that
are therein shall be turned into one funeral Pile. Then E
the foundations of the earth shall be shaken, and all the combustible matter
which lies hid in the bowels of it shall break forth into prodigious flames;
which while it rouls up and down within, making it self a passage out, will
cause an universal quaking in all parts of the earth, and make the Sea to A
roar with a mighty noise, which will either by the violent heat spend it self
in vapor and smoke, or be swallowed up in the hollow places of the deep.
Neither are we to imagine that only the sulphurous matter within the earth
shall by its kindling produce so general a conflagration, (although some
Philosophers of old thought that sufficient for so great an effect) but as it
was in the deluge of water Genesis 7. 11.
the fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of Heaven were
opened; so shall it be in this deluge of fire, as one of the ancients calls it,
not only mighty streams and rivers of Fire shall B
issue of out the bowels of the earth; but the cataracts above shall discharge
such abundance of thunder and lightning, wherein God will rain down fire and
brimstone from Heaven, that nothing shall be able to withstand the force of it.
Then the Craters breaches made in the earth by horrible earthquakes, caused by
the violent eruptions of Fire, shall be wide enough to swallow up not only
Cities but whole Countries too: And what shall remain of the spoils of this
devouring enemy within, shall be consumed by the merciless fury of the thunder
and lightning above. What will then become of all the glories of C
the world which are now so much admired and courted by foolish men? What will
then become of the most magnificent piles, the most curious structures, the
most stately palaces, the most lasting monuments, the most pleasant gardens and
the most delightful countries? they shall be all buried in one common heap of
ruins, when the whole face of the earth shall be like the top of mount Aetna,
nothing but rubbish, and stones, and ashes, which, unskilful travelers have at
a distance mistaken for Snow. What will then become of the pride and gallantry
of the vain persons, the large possessions of the great, or D
the vast treasures of the rich? the more they have had of these things only
the more fuel they have made for this destroying fire, which will have no
respect to the honors, the greatness, or the riches of men. Nay, what will
then become of 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
the wicked and ungodly, who have scoffed at all these things, and walked after
their own lusts, saying, where is this promise of his coming, because all
things yet continue as they were from the beginning of the creation? When this
great day of his wrath is come, how shall they be able to stand or escape his
sury? Will they fly to the tops of the mountains? that E
were only to stand more ready to be destroyed from Heaven. Will they hide
themselves in the dens and the rocks of the mountains? but there they fall into
the burning furnaces of the earth; and the mountains may fall upon them but can
never hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. Will they go down A
into the deep and convey themselves to the uttermost parts of the Sea? but
even there the storms and tempests of these shours of fire shall overtake them;
and the vengeance of God shall pursue them to everlasting flames.

Consider now whether so dreadful a preparation for Christ's coming to judgment
be not one great reason why it should be called the terror of the Lord? For can
any thing be imagined more full of horror and amazement than to see the whole
world in a flame about us? We may remember (and I hope we yet do so) when the
flames of one City filled the minds of B
all the beholders with astonishment and fear: but what then would it do, not
only to see the earth vomit and cast forth fire every where about us; and the
Sea to boil and swell and froth like water in a seething pot, but to hear
nothing but perpetual claps of thunder, and to see no light in the Heavens, but
what the flashings of lightning give? Could we imagine our selves at a
convenient distance to behold the eruption of a burning mountain, such as Aetna
and Vesuvius are, when the earth about it trembles and groans, the Sea foams
and rages, and the bowels of the mountain roar through impatience of casting
forth C
its burden, and at last gives it self ease by sending up a mixture of flames,
and ashes, and smoke, and a flood of fire, spreading far and destroying where
ever it runs; yet even this, though it be very apt to put men in apprehensions
and fears of this great day, falls very far short of the terror of it. Could we
yet farther suppose that at the same time we could see fire and brimstone
raining from Heaven on Sodom and Gomorrah, the earth opening to devour Corah
and his company, Belshazzar trembling at the hand writing against the wall, and
the Jews destroying themselves in the fire of their Temple and City, this D
may somewhat higher advance our imaginations of the horror of the worlds
conflagration, but yet we cannot reach the greatness of it: in as much as the
Heavens and the earth which are now, are kept in store says the Apostle 2 Pet.
3. 7.
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men;
even those heavens whole beauty, and order, and motion, and influence we now
admire; and that earth whose fruitful womb and richly adorned surface affords
all the conveniences of the life of man, must either be destroyed or at least
purged and refined by this last and dreadful Fire. The expressions of which E
in Scripture being so frequent, so particular, so plain in Writers not
affecting the ^ofty Prophetical style, wherein fire is often used only to
express the wrath of God, make it evident, that their meaning is not barely
that the world shall be destroyed by the anger of God, but that this
destruction shall A
be by real fire, which adds more to the sensible terror of it, to all that
shall behold it.

2. The terror of Christ's appearance in that day. The design of the Scripture
in setting forth the coming of Christ to judgment is to represent it in such a
manner to us as is most apt to strike us with awe and terror at the
apprehension of it. Now the greatest appearance of Majesty among men is, either
when a mighty Prince marches triumphantly in the midst of a Royal Army, with
all the splendour of a Court and the discipline of a Camp, having his greatest
attendants about him, B
and sending his Officers before him, who with the sound of Trumpets give
notice of his approach, and is every where received with the shouts and
acclamations of the people: or else, of a Prince, sitting upon his throne of
Majesty set forth with all the Ornaments of State and Greatness, with all his
Nobles and Courties standing about his Throne, and in his own Person calling
Malefactors to account; and both these ways the appearance of Christ upon his
second coming is represented to us: first Matthew. 24. 25.
as coming in the clouds of Heaven, i. e. riding triumphantly (as it were upon
a Chariot) on a body of C
light brighter than the Sun, having 2 These. 1. 7.
all the Heavenly host attending upon him, and therefore he is said Matthew. 24.
31.
to come with power and great glory; and sending his Angels with a great sound
of a trumpet before him; 1 These. 4. 16
after whom the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel and with the trump of God. Not as though we were to
imagine any material trumpet, as some have grossly done, whose sound could
reach over the whole earth; but the sound of the last trumpet seems to be the
same with John 5. 25.
the voice of the Son of God, which the dead are said to D
hear and live; i. e. it shall be an effectual power for raising the dead;
which may be therefore called the sound of a trumpet, because it supplies the
use of one in calling all people together, and does more lively represent to
our capacities the Majesty of Christ's appearance with all the Heavenly host of
Angels and Saints. Thus when God appeared upon Mount Sinai with his Holy Angels
about him, we there read Psalm. 68. 17. Exodus 20. 18.
of the noise of the trumpet: and when God showed his glorious presence in the
temple, he is said Psalm. 47. 5.
to go up with a shout and the Lord with the sound of a trumpet: and when he
sets himself E
against his enemies, God himself is said Zach 9. 14.
to blow the trumpet, and to go with the whirlwinds of the South. But besides
this, we find Christ upon his second coming described as Matthew. 25. 31.
sitting on the throne of his glory, and all the Holy Angels about him, and all
nations gathered before him to receive A
their sentence from him. His throne is said to be great and white, i. e. most
magnificent and glorious, and to make it the Rev. 20. 11.
more dreadful; Chap. 4. 5.
from it are said to proceed lightnings and thundrings and voices; and so
terrible is the Majesty of him that sits upon the throne Rev. 20. 11.
that the Heaven and earth are said to fly away from his face; but the dead
small and great are to stand before him and to be judged according to their
works. And if the appearance of a common Judge be so dreadful to a guilty
prisoner, if the Majesty of an earthly Prince begets an awe and reverence where
there is no fear of B
punishment, what may we then imagine when Justice and Majesty both meet in the
person of the Judge, and fear and guilt in the Conscience of Offenders?
Therefore it is said, Rev. 1. 7.
behold he comes with clouds and every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him: and all kindreas of the earth shall wail because of him. We find
the best of men in Scripture seized on with a very unusual consternation at any
extraordinary divine appearance: The sight upon Mount Sinai was so terrible
even to Moses Heb. 12. 21.
that he did exceedingly fear and quake: the vision which Isaiah had of the
glory of C
God made him cry out, Isai, 6. 5.
Woe is me for I am un^one, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts:
When Daniel saw his vision, all his strength and vigor was gone, and though an
Angel raised him from the ground, yet he says of himself Dan. 10. 8, 11.
that he stood trembling. If these whom God appeared o in a way of kindness
were so possessed with fear, what horror must needs seize upon the minds of the
wicked when 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire on purpose to
take vengeance upon them? If in the days of his flesh there appeared so much
Majesty in his Countenance, D
that when the Officers came to apprehend him, John. 18. 6.
they went backward and fell to the ground; how unconceivably greater must it
be when his design shall be to manifest that Glory to the world which he then
concealed from it? If in the short time of his transfiguration on the Holy
Mount, his own Disciples were so far from being able to behold the glory of his
presence, that Matthew. 17. 2. 6. Mark 9. 6.
they fell on their faces and were sore afraid; how shall his enemies abide the
day of his wrath, or how can they stand when he shall appear in the full glory
of his Majesty and Power? E


3. The terror of the proceedings upon that day: for then we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, not for any ostentation of his greatness
and power before the whole world, but that every one may receive according to
the things done in his body, whether it be good or bad. How full of A
terror will the proceedings of that day be, wherein all secrets shall be
disclosed, all actions examined and all persons judged? That will be (a) the
day of the Revelation of the righteous (b) Romans 2. 5.
judgment of God; this is the time of darkness and therefore of disputes and
quarrels; but then the wisdom and justice of divine providence shall be made
manifest to all, for every one shall receive according to his works: and none
will wonder at the sentence when they have seen the evidence. Then the most
secret impurities, the most subtle hypocrisy, the most artificial fraud, and
the most dissembled malice shall be laid B
open to public view. For then 1 Cor. 4. 5.
God will bring to hight the hidden things of darkness and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts. Then all the intrigues of lust and ambition so much
the talk and business of this world, will be nothing but men's shame and
reproach in the next. With what horror will they then behold all the sins of
their lives set in order before them, when they seemed in this life, next to
the committing them, to design as much as may be to forget them? Happy men! if
their Consciences were like their Table Books, that they could blot out and put
in what they pleased themselves: C
then all the black Catalogue of their sins would be presently expunged, and
they would have nothing to be seen there, but the Characters of what at least
seemed to be good. For though men be never so vicious they neither care that
others should think so of them, nor they of themselves: of all things they do
not love to dispute where they cannot answer, and that is their case in all
their retorts of Conscience upon them. They know there is no drolling with so
sour a piece, as that within them is, for that makes the smartest and most
cutting repartees; which are uneasy to bear, but impossible to answer. D
Therefore they study their own quiet, by seeking to keep that silent; and
since they never hope to make Conscience dumb, they would have it sleep as much
as may be: and although the starts it sometimes makes, show that the most
sleepy sinners have some troublesome dreams, yet if it does not thoroughly awake
in this world, it will do it with a vengeance in another. Then there will be no
Music and Dancing which can cure the biting of this Tarantula within; no Opium
of stupidity or Atheism will be able to give one minutes rest. How will men
then curse themselves for their own folly in being so easily tempted; E
and all those who laid traps and snares to betray them by? what different
apprehensions of sin will they have then, from what they have now, while they
are beset with temptations to it? O, will a forsaken sinner then say, had I
ever believed as I ought to have done, that this would have been the fruit of a
A
sinful life, I should have taken more care to prevent this misery than I have
done! But O the solly of intemperance, the mischief of ambition, the rage of
lust, the unfatiableness of covetousness, the madness of debauchery, and the
dullness of Atheism, what have ye now brought me to, with all your pleasures and
promises and flatteries while I lost my soul in your service! O that I had
time, to grow wise, again; and once more to try whether I could withstand the
cheats and witchcraft of a deceitful world! Now all my sins are as fresh before
me, as if committed yesterday, and their burden is heavier than the B
weight of mountains however light I made of them then; I need no judge to
condemn me but my own conscience; O that I could as easily see an end of my
misery, as I do that I have deserved that there should be none. Thus shall the
book of conscience be opened at that day in the heart of every impenitent
sinner, wherein like Ezekiels roll he finds written within and without, Ezekiel.
2. 10.
lamentation and mourning and Woe. Yet this will not be the only terror in the
proceedings of that day, that all the sins that ever wicked men committed will
be set in order before them with their several circumstances and C
aggravations, although the remembrance of them cannot be without extreme
horror and amazement; but that they must undergo a strict and severe
examination of all their actions by a most powerful, holy and just Judge. And
if it be so troublesome a thing to them in this world to go down into
themselves, or to call to remembrance their own wicked actions which they have
loved and delighted in; what will it be when they must all be brought forth
before the judgment seat of Christ who hates and abhorrs them? If men can so
hardly endure to have the deformity of their vices represented to D
them though very imperfectly here, how will they bear the dissecting and
laying them open in the view of the whole world? When the smallest fibers and
the most subtle threads in our hearts shall be curiously examined, and the
influence they have had upon our actions fully discovered. When sins that have
been despised for their littleness, or unregarded for their frequency, or
laughed at as no sins at all, shall appear to have had a greater venom in them,
than men would imagine. What shall they think then of their great and
presumptuous sins; whereby they have not only offered violence to God and E
his Laws, but to the dictates of their own consciences in committing them?
Never think that length of time will abate the severity of the enquiry, or
lessen the displeasure of God against thee for them. Remember the case of
Amalek, how God dealt with that people in this world for a sin committed 400. A
years before, and think then whether God be not in earnest, when he tells us
how much he hates sin; and how severe he will be in the punishment of it? I
remember says God Sam. 15. 2, 3.
what Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came
up from Egypt. Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have
and spare them not; but sl^y both man and woman, infant and suckling, etc.
What? a whole na^ion to be destroyed for one sin, and for a sin they thought to
be none at all who committed it, and for a sin at so great a distance of time
from the commission of it? But B
I forbear. I know not whether there be such another instance of Gods severity
in Scripture, but it is such as may justly make us cry out with the P^almist,
Psalm. 103. 3.
If thou Lord should thus mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But
although God in this world so seldom shows his severity, and tempers it with so
much kindness, we have no reason to expect he should do so in another. For here
he has declared that James 2. 13.
mercy rejoices against judgment. This being the time Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
of Gods patience and forbearance and goodness toward sinners, being not
willing that any should perish but that all should come to C
repentance; but if men will despise the riches of his goodness, if they will
still abuse his patience, if they will trample under foot the means of their
own salvation, then they shall to their unspeakable sorrow find, that there is
a day of wrath to come, wherein their own dreadful experience will tell them,
Heb. 10. 31.
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. For that
will be a day of Justice without mercy, a day of vengeance without pity, a day
of execution without any further patience. Then no vain excuses will be taken,
whereby men seek to palliate their sins and give ease to their minds now. D
It will be to no purpose to charge thy wilful sins upon the infirmity of thy
nature, the power of temptation, the subtility of the Devil, the allurement of
company, the common practice of the world, the corruption of the age, the
badness of education, the fol^y of youth; all these and such like excuses will
be too weak to be made then, when it shall appear to thy eternal confusion,
that thy own vicious inclination swayed thee beyond them all. Then there will
be as little place for entreaties, as for vain excuses; God shows his great
pity and indulgence to mankind now, that he is so ready to hear the E
prayers and grant the desires of all penitent sinners; but for those who stop
their ears to all his instructions, and will not not hearken to the reproofs of
his word or the rebukes of their own consciences, but contemn all sober
Counsels and scoff at Religion; what can they expect from him, but that Prove.
1. 25, 26 27.
when A
they shall call upon him he will not answer, and when they seek him earnestly
they shall not find him; but he will laugh at their calamity and mock when
their fear comes. O blessed Jesus! did thou weep over an incorrigible people
in the days of thy flesh, Luke 19. 41.
and will thou laugh at their miseries when thou come to judge the world?
did thou shed thy precious blood to save them, and will thou mock at their
destruction? did thou woo and entreat and beseech sinners to be reconciled
and will thou not hear them when in the anguish of their souls, they cry unto
thee? See then the mighty difference between B
Christ's coming as a Savior and as a Judge, between the day of our salvation
and the day of his wrath, between the joy in Heaven at the conversion of
penitent sinners, and at the confusion of the impenitent and unreclaimable. How
terrible is the representation of Gods wrath in the style of the Prophets, when
he punishes a people in this world for their sins? It is called Isa. 13. 9,
34, 9.
the day of the Lord cruel with wrath and fierce anger: the day of the Lords
vengeance Malach. 4. 5. Joel. 2. 31.
the great and dreadful day of the Lord. If it were thus, when his wrath was
kindled but a little, when mercy was mixed with his severity, C
what will it be, when he shall stir up all his wrath, and the heavens and the
earth shall shake that never did offend him, what shall they then do that shall
to their sorrow know how much they have displeased him? Then neither power, nor
wit, nor eloquence, nor craft shall stand men in any stead; for the great Judge
of that day can neither be overawed by power, nor overreached by wit, nor
moved by eloquence, nor betrayed by craft, but every man shall receive
according to his deeds. The mighty disturbers of mankind, who have been called
Conquerours, shall not then be attended with their great armies, D
but must stand alone to receive their sentence: the greatest wits of the world
will then find that a sincere honest heart will avail them more than the
deepest reach or the greatest subtilty; the most eloquent persons without true
goodness will be like the man in the parable without the wedding garment,
speechless; the most crafty and politic, will then Mat. (...) 22. 12.
see, that though they may deceive men and themselves too, yet God will not be
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap; and they who have spread
snares for others and been hugely pleased to see them caught by them, E
shall then be convinced that they have laid the greatest of all for
themselves, for Psalm. 9. 16. 1 7.
God will then be fully known by the judgment which he shall execute and the
wicked shall be snared in the work of their own hands: for, the wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget A
God.

4. The terror of the sentence, which shall then be passed. The Judge himself
has told us before hand what it shall be, to make us more apprehensive of it
in this State, wherein we are capable to prevent it by sincere repentance and a
holy life. The tenor of it is expressed in those dreadful words, Mat. 25.
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. It is impossible to conceive words fuller of horror and amazement than
those are, to such as duly consider the importance of them. It is true B
indeed wicked men in this world are so little apprehensive of the misery of
departing from God, that they are ready to bid God depart from them, and place
no mean part of their felicity in keeping themselves at a distance from him.
The true reason of which is, that while they pursue their lusts, the thoughts
of God are disquieting to them; as no man that robs his neighbor loves to
think of the Judge while he does it, not as though his condition were securer
by it, but when men are not wise enough to prevent a danger, they are so great
fools to count in their wisdom not to think of it. But therein lies a C
great part of the misery of another world, that men shall not be able to cheat
and abuse themselves with false notions, and shows of happiness. The clouds
they have embraced for Deities shall then vanish into smoke; all the
satisfaction they ever imagined in their lusts shall be wholly gone, and
nothing but the sad remembrance of them, lest behind to torment them. All the
Philosophy in the world will never make men understand their true happiness so
much, as one hours experience of another State will do: all men shall know
better, but some shall be more happy and others more miserable by it. The
righteous shall not D
only see God, but know what the seeing of God means, and that the greatest
happiness we are capable of is employed therein; and the wicked shall not only
be bid to depart from him, but shall then find that the highest misery
imaginable is comprehended in it. It is a great instance of the weakness of our
capacities here, that our discourses concerning the happiness and misery of a
future life, are like, those of Children about affairs of State, which they
represent to themselves in a way agreeable to their own Childish fancies;
thence the Poctical dreams of Elysian fields, and turning wheels and rouling
stones and such E
like imaginations. Nay, the Scripture it self sets forth the joys and torments
of another world in a way more suited to our fancy than our understanding;
thence we read of sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to represent the
happiness of that State, and of a gnawing worm, and a devouring fire A
and blackness of darkness to set forth the misery of it But as the happiness
of heaven does infinitely exceed the most lofty metaphors of Scripture, so does
the misery of hell the most dreadful representation that can be made of it.
Although a worm gnawing our entrails, and a fi^e consuming our outward parts be
very sensible and moving metaphors yet they cannot fully express the anguish
and torment of the soul, which must be so much greater, as it is more active
and sensible, than our bodies can be. Take a man that afflicts himself under
the sense of some intolerable disgrace, or calamity befallen him; B
or that is oppressed with the guilt of some horrid wickedness, or sunk into
the depth of despair; the Agonies and torments of his mind may make us
apprehend the nature of that misery, although he falls short of the degrees of
it. And were this misery to be of no long continuance, yet the terror of it
must needs be great; but when the worm shall never dye, and the fire shall
never be quenched, when insupportable misery shall be everlasting, nothing can
then be added to the terror of it: and this is as plainly contained in the
sentence of wicked men, as any thing else is. But here men think they may
justly C
plead with God and talk with him of his judgments; what proportion, say they,
is there, between the sins of this short life and the eternal misery of
another? which objection is not so great in it self as it appears to be by the
weak answers* which have been made to it; When to assign a proportion, they
have made a strange kind of infinity in sin either from the object, which
unavoidably makes all sins equal, or from the wish of a sinner that he might
have an eternity to sin in, which is to make the justice of Gods punishments to
be not according to their works, but to their wishes; But we need not strain
things D
so much beyond what they will bear to vindicate Gods justice in this matter.
Is it not thought just and reasonable among men, for a man to be confined to
perpetual imprisonment for a fault he was not half an hour in committing? Nay
do not all the Laws of the world make death the punishment of some crimes,
which may be very suddenly done? And what is death, but the eternal depriving a
man of all the comforts of life? And shall a thing then so constantly practiced
and universally justified in the world, be thought unreasonable when it is
applied to God? It is true, may some say if annihilation were E
all that was meant by eternal death, there could be no exception against it:
but I ask, whether it would be unjust for the Laws of men to take away the
lives of offenders in case their souls ^urvive their bodies, and they be for
ever sensible of the loss of life? if not, why shall not God preserve the
honor A
of his Laws, and vindicate his Authority in governing the world, by sentencing
obstinate sinners to the greatest misery, though their souls live for ever in
the apprehension of it? Especially since God has declared these things so
evidently before hand, and made them part of his Laws, and set everlasting life
on the other side to balance everlasting misery, and proposed them to a
sinners choice in such a manner, that nothing but contempt of God and his
grace, and wilful impenitency can ever betray men into this dreadful State of
eternal destruction. B


2. Thus much for the argument used by the Apostle, the terror of the Lord; I
now come to the assurance he expresses of the truth of it; Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord we persuade men. We have two ways of proving Articles
of faith, such as this concerning Christ's coming to judgment is,

1. By showing, that there is nothing unreasonable in the belief of them. 2.
That there is sufficient evidence of the truth and certainty of them.
In the former of these it is of excellent use to produce the C
common apprehensions of mankind as to a future judgment, and the several
arguments insisted on to that purpose; for if this were an unreasonable thing
to believe, how come men without revelation to agree about it as a thing very
just and reasonable? If the conflagration of the world were an impossible
thing, how came it to be so anciently received by the eldest and wisest
Philosophers? How came it to be maintained by those two Sects which were St.
Paul's enemies, when he preached at Athens, and always enemies to each other,
the Act. 17. 18.
Epicureans and the Stoics? It is true they made these conflagrations D
to be periodical and not final: but we do not establish the belief of our
doctrine upon their assertion, but from thence show that is a most unreasonable
thing to reject that as impossible to be done, which they assert has been and
may be often done. But for the truth and certainty of our doctrine, we build
that upon no less a foundation than the word of God himself. We may think a
judgment to come reasonable in general upon the ^sideration of the goodness
and wisdom and justice of God; but all that depends upon this supposition, that
God does govern the world by Laws and not by Power, E
but since God himself has declared it who is the Suprem Judge of the world,
Eccles 12. 14.
that he will bring every work into judgment whether it be good or evil, since
the Son of God made this so great a part of his doctrine with all the
circumstances of his own coming for again this end; since he opened the A
commission he received from the Father for this purpose when he was upon
earth, by declaring that John 5. 22, 28, 29.
the Father had committed* all judgment to the Son, and that the hour is
coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have
done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. Since this was so great a part of
the Apostles doctrine to preach of this judgment to come, and Act. 17. 31.
that God has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man whom he has ordained, B
whereof he has given assurance to all men in that he has raised him from the
dead: No wonder the Apostle speaks here with so great assurance of it, knowing
therefore, etc. And no persons can have the least ground to question it, but
such who wholly reject the Christian doctrine, upon the pretenses of
infidelity, which are so vain and trifling, that, were not their lusts stronger
than their arguments men of wit would be ashamed to produce them; and did not
men's passions oversway their judgments it would be too much honor to them to
confute them. But every Sermon is not intended for the C
conversion of Turks and Infidels, my design is to speak to those who
acknowledge themselves to be Christians and to believe the truth of this
doctrine upon the Authority of those divine persons who were particularly sent
by God to reveal it to the world. And so I come to the last particular, by way
of application of the former, viz.

3. The efficacy of this argument for the persuading men to a reformation of
heart and life; knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men. For as another
Apostle reasons from the same argument. 2 Pet. 3. 11.
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved D
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness?
There is great variety of arguments in the Christian Religion to persuade men
to holiness, but none more sensible and moving to the generality of mankind
than this. Especially considering these two things.

1. That if this argument does not persuade men, there is no reason to expect
any other should. 2. That the condition of such persons is desperate, who
cannot by any arguments be persuaded to leave off their sins.
1. There is no reason to expect any other argument should E
persuade men if this of the terror of the Lord do it not. If an almighty power
cannot awaken us, if infinite justice cannot affright us, if a judgment to
come cannot make us tremble, and eternal misery leave no impression upon us,
what other arguments or methods can we imagine would reclaim us from our A
sins? We have been too sad an instance our selves, of the ineffectualness of
other means of amendment by the mercies and judgments of this present life:
have ever any people had a greater mixture of both these, than we have had in
the compass of a few years? If the wisest persons in the world had been to have
set down beforehand the method of reforming a sinful nation, they could have
pitched upon none more effectual than what we have showed not to be so. First
they would have imagined, that after enduring many miseries and hardships, when
they were almost quite sunk under despair, if God should B
give them a sudden and unexpected deliverance, mere ingenuity and thankfulness
would make them afrid to displease a God of so much kindness. But if so great a
flash of joy and prosperity instead of that should make them grow wanton and
extravagant, what a course then so likely to reclaim them, as a series of smart
and severe judgments one upon another, which might sufficiently warn yet not
totally destroy. These we have had experience of, and of worse than all these,
viz. that we are not amended by them. For are the Laws of God less broken, or
the duties of Religion less contemned and despised C
after all these? What vices have been forsaken, what lusts have men been
reclaimed from, nay what one sort of sin has been less in fashion than before?
Nay have not their number as well as their aggravation, increased among us? Is
our zeal for our established Religion greater? Is our faith more firm and
settled, our devotion more constant, our Church less in danger of either of the
opposite factions than ever it was? Nay is it not rather like a neck of land
between two rough and boisterous seas, which rise and swell, and by the
breaches they make in upon us, threaten an inundation? By all which we see what
D
necessity there is that God should govern this world by the considerations of
another; that when neither judgments nor mercies can make men better in this
life; judgment without mercy should be their portion in another. O the
infatuating power of sin! when neither the pity of an indulgent Father, nor the
frowns of a severe Judge can draw us from it: when neither the bitter passion
of the Son of God for our sins, nor his threatening to come again to take
vengeance upon us for them, can make us hate and abhor them: when neither the
shame nor contempt, the diseases and reproaches which follow sin in this E
world; nor the intolerable anguish and misery of another can make men
sensible of the folly of them so as to forsake them. Could we but represent to
our minds that State wherein we must all shortly be, when the bustle and hurry,
the pleasures and diversions, the courtships and entertainments of this world A
shall be quite at an end with us, and every one must give an account of
himself to God; what another opinion of these things should we have in our
minds, with what abhorrency should we look upon every temptation to sin, how
should we loath the sight of those who either betrayed us into sin or flattered
us when we had committed it? Could men but ask themselves that reasonable
question, why they will defy God by violating his known Laws, unless they be
sure he either cannot or will not punish them for it? thy would be more afraid
of doing it than they are, for supposing both, to do it, is perfect madness: B
to question his power who is Almighty, or his will who has declared it and is
immutable is the height of folly.

2. The condition of such is desperate whom no arguments can persuade to leave
their sins. For there can be no breaking prison in that other State, no
escaping trial, no corrupting the Judge, no reversing the sentence, no pardon
after judgment, no reprieve from punishment, no abatement or end of misery.
How can thou then hope O impenitent sinner, either to fly from or to endure
that wrath of God that is coming swiftly upon thee to arrest thee by death, and
convey thee to C
thy tormenting prison? can thou hope, that God will discharge thee before
that dreadful day comes, when he has confined thee thither in order to it?
Can thou hope that day will never come which the vindication of Gods justice,
the honor of Christ, the happiness of the blessed, as well as the punishment
of the wicked make so necessary that it should come? or can thou hope, to
defend thy self, against an all seeing eye, a most righteous Judge and an
accusing conscience when that day does come? when all the mercies thou have
abused, the judgments thou have slighted, the motions of grace thou D
have resisted, the checks of conscience thou have stifled, and the sins of all
kinds thou have committed, shall rise up in judgment to condemn thee? O that
we had all the wisdom to consider of these things in time, that the terror of
the Lord may persuade us to break off all our sins by a sincere repentance, and
to live so that we may dye with comfort, and be for ever with the Lord in his
eternal Joy. E


SERMON XII. Ser. XII.
A
Preached at B
WHITE HALL. FEBRUARY 18. 1672.
MATTHEW XVI. XXVI. C
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own
soul? or what shall he give in exchange for his soul?


IF we look into the twenty fourth verse of this Chapter we shall find our
Savior there, laying down such hard conditions of men's being his Disciples, as
were, to all D
appearance, more likely to have driven away those which he had already, than
to have drawn any others after him: For he requires no less than the greatest
readiness to suffer for his sake, and that to no meaner a degree than the loss
of what is most precious to men in this world, in their lives; which is employed
in those words; If any man will come after me let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross and follow me. If our Savior had only designed to have made himself
great by the number of his followers, if he had intended a Kingdom in this
world, as the E
Jews imagined, he would have made more easy conditions of being his
Disciples; He would have chosen another way to have attained his end, and made
use of more pleasing and popular arguments to have persuaded the people to
follow him. When the Eastern Impostor afterward began to set up for a new A
Religion, he took a method as contrary to our Saviors as his Religion and
design was: he knew the Greatness and Honor, the pleasures and the pomp of
this world, were the things most passionately loved and admired by the
generality of mankind; and therefore he fitted his Religion to the natural
inclinations of men, and proposed such means of advancing it as were most like
to make men great by undertaking them. And men are never so willing to be
cheated by any Religion, as that which complies with their present interests
and gratifies their sensual inclinations. In this case there need not many
arguments B
to court persons to embrace that which they were so strongly inclined to
before; and the very name of Religion does them great service when it allows
what they most desire, and makes them sin with a quiet Conscience.

But that is the peculiar honor of Christianity, that as it can never be
suspected to be a design for this world, so it has risen and spread it self by
ways directly contrary to the Splendour and Greatness of it: For it overcame by
sufferings, increased by persecutions, and prevailed in the world by the
patience and self-denial of its followers. He that was the first Preacher of C
it, was the greatest example of suffering himself; and he bids his Disciples
not to think much of following their Lord and Savior though it were to take up
the Cross and lay down their lives for his sake. We may easily imagine how much
startled and surprised his Disciples were at such discourses as these, who
being possessed with the common opinion of the temporal Kingdom of the Messiah,
came to him with great expectations of honor and advancement by him; and no
less would content some of them, than being his highest Favorites and
Ministers of State suting at his right hand, and at his left D
hand in his Kingdom: they had already in their imaginations shared the
preferments and dignities of his Kingdom among themselves; and were often
contending about pre-eminence, who should be the greatest among them. Insomuch,
that when Christ now, the time of his suffering approaching, began more plainly
to discourse to them of his own sufferings at Jerusalem, v. 21. St. Peter,
either out of his natural forforwardness and heat, or being elevated by the
good opinion which our Lord had expressed of him before v. 17. takes upon him
very solemnly to rebuke him for ever thinking to submit E
himself to so mean a condition; Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be
unto thee, v. 22. upon which, Jesus not only reproves Peter with great
smartness and severity, as savoring more of the pomp and ease of the world,
than of the nature and design of his Kingdom; v. 23. but takes this occasion A
to tell his Disciples, that they must no longer dream of the Glories and
Splendour of this world, nor entertain themselves with vain Fancies of the
Pleasures and contentments of this life; but if they would show themselves to
be truly his Disciples they must prepare for persecutions and Martyrdoms, they
must value their Religion above their lives; for the time was now coming on,
they must part with one or the other; and if they were not prepared beforehand
by self-denial and taking up the Cross, they would run great hazard of losing
their souls for the love of this world: and therefore our Savior B
shows,

1. The great advantage that would accrue to them; if they were willing to
suffer for his sake. Whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it, v.
25. i. e. instead of this short and uncertain life, which would spend it self
in a little time, he should have one infinitely more valuable; and therefore no
exchange could be better made, than that of laying down such a life as this for
one of eternal Happiness and Glory; for so our Savior elsewhere explains it he
that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal, St. John
12. 25. C


2. The great folly of losing this eternal state of happiness for the
preservation of this present life, or the enjoyment of the things of this
world: which he first lays down as a certain truth, v. 25. For whosoever will
save his life shall lose it, and then discovers the folly of it in the words of
the text, by comparing such a man's gain and his loss together, supposing he
should obtain the utmost that can be hoped for in this world. For what is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall
a man give in exchange for his soul? D


Wherein we may consider these three particulars;

1. The possibility supposed of losing the soul; though a man should gain the
whole world. 2. The hazard implied of the loss of the soul for the sake of the
gain of the world. 3. The folly expressed of losing the soul, though it be for
the gain of the whole world.
1. The possibility supposed of the loss of the soul in another world; For the
force of our Saviors argument depends wholly on the supposition of the
certainty of the souls Being E
in another state; and its capacity of happiness or misery therein. For,
setting that aside there can be no argument strong enough to persuade any man
to part not only with what he has or hopes for in this life, but with life it
self. He that is so great a Fool to be an Athiest, would yet be much more so A
to be a Martyr for his opinion. What is there could recompense the loss of
life, to a man that believes that there is nothing after it? But supposing
there should be a life to come, as it is impossible to give any demonstration
to the contrary, what madness would it be, for a man to run himself into the
miseries of another world with a design to prove there is none? If all that our
Savior had meant, were only to represent the folly of a person, that would lay
down his life for the purchase of an estate, (for so the soul is often taken
for the life) that would not have reached the scope and design of his
discourse. B
And no instances can be produced of such a kind of folly, which would be as
great as for a man to lose his head for a wager, or to purchase the lease of
his life by destroying himself. But supposing this to be a Proverbial speech,
yet the folly of losing a man's life for the gain of the whole world is not
brought in by our Savior merely for it self: but as it does much more
represent the unspeakable folly of such who for the love of this world will
venture the loss of an eternal endearing life, and all the misery which is
consequent upon it. If that man would gain nothing by his bargains but the
reputation of a Fool, that C
for the possession of the whole world for one moment, would be content to be
killed in the next; how much greater folly are they guilty of, that for the
sake of this world and the p^eservation of their lives here, expose themselves
to all the miseries of another life, which God has threatened or their souls
can undergo? It is such a loss of the soul which is here spo ken of, as is
consistent with the preservation of this present life; for whosoever says
Christ, will save his life shall lose it; and to those words before, these of
the text have a particular reference, and therefore must be understood not of
losing this D
life, but of the loss of the Soul in a future state.

And this loss cannot be understood of the souls annihilation or ceasing to be,
as soon as the life is gone; for that being supposed, he would be the happiest
man that had the most of this world at his command and enjoyed the greatest
pleasure in it. So St. Paul himself determines, that if there were no future
state, the Epicureans argument would take place, 1 Cor 15. 32.
Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die: and he reckons those among the most
miserable of all mankind who ventured the loss of all that is accounted
desirable in this world and of their E
lives too; if there were not a better life to come. 1 Cor 15. 19.
For if in this life only we have hope in Christ, says he, we are of all men
the most miserable. So that the strength of our Saviors discourse depends upon
the supposition of the immortality of the soul; and its capacity of being happy
or miserable in A
a future state.

And it is the great commendation of the Christian Religion, that the
particular duties required in it are established on the same Foundations that
natural Religion is, which are the belief of a Deity and the immortality of the
Soul. Heb. 11. 6.
For he that comes unto God must believe that he it, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him; which being spoken with a respect to one who for being
good was translated out of this world, must refer to the rewards of a future
life. And we desire no more than these common principles of Religion to make B
the most difficult duties of Christianity appear reasonable to mankind. For it
is upon the account of this future state of the soul, that it is our most just
and necessary care to look after the welfare of our souls in the first place,
to seek the Kingdom of God the and righteousness thereof, before the
concernments of this present life, because a state that endures for ever ought
to be preferred before a short and uncertain abode in this world. It is this,
which makes it reasonable to please God, though to the displeasing our selves
and the crossing our natural inclinations; because eternal happiness and misery
depends upon C
his favor or displeasure. It is this, which obliges men to the greatest care
of their actions, because their future state in another world, will be
according to their lives here, for every man shall then receive according to
his works. It is this, which ought to keep men from all fleshly lusts, not
merely because they are inconvenient for their bodies, but because they war
against their souls. It is this, which makes the love of this world so
dangerous a thing, because it draws away the hearts and affections of men from
things that are above and fixes them upon things below. It is this, which makes
it necessary for D
us to subdue our passions, to conquer temptations, to forgive injuries, to be
patient under afflictions, and to lay down our lives for Religion, because
there will be a reward for the righteous and the happiness of another state
will make abundant recompense for all the difficulties of this.

So that in the Gospel the doctrine of the souls immortality is not spoken of
as the nice speculation of subtle and contemplative men; nor merely supposed
as a foundation of all Religion, but it is interwoven in the substance of it,
and adds strength to all its parts. For herein we find the immortality E
of the soul not barely asserted, nor proved by uncertain arguments, nor
depending on the opinion of Philosophers; but delivered with the greatest
authority, revealed with the clearest light, and confirmed by the strongest
evidence. If any one can make known to mankind the state of souls in another A
world it must be God himse^lf; if ever it was made known plainly by him it
must be in the Gospel, whereby 2 Timothy 1. 10.
life and immortality are brought to light; if ever any arguments were proper
to convince mankind of it, they are such as are contained therein. For it is
not barely the resurrection of our Lord, which is a manifest evidence of the
truth of the souls subsisting after a real death; but the whole design of his
doctrine and the Christian Religion is built upon it. So that if we suppose the
immortality of the soul the Christian Religion appears more reasonable by it;
but if we suppose the doctrine B
of Christ to be true there can be no doubt left of the immortality of the
soul; and whatever arguments we have to prove the truth of this doctrine by,
the same do of necessity prove the certainty of the souls immortality.

I confess many subtle arguments have been used by those who never knew any
thing of divine revelation to prove the soul to be of such a nature, that it
was not capable of dying with the body; and some of them such as none of their
Adversaries were ever able to answer. For the most common acts of sense are
unaccountable in a mere Mechanical way; and after all C
the attemps of the most witty and industrious men I despair of ever seeing the
powers of mere matter raised to a capacity of performing the lowest acts of
perception; and much more of those nobler faculties of memory, understanding
and will. But although the arguments from hence are sufficient to justify the
belief of the souls immortality to all considering men; yet the far greatest
part of mankind was never so; and a matter of so great consequence as this is,
ought to be proposed in the most plain, most certain, and most effectual manner.

While these disputes were managed among the Philosophers D
of old, though those who asserted the immortality of the soul had the better
reason of their side; yet their Adversaries spoke with greater confidence; and
that always bears the greatest sway among injudicious people. And some men are
always fond of a reputation for wit by opposing common opinions though never so
true and useful: especially when they serve a bad end in it and do thereby
plead for their own impieties. But it cannot be denied, that those who were in
the right did likewise give too great advantage to their enemies, partly by
their own diffidence and distrust of what they had E
contended for, partly from the too great niceness and subtilty of their
arguments, partly from the ridiculous fopperies which they maintained together
with that of the souls immortality, as the transmigration of them into the
bodies of Brutes and such like. But the main disadvantage of all to the world
was, that the immortality of the soul was rather insisted on as a A
Principle of Philosophy than of Religion. Some of the best of their arguments
were such as made the souls of Brutes immortal as well as those of men; and
those could not be imagined to have any great force on the lives of men, which
would equally hold for such creatures which were not capable of rewards and
punishments in another life. But therein lies the great excellency of the
doctrine of the souls immortality as it is discovered in the Gospel, not only
that it comes from him who best understands the nature of souls, but is
delivered in such a manner as is most effectual for the reformation B
of mankind. For the fullest account herein given of it is by the rewards and
punishments of another life; and those not Poetically described by fictions and
Romances; but delivered with the plainess of truth, the gravity of a Law, the
severity of a Judge, the authority of a Lawgiver, the Majesty of a Prince, and
the wisdom of a Deity. Wherein the happiness described is such as the most
excellent minds think it most desirable; and the misery so great as all that
consider it, must think it most intolerable. And both these are set forth C
with so close a respect to the actions of this life, that every one must
expect in another world, according to what he does in this.

How is it then possible that the doctrine of the souls being in another state,
could be recommended with greater advantage to mankind, than it is in the
Gospel? and what is there can be imagined to take off the force of this, but
the proving an absolute incapacity in the soul of subsisting after death? It is
true indeed in the state of this intimate union and conjunction between the
soul and body, they do suffer mutually D
from each other. But if the souls suffering on the account of the body, as in
diseases of the brain, be sufficient to prove there is no soul; why may not the
bodies suffering on the account of the soul, as in violent passions of the
mind, as well prove that there is no body? It is not enough then to prove that
the soul does in some things suffer from the body; (for so does the Child in
the Mothers womb from the distempers of its Mother, yet very capable of living
when separated from her) but it must be showed that the soul is not distinct
from the body to prove it incapable of being without it. E


But on the other side, I shall now show that there is nothing unreasonable in
what the Scripture delivers concerning the immortal state of the Souls of men,
as to future rewards and punishments, because there are those things now in
them considered as distinct from their bodies, which make them capable A
of either of them. And those are,

1. That they are capable of pleasure and pain distinct from the body. 2. That
they have power of determining their own actions.
1. That the souls of men are capable of pleasure and pain distinct from the
pleasure and pain of the body. Wherever pleasure and pain may be, there must
be a capacity of rewards and punishments, for a reward is nothing but the
heightning of pleasure, and punishment an increase of pain; And if there be
both these in men of which no account can be given from B
their bodies, there must be a nobler principle within, which we call the Soul,
which is both the cause and the subject of them. We may as easily imagine that
a Fox should leave his prey to find out a demonstration in Euclid, or a Serpent
attempt the squaring of the circle in the dust, or all the Fables of A^sop
become real histories, and the Birds and Beasts turn Wits and Politicians, as
be able to give an account of those we call pleasures of the mind from the
affections of the body. The transport of joy which Archimedes was in at the
finding out his desired Problem, was a more certain evidence of the real
pleasures C
of the mind, than the finding it was of the greatness of his wit. Could we
ever think that men who understood themselves would spend so much time in
lines, and numbers, and figures, and examining Problems and Demonstrations
which depend upon them, if they found not a great delight and satisfaction in
the doing of it? But whence does this pleasure arise? not from seeing the
figures, or mere drawing the lines, or calculating the numbers, but by deducing
the just and necessary consequences of one thing from another; which would
afford no more pleasure to a man without his soul, than a book D
of Geometry would give to a herd of Swine. It is the Soul alone which takes
pleasure in the search and finding out such Truths, which can have no kind of
respect to the body; it is that, which can put the body out of order with its
own pleasures, by spending so much time in contemplation as may exhaust the
spirits, abate the vigor of the body and hasten its decay. And while that
droops and sinks under the burden, the soul may be as vigorous and active in
such a consumptive state of the body as ever it was before, the understanding
as clear, the memory as strong, the entertainments of the mind as great, E
as if the body were in perfect health. It is a greater and more manly
pleasure, which some men take in searching into the nature of these things in
the world than others can take in the most voluptuous enjoyment of them; the
one can only satisfy a brutish appetite while, it may be, something A
within is very unquiet and troublesome; but the other brings a solid pleasure
to the mind without any regret or disturbance from the body. By this we see,
that setting aside the consideration of Religion, the mind of man is capable of
such pleasures peculiar to it self, of which no account could be given, if
there were not a spiritual and therefore immortal Being within us, not only
distinct from the body, but very far above it. But the very capacity of
Religion in mankind does yet further evidence the truth of it. I would fain
understand how men ever came to be abused B
with the notion of Religion, as some men are willing to think they are, if
there were not some faculties in them above those of sense and imagination? For
where we find nothing else but these, we see an utter incapacity of any such
thing as Religion is; in some brute creatures we find great subtilty and
strange imitations of reason; but we can find nothing like Religion among them.
How should it come to be otherwise among men, if imagination were the highest
faculty in man; since the main principles of Religion are as remote from the
power of imagination as may C
be? What can be thought more repugnant to all the conceptions we take in by
our senses, than the conception of a Deity and the future State of Souls is?
How then come the impressions of these things to sink so deep into humane
nature, that all the art and violence in the world can never take them out? The
strongest impressions upon all other Beings are such as are suitable to their
natures, how come those in mankind to be such as must be supposed to be not
only above but contrary to them if an immortal soul be not granted? If men had
no principle within them, beyond that D
of sense, nothing would have been more easy, than to have shaken off the
notion of a Deity and all apprehension of a future State: But this has been so
far from easy, that it is a thing utterly impossible to be done: all the wit
and arts, all the malice and cruelty, all the racks and torments that could yet
be thought on could not alter men's persuasions of the Christian Religion, much
less raze out the Foundations of Natural Religion in the world. But what
imaginable account can be given of the joys and pleasures, which the Martyrs of
old expressed under the E
most exquisite torments of their bodies; if their minds were not of a far
nobler and diviner nature than their bodies were? Although a natural stupidity
and dullness of temper may abate the sense of pain, although an obstinate
resolution may keep men from complaining of it; yet, not only to A
bear the Cross but to embrace it; to be not only patient but pleasant under
tortures; nay, to sing with greater joy in the flames than others do when they
are heated with wine, does not only show that there is something within us
capable of pleasure distinct from the body, but that the pleasures of it may be
so great as to swallow up the pains of the body. But I need not have recourse
to such great and extraordinay instances; (although sufficiently attested by
such who saw and heard them) for every good man has that inward pleasure in
being and doing good, which he would not part with for all the greatest
Epicurism in B
the world. And where there is, or may be so great pleasure, no wonder if there
be likewise a sense of pain proportionable to it; witness those gripes and
tortures of Conscience which wicked men undergo from the reflection upon
themselves; when their own evil actions fill them with horror and amazement,
when the cruelties they have used to others return with greater violence upon
their own minds, when the unlawful pleasures of the body prove the greatest
vexation to their souls, and the weight of their evil actions sinks them under
despair and the dreadful apprehensions of future misery. These are things we C
need not search histories, or cite ancient authors for; every man's own
Conscience will tell him, if he has not lost all sense of good and evil; that
as there is a real pleasure in doing good, there is the greatest inward pain in
doing evil. Having thus showed that the soul of man is capable of pleasure and
pain in this present state distinct from the body, it thence follows that it is
capable of rewards and punishments, when it shall be separated from it.

2. That the souls of men have a power of determining their own actions;
without which there could be no reasonable D
account given of the rewards and punishments of another life. Were I to prove
liberty in man from the supposition of Religion I know no argument more plain
or more convincing than that which is drawn from the consideration of future
rewards and punishments: but being now to prove a capacity of rewards and
punishments from the consideration of Liberty, I must make use of other means
to do it by. And what can be imagined greater evidence in Beings capable of
reflecting upon themselves, than the constant sense and experience of all
mankind? Not that all men are agreed in E
their opinions about these things; (for even herein men show their liberty, by
resisting the clearest evidence to prove it) but that every man finds himself
free in the determining his moral actions. And therefore he has the same
reason to believe this, which he has of his own Being or understanding. For
what A
other way has a man to know that he understands himself or any thing else,
but the sense of his own mind? and those who go about to persuade men that they
think themselves free when they are not, may in the next place persuade them
that they think they understand when they do not. Nay, they might hope in the
first place to persuade men out of their understandings, for we are not so
competent judges of the more necessary and natural acts, for men understand
whether they will or no, as of the more free and voluntary; for in this case
every man can when he pleases put a trial upon himself, and like the confuting
the B
arguments against motion by moving, can show the folly of all the pleas for
fatal necessity by a freedom of action. But if once this natural liberty be
taken away, wisdom and folly as well as vice and virtue would be names invented
to no purpose, no men can be said to be better or wiser than others, if their
actions do not depend on their own choice and consideration, but on a hidden
train of causes which it is no more in a man's power to hinder than in the earth
to hinder the falling of rain upon it. If therefore sense and reason may
prevail upon mankind, not to fancy themselves under invisible chains and
fetters, of which they can C
have no evidence or experience; we may thence infer the souls capacity of
rewards and punishments in another life, since happiness and misery are set
before them, and it must be their own voluntary choice which brings them to
either of them: When either by their own folly they run themselves upon
everlasting ruin, or by making use of the assistance of divine grace they
become capable of endless Joy. But since men have not only a power of governing
themselves, but are capable of doing it by considerations as remote from the
things of sense as Heaven is from Earth; it is not conceivable there should be
such a power D
within us, if there were not an immortal soul which is the subject of it. For
what is there that has the shadow of liberty in mere matter? what is there of
these inferior creatures that can act by consideration of future things, but
only man? Whence comes man to consider but from his reason? or to guide himself
by the consideration of future and eternal things, but from an immortal
principle within him; which alone can make things at a distance to be as
present, can represent to it self the infinite pleasures and unconceivable
misery of an eternal state in such a manner as to direct the course of this
present life in order to E
the obtaining of the one and avoiding of the other. And thus much concerning
the supposition here made of the loss of the soul, and its immortality implied
therein.

I come to consider the hazard of losing the soul for the gain of this world.
F^r although our Savior puts the utmost supposable case, the better to
represent the folly of losing the soul for the A
sake of the world; yet he does imply the danger may be as great, although a
man's ambition never comes to be so extravagant, as to aim at the possession of
the whole world. The whole world can never make amends for the loss of the
soul; yet the soul may be lost for a very inconsiderable part of it; although
all the wealth and treasures of the Indies can never compensate to a man the
loss of his life, yet that may be in as great danger of losing upon far easier
terms than those are. It is not to be thought that those whom our Savior
speaks to, could ever propose such vast designs to themselves as the Empire of
the whole world was; but, he tells B
them, if that could be supposed, it were far more desirable to save a soul
than to gain the world, yet such is the folly of mankind to lose their souls
for a very small share of this present world. For the temptations of this world
are so many, so great, so pleasing to mankind, and the love of life so natural
and so strong, that inconsiderate men will run any hazard of their souls for
the gain of one or preservation of the other. The highest instance of this kind
is that which our Savior here intends, when men will make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience to escape the danger of their lives; or with Judas will
betray their Savior for some present C
gain although very far short of that of the whole world. And if I be not much
mistaken, it is upon this account, that our Savior pronounces it so hard
Matthew. 19. 23, 24. Mark. 10. 24, 25. Luke 18. 24, 25.
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, because in such difficult
times of persecution on the account of Religion as those were; such men would
be shrewdly tempted to venture the loss of their souls in another world rather
than of their estates in this. For it was the young man's unwillingness to part
with his great possessions to follow Christ, which gave him occasion to utter
that hard saying. It is on this account St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
the love of money is the root of D
all evil, which while some have coveted after they have erred from the faith
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows: It was on this account, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
that Demas forsook Paul, having loved this present world: and that, James 4. 4.
the friendship of this world is said to be enmity with God, and that our
Savior says, Mat. 6. 24.
no man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one and love the
other; else he will hold to the one and despise the other; ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. Which does suppose that these two do require two contrary things at
the same time; for if a hundred Masters did all require the same E
thing a man might, in doing that, be said to serve them all. But when Religion
requires that we must part with all for that, and the world requires that we
must part with Religion to preserve our interest in it, then it is impossible
to serve God and Mammon together; for we must hold to the one and despise the
other.

But what then? Is there no danger of the loss of the soul A
for the sake of this world, but only in the case of persecution? then, some
may say, we hope there is no fear now of men's being too rich to go to Heaven.
Thanks be to God that we live in times free from such dangerous trials as those
of persecution are, and wherein men may quietly enjoy their Estates, and the
best Religion in the world together: but although there be no danger of
splitting upon the rocks, there may be of sinking with being overcharged or
springing too great a leak within us, whereby we let in more than we can be
able to bear. And supposing the most prosperous and easy condition men can
fancy to themselves here; yet the things of this B
world are so great occasions of evil, so great hindrances of good, that on
these accounts men always run a mighty hazard of their souls for the sake of
this world. The Devil knew well enough where his greatest strength lay, when he
reserved the Matthew. 4. 8. 9.
temptation of the glories of this world to the last place in dealing with
Christ himself; when nothing else would prevail upon him, he was yet in hopes
that the Greatness and Splendor of this world would bring him to his terms.
And surely if the Devil had not a mighty opinion of the power of C
these charms of the Kingdoms and glory of this world, he would never have put
such hard terms to them which were no less than falling down and worshipping
him: which we do not find he ever durst so much as mention before till he held
this bait in his hand. And although our Savior baffled him in this his
strongest temptation, yet he still finds, that far less than what he here
offered, will bring men in subjection to him. How small a matter of gain will
tempt some men to all the sins of lying, of fraud and injustice? who pawn their
souls and put them out at interest for D
a very small present advantage, although they are sure in a very little time
to lose both their interest and the Principal too.

How many for the sake of the Honors and preferments of this World are willing
to do by their consciences as the Indian did by his letter, lay them aside till
their business be done and then expect to hear no more of them! What poor and
trifling things in this world, do men continually venture their souls for? As
though all were clear gains which they could put off so dead a commodity as the
Salvation of their Souls for. How apt are such to applaud themselves for their E
own skill, when merely by a little swearing and lying and cheating, things
which cost them nothing but a few words, they can defeat the designs of their
enemies and compass their own! But how low is the rate of souls fallen in the
esteem of such persons as these are! If they had not been of any greater value,
they had not been worth any ordinary man's, much less, the Son A
of Gods laying down his life for the redemption of them. Is this all the
requital men make him for the travail of his soul, the wounds of his body, the
bitterness of his passion, to sq^ander away those souls upon any trifling
advantages of this world, which he shed his most p^ecious blood for the
redemption of^ When ever men are tempted to sin with the hopes of gain, let
them but consider how much they undervalue not only their own souls, but the
eternal Son of God, and all that he has done and suffered for the sake of the
souls of men: If the^e had been no greater worth in our souls, silver and gold
would have been a B
sufficient price of redemption for them (for if men lose their souls for these
things, it is a sign they set a higher value upon them) But Gods justice was
not to be bribed, his wrath against sin was not to be appeased by the greatest
riches of this World, nothing but the inestimable blood of Christ would be
accepted for the purchase of souls; and when they are so dearly bought must
they be cast away upon such trifles as the riches and honors of this world
are, in comparison with them?

These are men who lose their souls upon design, but there are others so
prodigal of them, that they can play and sport them C
away, or lose them only because it is the custom to do so. With whom all the
reasons and arguments in the world cannot prevail to leave off their sins, if
it once be accounted a fashion to commit them. Yea so dangerous things are
fashionable vices, that some will seem to be worse than they are, (although few
continue long Hypocritical in that way) that they might not be out of the
fashion, and some will be sure to follow it (if not outdo it) though to the
eternal ruin of their souls. But although all damned persons at the great day
will be confounded and ashamed, yet none will be more ridiculously miserable
than such who go to D
Hell for fashion sake. What a strange account would this be at the dreadful
day of judgment for any to plead for themselves, that they knew that chastity,
temperance, sobriety and devotion were things more pleasing to God, but it was
grown a Mode to be vicious, and they had rather be damned than be out of the
fashion? The most charitable opinion we can have of such persons now, is that
they do not think they have any souls at all; for it is prodigious folly for
men to believe they have souls that are immortal, and yet be so regardless of
them.

Yet these who are vicious out of compliance are not the only E
persons who show so little care of their souls, what shall we say to those who
enjoying the good things of this life, scarce ever do so much as think of
another? Who are very solicitous about every little mode of attire for their
bodies, and think no time long enough to be spent in the grand affairs of
dressing and adorning their out sides; but from one end of the year to the
other never A
spend one serious thought about eternity, or the future State of their souls.
Their utmost contrivances are how to pass away their days with the greatest
ease and pleasure to themselves; and never consider what will become of their
souls when they come to die. Alas poor immortal souls! are they become the only
contemptible things men have about them? All care is little enough with some
for the body, for the pampering and indulging of that, and making provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; but any cure is thought too much for the
soul; and no time passes so heavily away, as the hours of devotion do. The very
show of Religion is looked on as a burden, what then do they think of B
the practice of it? The Devil himself shows a greater esteem of the souls of
men, than such persons do; for he has been always very active and industrious
in seeking their ruin, but is ready enough to comply with all the inclinations
of the body, or men's designs in this world; nay he makes the greatest use of
these as the most powerful temptations for the ruin of their souls; by all
which it is evident, that, being our greatest enemy he aims only at the ruin of
that which is of greatest value and consideration, and that is the thing so
much despised by wicked C
men, viz. the soul. These do in effect, tell the Devil he may spare his pains
in tempting them; they can do his work fast enough themselves, and destroy
their own souls without any help from him. And if all men were so bent upon
their own ruin, the Devil would have so little to do, that he must find out
some other employment besides that of tempting to divert himself with, unless
it be the greatest diversion of all to him, to see men turned Devils to
themselves. But are the temptations of this world so infatuating that no reason
or consideration can bring men to any care of or regard to their souls? D
we have no ground to think so, since there have been and I hope still are
such, who can despise the glittering vanities, the riches and honors, the
pleasures and delights of this world when they stand in competition with the
eternal happiness of their souls in a better world. And that not out of a
sullen humor or a morose temper, or a discontented mind; but from the most
prudent weighing and ballancing the gain of this world and the loss of the soul
together. For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul, or what shall he give in exchange for his soul? E


3. Which is the last particular, to represent the folly of losing the soul,
though it were for the gain of the whole world. Which will appear by comparing
the gain and the loss with each other in these 4. things.

1. The gain here proposed is at the best but possible to one; but the hazard
of losing the soul is certain to all. And what A
folly is it for men to run themselves upon so great and certain danger, for so
uncertain gain, which never any man yet attained to, or are ever like to do it?
our Savior knew how hard a matter it was so set any bounds to the ambitious
thoughts or the covetous designs of men: every step the ambitious man takes
higher gives him the fairer prospect before him; it raises his thoughts,
enlarges his desires, puts new projects into his mind, which like the circles
of water spread still farther and farther, till his honor and he be both laid
in the dust together: The covetous person is never satisfied with what he
enjoys, the B
more he gets, still the more he hopes for; and like the grave whither he is
going, is always devouring and always craving: Yet neither of these can be
thought so vain as to propose no less to themselves than the Empire or riches
of the whole world. But our Savior allows them the utmost, that ever can be
supposed as to men's designs for this world; let men be never so ambitious or
covetous, they could desire no more than all the world; though they would have
all this, yet this all would never make amends for the loss of the soul. It is
a thing possible, that one person might by degrees bring the whole world in
subjection C
to him, but it is possible in so remote a degree that no man in his wits can
be thought to design it. How small a part of the inhabited world have the
greatest Conquerours been able to subdue! and if the Macedonian Prince was ever
so vain to weep that he had no more worlds to conquer, he gave others a just
occasion to laugh at so much Ignorance which made him think he had conquered
this. And to put a check to such a troublesome ambition of disturbing the world
in others, how early was he taken away in the midst of his vast thoughts and
designs? What a small thing would the compass of the whole D
earth appear to one that should behold it at the distance of the fixed stars?
and yet the mighty Empires which have made the greatest noise in the world have
taken up but an inconsiderable part of the whole earth. What are then those
mean designs which men continually hazard their souls for, as much as if they
aimed at the whole world? For we are not to imagine that only Kings and Princes
are in any hazard of losing their souls for the sake of this world; for it is
not the greatness of men's condition, but their immoderate love to the world
which ruins and destroys their souls. And covetousness and ambition do not
always reign E
in Courts and Palaces, they can stoop to the meanness of a Cottage, and ruin
the souls of such as want the things of this world as well as those that enjoy
them. So that no state or condition of men is exempt from the hazard of losing
the soul for the love of this world, although but one person can be supposed at
once to have the possession of the whole world.

2. The gain of this world brings but an imaginary happiness, A
but the loss of the soul a most real misery. It is easy to suppose a person
to have the whole world at his command and not himself; and how can that man be
happy that is not at his own command? The cares of Government in a small part
of the earth are so great and troublesome, that by the consent of mankind the
managers of it are invested with more than ordinary privileges by way of
recompense for them; but what are these to the solicitous thoughts, the
continual fears, the restless employments, the uninterrupted troubles which
must attend the gain of the whole world? So that after all the success of such
a man's designs, B
he may be farther off from any true contentment than he was at the beginning
of them. And in that respect men's conditions seem to be brought to a greater
equality in the world, because those who enjoy the most of the world do
oft-times enjoy the least of themselves; which has made some great Emperors
lay down their Crowns and Scepters to enjoy themselves in the retirements of a
Cloister or a Garden. All the real happiness of this world lies in a contented
mind, and that we plainly see does not depend upon men's outward circumstances;
for some men may be much farther from it in a higher condition in this world, C
than others are, or it may be themselves have been, in a far lower. But if
men's happiness did arise from any thing without them, that must be always
agreeable to their outward condition; but we find great difference as to men's
contentment in equal circumtances, and many times much greater in a private
State of life, than in the most public capacity. By which it appears, that
what ever looks like happiness in this world, depends upon a man's soul and not
upon the gain of the world; nay it is only from thence that ever men are able
to abuse themselves with false notions and Idea's of happiness here. But none
of those shall go into another D
world with them; farewell then to all imaginary happiness; to the pleasures of
sin, and the cheats of a deceitful world; then nothing but the dreadful
apprehensions of its own misery shall possess that soul which shall then too
late descern its folly, and lament it when it is past recovery. Then the
torments of the mind shall never be imputed to melancholy vapors, or a
disordered fancy. There will be no drinking away sorrows, no jesting with the
sting of conscience, no playing with the flames of another world. God will then
no longer be mocked by wicked men, but they shall find to their own eternal
horror and confusion, that E
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. He neither
wants power to inflict, nor justice to execute, nor vengeance to pursue, nor
wrath to punish; but his power is irresistible, his justice inflexible, and his
wrath is insupportable. Consider now O foolish sinner that have hither to been
ready to cast away thy soul upon the pleasures of sin for a season; what a wise
exchange A
thou will make of a poor imaginary happiness for a most real and intolerable
misery. What will all the gain of this world signify in that State whither we
are all hastening a pace? What contentment will it be to thee then to think of
all those bewitching vanities, which have betrayed thy soul into unspeakable
misery? Would thou be willing to be treated with all the ceremonies of State
and Greatness for an hour or two, if thou were sure that immediately after thou
must undergo the most exquisite tortures and be racked and tormented to death?
When men neglect their souls and cast them away upon the sinful pleasures B
and gains of this world, it is but such a kind of aerie and fantastical
happiness; but the miseries of a lost soul are infinitely beyond the racks and
torments of the body. It has sometimes happened that the horror of despair
has seized upon men's minds for some notorious crimes in this life, which has
giyen no rest either to body or mind, but the violence of the inward pains have
forced them to put an end to this miserable life; as in the case of Judas. But
if the expectation of future misery be so dreadful, what must the enduring of
it be? Of all the ways of dying we can hardly imagine any more painful or full
of honor C
than that of sacrificing their Children to Moloch was among the Canaanites,
and Children of Ammon where the Children were put into the body of a brass
Image and a fire made under it, which by degrees with lamentable shricks and
cryings roasted them to death; yet this above all others in the New Testament
is chosen as the fittest representation of the miseries of another world and
thence the very name of Gehenna is taken. But as the joys of heaven will far
surpass all the pleasure which the mind of a good man has in this life; so
will the torments of Hell as much exceed the greatest miseries of this world. D


But in the most exquisite pains of the body there is that satisfaction still
left, that death will at last put an end to them; but that is a farther
discovery of the unspeakable folly of losing the soul for the sake of this
world, that

3. The happiness of this world can last but for a little time, but the misery
of the soul will have no end. Suppose a man had all the world at his command
and enjoyed as much satisfaction in it as it was possible for humane nature to
have; yet the very thoughts of dying and leaving all in a short time, must
needs make his happiness seem much less considerable to E
him. And every wise man would provide most for that State wherein he is sure
to continue longest. The shortness of life makes the pleasures of it less
desirable, and the miseries less dreadful: but an endless State makes every
thing of moment which belongs to it. Where there is variety and liberty of
change, there is no necessity of any long deliberation before hand, A
but for that which is to continue always the same the greatest consideration
is needful, because the very continuance of some things is apt to bring
weariness and satiety with it. If a man were bound for his whole life time to
converse only with one person without so much as seeing any other, he would
desire time and use his best judgment in the choice of him. If one were bound
to lie in the same posture without any motion but for a month together, how
would he employ his wits before hand to make it as easy and tolerable as might
be? Thus solicitous and careful would men be for any thing that was to continue
the same although but for a short B
time here: But what are those things to the endless duration of a soul in a
misery, that is a perpetual destruction, and everlasting death; always
intolerable and yet must always be endured. A misery that must last when time
it self shall be no more; and the utmost periods we can imagine fall infinitely
short of the continuance of it. O the unfathomable Abyss of Eternity! how are
our imaginations lost in the conceptions of it! But what will it then be to be
swallowed up in an Abyss of misery and eternity together? And I do not know
how such an eternal State of misery could have been represented in Scripture in
words more Emphatical than it is; not C
only by everlasting fire, and everlasting destrustion, but by a worm that
never dies and a fire that never goes out; and the very same expressions are
used concerning the eternal State of the Blessed and the damned; so that if
there were any reason to Question the one, there would be the same to question
the other also.

4. The loss of this world may be abundantly recompensed, but the loss of the
soul can never be. For what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? If a man
runs the hazard of losing all that is valuable or desirable in this world for
the sake of his soul, heaven and eternal happiness will make him infinite
amends for it. He will D
have no cause to repent of his bargain that parts with his share in this evil
world for the joys and glories which are above. They who have done this in the
resolution of their minds, have before hand had so great satisfaction in it,
Romans 5. 2. 3.
that they have gloried in tribulations and rejoiced in hopes of the glory of
God; they have upon casting up their accounts found 8. 18.
that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed; because the afflictions they meet with here
are but light and momentany, but that which they expected in recompense for
them, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
was an exceeding and an eternal weight of Glory. O E
blessed change! what life can be so desirable as the parting with it is on
such terms as these? It was the hopes of this glorious recompense which
inspired so many Martyrs to adventure for heaven with so much courage,
patience, and constancy in the primitive times of the Christian Church. How do
they look down from heaven and A
despise all the vanities of this world in comparison with what they enjoy! And
if they are sensible of what is done on earth with what pity do they behold us
miserable creatures, that for the sake of the honors, pleasures, or riches of
this world venture the loss of all which they enjoy and thereby of our souls
too! Which is a loss so great, that no recompense can ever be made for it, no
price of redemption can ever be accepted for the delivery of it. For even the
Son of God himself who laid down his life for the redemption of souls, shall
then come from heaven with flaming fire to take vengeance on all those who so
much despise the blood he has shed for B
them, the warnings he has given to them, the Spirit he has promised them,
the reward he is ready to bestow upon them, as in spite of all to cast away
those precious and immortal souls which he has so dearly bought with his own
blood.

Methinks the consideration of these things might serve to awaken our security,
to cure our stupidity, to check our immoderate love of this world and inflame
our desires of a better. Wherein can we show our selves men more than by having
the greatest regard to that which makes us men? which is our souls. Wherein can
we show our selves Christians better, than by abstaining from all those C
hurtful lusts which war against our souls, and doing those things which tend
to make them happy? We are all walking upon the shore of eternity, and for all
that we know the next tide may sweep us away; shall we only sport and play or
gather cockle shells and lay them in heaps like Children, till we are snatched
away past all recovery? It is no such easy matter to prevent the losing our
souls as secure sinners are apt to imagine. It was certainly to very little
purpose that we are bid Phil. 2. 12.
to work out our Salvation if lying still would do it; or 2 Pet. 1. 10.
to give all diligence about it, if none would serve the turn: Matthew. 7. 14
or to strive to enter in at the straight gate, if it D
were so wide to receive all sinners. No? Luke 13. 24.
Many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able, what then shall become of
those that run as far from it as they can? Those, I mean, whom no entreaties of
God himself, no kindness of his Son, no not the laying down his life for their
souls, no checks or rebukes of their own consciences can hinder from doing
those things which do without a speedy and sincere repentance exclude men from
the Kingdom of heaven. O that men could at last be persuaded to understand
themselves and set a just value upon their immortal souls! How would they then
despile the vanities, conquer the temptations, and break through E
the difficulties of this present world, and by that means fit their souls for
the eternal enjoyment of that blessed State of souls which God the Father has
promised, his Son has purchased, and the Holy Ghost has confirmed. To whom be
rendered, etc.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the TRUE REASON OF THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shops, at the Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall, and the Phoenix in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

A
DISCOURSE Concerning the TRUE REASON Of the SUFFERINGS of CHRIST.
CHAP. 1. B

Of the Socinian way of interpreting Scripture. Of the uncertainty it leaves us
in as to the main articles of Faith, manifested by an Exposition of Genesis 1.
suitable to that way. The state of the Controversy in general concerning the
sufferings of Christ for us. He did not suffer the same we should have done.
The grand mistake in making punishments of the nature of Debts; the difference
between them at large discovered, C
from the different reason and ends of them. The right of punishment in God,
proved against Crellius, not to arise from mere dominion. The end of punishment
not bare Compensation, as it is in debts; what punishment due to an injured
person by the right of Nature; proper punishment a result of Laws. Crellius his
great mistake about the end of Punishments. Not designed for satisfaction of
Anger as it is a desire of Revenge. Seneca and Lactantius vindicated against
Crellius. The Magistrates interest in Punishment distinct from that of private
persons. Of the nature of Anger D
in God, and the satisfaction to be made to it. Crellius his great arguments
against satisfaction depend on a false Notion of Gods anger. Of the ends of
divine Punishments, and the different nature of them in this and the future
state.

SIR,
ALthough the Letter I received from your hands contained. 1. The introduction,
concerning the Socinian, way of interpreting Scripture.
in it so many mistakes of my meaning and design, that it seemed to be the
greatest civility to the E
Writer of it, to give no answer at all to it, because that could not be done,
without the discovery of far more weaknesses in him, than he pretends to find
in my discourse: Yet the weight and importance of the matter may require a
further account from me, concerning the true reason of A
the sufferings of Christ. Wherein my design was so far from representing old
Errors to the best advantage, or to rack my wits to defend them, as that person
seems to suggest; that I aimed at nothing more than to give a true account of
what upon a serious enquiry, I judged to be the most natural and genuine
meaning of the Christian Doctrine contained in the Writings of the New
Testament.

For finding therein such multitudes of expressions which to an unprejudiced
mind attribute all the mighty effects of the Love of God to us, to the
obedience and sufferings of Christ; B
I began to consider what reason there was why the plain and easy sense of
those places must be forsaken, and a remote and Metaphorical meaning put upon
them. Which I thought my self the more obliged to do, because I could not
conceive if it had been the design of the Scripture, to have delivered the
received Doctrine of the Christian Church, concerning the reason of the
sufferings of Christ, that it could have been more clearly and fully expressed
than it is already. So that supposing that to have been the true meaning of the
several places of Scripture which we contend for; yet the C
same arts and subtilties might have been used to pervert it, which are
employed to persuade men that is not the true meaning of them. And what is
equally serviceable to truth and falsehood, can of it self, have no power on the
minds of men to convince them it must be one, and not the other. Nay, if every
unusual and improper acception of words in the Scripture, shall be thought
sufficient to take away the natural and genuine sense, where the matter is
capable of it; I know scarce any article of Faith can be long secure; and by
these arts men may declare that they believe the Scriptures, and yet D
believe nothing of the Christian Faith. For if the improper, though unusual
acception of those expressions of Christ's dying for us, of redemption,
propitiation, reconciliation by his blood, of his bearing our iniquities, and
being made sin and a curse for us, shall be enough to invalidate all the
arguments taken from them to prove that which the proper sense of them does
imply; why may not the improper use of the terms of Creation and Resurrection,
as well take away the natural sense of them in the great Articles of the
Creation of the World, and Resurrection after death? For if it be enough to
prove E
that Christ's dying for us, does not imply dying in our stead; because
sometimes dying for others imports no more than dying for some advantage to
come to them; if redemption being sometimes used for mere deliverance, shall
make our redemption by Christ, wholly Metaphorical; if the terms of
propitiation reconcilation, A
etc. shall lose their force because they are sometimes used where all things
cannot be supposed parallel with the sense we contend for: why shall I be bound
to believe that the World was ever created in a proper sense, since those
persons against whom I argue, so earnestly contend that in those places in
which it seems as proper as any, it is to be understood only in a metaphorical?
If when the World and all things are said John 1. 3, 10.
to be made by Christ, we are not to understand the production but the
reformation of the World and all things in it, although the natural sense of
the Words be quite otherwise; what argument B
can make it necessary for me not to understand the Creation of the World in a
metaphorical sense, when Moses delivers to us the history of it? Why may not I
understand in the beginning, Genesis 1. for the beginning of the Mosaical
Dispensation, as well as Socinus does in the beginning, John 1. for the
beginning of the Evangelical? and that from the very same argument used by him,
viz. that in the beginning is to be understood of the main subject concerning
which the author intends to write, and that I am as sure it was in Moses
concerning the Law given by him as it was in St. John, concerning C
the Gospel delivered by Christ. Why may not the Creation of the Heavens and
the Earth, be no more than the erection of the Jewish Polity? since it is
acknowledged, that by New Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells righteousness,
no more is understood than a new state of things under the Gospel? Why may not
the confused Chaos import no more than the state of Ignorance and darkness
under which the World was before the Law of Moses? since it is confessed that
it signifies in the New Testament such a state of the World before the Gospel
appeared? and consequently, why may not the light which made the first D
day be the first tendencies to the Doctrine of Moses, which being at first
divided and scattered, was united afterward in one great Body of Laws, which
was called the Sun, because it was the great Director of the Jewish Nation, and
therefore said to rule the day; as the less considerable Laws of other Nations
are called the Moon, because they were to govern those who were yet under the
night of Ignorance? Why may not the Firmament being in the midst of the Waters,
imply the erection of the Je^ish State in the midst of a great deal of trouble,
since it is confe^^ed, that Waters are often taken in Scripture in a
Metaphorical E
sense for troubles and afflictions? and the Earth appearing out of the Waters,
be no more but the settlement of that state aft^^ ^t^ troubles; and
particularly with great elegancy after (...) p^age through the Red Sea? And the
production of Herbs and living Creatures, be the great increase of the People A
of all sorts, as well those of a meaner rank (and therefore called herbs) as
those of a higher, that were to live upon the other, and sometimes trample upon
them, and therefore by way of excellency called the Living Creatures? And when
these were multiplied and brought into order, (which being done by steps and
degrees, is said to be finished, in several days) then the State and the Church
flourished and enjoyed a great deal of pleasure, which was the production of
Man and Woman, and their being placed in Paradise (for a perfect Man, notes a
high degree of perfection, and a Woman is taken for the Church B
in the Revelations): But when they followed the Customs of other Nations which
were as a forbidden tree to them, then they lost all their happiness and
pleasure, and were expelled out of their own Country, and lived in great
slavery and misery, which was the Curse pronounced against them, for violating
the rules of Policy established among them. Thus you see how small a measure of
wit, by the advantage of those ways of interpreting Scripture, which the
subtilest of our adversaries make use of, will serve to pervert the clearest
expressions of Scripture to quite another sense than was ever intended by the
Writer of C
them. And I assure you, if that rule of interpreting Scripture be once
allowed, that where words are ever used in a Metaphorical sense, there can be
no necessity of understanding them in a proper; there is scarce any thing which
you look on as the most necessary to be believed in Scripture, but it may be
made appear not to be so upon those terms: for by reason of the paucity and
therefore the ambiguity of the Original words of the Hebrew language, the
strange Idioms of it, the different senses of the same word in several
Conjugations, the want of several modes of expression which are used in other D
Languages, and above all the lofty and Metaphorical way of speaking used in
all Eastern Countries, and the imitation of the Hebrew Idioms in the Greek
translation of the Old Testament, and Original of the New, you can hardly affix
a sense upon any words used therein, but a man who will be at the pains to
search all possible significations and uses of those words, will put you hard
to it, to make good that which you took to be the proper meaning of them.
Wherefore although I will not deny to our adversaries the praise of subtilty
and diligence, I cannot give them that, (which is much more praise worthy) E
viz. of discretion and sound judgment. For while they use their utmost
industry to search all the most remote and Metaphorical senses of words, with a
design to take off the genuine and proper meaning of them, they do not attend
to the ill consequence that may be made of this to the overthrowing those A
things, the belief of which themselves make necessary to salvation. For by
this way the whole Gospel may be made an Allegory, and the Resurrection of
Christ be thought as metaphorical as the Redemption by his Death, and the sorce
of all the Precepts of the Gospel avoided by some unusual signification of the
words wherein they are delivered. So that nothing can be more unreasonable than
such a method of proceeding, unless it be first sufficiently proved that the
matter is not capable of the proper sense, and therefore of necessity the
improper only is to be allowed. And this is that which Socinus B
seems after all his pains to pervert the meaning of the places in
controversy, to rely on most; viz. That the Doctrine of satisfaction does
imply an impossibility in the thing it self, Socia. de Servat. Part. 2. Cap. 4.
(...)
and therefore must needs be false; nay, he says the infallibility of the
Revealer had not been enough in this Case, supposing that Christ had said it,
and risen from the dead, to declare his own Veracity; unless he had delivered
it by its proper causes and effects, and so showed the possibility of the thing
it self. And the reason, he says, why they believe their Doctrine true, is not
barely because God has said it, but they believe certainly C
that God has said it, because they know it to be true; by knowing the
contrary Doctrine to be impossible. The controversy then, concerning the
meaning of the places in dispute is to be resolved from the nature and
reasonableness of the matter contained in them: for if Socinus his reason were
answerable to his confidence, if the account we give of the sufferings of
Christ, were repugnant not only to the Justice, Goodness and Grace of God, but
to the nature of the thing; if it appear impossible, that mankind should be
redeemed in a proper sense, or that God should be propitiated by the Death of
his Son as a Sacrifice for D
sin; if it enervate all the Precepts of Obedience, and tends rather to
justify sins than those who do repent of them, I shall then agree, that no
industry can be too great in searching Authors, comparing places, examining
Versions, to find out such a sense as may be agreeable to the nature of things,
the Attributes of God, and the design of Christian Religion. But if on the
contrary, the Scripture does plainly assert those things, from whence our
Doctrine follows, and without which no reasonable account can be given either
of the expressions used therein, or of the sufferings of Christ; if Christ's
death did E
immediately respect God as a sacrifice, and were paid as a price for our
Redemption; if such a design of his death be so far from being repugnant to the
nature of God, that it highly manifests his Wisdom, Justice and Mercy; if it
assert nothing but what is so far from being impossible, that it is very
reconcilable to the common principles of Reason, as well as the Free Grace of
God in the pardon of sin; if, being truly understood, it is so far from
enervating, that it advances highly all the purposes of Christian Religion,
then it can be no less than a betraying one of the grand Truths of the
Christian Doctrine, not to believe ours to be the true sense of the places in
controversy. And this is that which I now take upon me to maintain.

For our clearer proceeding herein, nothing will be more necessary, than to
understand the true state of the Controversy;. 2. The state of the
Controversy in general.
which has been rendered more obscure by the mistakes of some, B
who have managed it with greater zeal than judgment; who have asserted more
than they needed to have done, and made our Adversaries assert much less than
they do: And by this means have shot over their Adversaries heads, and laid
their own more open to assaults. It is easy to observe, that most of Socinus
his Arguments are levelled against an opinion, which few who have considered
these things do maintain, and none need to think themselves obliged to do it;
which is, That Christ paid a proper and rigid satisfaction for the sins of men,
considered under the notion of debts, and that he paid the very C
same, which we ought to have done; which in the sense of the Law, is never
called Satisfaction, but strict payment. Against this, Socinus disputes from
the impossibility of Christ's paying the very same that we were to have paid;
because our penalty was Eternal death, and that as the consequent of inherent
guilt, which Christ neither did nor could undergo. Neither is it enough to say,
That Christ had undergone Eternal death, unless he had been able to free
himself from it; for the admission of one to pay for another, who could
discharge the debt in much less time than the offenders could, was not the same
which the Law D
required. For that takes no notice of any other than the persons who had
sinned; and if a Mediator could have paid the same, the Original Law must have
been disjunctive; viz. That either the Offender must suffer, or another for
him; but then the Gospel had not been the bringing in of a better Covenant, but
a performance of the old. But if there be a relaxation or dispensation of the
first Law, then it necessarily follows, that what Christ paid, was not the very
same which the first Law required; for what need of that, when the very same
was paid that was in the obligation? But if it be said, That the Dignity of the
person E
makes up, what wanted in the kind or degree of punishment: This is a plain
confession that it is not the same, but something equivalent, which answers the
ends of the Sanction, as much as the same would have done, which is the thing
we contend for. Besides, if the very same had been paid in the strict sense,
there A
would have followed a deliverance ipso facto; for the release immediately
follows the payment of the same: and it had been injustice to have required any
thing further, in order to the discharge of the Offender, when strict and full
payment had been made of what was in the obligation. But we see that Faith and
Repentance, and the consequences of those two, are made conditions on our
parts, in order to the enjoying the benefit of what Christ has procured: So
that the release is not immediate upon the payment, but depends on a new
contract; made in consideration of what Christ has done and suffered B
for us. If it be said, That by Christ's payment we become his; and he requires
these conditions of us; besides the contrariety of it to the Scriptures, which
make the conditions to be required by him to whom the payment was made; we are
to consider, that these very persons assert, that Christ paid all for us, and
in our name and stead; so that the payment by Christ, was by a substitution in
our room; and if he paid the same which the Law required, the benefit must
immediately accrue to those in whose name the debt was paid: For what was done
in the name of another, is all one to the Creditor, as if it had been done C
by the Debtor himself. But above all things, it is impossible to reconcile the
freeness of remission, with the full payment of the very same which was in the
obligation. Neither will it serve to say, That though it was not free to
Christ, yet it was to us: For the satisfaction and remission must respect the
same person; for Christ did not pay for himself, but for us, neither could the
remission be to him: Christ therefore is not considered in his own name, but as
acting in our stead; so that what was free to him, must be to us; what was
exactly paid by him, it is all one as if it had been done by us; so that it is
impossible D
the same debt should be fully paid and freely forgiven. Much less will it
avoid the difficulty in this case to say, That it was a refusable payment; for
it being supposed to be the very same, it was not in justice refusable; and
however not in equity, if it answer the intention of the Law, as much as the
suffering of the offenders had done; and the more it does that, the less
refusable it is. And although God himself found out the way, that does not make
the pardon free, but the designation of the person who was to pay the debt.
Thus when our Adversaries dispute against this opinion, no wonder if they do it
successfully, E
but this whole opinion is built upon a mistake, that satisfaction must be the
payment of the very same; which while they contend for, they give our
Adversaries too great an advantage, and make them think they triumph over the
Faith of the Church, when they do it only over the mistake of some A
particular persons. But the foundation of this mistake, lies in the
consideration of punishment, under the notion of debts, and that satisfaction
therefore must be by strict payment in rigor of Law; but how great that mistake
is, will appear in the subsequent discourse: but it cannot but be wondered at,
that the very same persons who consider sins, as debts which must be strictly
satisfied for, do withal contend for the absolute necessity of this
satisfaction; whereas Socinus his Arguments would hold good, if sins were only
considered as debts, and God as the mere Creditor of punishment, he might as
freely part B
with his own right without satisfaction, as any Creditor may forgive what sum
he pleases, to a person indebted to him; and no reason can be brought to the
contrary, from that notion of sins, why he may not do it. But if they be
considered with a respect to Gods Government of the world, and the honor of
his Laws, then some further account may be given, why it may not be consistent
with that, to pass by the sins of men, without satisfaction made to them.

And because the mistake in this matter, has been the foundation of most of
the subsequent mistakes on both sides, and C
. 3. Of the difference of debts and punishments.
the discovery of the cause of errors, does far more to the cure of them, than
any Arguments brought against them; and withal, the true understanding of the
whole Doctrine of satisfaction depends upon it, I shall endeavor to make clear
the notion under which our sins are considered; for upon that, depends the
nature of the satisfaction which is to be made for them. For while our
Adversaries suppose, that sins are to be looked on under the notion of debts in
this debate, they assert it to be wholly free for God to remit them, without
any satisfaction. They make the right of punishment merely to depend D
on Gods absolute Dominion; and that all satisfaction must be considered under
the notion of compensation, for the injuries done to him, to whom it is to be
made But if we can clearly show a considerable difference between the notion of
debts and punishments, if the right of punishment does not depend upon mere
Dominion, and that satisfaction by way of punishment, is not primarily intended
for compensation, but for other ends, we shall make not only the state of the
Controversy much clearer, but offer something considerable toward the
resolution of it. The way I shall take for the proof of the difference E
between debts and punishments, shall be using the other for the Arguments for
it. For besides, that those things are just in matter of debts, which are not
so in the case of punishments; as, that it is lawful for a man to forgive all
the debts which are owing him by all persons, though they never so
contumaciously A
refuse payment, but our Adversaries will not say so in the case of sins; for
although they assert, That the justice of God does never require punishment in
case of Repentance, yet withal they assert, That in case of Impenitency, it is
not only agreeable, but due to the nature and decrees; and No^ re^^pi^^ntib^s
^^mam ro^ conc^de^e, id d^m^m naturae divinae, and decretis ejus and propterea
rellitudi^i and aeq^itati debitu^ est ac con^e^ta^e^m. Socin. de Servat. l. 1.
c. 1. No^ resipis^eates ^oe^a non lio rare tum p^r se aequitati est admodum
cons^nta^eum, and positis quibusda^ fi^ibus quos D^us sibi in re^^^dis
hominibus pr^sixit ^^^lo necessari^m. Crell. c. Grot. c. 2. sect. 29.
therefore to the rectitude and equity of God not to give pardon. But if this
be true, then there is an apparent difference between the notion of debts and
punishments; for the Impenitency does but add to the greatness of the debt: And
will they say, it is only in Gods power to remit small debts, but he must B
punish the greatest? what becomes then of Gods absolute liberty to part with
his own right? will not this show more of his kindness to pardon the greater,
rather than lesser offenders? But if there be something in the nature of the
thing, which makes it not only just, but necessary for impenitent sinners to be
punished, as Crellius after Socinus frequently acknowledges, then it is plain,
that sins are not to be considered merely as debts, for that obstinacy and
impenitency is only punished as a greater degree of sin, and therefore as a
greater debt. And withal, those things are lawful in the remission C
of debts, which are unjust in the matter of punishments; as it is lawful for a
Creditor, when two persons are considered in equal circumstances, to remit one,
and not the other; nay, to remit the greater debt, without any satisfaction,
and to exact the lesser to the greatest extremity; but it is unjust in matter
of punishments, where the reason and circumstances are the same, for a person
who has committed a crime of very dangerous consequence, to escape unpunished,
and another who has been guilty of far less to be severely executed. Besides
these considerations, I say, I shall now D
prove the difference of debts and punishments, from those two things whereby
things are best differenced from each other; viz. The different Reason, and the
different End of them.

The different Reason of debts and punishments: The reason of debts is dominion
and property, and the obligation of. 4. The reason of humame punishment is the
public interest.
them, depends upon voluntary contracts between parties; but the reason of
punishments is Justice and Government, and depends not upon mere contracts, but
the relation the person stands in to that Authority to which he is accountable
for his actions. For if the obligation to punishment, did depend upon mere E
contract, then none could justly be punished, but such who have consented to
it by an antecedent contract: If it be said, That a contract is implied, by
their being in society with others; that is as much as I desire to make the
difference appear, for in case of debts, the obligation depends upon the
voluntary A
contract of the person; but in case of punishments, the very relation to
Government, and living under Laws does imply it. And the right of punishment
depends upon the obligation of Laws, where the reason of them holds, without
any express contract, or superiority of one over another; as in the case of
violation of the Law of Nations, that gives right to another Nation to punish
the infringers of it. Otherwise Wars could never be lawful between two Nations,
and none could be warrantable, but those of a Prince against his rebellious
subjects, who have broken the Laws themselves consented B
expressly to. Besides, in case of debts, every man is bound to pay, whether he
be called upon or no; but in case of punishments, no man is bound to betray or
accuse himself. For the obligation to payment in case of debt; arises from the
injury sustained by that particular person, if another detains what is his own
from him; but the obligation to punishment, arises from the injury the Public
sustains by the impunity (...) of crimes, of which the Magistrates are to take
care; who by the dispensing of punishments, do show that to be true which
Grotius asserts, that if there be any Creditor to be assigned C
in punishment, it is the public good: Which appears by this, that all
punishments are proportioned, according to the influence the offenses have upon
the public interest; for the reason of punishment is not because a Law is
broken, but because the breach of a Law tends to dissolve the community, by
infringing the Authority of the Laws, and the honor of those who are to take
care of them. For if we consider it, the measure of punishments is in a well
ordered State, taken from the influence which crimes have upon the peace and
interest of the community. No man questions, but that Malice, Pride D
and Avarice, are things really as bad as many faults, that are severely
punished by humane Laws; but the reason these are not punished is, because they
do not so much injury to the public interest, as Theft and Robbery do.
Besides, in those things wherein the Laws of a Nation are concerned, the utmost
rigor is not used in the preventing of crimes, or the execution of them when
committed, if such an execution may endanger the public more than the impunity
of the offenders may do. And there are some things which are thought fit to be
forbidden, where the utmost means are not used to E
prevent them; as Merchants are forbidden to steal customs, but they are not
put under an Oath not to do it. And when penalties have been deserved, the
execution of them has been deferred, till it may be most for the advantage of
the public: as Ioabs punishment till Solomon's Reign, though he deserved it as
much in David's. So that the rule commonly talked of, Fiat justitia and pereat
mundus, is a piece of Pedantry, rather than true Wisdom; for whatever penalty
inflicted, brings a far greater detriment to the public, than the forbearance
of it, is no piece of Justice to the State, but the contrary, the greatest Law,
being the safety and preservation of the whole body. By which it appears, that
in humane Laws, the reason of punishment is not, that such an action is done,
but because the impunity in doing it, may have a bad influence on the public
interest; but in debts, the right of Restitution B
depends upon the injury received by a particular person, who looks at no more
than the reparation of his loss by it.

We are now to consider, how far these things will hold in Divine Laws, and
what the right of punishment does result. 5. The right of Divine punishment not
mere Dominion. Crell. Respons. ad Grot. cap. 2. sect. 1. etc.
from there. For Crellius, the subtillest of our Adversaries, knowing how great
consequence the resolution of this is, in the whole Controversy of
Satisfaction, vehemently contends, That the right of punishment does result
from Gods absolute Dominion, and therefore he is to be considered as the
offended party, and not as Governor in the right of inflicting punishment; for
which his C
first Argument is, That our obedience is due to Gods Law, on the account of
his Dominion; but when that is not performed, p. 144.
the penalty succeeds in its room, and therefore that does belong to God on the
same account: His other arguments are, from the compensation of injuries due to
the offended party, and from Gods anger against sin, in which he is to be
considered as the offended party: These two latter will be answered under the
next head; the first I am to examine here. He therefore tells us, that the
right of punishment belongs to Gods Dominion, because the reason of his
Government of mankind is, because he D
is the Lord of them. But, for our better understanding this, we are to
consider, although the original right of Government does result from Gods
Dominion; for therefore our obedience is due, because of his Sovereignty over
us; yet when God takes upon him the notion of a Governor, he enters into a new
relation with his creatures, distinct from the first as mere Lord. For he is
equally Lord of all to whom he gives a being, but he does not require obedience
upon equal terms, nor governs them by the same Laws: Dominion is properly
showed in the exercise of power; but when God gives Laws according to which he
will E
reward and punish, he so far restrains the exercise of his Dominion to a
subserviency to the ends of Government. If we should suppose, that God governs
the world merely by his Dominion, we must take away all rewards and
punishments; for then the actions of men, would be the mere effects of
irresistible power, A
and so not capable of rewards and punishments; for there could be neither of
these, where men's actions are not capable of the differences of good and evil,
and that they cannot be, if they be the acts of Gods Dominion, and not of their
own. But if God does not exercise his full Dominion over rational creatures, it
is apparent that he does govern them under another notion than as mere Lord,
and the reason of punishment is not to be taken from an absolute right which
God does not make use of, but from the ends and designs of Government, which
are his own Honor, the Authority of his Laws, and the good B
of those whom he does govern. And Crellius is greatly mistaken, when he makes
punishment to succeed in the place of the right of obedience; for it is only
the desert of punishment, which follows upon the violation of that right, and
as we assert, that the right of obedience is derived from Gods Sovereignty, so
we deny not, but the desert of punishment is from the violation of it; but
withal we say, that the obligation to punishment depends upon the Laws, and
Gods right to inflict punishment (Laws being supposed) is immediately from that
Government which he has over mankind: For otherwise, if the C
whole right of punishment did still depend upon Gods Dominion, and the first
right of Sovereignty, then al sins must have equal punishments, because they
are all equal violations of the fundamental right of obedience; then it were at
liberty for God to punish a greater sin, with a less punishment; and a lesser
sin, with a greater: And lastly, this would make the punishment of sin, a mere
Arbitrary thing in God; for there would be no reason of punishment, but what
depended upon Gods mere will; whereas the reason of punishment in Scripture is
drawn from a repugnancy of sin to the divine purity and holiness, D
and not merely from Gods power or will to punish; but if that were all the
reason of it, there would be no repugnancy in the nature of the thing for the
most vicious person to be rewarded, and the most pious to be made everlastingly
miserable. But who ever yet durst say or think so? From whence it appears that
the relation between sin and punishment is no result of Gods arbitrary will;
but it is founded in the nature of the things, so that as it is just for God to
punish offenders, so it would be unjust to punish the most innocent person
without any respect to sin. But if the right of punishment depends E
merely on Gods Dominion, I cannot understand why God may not punish when, and
whom, and in what manner he pleases; without any impeachment of his Justice,
and therefore it is to be wondered at, that the same persons who assert the
right of punishment to be merely in Gods dominion, should A
yet cry out of the injustice of one person being punished for another faults;
for why may not God exercise his dominion in this case? yes, say they, he may
his dominion, but he cannot punish, because punishment supposes guilt, and
cannot be just without it; how far that reaches, will be examined afterward;
at present, we take notice of the contradiction to themselves which our
Adversaries are guilty of, that they may serve their own hypothesis, for when
we dispute with them, against absolute remission without satisfaction, then
they contend that the right of punishment is a mere act of dominion, and God
may B
part with his right, if he please; but when they dispute with us against the
translation of punishment from one to another, then they no longer say that the
right of punishment is an act of dominion, but that it is a necessary
consequent of inherent guilt, and cannot be removed from one to another. And
then they utterly deny that punishment is of the nature of debts; for one man's
money, they say, may become another, but one Soc. de Servat. l. 3. c. 3.
Prae^ect. c 18.
man's punishment cannot become another: Thus they give and take, deny and
grant, as it serves for their present purposes.

2. The different end of debts and punishments, make it appear. 6. 2. The end
of punishments not bare compensation as it is in debts. (...)
C
that there is a difference in the nature of them; for the intention of the
obligation to payment in case of debt, is the compensation of the damage which
the Creditor sustains; but the intention of punishment, is not bare
compensation, but it is designed for greater and further ends. For which we are
to consider the different nature of punishments, as they are inflicted by way
of reparation of some injury done to private persons, and as they do respect
the public good. I grant, that private persons in case of injuries, seek for
compensation of the damage they sustain, and so far they bear the nature of D
debts; but if we consider them as inflicted by those who have a care of the
public, though they are to see that no private persons suffers injury by
another; yet the reason of that is not merely that he might enjoy his own, but
because the doing injuries to others tends to the subversion of the ends of
Government. Therefore, I can by no means admit that Position of Crellius, that
a Magistrate only punishes as he assumes the person of the particular mon who
have received injuries from Crell. (...). G^ot. cap. 2. Sect. 2. p. 14^. Sect.
17. p. 162.
other; for he aims at other ends than merely the compensation of those injured
persons. Their great end is according to E
the old Roman Formula, ne quid Resp. detrimenti capiat: the reason of exacting
penalties upon private men is still with a regard to the public safety.
Supposing men in a state of nature no punishment is due to the injured person,
but restitution of damage, and compensation of the loss that accrues to him by
the A
injury sustained; and whatever goes beyond this, is the effect of Government,
which constitutes penalties for preservation of the Society which is under
Laws. But herein Crellius is our adversary, but with no advantage at all to his
Cause; for he offers to prove against Grotius, that something more is due by an
injury beyond bare compensation for what the other is supposed to lose by the
right of nature; for says he, in every injury there is not only the real
damage which the person sustains, but there is a contempt of the person employed
in it, for which as well as the former, he ought to have compensation. To which
I answer, B
1. That this does not prove what he designs, viz. that punishment does belong
to the injured person in a state of Nature, beyond bare restitution, but that
it is necessary, that men should not continue in such a state, that so they may
be vindicated from that contempt, and others compelled to restitution. Both
which, as they are punishments, are not in the power of the offended party as
such, but show that it is very reasonable there should be Laws and Governors,
that private persons may be preserved in their just rights, and offenders
punished for the vindication not only of their honor, but of the Laws too. And
C
Laws being established, the injured person has right to no more, than the
compensation of his loss; for that being forced upon the offending party, is a
sufficient vindication of his honor. 2. If the contempt of a private person
makes a compensation necessary, how much more will this hold in a public
Magistrate; whose contempt by disobedience is of far worse consequence than
that of a private person. And by this argument Crellius overthrows his main
hypothesis, viz. that God may pardon sin without satisfaction; for if it be not
only necessary, that the loss be compensated but the dishonor too; then so
much D
greater as the dishonor is; so much higher as the person is; so much more
beneficial to the world as his Laws are; so much more necessary is it that in
order to pardon there must be a satisfaction made to him, for the affronts he
has received from men. And if the greatness of the injury be to be measured as
Crellius asserts, from the worth and value of the thing, from Crell. c. Grot.
cap. 2. p. 174.
the dignity and honor of the person, from the displicency of the fact to him,
which he makes the measure of punishment; this makes it still far more
reasonable, that God should have satisfaction for the sins of men, than that
men should have for the injuries E
done them by one another; especially considering what the same Author does
assert afterward, that it is sometime repugnant to justice, for one to part
with his own right in case of injuries, and Sect. 29. p. 198.
that either from the nature and circumstances of the things themselves, or a
decree or determination to the contrary, for the first A
he instanceth in case of not orious defamation; in which he says, it is a
dishonest and unlawful thing for a man, not to make use of his own right for
his vindication, and for the other, in case of great obstinacy and malice. By
both which, it is most apparent, that Crellius puts a mighty difference between
the nature of debts, and punishments, since in all cases he allows it lawful
for a person free, to remit his debts; but in some cases he makes it utterly
unlawful for a person not to make use of his right for punishment. And withal
if a private person may not part with his own right in such cases, how
unreasonable is it not to assert the B
same of the great Governor of the world? and that there may be a necessity
for him upon supposition of the contempt of himself and his Laws, to vindicate
himself and his honor to the world, by some remarkable testimony of his
severity against sin.

But Crellius yet urges another end of punishment which. 7. Of Crelli^s his
great mistake about the end of punishments. Crell. cap. 2. sect. 2 sect. 28.
though the most unreasonable of all others, yet sufficiently proves from
himself the difference of debts and punishments, which is, the delight which
the injured person takes in seeing the offender punished. This he so much
insists upon, as though he made it the most natural end of punishment, for
says he, among C
the Punishments which a Prince or any other free Person can inflict, revenge
is in the first place, and the more there is of that in any thing, the more
properly it is called a punishment; and he tells what he means by this ultio;
viz. solatium ex alieno dolor, the contentment taken in another pain. But
says he, no P. 191.
man must object, that this is a thing evil in it self; for although it be
forbidden us under the New Testament, yet in it self it is not unlawful for one
that has suffered pain from another to seek for the case of his own pain, by
the miseries of him that injured him: and for this purpose, says he, we have
the Passion of D
Anger in us, which being a desire of returning injuries, is then satisfied
when it apprehends it done. But how absurd and unreasonable this doctrine is,
will be easily discovered, for this would make the primary intendment of
punishment to be the evil of him that suffers it. Whereas the right of
punishment is derived from an injury received, and therefore that which gives
that right, is some damage sustained, the reparation of which is the first
thing designed by the offended party: Though it take not up the whole nature of
punishment. And on this account no man can justly propose any end to himself in
another evil, but E
what comes under the notion of restitution. For the evil of another is only
intended in punishment as it respects the good of him for whose sake that evil
is undergone. When that good may be obtained without another evil, the desire
of it is unjust and unreasonable: and therefore all that contentment that any A
one takes in the evil another undergoes, as it is evil to him, is a thing
repugnant to humane nature, and which all persons condemn in others when they
allow themselves in it. It will be hard for Crellius to make any difference
between this end of punishment which he assigns, and the greatest cruelty; for
what can that be worse than taking delight in making others miserable, and
seeing them so when he has made them. If it be replied, that cruelty is
without any cause, but here a just cause is supposed, I answer, a just cause is
only supposed for the punishment, but there can be no just cause for any to
delight in the miseries B
of others, and to comfort themselves by inflicting or beholding them. For the
evil of another is never intended, but when it is the only means left for
compensation; and he must be guilty of great inhumanity, who desires another
evil any further than that tends to his own good, i. e. the reparation of the
damage sustained; which if it may be had without another evil, then that comes
not by the right of nature within the reason of punishment; and consequently
where it does not serve for that end, the comfort that men take in it is no
part of justice, but cruelty. For there can be no C
reason at all assigned for it; for that lenimentum doloris which Crellius
insists on is merely imaginary, and no other than the Dog has in gnawing the
stone that is thrown at him; and for all that I know, that propension in nature
to the retribution of evil for evil any further than it tends to our security,
and the preservation for the future, is one of the most unreasonable Passions
in humane Nature.

And if we examine the nature of Anger either considered. 8. Of the nature of
ang^^ and revenge in m^n, and whether punishments are designed to satisfy them.
Naturally or Morally, the intention of it is not the returning evil to
another, for the evil received, but the security D
and preservation of our selves, which we should not have so great a care of,
unless we had a quick sense of injuries, and our blood were apt to be heated at
the apprehension of them. But when this passion vents it self, in doing others
injury to alleviate its own grief, it is a violent and unreasonable
perturbation; but being governed by reason, it aims at no more, than the great
end of our beings; viz. Self-Preservation. But when that cannot be obtained
without another evil, so far the intendment of it is lawful, but no further.
And I cannot therefore think those Philosophers, E
who have defined Anger to be (...), by whose Authority Crellius defends
himself, when he makes Crell. c 2. sect. 22. (...). 177.
anger to be a desire of revenge, did thoroughly consider what was just and
reasonable in it, but barely what was natural, and would be the effect of that
passion, if not governed by A
reason. For otherwise Iul. Scaligers definition is much more true and
justifiable, that it is appetitus depulsionis; viz. that whereby we are stirred
up to drive away from us, any Exert. 313.
thing that is injurious to us. But because Crellius alleges a saying of
Seneca, that would make vindicta of the nature of punishment, duabus de causis
punire princeps solet, si aut se vindicet aut alium: We shall oppose to this
the sense of Seneca de Clem. l. 1. c. 20.
the same Author in this matter, which may sufficiently clear the other
passage: For, says he, Inhumanum verbum est, De Ira. l. 2. c. 32.
and quidem pro justo receptum, ultio, and a contumelia non B
differt nisi ordine: qui dolorem regerit, tantum excusatius peccat. And no man
speaks with greater vehemence against the delight in others punishments than he
does; for he always asserts, the only reason of punishment, to be some
advantage which is to come by it, and not merely to satisfy anger, or to allay
their own griefs, by seeing another: For, says he, the punishment is
inflicted, Non quia delectetur ullius De I^a l. 1. c. 6.
poena (proculest enim a sapiente tam inhumana feritas) sed ut documentum
omnium sint: So that it is only the usefulness of punishment according to him,
which makes it become C
any wiseman; and so far from a satisfaction of his grief by another
punishment, that he makes that a piece of inhumanity, not incident to any who
pretend to wisdom. Nay, he denies, that a just punishment does flow from Anger;
for he that inflicts that, does it, non ipsius poenae avidus sed quia oportet,
not as desiring the punishment, but because De Ira. l. 1. c. 9. Cap. 12.
there are great reasons for it: And elsewhere, Exsequar quia oportet, non quia
dolet: he is far enough then from Cap. 13.
approving, that imaginary compensation of one man's grief by another. And he
shows at large, that the weakest natures, D
and the least guided by reason, are the most subject to this anger and
revenge. And although other things be pretended, the general cause of it is, a
great infirmity of humane nature; and thence it is, that children and old men,
and sick persons, are the most subject to it; and the better any are, the more
they are freed from it: -- quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Ultio -- E



He makes Cruelty to be nothing else, but the intemperance De Clem. l. 2. c. 4.
of the mind in exacting punishment; and the difference between a Prince and a
Tyrant to lie in this, That one delights De Clem. l. 1. c. 11, 12.
in punishing, the other never does it but in case of necessity, when the
public good requires it. And this throughout his A
discourse, he makes the measure of punishment; who then could imagine, that he
should speak so contradictory to himself, as to allow punishment for mere
revenge, or the easing ones own griefs, by the pains of another? In the places
cited by Crellius, (if taken in his sense) he speaks what commonly is, not what
ought to be in the world; for he disputes against it in that very place,
therefore that cannot be the meaning which he contends for. The common design
of punishments by a Prince, says he, is either to vindicate himself or others.
I so render his words, because vindicare, B
when it is joined with the person injured, as here, vindicare se aut alium,
does properly relate to the end of punishment, which is asserting the right of
the injured person; but when it is joined with the persons who have done the
injury, or the crimes whereby they did it, then it properly signifies to
punish. Thus Salust uses, Vindicatum in eos; and Cicero, In milites nostros
vehementer vindicatum, and Salust. in Catalin. Cicero 7. v.
for the fact very frequently in him, maleficia vindicare: but when it relates
to the injured person, as here it does, it cannot signify merely to punish;
for then se vindicare would C
be to punish ones self, but to assert his own right in case of injury, though
it be with the punishment of another: For Vindicatio, as Cicero defines it, est
per quam vis and injuria and omnino quod obsuturum est defendendo aut
ulciscendo Cicero de Iaveat. 2.
propulsatur. So that the security of our selves in case of force or injury, is
that which is called Vindication; which sometimes may be done by defense, and
other times by punishment. And that Seneca does mean no more here, is apparent
by what follows; for in case of private injuries, he says, poenam si tuto
poterit donet, he would have the Prince forgive D
the punishment, if it may be done with safety; so that he would not have any
one punished, to satisfy another desire of revenge, but to preserve his own
safety: And afterward he says, It is much beneath a Princes condition, to
need De Ira. l 1. c. 21.
that satisfaction which arises from another sufferings: But for the
punishments of others, he says, The Law has established three ends, the
amendment of the persons, or making others better by their punishments, or the
public security, by taking away such evil members out of the body: So that in
public punishments, he never so much as supposes, that contentment E
which revenge fancies in others punishments, but makes them wholly designed
for the public advantage. For the Laws in punishment do not look backward but
forward; for as Non praeterita sed futura intuebitur; nam ut Plato ait, remo
pr^de^s punit quia pe^catum est, sed ne pec ^^^r. Sen. de Ira. l. 1. c. 16.
Plato says, No wise man ever punished, merely because men had offended, but
lest they should: For past things cannot A
be rec^^ed, but future are, therefore forbidden, that they may be prevented.
So to the same purpose is the saying of Lactantius, produced by Grotius,
Surgimus ad vindictam Lact. de ira Dei. c. 17.
non quia laest sumus, sed ut disciplina servetur, mores corrigantur, licentia
comprimatur: haec est Ira justa. To which Crellius answers, That this signifies
nothing, unless it can be proved, that no man may justly punish another, merely
Cap. 2. sect. 13.
because he is wronged. If he means of the right to punish, we deny not that to
be, because the person is wronged; but if he understands it of the design and
end of punishment, B
then we deny, that it is an allowable end of punishments, any further than it
can come under the notion of restitution, of which we have spoken already. When
a Master (which is the instance he produces) punishes his servants, because
they have disobeyed him: The reason of that punishment, is not the bare
disobedience, but the injury which comes to him by it; the reparation of which
he seeks by punishment, either as to his authority, security or profit. But he
adds, That where punishment is designed, for preservation of discipline, and
amendment of manners, and keeping persons in C
order, (which are the ends mentioned by Lactantius) it is where the interest
of the person lies, in the preservation of these, and is thefore offended at
the neglect of them. To which I answer, That the interest of such a one, is not
barely the interest of an offended party, as such, but the interest of a
Governor; and no body denies, but such a one may be an offended party: but the
question is, Whether the design of punishment be merely to satisfy him as the
offended party, or to answer the ends of Government? For Crellius has already
told us, what it is to satisfy one as an offended party, D
that is, to ease himself by the punishment of others; but what ever is
designed for the great ends of Government, is not to be considered under that
notion, although the Governor may be justly offended at the neglect of them.
And there is this considerable difference between the punishment made to an
offended party, as such, and that which is for the ends of Government, that the
former is a satisfaction to Anger, and the latter to Laws and the public
interest. For Crellius disputes much for the right of Anger in exacting
punishments; the satisfaction of which, in case of real injury, E
Cap. 2. sect. 1. p. 143. Sect. 13. p. 161.
he never makes unlawful, but in case that it be prohibited us by one, whose
power is above our own: nay he makes it otherwise the primary end of
punishment. So that anger is the main thing upon these terms to be respected in
punishment: but where it is designed for the ends before mentioned, A
there is no necessity of any such passion as anger to be satisfied, the ends
of punishment may be attained wholly without it: And public punishment,
according to Seneca, Se^. de ^^a, l. 1. c. 14. and 15.
non ira sed ratio est, is no effect of anger, but reason; for, says he, nihil
minus quam irasci punientem decet: nothing less becomes one that punishes,
than anger does; for all punishments being considered as Medicines, no man
ought to give Physic in anger, or to let himself blood in a sury: A Magistate,
says he, when he goes to punish, ought to appear Cap. 16.
only vultu legis quae non irascitur, sed constituit, with B
the continuance of the Law, which appoints punishments without passion: The
reason of which is, because the Law aims not primarily at the evil of the man
that suffers punishment, but at the good which comes to the public by such
sufferings. For the first design of the Law was to prevent any evil being done,
and punishment coming in by way of Sanction to the force of the Law, must have
the same primary end which the Law it self had; which is not to satisfy barely
the offended party for the breach, any further than that satisfaction tends to
the security of the Law, and preventing C
the violation of it for the future. The substance of what I have said upon
this subject, may be thus briefly comprised, That antecedently to Laws, the
offended party has right to no more than bare reparation of the damage
sustained by the injury; that the proper notion of punishment is consequent to
Laws, and the inflicting of it is an act of Government, which is not designed
for mere satisfaction of the anger of the injured person, but for the public
good, which lies in preserving the authority of the Laws, the preventing all
injuries by the security of men's just rights, and the vindication D
of the dignity and honor of him, who is to take Quibus (sc. solatio and
securitati) addi poss^nt honoris ac dign tatis, per iajuriam violatae, and
aliqua ratione immi^^tae vi^diciae, ass^^tioque juris nostri Crel. cap. 2.
sect. 28. p. 191.
care of the public good. For these Crellius himself acknowledges, to be the
just ends of punishments, only he would have the satisfaction a man takes in
another evil, to come in the first place; wherein how much he is mistaken, I
hope we have already manifested. Because the proper nature of punishment
depending upon Laws, the Laws do not primarily design the benefit of private
persons (supposing that were so) but the advantage of that community which they
are made for. E


And in those cases wherein the Magistrate does right to 9. The Interest of the
Magistrate in punishment distinct from that of private persons.
particular persons in the punishment of those who have injured them, he does
it not as taking their person upon him, for he aims at other things than they
do; they look at a bare compensation for the injury received; but the
Magistrate at A
the ill consequence the impunity of injuries may be of to the public: they,
it may be at the satisfaction of their disoleasure; but he at the satisfaction
of the Laws; they at their own private damage; he at the violation of the
public peace. And from hence among those Nations who valued all crimes at a
certain rate, in matters of injury between man and man, the injured person was
not only to receive compensation for his wrong; but a considerable fine was to
be paid to the Exchequer for the violation of the public peace. This Tacitus
D^^^ (...) German. c. 12. G^. de. (...). G^^h. i^ (...). a^ (...). Go^h p. ^7.
(...) G^. ad ^o^. (...) A^. F^ (...). Gloss. (...). F^
observes among the old Germans, Grotius of the old Gothic B
Laws, and from them (as most of our modern Laws and Customs are derived)
Lindenbrogius of the Salick, Alemannick, Lombardick, Spelman of the Saxon, who
tells us in case of murder there were three payments, one to the Kindred, which
was called Megbote; the second to the Lord, called Manbote, the third to the
King, called Freda from the German Frid, which signifies peace, it being the
consideration paid to the King for the breach of the public peace. And this,
says he, in all actions, was anciently paid to the King, because the peace was
supposed to be broken, not by mere force, C
but by any injuries; and if the action was unjust, the Plain tiffe paid it; if
just, the defendant. And the measure of it, says Bignonius, was the tenth part
of the value of the thing Big^o^. not. i^ M^ ^m cap. 20.
as estimated by Law; which by the Customs of the ancient Romans was deposited
at the commencing of a suit by both, and only taken up again by him who
overcame; and was by them called Sacramentum, as Varro tells us. And the same
^^a to. de. L. (...). l^b. 4.
custom was observed among the Greeks too, as appears by Julius Pollux, who
tells us it was called (...) among I^ Pollux. l 8.
them, and in public actions was the fifth part, in private D
the tenth. But that which was paid to the public in case of murder, was among
the Greeks called (...), the same with poena, for Hesychius tells us that is
(...), and to the same purpose the Scholiast on Homer on those words, Iliad. 1.
(...), by which the Original of the name poena, comes from a payment made to
the public, according to that known rule, interest reip. delicta puniri, that
persons may see how much the public safety is concerned, that crimes be
punished. From which and many other things which might be insisted on, Crellius
his Hypothesis will E
appear to be false, viz. that when the Magistrate does judge in the affairs of
particular men, he does it only as assuming the person of those men; whereas it
appears from the reason of the thing, and the Custom of Nations, that the
interest of the Magistrate is considered as distinct from that of private
persons, A
when he does most appear in vindication of injuries. But all this is managed
with a respect to the grand hypothesis, viz that the right of punishing does
belong only to the offended party as such, that the punishment is of the nature
of debts, and the satisfaction by compensation to the anger of him who is
offended. The falsity of which this discourse was designed to discover.

Having thus considered the nature of punishments among men, we come more
closely to our matter, by examining how far this will hold in the punishments
which God inflicts on the B
account of sin. For which two things must be enquired into, 1. In what sense
we attribute anger to God. 2. What are the great ends of those punishments God
inflicts on men on the account of sin.

For the first, though our Adversaries are very unwilling to. 10. Of the nature
of Anger in God; the satisfact on to be made to it. Crell. cap. 2. sect. 1. p.
145. p. 177.
allow the term of punitive justice, yet they contend for a punitive anger in
God, and that in the worst sense as it is appetitus vindictae: for after
Crellius has contended that this is the proper notion of anger in general;
neither ought any one to say, he adds, that anger as other passions is
attributed improperly C
to God; for setting aside the imperfections, which those passions are subject
to in us, all the rest is to be attributed to him; taking away then that
perturbation, and pain, and grief we find in our selves in anger, to which the
abhorrency of sin answers in God, all the rest does agree to him. I would he
had a little more plainly told us what he means by all the rest, but we are to
ghess at his meaning by what went before, where he allows of Cicero, and
Aristotle's definition of Anger, whereof the one is, that it is libido, or (as
Crellius Cicer. T^. 4. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 2.
would rather have it,) cupiditas puniendi, the other D
(...), etc. and himself calls it poenae appetitio, and in another place, that
it may be as properly defined cupiditas vindictae as cupiditas poenae, or
affectus vindicandi, as well as puniendi: in all which places, he does assert
such an Crell. c. 2. sect. 22 p. 177.
anger in God as supposes such a motion, or desire, or inclination to punish
sin when it is committed, as there is in us when an injury is done us, only the
perturbation and pain excluded. But he has not thought fit to explain how such
new motions or inclinations in the divine nature every time sin is committed,
are consistent with the immutability and perfection of it; E
nor what such a kind of desire to punish in God imports, whether a mere
inclination without the effect, or an inclination with the effect following: if
without the effect, then either because the sin was not great enough, or Gods
honor was not concerned to do it, and in this case the same reasons A
which make the effect not to follow, make the desire of it inconsistent with
the divine wisdom and perfection: or else because the effect is hindered by the
repentance of the person, or some other way which may make it not necessary to
do it; then upon the same reason the effect is suspended, the inclination to do
it should be so too; for that must be supposed to be governed by an eternal
reason and counsel as well as his actions; unless some natural passions in God
be supposed antecedent to his own wisdom and counsel, which is derogatory to
the infinite perfection of God, since those are judged imperfections in our
selves: If it be taken only with the effect following it, B
then God can never be said to be angry but when he does punish, whereas his
wrath is said to be kindled in Scripture, where the effect has not followed;
which if it implies any more than the high provocation of God to punish (as I
suppose it does not) then this inclination to punish is to be conceived
distinct from the effect following it. But that conception of anger in God
seems most agreeable to the divine nature, as well as to the Scriptures, which
makes it either the punishment it self, as Crellius elsewhere acknowledges it
is often taken so; or Crell. de vera Relig. l. 1. c. 30.
C
Gods declaration of his will to punish, which is called the revelation of the
wrath of God against all unrighteousness of men, God thereby discovering the
just displeasure he has against sin; or the great provocation of God to
punish, by the sins of men; as when his wrath is said, to be kindled, etc. By
this sense we may easily reconcile all that the Scripture says concerning the
wrath of God; we make it agreeable to infinite perfection, we make no such
alterations in God, as the appeasing of his anger must imply, if that imply any
kind of commotion in him. And thus the grand difficulty of Crellius Crell. cap.
7. sect. 3. p. 350.
D
appears to be none at all, against all those passages of Scripture which speak
of appeasing God, of atonement, and reconciliation, viz. that if they prove
satisfaction, they must prove that God being actually angry with mankind before
the sufferings of his Son, he must be presently appeased upon his undergoing
them. For no more need to be said, than that God being justly provoked to
punish the sins of mankind, was pleased to accept of the sufferings of his Son,
as a sufficient sacrifice of Atonement for the sins of the world, on
consideration of which he was pleased to offer those terms of pardon, E
which upon men's performance of the conditions required on their part, shall be
sufficient to discharge them from that obligation to punishment which they were
under by their sins. And what absurdity, or incongruity there is in this to any
principle of reason, I cannot imagine. But our Adversaries first A
make opinions for us, and then show they are unreasonable. They first suppose
that anger in God is to be considered as a passion, and that passion a desire
of revenge for satisfaction of it; and then tell us, that if we do not prove,
that this desire of revenge can be satisfied by the sufferings of Christ, then
we can never prove the doctrine of satisfaction to be true; whereas we do not
mean by Gods anger any such passion, but the just declaration of Gods will to
punish upon our provocation of him by our sins; we do not make the design of
satisfaction to be, that God may please himself in the revenging B
the sins of the guilty upon the most innocent person; because we make the
design of punishment, not to be the satisfaction of anger as a desire of
revenge, but to be the vindication of the honor and rights of the injured
person, by such a way as himself shall judge most satisfactory to the ends of
his Government.

2. Which is the next thing we are to clear: For which. 11. Of the ends of
divine punishments. Crell. c. 2 sect. 29. p. 129.
end we shall make use of the Concession of Crellius, That God has prefixed
some ends to himself in the Government of mankind; which being supposed, it is
necessary, that impenitent C
sinners should be punished. What these ends of God are, he before tells us,
when he enquires into the ends of Divine punishments, which he makes to be,
security for the future, by men's avoiding sins, and a kind of (...), or
pleasure which P. 195.
God takes in the destruction of his implacable enemies, and the asserting and
vindicating his own right by punishing, and showing men thereby, with what care
and fear they ought to serve him; and so attains the ends of punishment
proposed by Lactantius, and manifestation of the Divine Honor and Majesty,
which has been violated by the sins of men. All these D
we accept of, with this caution, That the delight which God takes in the
punishing his implacable enemies, be not understood of any pleasure in their
misery, as such, by way of mere revenge; but as it tends to the vindication of
his Right, and Honor, and Majesty; which is an end suitable to the Divine
Nature: but the other cannot in it self; have the notion of an end; for an end
does suppose something desirable for it self; which surely the miseries of
others cannot have to us, much less to the Divine Nature. And that place which
Crellius insists on to prove the contrary, Deuteronomy. 28. 63. The Lord E
will rejoice over you, to destroy you; imports no more, than the satisfaction
God takes in the execution of his Justice, when it makes most for his honor,
as certainly it does in the punishment of his greatest enemies. And this is to
be understood in a sense agreeable to those other places, where God is said A
not to delight in the death of sinners; which does not (as Ezekiel. 18. v. 23,
32. c. 33. 11.
Crellius would have it) merely express Gods benignity and mercy, but such an
agreeableness of the exercise of those attributes to Gods nature, that he
neither does nor can delight in the miseries of his creatures in themselves,
but as they are subservient to the ends of his Government; and yet such is his
kindness in that respect too, that he uses all means agreeable thereto, to
make them avoid being miserable, to advance his own glory. And I cannot but
wonder that Grotius, who Grot. de satisfact. c. 2. p. 43. Ed. 1617. Grot. de
jure belli, etc. l. 2. c. 20. sect. 4.
had asserted the contrary in his book of Satisfaction, should in his books De
Iure belli ac pacis, assert, That when God punishes B
wicked men, he does it for no other end, but that he might punish them: For
which he makes use of no other arguments, than those which Crellius had
objecte^ against him; viz. The delight God takes in punishing, and t^
judgments of the life to come, when no amendment can be expected; the former
has been already answered, the latter is objected by Crellius against him,
when he makes the ends of punishment, merely to respect the community, which
cannot be asserted of the punishments of another life, which must chiefly
respect C
the vindication of Gods glory, in the punishment of unreclaimable sinners. And
this we do not deny to be a just punishment, since our Adversaries themselves,
as well as we, make it necessary. But we are not to understand, that the end of
Divine punishments does so respect the community, as though God himself were to
be excluded out of it; for we are so to understand it, as made up of God as the
Governor, and mankind as the persons governed, whatever then tends to the
vindication of the rights of Gods Honor and Sovereignty, tends to the good of
the whole, because the manifestation of that D
end is so great an end of the whole.

But withal, though we assert in the life to come, the ends of. 12. The ends of
Divine punishments different in this and the future state.
punishment not to be the reclaiming of sinners, who had never undergone them,
unless they had been unreclaimable; yet a vast difference must be made between
the ends of punishments in that, and in this present state. For the other is
the Reserve, when nothing else will do, and therefore was not primarily
intended; but the proper ends of punishment, as a part of Government, are to be
taken from the design of them in this life. And here we assert, that Gods end
in punishing, is the advancing E
his honor, not by the mere miseries of his creatures, but that men by
beholding his severity against sin, should break off the practice of it, that
they may escape the punishments of the future state. So that the ends of
punishment here, are quite of another kind, from those of another life; for A
those are inflicted, because persons have been unreclaimable by either the
mercies or punishments of this life; but these are intended, that men should so
far take notice of this severity of God, as to avoid the sins which will expose
them to the wrath to come. And from hence it follows, That whatsoever
sufferings, do answer all these ends of Divine punishments, and are inflicted
on the account of sin, have the proper notion of punishments in them, and God
may accept of the undergoing them as a full satisfaction to his Law, if they be
such as tend to break men off from sin, and assert Gods B
right, and vindicate his honor to the world; which are the ends assigned by
Crellius, and will be of great consequence to us in the following Discourse. C
D
E


CHAP. II. A

The particular state of the Controversy, concerning the sufferings of Christ.
The Concessions of our Adversaries. The debate reduced to two heads: The first
concerning Christ's sufferings, being a punishment for sin, entered upon. In what
sense Crellius acknowledges the sins of men, to have been the impulsive cause
of the death of Christ. The sufferings of Christ proved to be a punishment,
from Scripture. The importance of the phrase B
of bearing sins. Of the Scape-Goats bearing the sins of the people into the
Wilderness. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2. 24. vindicated against Crellius and
himself. (...) never used for the taking away a thing by the destruction of it.
Crellius his sense examined. Isa. 53. 11. vindicated. The argument from Mat. 8.
17. answered. Grotius constant to himself in his notes on that place. Isa. 53.
5, 6, 7. cleared. Whether Christ's death be a proper (...), and whether that
does imply, that it was a punishment of sin? How far the punishments of
Children C
for their Fathers faults, are exemplary among men. The distinction of
calamities and punishments, holds not here. That Gods hatred of sin could not
be seen in the sufferings of Christ, unless they were a punishment of sin,
proved against Crellius. Grotius his Arguments from Christ being made sin and a
curse for us, defended. The liberty our Adversaries take in Changing the sense
of words. The particles (...), being joined to sins and relating to sufferings
do imply those sufferings to be a punishment for sin. According to their way of
interpreting Scripture, it D
had been impossible for our doctrine to be clearly expressed therein.

THese things being thus far cleared concerning the nature and ends of
punishments, and how far they. 1. The particular state of the controversy
concerning the sufferings of Christ for us.
are of the nature of debts, and consequently what kind of satisfaction is due
for them, the resolution of the grand Question concerning the sufferings of
Christ will appear much more easy; but that we may proceed with all E
possible clearness in a debate of this consequence, we must yet a little more
narrowly examine the difference between our Adversaries and us in this matter;
for their concessions are in te^ms sometimes so fair, as though the difference
were merely about words without any considerable difference in the A
thing it self. If we charge them with denying satisfaction, Crellius answers
in the name of them, that we do it unjustly; Crell. praes. p. 7.
for they do acknowledge a satisfaction worthy of God, and agreeable to the
Scriptures. If we charge them with denying that our salvation is obtained by
the death of Christ, they assert the contrary, as appears by the same Author.
Nay, Ruarus attributes merit to the death of Christ too. They acknowledge,
Ruarus in Epistol. Crell. cap. 9. sect. 2. Cap. 10. sect. 10. Cap. 7, 8, etc.
Cap. 1. sect. 57.
that Christ dyed for us, nay, that there was a commutation between Christ and
us, both of one person for another, and of a price for a person; and that the
death of Christ B
may be said to move God to redeem us; they acknowledge reconciliation, and
expiation of sins to be by the death of Christ. Nay, they assert, that Christ's
death was by reason of our sins, and that God designed by that to show his
severity against sin. And what could we desire more, if they meant the same
thing by these words, which we do? They assert a satisfaction, but it is such a
one as is merely fulfilling the desire of another; in which sense all that obey
God may be said to satisfy him. They attribute our salvation to the death of
Christ, but only as a condition intervening, upon the performance C
of which the Covenant was confirmed and himself taken into Glory, that he
might free men from the punishment of their sins. They attribute merit to
Christ's death but in the same sense that we may merit too, when we do what is
pleasing to God. They acknowledge, that Christ died for us, but not in our
stead, but for our advantage; that there was a commutation; but not such a one,
as that the Son of God did lay down his blood as a proper price in order to our
redemption as the purchase of it; when they speak of a moving cause, they tell
us, they mean no more than the performance of any condition D
may be said to move, or as our prayers and repentance do. The reconciliation
they speak of, does not at all respect God but us; they assert an expiation of
sins consequent upon the death of Christ, but not depending upon it any
otherwise, than as a condition necessary for his admission to the office of a
High Priest in Heaven, there to expiate our sins by his power, and not by his
blood; but they utterly deny, that the death of Christ is to be considered as a
proper expiatory sacrifice for sin; or that it has any further influence upon
it, than as it is considered as a means of the confirmation of the E
truth of his Doctrine, and particularly the promise of remission of sins, on
which, and not on the death of Christ they say our remission depends; but so
far as the death of Christ may be an argument to us to believe his Doctrine,
and that faith may incline us to obedience, and that obedience being the
condition A
in order to pardon, at so many removes they make the death of Christ to have
influence on the remission of our sins. They assert that God took occasion by
the sins of men to ex ercise an act of dominion upon Christ in his sufferings,
and that the sufferings of Christ were intended for the taking away the sins of
men; but they utterly deny, that the sufferings of Christ were to be considered
as a punishment for sin, or that Christ did suffer in our place and stead; nay,
they contend with great vehemence, that it is wholly inconsistent with the
justice of God to make one man's sins the meritorious B
cause of another punishment; especially one wholly innocent, and so that the
guilty shall be freed on the account of his sufferings. Thus I have endeavored
to give the true state of the controversy with all clearness and brevity. And
the substance of it will be reduced to these two debates.

1. Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a
punishment of sin, or as a mere act of dominion? 2. Whether the death of Christ
in particular were a proper expiatory sacrifice for sin, or only an antecedent
condition to C
his exercise of the Office of Priesthood in Heaven?
1. Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered. (...).
Whether the sufferings of Christ are to be considered as a punishment of sin.
as a punishment of sin, or as a mere act of dominion? for that it must be one
or the other of these two, cannot be denied by our Adversaries; for the
inflicting those sufferings upon Christ, must either proceed from an antecedent
meritorious cause, or not. If they do, they are then punishments; if not, they
are mere exercises of power and dominion; whatever ends they are intended for,
and whatever recompense be made for them. So Crellius asserts, that God as
absolute Crell. cap. 2. sect. 1. p. 142.
D
Lord of all, had a right of absolute dominion upon the life and body of
Christ, and therefore might justly deliver him up to death, and give his body
to the Cross; and although Christ by the ordinary force of the Law of Moses,
had a right to escape so painful and accursed death, yet God by the right of
dominion had the power of disposal of him, because he intended to compensate
his torments with a reward infinitely greater than they were: but because he
says, for great ends the consent of Christ was necessary, therefore God did
not use his utmost dominion in delivering him up by force as he might E
have done, but he dealt with him by way of command, and rewards proposed for
obedience, and in this sense he did act as a righteous Governor, and indulgent
Father, who encouraged his Son to undergo hard, but great things. In which we
see, that he makes the sufferings of Christ an act of mere dominion in A
God, without any antecedent cause as the reason of them; only he qualifies
this act of dominion with the proposal of a reward for it. But we must yet
further enquire into their meaning, for though here Crellius attributes the
sufferings of Christ merely to Gods dominion, without any respect to sin, yet
elsewhere he will allow a respect that was had to sin antecedently to the
sufferings of Christ, and that the sins of men were the Crell. cap. 1. sect. 7.
etc. So^i^. de Christo servat. l. 3. c. 10. Crell. cap. 1. sect. 16. Socia. l.
2. c. 7.
impulsive cause of them. And although Socinus in one place utterly denies any
lawful-antecedent cause of the death of Christ, besides the will of God and
Christ, yet Crellius in his Vindication B
says, by lawful cause, he meant meritorius, or such upon supposition of which
he ought to dye; for elsewhere he makes Christ to dye for the cause, or by the
occasion of our sins; which is the same that Crellius means by an impulsive, or
procatartick cause. Which he thus explains, we are now to suppose a decree of
God not only to give salvation to Mankind, Crell. c. 1. sect. 11.
but to give us a firm hope of it in this present state, now our sins by
deserving eternal punishment, do hinder the effect of that decree upon us, and
therefore they were an impulsive cause of the death of Christ, by which it was
effected, that this C
decree should obtain notwithstanding our sins. But we are not to understand as
though this were done by any expiation of the guilt of sin by the death of
Christ; but this effect is hindered by three things, by taking away their sins,
by assuring men that their former sins, and present infirmities upon their
sincere obedience shall not be imputed to them, and that the effect of that
decree shall obtain, all which, says he, is effected morte Christi
interveniente, the death of Christ intervening, but not as the procuring cause.
So that after all these words he means no more by making our sins an impulsive
cause of the D
death of Christ, but that the death of Christ was an argument to confirm to us
the truth of his Doctrine, which doctrine of his does give us assurance of
these things: and that our sins when they are said to be the impulsive cause,
are not to be considered with a respect to their guilt, but to that distrust of
God which our sins do raise in us; which distrust is in truth according to this
sense of Crellius the impulsive cause, and not the sins which were the cause or
occasion of it. For that was it which the doctrine was designed to remove, and
our sins only as the causes of that. But if it be said, that he speaks not only
of the distrust, E
but of the punishment of sin as an impediment which must be removed too, and
therefore may be called an impulsive cause, we are to consider that the removal
of this is not attributed to the death of Christ, but to the leaving of our
sins by the belief of his Doctrine; therefore the punishment of our sins cannot
unless A
in a very remote sense be said to be an impulsive cause of that, which for all
that we can observe by Crellius, might as well have been done without it; if
any other way could be thought sufficient to confirm his Doctrine, and Christ,
without dying, might have had power to save all them that obey him. But we
understand not an impulsive cause in so remote a sense, as though our sins were
a mere occasion of Christ's dying, because the death of Christ was one argument
among many others to believe his Doctrine, the belief of which would make men
leave their sins; but we contend for a nearer and B
more proper sense, viz. that the death of Christ was primarily intended for
the expiation of our sins, with a respect to God and not to us, and therefore
our sins as an impulsive cause are to be considered as they are so displeasing
to God; that it was necessary for the Vindication of Gods Honor, and the
deterring the world from sin, that no less a Sacrifice of Atonement should be
offered, than the blood of the Son of God. So that we understand an impulsive
cause here in the sense, that the sins of the people were, under the Law, the
cause of the offering up those Sacrifices, which were appointed C
for the expiation of them. And as in those Sacrifices there were two things to
be considered, viz. the mactation, and the oblation of them, the former as a
punishment by a substitution of them in place of the persons who had offended;
the latter as the proper Sacrifice of atonement, although the mactation it
self, considered with the design of it, was a Sacrificial act too: So we
consider the sufferings of Christ with a twofold respect, either as to our
sins, as the impulsive cause of them, so they are to be considered as a
punishment, or as to God, with a design to expiate the guilt of them, so they
are D
a Sacrifice of Atonement. The first consideration is, that we are now upon,
and upon which the present debate depends, for if the sufferings of Christ be
to be taken under the notion of punishment, then our Adversaries grant, that
our sins must be an impulsive cause of them in another sense than they
understand it. For the clearing of this, I shall prove these two things.

1. That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of Scripture which
speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect to sin, but this. E
2. That this Account of the sufferings of Christ, is no ways repugnant to the
Justice of God.
That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of A
Scripture, which speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect 3. The
sufferings of Christ proved to be a punishment from Scripture 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Isa. 53. 45, 6, 7, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5. 2^. Gal. 3. 13. Romans 4. 25.
to our sins, but that they are to be considered as a punishment for them. Such
are those which speak of Christ hearing our sins, of our iniquities being laid
upon him, of his making himself an offering for sin, and being made sin and a
curse for us, and of his dying sor our sins. All which I shall so far consider,
as to vindicate them from all the exceptions which Socinus and Crellius have
offered against them.

1. Those which speak of Christ's bearing our sins. As to which we shall
consider, First, The importance of the phrase B
in general of bearing sin, and then the circumstances of the particular places
in dispute. For the importance of the phrase, Socinus acknowledges, that it
generally signifies bearing the Soc. d^ s^rvat. l. 2. cap. 4.
punishment of sin in Scripture: but that sometimes it signifies taking away.
The same is confessed by Crellius, but he says, it does not always signify
bearing proper punishment, but it is Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 32.
enough (he says) that one bears something burdensome on the occasion of others
sins: and so Christ by undergoing his sufferings by occasion of sins, may be
said to bear our sins. And for this sense he quotes Numb. 14. 33. And your
Children shall C
wander in the Wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your
carcasses be wasted in the Wilderness. Whereby, says he, it is not meant that
God would punish the Children of the Israelites, but that by the occasion of
their parents sins, they should undergo that trouble, in wandering in the
Wilderness, and being deprived of the possession of the promised Land. But
could Crellius think that any thing else could have been imagined, (setting
aside a total destruction) a greater instance of Gods severity, than that was
to the Children of Israel all their circumstances being considered? D
Is it not said, that God did swear in his wrath, they should not enter into
his rest? Surely then the debarring them so Psalm. 95. 11. Heb. 3. 11.
long of that rest, was an instance of Gods wrath, and so according to his own
principles must have something of Vindicta in it, and therefore be a proper
punishment. The truth is, our Adversaries allow themselves in speaking things
most repugnant to Humane Nature in this matter of punishments, that they may
justify their own hypothesis. For a whole Nation to be for forty years
debarred from the greatest blessings were ever promised them; and instead of
enjoying them, to endure E
the miseries and hardships of forty years travels in a barren wilderness, must
not be thought a punishment, and only because occasioned by their Parents sins.
But whatever is inflicted on the account of sin, and with a design to show Gods
severity against it, and thereby to deter others from the practice A
of it, has the proper notion of punishment in it; and all these things did
concur in this instance, besides the general sense of mankind in the matter of
their punishment, which was such, that supposing them preserved in their
liberty, could not have been imagined greater. And therefore Vatablus, whom
Socinus and Crellius highly commend, thus renders those words, dabunt poenas
pro fornicationibus vestris quibus Doc^issi^e and ^^ga^tissi^e Vata^lus ^t f^^e
^olet. Soc. d ^v. l. 1 c. 8. Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 31.
defecistis a Deo vestro: they shall suffer the punishment of your forications.
And that bearing the sins of Parents does imply properly bearing the punishment
of them, methinks they B
should not so earnestly deny, who contend that to be the meaning of the words
in Ezekiel, The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; viz. that he
shall not bear the punishment Ezekiel 18 20.
of his Fathers sins. Where in bearing iniquity with a respect to their Parents
sins, by their own confession, must be taken for the proper punishment; for
otherwise they do not deny, Crell. cap. 4. Sect. 15.
but Children, notwithstanding that sentence, may undergo much affliction on
the occasion of their Parents sins.

But Socinus further objects, that bearing sins does not imply. 4. Of the
Scape-Go^ts bearing away the sins of the people.
the punishment of them, because the Scapegoat under the C
Law, is said to bear upon him the iniquities of the people, and yet could not
be said to be punished for them. To which Grotius answers, that Socinus takes
it for granted without reason, that the Scapegoat could not be said to be
punished for Socil. 2. c. 4. Lev. 16. 22. Grot. de sat. cap. 1.
the sins of the people; for punishment in general, may fall upon beasts for
the sins of men, Genesis 9. 5. Exodus 21. 28. Lev. 20. 15. Genesis 8. 21. and Socinus
has no cause to say, that the Scapegoat was not slain; for the Jewish
Interpreters do all agree that he was, and however the sending him into the
Wilderness was intended as a punishment; and most probably D
by an unnatural death. To which Crellius replies, That in Crell. cap. 1. Sect.
56.
the general, he denies not but punishment may fall upon beasts as well as men;
but (that he might show himself true to his principle, that one cannot be
punished for another faults,) he falls into a very pleasant discourse, That
the Beasts are not said to be punished for men's sins, but for their own, and
therefore when it is said, before the flood, that all flesh had corrupted his
way; he will by no means have it understood only Genesis 6. 12.
of men, but that the sins of the beasts at that time, were greater than
ordinary, as well as men's. But he has not E
told us what they were, whether by eating some forbidden herbs; or e^g into
conspiracies against mankind their lawful Sovereigns, or unlawful mixtures; and
therefore we have yet reason to believe, that when God says, the ground G^n.
8. 21.
was cursed for man's sake, that the beasts were punished for A
man's sin. And if all flesh, must comprehend be ^sts in this place, why shall
not all flesh seeing the glory of the Lord, take Isa. 40. 5.
in the beasts there too: for V^^ablus parallels this place with the other. But
if, says Crellius any shall contend that some beasts at least were innocent,
then, he says, that those though they were destroyed by the flood, yet did not
suffer punishment, but only a calamity by occasion of the sins of men. I wonder
he did not rather say, that the innocent beasts were taken into the Ark, for
the propagation of a better kind afterward. But by this solemn distinction of
calamities and punishments, B
there is nothing so miserable, that either men or beasts can undergo, but when
it serves their turn, it shall be only a calamity and no punishment, though it
be said to be on purpose to show Gods severity against the sins of the world.
And this excellent notion of the beasts being punished for their own sins, is
improved by him to the vindication of the Scapegoat from being punished;
because then, says he, the most wicked and corrupt Goat should have been made
choice of. As though all the design of that great day of expiation had been
only to call the Children of Israel together with great solemnity; to let C
them see, how a poor Goat must be punished for breaking the Laws which we do
not know were ever made for them. I had thought our Adversaries had maintained
that the Sacrifices (on the day of expiation at least) had represented and
typified the Sacrifice which was to be offered up by Christ; and so Socinus and
Crellius elsewhere contend: he need not therefore have troubled himself
concerning the sins of the Goat, when it is expressly said, That the sins of the
people were put on the head of the Goat; Whatever then the punishment Lev. 16.
21.
were, it was on the account of the sins of the people, and not D
his own. But Crellius urges against Grotius, that if the Scapegoat had been
punished for the expiation of the sins of the people, that should have been
particularly expressed in Scripture, whereas nothing is said there at all of
it, and that the throwing down the Scapegoat from the top of the rock, was no
part of the Primitive Institution, but one of the superstitions taken up by the
Jews in aftertimes, because of the ominousness of the return of it; and
although we should suppose (which is not probable) that it should dye by famine
in the Wilderness, yet this was not the death for expiation, E
which was to be by the shedding of blood. To this therefore I answer. 1. I do
not insist on the customs of the later Jews to prove from thence any punishment
designed by the primitive institution. For I shall easily yield, that many
superstitions obtained among them afterward about the Scapegoat; A
as the stories of the red list turning white upon the head of it, the booths
and the causey made on purpose, and several other things mentioned in the
Rabbinical Writers do manifest. But Cod. Ioma. tit. 6.
yet it seems very probable from the Text it self, that the Scapegoat was not
carried into the Wilderness at large, but to a steep mountain there. For
although we have commonly rendered Azazel by the Scapegoat, yet according to
the best of the Jewish Writers, as P. Fagius tell us, (...) does not come from
(...) a Goat, and (...) abiit; but is the name of a Mountain very steep and
rocky near Mount Sinai, and therefore B
probably called by the later Jews, (...) the name of a Rock: and to this
purpose, it is observable that where we render it, and let him go for a
Scapegoat into the Wilderness in the Lev. 16. 10.
Hebrew it is, (...) to send him to Azazel in the Wilderness: as the joining
the preposition (...) does import, and the Arabic Version wherever Azazel is
mentioned, renders it by Mount Azaz: and the Chaldee and Syriack to Azazel; so
that from hence, a carrying the Scapegoat to a certain place may be inferred;
but I see no foundation in the Text for the throwing it down from the rock C
when it was there; and therefore I cannot think, but that if the punishment
intended did lie in that, it would have been expressly mentioned in the
solemnities of that day, which had so great an influence on the expiation of
the sins of the people. 2. I answer, that the Scapegoat was to denote rather
the effect of the expiation, than the manner of obtaining it. For the proper
expiation was by the shedding of blood, as the Apostle Heb. 9. 22.
tells us; and thence the live Goat was not to have the sins of the people to
bear away into the desert, till the High Priest Lev. 16. 20.
had made an end of reconciling the Holy Place, and the Tabernacle D
of the Congregation, and the Altar; and by the sprinkling of the blood of the
other Goat which was the sin-offering for the people; which being done, he was
to bring the V. 15.
live Goat, and to lay his hands upon the head of it, and confess over it all
the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all
their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and shall send him away by
the hand of a fit man into V. 21.
the Wilderness; and so the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto
a land not inhabited, and he shall let go the V. 22.
Goat in the Wilderness. So that the former Goat noted the E
way of expiation by the shedding of blood, and the latter the effect of it,
viz. that the sins of the people were declared to be expiated by the sending
the Goat charged with their sins into a desert place; and that their sins would
not appear in the presence of God against them, any more than they expected, A
that the Goat which was sent into the Wilderness should return among them.
Which was the reason that afterward they took so much care that it should not,
by causing it to be thrown off from a steep rock; which was no sooner done; but
notice was given of it very suddenly by the sounding of horns all over the
Land. But the force of Socinus his argument from the Escape Goats bearing the
sins of the people, that therefore that phrase does not always imply the
bea^ing of punishment, is taken off by Crellius himself, who tell us Crell. c.
1 Sect. 56.
that the Scapegoat is not said to bear the sins of the people in B
the Wilderness; but only that it carried the sins of the people into the
Wilderness, which is a phrase of another importance from that we are now
discoursing of. As will now further appear from the places where it is spoken
of concerning our Savior, which we now come particularly to examine.

The first place insisted on by Grotius with a respect to Christ, is 1 Pet. 2.
24. Who his own self bare our sins in his. 5. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2.
24. vindicated. Crell. c. 1. Sect. 35.
own body on the tree, which, says Crellius, is so far from proving that
Christ did bear the punishment of our sins, that it does not imply any
sufferings that he underwent on the occasion C
of them. He grants that (...) does signify to carry up, but withal (he
says) it signifies to take away; because that which is taken up, is taken away
from the place where it was. Besides, he observes, that (...) does answer to
the Hebrew (...) he has made to ascend, which is frequently rendered by it in
the LXX. and sometimes by (...), but that Hebrew word does often signify to
take away, where it is rendered in the Greek by one of those two words, 2 Samuel
21. 13. Josh. 24. 32. Psalm. 102. 25. Ezra. 1. 11. To which I answer, 1. That
the signification of (...) in this place, must not be D
taken from every sense the word is ever used so, but in that which the words
out of which these are taken do imply; and in Isa. 53. 11. it does not answer
(...) but to (...) a word which by the confession of all is never properly used
for taking away, but for bearing of a burden, and is used with a respect to the
punishment of sin, Lament. 5. 7. Our fathers have sinned, and are not, and we
have born their iniquities, where the same word is used; so that the
signification of the word (...) here, must depend upon that in Isaiab, of which
more afterward. 2. Granting that (...) does answer E
sometimes to the Hebrew (...) yet it makes nothing to Crellius his purpose,
unless he can prove that (...) does ever signify the taking away a thing by
the destruction of it; for where it answers to that word, it is either for the
offering up of a Sacrifice, in which sense (...) is very frequently A
used, as is confessed by Crellius; and in that sense it is no prejudice at all
to our cause; for then it must be granted, that Christ upon the Cross is to be
considered as a sacrifice for the sins of men; and so our sins were laid upon
him as they were supposed to be on the Sacrifices under the Law, in order to
the expiation of them, by the shedding their blood; and if our Adversaries
would acknowledge this, the difference would not be so great between us; or
else it is used for the removal of a thing from one place to another, the thing
it self still remaining in being, as 2 Samuel 21. 13. And he made Saul's B
bones to ascend, (...), he took them away, says Crellius; true, but it is
such a taking away, as is a bare removal; the thing still remaining; the same
is to be said of Joseph's bones, Josh. 24. 32. which are all the places where
(...) is used; and although (...) may be sometimes taken in another sense, as
Psalm. 102. 25. yet nothing can be more unreasonable than such a way of arguing
as this is; (...) says Crellius signifies taking away; we demand his proof of
it; is it that the word signifies so much of it self? No; that he grants it
does not. Is it that it is frequently used in the C
Greek Version to render a word that properly does signify so? No; nor that
neither. But how is it then? Crellius tells us, that it sometimes answers to a
word that signifies to make to ascend: well, but does that word signify taking
away? No; not constantly, for it is frequently used for a sacrifice: but does
it at any time signify so? Yes; it signifies the removal of a thing from one
place to another. Is that the sense then he contends for here? No; but how
then? why (...) is used to render the same word that (...) does, and (...)
though it signifies too a bare removal, as Ezra 1. 11. yet Psalm. 102. D
25. it is used for cutting off, (...), the Hebr. is, make me not to ascend in
the midst of my days. But does it here signify utter destruction? I suppose
not; but grant it, what is this to (...), when the LXX. uses not that word
here, which for all that we know was purposely altered; so that at last (...)
is far enough from any such signification as Crellius would fix upon it, unless
he will assert, that Christ's taking away our sins, was only a removal of them
from Earth to Heaven. But here Grotius comes in to the relief of Crellius
against himself; for in his Notes upon this place, though he E
had before said, that the word was never used in the New Testament in that
sense, yet he there says, (...) is abstulit, for which he refers us to Heb. 9.
28. where he proceeds altogether as subtly as Crellius had done before him,
for he tells us (...) is put for (...) Numb. 14. 33. Deuteronomy. 14. 24. A
Isa. 53. 12. but (...), i. e. (...) is put for (...), Lev. 10. 17. Number. 14.
18. A most excellent way of interpreting Scripture! considering the various
significations of the Hebrew words, and above all of that (...) which is here
mentioned. For according to this way of arguing, (...) shall signify the same
with (...), and (...), for (...) signifies all these, and is rendered by them in
the Greek Version, so that by the same way that Grotius proves that (...)
signifies (...), we can prove that (...) does not signify to take away, but to
bear punishment; nay, (...) signifies the bearing punishment B
in the strictest sense, Ezekiel. 16. 52, 54. and bearing sin in that sense, Ezekiel.
16. 58. Thou have born thy lewdness, and thy abominations, (...) So that when
(...) is more frequently used in this than in the other sense, why shall its
signifying (...) at any time make (...) be taken in the same sense with that?
Nay, I do not remember in any place where (...) is joined with sin, but it
signifies the punishment of it, so (...), Lev. 19. 8. to bear his iniquity,
Lev. 20. 17. (...), bearing their iniquity in one verse is explained by being
out off from among their people, in the next. And in the places cited C
by Grotius, that Numb. 14. 33. has been already showed to signify bearing
the punishment of sin, and that Deuteronomy. 14. 24. is plainly understood of a
Sacrifice, the other, Isa. 53. 12. will be afterward made appear by other
places in the same Chapter, to signify nothing to this purpose. So that for
all we can yet see, (...) must be taken either for bearing our sins as a
sacrifice did under the Law, or the punishment of them; in either sense it
serves our purpose, but is far enough from our Adversaries meaning.

But supposing we should grant them, that (...) may signify D
to take away, let us see what excellent sense they make of these. 6. Crell.
his sense examined.
words of St. Peter. Do they then say, that Christ did take away our sins upon
the Cross? No, they have a great care of that, for that would make the
expiation of sins to have been performed there; which they utterly deny, and
say, that Christ only took the Cross in his way to his Ascension to Heaven,
that there he might expiate sins. But does not St. Peter say, that what was
done by him here, was in his body on the tree: and they will not say, he
carried that with him to Heaven too. Well, but what then was the taking away of
sin which belonged E
to Christ upon the Cross? is it only to persuade men to live virtuously, and
leave off their sins? This Socinus would have, and Crellius is contented that
it should Soc. deserv. l. 2. cap. 6. Crell cap. 1. Sect. 39.
be understood barely of taking away sins, and not of the punishment of them,
but only by way of accession and A
consequence: but if it be taken (which he inclines more to) for the
punishment, then (he says) it is to be understood not of the virtue and
efficacy of the death of Christ, but of the effect: and yet a little after he
says, those words of Sect. 44.
Christ's bearing our sins, are to be understood of the force and efficacy of
Christ's death to do it, not including the effect of it in us; not as though
Christ did deliver us from sins by his death, but that he did that by dying,
upon which the taking away of sin would follow, or which had a great power for
the doing it. So uncertain are our Adversaries, in affixing B
any sense upon these words, which may attribute any effect at all, to the
death of Christ upon the Cross. For if they be understood of taking away sins,
then they are only to be meant of the power that was in the death of Christ, to
persuade men to leave their sins; which we must have a care of understanding
so, as to attribute any effect to the death of Christ in order to it; but only
that the death of Christ was an argument for us to believe what he said, and
the believing what he said would incline us to obey him, and if we obey him, we
shall leave off our sins, whether Christ had died or C
no: supposing his miracles had the same effect on us, which those of Moses had
upon the Jews, which were sufficient to persuade them to believe and obey
without his death. But if this be all that was meant by Christ's bearing our
sins in his body on the tree; why might not St. Peter himself be said to bear
them upon his cross too? for his death was an excellent example of patience,
and a great argument to persuade men he spoke truth, and that doctrine which he
preached, was repentance and remission of sins: So that by this sense, there is
nothing peculiar attributed to the death of Christ But taking D
the other sense for the taking away the punishment of sins, we must see how
this belongs to the death of Christ: Do they then attribute our delivery from
the punishment of sin, to the death of Christ on the Cross? yes, just as we may
attribute Coesars subduing Rome, to his passing over Rubicon, because he took
that in his way to the doing of it: so they make the death of Christ only as a
passage, in order to expiation of sins, by taking away the punishment of them.
For that shall not be actually perfected, they say, till his full deliverance
of all those that obey him, from hell and the grave, E
which will not be till his second coming. So that if we only take the body of
Christ for his second coming, and the Cross of Christ, or the tree, for his
Throne of Glory, then they will acknowledge, that Christ may very well be said,
to take away sins in his own body on the tree: but if you take it in A
any sense that does imply any peculiar efficacy to the death of Christ, for
all the plainness of St. Peter's words, they by no means will admit of it.

But because Crellius urges Grotius with the sense of that place, Isa. 53. 11.
out of which he contends these words are. 7. Isa. 53. 11. vindicated. Crell. c.
1. sect. 35.
taken, and Crellius conceives he can prove there, that bearing is the same
with taking away sin: We now come to consider, what force he can find from
thence, f^r the justifying his assertion, That the bearing of sins, when
attributed to Christ, does not imply the punishment of them, but the taking B
them away The words are, for he shall bear their iniquities. As to which
Grotius observes, that the word (...) which signifies iniquity, is sometimes
taken for the punishment of sin, 2 Kings 7. 9. and the verb (...) is to bear,
and when ever it is joined with sin or iniquity, in all languages, and
especially the Hebrew, it signifies to suffer punishment; for although (...)
may sometimes signify to take away, (...) never does: so that this phrase can
receive no other interpretation. Notwithstanding all which, Crellius attempts
to prove, that (...) here, must be taken in a sense contrary to C
the natural and perpetual use of the word; for which his first Crell. c. 1.
sect. 44.
argument is very infirm, viz. because it is mentioned after the death of
Christ, and is therefore to be considered as the the reward of the other.
Whereas it appears: 1. By the Prophets discourse, that he does not insist on an
exact methodical order, but dilates and amplifies things as he sees occasion:
for Verse 9. he says, He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in
his death; and Verse 10. he says, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he
has put him to grief: Will Crellius therefore say, that this must be
consequent to his D
death and burial? 2. The particle (...) may be here taken causally, as we
render it, very agreeably to the sense; and so it gives an account of the
foregoing clause, By his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many,
for he shall bear their iniquities. And that this is no unusual acception of
that particle, might be easily cleared from many places of Scripture if it were
necessary; and from this very Prophet, as Isa. 39. 1. where (...) is the same
with (...) 2 King 20. 12. and Isa. 64. 5. Thou art wroth, for we have sinned
(...) where the same particle is made the causal of what went before. But E
we need not insist upon this to answer Crellius, who elsewhere makes use of it
himself, and says, They must be very ignorant of the Crell. c. 9. sect. 7. p.
463. Soc. Prae^. c. 14. sect. 6.
Hebrew Tongue, who do not know, that the conjunction copulative is often taken
causally; and so much is confessed by Socinus also, where he explains, that
particle in one sense in the beginning A
and causally in the middle of the verse: And the 2 Samuel 24. 1.
Lords anger was kindled against Israel, (...) for he moved, etc. but if this
will not do, he attempts to prove, That (...) in this very Chapter, has the
signification of taking away, v. 4. For he has born our griefs, and carried
our sorrows, which is applied by St. Matthew. 8. 17. to bodily diseases, which
our Savior did not bear, but took away, as it is said in the foregoing verse;
he healed all that were sick, on which those words come in, That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias, etc. To which I answer: 1. It is granted
by our Adversaries, B
that St. Matthew in those words, does not give the full sense of the Prophet,
but only applies that by way of accommodation, to bodily diseases, which was
chiefly intended for the sins of men. And in a way of accommodation it is not
unusual to strain words beyond their genuine and natural signification, or what
was intended primarily by the person who spoke them. Would it be reasonable for
any to say that (...) signifies to give, because that place Psalm. 68, 18. where
the word by all is acknowledged to signify to receive, is rendered to give,
Ephesians. 4. 8. so that admitting another sense of the C
word here, as applied to the cure of bodily diseases, it does not from thence
follow, that this should be the meaning of the word in the primary sense
intended by the Prophet. 2. The word as used by St. Matthew, is very capable of
the primary and natural sense; for St. Matthew retain words of the same
signification, with that which we contend for, (...) and (...), neither of
which does signify taking away, by causing a thing not to be. So that all that
is implied hereby, is the pains and trouble which our Savior took in the
healing of the sick. For to that end, as Grotius well observes D
upon that place, the circumstances are mentioned, That it was Matthew. 8. 16.
at even, and multitudes were brought to him in St. Matthew, that after Sunset
all that were diseased were brought, and all the City was gathered together at
the door, in St. Mark; That he departed Ma^k 1. 32, 33. Luke 4. 42.
not till it was day, in St. Luke; that we might the better understand how our
Savior did bear our griefs, because the pains he took in healing them were so
great. And here I cannot but observe, that Grotius in his notes on that place,
continued still in the same mind he was in, when he writ against Socinus; for
he says, Those words may either E
refer to the diseases of the body, and so they note the pains he took in the
cure of them; or to our sins, and so they were fulfilled when Christ by
suffering upon the cross, did obtain remission of sins for us, as St. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 2. 24. But upon what reason the Annotations on that A
place come to be so different from his sense expressed here, long after
Crellius his answer, I do not understand. But we are sure he declared his mind,
as to the main of that Controversy, to be the same, that it was when he writ
his Book which Crellius answered; as appears by two Letters of his to Vossius,
not long since published; and he utterly disowns the charge of E^ist. Eccle. p.
747, 748. Discuss. p. 16, 17.
Socinianism, as a calumny in his discussion, the last Book he ever writ.

But we are no further obliged to vindicate Grotius, than he did the truth;
which we are sure he did in the vindication B
. 8. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7. vindicated.
of the 53 of Isaiah, from Socinus his interpretations, notwithstanding what
Crellius has objected against him. We therefore proceed to other Verses in the
same Chapter insisted on by Grotius, to prove That Christ did bear the
punishments of our sins, v. 6, 7. The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of
us all: It is required, and he was afflicted, as Grotius renders those words.
Socinus makes a twofold sense of the former De Servat. l. 2. c. 5.
clause; the first is, That God by or with Christ did meet with our iniquities;
the latter, That God did ^ake our iniquities to mee^ with Christ. The words
says Grotius, will C
not bear the former interpretation, for the verb (...) being in Hiphil, must
import a double action, and so it must not be, That God by him did meet with
our sins, but that God did make our sins to meet upon him. To which Crellius
replies, That words in Hiphil are sometimes used intransitively; but Crell. c.
1. sect. 52.
can he produce any instance in Scripture, where this word joined with (...)
and (...) is so taken? for in the last ver^e of the Chapter, the construction
is different: And (...) uncertain way of interpreting Scripture will this be,
(...) every Anomalous signification, and rare use of a word, shall be made D
use of to take away such a sense as is most agreeable to the design of the
place. For that sense we contend for, is not only enforced upon the most
natural importance of these words, but upon the agreeableness of them with so
many other expressions of this Chapter, that Christ did bear our iniquities,
and was wounded for our transgressions, and that his soul was made an offering
for sin: to which it is very suitable, that as the iniquities of the people
were (as it were) laid upon the head of the Sacrifice; so it should be said of
Christ, who was to offer up himself for the sins of the world. And the Jews E
themselves by this phrase do understand the punishment either for the sins of
the people, which Josias underwent, or which the people themselves suffered, by
those who interpret this prophecy of them. To which purpose, Aben Ezra
observes, that iniquity is here put for the punishment of it, as 1 Samuel A
28. 10. and Lam. 4. 6. But Socinus mistrusting the incongruity of this
Interpretation, flies to another; viz. That God did make our iniquities to meet
with Christ: And this we are willing to admit of, if by that they mean, That
Christ underwent the punishment of them; as that phrase must naturally import,
for what otherwise can our iniquities meeting with him signify? For the word
(...) taken properly (as Socinus acknowledges it ought to be, when he rejects
Pagnins Interpretation of making Christ to interceed for our iniquities)
signifies, either to meet with one by chance, or out of kindness, B
or else for an encounter, with an intention to destroy that which it meets
with. So Judge. 8. 21. Rise thou (...) (...) LXX irrue in nos, fall upon us; i.
e. run upon us with thy sword, and kill us, Judge. 15. 12. Swear unto me, that
ye will not fall upon me your selves; where the same word is used, and they
explain the meaning of it in the next words, v. 13. We will not kill thee, Amos
5. 19. as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, (...) i. e. with a
design to kill him. Now I suppose they will not say that our sins met with
Christ by Chance, since it is said, that C
God laid on him, etc. nor out of kindness; it must be there fore out of
enmity; and with a design to destroy him, and so our sins cannot be understood
as Socinus and Crellius would have them, as the mere occasions of Christ's
death: but as the proper impulsive cause of it. Whether the following word
(...) be taken with a respect to sin, and so it properly signifies It is
required, or with a respect to the person, and so it may signify he was
oppressed, is not a matter of that consequence, which we ought to contend
about; if it be proved that Christ's oppression had only a respect to sin, as
the punishment D
of it. Which will yet further appear from another expression in the same
Chapter, verse. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his
stripes we are healed. In which Grotius says the word (...) does not signify
any kind of affliction, but such as has the nature of punishment, either for
example or instruction; but since the latter cannot be intended in Christ, the
former must. Crellius thinks to escape from this, by acknowledging, that the
Crell. c. 1. Sect. 57.
sufferings of Christ have some respect to sin; but if it be such a respect to
sin, which makes what Christ underwent a punishment E
(which is only proper in this case) it is as much as we contend for. This
therefore he is loath to abide by; and says that chastisement imports no more
than bare affliction without any respect to sin, which he thinks to prove from
St. Paul's words, 2 Cor. 6. 9. We are chastised, but not A
given over to death; but how far this is from proving his purpose will easily
appear, 1. Because those by whom they were said to be chastened, did not think
they did it without any respect to a fault; but they supposed them to be justly
punished; and this is that we plead for, that the chastisement considered with
a respect to him that inflicts it, does suppose some fault as the reason of
inflicting it. 2. This is far from the present purpose, for the chastisement
there mentioned is oposed to death, as chastened, but not killed; whereas
Grotius expressly speaks of such chastisements as include death, that these
cannot be B
supposed to be merely designed for instruction, and therefore must be
conceived under the notion of punishment. The other place Psalm. 73. 14. is yet
more remote from the business; for though the Psalmist accounts himself
innocent in respect of the great enormities of others; yet he could not account
himself so innocent with a respect to God, as not to deserve chastisement from
him.

But Crellius offers further to prove that Christ's death must be considered as
a bare affliction, and not as a (...), or exemplary. 9. Whether Christ's death
be a proper. (...), and whether that does imply that it was a punishment of sin.
punishment, because in such a punishment the guilty C
themselves are to be punished, and the benefit comes to those who were not
guilty, but in Christ's sufferings it was quite contrary, for the innocent was
punished, and the guilty have the benefit of it: and yet (he says) if we
should grant that Christ's sufferings were a (...), that will not prove that his
death was a proper punishment. To which I answer, That whatever answers to the
ends of an exemplary punishment, may properly be called so: but supposing that
Christ suffered the punishment of our sins, those sufferings will answer to all
the ends of an exemplary punishment. D
For the ends of such a punishment assigned by Crellius himself, are, That
others observing such a punishment may abstain from those sins which have
brought it upon the person who suffers. Now the question is, whether supposing
Christ did suffer on the account of our sins, these sufferings of his may deter
us from the practice of sin or no? And therefore in opposition to Crellius, I
shall prove these two things: 1. That supposing Christ suffered for our sins,
there was a sufficient argument to deter us from the practice of sin. 2.
Supposing that his sufferings had no respect to our E
sins, they could not have that force to deter men from the practice of it: for
he after asserts, That Christ's sufferings might be a (...) to us, though they
were no punishment of sin. 1. That the death of Christ considered as a
punishment of sin, is a proper (...) or has a great force to deter men from A
the practice of sin: and that because the same reason of punishment is
supposed in Christ and in our selves, and because the example is much more
considerable, than if we had suffered our selves. 1. The same reason of
punishment is supposed. For why are men deterred from sin, by seeing others
punished; but because they look upon the sin as the reason of the punishment;
and therefore where the same reason holds, the same ends may be as properly
obtained. If we said that Christ suffered death merely as an innocent person
out of Gods dominion over his life; what imaginable force could this have to B
deter men from sin, which is asserted to have no relation to it as the cause
of it? But when we say, that God laid our iniquities upon him, that he suffered
not upon his own account but ours, that the sins we commit against God were the
cause of all those bitter Agonies which the Son of God underwent, what argument
can be more proper to deter men from sin than this is? For hereby they see the
great abhorrency of sin which is in God, that he will not pardon the sins of
men without a compensation made to his Honor, and a demonstration to the world
of his hatred of it. Hereby they C
see what a value God has for his Laws, which he will not relax as to the
punishment of offenders, without so valuable a consideration as the blood of
his own Son. Hereby they see, that the punishment of sin is no mere arbitrary
thing depending barely upon the will of God; but that there is such a connection
between sin and punishment as to the ends of Government, that unless the Honor
and Majesty of God, as to his Laws and Government may be preserved, the
violation of his Laws must expect a just recompense of reward. Hereby they see
what those are to expect who neglect or despise D
these sufferings of the Son of God for them; for nothing can then remain, but
a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall
devour the Adversaries. So that, here all the weighty arguments concur which
may be most apt to prevail upon men to deter them from their sins. For if God
did thus by the green tree, what will be do by the dry? If he who was so
innocent in himself, so perfectly holy, suffered so much on the account of our
sins; what then may those expect to suffer, who have no innocence at all to
plead, and add wilfulness and impenitency to their sins? But if it be replied E
by Crellius, that it is otherwise among men: I answer, that we do not pretend
in all things to parallel the sufferings of Christ for us, with any sufferings
of men for one another. But yet we add, that even among men the punishments
inflicted on those who were themselves innocent as to the cause of A
them, may be as exemplary as any other. And the greater appearance of severity
there is in them, the greater terror they strike into all offenders. As
Childrens losing their estates and honors, or being banished for their Parents
treasons in which they had no part themselves. Which is a proper punishment on
them of their Fathers faults, whether they be guilty or no? and if this may be
just in men, why not in God? If any say, that the Parents are only punished in
the Children, he speaks that which is contradictory to the common sense of
mankind; for punishment does suppose sense or feeling of it; and in this B
case the Parents are said to be punished, who are supposed to be dead and past
feeling of it, and the Children who undergo the smart of it must not be said to
be punished; though all things are so like it, that no person can imagine
himself in that condition, but would think himself punished, and severely too.
If it be said, that these are calamities indeed, but they are no proper
punishments, it may easily be showed that distinction will not hold here.
Because these punishments were within the design of the Law, and were intended
for all the ends of punishments, and therefore must have the nature of them. C
For therefore the Children are involved in the Fathers punishment on purpose
to deter others from the like actions. There are some things indeed that
Children may fall into by occasion of their Fathers guilt, which may be only
calamities to them, because they are necessary consequents in the nature of the
thing, and not purposely designed as a punishment to them. Thus, being deprived
of the comfort and assistance of their Parents, when the Law has taken them
off by the hand of justice: this was designed by the Law as a punishment to the
Parents, and as to the Children it is only a necessary consequent D
of their punishment. For otherwise the Parents would have been punished for
the Childrens faults, and not the Children only involved in that which
unavoidably follows upon the Parents punishment. So that Crellius is very much
mistaken either in the present case of our Saviors punishment, or in the
general reason of exemplary punishments, as among men. But the case of our
Savior is more exemplary, when we consider the excellency of his person,
though appearing in our nature, when no meaner sufferings would satisfy, than
of so transcendent a nature as he underwent, though he E
were the Eternal Son of God, this must make the punishment much more
exemplary, than if he were considered only as our Adversaries do, as a mere
man. So that the dignity of his person under all his sufferings may justly add
a greater consideration to deter us from the practice of sin, A
which was so severely punished in him, when he was pleased to be a Sacrifice
for our sins. From whence we see that the ends of a (...) are very agreeable
with the sufferings of Christ considered as a punishment for sin.

We now consider whether as Crellius asserts, supposing Christ's death were no
punishment, it could have these effects 10. Gods hatred of sin could not be
seen in the sufferings of Christ, if they were no punishment of sin. Crell. c.
1. p. 69.
upon men's minds or no? Yes, he says, it might, because by his sufferings we
might see how severely God would punish wicked and obstinate persons. Which
being a strange riddle at the first hearing it, viz. that by the sufferings of
an innocent B
person without any respect to sin as the cause of them: we should discern Gods
severity against those who are obstinate in sin; we ought the more diligently
to attend to what is said for the clearing of it. First, says he, If God
spared not his own most innocent and holy and only Son, than whom nothing was
more dear to him in Heaven or Earth, but exposed him to so cruel and
ignominious a death; how great and severe sufferings may we think God will
inflict on wicked men, who are at open defiance with him? I confess my self not
subtle enough to apprehend the force of this C
argument, viz. If God dealt so severely with him who had no sin either of his
own or others to answer for; therefore he will deal much more severely with
those that have. For Gods severity considered without any respect to sin, gives
rather encouragement to sinners, than any argument to deter them from it. For
the natural consequence of it is, that God does act arbitrarily, without any
regard to the good or evil of men's actions; and therefore it is to no purpose
to be sollicitous about them. For upon the same account that the most innocent
person suffers most severely from him, for D
all that we know, the more we strive to be innocent, the more severely we may
be dealt with, and let men sin, they can be but dealt severely with, all the
difference then is, one shall be called punishments, and the other calamities,
but the severity may be the same in both. And who would leave off his sins
merely to change the name of punishments into that of calamities? And from
hence it will follow, that the differences of good and evil, and the respects
of them to punishment and reward, are but aerie and empty things; but that God
really in the dispensation of things to men, has no regard E
to what men are or do, but acts therein according to his own Dominion, whereby
he may dispose of men how or which way he pleases. If a Prince had many of his
Subjects in open rebellion against him, and he should at that time make his
most obedient and beloved, Son to be publicly exposed A
to all manner of indignities, and be dishonored and put to death by the hands
of those rebels; could any one imagine that this was designed as an exemplary
punishment to all rebels, to let them see the danger of rebellion? No, but
would it not rather make them think him a cruel Prince, one that would punish
innocence as much as rebellion; and that it was rather better to stand at
defiance, and become desperate, for it was more dangerous to be beloved than
hated by him, to be his Son than his declared Enemy? So that insisting on the
death of Christ as it is considered as a (...), (for of B
that we speak now) there is no comparison between our Adversaries hypothesis
and ours; but, says Crellius, the consequence is not good on our side, if
Christ suffered the punishment of our sins, therefore they shall suffer much
more who continue in sin, for Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world;
but they suffer only for their own, and what they have deserved themselves. To
which I answer, that the argument is of very good force upon our hypothesis,
though it would not be upon theirs. For if we suppose him to be a mere man that
suffered, then there could be no argument drawn from C
his sufferings to ours, but according to the exact proportion of sins and
punishments: but supposing that he had a divine as well as humane nature, there
may not be so great a proportion of the sins of the world to the sufferings of
Christ, as of the sins of a particular person to his own sufferings; and
therefore the argument from one to the other does still hold. For the measure
of punishments must be taken with a proportion to the dignity of the person who
suffers them. And Crellius himself confesses elsewhere, that the dignity of
the person is Crell. c. 8. sect. 43.
to be considered in exemplary punishment, and that a lesser D
punishment of one that is very great, may do much more to deter men from sin,
than a greater punishment of one much less. But he yet further urges, that the
severity of God Crell. c. 1. sect. 57, ^0.
against sinners may be discovered in the sufferings of Christ, because Gods
hatredagainst sin is discovered therein. But if we ask how Gods hatred against
sin, is seen in the sufferings of one perfectly innocent and free from sin, and
not rather his hatred of innocence, if no respect to sin were had therein? he
answers, that Gods hatred against sin was manifested, in that he would not
spare his only Son to draw men off from sin. For E
answer to which, we are to consider the sufferings of Christ as an innocent
person, designed as an exemplary cause to draw men off from sin; and let any
one tell me, what hatred of sin can possibly be discovered, in proposing the
sufferings of a most innocent person to them without any consideration of A
sin as the cause of those sufferings? If it be said, that the Doctrine of
Christ was designed to draw men off from sin; and that God suffered his Son to
dye to confirm this Doctrine, and thereby showed his hatred to sin. I answer,
1. This is carrying the dispute off from the present business, for we are not
now arguing about the design of Christ's Doctrine, nor the death of Christ as a
means to confirm that, but as a (...), and what power that has without respect
to our sins as the cause of them, to draw us from sin, by discovering Gods
hatred to it. 2. The Doctrine of Christ according to their B
hypothesis, discovers much less of Gods hatred to sin than ours does. For if
God may pardon sin without any compensation made to his Laws or Honor, if
repentance be in its own nature a sufficient satisfaction for all the sins past
of our Lives; if there be no such thing as such a Justice in God which requires
punishment of sin committed; if the punishment of sin depend barely upon Gods
will; and the most innocent person may suffer as much from God without respect
to sin as the cause of suffering, as the most guilty; let any rational man
judge whether this Doctrine discovers as much Gods abhorrency C
of sin, as asserting the necessity of vindicating Gods honor to the World,
upon the breach of his Laws, if not by the suffering of the offenders
themselves, yet of the Son of God as a sacrifice for the expiation of sin, by
undergoing the punishment of our iniquities, so as upon consideration of his
sufferings, he is pleased to accept of repentance and sincere obedience, as the
conditions upon which he will grant remission of sins; and eternal life. So
that if the discovery of Gods hatred to sin be the means to reclaim men from
it, we assert upon the former reasons, that much more is done upon our D
Doctrine concerning the sufferings of Christ, than can be upon theirs. So much
shall suffice to manifest in what sense Christ's death may be a (...), and that
this does imply, that his sufferings are to be considered as a punishment of
sin.

The next Series of places which makes Christ's sufferings 11. Grotius his
arguments from Christ's being made sin and a curse for us defined against
Crellius.
to be a punishment for sin, are those which assert Christ to be made sin and a
curse for us: which we now design to make clear, ought to be understood in no
other sense; for as Grotius says, As the Jews sometimes use sin, for the
punishment of sin; as appears, besides other places, by Zach. 14. E
19. Genesis 4. 13. so they call him that suffers the punishment of sin, by the
name of sin; as the Latins use the word Piaculum, both for the fault, and for
him that suffers for it. Thence under the Law, an expiatory Sacrifice for sin,
was called sin, Levit. 4. 3, 29 -- 5. 6. Psalm. 40. 7. A
Which way of speaking Esaias followed, speaking of Christ, Esai. 53. 10. (...)
he made his soul sin, i. e. liable to the punishment of it. To the same purpose
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. To which Crellius replies,
``That as there is no necessity, that by the name of sin, when applied to
sufferings, Crell. cap. 1. sect. 60.
any more should be implied, than that those sufferings were occasioned by sin,
no more is there when it is applied to the person; nay, much less, for he
says, ``No more is required B
to this, but that he should be handled as sinners use to be, and undergo the
matter of punishment, without any respect to sin, either as the cause or
occasion of it. So he says, The name Sinner is used, 1 King. 1. 21. and in St.
Paul, the name of sin in the first clause is to be understood, as of
righteousness in the latter; and as we are said to be righteousness in him,
when God deals with us as with righteous persons, so Christ was said to be sin
for us, when he was dealt with as a sinner. And the Sacrifices for sin under
the Law were so called, not with a respect to the punishment of C
sin, but because they were offered upon the account of sin, and were used for
taking away the guilt of it, or because men were bound to offer them, so that
they sinned if they neglected it. So that all that is meant by Esaias and St.
Paul is, That Christ was made an expiatory Sacrifice, or that he exposed
himself for those afflictions which sinners only by right undergo. But let
Crellius or any others of them tell me, if the Scripture had intended to
express, that the sufferings of Christ were a punishment of our sins, how was
it possible to do it more Emphatically than it is done by these expressions D
(the custom of the Hebrew Language being considered) not only by saying, that
Christ did bear our sins, but, that himself was made sin for us? those phrases
being so commonly used for the punishment of sin. Let them produce any one
instance in Scripture, where those expressions are applied to any without the
consideration of sin? that place 1 King. 1. 21. is very far from it; for in all
probability, the design of Bathsheba in making Solomon King was already
discovered, which was the reason that Adonijah his elder Brother declaring
himself King, invited not him with the rest of the E
Kings sons: All that she had for Solomon's succession, was a secret promise and
oath of David; and therefore she urges him now to declare the succession, v.
20. Otherwise, she says, when David should dye, I and my son Solomon shall be
accounted offenders; i. e. says Crellius, We shall be handled as A
offenders, we shall be destroyed: But surely not without the supposition of a
fault; by them which should inflict that punishment upon them: The plain
meaning is, they should be accused of Treason, and then punished accordingly.
But we are to consider, that still with a respect to them, who were the
inflicters, a fault or sin is supposed as the reason of their punishment,
either of their own or others. But of our Savior it is not said, That he
should be counted as an offender by the Jews; for although that does not take
away his innocence, yet it supposes an accusation of something, which in it
self B
deserves punishment. But in Esai. 53. 10. it is said, He made his soul sin;
and 2 Cor. 5. 21. That God made him sin for us, which must therefore imply, not
being dealt with by men only as a sinner, but that with a respect to him who
inflicted the punishment, there was a consideration of sin as the reason of it.
We do not deny but Gods suffering him to be dealt with as a sinner by men, is
implied in it, for that was the method of his punishment designed; but we say
further, that the reason of that permission in God, does suppose some
antecedent cause of it: For God would never have suffered his only C
Son, to be so dealt with by the hands of cruel men, unless he had made himself
an offering for sin; being willing to undergo those sufferings, that he might
be an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the world. And although Socinus will
not yield, That by being made sin for us should be understood Soc. l. 1. c. 8.
Christ's being an expiatory Sacrifice for sin; yet Crellius is contented it
should be so taken in both places: Which if he will grant, so as by virtue of
that Sacrifice, the guilt of sin is expiated, we shall not contend with him
about the reasons, why those Sacrifices were called sins, although the most
proper D
and genuine must needs be that, which is assigned by the Law, that the sins of
the people were supposed to be laid upon them, and therefore they were intended
for the expiation of them: But it is very unreasonable to say; That Expiatory
Sacrifices were called sins, because it would have been a sin to neglect them:
For on the same account, all the other Sacrifices must have been called so too;
for it was a sin to neglect any where God required them, and so there had been
no difference between Sacrifices for sin and others. To that reason of
Crellius, from our being made righteous, because dealt with as such, E
to Christ's being made sin only, because dealt with as a sinner, we need no
more than what this parallel will afford us; For as Crellius would never say,
that any are dealt with as righteous persons, who are not antecedently supposed
to be so; so by his own Argument, Christ being dealt with as a sinner, A
must suppose guilt antecedent to it; and since the Apostle declares it was not
his own, in those words, Who knew no sin, it follows that it must be the
consideration of ours, which must make him be dealt with as a sinner by him,
who made him to be sin for us. But to suppose that Christ should be said to be
made sin, without any respect to sin, is as much as if the Latins should call
any one Scelus, and mean thereby a very honest man; or a Piaculum, without any
supposition of his own or others guilt. But we are to consider, that the
sufferings of Christ, seeming at first so inconsistent with that relation B
to God as his only Son, which the Apostles assert concerning him, they were
obliged to vindicate his innocence as to men, and yet withal to show, that with
a respect to God, there was sufficient reason for his permission of his
undergoing these sufferings. That he knew no sin, was enough to clear his
innocence as to men; but then the question will be asked, If he were so
innocent, why did God suffer all those things to come upon him? Did not Abraham
plead of old with God, That he would not slay the righteous with the wicked,
because Genesis 18. 25.
it was repugnant to the righteousness of his nature to do so; C
That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee;
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? How then comes God to suffer the
most perfect innocence to be dealt with so, as the greatest sins could not have
deserved worse from men? Was not his righteousness the same still? And Abraham
did not think the distinction of calamities and punishments, enough to
vindicate Gods proceedings, if the righteous should have been dealt withal as
the wicked. And if that would hold for such a D
measure of righteousness as might be supposed in such who were not guilty of
the great abominations of those places, that it should be enough, not only to
deliver themselves, but the wicked too; how comes it that the most perfect
obedience of the Son of God, is not sufficient to excuse him from the greatest
sufferings of Malefactors? But if his sufferings had been merely from men, God
had been accountable only for the bare permission; but it is said, that he
foreordained and determined these things to be, that Christ himself
complained, that God had forsaken him; and here, that he made E
him sin for us: and can we imagine all this to be without any respect to the
guilt of sin, as the cause of it? Why should such an expression be used of
being made sin? might not many others have served sufficiently to declare the
indignities and sufferings he underwent, without such a phrase as A
seems to reflect upon Christ's innocence? If there had been no more in these
expressions than our Adversaries imagine, the Apostles were so careful of
Christ's honor, they would have avoided such ill-sounding expressions as these
were; and not have affected Hebraisms, and uncouth forms of speech, to the
disparagement of their Religion. But this is all which our Adversaries have to
say, where words are used by them out of their proper sense, that the Prophets
and Apostles affected tricks of wit, playing with words, using them sometimes
in one sense, and presently quite in another. So B
Crellius says of Esaiah, That he affects little elegancies of words and
verbal allusions, which makes him use words Crell. c. 1. sect. 57.
sometimes out of their proper and natural sense; thence he tells us, The
sufferings of Christ are called chastisements, though they have nothing of the
nature of chastisements in them: And from this liberty of interpreting, they
make words (without any other reason, than that they serve for their purpose)
be taken in several senses in the same verse: For Socinus in one verse of St.
John's Gospel, makes the World be taken in three several senses: He was in the
World, So^i^. ex^l^cat. 1 cap. Ioh. v. 10.
C
there it is taken, says he, for the men of the world in general: The world
was made by him, there it must be understood only of the reformation of things
by the Gospel: and, the world knew him not, there it must be taken in neither
of the former senses, but for the wicked of the world: What may not one make of
the Scripture, by such a way of interpreting it? But by this we have the less
reason to wonder, that Socinus should put such an Interpretation upon Gal. 3.
13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that D
hangs on a tree: In which he does acknowledge by the curse, in the first
clause to be meant, the punishment of sin, but not in the second: And the
reason he gives for it is, amavit enim Socin. de C^^isto servat. l 2. c. 1.
Paulus in execrationis verbo argutus esse. St. Paul affected playing with the
word curse, understanding it first in a proper, and then a Metaphorical sense.
But it is plain, that the design of S. Paul and Socinus are very different in
these words: Socinus thinks he speaks only Metaphorically, when he says, that
Christ was made a curse for us; i. e. by a bare allusion of the name, without a
correspondency in the E
thing it self; and so that the death of Christ might be called a curse, but
was not so: but St. Paul speaks of this not by way of extenuation, but to set
forth the greatness and weight of the punishment he underwent for us. He
therefore tells us, what it was which Christ did redeem us from, A
The curse of the Law; and how he did it, by being not only made a curse, but a
curse for us; i. e. not by being hateful to God, or undergoing the very same
curse, which we should have done; which are the two things objected by Crellius
against our sense; but that the death of Christ was to be considered, not as a
bare separation of soul and body, but as properly poenal, being such a kind of
death, which none but Malefactors by the Law were to suffer; by the undergoing
of which punishment in our stead, he redeemed us from that curse which we were
liable to by the violation of B
the Law of God. And there can be no reason to appropriate this only to the
Jews, unless the death of Christ did extend only to the deliverance of them
from the punishment of their sins; or because the curse of the Law did make
that death poenal, therefore the intention of the punishment, could reach no
further than the Law did; but the Apostle in the very next words speaks of the
farther extension of the great blessing promised to Abraham, That it should
come upon the Gentiles also; and withal those whom the Apostle speaks to, were
not Jews, but such as thought they ought to join the Law C
and Gospel together: that St. Paul does not mean as Crellius Crell. Annot. in
loc.
would have it, that Christ by his death did confirm the New Covenant, and so
take away the obligation of the Law; (for to what end was the curse mentioned
for that? What did the accursedness of his death add to the confirmation of the
truth of his Doctrine? and when was ever the curse taken for the continuance of
the Law of Moses?) but that Christ by the efficacy of his death as a punishment
for sin has redeemed all that believe and obey him from the curse deserved by
their sins, whether enforced by the Law of Moses, D
or the Law written in their hearts, which tells the consciences of sinners,
that such who violate the Laws of God are worthy of death, and therefore under
the curse of the Law.

We come now to the force of the particles which being joined with our sins as
referring to the death of Christ, do. 12. The particles (...) being joined to
sins, and relating to sufferings, do imply those sufferings to be the
punishment of sin.
imply that his death is to be considered as a punishment of sin. Not that we
insist on the force of those particles (...) and (...), as though of themselves
they did imply this (for we know they are of various significations according
to the E
nature of the matter they are joined with) but that these being joined with
sins and sufferings together, do signify that those sufferings are the
punishment of those sins. Thus it is said of Christ, that he dyed, (...) for
our sins, (...), that he suffered once (...), that Romans 4. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 3. 1
Pet. 3. 18. Heb. 10 12. Crell. c. 1. Sect. 6.
A
he gave himself, (...), that he offered a Sacrifice (...). To which Crellius
replies, That if the force of these particles not being joined with sufferings,
may be taken for the final and not for the impulsive cause, they may retain the
same sense when joined with sufferings, if those sufferings may be designed in
order to an end; but if it should be granted, that those phrases being joined
with sufferings, Sect. 14. p. 17.
do always imply a meritorious cause, yet it does not follow, it should be here
so understood because the matter will not bear it. To this a short answer will
at present serve: for, B
It is not possible a meritorious cause can be expressed more emphatically than
by these words being joined to sufferings: so that we have as clear a testimony
from these expressions as words can give; and by the same arts by which these
may be avoided any other might; so that it had not been possible for our
Doctrine to have been expressed in such a manner, but such kind of answers
might have been given as our Adversaries now give. If it had been said in the
plainest terms, that Christ's death was a punishment for our sins, they would as
easily have avoided the force of them as they do of these; C
they would have told us the Apostles delighted in an Antanaclasis, and had
expressed things different from the natural use of the words by them; and
though punishment were sometimes used properly, yet here it must be used only
metaphorically because the matter would bear no other sense. And therefore I
commend the ingenuity of Socinus after all the pains he had taken to enervate
the force of those places which are brought against his Doctrine; he tells us
plainly, That Socin. de servat. l. 3. c. 6.
if our Doctrine were not only once, but frequently mentioned in Scripture; yet
he would not therefore believe the D
thing to be so as we suppose. For, says he, seeing the thing it self cannot
be, I take the least inconvenient interpretation of the words; and draw forth
such a sense from them, as is most consistent with it self and the tenor of the
Scripture. But for all his talking of the tenor of the Scripture, by the same
reason he interprets one place upon these terms, he will do many, and so the
tenor of the Scripture shall be never against him: and by this we find, that
the main strength of our Adversaries is not pretended to lie in the Scriptures;
all the care they have of them is only to reconcile them if possible E
with their hypothesis; for they do not deny but that the natural force of the
words does imply what we contend for; but because they say the Doctrine we
assert is inconsistent with reason, therefore all their design is to find out
any other possible meaning which they therefore assert to be true, because A
more agreeable to the common reason of mankind. This therefore is enough for
our present purpose, that if it had been the design of Scripture to have
expressed our sense, it could not have done it in plainer expressions than it
has done, that no expressions could have been used, but the same arts of our
Adversaries might have been used to take off their force, which they have used
to those we now urge against them, and that setting aside the possibility of
the thing, the Scripture does very fairly deliver the Doctrine we contend for;
or, supposing in point of reason there may be arguments enough to B
make it appear possible, there are Scriptures enough to make it appear true. C
D
E


CHAP. III. A

The words of Scripture being at last acknowledged by our Adversaries to make
for us, the only pretense remaining is that our Doctrine is repugnant to
reason. The debate managed upon point of reason. The grand difficulty enquired
into, and manifested by our Adversaries concessions, not to lie in the
greatness of Christ's sufferings, or that our sins were the impulsive cause of
them, or that it is impossible that one should be punished for another faults:
or in all cases B
unjust: the cases wherein Crellius allows it, instanced. From whence it is
proved that he yields the main cause. The arguments propounded whereby he
attempts to prove it unjust for Christ to be punished for our sins. Crellius
his principles of the justice of punishments examined. Of the relation between
desert and punishment. That a person by his own consent may be punished beyond
the desert of his own actions. An answer to Crellius his Objections. What it is
to suffer undeservedly. Crellius his mistake in the state of the question. The
instances of Scripture considered. In C
what sense Children are punished for their Parents sins. Ezec. 18. 20.
explained at large. Whether the guilty being freed from the sufferings of an
innocent person makes that punishment unjust or no? Crellius his shifts and
evasions in this matter discovered. Why among men the offenders are not sreed
in criminal matters though the sureties be punished. The release of the party
depends on the terms of the sureties suffering, therefore deliverance not ipso
facto. No necessity of such a translation in criminal, as is in pecuniary
matters. D


HAving gained so considerable concessions from our. 1. The ma^ter debated in
point of reason.
Adversaries concerning the places of Scripture, we come now to debate the
matter in point of reason. And if there appear to be nothing repugnant in the
Nature of the thing, or to the justice of God, then all their loud clamors will
come to nothing; for on that they fix, when they talk the most of our Doctrine
being contrary to reason. This therefore we now come more closely to examine,
in order E
to which we must carefully enquire what it is, they lay the charge of
injustice in God upon, according to our belief of Christ's sufferings being a
punishment for our sins.

1. It is not, That the offenders themselves do not undergo A
the full punishment of their sins. For they assert, that there is no necessity
at all that the offenders should be punished from any punitive justice in God:
for they eagerly contend that God may freely pardon the sins of men: if so,
then it can be no injustice in God not to punish the offenders according to the
full desert of their sins.

2. It is not, that God upon the sufferings of Christ does pardon the sins of
men: for they yield that God may do this without any charge of injustice, and
with the greatest demonstration of his kindness. For they acknowledge, that the
sufferings of B
Christ are not to be considered as a bare antecedent condition to pardon, but
that they were a moving cause as far as the obedience of Christ in suffering
was very acceptable to God.

3. It is not, in the greatness or matter of the sufferings of Christ. For they
assert the same which we do. And therefore I cannot but wonder Ce tum est
Christum innocentissimum a Deo gravissimis cruciatibus, ipsaque morte suisse
assectum; cum ^on in materia poenae absolute and per se considerata, adeoque
etiam in ea afflictione a qua poe^ae forma abe^t, injuria residere a nobis
dicatur. Crel. c. 4. Sect. 3. Potuit autem id Deus facere, atque adeo fec^t,
^re dominii, q^od i^ Christi vitam ac corpus habebat; accedente
praesertimipsius Christi co^s^rsu. Id. Ib. Sect. 4.
to meet sometimes with those strange outcries of our making God cruel in the
punishing of his son for us: for what do we assert that Christ suffered, which
they C
do not assert too? Nay does it not look much more like cruelty in God to lay
those sufferings upon him without any consideration of sin? as upon their
hypothesis he does; than to do it supposing he bears the punishment of our
iniquities, which is the thing we plead for. They assert all those sufferings
to be lawful on the account of Gods dominion, which according to them must
cease to be so on the supposition of a meritorious cause. But however from this
it appears, that it was not unjust that Christ should suffer those things which
he did for us: D
the question then is, whether it were unjust that he should suffer the same
things, which he might lawfully do on the account of dominion with a respect to
our sins as the cause of them.

4. As to this, they acknowledge, that it is not, that the sufferings of Christ
were occasioned by our sins, or that our sins were the bare impulsive cause of
those sufferings. For they both consess in general, that one man's sins may be
the occasion of another punishment, so far that he might have escaped
punishment, if the others sins had not been the impulsive cause, E
of it. And therefore Crellius in the general state of this question, would not
have it, whether it be the unjust to punish one Quod si ex thesi speciale
sacere velis general^m, (...) erit, i^justum esse punire innocentem, quacunque
tandem de causa idsiat; non vern simpli i^^r, puaire quem, iam ob alie^a
delicta; id enim concedi potest non s^mper esse inj stum. Crel. c. 4 Sect. 3.
for another sins; for that he acknowledges it is not, but whether, A
for any cause whatsoever it be just to punish an innocent person? And likewise
in particular of Christ, they confess, that our sins were the impulsive cause,
and the occasion of his sufferings.

5. It is not, that there is so necessary a relation, between guilt and
punishment, that it cannot be called a punishment which is inflicted on an
innocent person. For Crellius, after a long dicourse of the difference of
afflictions and punishments, does acknowledge, That it is not of the nature of
punishment, that the person who is to be punished, should really deserve the C^
ne illud quide^ ad naturam poenae req^iratur, ut is ipse, q^i p^^ie id^s est,
poenam revera fu^rit commeritus, Id. Sect. 5.
punishment; and afterward when Grotius urges, that B
though it be essential to punishment, that it be inflicted for sin, yet it is
not, that it be inflicted upon him who has himself sinned, which he shows, by
the similitude of rewards, which though necessary to be given in consideration
of service, may yet be given to others besides the person himself upon his
account. All this Crellius acknowledges; who says, They do not make it
necessary to the nature, but to the justice of punishment, that it be inflicted
upon none but the person who has offended. So by his own Confession, it is not
against the nature of punishment, that one man suffer Poena quidem simpliciter
ia innocentem cadit, justa no^ cadit. Crell. c. 4. Sect. 28.
C
for another faults. From whence it follows, that all Socinus his arguments
signify nothing, which are drawn from the impossibility of the thing, that one
man should be punished for another faults; for Crellius grants the thing to be
possible, but denies it to be just; yet not absolutely neither, but with some
restrictions and limitations. For,

6. It is not, but that there may be sufficient causes assigned in. 2. In what
cases Crellius grants some may be lawfully punished for the sins of others.
some particular cases; wherein it may be just for God to punish some for the
sins of others. For Crellius himself has assigned diverse. When there is such a
near conjunction between D
them, that one may be said to be punished in the punishment of another: as
Parents in their Children and Posterity, Kings in their Subjects, or the body
of a State in its Members, Q^ia Deu^ h^^c p^^i^^do ill^m q^oq^e alterum ob
cujus peccati cum dicitur ^rt, si^^l p^nire possit, ob arctio^em (...) i^ter
i^^os i^te^ce ^at co^^^ (...). Crell. ^b. sect. 5. Crell. p. 242.
either in the most, or the most principal, though the fewest: but we are to
consider, how far he does extend this way of punishment of some in others. 1.
At the greatest distance of time, if they have been of the same Nation; for he
extends it to the utmost degree of Gods patience toward a people; For says
he, God does not presently punish as soon as they have sinned; but spares for a
great while, and forbears, iu expectation E
of their repentance, in the mean while a great many guilty persons die, and
seem to have escaped punishment. But at last the time of Gods patience being
past, he punishes their Posterity by exacting the fu l punishment of their
sins upon them, and by this means punishes their Ancestors t^o, A
and punishes their sins in their punishment; for, says he, all that people
are reckoned for one one man of several Ages, and that punishment which is
taken of the last, may be for the sins of the first, for the conjunction and
succession of them: of which we have an example, says he, in the destructiof
Jerusalem. By which we see a very remote conjunction, and a mere similitude in
comparing a succession of Ages in a people with those in a man, may (when
occasion serves) be made use of to justify Gods punishing one Generation of
men for the sins of others that have been long before. 2. When B
sins are more secret, or less remarkable, which God might not punish, unless
an occasion were given from others sins impelling him to it; but because God
would punish one very near them he therefore punishes them, that in their
punishment he might punish the other. Or in case sins spread through a Family
or a people, or they are committed by diverse persons at sundry times, which God
dot^ (...) severally punish, but sometimes then, when the Head of a People or
Family has done something which remarkably deserves punishment, whom he will
punish in those he is related to, and therefore generally punishes C
the whole Family or People. 3. That which may be a mere exercise of dominion
as to some, may be a proper punishment to others; as in the case of Infants,
being taken away for their Parents sins; For God, as to the Children, he says,
uses only an act of dominion, but the punishment only redounds to the Parents,
who lose them; and though this be done for the very end of punishment, yet he
denies, that it has the nature of Punishment in any but the Parents. 4. That
punishment may be intended for those who can have no sense at all of it; as
Crellius asserts in the case of Saul's sons, 2 Samuel 21. 8, 14. that D
Crell. ib. sect. 11. sect. 19.
the punishment was mainly intended for Saul, who was aheady dead. From these
concessions of Crellius in this case, we may take notice, 1. That a remote
conjunction may be sufficient for a translation of penalty, viz. from one
Generation to another. 2. That sins may be truly said to be punished in others,
when the offenders themselves may escape punishment, thus the sins of Parents
in their Children, and Princes in their Subjects. 3. That an act of dominion in
some may be designed as a proper punishment to others. 4. That the nature of
punishment is not to be measured by the sense of it. Now E
upon these concessions, though our Adversaries will not grant, that Christ was
properly punished for our sins, yet they cannot deny but that we may very
properly be said to be punished for our sins in Christ, and if they will yield
us this, the other may be a strife about words. For surely there may be A
easily imagined as great a conjunction between Christ and us, as between the
several Generations of the Jews, and that last which was punished in the
destruction of Jerusalem: and though we escape that punishment which Christ
did undergo, yet we might have our sins punished in him, as well as Princes
theirs in their Subjects, when they escape themselves; or rather as Subjects in
an innocent Prince, who may suffer for the faults of his people; if it be said,
that these are acts of mere dominion as to such a one, that nothing hinders but
granting it, yet our sins may be said to be punished in him; as B
well as Parents sins are punished properly in mere acts of dominion upon their
Children; if it be laid, that can be no punishment where there is no sense at
all of it, that is fully taken off by Crellius; for surely we have as great a
sense of the sufferings of Christ, as the first Generation of the Jews had of
the suffering of the last, before the fatal destruction of the City, or as Saul
had of the punishment of his Sons after his death. So that from Crellius his
own concessions, we have proved, that our sins may very properly be said to be
punished in Christ, although he will not say, that Christ could be properly
punished C
for our sins; nay he and the rest of our Adversaries not only deny it, but
earnestly contend, that it is very unjust to suppose it, and repugnant to the
rectitude of Gods nature to do it.

And so we come to consider the mighty arguments that are. 3. Crellius his
arguments propounded.
insisted on for the proof of this, which may be reduced to these three; viz.
1. That there can be no punishment but what is deserved, but no man can deserve
that another should be punished. 2. That punishment flows from revenge, but
there can be no revenge where there has been no fault. 3. That the punishment
of one, cannot any ways be made the punishment of another; and D
in case it be supposed possible, then those in whose stead the other is
punished, must be actually delivered upon the payment of that debt which was
owing to God.

1. That one man cannot deserve another punishment, and therefore one cannot
be punished for another; for there is no just punishment, but what is deserved.
This being the main Argument insisted on by Crellius, must be more carefully
considered; but before an answer be made to it, it is necessary that a clear
account be given in what sense it is he understands it, which will be best
done, by laying down his principles, as to the justice of E
punishments, in a more distinct method than himself has done; which are these
following: 1. That no person can be justly punished, either for his own or
another faults, but he that has deserved to be punished by some sin of his
own: For he still asserts, That the justice of punishment arises from a A
Crell. c. 4. sect. 3 p. 239, 240.
man's own fault, though the actual punishment may be from another: But he that
is punished without respect to his own guilt, is punished undeservedly; and he
that is punished undeservedly, is punished unjustly. 2. That personal guilt
being supposed one man's sin may be the impulsive cause of another punishment,
but they cannot be the meritorious. The difference between them he thus
explains, The cause, is that which makes a thing to be; the impulsive, that
which moves one to do a thing, without any consideration of right that one has
to do it: Merit, is that which makes a man worthy of a B
thing, either good or bad, and so gives a right to it; if it be good, to
himself; if bad, to him at whose hands he has deserved it. Now he tells us,
that it is impossible, That one man's sins should make any other deserve
punishment, but the person who committed them; but they may impel one to punish
another, and that justly, if the person has otherwise deserved to be punished,
unjustly if he has not. The reason he gives of it is, That the vitiosity of
the act, which is the proper cause of punishment, cannot go beyond the person
of the offender; and therefore can oblige none to punishment, C
but him that has committed the fault. And therefore he asserts, That no man
can be justly punished beyond the desert of his own sins, but there may
sometimes be a double impulsive cause of that punishment; viz. His own and
other men's, whereof one made that they might be justly Crell. ib. sect. 18.
punished, the other that they should be actually: but the later, he says,
always supposes the former, as the foundation of just punishment; so that no
part of punishment could be executed upon him, wherein his own sins were not
supposed as the meritorious cause of it. These are his two main principles D
which we must now thoroughly examine, the main force of his book lying in them.
But if we can prove, that it has been generally received by the consent of
mankind, that a person may be punished beyond the desert of his own actions; if
God has justly punished some for the sins of others, and there be no injustice
in one man's suffering by his own consent for another, then these principles of
Crellius will be found not so firm as he imagines them.

1. That it has been generally received by the consent of. 4. That a person by
his own consent may be punished beyond the desert of his own actions. Grot. de
Satisf. c. 4.
mankind, that a person may be justly punished beyond the desert E
of his own actions. For which purpose Grotius objected against Socinus (who
appealed to the consent of Nations, about one being punished for another
fault) That the Heathens did agree, that Children might be punished for their
Parents saults, and people for their Princes, and that corporal punishment A
might be born by one for another, did appear by the Persians punishing the
whole family for the fault of one. The Macedonians the near kindred in the case
of Treason, some Cities of Greece, destroying the Children of Tyrants together
with them; in all which, the mere conjunction was supposed a sufficient reason
without consent; but in case of consent, he says, They all agreed in the
Justice of some being punished for the faults of others. Thence the right of
killing hostages among the most civilized nations; and of sureties being
punished in Capital matters, if the guilty B
appear not, who were thence called (...) who were bound to answer body for
body. In which cases, the punishment did extend beyond the desert of the person
who suffered it; for no other reason is assigned of these sufferings, besides
the conjunction of the person, or his consent; but no antecedent guilt is
supposed as necessary, to make the punishment just. We are now to consider what
Crellius does answer to this: 1. As to their acknowledgements of Gods punishing
Children for their Parents faults, he gives the same answer which he does to
the examples recorded in Scripture to that C
purpose, That either they were punished for the sins of others, but their own
sins deserved the punishment; or that the Parents were punished in the
Children, but the Children were not properly punished. 2. As to punishments
among men, he answers two things; 1. That such persons were truly punished, but
not justly: for he acknowledges, That in Crell. c. 4. sect. 5. p. 244.
such a case it is a proper punishment, and that it is enough in order to that,
that any fault be charged upon a person, whether his own or another, whether
true or false, on the account of which he is supposed worthy to be punished: D
And that such a conjunction is sufficient for cruel, angry, or imprudent men;
for where ever there is a place, says he, for anger, there is likewise for
punishment. So that he consesseth, there may be a true punishment, and that
which answers all the reason and ends of punishment assigned by him, where
there is no desert at all of it in the person who undergoes it. But then he
adds, that this is an unjust punishment, to which I reply, That then the reason
of punishment assigned by Crellius before is insufficient; for if this answers
all the ends of punishments assigned by him, and yet be unjust, E
then it necessarily follows, that those ends of punishment are consistent with
the greatest injustice. For he before made punishment to have a natural respect
to anger, and makes the ordinary end of punishment to be a satisfaction of the
desire of revenge in men, yet now grants, that these may be in an unjust
punishment. Neither can it be said, that he considered punishment A
only naturally, and not morally; for he tells us, that this is the nature of
divine punishments, which are therefore just, because designed for these ends;
but in case there be no supposal of a fault at all, then he denies that it is a
punishment, but only an asfliction, and an exercise of dominion. So that
according to him, wherever there is a proper punishment, it must be just,
whenever God does punish men: and the only difference between God and man
supposable in this case is, that we have assurance God will never use his
dominion unjustly; but that men do so when they make one to suffer for another
B
fault, notwithstanding a consent and conjunction between the man that
committed the fault, and the person that suffers for him. But this is begging
the thing in question, for we are debating, whether it be an unlawful exercise
of power or no? for we have this presumption, that it is not unlawful, because
it may answer all the ends of punishments, and what way can we better judge,
whether a punishment be just or no, than by that?

But we are to consider, that we do not here take the person we speak of,
abstractly as an innocent person, for then there C
. 5. Objections answered.
is no question, but anger and punishment of one as such is unjust; but of an
innocent person as supposed under an obligation by his own consent to suffer
for another. And in this case we assert, since according to Crellius the
natural and proper ends of punishments may be obtained, and the consent of the
person takes away the wrong done to him in the matter of his sufferings, so far
as he has power over himself, that such a punishment is not unjust. For if it
be, it must suppose some injury to be done; but in this case let them assign
where the injury lies; it cannot be to the public, if the ends of punishments D
may be obtained by such a suffering of one for another, by a valid consent of
the suffering party; it cannot be to the person in whose room the other
suffers, for what injury is that to escape punishment by another suffering; it
cannot be to the suffering person, supposing that to be true, which the
Heathens still supposed, viz. that every man had a power I^o quenq^am pun^re
est injust e punire. Crell. p. 240.
over his own life. If it be said still, that the unjustice lies in this; that
such a one suffers undeservedly, and therefore unjustly. I answer, if be meant
by undeservedly without sufficient cause or reason of punishment, then we deny
that such E
a one does suffer undeservedly. Immerito in the Greek Glosses is rendered by
(...) and Merito by (...) and (...), and in Cicero, jure and merito are most
commonly joined together. So that where there is a right to punish, and
sufficient reason for A
it, such a one does not suffer immerito, i. e. undeservedly. If it be said,
that such a one is not dignus paena, that implies no more than the other, for
dignus, or as the Ancients writ it dicnus, comes from the Greek (...) jus as
Vossius tells us, ut dign us sit cui tribui aliquid aequum est: so that where
there is an equity in the thing, there is a dignity in the person, or he may be
said to be worthy to undergo it. But does not this lay open the greatest
innocence to as great a desert of sufferings, as the highest guilt? By no
means. For we make a lyableness to punishment, the natural consequent of guilt:
and he that B
has committed a fault, cannot but deserve to be punished, so that no
sufferings of others can take away the natural consequence of a bad action,
which is a desert of punishment; So that as we say, a wicked action cannot but
deserve to be punished, i. e. there is an agreeableness in reason and nature,
that he who has done ill, should suffer ill; so we say likewise there is
necessity in nature and reason, that he that has thus deserved it, must
unavoidably suffer it. And on the other side, we say, no man by his innocence
can deserve to be punished, i. e. no man's innocence makes him by virtue of C
that obnoxious to punishment; but yet we add, that notwithstanding his
innocence, the circumstances may be such that he may be justly punished, and in
that sense deservedly. So that the Question is strangely mistaken, when it is
thus put, Whether an innocent person considered as such, may be justly
punished; for no one asserts that, or is bound to do it; but the true question
is, whether a person notwith standing his innocence may not by some act of his
own will oblige himself to undergo that punishment which otherwise he did not
deserve? which punishment, in that case is just and agreeable D
to reason: And this is that which we assert and plead for. So that innocence
here is not considered any other ways, than whether that alone makes it an
unlawful punishment, which otherwise would be lawful, i. e. whether the
Magistrate in such cases, where substitution is admittable by the Laws of
Nations (as in the cases we are now upon) be bound to regard any more than that
the obligation to punishment now lies upon the person, who by his own act has
substituted himself in the others room; and if he proceeds upon this, his
action is justifyable and agreeable to reason. If it be said, E
that the substitution is unjust, unless the substituted person has before
hand deserved to be punished; it is easily answered, that this makes not the
matter at all clearer; for either the person is punished for the former fault,
and then there is no substitution; or if he be punished by way of substitution;
then A
there is no regard at all had to his former fault, and so it is all one as if
he were perfectly innocent.

And by this Crellius his answer to the instances both in Scripture. 6. The
instances of Scripture considered.
and elsewhere concerning Childrens being punished for their Parents faults,
will appear to be insufficient, viz. That God does never punish them for their
Parents faults beyond the desert of their own sins, and therefore no argument
can be drawn from thence, that God may punish an innocent person for the sins
of others, because he has punished some for what they were innocent: For the
force of the argument does B
not lie in the supposition of their innocence, as to the ground of punishment
in general, for we do not deny, but that they may deserve to be punished for
their own faults: but the argument lies in this, whether their own guilt were
then considered as the reason of punishment, when God did punish them for their
fathers faults? And whether they by their own sins did deserve to be punished
not only with the punishment due to their own miscarriages, but with the
punishment due to their fathers too? If not, then some persons are justly
punished, who have not deserved that punishment they undergo; if they did C
deserve it, then one person may deserve to be punished for another sins. If
it be said, as it is by Crellius, That his own sins make him capable of
punishment, and God by occasion of others sins does execute that punishment,
which he might not have done for his own. I answer, we are not enquiring into
the bare capacity of punishing, but into the reason of it: was the reason of
punishment his own or his fathers sins? If his own, then he was punished only
for his own sins; if his fathers, then the punishment may be just which is
inflicted without consideration of proper desert of it; for no man (say they) D
can deserve to be punished, but for his own sins. But it is said, that the sins
of Fathers are only an impulsive cause for God to punish the Children according
to the desert of their own sins, which he might otherwise have forborne to
punish. Then, the sins of the Fathers are no reason why the Children should be
punished; but their own sins are the reason, and their Fathers the bare
occasion of being punished for them. But in Scripture, the reason of punishment
is drawn from the Fathers sins: and not from the Childrens: For then the words
would have run thus, if the Children sin, and deserve punishment E
by their own iniquities, then, I will take occasion from their Fathers sins to
visit their own iniquities upon them: Whereas the words refer to the Fathers
sins as the reason of the Childrens punishment. So in the words of the Law,
wherein the reason of punishment ought to be most expressly assigned, it is not,
A
I will certainly punish the Children, if they continue in the Idolatry of
their Fathers; but, I will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation Exodus 20. 3.
of them that hate me: If it were only because of imitation of the Fathers sins
by the Children, there could be no reason for the limitation to the third and
fourth Generation; for then the reason of punishment would be as long as the
imitation continued, whether to the fourth or tenth Generation: And as
Alphonsus a Castro observes, If the reason of punishment were the imitation of
their Fathers sins, then the Children Alph. a Castro de justa haeret. punit. l.
2. c. 10.
B
were not punished for their Fathers sins, but for their own; for that
imitation was a sin of their own, and not of their Fathers. Besides, if the
proper reason of punishment were the sins of the Children, and the Fathers sins
only the occasion of it, then where it is mentioned that Children are punished
for their Parents sins, the Childrens sins should have been particularly
expressed, as the proper cause of the punishment: But no other reason is
assigned in the Law, but the sins of the Fathers, no other cause mentioned of
Canaans punishment, Genesis 9. 25.
but his Fathers sin; nor of the punishment of the people in C
David's time, but his own sin; Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but
these sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 17.
Which is no hyperbolical expression, but the assigning the proper cause of
that judgment to have been his own sin, as the whole Chapter declares: Nor, of
the hanging up of Saul's sons by the Gibeonites, but, that Saul their Father had
plotted Sam. 21. 5.
their destruction. And in an instance more remarkable than any of those which
Crellius answers; viz. the punishment of the people of Judah, for the sins of
Manasses in the time of Josias; when a through Reformation was designed among D
them, the Prince being very good, and all the places of Idolatry destroyed,
such a Passover kept as had not been kept before in the time of any King in
Israel, yet it then follows, Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the
fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, 2
Kings 23. v. 4. to v. 21.
because of all the provocations wherewith Manasses had provoked him withal.
Who can say here, that the sins of Manasseh were only the occasion of Gods
punishing the people in Verse. 22. Verse. 26.
the time of Josias for their own sins, when their sins were much less in the
time of Josias, than in any time mentioned E
before, after their lapse into Idolatry? Nay, it is expressly said, That Josiah
took away all the abominations out of all the 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.
countries that pertained to the Children of Israel, and made all that were
present in Isreal to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all his days
they departed not from following A
the Lord God of their Fathers: To say, that this was done in hypocrisy, and
bare outward compliance, is to speak without book; and if the reason of so
severe punishments had been their hypocrisy, that ought to have been
mentioned; but not only here, but afterward it is said, that the reason of
Gods destroying Judah, was for the sins of Manasseh; viz. 2 Samuel 24. 3, 4.
his Idolatries and Murder, which it is said, the Lord will not pardon. And if
he would not pardon, then he did punish for those sins, not barely as the
occasion, but as the meritorious cause of that punishment. What shall we say
then? Did B
the people in Iosiah's time, deserve to be punished for the sins of Manasseh,
Grandfather to Josiah? Or was God so highly provoked with those sins, that
although he did not punish Manasseh himself upon his repentance, yet he would
let the world see, how much he abhorred them, by punishing those sins upon the
people afterward; although according to the usual proportion of sins
punishments, the sins and of the people in that age did not exceed the sins of
others ages, as much as the punishments they suffered, did exceed the
punishments of other ages: which is necessary according to Crellius his
Doctrine; C
for if God never punishes by occasion of their Fathers sins, the Children
beyond the desert of their own sins; then it is necessary, that where
judgments are remarkably greater, the sins must be so too; the contrary to
which is plain in this instance. By which we see, that it is not contrary to
the Justice of God in punishing, to make the punishment of some on the account
of others sins, to exceed the desert of their own; measuring that desert, not
in a way common to all sin; but when the desert of some sins is compared with
the desert of others: For it is of this latter we speak of, D
and of the method which God uses in punishing sin here, for the demonstration
of his hatred of it, according to which the greatest punishments must suppose
the greatest sins, either of their own, or others which they suffer for.

But has not God declared, That he will never punish the Children for the
Fathers sins? for the soul that sins it shall. 7. Ezekiel. 18. 20. explained.
Exek. 18. 4, 20.
dye; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, etc. To which I
answer, These words are to be considered, as an answer to a complaint made by
the Jews, soon after their going into Captivity, which they imputed to Gods
severity in E
punishing them for their Fathers sins. Now the complaint was either true or
false; if it were true, then though this was looked upon as great severity in
God, yet it was no injustice in him; for though God may act severely, he cannot
act unjustly: If it was false, then the answer had been an absolute A
denial of it, as a thing repugnant to the Justice of God. Which we do not find
here, but that God says unto them, v. 3. Ye shall not have occasion any more
to use this Proverb in Israel: if the thing had been plainly unjust, which they
complained of, he would have told them, they never had occasion to use it. But
we find the Prophets telling them before hand, that they should suffer for
their Fathers sins, Ierem. 15. 3, 4, where he threatens them with destruction
and banishment, because of the sins of Manasseh in Jerusalem; and in the
beginning of the captivity they complain of this, Lam. B
5. 7. Our Fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born their iniquities.
And Ierem. 31. 28. God says by the Prophet, that he had watched over them to
pluckup, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to afflict: but that he would
watch over them to build, and to plant, and in those days they shall say no
more, The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on
edge; but every one shall dye for Jer. 31. 29, 30.
his own iniquity. Which place is exactly parallel with this in Ezekiel, and
gives us a clear account of it, which is, that now indeed God had dealt very
severely with them, by making C
them suffer beyond, what in the ordinary course of his providence their sins
had deserved; but he punished them not only for their own sins, but the sins of
their Fathers: But lest they should think, they should be utterly consumed for
their iniquities, and be no longer a people enjoying the Land which God had
promised them, he tells them by the Prophets, though they had smarted so much,
by reason of their Fathers sins, this severity should not always continue upon
them; but that God would visit them with his kindness again, and would plant
them in their own Land, then they should see no reason D
to continue this Proverb among them; for they would then find, Though their
Fathers had eaten sour grapes, their teeth should not be always set on edge
with it. And if we observe it, the occasion of the Proverb, was concerning the
Land of Israel, (...) super terra Israel, as the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it
more agreeable to the Hebrew, than the Ezekiel. 18. 2.
other Versions do. So that the Land of Israel was the occasion of the Proverb,
by their being banished out of it for their Fathers sins: Now God tells them,
they should have no more occasion to use this Proverb concerning the Land of
Israel; E
for they, notwithstanding their Fathers sins, should return into their own
Land. And even during the continuance of their captivity, they should not
undergo such great severities for the future, but they should find their
condition much more tolerable than they imagined; only, if any were guilty of A
greater sins than others, they should themselves suffer for their own faults,
but he would not punish the whole Nation for them, or their own posterity. This
I take to be the genuine meaning of this place; and I the rather embrace it,
because I find such insuperable difficulties in other Interpretations that are
given of it: For to say as our Adversaries do, That what God says, should not
be for the future, was repugnant to his nature and justice ever to do, is to
charge God plainly with injustice in what he had done: For the Prophets told
them they should suffer for the sins of their Fathers: Which sufferings B
were the ground of their complaint now, and the answer here given must relate
to the occasion of the complaint; for God says, They should not have occasion
to use that Proverb: Wherein is implied, they should not have the same reason
to complain which they had then. I demand then, Do not these words imply, That
God would not do for the future with them, what he had done before; if not, the
proper answer had been a plain denial, and not a promise for the future he
would not; if they do, then either God properly punished them for the sins of
their Fathers, and then God must be unjust C
in doing so; or it was just with God to do it, and so this place instead of
overthrowing will prove, that some may be justly punished, beyond the desert of
their own sins: or else, God did only take occasion by their Fathers sins, to
punish them according to the desert of their own iniquities: But then they had
no cause to complain, that they were punished for any more than their own
iniquities; and withal, then God does oblige himself by his promise here, never
to punish men for the future by the occasion of others sins: which is not only
contrary to their own Doctrine, but to what is plainly seen afterward D
in the punishment of the Jews for their Fathers sins, mentioned by our Savior
after this: And if this be a certain rule of equity which God here says, that
he would never vary Matthew. 23. 35.
from, then the punishing of some on the occasion of others sins, would be as
unjust, as our Adversaries suppose the punishing any beyond the desert of their
own sins to be. But is it not employed, that Gods ways would be unequal, if he
ever Ezekiel. 18. 25.
did otherwise than he there said he would do? No, it is not, if by equal he
meant just, for his ways never were, or can be so unequal; but here if it be
taken with a respect to the main E
dispute of the Chapter, no more is implied in them, but that they judged amiss
concerning Gods actions, and that they were just, when they thought them not to
be so: or if at least, they thought his ways very severe, though just, God by
remitting of this severity, would show that he was not only A
just, but kind; and so they would find his ways equal, that is, always
agreeable to themselves, and ending in kindness to them, though they hitherto
were so severe toward them in their banishment and captivity. Or if they be
taken with a respect to the immediate occasion of them both, Ezekiel. 18. -- 33.
They do not relate to this dispute about Childrens suffering for their Fathers
sins; but to another, which was concerning Ezekiel. 33. 20.
a righteous man's sinning and dying in his sins, and a wicked man's repenting,
and living in his righteousness; which were directly contrary to the common
opinion of the B
Jews to this day, which is, that God will judge men according to the greatest
number of their actions good or bad: as appears by Maimonides and others. Now
they thought it a very hard case, for a man who had been righteous the far
greatest part of his time, if he did at last commit iniquity, that his former
righteousness should signify nothing, but he must dye in his iniquity. To this
therefore God answers, that it was only the inequality of their own ways, which
made them think Gods ways in doing so unequal. This then does not make it
unequal, for God either to punish men, upon the occasion, C
or by the desert of other men's sins, supposing such a conjunction between
them, as there is in the same body of people, to those who went before them.
And Crellius himself grants, That Socinus never intended to prove, that one
man's suffering for another sins was unjust in it self, from this place: Crell.
c. 4. sect. 15.
no, not though we take it in the strictest sense, for one suffering in the
stead of another.

Having thus far cleared, how far it is agreeable to Gods Justice, to punish
any persons either by reason of his dominion,. 8. The deliverance of the guilty
by the sufferings of an innocent person by his own consent, makes not the
punishment unjust.
or the conjunction of persons, for the sins of others, D
and consequently whether any punishment may be undergone justly beyond the
proper desert of their own sins, I now return to the consent of Mankind in it,
on supposition either of a near conjunction, or a valid consent which must make
up the want of dominion in men without it. And the question still proceeds upon
the supposition of those things, that there be a proper dominion in men over
that which they part with for others sakes, and that they do it by their free
consent; and then we justify it not to be repugnant to the principles of
Reason and Justice for any to suffer beyond the desert of their E
own actions. And Crellius his saying, that such a punishment is true
punishment, but not just; is no answer at all to the consent of Nations that it
is so. And therefore finding this answer insufficient; he relies upon another,
viz. That it was never received by the consent of Nations, that one A
Crell. c. 4 sect. 30 32, 34, and^.
man should suffer in the stead of another, so as the guilty should be freed by
the others suffering. For he says, neither Socinus nor he do deny that one man
may be punished for another sins; but that which they deny is, that ever the
innocent were punished so as the guilty were freed by it, and so he answers, in
the case of Hostages and Sureties, their punishment did never excuse the
offenders themselves. And to this purpose he says, Socinus his argument does
hold good, that though one man's money may become another, yet one man's
sufferings cannot become another: For, says B
he, if it could, then it would be all one who suffered, as it is who pays the
money due: And then the offender must be presently released, as the Debtor is
upon payment of the debt. This is the substance of what is said by him upon
this Argument. To which I reply; 1. That this gives up the matter in dispute at
present between us; for the present question is, Whether it be unjust for any
one to suffer beyond the desert of his own actions? Yes says Crellius, it is,
in case he suffers so, as that the guilty be freed by his sufferings. But we
are not enquiring, Whether it be just for another person to be freed C
for a man's suffering for him? but whether it be just for that man to suffer by
his own consent, more than his own actions, without that consent deserved? The
release of another person by virtue of his sufferings, is a matter of another
consideration. Does the freeing or not freeing of another by suffering, add any
thing to the desert of suffering? He that being wholly innocent, and does
suffer on the account of another fault, does he not suffer as undeservedly,
though another be not freed, as if he were? As in the case of Hostages or
Sureties, does it make them at all the more guilty, because the D
persons they are concerned for, will be punished notwithstanding, if they come
under the power of those who exacted the punishment upon them, who suffered for
them? Nay, is not their desert of punishment so much the less, in as much as
the guilty are still bound to answer for their own offenses? If we could
suppose the guilty to be freed by the others sufferings, it would be by
supposing their guilt more fully translated upon those who suffer, and
consequently, a greater obligation to punishment following that guilt. From
whence it follows, that if it be just to punish, when the person is not
delivered E
from whom the other suffers, it is more just when he is; for the translation
of the penalty is much less in the former case, than in latter; and what is
just upon less grounds of punishment, must be more just upon greater. I look on
this therefore but as a shift of Crellius, hoping thereby to avoid A
the consent of mankind in one man's suffering for another, without attending to
the main argument he was upon; viz. The justice of one person suffering for
another. 2. It is a very unreasonable thing, to make an action unjust for that,
which of it self is acknowledged by our Adversaries to be very just; viz. The
pardoning the offenders themselves. If it were just to suffer, if the other
were not pardoned, and it were just to pardon, whether the other were punished
or no, how comes this suffering to be unjust, merely by the others being
pardoned by it: nay, is it not rather an Argument, that those B
sufferings are the most just, which do so fully answer all the ends of
punishments; that there is then no necessity that the offender should suffer;
but that the Supreme Governor having obtained the ends of Government, by the
suffering of one for the rest, declares himself so well pleased with it, that
he is willing to pardon the offenders themselves. 3. Many of those persons who
have had their sins punished in others, have themselves escaped the punishment
due to the desert of their sins. As is plain in the case of Ahab, whose
punishment was not so great as his sins deserved, because the full punishment
of them was C
reserved to his posterity. If it be said, as it is by Crellius, That Ahab was
not wholly freed, his life being taken away, Crell. c. 4. sect 25. 1 King 21.
19.
for his own sins: That gives no sufficient answer; for if some part of the
punishment was deferred, that part he was delivered from; and the same reason
in this case will hold for the whole as the part. As is plain in the case of
Manasseh, and several others, the guilt of whose sins were punished on their
posterity, themselves escaping it. 4. Our Adversaries confess, that in some
cases it is lawful and just for some to suffer, with a design that others may
be freed by their suffering for them. Thus D
they assert, That one Christian, not only may, but ought to lay down his life
for another, if there be any danger of his denying the truth, or be judges him
far more useful and considerable than himself: so likewise a son for his
Father, one Brother for another, or a Friend, or any, whose life he thinks more
useful Crell. cap. 6. sect. 39.
than his own. Now I ask, whether a man can be bound to a thing that is in its
own nature unjust? if not, as it is plain he cannot, then such an obligation of
one man to suffer for the delivery of another cannot be unjust, and
consequently the suffering it self cannot be so. But Crellius says, The
injustice E
in this case lies wholly upon the Magistrate who admits it: but I ask
wherefore is it unjust in the Magistrate to admit it? is it because the thing
is in it self unjust? if so, there can be no obligation to do it; and it would
be as great a sin to undergo it as in the Magistrate to permit it; but if it be
just in A
it self, we have obtained what we contend for; viz. that it may be just for a
man to suffer beyond the desert of his own actions; for he that lays down his
life for his Brethren, does not deserve by his own actions that very punishment
which he undergoes. And if the thing be in it self just, how comes it to be
unjust in him that permits it? 5. The reason why among men the offenders
themselves are punished, is because those were not the terms, upon which the
persons suffered. For if they had suffered upon these terms that the other
might be freed, and their suffering was admitted of by the Magistrate on that
consideration, then in all reason and B
justice the offenders ought to be freed on the account of the others suffering
for them. But among men the chief reason of the obligation to punishment of one
man for another, is not, that the other might be freed, but that there may be
security given to the public, that the offenders shall be punished: and the
reason of the sureties suffering is not to deliver the offender, but to
satisfy the Law, by declaring that all care is taken that the offender should
be punished, when in case of his escape, the surety suffers for him. But it is
quite another thing when the person suffers purposely that others might be C
freed by his suffering, for then in case the suffering be admitted, the
release of the other is not only not unjust, but becomes due to him that
suffered, on his own terms. Not as though it followed ipso facto as Crellius
fancies, but the manner of release does depend upon the terms which he who
suffered for them, shall make in order to it. For upon this suffering of one
for another upon such terms, the immediate consequent of the suffering is not
the actual discharge but the right to it which he has purchased; and which he
may dispense upon what terms he shall judge most for his honor. 6. Although D
one persons sufferings cannot become another so as one man's Money may; yet
one man's sufferings may be a sufficient consideration on which a benefit may
accure to another. For to that end a donation, or such a transferring right
from one to another as is in Money, is not necessary, but the acceptance which
it has from him who has the power to pardon. If he declare that he is so well
pleased with the sufferings of one for another, that in consideration of them,
he will pardon those from whom he suffered; where lies the impossibility or
unreasonableness of the thing? For Crellius grants, E
Crell. ib. sect. 18.
that rewards may be given to others than the persons who did the actions in
consideration of those actions; and why may not the sufferings of one for
others, being purposely undertaken for this end, be available for the pardon of
those whom he suffered A
for? For a man can no more transfer the right of his good actions, than of his
sufferings. From all which it follows, that one person may by his own consent,
and being admitted thereto by him to whom the right of punishing belongs,
suffer justly; though it be beyond the desert of his own actions; and the
guilty may be pardoned on the account of his sufferings. Which was the first
thing we designed to prove from Crellius, in order to the overthrowing his own
hypothesis. For it being confessed by him that such sufferings have all that
belongs to the nature of punishments, and since God has justly punished B
some for the sins which they have not committed; since all Nations have
allowed it just for one man by his own consent to suffer for another; since it
cannot be unjust for the offender to be released by another sufferings, if he
were admitted to suffer for that end, it evidently follows, contrary to
Crellius his main Principle, that a person may be justly punished beyond the
desert of his own actions: And so that first argument of Crellius cannot hold,
that one man cannot by his own consent suffer for another, because no man can
deserve another punishment, and no punishment is just but what is deserved. C
His second argument from the nature of anger and revenge has been already
answered in the first Discourse about the nature and ends of punishments, and
^s third argument, that one man's punishment cannot become another, immediately
before. And so we have finished our first consideration of the sufferings of
Christ in general, as a punishment of our sins, which we have showed to be
agreeable both to Scripture and Reason. D
E


CHAP. IV. A

e Death of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin. What the
expiation of sin was by the Sacrifices under the Law; twofold, Civil and
Ritual. The Promises made to the Jews under the Law of Moses, respected them as
a People, and therefore must be temporal. The typical nature of Sacrifices
asserted. A substitution in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, proved from
Lev. 17. 11. and the Concession of Crellius about the signification of (...)
joined with (...) B
Lev. 10. 17. explained. The expiation of uncertain murder proves a
substitution. A substitution of Christ in our room proved from Christ being
said to dye for us; the importance of that phrase considered. In what sense a
Surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Our Redemption by Christ
proves a substitution. Of the true notion of Redemption: that explained, and
proved against Socinus and Crellius. No necessity of paying the price to him
that detains captive, where the captivity is not by force, but by sentence of
Law. Christ's death a proper (...): and therefore the C
(...) attributed to it, cannot be taken for mere deliverance.

WE come now to consider the death of Christ,. 1. The death of Christ
considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin.
as an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of mankind: Which is as much denied by
our Adversaries, as that it was a punishment for our sins. For though they do
not deny, That Christ as a Priest did offer up a Sacrifice of Expiation for the
sins of men; yet they utterly deny, That this was performed on earth, or that D
the Expiation of sins did respect God, but only us; or, that the death of
Christ, had any proper efficacy toward the expiation of sin, any further than
as it comprehends in it all the consequences of his death, by a strange
Catechresis. I shall now therefore prove, that all things which do belong to a
proper Expiatory Sacrifice, do agree to the death of Christ. There are three
things especially considerable in it: 1. A Substitution in the place of the
Offenders. 2. An Oblation of it to God. 3. An Expiation of sin consequent upon
it. Now these three, I shall make appear to agree fully to the death of E
Christ for us.

1. A Substitution in the place of the Offenders. That we are to prove, was
designed in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, and that Christ in his
death for us, was substituted in our place. 1. That in the Expiatory Sacrifices
under the Law, there was A
a Substitution of them in the place of the Offenders. This our Adversaries are
not willing to yield us, because of the correspondency which is so plain in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, between those Sacrifices, and that which was offered up
by Christ. We now speak only of those Sacrifices, which we are sure were
appointed of old for the expiation of sin, by God himself. As to which the
great rule assigned by the Apostle was, That without shedding of blood there
was no remission. If we Heb. 9. 22.
yield Crellius what he so often urges; viz. That these words are to be
understood, of what was done under the Law: They Crell c. 10. sect. 14.
B
will not be the less serviceable to our purpose; for thereby it will appear,
that the means of Expiation lay in the shedding of blood: Which shows, that the
very mactation of the beast to be sacrificed, was designed in order to the
expiation of sin. To an inquisitive person, the reason of the slaying such
multitudes of beasts in the Sacrifices appointed by God himself among the Jews,
would have appeared far less evident than now it does, since the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews has given us so full an account of them. For it had
been very unreasonable to have thought, that they had been merely instituted C
out of compliance with the customs of other Nations, since the whole design of
their Religion, was to separate them from them: and on such a supposition the
great design of the Epistle to the Hebrews signifies very little; which does
far more explain to us the nature and tendency of all the Sacrifices in use
among them, that had any respect to the expiation of sins, than all the customs
of the Egyptians, or the Commentaries of the latter Jews. But I intend not now
to discourse at large, upon this subject of Sacrifices, either as to the nature
and institution of them in general, or with a particular respect to the D
Sacrifice of Christ, since a learned person of our Church, has already
undertaken Crellius upon this Argument, and we hope ere long will oblige the
world with the benefit of his pains. I shall therefore only insist on those
things which are necessary for our purpose, in order to the clearing the
Substitution of Christ in our stead, for the expiation of our sins by his
death; and this we say was represented in the Expiatory Sacrifices, which were
instituted among the Jews. If we yield Crellius what he after Socinus contends
for; viz. That the Sacrifice Crell. c. 10. sect. 13.
of Christ was only represented in the public and solemn Expiatory E
Sacrifices for the people, and especially those on the day of Atonement: We
may have enough from them to vindicate all that we assert, concerning the
Expiatory Sacrifice of the blood of Christ.

For that those were designed by way of Substitution in the A
place of the offenders, will appear from the circumstances and. 2. What the
expiation of si^ was by the sacrifices under the Law.
reason of their Institution: But before we come to that, it will be necessary
to show what that Expiation was, which the Sacrifices under the Law were
designed for; the not understanding of which, gives a greater force to our
Adversaries Arguments, than otherwise they would have. For while men assert,
that the expiation was wholly typical, and of the same nature with that
expiation which is really obtained by the death of Christ, they easily prove,
That all the expiation then, was only declarative, and did no more depend on
the sacrifices offered, than B
on a condition required by God, the neglect of which would be an act of
disobedience in them; and by this means it could represent, say they, no more
than such an expiation to be by Christ; viz. Gods declaring that sins are
expiated by him, on the performance of such a condition required in order
thereto, as laying down his life was. But we assert another kind of expiation
of sin, by virtue of the Sacrifice being slain and offered; which was real, and
depended upon the Sacrifice: And this was twofold, a Civil, and a Ritual
expiation, according to the double capacity in which the people of the Jews may
be considered, either C
as members of a Society, subsisting by a body of Laws, which according to the
strictest Sanction of it, makes death the penalty of disobedience, Deuteronomy. 27.
26. but by the will of the Legislator, did admit of a relaxation in many cases,
allowed by himself; in which he declares, That the death of the beast designed
for a Sacrifice should be accepted, instead of the death of the offender; and
so the offense should be fully expiated, as to the execution of the penal Law
upon him. And thus far, I freely admit what Grotius asserts upon Grot. de
Satisf. c. 10.
this subject, and do yield that no other offense could be D
expiated in this manner, but such which God himself did particularly declare
should be so. And therefore no sin which was to be punished by cutting off, was
to be expiated by Sacrifice; as wilful Idolatry, Murder, etc. Which it is
impossible for those to give an account of, who make the expiation wholly
typical; for why then should not the greatest sins much rather have had
sacrifices of expiation appointed for them: because the Consciences of men
would be more solicitous for the pardon of greater than lesser sins; and the
blood of Christ represented by them, was designed E
for the expiation of all. From whence it is evident, that it was not a mere
typical expiation; but it did relate to the civil constitution among them. But
besides this, we are to consider the people with a respect to that mode of
Divine Worship which was among them; by reason of which, the A
people were to be purified from the legal impurities which they contracted,
which hindered them from joining with others in the public Worship of God, and
many Sacrifices were appointed purposely for the expiating this legal guilt, as
particularly, the ashes of the red heifer, Numb. 19. 9. which is there called a
purification for sin. And the Apostle puts the Heb. 9. 12, 13.
blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the unclean,
together; and the effect of both of them, he says, was to sanctify to the
purifying of the flesh; which implies, that there was some proper and immediate
effect of these B
sacrifices upon the people at that time, though infinitely short of the effect
of the blood of Christ upon the Consciences of men. By which it is plain, the
Apostle does not speak of the same kind of expiation in those sacrifices, which
was in the Sacrifice of Christ, and that the one was barely typical of the
other; but of a different kind of expiation, as far as purifying the flesh is
from purging the Conscience. But we do not deny, that the whole dispensation
was typical, and that the Law had Heb. 10. 1.
a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, i. e. a
dark and obscure representation, and not the C
perfect resemblance of them. There are two things which the Apostle asserts
concerning the Sacrifices of the Law: First, that they had an effect upon the
Bodies of men, which he calls purifying the flesh; the other is, that they had
no power to expiate for the sins of the soul, considered with a respect to the
punishment of another life, which he calls purging the Conscience from dead
works; and therefore he says, that all the gifts Heb. 9. 9. 10. 4.
and sacrifices under the Law, could not make him that did the service perfect,
as pertaining to the Conscience, and that it was impossible that the blood of
Bulls and Goats should take D
away sin. So that the proper expiation which was made by them, was civil and
ritual, relating either to corporal punishment, or to legal uncleanness, from
whence the Apostle well proves the necessity of a higher Sacrifice to make
expiation for sins, as pertaining to the Conscience: But that expiation among
the Jews did relate to that Polity which was established among them, as they
were a people under the Government of a body of Laws distinct from the rest of
the world. And they being considered as such, it is vain to enquire, whether
they had only temporal or eternal promises; for it was impossible E
they should have any other than temporal, unless we imagine, that God would
own them for a distinct people in another World as he did in this. For what
Promises relate to a People as such, must consider them as a People, and in
that capacity they must be the blessings of a Society, viz. peace plenty, A
number of People, length of days, etc. But we are far from denying that the
general Principles of Religion did remain among them, viz. that there is a God,
and a rewarder of them that seek him; and all the Promises God made to the
Patriarchs, did continue in force as to another Country, and were continually
improved by the Prophetical instructions among them. But we are now speaking of
what did respect the people in general, by virtue of that Law which was given
them by Moses, and in that respect the punishment of saults being either death
or exclusion from the public Worship, the expiation of them, was taking away
the obligation to either of these, which B
was the guilt of them in that consideration.

But does not this take away the typical nature of these sacrifices? No, but it
much rather establishes it. For as Socinus argues, If the expiation was only
typical, there must be something in the type correspondent to that which is
typified Soci^. de servat. l. 2. c. 10. Prael^ct. Theolog. cap. 22.
by it. As the Brazen Serpent typified Christ, and the benefit which was to
come by him, because as many as looked up to it were healed. And Noah's Ark is
said to be a type of Baptism, because as many as entered into that were saved
from the deluge. So Corinth. 10. the Apostle says, that those C
things happened to them in types, v. 11. because the events which happened to
them, did represent those which would fall upon disobedient Christians. So that
to make good the true notion of a Type, we must assert an expiation that was
real then, and agreeable to that dispensation, which does represent an
expiation of a far higher nature, which was to be by the Sacrifice of the Blood
of Christ.

Which being premised, I now come to p^ove, that there was a substitution
designed of the Beast to be slain and sacrificed. 3. A substitution proved from
Levit. 17. 11, etc.
in stead of the offenders themselves. Which will appear from D
Levitious 17. 11. For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given
it you upon the Altar, to make an Atonement for your Souls; for it is the blood
that makes an Atonement for the Soul. The utmost that Crellius would have
meant by Crell c. 10. sect. 9.
this place is, that there is a double reason assigned of the prohibition of
eating blood, viz. that the life was in the blood, and that the blood was
designed for expiation; but he makes these wholly independent upon each other.
But we say, that the proper reason assigned against the eating of the blood, is
that which is elsewhere given, when this Precept is mentioned, E
viz. that the blood was the life, as we may see Genesis 9. 4 Levit. 17. 14. but
to confirm the reason given, that the blood was the life; he adds, that God had
given them that upon the Altar for an Atonement for their Souls: So the Arabic
Version A
renders it, and therefore have I given it you upon the Altar, viz. because the
blood is the life: And hereby a sufficient reason is given, why God did make
choice of the blood for atonement, for that is expressed in the latter clause,
for it is the blood that makes an atonement for the Soul; why should this be
mentioned here, if no more were intended but to give barely another reason why
they should not eat the blood? what force is there more in this clause to that
end, than in the soregoing? for therein God had said, that he had given it them
for an Atonement. If no more had been intended, but the B
bare prohibition of common use of the blood, on the account of its being
consecrated to sacred use, it had been enough to have said, that the blood was
holy unto the Lord, as it is in the other instances mentioned by Crellius, of
the holy Ointment and Perfume, for no other reason is there given, why it Exodus
30. 32, 33. 37. 38.
should not be profaned to common use, but that it should be holy for the Lord;
if therefore the blood had been forbidden upon that account, there had been no
necessity at all of adding, that the blood was it that made atonement for the
Soul: which gives no peculiar reason why they should not eat the blood, beyond C
that of bare consecration of it to a sacred use; but if we consider it as
respecting the first clause, viz. For the life of the flesh is in the blood,
then there is a particular reason why the blood should be for atonement, viz.
because the life was in that; and therefore when the blood was offered, the
life of the Beast was supposed to be given instead of the life of the offender.
According to that of Ovid, Hanc animam vobis pro meliore damus. Ovid. Fast l. 6.

This will be yet made clearer by another instance produced D
by Crellius to explain this, which is the forbidding the eating of fat, which,
says he, is joined with this of blood, Levit. 3. 17. It shall be a perpetual
S^atute for your Generations, throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat
neither fat, nor blood. To the same purpose, Levit. 7. 23, 25, 26. Now no other
reason is given of the prohibition of the fat, but this, All the fat is the
Lords. Which was enough to keep them Lev. 3. 16.
from eating it; but we see here in the case of blood somewhat further is
assigned, viz. that it was the life; and therefore was most proper for
expiation, the life of the beast being substituted E
in the place of the offenders. Which was therefore called anamalis hostia
among the Romans, as Grotius observes upon this place, and was distinguished
from those whose entrails were observed; for in those Sacrifices as Servius
says, sola anima Servius ad Aencid. 4.
Deo sacratur, the main of the Sacrifice lay in shedding of the A
blood, which was called the Soul; and so it is (...) in this place. From
whence it appears that such a sacrifice was properly (...), for the same word
(...) is used, both relating to the blood and the soul, that is expiated by it:
and the LXX do accordingly render it, (...), and in the last clause, (...).
From Eus^b. demonst. Evang l. 1. c. 10.
whence Eusebius calls these Sacrifices of living Creatures, (...), and
afterward says they were (...). And Crellius elsewhere Crell. cap. 8. sect.
23. Denotat e^im vo^ (...) eos quorum alter pro altero animam po^at aut
devoveat, and fie id malum quod alteri sube^nd^m erat ejus loco subire non
detrectet.
grants, that where (...) is joined with (...) it does imply B
that one does undergo the punishment which another was to have undergone,
which is all we mean by substitution, it being done in the place of another.
From whence it follows, that the Sacrifices under the Law being said to be
(...) does necessarily infer a substitution of them in the place of the
offenders. And from hence may be understood, what is meant by the Goat of the
Sin offering, bearing the iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement for
them before the Lord, Levit. 10. 17. for Crellius his saying, That bearing is
as much as taking away, or declaring that they are C
taken away, has been already disproved: And his other answer has as little
weight in it; viz. That it is not said, that the sacrifice did bear their
iniquities, but the Priest: For, 1. The Chaldee Paraphrast, and the Syriack
Version, understand it wholly of the Sacrifice. 2. Socinus himself grants,
Soci^. de servat. l. 2. c. 11.
That if it were said, the Priest did expiate by the sacrifices, it were all
one as if it were said, that the sacrifices themselves did expiate; because the
expiation of the Priest was by the sacrifice. Thus it is plain in the case of
uncertain murder, mentioned Deuteronomy 21. from the first to the tenth; If a D
murder were committed in the Land, and the person not known who did it, a
heifer was to have her head cut of by the Elders of the next City; and by this
means they were to put away the guilt of the innocent blood from among them:
The reason of which was, because God had said before, That blood defiled the
Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed Numb. 35. 33.
of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. From
whence it appears, that upon the shedding of blood, there was a guilt
contracted upon the whole Land wherein it was shed, and in case the Murderer
was not found to expiate that guilt by his own blood, then E
it was to be done by the cutting off the head of a heifer instead of him: In
which case, the death of the heiser was to do as much toward the expiating the
Land, as the death of the Murderer if he had been found: And we do not
contend, A
that this was designed to expiate the Murderers guilt (which is the Objection
of Crellius against this instance) Crell. c. 10. sect 9.
but that a substitution here was appointed by God himself, for the expiation
of the peo^: For what Crellius adds, That the people did not deserve
punishment, and therefore needed no expiation; it is a flat contradiction to
the Text: For the prayer appointed in that case is, Be merciful, O Deuteronomy. 21. 8.
Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent
blood unto thy people Isreal's Charge, and the blood shall be expiated; for the
same word (...) is B
used here, which is in the other places where Expiation is spoken of. So that
here must be some guilt supposed, where there was to be an expiation, and this
expiation was performed by the substitution of a sacrifice in the place of the
offender. Which may be enough at present to show, that a substitution was
admitted by the Law, of a sacrifice instead of the offender, in order to the
expiation of guilt; but whether the offender himself was to be freed by that
Sacrifice, depends upon the terms on which the sacrifice was offered; for we
say still, that so much guilt was expiated, as the sacrifice C
was designed to expiate; if the sacrifice was designed to expiate the guilt of
the offender, his sin was expiated by it; if not his, in case no sacrifice was
allowed by the Law, as in that of murder, then the guilt which lay upon the
Land was expiated, although the offender himself were never discovered.

I now come to prove, that in correspondency to such a substitution. 4. A
substitution of Christ in o^r room proved by his dying for us.
of the sacrifices for sin under the Law, Christ was substituted in our room
for the expiation of our guilt; and that from his being said to dye for us, and
his death being D
called a price of Redemption for us.

1. From Christ's being said to dye for us. By St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 18. 2. 21.
4. 1.
For Christ has also once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust; by whom
he is also said, to suffer (...), for us, and, for us in the flesh: By St.
Paul, he is said to dye (...), for all, and (...), for the ungodly, and to give
himself (...), a ransom for all, and, to 2 Cor. 5. 14. Romans 5. 6. 1 Timothy 2 6.
Heb. 2 9. John 11 50. Luke 22. 19, 20.
taste death (...), for every man: By Caiaphas, speaking by inspiration, he is
said to dye (...), for the people. So Christ himself instituting his last
Supper said, This E
is my body which was given, and my blood which was shed (...), for you; and
before he had said, That the Son of man came to give his life (...), a ransom
for many. Matthew. 20. 28.
We are now to consider, what arts our Adversaries have made use of to pervert
the meaning of these places, A
so as not to imply a substitution of Christ in our room: 1. They say, That all
these phrases do imply no more, than a final cause; viz. That Christ died for
the good of mankind; 1 John 3. 16. Colos^. 1. 24.
for the Apostle tells us, We are bound to lay down our lives for the Brethren,
and St. Paul is said to suffer for the Church. To which I answer; 1. This does
not at all destroy that which we now plead for; viz. That these phrases do
imply a substitution of Christ in our room: For when we are bid to lay down our
lives for our brethren, a substitution is implied therein; and supposing that
dying for another, B
does signify dying for some benefit to come to him, yet what does this hinder
substitution, unless it be proved, that one cannot obtain any benefit for
another, by being substituted in his room. Nay, it is observable, that although
we produce so many places of Scripture, implying such a substitution, they do
not offer to produce one that is inconsistent with Christ's suffering in our
stead; all that they say is, That (...) does not always signify so, which we
never said it did, who say, that Christ suffered (...) not instead of our sins,
but by reason of them; but we assert, C
that when one person is said to dye for others, as in the places mentioned, no
other sense can be so proper and agreeable, as dying in the stead of the other.
2. Socinus himself grants, That there is a peculiarity implied in those Soc de
servat. l. 2. c. 8.
phrases, when attributed to Christ, above what they have when attributed to
any other. And therefore he says, It cannot be properly said, That one Brother
dies for another, or that Paul suffered for the Colossians, or for the Church,
as Christ may truly and properly be said to suffer and to dye for us. And from
hence, says he, St. Paul D
says, was Paul crucified for you? implying thereby, that there never was, or
could be any, who truly and properly 1 Cor. 1. 13.
could be said to dye for men but Christ alone. How unreasonable then is it,
from the use of a particle as applied to others, to infer, that it ought to be
so understood, when applied to Christ? when a peculiarity is acknowledged in
the death of Christ for us, more than ever was or could be in one man's dying
for another. 3. It is not the bare force of the particle (...) that we insist
upon; but that a substitution could not be more properly expressed, than it is
in E
Scripture, by this and other particles, for not only (...) is used, but (...)
too: which Socinus says, Although it may signify Socin. io.
something else besides in the stead of another, yet in such places, where it
is spoken of a ransom or price, it signifies the payment of something which was
owing before, as A
Mat. 17. 27. (...), and so he acknowledges, that where redemption is spoken
of, there (...) does imply a commutation, because the price is given, and the
person received, which, he says, holds in Christ only metaphorically: for the
redemption according to him being only Metaphorical, the commutation must be
supposed to be so too.

And this now leads us to the larger Answer of Crellius upon. 5. In what sense
a surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Cr^l^. 9 sect. 3. Ib.
sect. 2.
this argument. Wherein we shall consider, what he yields, what he denies, and
upon what reasons. 1. He yields, and so he says, does Socinus very freely, a
commutation: but B
it is necessary that we should thoroughly understand what he means by it: to
that end he tells us, That they acknowledge a twofold commutation; one of the
person suffering, the kind of suffering being changed, not actually but
intentionally, because we are not actually freed by Christ dying for us, but
only Christ dyed for that end, that we might be freed. And this commutation, he
says, that Socinus does not deny to be implied in the particle (...), in the
places where Christ is said to dye for us. Another commutation, which he
acknowledges, is, that which is between a price, and the thing or C
person which is bought or redeemed by it; where the price is paid, and the
thing or person is received upon it. And this kind of commutation, he says, is
to be understood in the places where (...) is mentioned; which price, he says,
by accident may be a person; and because the person is not presently delivered,
he therefore says, that the commutation is Ib sect. 6.
rather imperfect than metaphorical; and although, he says, (...) does not of
it self imply a commutation, yet he grants, that the circumstances of the
places do imply it. 2. He denies, that there is any proper surrogation in
Christ's Ib. sect. 7.
D
dying for us, which, he says, is such a commutation of persons, that the
substituted person is in all respects to be in the same place and state wherein
the other was; and if it refers to sufferings; then it is when one suffers the
very same which the other was to suffer, he being immediately delivered by the
others sufferings. And against this kind of surrogation, Crellius needed not to
have produced any reasons; for Grotius never asserted it; neither do we say,
that Christ suffered eternal death for us, or that we were immediately freed by
his sufferings. But that which Grotius E
asserts that he meant by substitution was this, that unless Christ had died
for us, we must have died our selves, and because Christ has died we shall not
die eternally. But if this be all, says Crellius, he meant by it, we grant Ib.
(...). 3.
the whole thing, and he complains of it as an injury for any A
to think otherwise of them. If so, they cannot deny but that there was a
sufficient capacity in the death of Christ to be made an expiatory Sacrifice
for the sins of the world. But notwithstanding all these fair words, Crellius
means no more than Socinus did; and though he would allow the words which
Grotius used, yet not in the sense he understood them in; for Crellius means no
more by all this, but that the death of Christ was an antecedent condition to
the expiation of sins in Heaven, Grotius understands by them, that Christ did
expiate sins by becoming a Sacrifice for them in his death. B
However, from hence it appears, that our Adversaries can have no plea against
the death of Christ's being an expiatory Sacrifice (from want of a substitution
in our room) since they profess themselves so willing to own such a
substitution. But if they say, that there could be no proper substitution,
because the death of Christ was a bare condition, and no punishment, they then
express their minds more freely; and if these places be allowed to prove a
substitution, I hope the former discourse will prove that it was by way of
punishment. Neither is it necessary, that the very same kind of punishment C
be undergone in order to surrogation, but that it be sufficient in order to
the accomplishing the end for which it was designed. For this kind of
substitution being in order to the delivery of another by it, whatever is
sufficient for that end, does make a proper surrogation. For no more is
necessary to the delivery of another person than the satisfying the ends of the
Law and Government, and if that may be done by an aequivalent suffering, though
not the same in all respects, then it may be a proper surrogation. If David had
obtained his wish, that he had died for his Son Absalom, D
it had not been necessary in order to his Sons escape, that he had hanged by
the hair of his head, as his Son did; but his death, though in other
circumstances, had been sufficient. And therefore when the Lawyers say,
subrogatum, sapit naturam ejus in cujus locum subrogatur: Covarruvias Covarru
To. 1. p. 1. sect. 4 n. 3.
tells us, it is to be understood secundum primordialem naturam non secundum
accidentalem; from whence it appears, that all circumstances are not necessary
to be the same in surrogation; but that the nature of the punishment remain the
same. Thus Christ dying for us, to deliver us E
from death, and the curse of the Law, he underwent an accursed death for that
end; although not the very same which we were to have undergone, yet sufficient
to show, that he underwent the punishment of our iniquities in order to the
delivering us from it. And if our Adversaries will A
yield us this, we shall not much contend with them about the name of a proper
surrogation.

But in the matter of Redemption, or where (...) is used,. 6 Our Redemption by
Christ proves a substitution.
Crellius will by no means yield that there was a commutation of persons
between Christ and us, but all the commutation he will allow here is only a
commutation between a thing, or a price, and a person. Which he therefore
asserts, Crell. c 9 sect. 2.
that so there may be no necessity of Christ's undergoing the punishment of sin
in order to redemption, because the price that is to be paid, is not supposed
to undergo the B
condition of the person delivered by it. Which will evidently appear to have
no force at all, in case we can prove, that a proper redemption may be obtained
by the punishment of one in the room of another; for that punishment then comes
to be the (...) or price of redemption; and he that pays this, must be supposed
to undergo punishment for it. So that the commutation being between the
punishment of one, and the other redeemed by it, here is a proper commutation
of persons implied in the payment of the price. But hereby we may see that the
great subtilty of our Adversaries C
is designed on purpose to avoid the force of the places of Scripture, which
are so plain against them: For when these places where (...) and (...) are
joined together, are so clear for a substitution, that they cannot deny it;
then they say, by it is meant only a commutation of a price for a person; but
when the word (...) is urged to prove a redemption purchased by Christ, by the
payment of a price for it, then they deny that (...) does signify a proper
price, but is only taken metaphorically; and yet if it be so taken, then there
can be no force in what Crellius says, for a bare D
metaphorical price may be a real punishment: Two things I shall then prove
against Crellius. 1. That the (...) as applied to Christ, is to be taken in a
proper sense. 2. That although it be taken in a proper sense, yet it does not
imply a bare commutation of a price and a person, but a substitution of one
person in the room of another.

Both these will be cleared from the right stating the notion. 7. Of the true
notion of Redemption
of redemption between our Adversaries and us. For they will not by any means
have any other proper notion of redemption but from captivity, and that by the
payment of E
a price to him that did hold in captivity, and therefore because Christ did
not pay the price to the Devil, there could be no proper sense either of the
redemption, or the price which was paid for it. This is the main strength of
all the arguments used by Socinus and Crellius, to enervate the A
Socia. de servat. (...). 2. c. 1, 2. Crell. c. 8. sect. 11.
force of those places of Scripture which speak of our redemption by Christ,
and of the price which he paid in order to it. But how weak these exceptions
are, will appear upon a true examination of the proper notion of Redemption,
which in its primary importance signifies no more, than the obtaining of one
thing by another as a valuable consideration for it. Thence redimere anciently
among the Latins signified barely to purchase by a valuable price, for the
thing which they had a right to by it; and sometimes to purchase that which a
man has sold before, thence the pac^um B
redimendi in contracts: still in whatever sense it was used by the Lawyers or
others, the main regard was, to the consideration upon which the thing was
obtained, thence redimere delatorem pecunia, h. e. eum a delatione deducere; so
redimere litem; and redemptor litis was one that upon ulpia l 29. D. de ^^re
fi^^i.
certain consideration took the whole charge of a suit upon himself: and those
who undertook the farming of customs at certain rates, were called redemptores
vectigalium, quiredempturis auxissent vectigalia, says Livy. And all those
Budaeus ad Pa^dect. p. 189. Live. l. 23. Festus v. red. ul^ian. l 39. D. de rei
vend.
who undertook any public work at a certain price, redemptores C
antiquitus dicebantur, says Festus and Ulpian. From hence it was applied to
the delivery of any person from any inconvenience that he lay under, by
something which was supposed a valuable consideration for it. And that it does
not only relate to captivity, but to any other great calamity, the freedom from
which is obtained by what another suffers; is apparent from these two
remarkable expressions of Cicero to this purpose. Quam quidem ego (says he,
Cicer. ep. ^a^il l. 2. cp 16.
speaking of the sharpness of the time) a rep. meis privatis and domesticis
incommodis libentissime redemissem. And D
more expressly elsewhere, Ego vitam omnium civium, statum Or^t. ^^o Syll^.
orbis terrae urbem hanc denique, etc. quinque hominum amentium ac perditorum
poena redemi. Where it is plain, that redemption is used for the delivery of
some by the punishment of others; not from mere captivity, but from a great
calamity which they might have fallen into, without such a punishment of those
persons. So vain is that assertion of Socinus, redimere, nihil aliud proprie
significat, quam eum captivum e manibus illius, qui eum detinet, pretio Soc. de
^^rvat. l. 2. c. 1.
illi dato liberare. E


And yet supposing we should grant that redemption as used. 8. No necessity of
paying the price to him that detains captive.
in sacred Authors does properly relate to captivity, there is no necessity at
all of that which our Adversaries contend so earnestly for, viz. That the price
must be paid to him that detains captive. For we may very easily conceive a
double A
sort of captivity, from whence a redemption may be obtained; the one by force,
when a Captive is detained purposely for advantage to be made by his
redemption; and the other in a judicial manner, when the Law condemns a person
to captivity, and the thing designed by the Law is not a mere price, but
satisfaction to be made to the Law, upon which a redemption may be obtained;
now in the former case it is necessary, that the price be paid to the person
who detains, because the reason of his detaining, was the expectation of the
price to be pald; but in the latter, the detainer is merely B
the instrument for execution of the Law, and the price of redemption is not to
be paid to him; but to those who are most concerned in the honor of the Law.
But Crellius Crell. c 8. sect. 11.
objects, that the price can never be said to be paid to God, because our
redemption is attributed to God as the author of it, and because we are said to
be redeemed for his use and service, now, says he, the price can never be paid
to him for whose service the person is redeemed. But all this depends upon the
former mistake, as though we spoke all this while of such a redemption, as that
is of a Captive by force; C
in whom the detainer is no further concerned, than for the advantage to be
made by him; and in that case the price must be paid to him who detains,
because it would otherwise be unsuccessful for his deliverance: but in case of
captivity by Law, as the effect of disobedience, the Magistrate who is
concerned in the life of the person, and his future obedience may himself take
care that satisfaction may be given to the Law for his redemption, in order to
his future serviceableness. From hence we see both that the (...) is proper in
this case of our redemption, and that it is not a mere commutation D
of a price for a person, but a commutation of one persons suffering for
others, which suffering being a punishment in order to satisfaction, is a
valuable consideration, and therefore a price for the redemption of others by
it. Which price in this sense does imply a proper substitution; which was the
thing to be proved. Which was the first thing to be made good concerning the
death of Christ being a sacrifice for sin, viz. that there was a substitution
of Christ in our stead as of the sacrifices of old under the Law; and in this
sense the death of Christ was a proper (...) or price of redemption E
for us. Nothing then can be more vain, than the way of our Adversaries, to
take away the force of all this, because (...) is sometimes taken for a meet
deliverance without any price, which we deny not; but the main force of our
argument is from the importance of (...), where the (...) is mentioned; and
then we say that (...) when applied to A
sins, signifies expiation, (as Heb. 9. 15. (...),) but when applied to
persons, it signifies the deliverance purchased by the (...), which is not to
be considered as a bare price, or a thing given, but as a thing undergone in
order to that deliverance: and is therefore not only called (...), but (...)
too, which Crellius confesses does imply a commutation, and we have showed,
does prove a substitution of Christ in our place. B
C
D
E


CHAP. V. A

The notion of a sacrifice belongs to the death of Christ, because of the
Oblation made therein to God. Crellius his sense of Christ's Oblation proposed.
Against him it is proved, that the Priestly office of Christ had a primary
respect to God, and not to us. Expiatory Sacrifices did divert the wrath of
God. Christ not a bare Metaphorical High Priest. Crellius destroys the
Priesthood of Christ by confounding it with the exercise of his Regal Power. No
proper expiation of sin belongs B
to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his Doctrine be true. Ephesians. 5. 2. proves the
death of Christ an Expiatory Sacrifice, and an Oblation to God. The Phrase of a
sweet smelling savor, belongs to expiatory Sacrifices; Crellius his gross
notion of it. His mistakes about the kinds of Sacrifices. Burnt-offerings were
Expiatory Sacrifices both before and under the Law. A new distribution of
sacrifices proposed. What influence the mactation of the Sacrifice had on
Expiation. The High Priest only to slay the Sin-offering on the day of
Atonement; from whence it is proved, that Christ's C
Priesthood did not begin from his entrance into Heaven. The mactation in
Expiatory Sacrifices no bare preparation to a Sacrifice, proved by the Jewish
Laws, and the customs of other Nations. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself
once to God, were in Heaven, or on Earth? Of the proper notion of Oblations
under the Levitical Law. Several things observed from thence to our purpose.
All things necessary to a legal Oblation, concur in the death of Christ, His
entrance into Heaven has no correspondency with it; if the blood of Christ
were no sacrifice for sin. In Sin Offerings for the D
People, the whole was consumed; no eating of the Sacrifices allowed the
Priests, but in those for private Persons. Christ's exercise of Power in Heaven,
in no sense an Oblation to God. Crellius, his sense repugnant to the
circumstances of the places in dispute. Objections answered.

THE Second thing to prove the death of Christ a Sacrifice. 1. Of the O^lation
made by Christ unto God.
for sin, is the Oblation of it to God for that end. Grotius toward the
conclusion of his book, E
makes a twofold oblation of Christ, parallel to that of the Sacrifices under
the Law, the first of Mactation, the second of Representation; whereof the
first was done in the Temple, the second in the Holy of Holies; so the first of
Christ was on Earth, the second in Heaven; the first is A
not a bare preparation to a Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice: the latter not so much
a Sacrifice, as the commemoration of one already past. Wherefore, since
appearing and interceding are not properly sacerdotal acts, any further than
they depend on the efficacy of a sacrifice already offered, he that takes away
that Sacrifice, does not leave to Christ any proper Priesthood, against the
plain authority of the Scripture, which assigns to Christ the office of a
Priest distinct from that of a Prophet and a King. To which Crellius replies:
That the expiation of sin does properly belong to what Christ does B
Cr^ll. c. 10. sect. 45.
in Heaven; and may be applied to the death of Christ only, as the condition by
which he was to enjoy that power in Heaven, whereby he does expiate sins; but
the Priest was never said to Ib. sect. 55.
expiate sins when he killed the beast, but when the blood was sprinkled or
carried into the Holy of Holies, to which the Oblation of Christ in Heaven does
answer: but mactation, says he, Ib. sect. 47.
was not proper to the Priests, but did belong to the Levites also. And Christ
was not truly a Priest, while we was on Earth, but Ib. sect. 53.
only prepared by his sufferings to be one in Heaven, where by the perpetual
care he takes of his People, and exercising his Power C
Ib. sect. 54. Sect. 56.
for them, he is said to offer up himself, and intercede for them, and by that
means he discharges the Office of a High Priest for them. For his Priestly
Office, he says, is never in Scripture mentioned as distinct from his Kingly,
but is comprehended under it; and the great difference between them is, that
one is of a larger extension than the other is, the Kingly Office extending to
punishing, and the Priestly only to expiation. This is the substance of what
Crellius more at large discourses upon this subject. Wherein he asserts these
things. 1. That the Priestly Office of Christ does not in reference to the
expiation D
of sins respect God but us; his Intercession and Oblation wherein he makes the
sacerdotal function of Christ to consist, being the exercise of his power for
the good of his People. 2. That Christ did offer up no Sacrifice of expiation
to God upon Earth, because the mactation had no reference to expiation, any
other than as a preparation for it; and Christ not yet being constituted a
High Priest till after his Resurrection from the dead. Against these two
assertions I shall direct my following discourse, by proving; 1. That the
Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and E
not to us, 2. That Christ did exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation of
himself to God upon the Cross.

1. That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect A
to God, and not to us; which appears from the first Institution Tha^ ^e
Priest^y Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not us. Crell. in
Heb. 5. 1.
of a High Priest, mentioned by the Apostle, Hebr. 5. 1. For every High Priest
taken from among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he
may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: Id est, says Crellius elsewhere,
ut procuret and peragat ea quae ad colendum ac propitiandum numen pertinent; i.
e. That he may perform the things which appertain to the worshipping and
propitiating God: We desire no more, but that the propiating God, may as
immediately be said to respect him, as the worshipping of God does; or let
Crellius tell us, B
what sense the propitiating God will bear; if all that the High Priest had to
do, did immediately respect the people: nay, he says not long after, That it
was the chief Office of a High Priest, to plead the cause of sinners with God,
and to take care, that they may find him kind and propitious, and not angry or
displeased. In what sense God was said to be moved by the Expiatory Sacrifices,
is not here our business to discuss; it is sufficient for our purpose, that
they were instituted with a respect to God, so as to procure his favor, and
divert his wrath. In which sense, the Priest is so often in the Levitical Law
said, C
by the offering up of Sacrifices, to expiate the sins of the people. But
Crellius says, This ought not so to be understood, as though God by Expiatory
Sacrifices, were diverted from his Crell cap. 10. sect. 3.
anger, and inclined to pardon; which is a plain contradiction, not only to the
words of the law, but to the instances that are recorded therein; as when Aaron
was bid in the time of the Plague to make an Atonement for the people, for
there is wrath gone out from the Lord: and he stood between the living and the
dead; Numb. 16. 46.
and the plague was stayed. Was not Gods anger then diverted here, by the
making this Atonement? The like instance we read Verse. 48.
D
in David's time, that by the offering burnt-offerings, etc. the Lord was
entreated for the Land, and the plague was stayed from Israel: By which nothing
can be more plain, than that the primary 2 Samuel 24. 25.
intention of such Sacrifices, and consequently of the Office of the Priest who
offered them, did immediately respect the Atoning God: But yet Crellius urges,
This cannot be said of all, or of the most proper Expiatory Sacrifices: but we
see it said of more than the mere Sacrifices for sin, as appointed by the Law;
viz. of burnt-offerings, and peace offerings, and incense, in the examples
mentioned. So that these Levitical Sacrifices E
did all respect the atoning God; although in some particular cases; different
Sacrifices were to be offered; for it is said, the burnt-offering was to make
atonement for them, as well as the Lev. (...). 4. 4 20. 5. 7.
sin and trespass-offerings (excepting those sacrifices which were instituted
in acknowledgement of Gods Sovereignty over them, A
and presence among them, as the daily Sacrifices, the meat and drink
offerings, or such as were merely occasional, etc.) Thus it is said, that Aaron
and his sons were appointed to make an 1 Chronicles 6. 49.
Atonement for Israel: So that as Grotius observes out of Philo, The
High Priest was a Mediator between God and man, by Grot. in Heb. 5. 1.
whom men might propitiate God, and God dispense his favors to men. But the
means whereby he did procure favoursto men, was by atoning God by the
Sacrifices, which he was by his Office to offer to him. We are now to consider,
how far this holds in reference to Christ, for whose sake the B
Apostle brings in these words; and surely would not have mentioned this as the
primary Office of a High Priest, in order to the proving Christ to be our
High Priest, after a more excellent manner than the Aaronical was, unless he
had agreed with him in the nature of his Office, and exceeded him in the manner
of performance.

For the Apostle both proves, that he was a true and proper, and not a bare
Metaphorical High Priest, and that in such a capacity,. 3. Christ no barely
metaphorical High Priest.
he very far exceeded the Priests after the order of Aaron. But how could that
possibly be, if he failed in the primary C
Office of a High Priest; viz. In offering up gifts and sacrifices to God? If
his Office as High Priest did primarily respect men, when the Office of the
Aaronical Priest did respect God? To avoid this, Crellius makes these words to
be only an allusion to the Legal Priesthood, and some kind of similitude Crell.
cap. 10. sect. 3.
between Christ and the Aaronical Priests; but it is such a kind of allusion,
that the Apostle designs to prove, Christ to be an High Priest by it; and which
is of the greatest force, he proves the necessity of Christ's having somewhat to
offer from hence: For every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts, D
Heb. 8. 2.
and sacrifices; wherefore it is of necessity, that this man have somewhat also
to offer. This is that which he looks at as the peculiar and distinguishing
character of a High Priest; for interceding for others, and having compassion
upon them, might be done by others besides the High Priest; but this was that,
without which he could not make good his name, what order soever he were of. If
Christ then had no proper sacrifice to offer up to God, to what purpose does
the Apostle so industriously set himself to prove, that he is our High Priest?
when he must needs fail in the main thing, according to his own assertion? How
easy E
had it been for the Jews, to have answered all the Apostles Arguments
concerning the Priesthood of Christ, if he had been such a Priest, and made no
other Oblation than Crellius allows him? When the Apostle proves against the
Jews, that there was no necessity, that they should still retain the Mosaical
Dispensation, A
because now they had a more excellent High Priest than the Aaronical were; and
makes use of that character of a High Priest, that he was one taken out from
among men, in things pertaining to God to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins:
Well, say the Jews, we accept of this character, but how do you prove
concerning Christ, that he was such a one? Did he offer up a Sacrifice for sin
to God upon earth, as our Highpriests do? No, says Crellius, his sufferings
were only a preparation for his Priesthood in Heaven: But did he then offer up
such a Sacrifice to God in B
Heaven? Yes, says Crellius, He made an Oblation there. But is that Obligation
such a Sacrifice to God for sin, as our Highpriests offers? Yes, says
Crellius, it may be called so by way of allusion. Well then, say they, you
grant that your Jesus is only a High Priest by way of allusion, which was
against your first design to prove; viz. That he was a true High Priest, and
more excellent than ours. But suppose it be by way of allusion, does he make
any Oblation to God in Heaven or not? No, says Crellius, really and truly he
does not: for all his Office does respect us, C
but the benefits we enjoy coming originally from the kindness of God, you may
call it an Oblation to God if you please. But how is it possible then, say the
Jews, you can ever convince us, that he is any High Priest, or Priest at all,
much less, that he should ever exceed the Aaronical Highpriests in their
Office? for we are assured, that they do offer Sacrifices for sin, and that God
is attoned by them: but if your High Priest make no atonement for sin, he falls
far short of ours, and therefore we will still hold to our Levitical
Priesthood, and not forsake that for one barely Metaphorical, D
and having nothing really answering the name of a High Priest. Thus the force
of all the Apostles Arguments is plainly taken away, by what Crellius and his
Brethren assert concerning the Priesthood of Christ. But Crellius thinks to
make it good by saying, That things that are improper and Crell. cap. 10. ^ect.
3. I^. s^ct. 56. (...) 547.
figurative, may be far more excellent than the things that are proper, to
which they are opposed; so that Christ's Priesthood may be far more excellent
than the Aaronical, although his be only figurative, and the other proper. But
the question is not, Whether Christ's Priesthood by any other adventitious E
considerations, as of greater Power and Authority than the Aaronical Priests
had, may be said to be far more excellent than theirs was; but, Whether in the
notion of Priesthood, it does exceed theirs? Which it is impossible to make
good, unless he had some proper oblation to make unto God, which A
in it self did far exceed all the Sacrifices and Offerings under the Law.

But what that oblation of Christ in Heaven was, which. 4. Crellius destroys
the Priesthood of Christ.
had any correspondency with the Sacrifices under the Law, our Adversaries can
never assign; nay, when they go about it, they speak of it in such a manner, as
makes it very evident they could heartily have wished the Epistle to the
Hebrews had said as little of the Priesthood of Christ, as they say, any other
part of the New Testament does. Thence Smalcius and Crellius insist so much
upon the Priesthood of Christ, being distinctly B
Smalc. c. Smiglec. Crell cap. 10. p. 544.
mentioned by none but the Author to the Hebrews; which, say they, had surely
been done, if Christ had been a proper Priest, or that Office in him distinct
from his Kingly. Which sufficiently discovers what they would be at; viz. That
the Testimony of the Author to the Hebrews, is but a single Testimony in this
matter; and in truth, they do (as far as is consistent with not doing it in
express words) wholly take away the Priesthood of Christ: For what is there
which they say his Priesthood implies, which he might not have had, supposing
he had never been called a Priest? His being in Heaven, does C
not imply that he is a Priest, unless it be impossible for any but Priests
ever to come there: His Power and Authority over the Church, does not imply it;
for that power is by themselves confessed to be a Regal power: his readiness to
use that power, cannot imply it, which is the thing Smalcius insists on; for
his being a King of the Church, does necessarily imply his readiness to make
use of his power for the good of his Church. His receiving his power from God,
does not imply that he was a Priest, although Crellius insists on that, unless
all the Kings of the Earth are Priests by that means too, D
and Christ could not have had a subordinate power as King, as well as Priest.
But his death is more implied, says Crellius, in the name of a Priest, than of
a King; true, if his death be considered as a Sacrifice, but not otherwise: For
what is there of a Priest in bare dying, do not others so too? But this
represents greater tenderness and care in Christ, than the mere title of a
King: What kind of King do they imagine Christ the mean while, if his being so,
did not give the greatest encouragement to all his subjects? nay, it is plain,
the name of a King must yield greater comfort to his people, because that
implies E
his power to desend them, which the bare name of a Priest does not. So that
there could be no reason at all given, why the name of a High Priest should be
at all given to Christ, if no more were implied in it, than the exercise of his
power with respect to us, without any proper oblation to God: For here A
is no proper Sacerdotal act at all attributed to him; so that upon their
hypothesis, the name of High Priest, is a mere insignificant title used by the
Author to the Hebrews, without any foundation at all for it. By no means, says
Cellius, for his expiation of sin is employed by it, which is not employed in the
name of King: True, if the expiation of sin were done by him in the way of a
Priest by an oblation to God, which they deny; but though they call it
Expiation, they mean no more than the exercise of his divine power in the
delivering his people. But what parallel was there to this in the expiation of
sins by the B
Levitical Priesthood? that was certainly done by a Sacrifice offered to God by
the Priest, who was thereby said to expiate Levit. 4. 26. v, 31. 35.
the sins of the people: how comes it now to be taken quite in another sense,
and yet still called by the same name?

But this being the main thing insisted on by them, I shall prove from their
own Principles, that no expiation of sin in. 5. No proper expiation of sin
belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his doctrine be true.
their own sense can belong to Christ in Heaven, by virtue of his Oblation of
himself there, and consequently that they must unavoidably overthrow the whole
notion of the Priesthood of Christ. For this we are to consider, what their
notion of the expiation C
of sins is, which is set down briefly by Crellius in the beginning of his
discourse of Sacrifices, There is a twofold Crell. cap. 10. sect. 2.
power, says he, of the sacrifice of Christ toward the expiation of sin, one
taking away the guilt and the punishment of sin, and that partly by declaring,
that God will do it, and giving us a right to it, partly by actual deliverance
from punishment; the other is by begetting Faith in us, and so drawing us off
from the practice of sin: Now the first and last Crellius and Socinus attribute
to the death of Christ, as that was a confirmation of the Covenant God made for
the D
remission of sin; and as it was an argument to persuade us to believe the
truth of his Doctrine; and the other, viz. the actual deliverance from
punishment, is by themselves attributed to the second coming of Christ; for
then only, they say, the just shall be actually delivered from the punishment
of sin, viz. eternal death; and what expiation is there now left to the
Oblation of Christ in Heaven? Does Christ in Heaven declare the pardon of sin
any other way than it was declared by him upon Earth? What efficacy has his
Oblation in Heaven upon persuading men to believe? or is his second coming, E
when he shall sit as Judge, the main part of his Priesthood; for then the
expiation of sins in our Adversaries sense is most proper? And yet nothing can
be more remote from the notion of Christ's Pristhood, than that is; so that
expiation of sins according to them can have no respect at all to the Oblation A
of Christ in Heaven, or (which is all one in their sense) his continuance in
Heaven to his second coming. Yes, says Crellius, his continuance there, is a
condition in order to Crell. cap. 10. sect. 3. p. 476.
the expiation by actual deliverance, and therefore it may be said, that God is
as it were moved by it to expiate sins. The utmost then, that is attributed to
Christ's being in Heaven, in order to the expiation of sins, is that he must
continue there without doing anything in order to it; for if he does, it must
either respect God or us: but they deny (though contrary to the importance of
the words, and the design of the places B
where they are used) that the terms of Christ's interceding for us, or being an
Advocate with the Father for us, do H b. 7. 25. Romans 8. 3. 1 John 2. 1.
note any respect to God, but only to us; if he does any thing with respect to
us in expiation of sin, it must be either declaring, persuading, or actual
deliverance; but it is none of these by their own assertions; and therefore
that which they call Christ's Oblation, or his being in Heaven, signifies
nothing as to the expiation of sin: and it is unreasonable to suppose that a
thing, which has no influence at all upon it, should be looked on as a
condition in order to it. From whence C
it appears, that while our Adversaries do make the exercise of Christ's
Priesthood to respect us and not God, they destroy the very nature of it, and
leave Christ only an empty name without any thing answering to it: But if
Christ be truly a High Priest, as the Apostle asserts that he is, from thence
it follows that he must have a respect to God in offering up gifts and
sacrifices for sin: which was the thing to be proved.

2. That Christ did exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation. 6. Ephesians 5.
2. Proves the death of Christ in Expiatory Sacrifice and an oblation to God.
Ephesians. 5. 2.
of himself to God upon the Cross. Which I shall prove D
by two things, 1. Because the death of Christ is said in Scripture to be an
Offering, and a Sacrifice to God. 2. Because Christ is said to offer up himself
antecedently to his entrance into Heaven. 1. Because the death of Christ is
said to be an offering and a sacrifice to God, which is plain from the words of
St. Paul, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an offering
and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. Our Adversaries do not
deny that the death of Christ is here called an Oblation, but they deny, That
it is meant of an Expiatory Sacrifice, but of a free will E
Crell. cap. 10. sect. 47.
offering; and the reason Crellius gives is, because that phrase of a
sweet smelling savor is generally and almost always used of sacrifices which
are not expiatory; but if ever they be used of an Expiatory Sacrifice, they are
not applied to that which was properly expiatory in it, viz. the offering up of
the blood, for no smell, says he, went up from thence, but to the burning of
the fat, and the kidneys, which although required to perfect the expiation, yet
not being done till the High Priest returned out of the Holy of Holies, has
nothing correspondent to the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, where all things
are persected before Christ the High Priest goes forth of his Sanctuary. How
inconsistent these last words are with what they assert concerning the
expiation of sin by actual deliverance at the great day, the former discourse
has already B
discovered. For what can be more absurd, than to say, that all things which
pertain to the expiation of sin are perfected before Christ goes forth from his
Sanctuary, and yet to make the most proper expiation of sin to lie in that act
of Christ which is consequent to his going forth of the Sanctuary, viz. when he
proceeds to judge the quick and the dead. But of that already. We now come to a
punctual and direct answer, as to which two things must be enquired into. 1.
What the importance of the phrase of a sweet smelling savor is? 2. What the
Sacrifices are to which that phrase is applied? 1. For C
the importance of the phrase. The first time we read it used in Scripture was
upon the occasion of Noah's Sacrifice after the flood, of which it is said, that
he offered burnt-offerings on Genesis 8. 20. 21.
the Altar, and the Lord smelled a savor of rest, or a sweet savor. Which we
are not to imagine in a gross corporeal manner, as Crellius seems to understand
it, when he says, the blood could not make such a savor as the fat and the
kidneys; for surely, none ever thought the smell of flesh burnt was a
sweet smelling savor of it self, and we must least of all imagine that of God,
which Porphyry says, was the D
property only of the worst of Demons to be pleased, and as it were, to grow
fat, (...), with the smell and vapors of blood, and flesh, (by which testimony
Porph^r. de abstinent. l. 2. sect. 42.
it withal appears, that the same steams in Sacrifices were supposed to arise
from the blood as the flesh:) But we are to understand that phrase in a sense
agreeable to the divine nature, which we may easily do, if we take it in the
sense the Syriack Version takes it in, when it calls it. Odorem placabilitatis,
or the savor of rest, as the word properly signifies; for (...) is the word
formed from the Verb (...) which E
is used for the resting of the Ark, v. 4. of the same Chapter, and so it
imports a rest after some commotion, and in that sense is very proper to
Atonement, or that whereby God makes his anger to rest; so Aben Ezra upon that
place expounds the Savor of rest, to be such a one which makes God A
cease from his anger: Thence in Hiphil (...) signifies to appease, or to make
peace; in which sense it is used by R. Solom. upon Isa. 27. 5. Munster tells us
the sense is, Deus nunc quievit ab ira and placatus fuit, and to the same
purpose Vatablus: which sense is most agreeable to the design of the following
words, in which God expresses his great kindness, and the Lord said in his
heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; which are
words highly expressing, how much God was propitiated by the Sacrifice which
Noah offered, and therefore Josephus does well interpret this to be a B
proper Expiatory Sacrifice; that God would now be aioned, Joseph. A^tiq^. Iud.
l. 1. c. 4.
and send no more such a deluge upon the world; which he says, was the
substance of Noah's prayer, when he offered this Burnt-offering, and that God
would receive his Sacrifice (...), That he would no more receive such
displeasure against the earth: So that the first time ever this expression was
used, it is taken in the proper sense of an Expiatory Sacrifice.

And by that the second enquiry may be easily resolved; viz. What kind of
Sacrifices it does belong to, which we see in C
. 7. Crellius his mistakes about the kinds of sacrifices.
the first place is, to expiatory, which Crellius denies by a great mistake, of
the sense of the phrase, and of the nature of the Offerings, concerning which
this expression is most used; viz. Holocausts, as though those were not
Expiatory Sacrifices: But if we can make it appear, that the Holocausts were
Expiatory Sacrifices, then it will follow, that this phrase does most properly
agree to a Sacrifice designed for Expiation. But Crellius here speaks very
confusedly concerning Sacrifices, opposing Holocausts and Freewil-offerings to
Expiatory Sacrifices; whereas the Freewil-offerings might D
be Expiatory, as well as Eucharistical; that denomination not respecting the
end the Sacrifices were designed for, but that the precise time of offering
them was not determined by the Law; as in the stated and solemn Sacrifices. For
the general distribution of Sacrifices, seems most proper into Propitiatory and
Encharistical; which distinction is thought by some to hold from the first time
we read of Sacrifices in Scripture; because the Sacrifice of Cain was of the
fruits of the ground, and of Abel, of the Firstlings of his flock. Although
Genesis 4. 3, 4.
there seems to be nothing meant by this difference of Sacrifices, E
but the diversity of their employments, either of them Sacrificing according
to them; and I cannot say what some do, that the reason of Gods rejecting Cains
Sacrifice, was because it was not designed for expiation. But the practice of
after ages, wherein we have a fuller account of the grounds A
of the several Sacrifices, makes it appear, that the Expiatory Sacrifices
before the Law, were all Burnt-offerings; and of all those who were not under
the particular obligation of that Law: As is plain in the Expiatory Sacrifices
of Job for his sons, and for his friends, which were Burnt-offerings; and among
the Jews, all the Sacrifices that were offered up before Job. 1. 5. 42, 8.
the Levitical Law, were, as the Jews themselves tell us, only Burnt-offerings:
And after the settling of their Worship among themselves, they did receive
Burnt-offerings for expiation Seldom de jure ^a^. and ^e^t. a^u^ Eb^a. l. 3. c.
2. etc. 6.
from strangers, as Mr. Seldom at large proves from the B
Jewish Writers. It seems then very strange, that since Burnt-offerings before
the Law were Expiatory, and under the Law they continued so for strangers, they
should be of another nature for the Jews themselves. But what reason is there
for it in the text? not the least that I can find, but expressly the contrary.
For in the beginning of Leviticus, where the Law for Burnt-offerings is
delivered, the words are, And he shall put his hand upon the head of the
Burnt-offering^, and it shall Levit. 1. 4.
be accepted for him, to make atonement for him; which is as much as is ever
said of any Expiatory Sacrifices: And in the C
Verse before, where we render (...) of his own voluntary will; it is by the
vulgar Latin rendered, Ad placandum sibi Dominum; by the Syriack Version, Ad
placationem sibi obtinendam a Domino; and to the same purpose by the Chaldee
Paraphrast; but no one Version considerable that so renders it, as to make
Burnt-offerings to be Freewil-offerings here, which Lev. 7. 16. 22. 18. etc.
Levit. 6. 7.
are spoken of distinctly, and by themselves afterward: And the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Jonathan thus explains, This is the Law of the Burnt-offering; i.
e. Quod venit ad expiandum pro cogitationibus cordis; but although the Jews be
not fully D
agreed, what the Burnt-offerings were designed to expiate, yet they consent
that they were of an Expiatory nature. Which might make us the more wonder,
that Crellius and others should exclude them from it, but the only reason given
by Crell. c. 10. p 530.
him is, because they are distinguished from Sacrifices for sin, as though no
Sacrifices were of an Expiatory nature but they, and then the
Trespass-offerings must be excluded too, for they are distinguished from
Sin Offerings as well as the other. The ignorance of the Jews in the reason of
their own customs, has been an occasion of great mistakes among Christians,
concerning E
the nature of them; when they judge of them according to the blind or
uncertain conjectures which they make concerning them: So that the Text is
oft-times far clearer than their Commentaries are. Setting aside then the
intricate and unsatisfactory niceties of the Jewish Writers, about the several A
reasons of the Burnt-offerings and Sin and Trespass-offerings, and the
differences they make between them, which are so various and incoherent, I
shall propose this conjecture concerning the different reasons of them, viz.
That some Sacrifices were assumed into the Jewish Religion, which had been long
in use in the world before, and were common to them with the Patriarchs, and
all those who in that age of the world did fear and serve God, and such were
the Burnt-offerings for expiation of sin, and the fruits of the earth by way of
gratitude to God. Other Sacrifices were instituted among them, with B
a particular respect to themselves, as a people governed by the Laws of God:
And these were of several sorts; 1. Symbolical, of Gods presence among them,
such was the daily Sacrifice, instituted as a testimony of Gods presence, Exodus
29. from v. 38. to the end. 2. Occasional, for some great mercies vouchsased to
them, as the Passover and the Solemn Festivals, etc. 3. Expiatory, for the sins
committed against their Law: And these were of three sorts; 1. Such as were
wholly consumed to the honor of God, which were the Burnt-offerings. 2. Such,
of which some part was consumed upon C
the Al^ar, and some part fell to the share of the Priests; and these were
either sins particularly enumerated by God himself, under the (...), or else
generally comprehended under the (...) as being allowed to be expiated, because
committed through inadvertency. 3. Such, whereof a less part was consumed, as
in the Peace Offerings of the Congregation, mentioned Levit. 23. 19. whereof
the blood was sprinkled, only the inwards burnt, and the flesh not eaten by the
persons that offered them, as it was in the Peace Offerings of particular
persons (of which as being private Sacrifices, I have here no D
occasion to speak) but only by the Priests in the Court; and these had
something of expiation in them: For thence, says Vatablus, the Peace offering
was called by the Greeks (...), i. e. Expiatorium, and the LXX. commonly render
it, (...), and several of the Jews think the reason of the name was, That it
made peace between God and him that offered it: But the great reason I insist
on, is, Because all the things which were used in an Expiatory Sacrifice, were
in this too; the slaying of the Beast, the sprinkling of the blood, and the
consumption of some part of it upon the Altar, as an E
Oblation to God, which are the three ingredients of an Expiatory Sacrifice;
for the shedding of the blood, noted the bearing the punishment of our
iniquity; and, the sprinkling of it on the Altar, and the consuming of the part
of the Sacrifice, or the whole there, that it was designed for the expiation of
A
sin. From whence it follows, that the phrase of a sweetsmelling savor, being
applied under the Law to Expiatory Sacrifices, is very properly used by St.
Paul, concerning Christ's giving up himself for us: so that from this phrase,
nothing can be inferred contrary to the Expiatory nature of the death of
Christ, but rather it is fully agreeable to it.

But Crellius has yet a farther Argument, to prove that Christ's death cannot
be here meant as the Expiatory Sacrifice;. 8. What i^fluence the mactation of
the sacrifice had on expiation. Crell. cap. 10. p 533.
viz. That the notion of a sacrifice, does consist in the oblation whereby the
thing is consecrated to the honor and service of B
God, to which the mactation is but a bare preparation; which he proves,
Because the slaying the sacrifice might belong to others besides the Priests,
Ezekiel. 44. 10, 11. but the oblation only to the Priests. To this I answer, 1.
The mactation may be considered two ways, either with a respect to the bare
instrument of taking away the life, or to the design of the Offerer of that
which was to be sacrificed: As the mactation has a respect only to the
instruments, so it is no otherways to be considered than as a punishment; but
as it has a respect to him that designs it for a Sacrifice, so the shedding of
the blood, C
has an immediate influence on the expiation of sin. And that by this clear
Argument, The blood is said to make an Atonement for the soul; and the reason
given is, because the life Levit. 17. 11.
of the flesh is in the blood: So that which was the life, is the great thing
which makes the Atonement; and when the blood was shed, the life was then
given; from whence it follows, that the great efficacy of the sacrifice for
Atonement lay in the shedding of the blood for that end. Thence the Apostle
attributes remission of sins to the (...) the shedding of the blood; and not to
the bare Oblation of it on the Altar, or the Heb. 9. 22.
D
carrying it into the Holy of Holies, both which seem to be nothing else but a
more solemn representation of that blood before God, which was already shed for
the expiation of sins, which was therefore necessary to be performed, that the
concurrence of the Priest might be seen with the sacrifice in order to
expiation. For if no more had been necessary but the bare slaying of the
Beasts, which was the meanest part of the service, the people would never have
thought the institution of the Priesthood necessary, and least of all that of
the High Priest, unless some solemn action of his had been performed, E
such as the entering into the Holy of Holies, on the day of expiation, and
carrying it, and sprinkling the blood of the sin offering in order to the
expiation of the sins of the people. And it is observable, that although the
Levitical Law be silent in the common Sacrifices, who were to kill them whether
A
the Priests or the Levites; yet on that day whereon the High Priest was to
appear himself for the expiation of sin, it is expressly said, that he should
not only kill, the bullock Levit. ^6. 11, 15.
of the sin-offering, which is for himself, but the goa^ of the sin-offering,
which is for the people. And although the Talmudists dispute from their
Traditions on both sides, whether any one else might on the day of expiation,
slay the sin offerings besides the High Priest; yet it is no news for them to
dispute against the Text, and the Talmud it self is clear, that the High Priest
did it. From whence it appears, B
Codex Ioma. cap 4. sect. 3. cap. 5 sect. 4.
there was something peculiar on that day as to the slaying of the
sin offerings; and if our Adversaries opinion hold good, that the Sacrifices on
the day of expiation did, i^ not a^one, yet chiefly represent the Sacrifice of
Christ, no greater argument can be brought against themselves than this is, for
the office of the High Priest did not begin at his carrying the blood into the
Holy of Holies, but the slaying the sacrifice did belong to him too: from
whence it will unavoidably follow^, that Christ did not enter upon his Office
of High Priest, when he entered into Heaven, but when the Sacrifice was to be C
be slain which was designed for the expiation of sins. It is then to no
purpose at all, if Crellius could prove that sometimes in ordinary Sacrifices,
(which he will not say, the Sacrifice of Christ was represented by) the Levites
might kill the beasts for Sacrifice; for it appears, that in these Sacrifices,
wherein themselves contend that Christ's was represented, the office of the
High Priest did not begin with entering into the Sanctuary, but with the
mactation of that Sacrifice whose blood was to be carried in thither. Therefore
if we ^peak of the bare instruments of mactation in the death of Christ, those D
were the Jews, and we make not them Priests in it, for they aimed at no more
than taking away his life (as the Popae among the Romans, and those whose bare
Office it was to kill the beasts for Sacrifice among the Jews did:) but if we
consider it with a respect to him that offered up his life to God, then we say,
that Christ was the High Priest in doing it; it being designed for the
expiation of sin; and by virtue of this bloodshed for that end, he enters into
Heaven as the Holy of Holies, there ever living to make intercession for us.
But the virtue of the consequent acts, depends upon the efficacy of the blood E
shed for expiation; otherwise the High Priest might have entered with the same
effect into the Holy of Holies with any other blood besides that which was shed
on purpose as a sin-offering, for expiation of the sins of the people; which it
was unlawful for him to do. And from hence it is, that the A
Apostle to the Hebrews insists so much on the comparison between the blood of
Christ, and the blood of the legal sacrifices, and the efficacy of the one far
above the other, in its power Heb. 9. 13, 14 1^. 4, 10.
of expiation; which he needed not to have done, if the shedding of his blood,
had been only a preparation for his entrance on his Priesthood in Heaven. So
that the proper notion of a Sacrifice for sin, as it notes the giving the life
of one for the expiation of the sins of another, does properly lie in the
mactation, though other sacrificial acts may be consequent upon it. So it was
in the animales hostiae among the Romans, Ma^rob. Sat^a. l. 3. c. 5.
B
in which, says Macrobius, Sola anima Deo sacratur: of which he tells us
Virgil properly speaks in those words, Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte
Daretis.
And that we may the better understand what he means by the anima here, he
says elsewhere (as Macrobius and Servius observe out of his excellent skill
and accuracy in the Pontifical rites) C
Sanguine placastis ventos and virgin caesa,
Cum primum Iliacas Danai venistic ad oras:
Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litaendum
Argolica.
Which shows, that the expiation was supposed to lie in the blood which they
called the Soul, as the Scripture does. And the Persians as Strabo tells us,
looked upon the bare mactation as the Sacrifice, for they did not porricere as
the Romans called D
it, they laid none of the parts of the Sacrifice upon the Altar to be consumed
there, (...). For God regarded nothing but the Soul in the sacrifice: Strabo l.
15.
which words Eustathius likewise uses upon Homer; Eustath. i^ Hom. Iliad.
(...).
of the Sacrifices of the Magi. And Strabo affirms of the ancient Lusitani,
that they cut off nothing of the Sacrifice: Strabo l. 3.
but consumed the entrals whole; but though such Sacrifices which were for
divination were not thought expiatory, and therefore different from the
animales hostiae, yet among the Persians, every Sacrifice had a respect to
expiation of the whole E
people. For Herodotus tells us, that every one that offers Sacrifice among
them, (...), prays for good to all Persians and the King. But thus Herod. l. 1.
much may serve to prove against Crellius, that the mactation in an Expiatory
Sacrifice, was not a mere preparation to a Sacrifice, A
but that it was a proper Sacrificial act, and consequently that Christ acted
as High Priest, when he gave himself for us, an offering and a Sacrifice to God
for a sweet smelling savor.

But this will further appear from those places wherein. 9. Whether Christ's
Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven or on Earth.
Christ is said to offer up himself once to God: the places to this purpose
are. Heb. 7. 27. Who needs not daily as those Highpriests to offer up
Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the Peoples, for this he did
once, when he offered up himself. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall B
the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without
spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. V.
25, 26, 27, 28. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the High Priest
enters into the holy place every year with the blood of others; for then must
he often have suffered since the foundation of the World: but now once in the
end of the World has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself.
And as it is appointed to men once to dye, but after this the Judgment: so
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look C
for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Heb. 10.
10, 11, 12. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ once for all. And every High Priest, stands daily
ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take
away sins: but this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever
sat down on the right hand of God. To these places Crellius gives this answer,
That the name of Oblation as applied to Cr^ll. cap. 10. sect. 54.
Christ, primarily signifies Christ's first entrance into Heaven, and appearance
before the face of God there, but consequently D
the continuance of that appearance; so that when a thing is once actually
exhibited and presented, it is said to be once offered, although being offered,
it always remains in the same place, and so may be said to be a continual
Oblation. But this first appearance, says he, has a peculiar agreement with
the legal Oblation; and therefore the name of Oblation does most* properly
belong to that, because Christ by this means obtained that power on which the
perfect remission of our sins depends: but although the continuance of that
appearance, seems only consequentially E
to have the name of Oblation belonging to it, yet in i^s own nature, it has a
nearer conjunction with the effect of the Oblation, viz. the remission of sins,
or deliverance from punishment, and does of it self confer more to it than the
other does. And therefore in regard of that, Christ is A
said most perfectly to exercise his Priesthood, and to offer and intercede for
us, from the time he is said to sit down at the right hand of God. Against this
answer, I shall prove these two things, 1. That it is incoherent, and repugnant
to it self. 2. That it by no means agrees to the places before mentioned. 1.
That it is incoherent and repugnant to it self in two things. 1. In making that
to be the proper Oblation in correspondency to the Oblations of the Law, which
has no immediate respect to the expiation of sins. 2. In making that to have
the most immediate respect to the expiation of B
sins, which can in no tolerable sense be called an Oblation. For the first,
since Crellius says, that the proper notion of Oblation is to be taken from
the Oblations in the Levitical ^aw, we must consider what it was there, and
whether Christ's first entrance into Heaven can have any correspondency with it.
An Oblation under the Law was in general, any thing which was immediately
dedicated to God, but in a more limited sense it was proper to what was
dedicated to him by way of Sacrifice according to the appointments of the
Levitical Law. We are not now enquiring what was properly C
called an Oblation in other Sacrifices, but in those which then were for
expiation of sin; And in the Oblation was, first of the persons for whom the
Sacrifice was offered. So in the Burnt-offering, the person who brought it, was
to offer Lev. 1. 3.
it at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: i. e. as the Jews
expound it at the entrance of the Court of the Priests, and there he was to lay
his hands upon the head of it, and it shall be accepted for him to make
atonement for him. This V. 4.
Offering was made before the Beast was slain; after the killing the beast,
then the Priests were to make an Offering of the D
blood, by sprinkling it round about the Altar of Burnt-offerings, the rest of
the blood, say the Jews, was poured out by the Priests, at the South Side of
the Altar upon the foundation, where the two holes were for the passage into
the Channel which conveyed the blood into the valley of Kidron: thus the blood
being offered, the parts of the beast, were by the Priests to be laid upon the
Altar, and there they were all to be consumed by fire; and then it was called
an Offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord. The same rites were
used in the Peace Offerings, and Trespass-offerings, as E
to the laying on of hands, and the sprinkling the blood, and consuming some
part by fire: and in the sin offerings, there was to be the same imposition of
hands: but concerning the sprinkling of the blood, and the way of consuming the
remainders of the Sacrifice, there was this considerable difference; A
that in the common sin offerings for particular persons, the blood was
sprinkled upon the horns of the Altar of Burnt-offerings, but in the
sin offerings for the High Priest and the Lev. 4. 25, 30.
Congregation, or all the People, he was to carry the blood within the
Sanctuary, and to sprinkle of it seven times before the Vail of the Sanctuary;
and some of the blood was to be put upon the horns of the Altar of Incense; but
the remainder V. 6.
of the blood, and the same things (which were offered by fire in
Peace Offerings) were to be disposed of accordingly, on the Altar of
Burnt-offerings. And withal, there was this B
great difference, that in other sin offerings the Priests were to eat the
remainder of the sacrifice in the Holy place; but in these there was nothing to
be eaten by them; for the whole Bullock L^vit. 6. 26.
was to be carried forth without the Camp, and there he was to be burned till
all were consumed. For it was an express Lev. 4. 11, 12.
Law, That no sin-offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, to reconcile withal in the Holy-place, shall be
eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire. Levit. 6. 30.
All the difference that was on the great day of Atonement, was this, that the
High Priest himself was to slay the Sin Offerings, C
and then to carry the blood of them into the Holy of Holies, and there was to
sprinkle the blood with his finger Lev 16. 14, 15.
toward the Mercy-seat seven times: after which, and the sending away the
scapegoat, the ceremonies were the same for the Atonement of the people, which
were at other solemn sin offerings, for the Priest or the people.

From all which being thus laid together, we shall observe several. 10. All
things necessary to a legal oblation concur in the death of Christ.
things, which are very material to our purpose: 1. That in the oblations which
were made for expiation of sins, the difference between the mactation and the
oblation, did arise from the D
difference between the Priest and the Sacrifice. For the Priests Office was to
atone, but he was to atone by the Sacrifice; on which account, although the
Priest were to offer the Sacrifice for himself, yet the oblation did not lie in
the bare presenting himself before God, but in the presenting the blood of that
Sacrifice, which was shed in order to expiation. If we could have supposed,
that the High Priest under the Law, instead of offering a Goat for a
Sin-offering for the people, on the day of Atonement, should have made an
oblation of himself to God, by dying for the expiation of their sins: In this
case, his death being E
the Sacrifice, and himself the Priest, the mactation, as it relates to his own
act, and his oblation had been one and the same thing. For his death had been
nothing else, but the offering up himself to God, in order to the expiation of
the sins of the people; and there can be no reason, why the oblation A
must be of necessity something consequent to his death, since all things
necessary to a perfect oblation do concur in it. For where there is something
solemnly devoted to God, and in order to the expiation of sins, and by the hand
of a Priest, there are all things concurring to a legal oblation; but in this
case, all these things do concur, and therefore there can be no imaginable
necessity of making the oblation of Christ, only consequent to his Ascension,
since in his death all things concur to a proper oblation. In the Law, we grant
that the oblation made by the Priest, was consequent to the death B
of the beast for Sacrifice; but the reason of that was, because the beast
could not offer up it self to God, and God had made it necessary, that the
Priest should expiate sins, not by himself, but by those Sacrifices, and
therefore the oblation of the blood was after the Sacrifice was slain; neither
could this have been solved barely by the Priests slaying of the Sacrifices;
for this being an act of violence toward the beasts that were thus killed,
could not be a proper oblation, which must suppose a consent antecedent to it.
All which showed the great imperfection of the Levitical Law, in which so many
several C
things were to concur, to make up a sacrifice for sin; viz. The first offering
made by the party concerned, of what was under his dominion; viz. The beast to
be sacrificed at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: but the beast
not being able to offer up it self, it was necessary for the offering up its
blood, that it must be slain by others; and for the better understanding, not
only of the efficacy of the blood, but the concurrence of the Priest for
expiation, he was to take the blood, and sprinkle some of it on the Altar, and
pour out the rest at the foundation of it. But since we assert a far more D
noble and excellent Sacrifice, by the Son of God freely offering up himself,
to be made a Sacrifice for the sins of the world, why may not this be as proper
an oblation made unto God, as any was under the Law, and far more excellent,
both in regard of the Priest and the Sacrifice: why should his oblation of
himself then be made only consequent to his death and resurrection? Which
^latter, being by our Adversaries made not his own act, but Gods upon him, and
his entrance into Heaven, being given him (as they assert) as a reward of his
sufferings, in what tolerable sense can that be called an oblation E
of himself, which was confer^ed upon him as a reward of his former sufferings?
From whence it follows, that upon our Adversaries own grounds, the death of
Christ may far more properly be called the oblation of himself, than his
entrance into Heaven; and that there is no necessity of making A
the oblation of Christ consequent to his death, there being so great a
difference between the Sacrifice of Christ, and that of the Sacrifices for sin
under the Levitical Law.

2. We observe, That the oblation as performed by the Priest, did not depend
upon his presenting himself before God, but upon the presenting the blood of a
Sacrifice, which had been already slain for the expiation of sins. If the
Priest had gone into the Holy of Holies, and there only presented himself
before the Mercy-seat, and that had been all required in order to the expiation
of sins, there had been some pretense for our B
Adversaries making Christ's presenting himself in Heaven, to be the oblation of
himself to God; but under the Law, the efficacy of the Highpriests entrance
into the Holy of Holies, did depend upon the blood which he carried in thither,
which was the blood of the Sin-offering, which was already slain for the
expiation of sins: And in correspondency to this, Christ's efficacy in his
entrance into Heaven, as it respects our expiation, must have a respect to that
Sacrifice which was offered up to God antecedent to it. And I wonder our
Adversaries do so much insist on the Highpriests entering into the most holy C
place once a year, as though all the expiation had depended upon that; whereas
all the promise of expiation, was not upon his bare entrance into it; but upon
the blood which he carried along with him, and sprinkled there: In
correspondency to which, our Savior is not barely said, to enter into Heaven,
and present himself to God, but that he did this Heb. 9. 12.
by his own blood, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us.

3. We observe, That there was something correspondent in the death of Christ,
to somewhat consequent to the oblation D
under the Law, and therefore there can be no reason to suppose, that the
oblation of Christ must be consequent to his death: for that destroys the
correspondency between them. Now this appears in this particular, in the solemn
Sacrifices for sin, after the sprinkling of the blood, which was carried into
the Holy place to renconcile withal, all the remainder of the Sacrifice was to
be burnt without the Camp, and this held on the day of Atonement, as well as in
other Sin Offerings for the Congregation. Now the Author to the Hebrews tells
us, That in correspondency to this, Jesus that he might sanctify E
the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate: What Heb. 13. 12.
force is there in this, unless the blood of Christ did answer to the
Sin Offerings for the people, and his oblation was supposed to be made before;
and therefore that he might have all things agreeable to those Sin Offerings,
the last part was to be A
completed too; viz. That he was to suffer without the gate; which after the
peoples settlement in Jerusalem, answered to the being burnt without the Camp
in the Wilderness.

4. We observe, That the Oblation in Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, by the
Priest, had always relation to the consumption of what was offered: Thus the
offering of the blood, in token of the destruction of the life of the beast,
whose blood was offered; for no blood was to be offered of a living creature,
nor of one killed upon any other account, B
but for that end to be a sacrifice for sin, and after the sprinkling and
pouring out of the blood, the inwards of some, and all of the other, were to be
consumed by fire. And it is observable, that the greater the Sacrifice for sin
was, always the more was consumed of it; as appears plainly by the
forementioned difference of the Sin Offerings for private persons, and for the
people; of the former, the Priests were allowed to eat, but not at all of the
latter. And so it was observed among the Egyptians, in the most solemn
Sacrifices for expiation, nothing was allowed to be eaten of that part which
was designed C
for that end. For Herodotus gives us an account why the Egyptians never eat
the head of any living Creature; which is, That when they (...). Herodot. l 2.
c. 39.
offer up a Sacrifice, they make a solemn execration upon it, that if any evil
were to fall upon the persons who Sacrificed, or upon all Egypt, it might be
turned upon the head of that beast: And Plutarch adds, that after this solemn
execration, (...). Plutarch. de Iside.
They cut off the head, and of old, threw D
it into the River, but then gave it to strangers. From which custom we
observe, that in a solemn Sacrifice for expiation, the guilt of the offenders,
was by this rite of execration supposed to be transferred upon the head of the
Sacrifice, as it was in the Sacrifices among the Jews, by the laying on of
hands; and that nothing was to be eaten of what was supposed to have that guilt
transferred upon it. From hence all Expiatory Sacrifices were at first whole
Burnt-offerings, as appears by the Patriarchal Xenoph. Cy^opaed. l. 7. 8.
Strab. l. 4. Plutarch. Symp. l. 6. probl. 8.
Sacrifices, and the customs of other Nations, and among the E
Jews themselves, as we have already proved in all solemn offerings for the
people. And although in the sacrifices of private persons, some parts were
allowed to be eaten by the Priests; yet those which were designed for expiation
were consumed. So that the greater the offering was to God, the A
more it implied the Consumption of the thing which was so offered: How
strangely improbable then is it, That the Oblation of Christ should not (as
under the Law) have respect to his death and sufferings; but to his entrance
into Heaven, wherein nothing is supposed to be consumed, but all things given
him with far greater power, as our Adversaries suppose, than ever he had
before. But we see the Apostle parallels Christ's suffering with the burning of
the Sacrifices, and his blood with the blood of them, and consequently his
offering up himself, must relate not to his entrance into Heaven, but B
to that act of his whereby he suffered for sins, and offered up his blood as a
Sacrifice for the sins of the world.

From all which it appears; how far more agreeably to the Oblations under the
Law, Christ is said to offer up himself. 11. Chri^ts entrance into Heaven could
not be the Oblation of himself mentioned.
for the expiation of sins by his death and sufferings, than by his entrance
into Heaven; For it is apparent, that the Oblations in expiatory Sacrifices
under the Law, were such upon which the expiation of sin did chiefly depend;
but by our Adversaries own confession, Christ's oblation of himself by his
entrance into Heaven, has no immediate respect at all to the C
expiation of sin: only as the way whereby he was to enjoy that power by which
he did expiate sins, as Crellius says; now, let us consider, what more
propriety there is in making this presenting of Christ in Heaven to have a
correspondency with the legal Oblations, than the offering up himself upon the
Cross. For 1. on the very same reason that his entrance into Heaven is made an
Oblation, his death is so too; viz. Because it was the way whereby he obtained
the power of expiation; and far more properly so than the other, since they
make Christ's entrance and power the reward of his sufferings, but they never D
make his sitting at the right hand of God, the reward of his entrance into
Heaven. 2. His offering up himself to God upon the Cross, was his own act, but
his entrance into Heaven was Gods, as themselves acknowledge, and therefore
could not in any propriety of speech be called Christ's offering up himself. 3.
If it were his own act, it could not have that respect to the expiation of
sins, which his death had; for our Adversaries say, that his death was by
reason of our sins, and that he suffered to purge us from sin; but his entrance
into Heaven was upon his own account, to enjoy that power and authority, E
which he was to have at the right hand of God. 4. How could Christ's entrance
into Heaven, be the way for his enjoying that power which was necessary for the
expiation of sin, when Christ before his entrance into Heaven, says, that all
power was given to him in Heaven and earth: and the reason Matthew. 28. 18.
A
assigned in Scripture of that power and authority which God gave him is,
because he humbled himself, and became obedient Phil. 2. 8, 9
to death, even the death of the Cross: So that the entrance of Christ into
Heaven, could not be the means of obtaining that power which was conferred
before; but the death of Christ is menti^ned on that account in Scripture. 5.
If the death of Christ were no expiatory Sacrifice, the entrance of Christ into
Heaven could be no Oblation proper to a High Priest; for his entrance into the
Holy of Holies, was on the account of the blood of the sin-offering which he
carried in with him. If there B
were then no Expiatory Sacrifice before, that was slain for the sins of men;
Christ could not be said to make any Oblation in Heaven, for the Oblation had
respect to a Sacrifice already slain; so that if men deny that Christ's death
was a proper Sacrifice for sin, he could make no Oblation at all in Heaven, and
Christ could not be said to enter thither, as the High Priest entered into the
Holy of Holies with the blood of the Sacrifice; which is the thing which the
Author to the Hebrews, asserts concerning Christ.

2. There is as great an inconsistency in making the exercise C
of Christ's power in Heaven, an Oblation in any sense, as in. 12.
Christsexercise of power in Heaven in no sense an Oblation to God.
making Christ's entrance into Heaven, to be the Oblation which had
correspondency with the Oblations of the Law. For what is there which has the
least resemblance with an Oblation in it? Has it any respect to God, as all
the legal Oblations had? no; for his intercession and power, Crellius says,
respects us, and not God. Was there any Sacrifice at all in it for expiation?
how is it possible, that the mere exercise of power should be called a
Sacrifice? What analogy is there at all between them? And how could he be then
said most D
perfectly to exercise his Priesthood, when there was no consideration at all
of any Sacrifice offered up to God? so that upon these suppositions the Author
to the Hebrews must argue upon strange similitudes, and fancy resemblances to
himself, which it was impossible for the Jews to understand him in, who were to
judge of the nature of Priesthood and Oblations in a way agreeable to the
Institutions among themselves. But was it possible for them to understand such
Oblations and a Priesthood which had no respect at all to God, but wholly to
the People; and such an entrance into the Holy of Holies without the blood of
an E
Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the people? But such absurdities do men
betray themselves into, when they are forced to strain express places of
Scripture to serve an hypothesis, which they think themselves obliged to
maintain.

We now come to show that this interpretation of Crellius A
. 13. Crel^ius his sense repugnant to the circumstances of the place^. Heb. 7.
27. 9. 26. 10. 10.
does not agree with the circumstances of the places before mentioned, which
will easily appear by these brief considerations. 1. That the Apostle always
speaks of the offering of Christ as a thing past and once done, so as not to be
done again; which had been very improper, if by the Oblation of Christ, he had
meant the continual appearance of Christ in Heaven for us, which yet is, and
will never cease to be till all his enemies be made his footstool. 2. That he
still speaks in allusion to the Sacrifices which were in use among the Jews,
and Heb. 9. 12, 13. 10. 4, 5.
therefore the Oblation of Christ must be in such a way as was B
agreeable to what was used in the Levitical Sacrifices, which we have already
at large proved he could not do in our Adversaries sense. 3 That the Apostle
speaks of such a Sacrifice for sins to which the sitting at the right hand of
God was consequent; so that the Oblation antecedent to it must be properly that
Sacrifice for sins which he offered to God; and therefore the exercise of his
power for expiation of sins, which they say is meant by sitting at the right
hand of God, cannot be that Heb. 10. 12.
Sacrifice for sins: Neither can his entrance into Heaven be it, which in what
sense it can be called a Sacrifice for sins, since C
themselves acknowledge it had no immediate relation to the expiation of them,
I cannot understand. 4. The Apostle speaks of such an Offering of Christ once,
which if it had been repeated, does imply, that Christ's sufferings must have
been repeated too. For then must he often have suffered since Heb. 9. 26.
the foundation of the World: but the repeated exercise of Christ's power in
Heaven does imply no necessity at all of Christ's frequent suffering, nor his
frequent entrance into Heaven; which might have been done without suffering,
therefore it must be meant of such an offering up himself D
as was employed in his death and sufferings. 5. He speaks of the offering up of
that body which God gave him when he Heb. 10. 5, 10
came into the World; but our Adversaries deny, that he carried the same Body
into Heaven, and therefore he must speak not of an offering of Christ in
Heaven, but what was performed here on Earth. But here our Adversaries have
shown us a trial of their skill, when they tell us with much confidence that
the World into which Christ is here said to come, is not Crell. cap. 10. sect.
53.
to be understood of this World, but of that to come, which is not only
contrary to the general acceptance of the word E
when taken absolutely as it is here, but to the whole scope and design of the
place. For he speaks of that World, wherein Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings were
used, and the Levitical Law was observed, although not sufficient for perfect
expiation, and so rejected for that end; and withal he speaks of that A
World wherein the cheerful obedience of Christ to the will of his Father was
seen, for he says, Lo I come to do thy will O God, which is repeated
afterward; but will they say, that Heb 10. 7, 9.
this World was not the place into which Christ came to obey the Will of his
Father? and how could it be so properly said of the future World, Lo I come to
do thy will; when they make the design of his ascension to be the receiving the
reward of his doing and suffering the will of God upon Earth?

But yet they attempt to prove from the same Author to the Hebrews, that
Christ's entrance into Heaven, was necessary to. 14. Object^ons a^^wered. (...).
7 26. 8. 4 7. 16.
B
his being a perfect High Priest; for he was to be made higher than the
Heavens; and if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest; but he was a
Priest after the power of an endless life: Neither could he, say they, be a
perfect High Priest, till those words were spoken to him, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee; which as appears by other places, was after the
Resurrection: 5. 5.
But all the sufferings he underwent in the world, were only to qualify him
for this Office in Heaven; therefore it is said, That in all things it behoved
him to be made like unto his 2. 17.
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, C
etc. This is the substance of what is produced by Crellius and his Brethren,
to prove that Christ did not become a perfect High Priest, till he entered into
Heaven: But it were Crell. cap. 10. sect. 53.
worth the knowing, what they mean by a perfect High Priest; Is it that Christ
did then begin the Office of a High Priest, and that he made no offering at all
before? No, that they dare not assert at last, but that there was no perfect
Sacrifice offered for sin, otherwise S^cinus contends, That Christ did offer
upon earth, and that for himself too: So that all kind of offering is Soci^.
p^aelect. c. ^lt.
not excluded by themselves, before Christ's entrance into D
Heaven: But if they mean by perfect High Priest in Heaven, that his Office of
High Priest was not consummated by what he did on earth, but that a very
considerable part of the Priesthood of Christ was still remaining to be
performed in Heaven; it is no more than we do freely acknowledge, and this is
all we say is meant by those places: For the Apostles design is to prove, the
excellency of the Priesthood of Christ above the Aaronical; which he does, not
only from the excellency of the Sacrifice which he offered, above the blood of
Bulls and Goats; but from the excellency of the Priest, who did ex^el the
Aaronical E
Priests; both in regard of his calling from God, which is all the Apostle
designs, Heb 5. 5. not at all intending to determine the time when he was made,
but by whom he was made High Priest, even by him that had said, Thou art my
Son, etc. and in regard of the excellency of the Sanctuary which he ent^ed
into, which A
was not an earthly, but ia heavenly Sanctu^ry; and in regard of the perpetuity
of his function there, Not g^ing in once a year, as the Highpriests under the
Law did, but there ever living to make intercession for us: Now this being the
Apostles design, we may easily understand why he says, That he was to be a
heavenly High Priest, and if he had been on earth, he could not have been a
Priest: The meaning of which is only this, that if Christ's Office had ended in
what he did on earth, he would not have had such an excellency as he was
speaking of; for then he had ceased to be at all such a High Priest, having B
no Holy of Holies to go into, which should as much transcend the earthly
Sanctuary, as his Sacrifice did the blood of Bulls and Goats: Therefore in
correspondency to that Priesthood, which he did so far excel in all the parts
of it, he was not to end his Priesthood merely with the blood which was shed
for a Sacrifice, but he was to carry it into Heaven, and present it before God,
and to be a perpetual Intercessor in the behalf of his people: And so was in
regard of the perpetuity of his Office, a Priest after the Law of an
endlesslife: But lest the people should imagine, that so great and excellent a
High Priest, being C
so far exalted above them, should have no sense or compassion upon the
infirmities of his people, therefore to encourage them to adhere to him, he
tells them, That he was made like to his Brethren; and therefore they need not
doubt, but by the sense which he had of the infirmities of humane nature, he
will have pity on the weaknesses of his people; which is all the Apostle means
by those expressions. So that none of these places do destroy the Priesthood of
Christ on earth, but only assert the excellency, and the continuance of it in
heaven: Which latter, we are as far from denying, as our Adversaries D
are from granting the former. And thus much may suffice for the second thing,
to prove the death of Christ a proper sacrifice for sin; viz. The Oblation
which Christ made of himself to God by it. E


CHAP. VI. A

That the effects of proper Expiatory Sacrifices belong to the death of Christ,
which either respect the sin or the person. Of the true notion of expiation of
sin, as attributed to Sacrifices. Of the importance of (...), as applied to
them. Socinus his proper sense of it examined. Crellius his Objections
answered. The Jews notion of (...). The Sacrifices not bare B
conditions of pardon, nor expiated merely as a slight part of obedience. Gods
expiating sin, destroys not expiation by Sacrifice. The importance of (...) and
(...), relating to Sacrifices. Expiation attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ,
in the same sense that it was to other Sacrifices: and from thence, and the
places of Scripture which mention it, proved not to be merely declarative. If
it had been so, it had more properly belonged to his Resurrection than his
death. The Death of Christ not taken Metonymically for all the Consequents of
it; because of the peculiar effects of the death of Christ in C
Scripture, and because Expiation is attributed to him antecedently to his
entrance into Heaven. No distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's
entrance into Heaven from his sitting at the right hand of God. The effects of
an Expiatory Sacrifice, respecting the person, belong to the death of Christ,
which are Atonement and Reconciliation. Of the signification of (...) and
(...). The Reconciliation by Christ's death, does not merely respect us, but
God; why the latter lessused in the Now Testament. Atwofold Reconciliation with
God mentioned in Scripture. Crellius his evasion D
answered. The Objections from Gods being reconciled in the sending his Son,
and the inconsistency of the Freeness of Grace with the Doctrine of
Satisfaction answered, and the whole concluded.

THE last thing to prove the death of Christ a proper Expiatory Sacrifice, is,
That the effects of a proper. 1. Of the true notion of Expiation, as attributed
to Sacrifices.
Sacrifice for sin are attributed to it. Which do either respect the sins
committed, and are then E
called Expiation and Remission, or the persons who were guilty of them, as
they stand obnoxious to the displeasure of God, and so the effect of them is
Atonement and Reconciliation. Now these we shall prove do most properly and
immediately refer to the death of Christ; and are attributed to it, as the
procuring A
cause of them; and not as a bare condition of Christ's entrance into Heaven, or
as comprehending in it the consequents of it. I begin with the Expiation and
Remission of sins; as to which Socinus does acknowledge, That the great
correspondency does Soci^. de Christo servat. p. 2. l. 13. C^ell. cap. 10.
sect. 26.
lie between Christ's and the Legal Sacrifices. We are therefore to enquire: 1.
What respect the Expiation of sins had to the Sacrifices under the Law. 2. In
what sense the Expiation of sins in attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ: For
the due explication of the respect which Expiation of sins had to the Legal
Sacrifices, we are to consider in what sense Expiation is understood, B
and in what respect it is attributed to them. For this we are to enquire into
the importance of the several phrases it is set sorth by, which are (...) and
(...) in the Old Testament, (...) in the New; all which are acknowledged by our
Adversaries to have a peculiar respect to the Expiation made by a Sacrifice. We
shall begin with the former, because Crellius objects this against Grotius,
That he employed Crell. cap. 10. sect. 38.
his greatest diligence in the explication of the Greek and Latin words for
Expiation of sin, and was contented only to say, that the Hebrew words would
bear the same signification: Whereas, C
says he, he ought to have proved, that the Hebrew words do require that sense
which he takes them in. But by Crellius his leave, Grotius took the best course
was to be taken in words, whose signification is so obscure as those are in the
Hebrew Language. For (...) being so very rarely used in Scripture in that which
Socinus and Crellius contend to be the proper and natural signification of it;
viz. To hide or cover, and so frequently in the sense of Expiation, what better
way could be taken for determining the sense of it, as applied to Sacrifices,
than by insisting upon those words which are used in the New Testament, D
to the very same purpose that (...) is used in the old? For they cannot
pretend that which they say is the most proper sense, can be applied to this
subject, viz. To cover with pitch, or a bituminous matter, which is called
(...) Genesis 6. 14. therefore it must of necessity be taken in another sense
here. But Socinus contends, That it ought to be taken in a sense most agreeable
to that, which is, says he, that the Expiation Soci^. de Servat. p. 2. c. 11.
of sin be nothing else, but the covering of it, by Gods grace and benignity.
Thence, says he, David says, Blessed Psalm. 32. 1.
is the man whose iniquity is covered. But how can this prove, E
that the proper signification of (...) as applied to sin, is covering by Gods
Grace, when neither the word (...) is here used, nor is there any respect at
all mentioned of an Expiation by Sacrifice, which is the thing we are
discoursing of? And is the covering of sin such an easy and intelligible
phrase, that this A
should be made choice of to explain the difficulty of (...) by? What is it
that they would have us understand by the covering sin? surely not to make it
stronger and more lasting, as the Ark was covered, with that bituminous matter
for that end, and yet this would come the nearest to the proper sense of (...).
So that from their own interpretation it appears, that (...) as applied to the
expiation of sin by Sacrifices, cannot be taken so much as in allusion to that
other sense; for their sense of Expiation, is either by the destruction of sin,
or deliverance of the sinner from the punishment of it, but what resemblance B
is there between the covering of a thing, in order to its preservation, and
the making it not to be, or at least destroying all the power of it? But
supposing we should grant that it has some allusion to the sense of covering,
why must it necessarily be supposed to be done by the mere Grace of God, as
excluding all antecedent causes which should move to it? would not the
propriety of the sense remain as well, supposing a moving cause, as excluding
it? What should hinder, but that God may be said as well to cover sin upon a
Sacrifice as to forgive it, and this is very frequently used upon a Sacrifice,
That the Lev. 4. 26. Verse 31. 35.
C
sin shall be forgiven? But yet themselves acknowledge, that the Sacrifices
were conditions required in order to expiation; if then (...) has an immediate
respect to Gods immediate favor and benignity, how comes it to be used where a
condition is necessarily supposed in order to it? Had it not been more
agreeable to this benignity of God to have pardoned sin without requiring any
sacrifice for it, than so strictly insisting upon the offering up Sacrifice in
order to it, and then declaring that the sin is expiated, and it should be
forgiven? from hence we see that there is no necessity why (...) should be used
D
as applied to sacrifices in a sense most agreeable to that of covering with
pitch, nor that it is not possible it should have such a sense when applied to
sins; and withal that it is very consistent with an antecedent condition to it,
and therefore can by no means destroy satisfaction.

Yes, says Crellius, it does, for expiation is explained in the Crellius his
O^j^ctions answered.
Law by non-imputation, Deuteronomy. 21. 8. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people
Israel wh^m thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent. 2. Cr^ll. c. 10. sect. 9.
blood unto thy people of Isreal's charge; and the blood shall be forgiven them.
But not to impute, says he, and to receive true and E
full satisfaction overthrow each other: and so expiation being the same with
that, will overthrow it too. To this I answer, 1. I grant that (...) is here
used both as applied to God, and to the sin, and that the sense of it is used
as to the people, when the prayer is, that God would not lay it to their
charge, which is A
the same with expiating of it. 2. We are to consider, what the foundation of
this Prayer was, viz. the slaying of the Heifer for expiation of the uncertain
murder; and when the Elders had washed their hands over the head of the Heifer,
then they were to protest their own innocence, and to use this prayer. (...)
Expiate thy people Israel, etc. i. e. accept of this Sacrifice as an expiation
for them, and so charge not on them the innocent blood, etc. and upon doing of
this it is said, (...) and the blood shall be expiated, i. e. as the Vulgar
Latin explain it, the guilt of the blood shall be taken from B
them. But how then should the expiating sin upon a Sacrifice slain in order
thereto, dest^oy that satisfaction which we assert by the blood of Christ being
shed in order to the expiation of our sins? Nay, it much rather shows the
consistency and agreeableness of these one with another. For we have before
proved, that the Sacrifice here did expiate the sin by a substitution, and
bearing the guilt which could not have been expiated without it. But Crellius
further urges, that God himself is here said to expiate, and therefore to
expiate cannot signify to atone or satisfy; in which sense Christ may be
said to expiate C
too, not by atoning or satisfying, but by not imputing sins, or taking away
the punishment of them by his power. To which we need no other answer than what
Crellius himself elsewhere gives, viz. that Socinus never denies but that (...)
does signify to appease or atone; which is most evi^ently proved from the
place mentioned by Grotius, Genesis 32. 20. (...) Cum ro^ neget, Socinus hoc
verb^m placandi significationem habere. Crell. c. 20. sect. 38.
Expiabo faciem ejus in munere, says the interlineary Version, placabo illum
muneribus, the Vulg. Lat. (...), the LXX. and all the circumstances of the
place make it appear to be meant in the proper sense of appeasing the anger D
of a person by something which may move him to show favor. And if Crellius
will yield this to be the sense of expiation as applied to the Sacrifice of
Christ, he need not quarrel with the word satisfaction. But why should he
rather attribute that sense of expiation to Christ, which is alone given to
God, wherein the expiation is attributed to him that receives the Sacrifice:
rather than to him that offers the sacrifice in order to the atonement of
another? since it is acknowledged that Christ did offer a sacrifice; and
therefore there can be no reason why that sense of expiation should not belong
to him, which was E
most peculiar to that; which we shall now show to be of the same kind with
what is here mentioned, viz. an appeasing by a gift offered up to God. So we
find the word used to the same sense, 2 Samuel 21. 3. (...), and wherewith shall
I make the Atonement, i. e. wherewith shall A
I satisfy you for all the wrong which Saul has done unto you? and we see
afterward it was by the death of Saul's sons. In which place it cannot be
denied but that (...) not only signifies to appease, but such a kind of
satisfaction as is by the death of some for the faults of others; and so comes
home, not only to the importance of the expiation belonging to a Sacrifice in
general; but to such a kind of expiation as is by the suffering of some in the
place of others. Which though it be more clear and distinct, where one man
suffers for others, yet this was sufficiently represented in the sacrifices
under the B
Law, in which we have already proved that there was a substitution of them in
the place of the offenders.

And in this sense the Jews themselves do understand (...) viz. such an
expiation as is made by the substitution of one in the. 3. The Iew^ notion of
(...)
place of another. Of which many instances are collected by Buxtorf, wherein
(...) is taken by the Rabbinical Writers for such an expiation, whereby one was
to undergo a punishment Buxtorf. ^exic. Talmud. v. (...)
in the place of another. So when in the title Sanhedrin the people say to the
High Priest (...) simus nos expiatio tua, let us be for an expiation for you,
the Gloss explains it C
thus, hoc est, in nobis fiat expiatio tua, nosque subeamus tuo loco quicquid
tibi evenire debet. And when they tell us how Children ought to honor their
Parents after their death, they say when they recite any memorable speech of
their Fathers, they are not barely to say, My Father said so: but my Lord and
Father said so, would I had been the expiation of his death: i. e. as they
explain it themselves. would I had undergone what he did, and they give this
general rule, Where ever it is said, behold I am for expiation, it is to be
understood, behold I am in the place of another to bear his iniquities. So that
this signifies D
the same with (...) or a price of redemption for others. Hence (...) is taken
for a price of redemption of the life of another, and rendered by (...), Exodus
21. 30. -- 30. 12. Numb. 35. 31, 32. where we render it satisfaction, and by
(...), Psalm. 48. 7. and thereby we fully understand, what our Savior meant
when he said, that he gave his Soul, (...), a ransom for many, and to this day
the Jews call the Cock which they kill Matthew. 20. 28.
for Expiation on the day of Atonement, by the name of Cappara; and when they
beat the Cock against their heads thrice, they every time use words to this
purpose, Let this Cock be an E
exchange for me, let him be in my room, and be made an Expiation for me; let
death come to him, but to me and all Israel life and happiness. I insist on
these things, only to let us understand, that the Jews never understood (...)
in the sense our Adversaries contend for, when applied to an Expiatory
Sacrifice, A
but as implying a Commutation, and a Substitution of one in the place of
another, so as by the punishment of that, the other in whose room he suffers,
may obtain deliverance. Which is the sense we plead for. But the utmost which
Socinus and Socia. l. 2. c. 11. Doc^t Socinus victima^um oblationem obedientiam
quandam Deo praestandam, quanq^am lev^m contin^isse, quam ex ^romisso Dei
levium quoru^dam errator^m ac peccatorum venia co^se^^eretur. Creli. c. 10.
sect. 10.
Crellius will allow to the Sacrifices in order to Expiation, is barely this,
That the offering of them is to be considered as a mere condition (that has no
other respect to the expiation of sins, than the paring a man's nails would have
had, if God had required it) upon which slight obedience, the pardon of some
light sins might be obtained. But can any one imagine, that B
this was all that was designed by the Sacrifices of old, who considers the
antiquity and universality of them in the world in those elder times before the
Law, the great severity by which they were required under the Law, the punctual
prescriptions that were made in all circumstances for them, the vast and almost
inestimable expense the people were at about them, but above all, the reason
that God himself assigns in the Law, That the blood was given for expiation,
because it was the life; and the correspondency so clearly expressed in the New
Testament, between the Sacrifice of Christ, and those Levitical Sacrifices? C
Can any one, I say, imagine upon these considerations, that the Sacrifices had
no other respect to the expiation of sin, than as they were a slight testimony
of their obedience to God? Why were not an inward sorrow for sin, and tears and
prayers rather made the only conditions of Expiation, than such a burdensome
and chargeable service imposed upon them, which at last signified nothing, but
that a command being supposed, they would have sinned if they had broken it?
But upon our supposition, a reasonable account is given of all the expiatory
Sacrifices; viz. That God would have them see, how D
highly he esteemed his Laws, because an expiation was not to be made for the
breach of them, but by the sacrificing of the life of some Creature which he
should appoint in stead of the death of the Offender; and if the breach of
those Laws which he had given them must require such an expiation, what might
they then think would the sins of the whole world do, which must be expiated by
a Sacrifice infinitely greater than all those put together were; viz. The death
and sufferings of the Son of God for the sins of men? But if the offering
Sacrifice had been a bare condition required of the person who committed E
the fault, in order to expiation; Why is it never said, That the person who
offered it, did expiate his own fault thereby? For that had been the most
proper sense; for if the expiation did depend on the offering the Sacrifice, as
on the condition of it, then the performing the condition, gave him A
an immediate right to the benefit of the promise. If it be said, That his own
act was not only necessary in bringing the Sacrifice, but the Priests also in
offering up the blood: This will not make it at all the more reasonable;
because the pardon of sin should not only depend upon a man's own act, but upon
the act of another, which he could not in reason be accountable for, if he
miscarried in it. If the Priest should refuse to do his part, or be unfit to do
it, or break some Law in the doing of it, how hard would it seem that a man's
sins could not be expiated, when he had done all that lay in his own power in
order to the expiation B
of them, but that another person, whose actions he had no command over,
neglected the doing his duty? So that if the Sacrifice had no other influence
on expiation, but as a part of obedience, in all reason the expiation should
have depended on no other conditions but such as were under the power of him,
whose sins were to be expiated by it.

But Crellius urges against our sense of Expiation, That if it. 4. G^d^
ex^i^ting sin, des^^o^es n^^ ex^xp^ation by sacrifices. C^ell. ib. sect. 39.
were by Substitution, then the Expiation would be most properly attributed to
the Sacrifices themselves; whereas it is only said, that by the Sacrifices the
Expiation is obtained, but that God or C
the Priest do expiate; and to God it belongs properly, because he takes away
the guilt and punishment of sin; which is, says he, all meant by expiation; to
the Priest only consequently, as doing what God requires in order to it; and to
the Sacrifices only as the conditions by which it was obtained. But if the
Expiation does properly belong to God, and implies no more than bare pardon, it
is hard to conceive that it should have any necessary relation to the blood of
the Sacrifice: but the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, that Remission had a
necessary respect to the shedding of H^b. 9. 22.
blood, so that without that there was no remission. How improperly D
does the Apostle discourse throughout that Chapter, wherein he speaks so much
concerning the blood of the Sacrifices purisying, and in correspondency to
that, the blood of Christ purging Verse 1^, 14. Verse 18, 19, 20, 21, 23.
our Consciences; and that all things under the Law; were purified with blood;
Had all this no other significati^n, but that this was a bare condition that
had no other importance, but as a mere act of obedience when God had required
it? why does not the Apostle rather say, without Gods favor there is no
remission, than without the shedding of blood; if all the expiation did
pr^perly belong to that, and only very remotely to the blood E
of the Sacrifice? What imaginable necessity was there, that Christ must shed
his blood in order to the expiation of our sins, if all that blo^d of the Legal
Sacrifices did signify no more than a bare condition of pardon, though a
slight part of obedience in it self? Why must Christ lay down his life in
correspondency A
to these Levitical Sacrifices? for that was surely no slight part of his
obedience. Why might not this condition have been dispensed with in him, since
our Adversaries say, that in it self it has no proper efficacy on the
expiation of sin? And does not this speak the greatest repugnancy to the
kindness and Grace of God in the Gospel, that he would not dispense with the
ignominious death of his Son, although he knew it could have no influence of it
self on the expiation of the sins of the world? But upon this supposition, that
the blood of Sacrifices under the Law had no proper influence upon Expiation,
the Apostles B
discourse proceeds upon weak and insufficient grounds. For what necessity in
the thing was there, because the blood of the Sacrifices was made a condition
of pardon under the Law, therefore the blood of Christ must be so now; although
in it self it has no proper efficacy for that end? But the Apostles words and
way of Argumentation does imply, that there was a peculiar efficacy both in the
one and the other, in order to Expiation; although a far greater in the blood
of Christ, than could be in the other; as the thing typified, ought to exceed
that which was the representation of it. From hence we see, C
that the Apostle attributes what Expiation there was under the Law, not
immediately to God, as belonging properly to him, but to the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean. Which he had very
great reason to do, since God expressly says to the Jews, that the blood was
given them (...) ad expiandum, to expiate for their souls, for the blood (...)
shall expiate the soul. Than which words, nothing Lev. 17. 11.
could have been more plainly said to overthrow Crellius his assertion, that
Expiation is not properly or chiefly attributed to the Sacrifices, but
primarily to God, and consequentially D
to the Priest: who is never said to expiate, but by the Sacrifice which he
offered, so that his Office was barely Ministerial in it. But from this we may
easily understand, in what sense God is said to expiate sins, where it has
respect to a Sacrifice (which is that we are now discoursing of, and not in any
larger or more improper use of the word) for since God himself has declared,
that the blood was given for Expiation, the Expiation which belongs to God,
must imply his acceptance of it for that end, for which it was offered. For the
execution or discharge of the punishment belonging to him, he may be said in
that sense to E
expiate, because it is only in his power to discharge the sinner from that
obligation to punishment he lies under by his sins. And we do not say, that
where expiating is attributed to him that accepts the Atonement, that it does
imply his undergoing any punishment which is impossible to suppose; but that A
where it is attributed to a Sacrifice, as the means of Atonement, there we say
it does not imply a bare condition, but such a Substitution of one in the place
of another, that on the account of that, the fault of the offender himself is
expiated thereby.

And to this sense the other word (...) does very well agree;. 5. The
importance of (...), and (...), relating to sacrifices.
for Socinus and Crellius cannot deny, but that Genesis 31. 39. it properly
signifies Luere, or to bear punishment; although they say, it no where else
signifies so, and the reason is, because it is applied to the Altar, and such
other things, which are not capable of it; but does it hence follow, that it
should B
not retain that signification where the matter will bear it, as in the case of
Sacrifices. And although it be frequently rendered by (...), yet that will be no
prejudice to the sense we plead for in respect of Sacrifices, because those
words when used concerning them, do signify Expiation too. Grotius proves,
that they do from their own nature and constant use in Greek Authors, not only
signify an antecedency of order, but a peculiar efficacy in order to
Expiation. Thence expiatory Sacrifices among the Greeks were called (...), and
(...), frequently in Homer, C
applied to Sacrifices, (...) in Plutarch, and (...) used in the same sense; an
Expiatory Sacrifice in Herodotus is called (...), and to the same purpose it is
used in Hermogenes, Plato and Plutarch: as among the Latins, placare, purgare,
purificare, conciliare, lustrare in the same sense, and piare when used in
Sacrifices, he proves to signify Luere per successionem rei alterius in locum
poenae debitae. Thence piaculum used for an Expiatory Sacrifice, and expiare is
to appease by such a Sacrifice, so Cereris numen expiare is used in Cicero;
filium expiare in Livy. So that all D
these Sacrifices among them, were supposed still to pertain to the atoning the
Deity, and obtaining a remission of sins committed by them. And from hence
(because where there was a greater equality and nearness, there might be the
greater efficacy of the Sacrifice for expiation) came the custom of
sacrificing men, which Grotius at large shows to have almost universally
obtained before the coming of Christ. We are now to consider what Crellius
answers to this; the substance of which lies in these two things, 1. He denies
not but that (...) and (...) do in their proper use in the Greek Crell. c. 10.
sect. 23. and 24.
E
Tongue signify the purging of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God and
punishment, but that those and such other words are attributed to Sacrifices,
because those were supposed to be the effects of them among the Heathens; but
the attributing such effects to them, did arise from their A
superstition, whereby greater things were attributed to Sacrifices, than God
would have given to them, either before or under the Law. 2. He denies not, but
that those words, (...) and (...), being used by the Author to the Hebrews more
than Itaque quod ad ^es Graecas (...) and (...) attinet, quic^s i^ hoc
ar^u^^nto non semel ^titur D. scriptor ad Heb. t^ ad Christi Sacrifici^^ and
Sac^rd^^i ^^^ctionem relatae ^o etiam (...) ^s^r^antur q^^m Graeca ^i^gua
recep^rat, b. c. de ^xp^^gatio^e r^atus and aversio^^ irae n^mi^is a^t p^^^ae.
Crell. c. 10. p. 499.
once with respect to the Sacrifices and Priesth^od of Christ, were taken in
the same sense in which they are used in the Greek Tongue, viz. For the purging
of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and the punishment consequent
upon it: But all that he contends for is, That there is a difference in the
manner of effecting it, which he acknowledges the words themselves B
do not imply; and the reasons he gives for it are, That the other were proper,
but Christ's an improper Sacrifice; and that the other Sacrifices were offered
by men to God, but the Sacrifice of Christ was given by God to men, and
therefore he must be supposed to be reconciled before. From whence he would at
least have other senses of these words joined together with the former; viz.
Either for purging away the filth of sin, or for a declaration of a deliverance
from guilt and punishment, in imitation of the Idiome of the Hebrew, in which
many words are used in the New Testament. From hence it follows, that Crellius C
does yield the main cause, if it appear, that Christ did offer up an Expiatory
Sacrifice to God in his death, for then he grants that (...) and (...) being
applied to the Sacrifice of Christ, are to be taken for the purging away of
guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and the punishment of sin. And it
is to no purpose to say, that it is not a proper Sacrifice, for if the effects
of a proper Sacrifice do belong to it, that proves that it is so; for these
words being acknowledged to be applied to the Sacrifice of Christ by the Author
to the Hebrews, what could more evince that Christ's D
was a proper Sacrifice, than that those things are attributed to it, which by
the consent of all Nations, are said to belong to proper Sacrifices, and that
in the very same sense in which they are used by those who understood them in
the most proper sense. And what reason could Crellius have to say, that it was
only the superstition of the Heathens, which made them attribute such effects
to sacrifices; when himself acknowledges that the very same sense does belong
to the Sacrifice of Christ under that notion? and as to the Jews we have
already proved that the sense of expiation among them was by virtue of the E
Law to be taken in as proper a sense as among the Heathens, for the purging of
guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God. And why should Crellius deny that
effect of the Sacrifice of Christ as to the atonement of God, because Gods love
was seen in giving him who was to offer the Sacrifice? A
since that effect is attributed to those Sacrifices under the Law which God
himself appointed to be offered, and showed his great kindness to the people in
the Institution of such a way, whereby their sins might be expiated, and they
delivered from the punishment of them. But of the consistency of these two, I
shall speak more afterward, in the effect of the Sacrifices as relating to
Persons.

We now come to consider in what sense the expiation of sins. 8. Expiation
attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ in the same sense that it was to other
Sacrifices.
is in Scripture attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ, and therein I shall
prove these two things. 1. That the expiation is B
attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ in the same sense that is attributed to
other Sacrifices, and as the words in themselves do signify. 2. That what is
so attributed does belong to the Sacrifice of Christ in his death, antecedent
to his entrance into Heaven. 1. That the expiation is to be taken in a proper
sense, when it is attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ. Crellius tells us, the
controversy is not about the thing, viz. whether Crell. c. 10. sect. 24.
expiation in the sense we take it in for purging away guilt, and aversion of
the wrath of God, does belong to the Sacrifice of Christ, for he acknowledges
it does; but all the question is about C
the manner of it: which in the next Section he thus explains: There are three
senses in which Christ may be said to expiate sins; either by begetting Faith
in us, whereby we are drawn off from the practice of sin, in which sense, he
says, it is a remoter antecedent to it; or as it relates to the expiation by
actual deliverance from punishment, so he says, it is an immediate antecedent
to it: or as he declares that they are expiated, but this, he says, does not
so properly relate to Christ as a Sacrifice, but as a Priest. But never a one
of these senses comes near to that which Crellius grants to be the proper
importance D
of (...) and (...), as applied to a Sacrifice, viz. the purging away guilt,
and the aversion of the wrath of God, and punishment, not any way, but by the
means of the Sacrifice offered. For in the Legal Sacrifices nothing can be more
plain than that the expiation was to be by the Sacrifice offered for Atonement:
supposing then that in some other way (which could be by no means proper to
those Sacrifices) Christ may be said to expiate sins, what does this prove that
there was an expiation belonging to his Sacrifice agreeable to the Sacrifices
of old? But as I urged before in the case of Christ's E
being High Priest, that by their assertions the Jews might utte^ly deny the
force of any argument used by the Author to the Hebrews to prove it: so I say
as to the expiation by Christ's Sacrifice, that it has no analogy or
correspondency at all with any Sacrifice that was ever offered for the
expiation of A
sins. For by that they always understood something which was immediately
offered to God for that end, upon which they obtained remission of sins; but
here is nothing answerable to it in their sense of Christ's Sacrifice; for here
is no Oblation at all made unto God for this end; all the efficacy of the
Sacrifice of Christ, in order to expiation does wholly and immediately respect
us; so that if it be a proper Sacrifice to any, it must be a Sacrifice to us,
and not to God: for a Sacrifice is always said to be made to him whom it does
immediately respect; but Christ in the planting Faith, in actual B
deliverance, in declaring to us this deliverance, does wholly respect us, and
therefore his Sacrifice must be made to men, and not to God. Which is in it
self a gross absurdity, and repugnant to the nature and design of Sacrifices
from the first institution of them; which were always esteemed such immediate
parts of divine Worship, that they ought to respect none else but God, as the
object to which they were directed, though for the benefit and advantage of
Mankind. As well then might Christ be said to pray for us, and by that no more
be meant but that he does teach us to understand our duty; as be C
made an expiatory Sacrifice for us, and all the effect of it only respect us
and not God. And this is so far from adding to the perfection of Christ's
Sacrifice above the Legal (which is the thing pleaded by Crellius) that it
destroys the very nature of a Sacrifice, if such a way of expiation be
attributed to it Crell. c. 10. sect. 26.
(which though conceived to be more excellent in it self) yet is wholly
incongruous to the end and design of a Sacrifice for Expiation. And the
excellency of the manner of expiation ought to be in the same kind, and not
quite of another nature; for, will any one say, that a General of an Army has D
a more excellent conduct than all that went before him, because he can make
finer speeches; or that the Assomanaean Family discharged the Office of
Priesthood best, because they had a greater power over the people; or that Nero
was the most excellent Emperor of Rome because he excelled the rest in Music
and Poetry: by which we see that to assert an excellency of one above another,
we must not go to another kind, but show its excellency in that wherein the
comparison lies: So that this does not prove the excellency of the Sacrifice of
Christ, because he has a greater power to persuade, deliver E
and govern, than any Sacrifice under the Law; for these are things quite of
another nature from the consideration of a Sacrifice: But therein the
excellency of a Sacrifice is to be demonstrated, that it excells all other in
the proper end and dedesign of a Sacrifice, i. e. if it be more effectual
toward God for A
obtaining the expiation of sin; which was always thought to be the proper end
of all Sacrifices for expiation. Although then Christ may be allowed to excel
all other Sacrifices in all imaginable respects but that which is the proper
intention of a Sacrifice; it may prove far greater excellency in Christ, but it
does withal prove a greater imperfection in his Sacrifice, if it fail in that
which is the proper end of it. So that if we should grant that the expiation
attributed to Christ's Sacrifice signified no more than reclaiming men from
their sins, or their deliverance by his power, or a declaration of Gods decree
to pardon, B
this may prove that there are better arguments to believe the remission of
sins now under the Gospel; but they do not in the least prove that Christ is to
be considered as a Sacrifice; much less that he does far excel in the notion
of an Expiatory Sacrifice all those which were offered up to God for that end
under the Law.

But we must now further consider, whether this be all attributed to Christ in
order to expiation in Scripture; i. e. Whether. 7. Expiation by Christ not
merely declara^ive.
those words which of themselves do imply the aversion of the wrath of God,
when used concerning other Sacrifices, C
when applied to the Sacrifice of Christ, do only imply the begetting faith in
us, or a declaration of pardon. The words which are used to this purpose, are
(...), which are all applied to the blood of Christ, and the dispute is,
whether they signify no more but a declaration of pardon, or a means to beget
says in us. The first words (...) and (...) Crellius acknowledges do
frequently signify deliverance from guilt and punishment; but, he says, they
may Crell. cap. 10. sect. 28. p 506.
likewise signify a declaration of that deliverance, as decreed by God, or a
purging from the sins themselves, or from the D
custom of sinning. So that by Crellius his own confession, the sense we
contend for is most proper and usual, the other are more remote, and only
possible; why then should we forsake the former sense, which does most
perfectly agree to the nature of a Sacrifice, which the other senses have no
such relation to, as that has? For these being the words made use of in the
New Testament, to imply the force and efficacy of a Sacrifice, why should they
not be understood in the same sense which the Hebrew words were taken in, when
they are applied to the Sacrifices under the Law? We are not E
enquiring into all possible senses of words, but into the most natural and
agreeable to the scope of them that use them: and that we shall make it appear
to be the same, we plead for in the places in dispute between us; as, 1 John 1.
7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, (...), purges A
us from all sin, Heb. 9. 13, 14. If the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the
ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, (...), sanctifies to the purifying
of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences
from dead works, (...), Heb. 1. 3. (...), when he had by himself purged our
sins. So (...) and (...) are used with a respect to the blood of Christ, Heb.
10. 22. Apocalip. 1. 5. And because remission of sin was looked on as the
consequent of expiation by Sacrifice under the Law; B
therefore that is likewise attributed to the blood of Christ, Matthew. 26. 28,
This is the blood of the New Testament which was shed for many, (...), for the
remission of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
remission of sins, and to the same purpose, Coloss. 1. 14. And from hence we
are said to be justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. and Christ is said to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. The substance of all that
Crellius replies to these places is, That those words which do properly
signify the thing Crell. cap. 10. sect. 28.
it self, may very conveniently be taken only for the declaration C
of it, when the performance of the thing does follow by virtue of that
declartaion: which then happens, when the declaration is made of the thing
decreed by another, and that in the name and by the command of him who did
decree it. And in this sense, Christ by his blood may be said to deliver us
from the punishment of our sins, by declaring or testifying to us the will and
decree of God for that purpose. But this answer is by no means sufficient, upon
these considerations; 1. Because it does not reach the proper and natural sense
of the words, as Crellius himself confesses; and yet he assigns no reason D
at all, why we ought to depart from it, unless the bare possibility of another
meaning be sufficient. But how had it been possible for the efficacy of the
blood of Christ for purging away the guilt of our sins, to have been expressed
in clearer and plainer terms than these, which are acknowledged of themselves
to signify as much as we assert? If the most proper expressions for this
purpose, are not of force enough to persuade our Adversaries, none else could
ever do it: so that it had been impossible for our Doctrine to have been
delivered in such terms, but they would have found out ways to evade E
the meaning of them. It seems very strange, that so great an efficacy should
not only once or twice, but so frequently be attributed to the blood of Christ
for expiation of sin, if nothing else were meant by it, but that Christ by his
death did only declare that God was willing to pardon sin? If there A
were danger in understanding the words in their proper sense, why are they so
frequently used to this purpose? why are there no other places of Scripture
that might help to undeceive us, and tell us plainly, that Christ dyed only to
declare his Fathers will? but what ever other words might signify, this was
the only true meaning of them. But what miserable shifts are these, when men
are forced to put off such Texts which are confessed to express our Doctrine,
only by saying that they may be otherwise understood? which destroys all kind
of certainty in words; which by reason of the various use B
of them, may be interpreted to so many several senses, that if this liberty be
allowed, upon no other pretense, but that another meaning is possible, men will
never agree about the intention of any person in speaking. For upon the same
reason, if it had been said, That Christ declared by his death Gods readiness
to pardon, it might have been interpreted, That the blood of Christ was
therefore the declaration of Gods readiness to pardon, because it was the
consideration upon which God would do it: So that if the words had been as
express for them, as they are now against them, according to their way of
answering C
places, they would have been reconcilable to our opinion. 2. The Scripture in
these expression, does attribute something peculiar to the blood of Christ; but
if all that were meant by it were no more, than the declaring Gods will to
pardon, this could in no sense be said to be peculiar to it. For this was the
design of the Doctrine of Christ, and all his miracles were wrought to confirm
the truth of that part of his Doctrine, which concerned remission of sins as
well as any other: but how absurd would it have been to say, that the miracles
of Christ purge us from all sin, that D
through Christ healing the sick, raising the dead, etc. we have redemption,
even the forgiveness of sins, which are attributed to the blood of Christ? but
if in no other respect, than as a testimony to the truth of the Doctrine of
Remission of sins, they were equally applicable to one as to the other.
Besides, if this had been all intended in these expressions, they were the most
incongruously applied to the blood of Christ; nothing seeming more repugnant to
the Doctrine of the Remission of sins, which was declared by it, than that very
thing by which it was declared, if no more were intended by it: E
For how unsuitable^a way was it to declare the pardon of the guilty persons,
by such severities used toward the most Innocent! Who could believe, that God
should declare his willingness to pardon others, by the death of his own Son;
unless that death of his be considered as the Meritorious cause for A
procuring it? And in that sense we acknowledge, That the death of Christ was a
declaration of Gods will and decree to pardon, but not merely as it gave
testimony to the truth of his Doctrine (for in that sense the blood of the
Apostles and Martyrs might be said to purge us from sin, as well as the blood
of Christ) but because it was the consideration upon which God had decreed to
pardon. And so as the acceptance of the condition required, or the price paid,
may be said to declare or manifest, the intention of a person to release or
deliver a Captive: So Gods acceptance of what Christ did suffer for our sakes, B
may be said to declare his readiness to pardon us upon his account. But then
this declaration does not belong properly to the act of Christ in suffering;
but to the act of God in accepting: and it can be no other ways known, than
Gods acceptance is known; which was not by the Sufferings, but by the
Resurrection of Christ. And theref^re the declaring Gods will and decree to
pardon, does properly belong to that: and if that had been all which the
Scripture had meant, by purging of sin by the blood of Christ, it had been very
incongruously applied to that, but most properly to his Resurrection. But C
these phrases being never attributed to that which most properly might be said
to declare the will of God; and being peculiarly attributed to the death of
Christ, which cannot be said properly to do it; nothing can be more plain, than
that these expressions ought to be taken in that which is confessed to be their
proper sense; viz. That Expiation of sin, which does belong to the death of
Christ, as a Sacrifice for the sins of the world.

But yet Socinus and Crellius have another subterfuge. (For therein lies their
great art, in seeking rather by any. 8. The death of Christ not taken
Metonymically for all the consequents of it.
means to escape their enemies, than to overcome them.) D
For being sensible, that the main scope and design of the Scripture is against
them, they seldom, and but very weakly assault: but show all their subtilty in
avoiding by all imaginable arts, the force of what is brought against them. And
the Scripture being so plain in attributing such great effects to the death of
Christ, when no other answer will serve turn, then they tell us, That the death
of Christ is C^ell. cap. 1. sect. 103. Sect. 119. c. 10 Sect. 45. p. 527.
taken Metonymically for all the consequents of his death; viz. His
Resurrection, Exaltation, and the Power and Authority which he has at the
right hand of his Father. But how is it E
possible to convince those, who by death, can understand life; by sufferings,
can mean glory, and by the shedding of blood, sitting at the right hand of God?
And that the Scripture is very far from giving any countenance to these bold
Interpretations, will appear by these considerations; 1. because the effect A
of Expiation of our sins, is attributed to the death of Christ, as distinct
from his Resurrection.; viz. Our reconciliation with God, Romans 5. 10. For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. To which Crellius
answers, That the Apostle does not speak of the death of Crell. cap. 1. sect.
112.
Christ alone, or as it is considered distinct from the consequences of it; but
only that our Reconciliation was effected by the death of Christ intervening.
But nothing can be more evident to any one, who considers the design of the
Apostles B
discourse, than that he speaks of what was peculiar to the death of Christ:
for therefore it is said, that Christ dyed for Romans 5. v. 6.
the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one dye: but God comm^ndeth
his love toward us, in that while we 7. 8. 9.
were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Much more then being now justified by
his blood, we shall be saved through him; upon which those words follow, For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, etc.
10.
The Reconciliation here mentioned, is attributed to the death of Christ in the
same sense, that it is mentioned before; C
but there it is not mentioned as a bare condition intervening in order to
something farther; but as the great instance of the love both of God and
Christ; of God, in sending his Son; of Christ, in laying down his life for
sinners, in order to their being justified by his blood. But where is it that
St. Paul says, that the death of Christ had no other influence on the
expiation of our sins, but as a bare condition intervening in order to that
power and authority whereby he should expiate sins? what makes him attribute so
much to the death of Christ, if all the benefits we enjoy D
depend upon the consequences of it; and no otherwise upon that, than merely as
a preparation for it? what peculiar emphasis were there in Christ's dying for
sinners, and for the ungodly; unless his death had a particular relation to the
expiation of their sins? Why are men said to be justified by his blood, and not
much rather by his glorious Resurrection, if the blood of Christ be only
considered as antecedent to the other? And that would have been the great
demonstration of the love of God which had the most immediate influence upon
our advantage: which could not have been the death E
in this sense, but the life and glory of Christ. But nothing can be more
absurd than what Crellius would have to be the meaning of this place, viz. that
the Apostle does not speak of the proper force of the death of Christ distinct
from his life; but that two things are opposed to each other for the effecting
of A
one of which the death of Christ did intervene, but it should not intervene
for the other; viz. it did intervene for our reconciliation, but it should not
for our life. For did not the death of Christ equally intervene for our life as
for our reconciliation? was not our eternal deliverance the great thing
designed by Christ, and our reconciliation in order to that end? what
opposition then can be imagined, that it should be necessary for the death of
Christ to intervene in order to the one than in order to the other? But he
means, that the death of Christ should not intervene anymore; what B
need that, when it is acknowledged by themselves, that Christ dyed only for
this end before, that he might have power to bestow eternal life on them that
obey him? But the main force of the Apostles argument lies in the comparison
between the death of Christ having respect to us as enemies in order to
reconciliation, and the life of Christ to us considered as reconciled; so that
if he had so much kindness for enemies, to dye for their reconciliation, we may
much more presume that he now living in Heaven will accomplish the end of that
reconciliation, in the eternal salvation C
of them that obey him. By which it is apparent that he speaks of the death of
Christ in a notion proper to it self, having influence upon our reconciliation;
and does not consider it metonymically as comprehending in it, the consequents
of it.

2. Because the expiation of sins is attributed to Christ antecedently to the
great consequents of his death, viz. his sitting. 9. Expiation attributed to
Christ antecedently to his entrance into heaven.
at the right hand of God. Heb. 1. 3. When he had by himself purged our sins,
sat down on the right hand of his Majesty on high. Heb. 9. 12. But by his own
blood he entered in D
once into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. To these
places Crellius gives a double answer. 1. That indefinite particles ((...) and
(...)) being Crell. cap. 10. sect. 50.
joined with Verbs of the praeterperfect tense do not always require that the
action expressed by them, should precede that which is designed in the Verbs to
which they are joined; but they have sometimes the force of particles of the
present or imperfect tense; which sometimes happens in particles of the
praeterperfect tense, as Matthew. 10. 5. (...) so (...); and several other
instances produced by him: E
according to which manner of interpretation the sense he puts upon those
words, Heb. 9. 12. is, Christ by the shedding of his blood entered into the Holy
of Holies, and in so doing he found eternal redemption, or the expiation of
sins. But not to dispute with Crellius concerning the importance of the Aorist A
being joined with a Verb of the praeterperfect tense, which in all reason and
common acceptance does imply the action past by him who writes the words
antecedent to his writing of it, as is plain in the instances produced by
Crellius; but according to his sense of Christ's expiation of sin, it was yet to
come after Christ's entrance into Heaven, and so it should have been more
properly (...) than (...); not I say to insist upon that, the Apostle
manifests, that he had a respect to the death of Christ in the obtaining this
eternal redemption, by his following discourse: for v. 14. he compares the
blood of B
Christ in point of efficacy for expiation of sin, with the blood of the Legal
Sacrifices: whereas if the expiation meant by him had been sound by Christ's
Oblation of himself in Heaven, he would have compared Christ's entrance into
Heaven in order to it, with the entrance of the High Priest into the Holy of
Holies, and his argument had run thus. For if the High Priest under the Law did
expiate sins by entering into the Holy of Holies; How much more shall the Son of
God entering into Heaven expiate the sins of Mankind: but we see the Apostle had
no sooner mentioned the redemption obtained for us; but he presently C
speaks of the efficacy of the blood of Christ in order to it, and as plainly
asserts the same, v. 15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New
Testament that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
which were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. Why does the Apostle here speak of the (...),
the expiation of sins by the means of death; if he had so lately asserted
before that the redemption or expiation was found not by his death, but by his
entrance into Heaven? and withal the Apostle here does not speak of such a D
kind of expiation as wholly respects the future, but of sins that were under
the first Testament, not barely such as could not be expiated by virtue of it,
but such as were committed during the time of it, although the Levitical Law
allowed no expiation for them. And to confirm this sense, the Apostle does not
go on to prove the necessity of Christ's entrance into Heaven; but of his dying,
v. 16, 17, 18. But granting that he does allude to the Highpriests entering
into the Holy of Holies, yet that was but the representation of a Sacrifice
already offered, and he could not be said to find expiation by his entrance;
but that was already E
found by the blood of the Sacrifice, and his entrance was only to accomplish
the end for which the blood was offered up in sacrifice. And the benefit which
came to men is attributed to the Sacrifice, and not to the sprinkling of blood
before the Mercy-seat: and whatever effect was consequent upon his entrance
into the A
Sanctuary, was by virtue of the blood which he carried in with him, and was
before shed at the Altar. Neither can it with any reason be said, that if the
redemption were obtained by the blood of Christ, there could be no need of his
entrance into Heaven; since we do not make the Priesthood of Christ to expire
at his death; but that he is in Heaven a merciful High Priest in negotiating
the affairs of his People with God, and there ever lives to make intercession
for them.

Crellius answers, That granting the Aorist being put before. 10. No
distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's entrance into Heaven from
his sitting at the right hand of God.
the Ver (...) should imply such an action which was antecedent B
to Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, yet it is not there said, that
the expiation of sins was made before Christ's entrance into Heaven; for those,
says he, are to be considered as two different things; for a Prince first
enters into his Palace, before he sits upon his throne. And therefore, says
he, Christ may be said to have made expiation of sins, before he sat down at
the right hand of his Father, not that it was done by his death, but by his
Crell. c. 10. sect. 50. p. 537.
entrance into Heaven, and offering himself to God there, by which means he
obtained his sitting on the right hand of the Majesty on high, and thereby the
full Power of remission of sins, C
and giving eternal life. To which I answer, 1. That the Sripture never makes
such a distinction between Christ's entrance into Heaven, and sitting at the
right hand of God; which latter implying no more but the glorious state of
Christ in Heaven, his entrance into Heaven does imply it: For therefore God
exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior; and the reason of the power and
authority given him in Heaven is no where attributed to his entrance into it as
the means of it; but our Savior before that tells us that all power and
authority was committed to Matthew. 28. 18.
him; and his very entrance into Heaven was a part of his glory; D
and given him in consideration of his sufferings; as the Apostle plainly
asserts; and he became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross,
wherefore God has highly exalted him, etc. Phil. 2. 8, 9.
There can be then no imaginable reason to make the entrance of Christ into
Heaven, and presenting himself to God there, a condition or means of obtaining
that power and authority which is employed in his sitting at the right hand of
God. 2. Supposing, we should look on these as distinct, there is as little
reason to attribute the expiation of sin to his entrance, considered as
distinct from the other: For the expiation of sins in Heaven E
being by Crellius himself confessed to be by the exercise of Christ's power,
and this being only the means to that power, how could Christ expiate sins by
that power which he had not? But of this I have spoken before, and showed that
in no sense allowed by themselves the expiation A
of sins can be attributed to the entrance of Christ into Heaven as distinct
from his sitting at the right hand of God. Thus much may suffice to prove, that
those effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice, which do respect the sins committed,
do properly agree to the death of Christ.

I now come to that which respects the person, considered as. 11. Of the
Atonement made by Christ's death.
obnoxious to the wrath of God by reason of his sins; and so the effect of an
Expiatory Sacrifice is Atonement and Reconciliation. By the wrath of God, I
mean, the reason which God has from the holiness and justice of his nature, to
punish sin B
in those who commit it: by the means of Atonement and Reconciliation, I mean,
that in consideration of which, God is willing to release the sinner from the
obligation to punishment he lies under by the Law of God, and to receive him
into favor, upon the terms which are declared by the Doctrine of Christ. And
that the death of Christ was such a means of Atonement and Reconciliation for
us, I shall prove by those places of Scripture which speak of it. But Crellius
would seem to acknowledge, Crell. c. 7. sect. 3.
That if Grotius seem to contend for no more, than that Christ did avert that
wrath of God which men had deserved C
by their sins, they would willingly yield him all that he pleads for: but then
he adds, That this deliverance from the wrath to come, is not by the death, but
by the power of Christ. So that the question is, Whether the death of Christ
were the means of Atonement and Reconciliation between God and us? and yet
Crellius would seem willing to yield too, that the death of Christ may be said
to avert the wrath of God from us, as it was a condition in order to it; for in
that sense it had no more influence upon it than his birth had: but we have
already seen, that the Scripture attributes much more to the death and blood D
of Christ, in order to the expiation of sin. We do not deny, that the death of
Christ may be called a condition, as the performance of any thing in order to
an end, may be called the condition upon which that thing is to be obtained;
but we say, that it is not a bare condition, but such a one as implies a
consideration, upon which the thing is obtained, being such as answers the end
of him that grants it: by which means it does propitiate or atone him, who had
before just reason to punish, but is now willing to forgive and be reconciled
to them, who have so highly offended him. And E
in this sense we assert, that Christ is said to be (...), a propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 2. 2. -- 4. 10. which we take in the same sense that (...), is
taken for the Sin-offering for Atonement. Ezekiel. 44. 27. (...), they shall offer
a sin-offering; for so (...) there signifies: and in the same A
sense (...) is taken, Ezekiel. 45. 19, and the Ram for Atonement ts called (...),
Numb. 5. 8. And thence the High Priest when he made an Atonement, is said
(...), 2 Maccab. 3. 33. which is of the greater consequence to us, because
Crellius would not have the sense either of (...) or (...), to be Crell. 7.
sect. 10.
taken from the common use of the word in the Greek Tongue; but from that which
some call the Hellenistical use of it; viz. That which is used in the Greek of
the New Testament, out of the LXX. and the Apocryphal Greek; in both which we
have found the word (...) in a sense fully correspondent to what B
we plead for. But he yet urges, and takes a great deal of pains to prove, that
(...) and (...) do not always signify to be appeased by another; but
sometimes signifies to be propitious and merciful in pardoning; and sometimes
to expiate, and then signifies the same with (...) and (...): which if it be
granted, proves nothing against us, having already proved, that those words do
signify the aversion of the wrath of God by a Sacrifice, and that there is no
reason to recede from that signification, when they are applied to the blood of
Christ. And we do not contend, that when the word (...) or (...) is applied C
to him that does forgive, it does imply appeasing; but the effect of it, which
is pardoning; but that which we assert, is, that when it is applied to a third
person, or a thing made use of in order to forgiveness, then we say it
signifies the propitiating him that was justly displeased: so as by what was
done or suffered for that end, he is willing to pardon what he had just reason
to punish. So Moses is said, to make Atonement for the people by his prayers,
(...), Exodus 34. 14. and we may see Verse 11. how much God was displeased
before. And Moses besought D
the Lord his God, and said, Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people: and
Verse 12. Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy
people: and then it is said, Verse 14. The Lord was atoned for the evil which
he thought to do unto his people. I would therefore willingly know, why Moses
might not here properly be said, (...), as it is said, (...), and therefore
since it is so very often said in the Levitical Law, (...) and (...), as (...),
and the accusative case scarce ever put but in two cases; (viz. When E
these words are applied to inanimate things, as the Altar, etc. or when to God
himself, implying forgiveness) what reason can we assign more probable for this
different construction, than that when (...) is used, the verb has a respect
to the offended party as the accusative understood? as Christ is A
said in the places mentioned to be (...), which ought in reason to be
understood as those words after Moses his intercession, (...). But Crellius
asks, Why then do we never read once concerning the Priest, that he did (...)
or (...), but we read that he did (...), and God is said, (...). To this I
answer; 1. That the reason why the person propitiated, is not expressed, is,
because it was so much taken for granted, that the whole Institution of
Sacrifices did immediately respect God, and therefore there was no danger of
mistaking, B
concerning the person who was to be atoned. 2. I wonder Crellius can himself
produce no instance where (...) is used with respect to the Sacrifices, and the
persons whose offenses are remitted by the Atonement; but where (...) has a
relation to that, it is still joined with a Preposition relating, either to the
person or to the offenses; if no more were understood when it is so used, than
when God himself is said to do it, why is not the phrase (...), as well said of
the Priest, as it is of God? From whence Grotius his sense of Hebr. 2. 17.
(...) for C
(...), is far more agreeable to the use of the phrase in the Old Testament,
than that which Crellius would put upon it. Therefore since the (...) is
attributed to Christ, we ought to take it in the sense proper to a Propitiatory
Sacrifice: so it is said by Moses, where God is left out, but is necessarily
understood, after the people had provoked God by their Idolatry; Ye have sinned
a great sin: And now I will go up unto the Lord, (...), That I may make an
Atonement for your sin: What way could Moses be said to make this Atonement, D
but by propitiating God; yet his name is not there expressed, but necessarily
understood. So (...) is used in the most proper sense for appeasing the anger
of a person, Gen 32. 20. and (...), 2 Samuel 21. 3. which places have been
already insisted on, in the signification of the word (...). And that those
places wherein Christ is said to be a propitiation for our sins, are capable of
no other sense, will appear from the consideration of Christ, as a middle
person between God and us; and therefore his being (...), cannot be parallel
with that phrase, where God himself is said, E
(...), for Christ is here considered as interposing between God and us, as
Moses and the Priests under the Law did between God and the people, in order to
the averting his wrath from them. And when one does thus interpose in order to
the Atonement of the offended A
party, something is always supposed to be done or suffered by him, as the
means of that Atonement. As Jacob supposed the present he made to his Brother
would propitiate him; and David appeased the Gibeonites by the death of Saul's
Sons, both which are said (...). So the shedding of the blood of Sacrifices
before and under the Law, was the means of atoning God for the sins they
committed. What reason can there be then why so received a sense of Atonement,
both among the Jews, and all other Nations at that time when these words were
written, must be forsaken; and any other sense be embraced, which B
neither agrees with the propriety of the expression, nor with so many other
places of Scripture, which make the blood of Christ to be a Sacrifice for the
Expiation of sin?

Neither is it only our Atonement, but our Reconciliation is attributed to
Christ too, with a respect to his Death and. 12. Of Reconciliation by Christ's
death.
Sufferings. As in the place before insisted on: For if when we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; and more largely in the
second Epistle to the Corinthians. Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 18. 19, 21.
And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ,
and has given to us the ministry of C
reconciliation: To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the
word of reconciliation. For he has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And to the Ephesians,
And Ephesians. 2. 16.
that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by his Cross, having slain
the enmity thereby. To the same purpose to the Colossians, And having made
peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to
himself, by him I Col. 1. 20, 21, 22.
say whether they be things in Heaven or in Earth; and you D
that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet
now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death. Two things the
substance of Crellius his answer may be reduced to concerning these places. 1.
That Crill. c. 7. sect. 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.
it is no where said that God was reconciled to us, but that we are reconciled
to God, and therefore this reconciliation does not imply any averting of the
anger of God. 2. That none of these places do assert any reconciliation with
God antecedent to our conversion, and so that the Reconciliation mentioned
implies only the laying aside our enmity to E
God by our sins. I begin with the first of these, concerning which we are to
consider not barely the phrases used in Scripture, but what the nature of the
thing implies; as to which a difference being supposed between God and man on
the account of sin, no reconciliation A
can be imagined but what is mutual. For did man only fall out with God, and
had not God just reason to be displeased with men for their Apostasy from him?
If not, what made him so severely punish the first sin that ever was committed
by man? what made him punish the old World for their impieties by a deluge?
what made him leave such Monuments of his anger against the sins of the World
in succeeding Ages? what made him add such severe sanctions to the Laws he made
to the people of the Jews? what made the most upright Psalm. 6. 1. 38. 1. Psalm.
5. 5. 7. 11. 11. 5. Levit. 26. 30.
among them so vehemently to deprecate his wrath and displeasure B
upon the sense of their sins? what makes him declare not only his hatred of
the sins of men, but of the persons of those who commit them; so far as to
express the greatest abhorrency of them? Nay, what makes our Adversaries
themselves to say, that impiety is in its own nature hateful to God, and stirrs
him up to anger against all who commit it? what Crell. de Deo and Attrib. l.
(...). c. 30.
means, I say, all this, if God be not angry with men on the account of sin?
Well then; supposing God to be averse from men by reason of their sins, shall
this displeasure always continue or not; if it always continues, men must
certainly suffer the C
desert of their sins; if it does not always continue, then God may be said to
be reconciled in the same sense that an offended party is capable of being
reconciled to him who has provoked him. Now there are two ways whereby a party
justly offended may be said to be reconciled to him that has offended him.
First, when he is not only willing to admit of terms of agreement, but does
declare his acceptance of the mediation of a third person, and that he is so
well satisfied with what he has done in order to it, that he appoints this to
be published to the World to assure the offender, that if the D
breach continues, the fault wholly lies upon himself. The second is, when the
offender does accept of the terms of agreement offered, and submits himself to
him whom he has provoked, and is upon that received into favor. And these two
we assert must necessarily be distinguished in the reconciliation between God
and us. For upon the death and sufferings of Christ, God declares to the World
he is so well satisfied with what Christ has done and suffered in order to the
reconciliation between himself and us, that he now publishes remission of sins
to the World upon those terms which the Mediator E
has declared by his own doctrine, and the Apostles he sent to preach it: But
because remission of fins does not immediately follow upon the death of Christ,
without supposition of any act on our part, therefore the state of favor does
commence from the performance of the conditions which are A
required from us. So that upon the death of Christ God declaring his
acceptance of Christ's mediation, and that the obstacle did not lie upon his
part; therefore those Messengers who were sent abroad into the world to
persuade men to accept of these terms of agreement, do insist most upon that
which was the remaining obstacle, viz. the sins of Mankind, that men by laying
aside them, would be now reconciled to God, since there was nothing to hinder
this reconciliation, their obstinacy in sin excepted. Which may be a very
reasonable account why we read more frequently in the writings B
of the Apostles, of men's duty in being reconciled to God; the other being
supposed by them as the foundation of their preaching to the world, and is
insisted on by them upon that account, as is clear in that place to the
Corinthians, That God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not
imputing 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20.
unto men their trespasses, and has committed to us the Word of
Reconciliation; and therefore adds, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled
to God: And least these words should seem dubious, he declares that the
reconciliation C
in Christ was distinct from that reconciliation he persuades them to; for the
reconciliation in Christ he supposes past. v. 18. All things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and v. 21. he shows us how this
Reconciliation was wrought: For he has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Crellius here finds
it necessary to acknowledge a twofold Reconciliation, but hopes to escape the
force of this Crell. cap. 1. sect. 118. (...) cap. 7. sect. 24.
place by a rare distinction of the Reconciliation as preached by Christ, and
by his Apostles; and so Gods having reconciled D
the World to himself by Jesus Christ is nothing else but Christ's preaching the
Gospel himself, who afterward committed that Office to his Apostles. But if
such shifts as these will serve to baffle men's understandings, both they were
made, and the Scripture were written to very little purpose; for if this had
been all the Apostle had meant, that Christ preached the same Doctrine of
Reconciliation before them, what mighty matter had this been to have solemnly
told the World, that Christ's Apostles preached no other Doctrine, but what
their Master had preached before? especially if no more were meant by it, E
but that men should leave their sins, and be reconciled to God. But besides,
why is the Ministry of Reconciliation, then attributed only to the Apostles,
and not to Christ, which ought in the first place to have been given to him,
since the Apostles did only receive it from him? Why is that Ministry of
Reconciliation A
said to be, viz. that God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself? was
this all the subject of the Apostles preaching, to tell the World, that Christ
persuaded men to leave off their sins? how comes God to reconcile the World to
himself by the preaching of Christ, since Christ himself says, he was not sent
to preach to the world; but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? Was the
World reconciled to God by the preaching of Christ before they had ever heard
of him? Why is God said not to impute to men their trespasses by the preaching
of Christ, rather than his Apostles; if the not imputing B
were no more than declaring Gods readiness to pardon; which was equally done
by the Apostles as by Christ himself? Lastly, what force or dependence is there
in the last words, For he made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, etc. if
all he had been speaking of before had only related to Christ's preaching? How
was he made sin more than the Apostles, if he were only treated as a sinner
upon the account of the same Doctrine which they preached equally with him? and
might not men be said to be made the righteousness of God in the Apostles, as
well as in Christ, if no more be meant, but C
being persuaded to be righteous, by the Doctrine delivered to them?

In the two latter places, Ephesians. 2. 16. Coloss. 1. 20. etc. it is plain, that a
twofold reconcilation is likewise mentioned, the one of the Jews and Gentiles
to one another, the other of both of them to God. For nothing can be more
ridiculous than the Exposition of Socinus, who would have (...) not to be
joined with the Verb, (...), but to stand by it self, and to signify that this
reconciliation of the Jews and Gentiles did tend to the glory of God. And
Crellius, who stands out D
at nothing, hopes to bring off Socinus here too; by saying, Crell. cap. 7.
sect. 30.
that it is very common, for the end to which a thing was appointed to be
expressed by a Dative case following the Verb; but he might have spared his
pains in proving a thing no one questions; the shorter answer had been to have
produced one place where (...) ever signifies any thing but to be reconciled to
God as the offended party; or wherever the Dative of the person following the
Verb importing reconciliation, did signify any thing else but the party with
whom the reconciliation was to be made. As for that objection concerning E
things in Heaven being reconciled; that phrase does not import such a
Reconciliation of the Angels as of Men, but that Men and Angels upon the
reconciliation of men to God, become one body under Christ, and are gathered
together in him, as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 1. 10. A


Having thus far proved, that the effects of an Expiatory. 12. Obj^ctions
answered.
Sacrifice do belong to the death of Christ, nothing now remains but an answer
to be made to two Objections, which are commonly insisted on by our
Adversaries. The first is, That God was reconciled before he sent his Son, and
therefore Christ could not dye to reconcile God to us. The second is, That the
Doctrine of Satisfaction asserted by us, is inconsistent with the freeness of
Gods grace in the remission of sins: Both which (...) admit of an easy
Solution upon the principles of the foregoing discourse. To the first I answer,
That we assert nothing inconsistent B
with that love of God, which was discovered in sending his Son into the world;
we do not say, That God hated mankind so much on the account of sin, that it
was impossible he should ever admit of any terms of Reconciliation with them,
which is the only thing inconsistent with the greatness of Gods love, in
sending Christ into the world; but we adore and magnify the infiniteness and
unexpressible greatness of his love, that notwithstanding all the contempt of
the former kindness and mercies of Heaven, he should be pleased to send his own
Son to dye for sinners, that they might be reconciled C
to him. And herein was the great love of God manifested, that while we were
enemies and sin^ers, Christ dyed for us, and that for this end, that we might
be reconciled to God by his death. And therefore surely, not in the state of
favor or Reconciliation with God then. But it were worth the while, to
understand what it is our Adversaries mean, when they say, God was reconciled
when he sent his Son, and therefore he could not dye to reconcile God to us.
Either they mean, that God had decreed to be reconciled upon the sending his
son, or that he was actually reconciled when he sent him: if he D
only decreed to be reconciled, that was not at all inconsistent with Christ's
dying to reconcile God and us in pursuance of that decree: if they mean, he was
actually reconciled, then there was no need for Christ to dye to reconcile God
and us; but withal, actual Reconciliation implies pardon of sin; and if sin
were actually pardoned before Christ came, there could be no need of his coming
at all, and sins would have been pardoned before committed; if they were not
pardoned, notwithstanding that love of God, then it can imply no more, but that
God was willing to be reconciled. If therefore the E
not remission of sins were consistent with that love of God, by which he sent
Christ into the world, then notwithstanding that he was yet capable of being
reconciled by his death. So that our Adversaries are bound to reconcile that
love of God, with not presently pardoning the sins of the world, as we are A
to reconcile it with the ends of the death of Christ, which are asserted by us.

To the other Objection, Concerning the inconsistency of the. 13. The freeness
of Grace asserted in Scripture, destroys not satisfaction.
Freeness of Gods Grace, with the Doctrine of Satisfaction. I answer, Either
Gods Grace is so free as to exclude all conditions, or not: If it be so free,
as to exclude all conditions, then the highest Antinomianism is the truest
Doctrine; for that is the highest degree of the Freeness of Grace, which admits
of no conditions at all. If our Adversaries say, That the Freeness of Grace is
consistent with conditions required on our part, Why B
shall it not admit of conditions on Gods part? especially, when the condition
required, tends so highly to the end of Gods governing the world, in the
manifestation of his hatred against sin, and the vindication of the honor of
his Laws by the Sufferings of the Son of God in our stead, as an Expiatory
Sacrifice for our sins. There are two things to be considered in sin, the
dishonor done to God, by the breach of his Laws, and the injury men do to
themselves by it; now remission of sins, that respects the injury which men
bring upon themselves by it; and that is Free, when the penalty is wholly
forgiven, C
as we assert it is by the Gospel to all penitent sinners: but shall not God be
free to vindicate his own Honor, and to declare his righteousness to the world,
while he is the Iustifier of them that believe? Shall men in case of
Defamation, be bound to vindicate themselves, though they freely forgive the
Authors of the slander, by our Adversaries own Doctrine? and must it be
repugnant to Gods Grace, to admit of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that the world
may understand, that it is no such easy thing to obtain pardon of sin
committed against God; but that as often as they consider the bitter Sufferings
of Christ, D
in order to the obtaining the forgiveness of our sins, that should be the
greatest Argument to dissuade them from the practice of them? But why should it
be more inconsistent with the Sacrifice of Christ, for God freely to pardon
sin, than it was ever presumed to be in all the Sacrifices of either Jews or
Gentiles? who all supposed Sacrifices necessary in order to Atonement; and yet
thought themselves obliged to the goodness of God in the Remission of their
sins? Nay, we find that God himself, in the case of Abimel^ch, appointed
Abraham to pray Genesis 20. 7.
for him, in order to his pardon; And will any one say, this E
was a derogation to the grace of God in his pardon? Or to the pardon of Jobs
Friends, because Job was appointed to Sacrifice f^r them? Or to the pardon of
the Israelites, because God out Job 42. 7.
of kindness to them, directed them by the Prophets, and appointed the means in
order to it? But although God appointed A
our High Priest for us, and out of his great love sent him into the world, yet
his Sacrifice was not what was given him, but what he freely underwent himself;
he gave us Christ, but Christ offered up himself a full, perfect and sufficient
Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins of the world.

Thus, Sir, I have now given you a larger account of what I then more briefly
discoursed of, concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of Christ; and
heartily wishing you a right understanding in all things, and requesting from
you an impartial consideration of what I have written, B


I am, SIR, Your, etc. E. S. C
D
E

Ian. 6. 166^.
FINIS.

