The Certainty of Heavenly, AND The Uncertainty of Earthly TREASURES.

Together with a Discovery where the Treasure and Heart is placed.

As it was Delivered in several Sermons, By that Eminently Faithful servant
of Christ, Mr William Strong, late Minister at Westminster.

They being his last Sermons.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson living in Well-yard near West-Smithfield, and
are to be sold by Francis Tyton at the Three Daggers ne^re the Inner Temple
(...) Fleetstreet.

The certainty of Heavenly, and the uncertainty of Earthly Treasures.
Math. 6.20, 21. Lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, etc. For where
your Treasure is, there will your heart be also.


IN these words there are two things; First a Dehortation, in Reference to
Treasures below; Secondly, an Exhortation, in References to Treasures above;
Both these branches have two things attending them. The Dehortation from laying
up Treasures below, lies in two Arguments: 1. their uncertainty, 2. their
decay. The Exhortation for laying up Treasure in Heaven lies also in two
arguments: 1. Their Stability. 2. Their continuance. The uncertainty of the
one, and the certainty of the other; the decay of the one, and the durablenesse
of the other, should cause us to treasure up the one, and disesteem the other.
Then the second part of the text comes in as a reason to enforce the former,
For where your Treasure is, there will your hearts be also.

For the opening of this Text, I shall lay down two propositions to treat upon.

1. That every man has a Treasure in this life; For he does speak it as an Act
performed in this life, and not as an Act to be performed in the life to come:
this life is the sowing time, that life is the Reaping time; Here the Treasure
is in getting, there it is in spending, therefore every man's Treasure is in
this life.

2. That wheresoever the Treasure is, it is Attractive to draw the heart unto
it. Or thus, Every man lays up his heart where he lays up his Treasure.

To begin with the first Doctrine, Doct. Every man has a Treasure in this life.
namely

Doct. 1 That every man has a Treasure in this life.

There are (for the explaining of this truth) two sorts of Treasures. First,
God has his Treasures; Secondly, men have their Treasures.

First, Gods Treasure are
God has his Treasures: The Treasures of God are of four sorts.

1. Of Nature.
The Treasures of Nature, Job 38.22. Have thou entered into the Treasures of the
Snow? or have thou seen the Treasures of the Hail?

2. Of Providence.
The Treasures of Providence, Ps. 17.14. Whose belly thou fillest with thy hid
Treasures; It Is spoken in Reference to ungodly men, some there are that have in
Common Providence their bellies filled with hid Treasure. Godly men they have
the best of the dainties of Providence, but ungodly ones what they have, is but
to satisfy their belly, never fills their Souls, their Souls are left empty
of grace, though their bellies are filled with hid Treasure.

3. Of Grace
There are Treasures of Grace, Col. 2.3. In him are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge.

4. Of wrath and vengeance
There are Treasures of wrath and vengeance in Deuteronomy. 32.34. It is sealed up
among my Treasures: to me belongs vengeance, etc. These are Gods Treasures the
Scripture speaks of.

Secondly, Men have their Treasures.
men have their Treasures; And that which a man makes his chief good, that is
his Treasure, that which he places his happiness in, that which the comfort
of his life flows from, that is man's Treasure; see it so in those two
Scriptures, Luke 16.25. Ps. 17.14. That which in this place is called a
Treasure, is there called, His good things, and his portion; that is, that
which a man makes his chief good. The greatest difference between Godly men,
and the men of this world is this; the one is all for great provisions in the
way, and nothing for the Journeies end; the other is for all at the Journeyes
end, and but little in the way.

For the opening of this Doctrine further, that every man in this life has his
Treasure, and his own Treasure, this take in four propositions.

1. Every man has some chief good.
That every man has some chief good which his Soul is set upon, and which it
centers in, wherein he places his happiness, which if you could attain
perfectly, your Souls would be at rest. Psalm. 116.7. Return unto thy rest O my
Soul. Godly men have their Treasure in Heaven, God is their Treasure, God is
their Portion, therefore they can rejoice and say, God is my chiefest good and
my utmost end. David tells you the tendency of his soul ran after God; My soul
thirsts for God, the living God, all this is to show that God is David's chief
good, until the Soul can attain to its chiefest good its never at rest: But
take a poor carnal wretch that never knew any thing above the Creature,
because the creature is his chief good, till he can obtain it, he is
restless, Psalm. 6. unto 14. verse. 1 Samuel 25.29. Ungodly men's souls go
wholly after their treasure, and a godly man's soul goes wholly after his God;
David's soul it is said, was bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord his
God; but it follows, a wicked man's soul is slung away from God, as out of the
middle of a sling. There are three things in that sling. 1. It notes a distance
from God, as the stone in the sling is at a distance from the man. 2. It notes
not only a distance from God, but it notes a distance in judgment, in wrath;
he will sling away the wicked from the midst of his people, he will separate
them from himself in wrath. 3. It notes violence, slinging is a violent motion.

2. Every man chooses some chief good in this life.
Proposition. Every man has some good in this life in regard of Election, not
in regard of Fruition; some chief good he chooses in this life, for the chief
good of the Saints is reserved for them for the life to come: the Election is
below, the Fruition is above; the one has his portion in this life, the other
in the life to come. Some have chosen vanity; now that you have chosen here,
you will enjoy hereafter; some of you choose Riches, that which you choose here,
will be your portion hereafter; that which is your chief good in this life, you
must content your selves to have in the life to come.

3. Every man has his own chief good.
Every man in this life has his own chief good, and that is his Treasure: That
which is another man's chief good, is not thine: As every man lives by his own
Faith so every man lives upon his own Treasure: thy Faith perhaps is thy
Treasure, and God is thy Treasure, an other man's Riches are his Treasure: see a
godly man's Treasure, Isai. 33.6. The fear of the Lord is his Treasure: this is
peculiarly spoken of Hezekiah, and in him of the Church of God; Now what is
here meant by the fear of God? Calvin notes two things.

1. Reverential fear and awe of the Majesty of God, from a right apprehension
of his Righteousness and Holiness, so Prove. 17. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom.

2. By Fear, is meant an aweful worship of God, Worship the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Psa. 2.11
Thus you see what was Hezekiah's Treasure, It was the fear of the Lord; a
holy fear of God, and a constant worship of him is a Christians Treasure.

But how comes it to pass, that every man has his own Treasure?

1. From the different lights that men have; Men have different lights
some can see good in that which an other man can see none, 2 Cor. 4.18. We
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen,
etc. 2 Cor. 4.4
There are some in whom the God of this world has blinded their eyes, and some
the eyes of whose understanding are enlightened. Ephe. 1.17.18. Men have
different good things, because they have different lights; the things of this
life are base in the eyes of some, though glorious to others.

2. Men have different savours.
Men have different treasures to themselves, because they have different
Savours, Romans 8.5. For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the
flesh; but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit: the
meaning is, they savor the things of the flesh. Tell a natural man of a
promise, it has no more savor to him, then a stock or a stone: tell a Rich
man of a promise, who makes Riches his treasure, this has no savor in it; he
can taste sweetness in dainty meats, and in gorgeous apparel, and in the
pleasures of sin that are but for a season: but let a Saint come and look upon
the word of God, thy word is sweeter to me then the honey or the honey comb:
Psalm. 19.10.
people run after vanity, because they savor no better things.

3. Men make different choice.
From their choice: would you know why Israel was Gods peculiar treasure, it
was because God chose them himself, Psalm. 144.4. Some men make choice of God
as their chiefest good, let him enjoy God he is contented; says David, Whom
have I in heaven but thee, there is none on earth whom I desire in comparison of
thee: But if you let me live without God, it is nothing, he accounts all things
nothing in comparison of God, because that is the man's chief good: Take an
other, He says, I can live without God all my life time, and I can be content
never to hear of God; the Reason is, because they choose an other good for
their chief good besides God himself, this chief good is called a man's
Treasure: you see now every man has his chief good in this life, and his own
chief good in this life.

4. A man's chief good is his treasure.
Particular, That a man's chief good is his Treasure, and that upon a
threefold Account.

1. Because of the preciousnesse.
From the Preciousnesse of it; No man owns or esteems his Treasure, unless it
be his own chief good, and that which he esteems as precious. A man's Treasures
are precious, therefore when the Lord speaks of precious things, he calls them
a Treasure, Mat. 13.44.2 Cor. 4.7. The Gospel is caled a Treasure, because it
carries precious things with it. Take a man whose chief good is God, take God
from him and he is undone. But an other man who makes wealth his treasure, he
says, take away this, and I shall have no comfort; one takes God for his
treasure, and the other wealth for his.

2. It Is called Treasure, Plentifulnesse.
not only for the preciousnesse of it, but for the plentifulnesse of it; for
it is not a little that will make a Treasure, but abundance, Col. 2.3. In whom
are hid all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge: What ever is a man's chief
good, he desires it with an infinite appetite, for he is never satisfied. Take
a man that makes pleasure his chief treasure, he is like a Horse-leach, that
cries, give, give: let him have to day, yet he is hungry to morrow. Take a man
whose chief good is laid up in God, though he have all the world can afford
him; yet he says, give me more comfort from God, more Communion with God, and
more likeness to God; he is still unsatisfied, because it is his chief good.

3. Valuation of it.
It Is called a Treasure because it is that by which a man values himself: look
how much a man has in his Treasure, so much he conceives he is worth: there is
a Rate which the man puts upon it, it adds as it were to the value of himself.
Now as men value themselves according to their wealth, honor, etc. so God
values every man according to his heart. Prove. 10.20. The heart of the wicked
is little worth: the man is worth nothing if his heart be worth nothing. For
these grounds it is called a Treasure, for the preciousnesse, for the
plentifullness, and for the value and esteem a man puts upon it.

Use 1. Use 1. For the examination.
Of Examination: where is your treasure? Take this rule, where thy love is,
there is thy heart; where thy heart is, there is thy Treasure; where thy Treasure
is, there is thy Heaven, where thy heaven is, there is thy God; and where thy God
is, there is thy happiness.

There are six things I would have you to consider, That is your Treasure.
as to this use of Examination, that you may know where your Treasure lies.

1. Which you labor most for.
Consider what it is that you dig for, that you labor for, that you are
willing to spend your money for; this is the first try all of your Treasure, If
you dig for wisdom as for precious stones, If thou seek^st her as Silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures. Pro. 2.4. and says our Savior Job:
6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life? What Is the great thing you work for in this life? What
is it you lay out your money for? that you labor for? do thou lay out thy
Knowledge for God? thy estate for God? or do thou spend thy money for that
which is not bread, and labor for that which satisfies not? Isaiah 55.2. When
a man shall return to his own heart, and say, I have labored for Wealth all my
days, and wearied my self for vanity, and now I come to die, I find that I
have not labored at all for God, I have not chosen God for my treasure; Oh
this man's condition is very sad! how many are there that can lavish out their
wealth upon their lusts; But let a poor member of Christ come, every penny
that is given to them, is as much as a drop of blood: that which you lay out
your money for, and digg for most, that is your Treasure.

2. Which is the comfort of your lives.
Examine what it is by which the comforts of your lives come in, what it is you
live upon: whether you labor for the meat which perishes, or for that which
endures to everlasting life? John 6.27. Whether your comforts come in by
eating the bread of wickedness, and drinking the wine of violence. Prove. 4.17.
Or by feeding upon Jesus Christ by faith? He that feeds only upon the
Creature, feeds upon Ashes, a deceived heart has turned him aside, Isa. 44.20.
That man that makes not God his treasure, makes the Devil his Treasure.
Therefore consider by what does the Comfort of your lives come in? some may
say, I live a comfortable life, because I have a great deal of wealth, and a
plentiful Table; but the other says, I live a comfortable life, because I
have had Communion with God, and some taste of Heavenly Treasures: that from
whence the Comfort of your lives comes, in that is your Treasure.

3. Which you are to keep.
What is that which is your greatest care to keep above all things else? that is
your Treasure. Treasures are commonly hidden, that men may keep them safe: take
a man that makes Riches his treasure, what does he fear most? theft: but take
a godly man that makes God his Treasure, what does he fear most? sin, because
God is his Treasure.

4. Which you retreat unto.
What does your souls retreat unto for comfort in any trouble, in any
disgrace, in any distress? whither do you retire? whither does a rich man
retire when he is in danger? to his Riches; whither does a godly man retire
when he is in danger; to his God; Prove. 18.10, 11. the name of the Lord is a
strong Tower: the Righteous runs into it, and are safe. Pro. 10.15.
The Rich man's wealth is his strong City: and as an high wall in his own
conceit; one retires to his Riches, and the other to his God.

5. Which you value men for.
How do you judge of other men? for you value men more or less according to
that you count your own treasure. A godly man that makes Grace his treasure;
Ask him this question, who is the best man? whether the rich man, or the godly
man? whether he that has much of grace, or he that has much of Gold? whether
he that has much of the Creature, or he that has most of Christ? He
answers, the godly man is the better man, because he seeks that which is
precious unto me, because he seeks his treasure above, says David. Psalm. 16.3.
To the excellent of the Earth, in whom is all my delight; He accounts them
excellent because they have much of that which he counts his treasure, and he
values all other men according to that they have of that which he accounts his
treasure.

6. Which you prize time for.
What are the times that you do mostly prize? A man usually prizeth those times
most that bring him in most of his treasure, most of his wealth, and profit
Amos 8.12. say they, When will the Sabbath be gone? there was no day so
tiresome unto them as a Sabbath day, they longed for the week days, because
they brought them in much plenty, much of their treasure. But now with a
gracious heart it is otherwise, as the one says, when will the Sabbath be
gone? so the other says, When will the Sabbath come? Isa. 38.13. they called
it a delight, because it brings in most of their treasure: So it is with a
gracious heart. Those times wherein he has trading with Heaven, wherein he has
Communion with Christ, wherein he has the powrings forth of the Spirit,
wherein he has the Exercise of Grace, wherein he is made serviceable to God;
these are the times that he accounts precious.

There are five Rules of trial more, which every one should take as
looking-Glasses, wherein you you may see where your treasure and chief good is
laid up; A man's treasure is that.
which is the greatest Question to be resolved that can be.

1. Which is first in his aim.
A man's treasure and chief good is that which is first in his eye and aim in
the whole bent and course of his life, that which has the priority in all his
intentions, that is his chief good. Intention is the bent and aim of the will
in Reference to some good propounded to it, by the understanding: that which is
first in Intention, is last in Execution, if it be a good obtained; but if it
be a good to be obtained, then that which is first in Intention, is last in
fruition; Mat. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, etc. There is not only a
seeking of the Kingdom of Heaven, but there must be a seeking of it first; for
God stands much on Priorities in Scripture; and if it be not set in its due
order, God himself is displeased with it, and that which is done is, as if it
had not been done at all. Take a natural man whose chief good is wealth; it
is first in his Eye, it has a prehemenency in all his Actions and Intentions
he seeks an Estate first to be great in the world, rather then to be good in
the World; the chief good is that which draws out the first born of the Soul,
2 Cor. 4.18. We look not at, or we seek not, the things that are seen, but at
the things that are not seen, etc. He speaks not only in his own name, but in
behalf of all the Saints, for they have all one chief good and utmost end;
Phil. 3.14.
thus it was with Paul, I press to the mark for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. I press to the mark, the mark is that he proposes,
that he shoots at, as an Archer at his mark: you may see by this, what is your
treasure; what is the first and main thing in your Intentions; for there is no
Saint in the World, but if God should say, ask what thou will, and I will give
it thee; he would say, first I desire interest in they self, and Inheritance
with the Saints: that which is first in Intention, is last in fruition, what
the main of your souls is set upon, that is your chief good.

2. Why he desires for it self.
A man shall know where his treasure and chief good lies by this; that is a
man's chief good which he desires for it self, desires are all things else in
subordination thereto; Christ gives you this rule in Mark 3.7. He that loves
Father and Mother more then me, is not worthy of me: A man is bound to love
Father and Mother, but not more then me; when does a man love any thing more
then Christ? when it comes in competition with him, but not in subordination to
him: God is to be beloved for himself, and Christ is to be received for
himself, and therefore it is said, Luke 14.26. He that hates not Father and
Mother, etc. cannot be my Disciple; how hates them? a man is bound to love them
all. The Command is not absolute, that he should hate them absolutely, but
comparatively; to hate them is to so an excellency in Christ above them,
Christ is to be beloved for himself, and God for himself. That Rule of Austin
is true, we are to love friends in God, and Enemies for God. But how shall I
know that I love God for himself? for a man may love Christ and God from a
principle of self-love. I shall give you two trials.

First, then a man loves God for himself, when he is willing to part with all
things for him: that man that is willing to part with all things for God, must
needs love God above all things. But how shall I know that I am willing to part
with all for Gods sake? there are two seasons when men are tried in this life;
at the time of Conversion, and the time of dissolution. First, At the time of
Conversion, Philipi. 3.8. Paul counts all things but dross and and dung that
he may win Christ, so (...). 14.33. he that forsakes not all, cannot be my
Disciple, The second is the time of Dissolution, without this I cannot attain
to my chiefest good: will the Lord have an Isaac? the soul will give him an
Isaac, he will sacrifice his parts with all that ever he has, and give them up
to God, 1 Cor. 6.23.
you are not your own, you are bought with a price, says the Apostle. A
gracious soul has experience of this at the time of dissolution, when he
sets all things here below aside for God; when his friends, his Estate, his
glory, and his portion take their leaves of him; A godly man when he comes to
die, he can look on all these dying things rejoycingly; he can say, I have no
need of them, Phil. 1.23.
Lord, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better,
Phil 1.23. as a Martyr said when he came to die, my friends are dear, my
Children are dear, my Wife is dear, but my Christ is dearer.

2. The second trial that a man loves God for himself; when a man does
abstract God and Christ, the good that is in them, and the good that comes by
them, and the soul is carried to them for the good that is in them. There are
two seasons when all the good that comes by Religion and godliness, seems to
be abstracted from it; at the time of Affliction, and at the time of desertion.

First, At the time of affliction: Is there any outward benefit comes by
Religion in the time of persecution and affliction?

Secondly, All the time of desertion that deprives a man of all comfort; now
when a man shall be able to fay as Job, though be kill me, yet I will trust in
him; I will love him for the excellency that he has in him, though I receive
none of that excellency from him: For the good that comes by him, many love
him, but for the good that is in him a gracious soul loves him. Take a man
that makes riches his Treasure, he will part with a good Conscience, the best
friends he has; nay, though he act to the grief of his friends, and to the
reproach of his Enemies; yet if the man do but obtain that which he desires,
he matters not; this is a clear argument: that a man loves it for it self. An
ambitious man will break all bonds, Natural, Civil, and Religious; yea, let
him be accounted an ambitious self-seeking man; yea, let credit and Conscience
lie at the stake, yet he will despise Counsel, tread upon friends, trample
upon Laws, and all that he may be great in the world.

3. Unto which he refers all things.
That which is a man's Treasure or his chief good, he referrs all things unto
it, and seeks all things from it; for a man's chief good and utmost end is that
which works in all the rest. I shall give you two rules for this.

First, he that seeks all things in subordination to his chiefest good, he
seeks nothing that shall fall cross unto it: this is the sign of a godly man,
what ever is cross to his chief good, he counts life not dear for the
removal of it, I count not my life dear unto me, says Paul, so I may finish
my course with joy, Acts 20.24 Bodily ease, carnal delight, worldly
contentments are not dear unto thee, if God be thy chief good; if thy Estate,
honor, thy relations, yea, thy life it self come in competition between thy
God and thee, thou will say as the Martyr: sarwell Wife, farewell Children,
farewell Estate, yea, farewell life, and give me my Christ. It Is with many men as
it was with Demas, Demas has forsaken us, and embraced the present world, he
professes godliness no more; So it is with men, they neglect known duties for
temporal advantages; take heed that nothing cross thee in thy treasure, but
let all things be subordinated unto it.

Then secondly, as it must not cross it, so it must serve it, every thing must
be subordinate to his chiefest good; thus it was with Jehu. 2 Kings 2.9.
The Kingdom was in his eye, that was his chief good; Now Jehu's reformation
of Religion tended only to this end, to set Jehu in his Kingdom; yet he did
the work that God intended, he executed Gods judgments upon the house of
Ahab, he thought to have had his ends upon God, and God had his ends upon him.
But take a godly man whose chief good is God and godliness, he loves an
Estate not for it self, but that he might honor God with it: gifts, what
does he value them for? for the Edification of the body of Christ's wisdom
(says Solomon) is good with an inheritance, Ecles. 7.11.
that is when grace teaches a man to make use of it.

4. After which his soul goes out.
Trial, by which you may find out your treasure; A man's soul goes out toward
it with continual and earnest breathings, and endless gaspings; so you shall
find it is with natural men, who have their treasure in this life, and and
whose bellies are fed with the providence of God only, and who make a God of
their belly, their hearts are only carried out with breathings after this
treasure. But on the other side, David says, my soul is lifted up to God;
Psalm. 27.4.
to lift up the soul in scripture is, to desire a thing earnestly. Take a man
whose treasure is in Heaven, whose chief good is God, the continual gaspings
of his soul are after God, Ps. 25.1. he desires God earnestly, 2 Cor 5.1. in
this we groan earnestly, etc. he is under continual groanings and gaspings
after God, though it is true the soul finds an impossibility of enjoying God
perfectly in this life; yet you shall find this true, love to him of the right
kind is so carried after God, that it is never satisfied, or at rest without
more of the enjoyment of him. Examine therefore your souls, what do they most
breath and pant after continually, and that is your treasure.

5. Wherein his soul receives satisfaction.
That Is a man's treasure wherein a man's Soul receives satisfaction, and without
which he is never satisfied, Ps. 49.18. the worldling blesseih his soul while
he lives; that is his treasure; Natural men are satisfied in nothing else but
in the things of this world, that their souls pant and breath after. Take an
Ambitious man, let every man's purse be opened, it will not satisfy him, he
cannot sit in a low place, because a high place is his chief good; so Haman,
let him have never such honors, he is not satisfied except he be made most
honorable, because his soul goes out after high places, he must be had in
esteem of the men of the World. But take a man that has godliness for his
chief good, and this he is satisfied in, and nothing else, in Psalm. 36.8. They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shall
make them drink of the River of thy pleasures: Now give a godly man wealth, it
will not satisfy him, give him honor, it will not satisfy him, Prove. 14.10. a
good man shall be satisfied from himself; By these rules you may easily see
where your chief good is laid.

Use 2. Use 2. For conviction.
Of Conviction, to set forth the misery of them that mislay their treasure,
that be deceived in their chiefest good. Take heed of laying up your treasures
in this life, every man in this life has some treasure, or some great good;
this will set forth the misery and wretched condition of all them that misplace
their treasure, misplace their chief good. There are many sorts of men whose
treasure is laid up here below, their portion is in this life, they are
mistaken in their chief good, this plainly shows they are in a miserable
condition; and yet this is the condition of most of the world, and under which
the greatest part of it will perish. That I may heighten this Conviction, Six
considerations.
I shall give you six considerations.

1. The scripture speaks of a true treasure.
Consider, the Scripture speaks of a true treasure, Luke 16.11. If ye have not
been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the
true riches: here is the opposition, he sets the one against the other. There is
a true treasure, and there is a false treasure, and they that inherit not
substances, inherit shadows. Pro. 23.5 Will thou set thine eyes upon that
which is not? they are said not to be, and that upon a twofold account.

1. Because there is no reality in them.

Secondly, because there is no stability in them, that is, in reference to that
which you fancy to be in them. Covetousness is Idolatry, for it is an Idol,
the Apostle says so of Riches: it is not so in substance as it is in
appearance; there never was a godly man in the world, whose eyes God had
opened, but he saw that it was only his thought, his apprehension of riches
that made them seem great. Then they have no stability in them: they perish in
the very enjoyment of them; he is a miserable man that does not Inherit such
spiritual abiding substance as God is, and has his treasure in God, and the
things of God.

2. There Is a false treasure.
There Is a false treasure as well as a true: herein lies a great delusion of
sin and Satan, to deceive a man in his chief good, Heb. 3.12, 13. Take heed
left there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the
living God, and left any of you be hardened through the deceitfullnsse of sin.
Satan will labor to deceive you in every thing, but he labors mostly to
deceive you in your chiefest good, in drawing you from God; for as the Spirit
of God is in direction, so the Spirit of Satan is in delusion. As the spirit
of God directs a man in this life to carry out affections more to God, and to
make his chief good; so on the contrary, the Devil does all to this end, that
he may deceive a man of his chiefest good, and take off the chiefest good, and
take off the affections of his heart from God: When Satan fixes a man's heart
on any particular good, it is to take him off from that that is an Universal
good: Satan is said to be a murderer from the beginning; how so? on this
account, because he deceives persons of their chiefest good, wherein the life
of their souls does lie.

3. Man's nature abhors to be deceived.
Consider the nature of man does exceedingly abhor to be deceived: the Holy
Ghost does charge us that we should not overreach our brother, the nature of
man is much inclined to deceive one another, 1 Timothy 2.14.
and therefore the nature of man does exceedingly abhor to be deceived it
self. 2 Cor. 11.3.
Now there was never such deceit as in the chiefest good, to give a man brass
for gold, and stones for bread; To take the Creature for the Creator, to set up
the Devil in the place of God; This deceit is of being cheated in our chief
good. There are many other that are lesser deceits, he does deceive in
particular Acts, as when a man has been convinced of sin, prayed against it,
and the Devil has varnished it over again, and led him to the Commission of
it; but the grand deceit of all is in his chiefest good.

4. The Devil labors above all to deceive you in this.
Consider this is the deceit that above all, he takes care to hide from you, he
will keep you under that all the days of your life. You have many deceits of
Satan laid in a man's way, that may be discovered to him, and these a man may
recover out of, as 2 Timothy 2.26. That they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil. He may see that in that particular Act he was deceived,
that which he thought was good, he finds it was not so, but he was deceived
through the wiles of Satan; a man may see the devices of Satan in reference to
his darling sin, 2 Pet. 2.18. But the Devils great design on all
unregenerated men, is to keep them in an unregenerate state, more then in
unregenerate Acts: Therefore the great work in conversion, is to cause the soul
to mind its chief good; never was there any converted to God and Christ, but
he saw that he erred in his chiefest good, and that he had departed from his
God; how is a man departed from God? He is departed from God in two things: 1.
As his chiefest good. 2. As his utmost end. How must a man return to God?
First, as his chiefest good, and then as his utmost end.

5. This deceives most, Mat. 7.14.
This will be the deceit under which the greatest part of the world will be
damned; for, straight is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life,
and few there be that find it. All men are carried forth to some good or other,
and say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4. But there are four things that
most of the world do usually mistake in.

1. They take that which is but a seeming good, for a real good.

2. They take that which is a particular good, for an universal good.

3. They take that which is a temporary good, for aneternall good.

4. They take that which is another man's good, for their own good: Most men
mistake under these four sorts of good, and so perish.

6. This will cause Satan to insult.
If you be deceived in your chiefest good, it will be the matter of Satan's
insultation, and the matter of your Lamentation for ever. It will be matter of
Satan's insultation, Satan is the envious man: TWO things there are in Satan to
sinners; one is cruel murderings, and the other is cruel mockings of them, as
in Isai. 14.11, 12. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer Son of
morning? Nebuchadnezzar that thought himself as it were placed in heaven,
falls down to hell, he deluded himself. It will be then too late to say, I
was ignorant, and as a beast before thee.

These men are miserable, The misery of those that are herein cheated.
that are cheated of their chief good, and their misery lies in six Particulars.

1. There Is nothing good to such a man.
Because there is nothing good to that man that err's in his chiefest good,
Eccle. 5.13. there is a man that made Riches his chiefest good; there is no good
to him therein, because he made not God his chiefest good, his Riches are to
his hurt: many a man is made honorable and Rich to his hurt. But are not
Ordinances you will say, for a man's good? Is it not good to live under the
means of grace? to have the droppings of the Sanctuary? I answer no, if not
improved, the nigher to Ordinances, and at distance from God, the nigher to the
Curse, Heb. 6.7, 8. Ordinances will ripen your sins, and they will hasten
your ruin, they will ensnare your souls, they will draw out your lusts, and
they will ruin you for ever: As every thing is good to a man that is right in
his chiefest good, so nothing is good to that man that errs in his chiefest
good.

2. This will cause him to eire in all things.
If a man err in his chiefest good, this will make him err in his judging of
al things and persons in this life; for the rule of every man's judgment is
according to his chief good, he errs, and must needs do so, if he errs in that:
Take a man that judges finning better then suffering, he chooses sin before
suffering, Job 36.21. Take heed, regard not iniquity; for this thou have chosen
rather then affliction: He chooses the present things, before things to come;
things that are seen, before things that are not seen: But to a godly man, sin
is worse then suffering, then death, then hell. It was the saying of one of the
Martyrs, He is not praiseworthy, nor worthy of praise, that God praises not.
A man that has his treasure in heaven, he judges all things aright according
to the heavenly Treasure.

3. This makes him misplace his affections
If a man mistake his chiefest good, this causes him to misplace all the
affections of his soul; they will be set wrong, and are set upon wrong
objects: The Holy Ghost speaks of a crooked and a perverse Generation, when
they were set upon wrong objects, they were in fear where no fear was. Now
take an other man whose chief good is God, he fears sin, the other fears
man; he rejoices in God, the other rejoices in man; here the affections of
soul are mistaken by misplacing the chiefest good.

4. To lose his labor.
This makes a man loose his labor, in what ever he does all his life time; he
labors only for the meat that perishes, but not for the meat that endures
for everlasting life; he spends his parts, his strength, and time in vain: He
sowes the wind, and reaps the whirle wind.

This grand error makes you err in every thing you do; the wicked man is
deceived, disappointed, and at the last will be ashamed of all his
undertakings: But the godly man cannot be deceived, nor disappointed of his
hopes, nor return ashamed, because he is not mistaken in his chiefest good, and
therefore cannot lose any of his labor.

5. This will destroy him.
This only will destroy the man: This is the grand mistake; a man may be
deceived in particular things, and yet the soul may be saved in the day of the
Lord: but if once he be deceived in his chiefest good, he can never be saved:
for what is a man's chief good here by way of Election, shall be hereafter his
chief good in way of fruition, 1 Cor 3.11. For other foundation can no man
lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, etc. To err in this, is a
fundamental error; those that err in matters of practice, it is said, yet
their souls might be saved, though their labors be lose; but if thou errest
in thy chief good, thou can never be saved.

6. Its the greatest cheat of all.
If there were nothing else but this, its the greatest delusion, and the
obsurdest cheat in the world, for a man is deceived, and makes that his
greatest happiness that is the quite contrary, that will prove his greatest
misery; blessing, or blessedness, requires two things. 1. It must be that
which cannot be lost. 2. It must be that that puts the soul into a condition
that he he does not sin, or that he cannot sin. He that places his
happiness below God and Heaven, he sets up an other God, which is the highest
way of sinning in the world, and therefore see what a miserable condition that
man is in, that sets his chiefest good in things below God and Heaven.

Use. 3. Use 3. For Exhortation.
Is this a truth that every man in this life has something he lays up for
his Treasure, whether it be in Heaven or Earth; then take this exhortation in
the words of the text, lay up treasures in Heaven. Three things I shall premise.

1. Some do observe the sweetness of Christ's Commands how he applies himself
to the desires of his people, the Lord Jesus Christ does not forbid this, he
does not say, let there be no such providence in you; but if you will lay up
treasure, he tells you where you should lay up the true treasure. So Luke
10.20. he sends forth the 72 Disciples, and they rejoiced the Devils were
subject to them; Now he does not forbid their joy, but he does augment their
joy; Rejoice rather that your names are written in the book of life: so when he
faith, Matthew. 20.18. Fear not him that can kill the body, he forbids you not
altogether to fear, but see if your fear be placed on the right object, that
is, himself more then them: so when men are apt to glory in some excellency
they have obtained, says the Holy Ghost. Jer. 9.23. Let not the wife man glory
in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich
man glory in his riches, but let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me that I am the Lord. Set a right object for your
glorying in; so here he does not forbid you to labor for riches, but to be
rich toward God; he does not forbid you to be adorned, but let it be with
beauties of holiness.

2. It Is observed that there are diverse ways of treasuring; 3. Sort of
treasure.
there are three forts of treasures that are laid up, three several ways.

1. Treasures on Earth.
There are treasures on Earth, some place their happiness on the things below:
our Savior faith, lock not to the things that are seen, but have an eye to the
things that are not seen. It was well observed by one, that that whieh a man
loves and aims at as his end, that is his treasure. A man that has no end
beyond this life, has no treasure beyond this life, let me be rich, let me be
honorable and brave in this world, that is all he looks at. He looks not up to
the treasure above; this man places his affections on the Earth, and makes
that his portion.

2. There are Treasures in Hell, 3. Treasures in Hell.
some lay up their treasures in Hell, Romans 2.5. they treasure up to themselves
wrath against the day of wrath. There are two treasures, one of sin, and the
other of wrath, and the one sits for the other; as the man adds to the one, so
God adds to the other; for you must know as sin ripens, so does judgment, as
sin increases, so does wrath, Ezekiel. 7.10. The Rod has blossomed, as Pride
has budded; It Is spoken of Gods bringing of wrath upon Nebuchadnezzar, now
mind the gradation, the Rod first blossoms, then it buds; judgment first
ripens, and then ruins; you read in scripture of an Ephah of wickedness, that
is, that which notes the full measure of wickedness; and you read of a Talent,
which is judgment proportioned to the sin. As you fill up the treasures of
your sins. so God fills up the treasures of his wrath: you think you only
carry on your own treasure, but God is carrying on his treasury of wrath also.
The

3. 2 Treasures in Heaven.
Sort are those that lay up treasure in Heaven, that place their happiness in
the chief good, in nothing but Heaven, that have aims beyond this life, the
things present are but for their way, not for the end of their Journey. Every
man is as his chief good, and as his utmost end is; if thy end be Earthly,
thou art a man of the Earth; if Heavenly, thou art a man of Heaven. It is said,
Psalm. 17.14. Men of the world that have their portion in this life: They are
called men of this world, because their end and aim is not beyond this world.
But the Saints and Citizens of Heaven are so called, because their end and aim
is beyond this life, and their chief good lies there.

3. You are to observe the manner and nature of this command; lay up treasures
in Heaven, his meaning is not, that they should lay up nothing on Earth: To lay
up on Earth is a duty, as to provide things necessary for the body; but in
especial manner be sure to lay up in Heaven, have your hearts in Heaven,
though your bodies be on the Earth, we ought to lay up something in summer
against the time of Winter; Parents ought to lay up for their Children. Lay not
up treasure on Earth; that is to say, as it is contrary to a treasure in
Heaven, but so as it may be helpful to thy treasure in Heaven. Again, lay not
up treasure on earth, so, as if there were an absolute necessity of it, or as
if a man could not live without it, ^^ke 12.15. a man's life consists not in
the abundance of the things that he possesses. Lastly, lay not up treasure on
Earth, so as to neglect Heaven, let not this be a means to take off your hearts
from higher things, if so, your treasure will be your curse, and God gives you
a great estate in great Judgment.

Let us now come to set home this Exhortation, seeing some lay up treasures in
Earth, some lay up treasures in Heaven, do you be exhorted to lay up your
treasures in Heaven.

Four things I will speak to in proscuting of it.

1. What is meant by Heaven?

2. What are the treasures of Heaven.

3. What is it to lay up treasures in Heaven.

4. Some arguments to enforce the Exhortation.

First, what is meant by Heaven? What is meant by Heaven.
There is a twofold Exposition of it, and we may make an improvement of both of
them.

1. God himself.
By Heaven, some expound it of God himself, as if he should say, lay up your
treasures in God, with God: so that they take Heaven for God, that is the God
of Heaven, the pleasures of Heaven. Now this will help you to understand other
Scriptures, Mat. 21.25. The Baptism of John, was it from Heaven? that is, from
the God of Heaven; Heaven is there put for God: so Luke 15.18. Father I have
sinned against Heaven; that is, against the God of Heaven, the God that dwells
in Heaven, there is your happiness alone, let your chief good be laid up in
him, let him who has promised to be our portion and exceeding great reward be
our treasure in Heaven; yet you are to consider that the Scripture speaks of
other treasures in Heaven, Luke 12.33. Provide your selves a treasure in Heaven
that fails not; that is, of good works, but they are only as they aim at
God; God is himself the great reward, and the rich treasure of Heaven; this is
the excellency of every gracious performance of duty, it is a treasure of
heaven, because it is recorded in heaven by God himself, lay up therefore your
treasures with God, that he may be your eternal reward. The

2. The third Heaven.
Exposition of this place, is this; They take Heaven for the third Heaven, the
highest Heaven, the habitation of Gods majesty and glory, the place where the
Saints shall be with God, where the Angels have Communion with God, Ier. 23.23.
He is said, to fill heaven and earth; it is called the place where his honor
dwells; there you have two things. 1. The Vision of him. 2. The Fruition of him,
so it is said to be a City, Heb. 11.10.
whose builder and maker is God; this being the place of the Saints, therefore
they are exhorted to lay up their treasure in it: the time will shortly come,
when the Saints shall be removed from earth to heaven, for here they have no
abiding City: now their happiness in heaven being to enjoy God to eternity,
for this cause they are exhorted to lay up a Treasure in heaven. Well, take it
in both these senses, in God, or in heaven, where the eternal enjoyment of God
shall be.

In the second place; What is that Treasure that a man should lay up in heaven?
We shall understand it by the opposite; there is a treasure that man lays up
on earth as his chief good, as Riches, Honor, High Places, Pleasure, popular
applause, etc. and where his Treasure is, there his heart is: So there is a
treasure in heaven which is a man's chief good; it is God that is his reward,
Christ as Mediator that brings him to God.

There are three things that demonstrate, Nothing but God can be a man's
treasure in heaven.
that none but God can be a man's treasure in heaven.

1. Because a man must love it best.
A Man's treasure is that which he loves best, and a man must love nothing more
then God; nay a man's chief good is that which he loves with an infinite love,
that he does never say I have enough. The Hebrew word for Treasures, signifies
that which a man sets his heart most on; where a man's love goes, there a man's
zeal goes, that is his treasure that carries out his love.

2. Prize it most.
That which a man prizeth most, which a man sets highest price on, that is a
man's Treasure; now a man should prize nothing more then God; Kingdoms and
Nations be not dear to God for the sake of the Saints, therefore Kingdoms and
Nations should not be dear to the Saints in respect of God, they should prize
nothing in comparison of him, much less in competition with him.

3. Relieup on it.
Upon a man's Treasure he relies for supplies, that which a man makes his
Treasure in Calamities and Distresses he goes to it; therefore David says,
Psalm. 13.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee: my flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever. Thus you see every man must be supplied out
of his own Treasure.

Thirdy, You will say, God is in heaven above, the habitation of his holiness
and glory; How can we be said to lay up God for a Treasure? It Is true, God is
in heaven, he made the heavens, and he dwells in heaven; but he is not laid up
there for thy treasure, unless thou closest with him by faith, and lay him up
for thy God, and in so doing he will be thy treasure; for though he dwells in
heaven, yet he dwells also in humble and contrite Spirits. Now there are six
Rules to get the God of heaven to be our God and Treasure.

1. Choose God so thy treasure.
He that will lay up Treasure in heaven, he must choose God for his treasure in
heaven, not only the joys and delights of heaven, the happiness of heaven,
but the God of heaven, that which thou chusest is thy treasure: If a man choose
Honor, and Riches, and Pleasure, that is his treasure; what you choose first,
you prize most, and you shall be sure to have God for your treasure if you
choose him.

2. Part with all for him.
Then part with all other treasures for him: No man can have two Treasures, no
more then he can have two Masters, Mat. 19.21. Look to your selves, you have
not God for your treasure, except you part with all other treasures for him.

3. Let thy heart be after him.
The soul is to be carried out after this treasure incessantly; that man that
lays up God for his treasure, his heart is continually carried after him, and
so must yours, if you will have God to be your Treasure, Psalm. 73.24. How does
the foul go out after God? Psa. 119.20.
My soul pants for the longings it has toward thee; my soul longs, yea even
faints for the Lord. Psalm. 84.2.
so says David: If your souls do not go out after God, and relish the
sweetness of God, certainly you have no part nor portion in this Treasure.

4. Live upon him.
If you would have God for your treasure, live upon him; men live upon their
treasures, so must you upon your God.

5. Glory in him.
Would you have the God of heaven for your treasure, then glory in him; what a
man labors to get for his treasure, that he glories in. Every man values other
men as he values his treasure; take a man that makes Riches his treasure, let
the person be never so honorable he despises him, because he has not so
great an estate as he: so a godly man values every man according as his
chiefest good is, he is worth no more then he is worth in Gods account,
therefore he esteems no more of him.

6. Add to thy treasure.
What ever is your Treasure, if you lay up your treasure in any thing, you must
use all means to add unto it, and make a daily increase, the increase of your
treasure coms in by adding to it, Isai. 33.6. Why does Hezekiab lay up treasure
in God? he gets a further interest in God, therefore the man is blessed with
his treasure: wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
thought of Salvation, and this is, because the fear of the Lord is his treasure.

The fourth particular is to give you some grounds to enforce the Exhortation;
is there a treasure in Heaven? then do not be such Enemies to your souls as
not to lay up treasures there. There are four Arguments to enforce the
Exhortation.

1. No treasure below God, will be lasting.
No treasure below God will be lasting, Christ speaks therefore to you
continually to lay up your treasure in Heaven, because there will come a time
when all treasures laid up below God, will be expunged and gone, and then what
will you live upon? 1. Cor. 7.29.31. the Apostle faith, the time is short, and
the fashion of this world passes away; it is a Metaphor taken from things
folded up, a great part of time is unfolded and unwoven, it is almost spent,
there is abundance of life run out already, and little left behind; there is an
eternity that will never be spent after all thy time here is spent, lay up
therefore treasures there.

2. Nor hopes of Heaven without this treasure.
Heaven is the place to which you hope to go, now carry your treasures with
you, and send your treasures before you, or else there can be no hopes of
entering into Heaven. This is the Exhortation of our Savior, when he faith,
lay up Treasures in Heaven; he seems to speak to the hopes of persons going to
Heaven, go power out your souls before the Lord, make sure of your Heavenly
mansion; you will leave the estates and your fine houses behind you, pour out
your souls to the Lord, make sure of your interest in Christ, that you may
carry your treasure with you.

3. God is an allsufficient treasure.
Consider, God is a faithful and true treasurer, therefore lay up your
treasure in Heaven: God is self-sufficient to himself, and he is allsufficient
to you; But if thy treasure be here below on this side to God, it will not
last, that which is thy treasure in this life, will be thy Torment in the life
to come Iam. 5.3. your Gold and Silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall
be a witness against you, and shall eat your bread as it were fire: ye have
heaped treasure together for the last days: when judgment shall come, your
Torment shall then begin, and you shall have the greatest plagues at the last
day of judgment; your treasures will then crush and begin to be your
tormentors, that which now thou choosest to be thy treasure, will then be thy
tormentor. The only way to preserve what you have of this treasure on Earth,
is to lay up treasures in Heaven. In the houses of godly men are the best and
pretiousest treasures, because they come into them from a promise, and so they
have much sweetness in them. All the cares of wicked men is what they shall
have, but a godly man, that has Communion with God, and an interest in Heaven;
these men look upon it as a privilege what they should do for God.

4. If God be not your treasure here he will not herafter.
Argument; you that have not God for your treasure here, you shall never have
him for your treasure hereafter, for after this life a man can never change his
chief good, that which is so here, shall be so hereafter; therefore if you
have not a treasure laid up in God in this life, he will not be thy God in
glory hereafter, and yet God shall be all in all.

You have seen already the misery of those that err in their chiefect good:
Now I shall come to show you the happy condition of them that have pitched upon
their chief good, and that have laid up their treasures in Heaven. Whatsoever
they are in this world; yet in regard of their chief good they have not
miscarried. A good man is every way blessed.
O how blessed is that soul that has not misplaced his treasure. A godly man
is every way a blessed man.

1. In the pardon of his sin.
He is blessed in regard of the pardon of his sin; blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Ps. 32.1.

2. Disposition of his soul.
He is blessed in regard of the disposition of his soul; blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. Mat. 5.8.

3. In hungerings after ordinances.
He is blessed in his hungrings and thirstings after ordinances; Blessed are
they that dwell in thy house, for they will be still praising thee, Psalm. 84.4.

4. In his acting to God.
He is blessed in his obedientiall actings to God; blessed are the undefiled
in the way that walk in the Law of the Lord: Psalm. 119.1.

5. In his expectation.
He is blessed in his expectations, Isa. 30.18. Blessed are they that wait for
him. Nay, even his very Afflictions are blessed; Psalm 94.10. blessed is the man
whom thou chastisest and teach out of thy Law; Thus you see every way how a
soul that has made God his treasure is blessed. But wherein lies the top of
his blessedness, But the top of his blessedness is in his chief good.
and the height of his happiness? he is blessed in his chief good, and there
lies the height of his blessedness, unto which, and in comparison of which all
these are but subordinate and inferior blessednesses. Look to the Angels in
the glory of of heaven, they are blessed.

First, in their in ward qualifications and endowments; their wisdom, their
power, their zeal, they are blessed in every respect.

Secondly, in regard of their offices and employments, they are principalities
and powers, they are Co-workers with Christ.

Thirdly, they are blessed for their Activities in those offices, Ezekiel. 1.14.
They go and return like lightning: Wherein the Angels blessedness lies.
but wherein lies the top of the Angels blessedness in heaven? it lies in
this, that they have pitched aright upon the chiefest good, they have not erred
in their treasure; nay, wherein lies the blessedness of Christ himself as
Mediator? he was every way blessed, he was the heir of all things, and
appointed unto glory, and to a glory suitable to the service that he did
perform, which neither men nor Angels were able to do; But wherein lies the
top of Christ's glory and blessedness? in Psalm. 16.5. you shall see where it
lies; the Lord is the portion of mine inheritance; his blessedness lay in the
chief good. The same is true of the glorified Saints in Heaven, the souls of
just men made perfect, the glory of the Elect, and the top of all their
blessedness is that they have pitched upon the right good. On the contrary,
what is the misery of the damned in hell? Wherein the misery of the damned lies.
there is nothing wanting to make them miserable, as there is nothing wanting
to make the other blessed. If you look upon their sins, you must consider in
hell, sin is their punishment: If you consider the bottomless pit, the burning
lake in which they are shut up, the worm of conscience that is ever gnawing and
wounding of them, for so it is in all those damned spirits in hell, this must
needs make their misery very miserable: but wherein lies the top of their
misery? alas it lies in none of these, it is in this, that they have erred in
their chiefest good. An ancient writer (Chrysostom) says, put a thousand of
them together in hell, and here is the worst of their Torment, their erring in
their chief good: so then there is none miserable like those sinners that have
erred in their chief good, nor none blessed like these Saints that have pitched
upon their chief good. The misery of the damned lies in two things.

First, because they have forsaken God.

Secondly, because God has forsaken them; they have hated the Lord, and the
Lord hates them, herein now does lie the top of their misery, as this was the
top of their folly, and the top of their vanity to neglect the chief good.

Now there are variety of comforts belonging to the Saints of God; But there
are some great grounds of comfort that belong to those that have chose God for
their chiefest good; and from these grounds should our comfort flow: As there
are some grand promises that are recorded in Scripture, which do wrap up all
the rest of the promises in them, The three great ptomises
and they are three.

First, I will give you my Son.

Secondly, I will give you my spirit.

Thirdly, I will give you my self: A godly man should take comfort from all the
promimises, but especially from the great promises: for if a man be much in the
least duties of Religion, and neglect the greatest, he gives just occasion to
suspect the truth of his obedience; and so if a man regard the lesser promises,
and look not to the greater, he gives just cause to suspect the truth of his
comfort: why is a godly man so happy a man? It is in this, that he has not
erred in his chief good. But there are seven grounds of the greatest comfort
that I know in all the book of God, Seven grounds of comfort for those that
have chosen God for their treasure.
arising from this consideration, I have not misplaced my treasure, I have not
erred in my chief good.

1. Hereby thou may see the riches of Gods love unthee.
Hereby the soul may see the riches as well as the freeness of the love of
God, I have not miscarried in that which is the greatest error of the world, I
have not gone with those who have their portion in this life: now its a great
mercy to be delivered from those sins of laying up your treasure in this
life; then this is much more a greater mercy, that a man has not misplaced his
chiefest good, for misplacing a man's chiefest good, it is the greatest sin,
and the greatest judgment that can befall him. The Scripture speaks of
delivering souls up to the Devil; Satan is both Lord and Executioner.
and there is a twofold delivering souls up to the Devil.

1. As a Lord.

2. As an Executioner.

First to deliver up a man to Satan as a Lord, so Judas was; the Lord Christ
delivered him to Satan as a Lord to rule over him.

But, Secondly, when the Lord shall give a man over to Satan as an
Executioner, that Satan shall terrify his conscience: now for a godly man to
be able to look into his own condition and say, when I looked abroad into the
world, I see one man place his chief good in riches, another in honors
another in pleasure; but in the midst of all these though I have miscarried in
many things, yet here is my comfort I have not miscarried in my chiefest good.
There is not any thing will comfort a godly man more then this, when he comes
to look the King of terrors in the face, nothing will be such pleasure to his
soul as this: when Satan shall triumph over most of the wordl, the poor soul
shall be able to triumph over all the powers of darkness; I am poor, I am
ignorant, I am unworthy; but through grace I obtained that mercy not to be
cheated of my chiefest good: here will lie a man's wisdom, and here will be a
man's glory; it is a man's chief good that will be a man's wisdom or folly for
ever hereafter. Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the better part whieh shall not be
taken way from her: we read it the good part; and herein lay her wisdom, and
herein lies the wisdom of all men in their Election, in a man's Election his
wisdom lies, and above all choices he make choice of his chiefest good: I have
been a fool in many things, but blessed be the name of God, I have been wise in
this thing; I have been deceived in many things, but I have not erred in this:
If this does not stand by a godly man in the greatest troubles, there is
nothing that can or will do it.

2. The true chief good shall neverb; taken from thee.
Comfort is this, I have chosen the true chief good that shall never be taken
from me, Luke 10.42, Which shall not be taken away from her. There is no man
miscarries in his treasure, but he that lays it up below, and there is no
treasure a man lays up below, but he shall be taken from it, and it shall be
taken from him. Now one of the Ancients observe, that earthly treasure is lost,
either from causes within, or from causes without: From causes within, Riches
have principles of decays in themselves, there is a Moth that comes out of
your finest Garments, and there will come dross out of your purest Gold; for
all the Creatures came under the Covenant of God at first, and that Covenant
being broken, those Creatures come under the curse of God. Then from principles
without, Thieves will steal them: man falls from God, and all things else fall
from him, and this is the great ground from whence all the perishing nature of
a man's treasure comes that is laid below: But here lies the difference between
the Treasures below, and the Treasures above. Austin has an excellent saying,
That a man's chief good is given to no man against his will, nor taken from no
man against his will, but the good here below is. The good above is liable to
no violence without, nor no decay within; no opposition then can hinder comfort
from the persons of those whose treasure is above. If Riches be a man's chief
good, it shall be taken from him; but thy chief good eannot be taken from thee,
and oh what a ground of comfort is this to to gracious souls!

3. Thou shall be guided in thy way, and reduced when wandering.
Comfort; A man that has chosen the true chief good, he has always
something to guide his way, he has always something to reduce his wanderings:
1. From this chief good he has the guide of his way; this is to the soul as
the Center is to the stone, the stone moves toward the Center, and moves
toward it the right way; what guids the motion to the Center, but the Center?
so a godly man, if he want a particular Rule, yet this general Rule, God is
his Center, is that that leads him to move toward him, that guids him in the
right way. What Is the great consultation of the soul? It is this, O what will
bring me nearest to my chiefest good? and it is the chief good that is the
guide of all our motions, Mat. 6.22. If thine eye be single, thy whole body is
full of light: Austin says, Its the intention of the man that is the eye of
the man, single intentions is his single eye, and a single eye, is an eye that
looks purely upon God. As the intention of the eye guids the man, so the
intention of the soul guides the way what carries me most to my chief good
this is that that guids the way. 2. This hash a great influence also to reduce
men's wanderings; many that have chosen God for their chiefest good, do many
times depart from him; now what shall bring him back again? it is the eying of
the chief good, this brings the man again: we have all gone astray like a
sheep, but now we are returned to the shepherd of our souls; There is not any
thing can reduce a man to God, that has departed from God, but the placing his
chief good in him: that soul, whose chief good is at home, will not long stay
abroad.

4. Unto thy chief good thou may always retire and fetch comfort.
Unto a man's chief good his soul retires, and from it he fetches chief
comfort upon all occasions, and so may Saints: he that makes choice of the
chiefest good, can say, I am sure of this Comfort, The Name of my God is a
strong Tower, Prove. 18.11. therefore I will run to it and be safe; the Rich
man goes to his wealth, the righteous man goes to his God. A godly man is able
to say in those distress, though I have no Riches to comfort me, and very few
friends to stand by me; yet I have a God, a Christ, a Heaven, a new Covenant, a
new image which I can retreat to, and rely upon in all occasions; and thus the
soul can triumph in his chief good over the chiefest evils; as the Spouse (it
is a voice of triumph) my beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10.
There is all a man's comfort in that which is his treasure, now God being his
Treasure, there is his comfort; and hence it is, that these dare compare with
any persons in any affliction, Psalm. 44.8. compared with verse 22. in verse 8.
In God we make our boast all the day long, and verse 22. For thy sake we are
killed all the day long: What? boast of God, and killed all the day long for
God? I, here is the comfort of a godly man, he can retire unto his chief good,
and whenever he retreats to it, he is filled full of comfort by it.

5. This may be a comfort in all thy failings. Prove. 20.9.
It Is of great Comfort to a godly man in the midst of all his failings, yet I
have not failed in choosing God for my chiefest good. The best men may, nay must
say, Who can make his heart clean? and when he looks back upon his way, he must
say, My heart bath run out inordinately after this thing and that thing, and
I have neglected my chief good and my treasure, but for this, I desire to be
ashamed all my life, but my happiness is laid up in him and no other, I have
chosen him for my chief good, and though I have failed in many things, Psalm.
18.2. Yet I have not wickedly departed from my God: departed he has, and many
times departed wittingly and willingly; but wickedly I have not departed from
God. What is it for a man to depart from God willingly? It Is for a man to place
his chief good some where else then in God, to go out after an other God: now
in this David can rejoice in the amidst of his failings, and so may thou. In
that he has not so departed from one God to set up another: therefore this,
and only this, can comfort the Saints in the amidst of all their failings:
The departings from God, is the greatest trouble that does befall them; but yet
here is their great comfort that they have not left him as their Treasure,
though they may sometimes leave him as their Lord.

6. That which thou layest up for thy chief good herethou shall enjoy for ever
hereafter.
Comfort which is unspeakable, that which thou have laid up for thy chief good
here by Election, that thou shall enjoy in the world to come by fruition,
therefore Austin says, A man's blessedness is begun in Election here, but
finished and perfected in fruition hereafter, Genesis 15.2. says the Lord, I will
be thy exceeding great reward: do thou choose God for thy chiefest good here?
if thou do, that which thou chusest in one world, thou shall enjoy in another.

7. Thou shall be blessed with the blessedness of God.
He that has laid up his chief good in heaven, shall be happy with the same
happiness that God himself is happy withal; look wherein Gods blessedness
lies, in that shall thy blessedness lie: wherein does Gods blessedness lie?
it lies in himself, his chief good lies in himself, for the Creature to
acknowledge God for his chief good so far as the Creature is capable, he is
blessed with the blessedness of God himself, and thou do enter into the joy
of thy Lord.

Now I proceed to the latter part of the Text, viz.

For where the Treasure is, there will the heart be also.
Out of which words, I gather this observation, viz.

That a man's chief good is Attractive of the heart; Doct.
or the Treasure where ever it is, carries the heart with it.

Where ever a man's Treasure is, there will his heart be.

THere are four things I shall speak to by way of Explication.

1. To show you what is meant by the heart: By heart in in Scripture, is meant
the whole soul.

2. That the soul of man, the heart goes out of it self for its happiness,
for its chief good; or thus, the chief good of man is without himself.

3. It Is a matter of great concernment, where a man's heart is placed.

4. That the heart does always follow the Treasure, the heart and the Treasure
will be together, and none can put them asunder.

5. We shall give you the grounds of it.

First, What is meant by the heart? By the heart is meant. 1. The whole soul.
By the heart in Scripture, is meant the whole soul. The Hebrews, generally
place the Government of man in the heart, and make the heart the seat of the
reasonable soul; so that you shall find the Scripture commonly speaking of it:
First, if you look to the whole soul as corrupt, as unsanctified, so
corruption goes through all the faculties of the soul, but the heart is said
to be the seat thereof, ler. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately nicked: and 1 Pet. 3.4. it is called, The hidden man of the
heart.

2. If you look upon the soul as renewed, it is said, With the heartman
believes, Romans 10.10. But the heart of man in Scripture, is sometimes taken for
those things that are situated, and have their habitation especially in the
heart. As wisdom is attributed to the heart, or folly, Ephraim is a silly Dove
without a heart, Hos. 7.11. and he that trusts to his own heart is a fool,
Prove. 28.26. that is, he that leanes to his own wisdom: Again, The
conscience.
the heart is put for Conscience, David's heart smote him when he cut off the
lap of Saul's garment. There Is a conviction of the Conscience, that is called the
heart: sometimes for the memory, which is the treasury of the soul. But there
are three things meant by the heart in this place.

1. 3. The thoughts and consultations.
The thoughts, Meditations, and consultations of the heart, where the treasure
is, there is the heart; that is, there is the thoughts, there is the
meditations and consultations of the heart, in these all the thoughts and
contrivances of the soul are, now where a man's treasure is, there are these,
2 Kings. 5.26. Did not my heart go along with thee. How did the Prophets heart
go with him? his thoughts went with him. So Job 17.11. the thoughts of the
heart are there called the heart, in the Hebrew it is the possessions of the
heart, for as what ever you do possess in the body, the body can see a glory,
and cast a sweetness in all things here below, so the soul can taste a a
sweetness, and see a glory in all things above.

2. 4. Love and affections.
By heart is meant a man's love, and affection, his desires and longings for, in
these the soul goes out toward its object, Genesis 34.8. As it is said of
Shechem, his house clave to Dinah. Now where your treasure is, there is your
love, there your desires are, the longings of your Souls are after it.

3. 5. Joy and delight.
By the heart is meant a man's delight, the joy of his heart, that whereby the
great Comfort of his life comes in Psalm. 62.16. If riches increase, set not
your heart on him; that is, do not place the comfort of your lives in them, let
not your hearts be swallowed up by them: Now where a man's treasure is, there
his thoughts are, there his love is, there the joy and delight of his soul is.
The

Second Proposition is this, Man's chief is without himself.
that the soul of man goes out of it self for happiness, for its treasure is
without it self, It Is Gods honor, his Prerogative only to have his
blessedness to be himself, he is unto himself the chief good, he has
nothing without himself to augment his happiness. Gods blessedness is in
himself.
The Lord Jesus Christ as Mediator in all his obedience, added nothing to the
blessedness of God; My goodness extends not to thee. Psalm. 16.2. But this is
Gods Prerogative only to have his happiness in himself; as for creatures that
are capable of a chief good, their happiness is not in themselves, but in
their treasure which is good, and therefore their heart is to go out after
their treasure. And here take notice of two great depths in Divinity.

1. Depth.
Man has not the chiefest good in himself, his happiness comes not from
himself, and hence it is that in reference to all things, he is a dependant
Creature. And therefore the soul is continually restless, because it seeks to
join it self to its chiefest good, which is without it self: you have a
saying, Prove. 14.14. a good man shall be satisfied from himself; It is not from
himself as separated from God, but from himself is united to God wherein his
blessedness lies: not self in opposition to God, but self in-subordination to
God, and so a man is satisfied from himself; that is; he goes not out of
himself when he goes into God, because he is made one with God.

2. Depth.
Depth in Divinity is this; that it is the nature and constitution of the
reasonable soul to make out to a chief good without it self; this is the
nature of it in its Creation, it does not only seek its own preservation, but
it seeks its own perfection. This is that which is the working of every
Greature, much more of the reasonable Greature, because it has not a Fountain
at home, it must go abroad to draw; and because it has not food at home, it
must go out to gather; Therefore Austin does observe very well, that man is a
middle Creature, well, there is some thing above him, and some thing below him:
That soul that has its chief good below it self, is a miserable soul; That
soul that has its chief good above it self, The good of the soul is above it
self.
is a happy soul; here is the happiness of the Saints, that their happiness
is above themselves says Christ, John 6.27. Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for the meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the
Son of man shall give unto you: the soul goes out to eat and to drink; Now the
soul that feeds upon something below it self is miserable, but that soul that
feeds on something above it self, is blessed, Isa. 44.20. the Prophet speaks of
some that feed upon ashes, a deceived heart has turned them aside, that they
cannot say, is there not a lie in my right hand? And thus does every man feed
whose chief food is below himself, he feeds on Ashes, not on spiritual food,
he feeds of the Earth as he lives in the Earth. Psalm. 62.10 If Riches
increase, set not your heart upon them, he sets his heart on Riches, and
therefore his heart cannot be set on God, and his heart is set so upon riches
as to suck something from them for his preservation and for his perfection; so
a godly man's heart is set upon God, does suck out of the sweetness of God for
his preservation, and for his perfection, Isai. 66.11. They shall suck and be
satisfied with the breasts of his Consolation.

Now give me leave to show you the misery of them that set their happiness in
things below themselves; here is their misery in three things. The misery of
those that set their happiness in things below themselves.


1. You draw where there is no water, the Creature is but vanity, all things
below are so; you suck where there is no milk, all these things are empty that
you think to find a fullness in.

2. The more your souls go out to these things for their Treasure, the more the
Appetite is increased, but the less it is satisfied; for I told you, that all
the Creatures, the more a man has to do with them, the more his appetite is
to them.

3. Consider what is there to be had in these Creature Comforts, when your
souls go forth after them, what do you leave for them? You have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters, and have hewn to your selves Cisterns, broken
Cisterns that will hold no water, Jer. 2.13. Observe four Particulars from
hence.

1. All the good you have in a Creature, Creature comforts compared to a
Cistern.
is but a Cistern, they have no good in themselves, no more then is put into
them.

2. A Cistern is but of a small compass, it will hold but a little, a man can
see an end of its perfection, but of a Fountain thou can see no end thereof.

3. Its water that will die and perish, therefore opposed to living water, it
will be a withering comfort.

4. They will all leak out of the bottom, therefore they are said to be broken
Cisterns.

But what is the water of the Fountain? what is the comfort that is in God?
There five things in it.

1. The comforts of God compared to a fountain
The water in the Fountain is originally in it self.

2. Its there continually.

3. Its is there inexhaustibly.

4. It is there communicatively, the Fountain naturally sends forth streams.

5. The comfort that is in God, is living comfort, the water that goes forth is
living water.

Third General Proposition; Its a matter of great concernment where our hearts
are placad.
That it is matter of great concernment in Christ's acount, and it should be so
in ours also, where our hearts are placed. Let me open this; The Lord has in
Scripture given especial directions for the setting of a man's heart, Hag. 1.5.
Consider your ways, in the Hebrew it is, Set your heart upon your ways; so
Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this
day. Now that it is a matter of great consequence where the heart is set, there
are these grounds for it.

1. God mainly looks at the heart,
Its the heart mainely that God looks upon and does observe, he looks not upon
what man looks upon, man looks upon the outside, but God looks upon the inside,
2 Chronicles. 16.9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to show himself strong in the behalse of them whose heart is perfect
toward him; and therefore because God looks upon the heart, it is matter of
great consequence where we place our hearts.

2. God claims the heart.
Its the heart mainly that God lays claim unto, and that he calls for, My
Son, give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26.

3. The man is where the heart is.
Its matter of great consequence, because where the heart is, there is the man;
therefore where the soul is gone, the man is gone, where the heart goes, the
man follows.

4. God values man according to his heart.
God values every man according to his heart, and the heart according to the
Treasure upon which it is set: a wicked man is worth nothing, because his heart
is worth nothing, Prove. 10.20. The heart of the wicked is little worth. God
values men according to their hearts, and their hearts according to their
treasure, or the object upon which his heart is set. There are two things that
make up the heart.

1. The Ornaments of the heart, a meek and a quiet spirit.

2. The Objects of the heart, and those things upon which the heart is set; the
man's heart is worth as much as the object is that it is set upon, and if the
object be worth nothing, the man's heart is worth nothing.

5. As the heart is, such is the life.
Ground, because from the heart all the conversation flows, therefore it is
matter of great consequence upon what the heart is set, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, so out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34. As the heart is pure or
impure, so is the whole life: on what a man's heart is set, that is his treasure,
or else it would not be so dangerous to misplace our hearts.

6. Objects transform the heart.
Its matter of great consequence, where and upon what you set your hearts,
because the objects upon which the heart is set, they have a transforming
power, and they do mightily frame and fashion the heart according to
themselves; and therefore as where your Treasure is, there will your hearts be
also, so like to what your Treasure is, that will your hearts be like also: If
a man mind nothing else in the world but Riches, they have nothing in their
hearts but Riches, either how they may get or save them, if a man's heart be set
on Covetousness, it transforms him, and the man is said to be a Covetous man,
when a man either gets, or saves, or covets much, (for unjust keeping is as
great an act of Covetousness as unjust getting.)

Jesus Christ has left one golden expression, what shall it profit a man to
gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26. observe the soul is not
only lost here, but it is lost hereafter also. It Is impossible to have the
heart set wholly on Riches, and set on Heaven, because the soul is framed
according to the object on which the heart is placed; therefore take these two
things wherein the soul is hereby injured: In the light of it, and in the
holiness and purity of it.

1. In the light of it, let a man's heart be set on any heavenly beauty, its
changed into a Heavenly complexion; let a man's heart be set on any earthly
beauty, its changed into an Earthly complexion, and so the soul is lost in the
sight of it.

Secondly, In the holiness of it: As the soul can see nothing that is sinfully
evil, or spiritually good, when the heart is placed on wrong objects; so it
can do nothing that is spiritually good, nor withstand any thing that is
spiritually evil, when it is placed on Earthly objects: the holiness and
purity of the soul is is wronged by Earthly objects; Therefore Covetousness is
called the not of all evil, how comes it to be so? I answer two ways.

First, all evil comes from thence as the root.

Secondly, all is nourished by it as the root; there is no principle of evil
that will not flow from this evil, and there is no evil principle that it
will not nourish, there is no sin that this will not frame the heart to, for it
will make a man in love with every sin, it will make a man prove an Apostate
from God, Demas has forsaken us, having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10.
It will make a man impudent and shameless in sin, as Mat. 26.16. What will you
give me and I will betray him, faith Judas. It will make a man forget the
offers of grace, Luke 16.14. and slight the word of God. And the Pharisees who
were covetous, heard all these things and derided him. It will make a man
desire the pleasures of sin that are but for season, it will make a man sin and
desire to sin; you little know what hideous wrong the setting of the heart upon
the world brings you, and what doleful wrath it will lay you under. The heart
does always follow the treasure.
In the.

Fourth Place for proof that the heart does always follow the Treasure.

1. The heart of man has its several motions and outgoings, its Processes,
and its Recesses, and all this is according as the Treasure is, Eccle. 6.9. The
sight of the Eye is betthen the wanderings of the desire; It Is in the Hebrew,
the walkings of the soul; then the soul of man is a walking thing, the heart of
a man has its outgoings; It Is true of the heart as it is said of the Angels,
Ezekiel. 1.13. they go forth with incredible swiftness like lightning, so does
the heart, Eccel. 11.9. there you read of the way of the heart; the heart is
rendered by Montanus as a thing that is ever in motion: most men do make choice
of their chief good in their youth, and their hearts go after it. Ezekiel. 33.31.
Their hearts go after their Covetousness; their hearts walk after their
Covetousness, so the Hebrew: you will say Covetousness is a sin in the heart,
how then does the heart go after it? either it is spoken of Covetousness here
as the Predominant lust; or else Covetousness is put for the Object of
Covetousness on which it is set, hence it is that in Scripture the soul of man
is made up of lustings in a good sense, Luke 22.15. with desire have I desired
to eat this passover with you, and in an evil sense, Ephesians. 4.22. Put off the
old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lust; faith the Church,
draw us and we will run after thee. Cant. 1.4. how so? by discovering the great
sweetness and excellencies that are in him; are souls drawn to him, then we
shall have a delight in fellowship and Communion with him, and the heart is
drawn out sutably to a man's Treasure: here are four Demonstrative Arguments
that I shall give you, how it comes to pass that the Treasure is attractive of
the heart.

1. Every unregenerate man has some predominant lust.
Every man in an unregenerate estate has some Predominant lust, and this lust
is said to be Predominant, because in the object that is enjoyed by that lust,
there lies his Treasure; it is called the stumbling block of a man's iniquity, the
Fathers use to style it a man's darling sin. Job. 20.12. It is sweet in his
mouth, and he hides it under his tongue: Every sin Rules over a man, but there
are some sins that rule more immediately then any other, and these sins are a
man's Treasure, that sin which he makes all other sins subordinate to, in that
he places his chief good, and then that is the sin he is least able to
resist; and what is the reason of it? because the heart will go out after its.
Treasure, James 1.14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his
wn lust, and enticed: sin draws a man's heart aside; But remember there is no
man does perish that ever did make a profession of Religion, but he did meet
with this stumbling block of his darling sin, and because there was his
Treasure, his heart would go out after it. The opportunity of Temptation is
when a man is tried in his master lust, he cannot hold his heart from his
treasure, because the treasure has such a command and rule over the heart that
he cannot resist it.

2. The heart is impatient of delay, in pursuit of its treasure.
It will appear the heart goes out to the treasure, because in the pursuit of
it, the heart is impatient of opposition, and of procrastination; of opposition
it can bear no denial, of procrastination it can bear no delay, Prove. 17.12.
It is better to meet with a Bearobbed of her whelps, then a fool in his folly:
who is Solomon's fool there? every wicked man that has no fear of God, an
unregenerate man that is in his folly, and has no mind to get out of it, he
is a fool; I, but when is it most dangerous to meet with him? when he is in his
folly, it is when the lust is got up, and is ruling and reigning in the man:
What Is the reason a man had better meet a Bear robbed of her whelps, then a
Fool in his folly? It Is because you stand between the heart and the treasure,
and it can bear no opposition. As it can bear no denial, so it can bear no
delay; thus it is when covetousness is a man's predominant lust; Balaam's lust
was too swift for his Ass, says the Prophet, They shall come as an Eagle does
hasten to the prey. (It is spoken of a covetous man) of all Birds, an Eagle
flies swiftest, and never flies swifter then when she hastens to eat the prey;
so it is with every one that persecutes his chiefest good whatsoever it be.

3. Let a man change his Treasure, A mana^ heart changes as he changes his
treasure.
and presently his heart changes and returns from that which before it went
out after with the greatest earnestness in the world, and now it returns from
it with the greatest swiftness: this is the first and the great change in
Conversion, a man's changing his chief good, and when that is done, the soul
returns to God.

There two things that make Conversion; one is an Aversion, the other a
Conversion; the man turns away from his other treasure, and then his heart
runs after God for his treasure, Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after
God. There are two expressions much alike, one is, Numb. 14.24. My servant
Caleb has followed me fully; To fulfill after the Lord, that is the Hebrew:
another expression is, To cleave unto God: the one points the sincerity of a
man's heart, and the other points the constancy of a man's heart; the heart that
did before follow sin and vanity, now follows after his chief good, because
he has changed his other good for God, Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have
I to do any more with Idols? Now where the Treasure is, there will the heart
be. The Fifth Particular, The reason why the heart goes after the treasure.
is to give you the Reasons or grounds, why the heart goes out to its treasure:
I shall give you six great grounds from that, that the treasure is to the soul.

1. The treasure is the souls food.
Because the treasure is the food that the soul feeds on, then its no wonder
the soul goes out after its treasure, and cannot live without it: take an
unregenerate man, he eats the treasures of wickedness, and drinks the wine of
violence: take a godly man, he feeds upon spiritual food, Ioh. 6.27. Labor
not or the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting
life: That which is the food of the heart, the heart makes after, and cannot
live without it; that is the first ground.

2. Its the support of the soul.
The chief good is the support of the soul, a man is not able to support
himself without it, Psalm. 41.12. Thou upholdest my heart, the Hebrew is, Thou
have underpropt my heart; the heart is not able to stand by it self, but the
chief good holds it up; then it wants a support, and this support is God, Job
8.15. There is a man that leanes upon his house: his house is the object of his
hope, he is born up by it, and not able to stand without it: A Saints support
is only in Gods strength, My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of heart and my portion for ever. Ps. 73.26
Riches are an ungodly man's treasure, and he runs to them to support him; the
name of the Lord is the righteous man's treasure, and he runs to it to
support him. Every man has and must have something to support and defend him,
and that the heart will go out after.

3. Its the delight of the soul.
Reason, why the Treasure is attractive of the heart, because it is the delight
of the heart, and a man cannot live without delight; but he cannot have
delight, but by retyring to his chief good, and there he must delight
himself; the chief good is the object of the greatest, the highest, the
fullest delight, all its joys come in by its chief good, without delight the
soul cannot live, take away all delight, and the soul dies, says Austin;
therefore it must needs go out after the treasure, because the treasure is the
delight of the soul.

4. Its the beauty of the soul.
A man's chief good is that wherein the beauty of the soul does lie, take the
soul off from this and its naked, because the chief good is the beauty and
ornament of the soul, Ier. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, says God?
it is intimated, God is the Ornaments and the attire of the soul. Take one
whose chief good is in clothing (that is it that beautifies the body) and he
will not easily forget his attire. Can a maid? There Is not a natural
impossibility of a maids forgetting of her attire, and the Bride her
ornaments; but there is moral impossibility, because they are her chief good,
and the heart goes out after them. But take a godly man now, God is the beauty
and ornament of his soul, his glory, and chief good, and therefore his heart
must needs go out after God. All the adorning of the soul is from the Treasure,
and therefore it must needs attract the heart.

5. Its the breath of the soul.
The soul must go to the Treasure, because it is the breath of the soul, the
soul strangles and dies if it do not enjoy it. The Soul is always breathing
after the chiefest good, Psalm. 42.1. As the Heart pants after the water brooks,
so my heart pants after thee O God, says David, the chief good causes the
breathings of the soul after it.

6. Because the chief good is the only rest of the soul, Ps. 116.7. Return
unto thy rest O my soul, the soul is restless till it come to the enjoyment of
him, therefore return unto thy rest.

The next thing is, How the heart is carried out to its treasure.
how is the heart of man is carried out to his Treasure? does it always go
after it? here let me lay down these six Conclusions.

1. Continually.
That the heart goes after the Treasure continually, the soul of man is always
active and never idle, and what is the ground of all its motions? its the chief
good, that is the ground of it, therefore the soul moans continually after its
chief good, Eccl. 2.23. the wise man speaks there of a Covetous rich man,
whose chief good is his wealth, the heart takes no rest in the night; because
his heart is continually carried forth after his treasure; the abundance of the
rich will not suffer them to sleep.

2. Infinitely.
The heart goes after the Treasure infinitely, and unsatiably, it is never
satisfied with any thing else, till it be arived to its chief good: They that
place their Treasure here below, they are never satisfied, but their hearts are
going forth after it without measure, as Hab. 2.6. it is said there, they load
themselves with thick clay; A wicked man man have as much as may sink him, but
he never has so much as will satisfy him, they are like the horse-leach that
cries give, give; so a godly man's heart is always gasping after God, and going
out with bounless desires after Heaven.

3. The heart possesses it for his own.
The heart takes fast hold of its Treasure, and possesses it for its own;
There be other things that a man may look on as his own, but this chiefly, Job
8.15. he shall take fast hold of his house. Take a proud woman, her vanity is
in her apparel, her apparel is her treasure, and how fast will she hold it?
Take a covetous man that makes Riches his Treasure, he takes fast hold of his
Treasure, and will not let it go; so take a man that makes God and Christ his
treasure, when temptations and afflictions come, that labor to pull a man from
his treasure; yet he lays fast hold of it, and will not let it go.

4. The heart re turns to its treasure.
If at any time the heart be shaken, yet it returns to the chief good again.
So you shall find an unregenerate man that has his treasure below, the man is
shaken with Afflictions, Crosses, Troubles, Sorrows; yet he returns again to
that which he has taken up for his chief good; So let a godly man be shaken by
temptations from God; yet for all that the soul returns to God again, Hos.
2.19. I will return to my first husband, etc.

5. The change of a man's chief good is the first change.
The change of a man's chief good is a godly man's first change, and a godly man's
great change, and his chief change. There is a change to destruction, they
have forsaken me the Fountain of living waters; But there is a change to
perfection, and that is forsaking of broken Cisterns for living waters, do not
talk of the change of Actions, but talk of this, the change of the chief good;
change thy Riches for a God, thy pleasures for a Christ.

6. In this the liberty and bondage of the heart lies.
In the chief good the liberty and the bondage of the heart does lie; wherein
lies the liberty of the soul? it is in this, that the soul is fastened upon God
as the chief good, and looks upon all other things in no other way then as
they are in subordination unto him; when the soul cleaves to God, and God
alone, and looks upon all other things as nothing, but as in subordination
unto him; Then, and not till then, the soul is at liberty; the more thou art
taken up with thy chief good, the freer thou art, for his service is perfect
freedom; on the contrary all men that have their Treasures below this
spiritual life, they are in bondage continually, because their treasures are
below themselves.

There is another thing we are to open, Such as the treasure is, such is the
heart.
as the heart and the treasure are inseparable, that the heart will be where
the treasure is; So such as the treasure is, such is the heart, as well as
where the treasure is there will be the heart, and such as the heart is, such
is the man; if it belaid on Earth, then men are said to be Earthly, if laid up
in Heaven, men are said to be heavenly, Phil. 3.19. Your Conversation is in
Heaven, though their souls go up and down among many Creatures; yet their
Conversation is in Heaven, for the heart of man does cheapen here and there
before itbuyes: yet notwithstanding all is included in things below, to a man
whose treasure is in Earth; if a man's treasure be in Heaven, his mind is in
heaven, hence it comes to pass that a godly man is said to be a stranger here,
Psalm. 39.12. I am a stranger; and a Sojourner, what is the reason: because he
does not converse here as in his Country, but seeks a Country above, he is a
stranger here, traveling toward his own Country. Bernard says, a godly man's
heart is in Heaven, because the Lord dwells in Heaven; hence it is that grace
is called glory, not only because its of the same nature with that grace which
a man in glory shall receive the the perfection of; nor only because it is a
pledge and an earnest, and will end in glory; but because the soul immediately
enters into glory after his treasure, for his treasure immediately being in
Heaven, his heart is there; hence it is, a godly man is more in Heaven then in
Earth, for his treasure is in Heaven, and his heart is there.

But let us see in particular, What i^ meant by the heart.
what is here intended by the heart; more especially there is meant all the
things that are seated in the heart, and let us begin with the first of them.

1. The ain and ben of the cart.
The heart is put for the aim, tendency, and bent of the heart, it is Animi
Propositum, it is the propension of the heart, Deuteronomy. 24.15. He is poor and
sets his heart upon it; he is a hireling, and his heart is set upon his
ways, he does not work for love to his master, nor love to his work, but the
aim and bent of his soul is for the good he shall receive by his work;
therefore the Scripture speaks of a double heart, Ps. 12.2. what makes a heart
a a double heart? some apply it to instability in opinions, that which is
called halting between two opinions, when the mind is in suspense, Luke 12.20.
Be not of doubtful minds: But whether it be in reference to opinions, or what
ever it is, the mind is in doubt, and he is double minded. But the intention
of the Scripture by a double heart does mainly aim at the intentions of the
heart, the heart goes not always one way, but sometimes for God, sometimes for
the Creature; sometimes for Heaven, sometimes for Earth, when men have not a
single Eye, when they have not single aims, this the Scripture calls a double
heart. When a man has an aim at God, and the things of God, and looks it
other things in subordination thereto, this the Scripture calls a single eye,
or a single heart: but when men go sometimes very hotly after the things of
God, and at other times pursue after Riches immoderately, this is a double
heart, Act. 8.1. Thy heart is not right in he sight of God: and Hab. 4.12. The
word of God is the discerner of the intents of the heart. Now then thus, where
a man's Treasure is, there the bent, the aim, and the tendency of a man's heart
is; one of the great things you are to look to, is the heart, for in the heart
lies the greatest deceit, but in the heart, above all other things, the bent
and tendency of the heart is that you are to look at, and there are two
Reasons for it.

1. The aim of his heart is the godly man's comfort in all failings.
Because this is the great Comfort, nay the only comfort that a godly man has
to fly to in all failings, and in all his falls the bent and aim of his
heart; In any particular failing and infirmity, what is it the soul can retreat
to? truly when a godly man can say, this has been my transgression, but this
was not my intention, this is the only comfort of the man; so it was with
Peter, it was a desperate fall to deny his Master, and wish himself accursed
that he knew not the man; but Peter could say, Lord, This was the bent of my
soul, not to deny thee, but to die for thee. Sin comes upon a godly man at
unawares, sin comes upon a godly man as judgment comes upon a wicked man by
way of surprisall, but the bent of his heart was not to sin, therefore this
is a comfort to him. It Is an expression of David, Though he did offend with his
mouth, yet I have purposed that my mouth should not offend; it was my
transgression, but not my intention, I have plotted that my mouth might not
offend; In all your failings, this is that that must support you, yea in every
transgression, that it was not your intention so to do.

2. It is his comfort after his failings.
Sometimes a godly man can take comfort in this after his fallings: many times
the Saints commit wickedness out of consultation, Psalm. 19.3. the Scripture
calls them Presumptuous sins, sins that they do intend before hand, 1
King. 15.5. It Is said, David's heart was upright in all things all. he days of
his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite. Then David's heart was
not upright in this matter, his dissembling and his lying was clearly
demonstrated. But now what may a godly man retreat to? to the general bent of
his heart, when he fails in a particular act, 1 Kin. 15.14. Nevertheless Asa
his heart was upright with God all his days; he does not speak of particular
Acts, but of the general bent of his heart, though in some particulars he
contrived sin: wicked men when they are carried on in a design that is
sinful, they will not be beaten from it, but the general bent of their soul
is to go on in it.

Now would you know which way the bent and tenderness of your heart goes, Six
rules for discovery of the bent of the heart.
there are six Rules I shall give you: It was the saying of a godly Minister, I
bless my God I have stadied my own heart more then Boukes; It would be very
happy for you to say, I have studied my heart more then the would, more then
trading.

1. That which its casryed after under different conditions, is the aim of the
heart.
Rule. That which the soul is carried after under different conditions, this
declares what the aim and bent of the soul is, and so you must judge of the
tendency of the heart; as waters, though you turn them out of their proper
current and alter their channel, yet they all run into the Sea, you will say
then the tendency of them is to the Sea: If you see the Sun, whether the day be
clear or cloudy, it makes to the West, it concludes there is the end of its
course, this is the race it has to run: the going of the heart is the same
in different conditions, it does wonderfully cleave to that which is its chief
good, and is never at rest til it be centered there: As for example, suppose it
be the heart of a natural man, his aim is at his own exaltation, now pride
being his predominant principle and master sin; this man's pride or prosperity
vents it self in Exaltation, Admiration, and seeking glory from men, he sets
himself in the face and glory of the times, despising of others, exalting
himself: bring this man under trouble of conscience, and then pride vents it
self in humility, and debases into poverty: As faith is an humbling grace, so
despair is the highest fruit of pride, here is the heart now showing the same
aim in different conditions, and all this does clearly argue, where the bent
of the heart is, there is the aim of a man's heart: If a man's heart go out to
covetousness, the love of money, when he is in a low condition, if he did but
observe his soul, his heart went after his covetousness; let him be brought
into a wealthy condition, he is scussling after the world still: Judas his
heart went after his money, when he was an Apostle, though in a different
condition; take a man in what condition you will, you hall find the aim and
bent of his heart is still the same. On the contrary; take a godly man who
makes God his treasure, who has another treasure and another aim, put him
into what condition you will, still you shall find his aim is the same, the
bent of his soul is still toward God, Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us,
yet have we not forsaken thee, nenher have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant:
He looks beyond them all, for his aim is at his treasure: Look upon Job upon
the dunghill, the aim of his heart was the same, fearing God, and eschewing
evil: Now consider what you were, when you were a private man, and what you
are, now you are advanced to places of dignity, and see by it where the aim of
your heart is.

2. That's the bent of the heart which it greedily catches at upon all
occasions.
In all places and in all companies, if opportunity be affected, consider what
it is that the heart does most greedily catch at upon all occasions, and in all
places: If the aim of the soul be lust, he went after her speedily, as a
soole to the correction of the Stocks Prove. 7.22. Suppose it be gain a man's
heart aims at, It goes after it presently. Josh. 7.21. When I saw a goodly
Babylonish Garment, and two hundred shekles of silver, and a wedge of Gold, I
coveted them and took them, etc. So let there be at any time a godly motion
offered to a godly man, his heart catches at the motion. By this you may see
what your souls are, by the first motion you close with, as according to the
aim and bent of the heart, so all temptations are suited; what is that then
which your heart closes withal with the greatest readiness? according to
that is the bent of your heart.

3. According to the bent of the heart, so ^t fran^^ object t^ i^ (...).
According to the bent of heart, so the heart gathers unto it self, whether
there be occasions given or no, Genesis 6.5. Every imagination of the heart is
only evil, and that continually; Imagination of the heart, it should be read,
Every Creature of the heart; the heart frames to it self something whether
there be occasions or no, according to the bent of it, 1 John 2.16. The lusts
of the slosh; lust there, is put for the object of lust, as faith is put for
the object of faith, and hope for the object of hope; there is nothing tha^
lust (...) not make some (...) there of, 2 Pet. 2.14. (...) eyes full of
adultery that cannot cease from sin, though they have no occasion at all,
Psalm. 41.6. David Complains, If he come to see me, his heart gathers
wickedness to it self. On the contrary, take a godly man, look on the aim of
his heart, here is no occasion given at all, yet he has something the heart
gathers up to it self, therefore David cries out in the midst of a crooked
and perverse Generation, Teach me O Lord to number my days, that I may apply
my heart unto wisdom; Ps. 90.1
as one gathers wickedness, the other gathers holiness for the heart of man
has a selfe-sufficiency in it, Jam. 1.15. when lust has conceived it
bring-eth forth sin: lust is said to be the Father and the Mother, able to
beget and able to bring forth, therefore look which way the aim goes, there
the heart goes, there it centers, according to the general bent of the heart,
it gathers something to it self, whether there be occasion given it or no.

4. According to the bent, so it will break through allopposition.
That Is the bent of the heart, that breaks through all opposition to accomplish
its design; the bent of the heart is such a thing, that look what ever the
thing be its set upon, though never so costly, it will spare no cost to obtain
it; you that delight your selves in vanity of Apparel, you will spare no cost
to obtain it, Genesis 34.6. Shechem's heart clave to Dinah, and what does this
bring forth, Ask never so much dowry and it shall be given. Thus in Isaiah,
they spare no cost to lavish away Gold for their Idol Gods, because the bent
of their hearts was set upon it, you that stick at all costs in Religion, and
at none in Rebellion, you may easily see which way the bent of your hearts
goes. If the bent of a man's heart be revenge, it will stick at no cost, Haman
will get the King abundance of Treasure for the destruction of the Jews: If
the bent of the heart be for Ambition, Absalom will not stick to murder his
Father if it hinder his rising: If it be halting and dissembling in Religion,
Jehu will not stick at it to get a Kingdom; if it be the making Merchandise
of the souls of men, and the establishing of Artichrist in the Chair of
Christ; if it be the change of Times and Laws, if to change the fundamental
Laws of a Nation, if the bent of the heart beset upon it, no opposition will
hinder: So its true in reference to spiritual things, if the bent of a man's
heart be set on God, no Creature opposition shall divert it: That Is an
excellent expression, Psalm. 84.6. Who passing through the valley of Baca, make
it a well: They will dig Wells in the desert, intimating that no opposition
can hinder them that are fully bent to come to Christ: The loss of a right
hand, the loss of a right eye, the soul does not stick at, he will cut off
the one, and pull out the other; and what is the reason? its all to attain that
which the bent of his soul is after.

5. The heart is restless until it obtain that after which it aim,
Where the bent and aim of the heart is, there it is continually restless,
until it attain that which it tends to; the aim of the heart is Pondus animi
the weight of the soul; my heart pants after the living God, so for worldly
things, to Mat. 6.32. After these things do the Gentiles seek, and they are
never quiet till they find them; if it be after Knowledge, the soul is still in
a pursuit after it, and the man never gives over, but is restless, because
the bent of his heart goes out after it; If it be after riches, they rise up
early, go to bed late, they eat the bread of carefullnesse; Ps. 127.2. If it be
a desire of rule and Dominon the soul is restless and never quiet till it
gets some superiority in the world.

6. The heart makes al other things subservient unto that, after which it aims.
That which is the aim a man's heart, he does make use of all other things to
attain it, makes all other things subservient to it: If the bent of his heart
be set on honoring God, he cares for riches no farther then that he may
honor God with his substance, Pro. 3. 9. and ordinances no further, then in
them he may enjoy Communion with God; nay, he looks on the Lord Jesus Christ
no farther, then he is brought to God by him: will the name of Religion and the
gifts of the Holy Ghost do it? Simon Magus will buy them with money rather then
he will be without them: will the countenance of godly men do it? then they
shall be courted by all parties; Iehu when he meet withs Ionadab, salutes him,
2 King. 10.15.
and faith, Is thy heart right as my heart is with thy heart? there is a doubt,
do thou love me truly as I love thee, no man professes more sincerity, then
he whose trade is Hypocrisy; he had destroyed the house of Ahab, but it was
to set up his own house, the one was in order to the other, he was a man for
Religion and reformation while Religion would serve his purpose; and he courts
Ionadab to join with him (who was a godly man) that he might the better color
his design; how many are are there that are Executioners of oppressors, and yet
succeed them in oppression? A man may be an Executioner of an Idolater, and yet
succeed him in his Idolatry.

2. The heart is put for the contrivance of the heart.
The heart is put for the wisdom, the studies, the plots, the contrivances of
the heart: now where the heart is, there are all these, Pro. 8.5. O ye simple,
understand wisdom; and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart; and in
Hosea 7.11. Ephraim is said to be a silly dove without a heart. Now a man whose
plots and designs are in Earth and never rises above the Earth, the mansplots
Earthly, therefore the man's wisdom is Earthly, James 3.15, 16. This wisdom
descends not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual, devilish; if a man's
treasure be in Heaven, his wisdom is heavenly, Iam. 3.17. But the wisdom that
is from above, is pure, peaceable, gentle, etc. so Luke 16.8. The Children of
this world are said to be in their Generation wiser then the Children of light:
There are two sorts of men, and two sorts of wisdoms; there is the Children of
this world, and they have the wisdom of this world; and there is the Children of
light, and they have the wisdom of another world: the one is the wisdom that
reaches not beyond this life, the other reaches to the life that is to come:
Both these are wise in two things; in doing their own business, and in
accomplishing their own end; now the wisdom of both these is seen in three
things, in getting, in keeping, in increasing and using their treasure: all the
wisdom, and designs, and plots of a man are exercised about one or all of
these three ethings.

1. Every man's wisdom is exercised in getting his treasure.
Every man's wisdom is exercised in getting his treasure; Amnon his lust was his
treasure, and do but see the devises he found for the obtaining of it 2 Samuel,
13. so Jeroboam his aim, was to be the head of the ten tribes, and see his
wisdom in obtaining of it, 1 Kings 12.26. According to man's Treasure, so his
wisdom and designs have been laid for the obtaining of it. Now a godly man,
all the Religion that he has attained to it, is to make him wise to Salvation;
A godly man has but one design in the world, and that is, that he may enjoy
God in Christ where his Treasure is laid up; therefore Bernard well observes, a
wise man's heart is with the Lord, that is, all his plots and contrivances are
how he may bring about those designs as may give him Communion with God.

2. In keeping his treasure.
All the plots and designs in the world are how he may keep his Treasure; Thus
it is with men here below Ier. 51, 1. The Prophet speaking of men that gathered
many riches, says the Lord by him, I will send unto Babylon fanners that shall
fan her, and shall empty her land; because men use their wisdom to keep their
treasure, the Lord says, he will send fanners that shall take away those
honors and riches which they use such means to keep with them, Job 20.15.
there is a man that has swallowed down riches, yet in the fulness of his
sufficiency he shall be in straights, ver. 2^. they thought that when they had
swallowed down riches, they should never vomit them up again; but vor. 15. He
shall vomit them up again And ver. 23. when he is about to fill his belly, God
shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain is upon him while he
is eating: the wisdom of the men of the world is not only how they may get
their Treasure, but how they may secure their treasure. So a godly man, God in
Christ is his Treasure, he knows it is sin only that separates between him
and his God, and so his desire is not to sin, that he may not be separated from
his treasure: A godly man has but one necessity that lies upon him, and all
his aim tends thereunto; and that is, that he does not sin, and thereby
lose his treasure.

3. In en creasing and improving his treasure.
Where his Treasure is, there is his plottings and contrivings how to improve
and increase it: a treasure is not filled up all at once, but by degrees,
therefore this is the great study and plot of men, how they may improve and
increase their treasure, Hab, 2.5. There Is one desires domination which was his
treasure, he looks on himself, as a man born to Rule, but looks (...) all
other men, as born to be Ruled; what does this put him on? to increase his
treasure; how does he do it? the Text says, He is a proud man, he keeps not at
home, but enlarges his desires as Hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satissied, he ^^thers all Nations to himself: and Dan. 11.24.25. O how earnest
are men in fore-casting devices, in contriving and plotting how to increase and
improve their treasure: If a man's treasure be in heaven in the enjoyment of God
and Christ, what ever his esteem is in the world, it does not trouble him, so
he can but go on to the obtaining of more of his treasure. Now where your
treasure is, there is your heart, that is, there is your wisdom, your
plottings, and contrivings for the getting, keeping, and improvement of it.

3. The heart is put for the thoughts and meditation of the heart.
The heart is used for the thoughts and meditations of the heart Psalm. 139.23.
Try me O Lord, and know my thoughts: there is nothing carries the heart with it
more then the thoughts; thoughts are the first born of the soul, the immediate
issuings forth of the heart. The way to taste water and not be deceived, is to
cast it at the Spring; and Wine, if you would not be deceived by the Vintner,
you must taste it at the Wine Press; so if you would judge aright of your
hearts, you must look to your thoughts, Solomon speaks of one, that invites to
dinners Now says he, Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither
desire thou his dainty meats: for as he thinks in his heart, so is he; eat
and drink says he to thee, but his heart is not with thee, Prove. 23.6, 7.
what way your hearts go, Three Rules for discovery where your thoughts and
hearts are.
that way your thoughts go.

There are three Rules that will much discover which way your thoughts go; and
by these you will know where your hearts are, and by that where your treasure
is.

1. Whither do your thoughts retire when you ar alone.
When you are alone sequestered from company, out of worldly employment; whither
then do your thoughts usually retire? for the man i^ as he is alone, such as
the thought is, such is the man: Take a godly man, would you know where his
thoughts are when he is in his Closet in his bed? when I awake says David, I
am still with thee, early in morning will I direct my prayer to thee, and will
look up, Psalm. 5.3.

2. What are these thoughts in which you find the greatest sweetness
Rule, by which your thoughts may be discovered, and you may judge where your
hearts are, is this; what are those thoughts that you use to find the greatest
sweetness and delight in? Psa. 12^.17. How precious are thy (...) unto me O
God! (...) great is the sum of them! To one man the thought of his lefts are
sweet, and he acts over his wickedness in a contemplative way with delight,
and the thoughts of God are bitter unto him, and trouble him; there is no
sweetness in thinking upon God to a wicked man, and there is nothing but
sweetness in the thoughts of God to a godly man.

3. What thoughts are of longest continuance with you.
Rule, What thoughts are they, that are of longest continuance with you, that
your souls do most abide upon, the thoughts that abide in your souls most,
discover where your hearts are? Jer. 4.19 How long shall vain thoughts abide
in you? Psalm. 10.4. God is not in all his thoughts; nay God is not in his
thoughts at at all: what do your thoughts stay on? Take a natural man, and
cast in some thoughts of his treasure, his thoughts will abide there; but cast
in any thought of heaven, and those dye presently as a fish out of its element.
Then examine your thoughts when you are alone, what thoughts come into your
mind and abide up on your spirits, for your treasure is as the meditation of
your thoughts and hearts are.

4. The heart is put for the love and affections of the heart.
The heart is put for the love and affections of the heart, Judge. 5.9. My heart
is toward the Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly among the
people: Its Deborah's speech. The people of God love all that are employed for
God, and the more men are employed for God, the more their hearts are drawn out
after them. The heart of man is said to be where it loves, rather then where it
lives; now the heart is here taken properly for the loves of the heart, so
where the heart is, there is the Treasure.

Now how should a man know where his love is set? It Is a thing of mavelous
great consequence to consider where a man sets his love, Its a thing of great
concernment where a man sets his love.
and upon what his love is fixed; And this is the maine of this Text, and there
are 4 grounds why it is a thing of so great Concernment, where a man sets the
loves of his heart.

1. Because a man's love is his greatest gift.
Because a man's love is his greatest gift, there is nothing else a gift indeed
without love, but love is a gift of it self, though there be nothing else.
It Is so if you consider the love of God, though the Lord have not given you any
thing, if he does but set his love upon you, its a greater gift then Heaven or
Earth could be: so likewise the Lord Jesus Christ if he had not given us
interest in his victories, in his sonship, in his privileges, so he had given
us but his love, it was a greater gift then heaven or earth, says the Apostle,
1 Cor. 13.1. If I had all things, and had not Charity, it profits nothing;
Hypocrites many times give God great gifts, but they reserve their love, so God
gives many of them great gifts but he reserves his love for the saints; so that
love is the greatest gift that a man has from God, and it is the great est gift
a man can give to God.

2. He that gives his love, gives himself.
Because he that gives his love, he gives himself, he gives all things else
whatsoever he has; That Is pure and free love indeed that gives all things to
the person beloved: the Lord sets his love upon his people from all eternity,
and when he purposes to give all things, he gave himself, love first gives
it self, and then all things else, Revel. 21.7. he that overcommeth shall
inherit all things, how so? I will be his God, and be shall be my Son; So it is
with men, he that gives his love, gives all things, and he that withholds his
love withholds all things, for a man's love Commands all that he has; Therefore
it is a mighty thing to consider where a man sets his love.

3. A man's love maks the (...) loved his own.
A man's love is that which makes the thing beloved his own. A learned man
says, God is our own above all things we call ours: Estate is ours, and
friends are ours, but God is more ours then they, because he loves us more then
they. It Is by the love of God that we come to be his, by our love to God that
he comes to be ours. Its our love that makes the thing beloved ours, thou can
call nothing thine but what thou love.

4. Its a man's love that sets the price upon all things.
It Is a man's love that sets the price upon all things. Great things are of
small value where love is wanting, and small things are of great value where
love is present; its so with God, and so with the Saints. If God give to
ungodly men the greatest heaps of Gold in the world, how do the Saints value
this? it is but a bone cast to the dogs, why so? because there is no love in
it; so likewise let a godly man give but to God a small thing, there is love in
it, and indeed that love raises the price, the poor widow cast in but two
mites, Luke 21.12. it was with more love and affection then others, and
therefore more in acceptance.

What should a man set his love upon, that by this means he may know where his
heart is? All love is lovely wheresoever it is, and to be beloved, even
natural love, God loves all his Creatures, and all pure love should be set
upon him, Mark. 10.21. He that loves Father and Mother more then me, is not
worthy of me. Whether may we not love that which is good? Yes, and nothing
else: As all truths are to be known and be believed, so all good things are to
be embraced and loved, Mark 10.37. He that hates not Father and Mother etc.
cannot be my Disciple: To love Father and Mother is a duty; but you see what it
is that must have the chief place of your love; 10. 12.35. He that loves his
life more then me, and my truth, and my ways, this man is not worthy of me, 1 John 2.15. He that loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Is it
not lawful to love the world, and the things of the world? Yes, but not more
then me. To love the Creature more then God, is that which makes it lust; To
love the Creature in subordination to God, is that which makes it love: Then
what is that which you love most? would a man know where his love is, there is
treasure is.

And because this is the main thing in the Text, Rules (...) know where ^^ur
love ^^d treasures are.
I shall give you eight things to know where your hearts are, and where your
treasure is.

1. What is it you do especially desire union with.
What is that you do especially desire union with? for love is an affection
that carries an affectionate tendency to union, and this will appear if you
observe the love of God; Union with God is first in Gods intention, because it
is last in his execution; the people of God in glory are brought into two things

1. Into an immediate vision of him.

2. Into the closest union with him. There is a twofold union. 1. Is general
of all the Creatures to God, that is the union of Dependence, In him me live,
and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. They cannot live separate from God,
because he is the life of them. 2. There Is a special union peculiar to the
Saints, which is the indwelling of God in them, and their indwelling in God;
such an union none but the Saints have by the enjoyment of God in their souls.
God loves the Saints, and his love carries a tendency to union; Jesus Christ
loved his people, and he seeks always to become one with them. There is a
natural union which is by constitution; there is an union of likeness and
fruition, a union of similitude, and there is an union of enjoyment, 1 Cor.
6.17. They that are joined to the Lord, are one spirit, the Greek signifies,
they are glewed to the Lord: If a man love God, he is glewed to God; where a
man's love is, there the soul goes after the thing beloved to be united: If a
man love God, then the heart follows hard after God and all, that it may be
made one with him; to this end, you have two Metaphors remarkable in scripture,
one is in Genesis 10.9. There Nimrod is called a mighty hunter before the Lord; It
is an expression to set forth the pursuit of the soul after a thing: A godly
man is a mighty hunter after God, his soul pursues after God continually. I
read a story of one that was going in have, one asked him whither he was going?
he said, he was going to hunt after God. The other Metaphor, is the merchandise
and trading for Christ and grace in the things of eternity; and he that trades
for Christ and grace, is called a Merchant-man, Mat. 13.45. and in a Pet. 2.3.
A worldly man is called a Merchant, he does wholly trade for things below. Now
observe what is your trade; if thy trade be for Jesus Christ, and the things of
eternity, then there is thy love: What is that you pursue after and desire union
with? according to your pursuit, so is your loves, and acording to your loves,
so is your treasure.

2. Love moves the swifter, the nearer it comes to the thing beloved.
The nearer love comes to the thing beloved, the swifter it moves toward it;
the nearer a man's love comes to possess the thing he loves, the swifter he
moves after it, Psalm. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not your hearts upon them:
wicked covetous men, the richer they are, the more their heart is set on
riches, the more miserable, and griping, and scraping they are to get their
treasure; why so? because the nearer that love comes to the thing beloved, the
swifter it moves after it. Bernard says, God puts his love into betrothed
persons; what is the reason of that? because there must be a time between the
betrothing and the marriage, that the desire may be kindled so much the more:
The nearer a man comes to the enjoyment of anything he loves, the more
vehemently his heart is carried after it. Now if it be so, examine by this
Rule, the more you have of God and of Christ, the more do your hearts run
after them, the more you have communion with Christ, the more your hearts act
toward him with the greatest impatiency.

3. When love is is bou^tiful.
Love is bountiful, and where ever thy bounty is, there is thy love; for where
a man shows most bounty, there certainly is most love. Acts of the greatest
bounty, are demonstrations of the highest love, for love opens the heart, and
that opens the hand; God loves you, and because he can give you no greater
gift, he gives you himself; he loves us, therefore he gives his Son to us.
Men may think sometimes Ministers speak for private respects; alas! it is to
prove the sincerity of your love the more: Tell me therefore where your bounty
is laid out; if your bounty be laid out about feasting your bellies, or
clothing your backs, there your love is: Is thy bounty toward God? As he that
loves his belly, thinks nothing to much for it; so he that loves his God,
thinks nothing too much for God, thinks no pains too much that he lays out for
God: so Haman loves his revenge, and he will give the King much for the ruin
of the Jews. David when he came to build the Temple, thought he could never
spend enough about the Temple; It is a large heart that makes an hand,
therefore where your love is, there is your bounty.

4. Love is laborious.
Love is laborious, it grudgeth no pains, Heb. 6.10. It is called the labor of
love; a man's labor is suitable to his love, he that labors most, loves most. If
a man loves riches, he labors for them, Hab. 2.13. Laboring in vain, is
called, laboring in the fire: you shall know where your love is by your
labor, Eccle.4.8. There Is a man has no end of all his labor; why so? There Is
his love, His eye is not satisfied with Riches: The Lord Jesus Christ his love
to his Father, made him labor in the work of his Father, till he had spent
his strength and dried up his radical humors, Isai. 49.4. For a man that is
sloathful, there is no love in him, lazy love is pretended love; where love is
according to the degree of it, such a man's labor will be. O you that are dead
and dull in holy duties, strengthen your love, and you will mend your pace. Its
an observation of one of the Ancients, That love that does not put forth it
self to its utmost endeavor, is unsound love; that which goes to its strength
and no more, that is true love, but weak love; strong love bends to
impossibilities, it will labor in those things which it is impossible to
obtain. It Is observed of Mary, her love out-bid her strength; therefore examine
where the great labor of your lives has been, how much have I labored for
the things of this world, and how little have I labored for the things of
another world, for God, and Christ.

5. Love is venturous.
Would you know where your love is? love is venturous, it will hazard any thing
for the thing beloved; our Savior Christ gives you an evidence of it, he does
not only venture his life, but lay down his life; Greater love has no man
then this, that a man lay down his life for his friend, Ioh. 15.13. and Psalm.
69.9. The reproach of them that reproached thee, has fallen upon me. It was a
gracious speech of an Ancient, If the Lord make use of me to keep off reproach
from himself, I shall look upon it as a great privilege, as a great honor.
Where is the man, that for the truths of God and Christ, will hazard the loss
of friends, the loss of his estate, the loss of his blood? True love turns
cowardice into courage; the Hen, though but a feeble Creature, yet will hazard
her self against the most ravenous Birds that come to devour her Chickens; so
will the mother, if her child be in danger. Take a man whose love is set on
lust, and what will not the man hazard for it? he will lose his friends, he
will spend his estate, he will blast his reputation, he will hazard his soul,
and all for the love he bears to sin: and indeed what is that which makes men
despise the judgments of God? it is their love to sin: then enquire and examine
your selves, where your adventures are, there is your love.

6. Love is zealous.
Love is zealous; I do not mean by zeal, a zeal of suspicion of evil in the
party beloved which we call jealousy, for love thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.4.
But when I say love is zealous, I mean, it is full of solicitude, fearing that
any injury or wrong should be offered to the person or thing beloved. Moses,
the meekest man upon earth, yet Moses's meekness is turned into anger, when
wrong is done to the God of his life, and the God of his love, and he breaks
the Tables. The Lord Jesus Christ out of love to his Father, says, The zeal of
thy house has eaten me up, Job. 2.17. Zeal in the heart is like boiling water
that wastes in the seething, it makes a man overlook all interests, considering
himself in the world, to be wholly intended to carry on the interests of the
party belove. So it is with godly men, for zeal is a mixed affection, it is
nothing else but love provoked: therefore Hoster speaks the language of love;
How should I endure to see the evil that should come upon me and upon my
people, Est. 8.6. Tell me, what are you zealous for? where is your zeal? Touch a
man in his Reputation, and you may quickly see where his love and zeal is;
touch God in his name, and Christ in his truth, then says Paul, To whom we
gave place, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue
with you, Gal. 2.5. Love is provoked with any thing, and comes contrary to
Christ and his truth; I would have zeal to be turned into fire, and so it will
be, (where love is) for God and his glory. Examine therefore what it is, that
makes you hot on every occasion; where thy zeal is, there is thy love, for love
is zealous.

7. Love i^ fearful of separation.
Love is very fearful of separation from the thing beloved, it desires nothing
more then union, it fears nothing more then separation; its the Spouses
expression, Cant. 3.4. When I sound him, I held him, and would not let him go.
Austin gives that as the difference, between true and unclean love, between
the love of a Wife, and the love of a Harlot, both fear the husband, but the
one fears lest the husband should come, the other fears lest the husband should
depart; the affections of the soul in this way are seen very much Death is
called the King of terror, because its a separation of the soul from the body;
love, it loves union, and he that loves, dies himself to live in the thing
beloved; for this cause, the great consolation of the Saints, lies in this, who
shall separate us from the love of God and c? Romans 8.30, 31. For in the absence
of the love of the thing beloved, the heart languishes: ^n union with the thing
loved, the heart rejoices, and in separation from the thing loved, the heart
dies and perishes; for this cause, is this the great cordial to the Saints,
that there is no separation between their love, and their beloved. The
unhappiness of wicked men lies in this, that they love that which shall be
separated from them; Riches make to themselves wings and fly away, P, o. 23.5.
And thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken away from thee, and then
whose shall these things be? Luke 12.20. So Amos 4.2. I will take away thy
posterity with fish-hooks: As easily as the fish is drawn out of the water with
a hook, so will I take them away with Fish-hooks. Therefore when an ungodly
man dies, his love dies, because his beloved cease when he dies: A godly man,
because he shall never be separated from the thing beloved, his love shall
continue for ever in heaven, and he shall never be separated from it. Then
examine your selves, that which you fear to be separated from, is that which
the love of your heart runs out unto.

8. Love is victorious.
Love is victorious, Cant. 8.4. It Is strong as death; there is a kind of
dominion in love, look over the love that men bear to the things of this life,
let them have but Riches, and if Christ, and the glory of heaven be tendered to
them, as the young man had in the Gospel, and bid them sell all, they will go
away sorrowful; why so? the love of the world overcomes them. On the other
side, offer a godly man all the comforts of this life whatsoever his heart
could wish, yet notwithstanding he does not embrace it; why so? his love to God
out-bids them, and overcomes them. Love, it is like Lime, in that respect many
waters cannot quench love, Cant. 8.7. Nay the more you pou^e upon lime, the
hotter it burns. Its not only faith that overcomes the world, but love
overcomes the world, for love is a victorious Grace as well as Faith. If you be
offered great things in this world, greater things in another world does
overcome them: therefore examine where your love is, for where your love is,
there is your heart; where your heart is, there is your Treasure; where your
Treasure is, there is your Heaven, where your Heaven is, there is your God; and
where your God is, there is your happiness.

There are only three short uses I shall make, and so shut up the point.

Use 1. 1. Use.
Shall be in general in two things.

1. To discover the fullness that is in every scripture sentence.
From hence see the fullness of Scripture, every short sentence of it, how full
of matter is it? the smallest things in Scripture there, are great things
depending on them, therefore a Father cries out in admiration of the fullness
of the Scripture: Its observed by Chrysostom, he says, Its the greatest
Blasphemy that can be, to think that in the Book of God there should be found
one idle word: he that will judge you for idle words, will not write one idle
word. There Is one place which Chrysostom himself insists upon, its 1 Timothy
5.23: Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs, ache; and
he has eight mighty truths out of that ordinary portion of Scripture.

1. Godly men out of love to duty, neglect the body.

2. Godly men are very moderate in the use of the creatures, left they should
be brought under the power of them.

3. Consider in his weakness he did not cease from his charge, he had
infirmities, and often infirmities, but he did not neglect the affairs of the
Gospel.

4. Take a little wine: That godly men may too far neglect their bodies, even
to offend therein.

5. Every creature of God is good in it self; yea, those creatures of God that
are most abused.

6. Godly men may be subject to many bodily infirmities, and that often.

7. In the decay of nature, the Creatures are to be used for its repair; but
according to the proportion of natures infirmities.

8. There Is a moderation appointed in receiving the creature, even when men
take them for necessities sake, for he that prescribes him the wine, prescribes
him the measure: upon this account, the Scripture becomes exceeding sweet to a
man; and it is a great Argument of growth of grace in him, and of profiting in
spiritual knowledge when a man can take delight and sweetness in the word,
not only in the substance, but in every circumstance of it. Do not study the
substance of the word only, but the phrase of it: they are not only words, but
such words as God himself has chosen out, and phrased it to our minds, and to
our understandings.

2. There are some sentences of scripture that we should especially treasure up.
Consider, though all the Scripture be to be studied, yet there are some
sentences above all, that a man, should lay up in his heart; such as these we
are speaking on, Where a man's Treasure is, there will his heart be.

There are fix parts of Scripture, that the Lord puts special marks upon,
which scriptures are suitable to especial occasions, and therefore we should
take especial notice of them.

1. Such as the Lord has added anote of attention unto.
Those scriptures which the Lord has added a note of attention and
asseveration to, those especially we should study; Io. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: Where the
Lord does put special marks upon them, there we should exercise a special
study about them; Isa. 40.5.
Behold, the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it,
etc.

2. Such as are of ten repeated.
Such scriptures as the Lord has often repeated, such scriptures should be
diligently studied; As Riches profit not in the day of wrath; Pro. 11.4 Mark.
8.36.
And what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul?
And if Riches increase, set not your hearts upon them, Psa. 62.10.

3. Such as have bin most effectual for your conversion.
Those scriptures that God has made use of in a special manner to do you, or
any other good, these should be mightily studied, God requiers you should take
notice of them in a special manner; so did the Ancients, Romans 13.1. And Luther
made use of Romans 1.17. and Junius, of Job. 1.1. Those by which the Lord has
spoken Conviction and Consolation, these he requires you should especially
observe, and diligently study.

4. Such are suitable to your condition.
Those scriptures that speak especially concerning thy condition, the Lord
requires a man should study that word, that is suitable to his estate, whether
thou art in poverty or riches, in health or sickness.

5. Such as speak to the controversies of the times
Those Scriptures that speak to the present controversy of the Age that you
live in, that you may be established in the present truth, and keep from
falling into the present errors; the Lord requires you to be much in the study
of these Scriptures.

6. Such as are most comprehensive.
Those scriptures that are very comprehensive, that carry in them the guidance
of a man's life; as in the Text, Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven,
etc. and that Heb. 13.5. Be convent with such things as you have, for he has
said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee: Heb. 12.14.
And without holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Such comprehensive
directions as these the Lord requires our hearts should be exercised in the
study of them.

Use 2. Use 2. To difcover the necessity regeneration.
Is most proper in this point: Is the heart inseparable from the treasure? Then
this shows to every unregenerate man, that there is an absolute necessity of
Regeneration. Many a carnal man will complain, and fay, I cannot bow my
thoughts Godward; what commands my thoughts? Thy treasure commands them. If
thy treasure be in God, the meditation of thy heart will be toward God. What
is Conversion? It Is a change of a man's chief good; Thy treasure and thy heart
will be changed together, change thy treasure, and thy heart will change. The
misery of that man whose treasure is on earth.
The misery of that man whose heart is on earth, is unspeakable, because then
his treasure is on earth. Consider these things.

1. Let thy Actions be what they will, if thy treasure be below, thy heart will
be below: A temporary man may and will go forth in temporary actions more then
a spiritual man can do: But in a Temporary man there is no change of heart.
Act, 8.21
Simon Magus he washed his hands, but kept his heart in the same blackness of
covetousness that it was before; Till thou change thy treasure, thy heart will
never change. The misery of an ungodly man is in this, he may change his love
when he will, but his heart is not changed unless his treasure be changed.

2. This is the ground of the greatest bondage to an ungodly man in the world,
because his treasure is below, therefore his heart cannot be above; for where
his Treasure is, there will the heart be. This is that which keeps all
unregenerate men in bondage; there is therefore an absolute necessity for the
change of a man's treasure, or otherwise thou can not be assured that thy
heart is changed.

Use. 3. Use 3.
Learn then the blessed condition of a godly man, To discover the blessed
condition of a godly man whose treasure is in heaven.
he is every where blessed; his body is on earth, but his heart is in heaven.
There Is a twofold blessing upon this account.

First Let this man at any time go astray (for a godly man is apt to wander)
this will reduce and bring him home again, the heart will be to the Treasure:
A godly man can never fall from God, why? because the heart and the treasure
are inseparable: As the misery of an ungodly man is, let him profess what he
will, yet his treasure will bring him back; so a godly man, let him wander
whither he will, yet his treasure will reduce him.

Secondly, He is a happy man that has his treasure always in Heaven; he is a
happy man, because he is a heavenly man, his heart is in heaven. There are four
Reasons, why he that has his Treasure always in Heaven, is a happy man.

1. Here by he is evidenced to be an heavenly man.
Because hereby he is evidenced to be a heavenly man, 1 Cor. 15.48. As is the
earthly, such are they that are earthly; and as is the heavenly, such are they
also that are heavenly: Because thy heart is in heaven, therefore thou art a
heavenly man: As that wisdom that is conversant about earth, is said to be
earthly, so that wisdom that is conversant about heaven, is said to be
heavenly. An earthly mind is a plague, an heavenly mind is a glory.

2. His heart does not change with his condition.
He that has his treasure in heaven is a blessed man, in this, that his heart
is not subject to those impressions of changes that other means are. It a man's
condition does change, yet if his heart does not change, its no great matter,
as Tertullian observes, though he was under great afflictions on earth, yet his
heart was out of danger, because it was in heaven; therefore Rev. 13.6. Saints
are said to dwell in heaven; the heart changes not for any evil, because its
bound up in an unchangeable good.

3. His conversation will be in heaven.
He is a happy man, who has his Treasure always in Heaven; because where his
treasure is, there will his heart and conversation be, Phil. 3.20. Our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for our Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ. Says the wise man, Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of
it are the issues of life, Prove. 4.23. The way of his life comes out of his
heart. Now this man taking up of his heart with God, must have his life taken
up with God also; he is taken up with God as his Father, with Christ as his
husband, with the Saints and blessed Spirits as his companions.

4. His soul shall shortly be there.
A man's heart being in heaven, his soul shall shortly be there too. And this
also is an argument, that bodies shall be there shortly; for though body and
soul be parted by death, yet it will not be long before they are united again;
and what a comfortable thing is this then, for a man to lay up his Treasure in
Heaven, seeing it is such an argument that he himself shall be taken up into
Heaven.

FINIS.

