The true Copies of two LETTERS: Written by the late Earl of STRAFFORD.

The one to his Sacred Majesty.

The other to a Lady of great note.

With the Psalm that he chose to read at the time of his death.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year 1641.

The Earl of STRAFFORDS Letter, to his most Excellent Majesty, dated from the
Tower, 4. May. 1641.
May it please your sacred Majesty,
IT has been my greatest grief in all these troubles, to be taken as a person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between your Majesty
and your people; and to give Counsels tending to the disquiet of the three
Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that this mine own private Condition considered, it had
been a great madness, since through your gracious favor I was so provided,
as not to expect in any kind to mend my fortune, or please my mind more, than
by resting where your bounteous hands had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty is well known, my
poor, and humble advises concluded still in this, That your Majesty and your
people could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt you
and them: no other means to effect and settle this happiness, but by the
Council and assent of the Parliament; or to prevent the growing evils upon
this state, but by entirely putting your self in the last resort, upon the
loyalty and good affections of your English subjects.

Yet such is my misfortune, this truth finds little credit, the contrary
seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed as some thing of
separation between you, and your people; under a heavier censure than which, I
am persuaded no Gentleman can suffer.

Now I understand the minds of men are more incensed against me,
notwithstanding your Majesty has declared, that in your Princely opinion I am
not guilty of Treason, nor are you satisfied in your Conscience to pass the
Bill.

This brings me into a very great straight, there is before me the ruin of
my Children, and family, hither^o untouched, in all the branches of it with any
foul Crimes. Here is before me the many ills which may b^fall your sacred
person, and the whole kingdom, should your self and Parliament part less
satisfied one with the other, than is necessary for the preservation both of
King and people. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared by
mortal man, Life or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a strife in me, were to make me less
man, then God knows, mine infirmities give me. And to call a destruction upon
my self and young Children, where the intentions of my heart, at least have
been innocent of this great offense, may be believed, will find no easy
consent from flesh and blood.

But with much sadness J am come to a resolution, of that which I take to be
best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principal in it self;
which doubtless is the prosperity of your sacred person, and the
Commonwealth, infinitely before any private man's interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the honor, and
justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to
have spared that Declaration of yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have
left me to their Lordships; so now to set your Majesty's conscience at liberty,
I do most humbly beseech your Majesty, in prevention of mistakes which may
happen by your refusal, to pass this Bill; And by this means remove (praised
be God) I cannot say, this accursed, (but I confess) this unfortunate thing
forth of the way, toward that blessed agreement, which God I trust, shall ever
establish between you and your Subjects.

Sir, my consent shall more acquit you herein to God, than all the world can
do besides. To a willing man there is no injury done. And as by Gods grace, I
forgive all the world with a calmnesse and meekness of infinite Contentment to
my dislodging soul; So sir, to you can I give the life of this world, with all
the cheerfulness imaginable; in the just acknowledgement of your exceeding
favors. And only beg that in your goodness you would vouchsafe to cast
your gracious regard upon my poor Son, and his three Sisters, less or more,
and no otherwise, then as their (in present unfortunate father, may hereafter
appear more, or less guilty of this death.

God long preserve your Majesty. Your Majesty's most faithful, and humble
Subject, and Servant STRAFFORD.
Tower. 4. May 1641.
A Letter sent unto a certain great Lady, and lately discovered by strange
accident, May 1641.
Madam:
ALthough there be some discovery made known, yet what is intended is made
secure; wherefore you must procure two thousand pound speedily; for no danger
lets difficulty to compass it, if you keep secret: Remember your oath, for we
shall slay the Beast with many heads, and destroy the Devils brood before they
dream or mistrust. Burn the letter you have received, your reward shall be in
Heaven.

FINIS.
The Psalm he chose to read a little before his execution, being the fifth
Psalm.
POnder my words, O Lord: consider my meditation.
2 O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King, and my God: for unto
thee will I make my prayer.
3 My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
4 For thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.
5 Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hate all them
that work vanity.
And so forwards to the end of the Psalm.

FINIS.

