A SERMON Preached at ABINGTON in the County of BERKS.

Febr. 19. 1642.

By JOHN STRAIGHT Master of Arts, and sometimes Scholar of Queens College in
Cambridge, now Vicar of Stowerpaine in the County of Dorset, and Chaplain to
the late Lord Bishop of Salisbury.

Containing, Christ's serious asseveration and protestation of the

1 True Christians sad Lamentation. 2 Wicked worldlings mad Exultation. 3 Good
Christians glad Exaltation.
Be glad O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye that
are true of heart,

Psalm. 32. 12. Est gaudium quod non datur impiis, sed eis qui te gratis colunt,
quorum gaudium tu ipse es, etc.

Aug. lib. 9. Confess. Printed in the year 1643.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Never was ambitious to see my self in print: They that know me can testify
for me how much I stand affected to privacy and retiredness. This Sermon of
mine was never meant for the press, though now it be constrained to show it
self in public. It was extorted from me at Abington, where I was taken up as
a Spy, and detained by the space of five days in the nature of a prisoner;
having things laid to my charge that I never Fiebile principium, melior fortuna
secutae est. Ovid.
knew, my known Innocence at length out-poised all my accusations, and I stood
as I deserved, Rectus in Curia. But preach I must, I could not be dismissed
without the undergoing of that task; I did; and was no sooner come home but
presently (the next week after) I heard by a neighbor a gentleman of no mean
quality, that there were Copies of this my Sermon abroad, taken it seems by
some Stenographers, transcribed, and sent into the Country after me, and there
passing from hand to hand. I know not how they have dealt with me in their
notes, but fearing least they should patch up any thing with their own
additions, and so make me speak that which I never meant, I have therefore
adventured (and yet not without the instigation of some special friends) to
expose this Sermon, just as it was then delivered to thy impartial view. To
thee I say I submit it non modo tanquam ad pium lectorem, sed and ad liberum
correctorem; Aug.
And so I commend thee to God, this Sermon to thine and the worlds light, and
my self to thy favorable censure and faithful prayers, remaining

Thine in the Lord Jesus JOHN STRAIGHT.
From my study in Stowerpaine this 28 of March 1643.
A Sermon Preached at Abington in the County of Berks Feb. 19. 1642.
JOHN 16. 20. Verily verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament,
but the world shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall
be turned into joy.
MIserable are the defects, and many are the infirmities, of the very best of
Gods children in all estates, and degrees; If David a man after Gods own heart
(as the Scripture styles him) be but a while compassed about with the hedge of
prosperity, he will think, nay he will say, he shall never be moved, Psalm. 30.
6. dixi in prosperitate mea non movebor Psalm. 30. 6.
in aeternum. If good Hezekiah have but success in battle, and get the
victory over his enemies, he is presently so lifted up with pride of the
conquest, and greatness of his treasures that he shows them in ostentation to
the Ambassadors of Babylon. 2. Kings. 20. 13. So likewise on the contrary, If
2. Kings. 20. 13.
God to reclaim his children from this Charybdis of presumptuous oblivion or
rather indeed oblivious presumption, do but a little whip them with his rod of
adversity, they are instantly ready to run into a Scylla of desperate
dejection: Thus David himself changed his non movebor in aeternum into a
conturbatus sum, Psalm. 30. 7. Nay more, into an Has God Psalm. 30. 7.
forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his loving mercy in displeasure?
Psalm. 77. 9. Thus likewise was the Prophet Jeremy Psalm. 77. 9.
with pain driven to and fro 'twixt hope and despair, Lam. 3. 18. And I said,
my strength and my hope is perished Lam. 3. 18.
from the Lord; Such, such (Beloved) is the frailty, and so great is the
weakness of the very best of Gods Champions, that, what with the
considerations of the prosperity of the wicked (at which David's feet were
almost gone, and his steps had well near slipped: as Psalm. 73. 2) and what on
the other side, with the contemplation of the adversity and afflicted life of
the righteous, they are so dejected, that they are even ready to faint, if not
forsake their colors. Our blessed Savior therefore with his all-seeing eye
observing this pusillanimity in his selected Disciples, to the end they might
neither be overmuch dejected by viewing the external felicity of wicked
worldlings, nor yet on the other side, too far cast down by reflecting on
their own miseries, he makes them before his assention many choice cordialls
against all distractions: As first, Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe
in God, believe also in me, John 14. 1. And again, Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, let not your hearts be troubled nor fear, Jo. 14. 27.
And yet again, These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain
in you, and that your joy might be full, Jo. 15. 11. And this also of my text,
Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, and the world
shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy.
Which words do naturally resolve themselves into these four particulars, viz.
1 Into serious Prostetation, 2 A sad Lamentation, 3 A mad exultation. 4 A glad
alteration,

The serious Protestation in these words, (...). verily verily I say unto you.
The sad lamentation in these, (...): Ye shall weep, Lament, and sorrow. The mad
exultation in these, (...), And the world shall rejoice. The glad Alteration in
the last words, (...), but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Of these in
their order, and first of the first, The serious Protestation (...), verily
verily I say unto you.

And here (not to trouble you with any tedious discourse concerning the various
acception of this word (...) in the Original) it being taken here neither
Nominally for truth, nor Verbally for fiat, or be it so, but for an Adverbiall
asseveration, for vere, verily, or truly: The ingemination whereof serves both
to invite your best attentions, as also to procure your most heedfull
observation to that which follows as most worthy to be received, Verily verily
I say unto you; as if Our Savior Christ had thus said: That which I declare
unto you is no doubtful dream, no incertaine cogitation; no, nor yet any
fickle conjecture, but a most certain, firm, stable, and infallible truth,
which shall not be changed, altered, nor revoked, it being so decreed by God,
and therefore of necessity must really come to pass; do not therefore think
that I speak this to you rashly, or slenderly, only by the way, but know that
I am in good earnest, and avouch it constantly, and that with a double
asseveration, verily verily I say unto you.

But why did our blessed Savior thus geminate his asseveration? what, would
not his single affirmation have been a sufficient warrant for any to rely on,
who was truth it self? Or might not his bare word have deservedly obtained
credit, who could not lie? For Heaven and Earth shall pass away but not one
jot or tittle of his word shall perish or fall to the ground. Surely (beloved)
this emphaticall iteration of our Saviors verily here, was to extirpate that
secure carelessness which he saw lurking in his own Disciples; he knew full
well the parasiticall disposition of man's depraved nature to be such that if it
but a while enjoyed peace and prosperity (as altogether forgetful of its own
miserable condition and never thinking of, much less expecting the billows of
iminent and approaching adversity) 'twould be ready to sooth up it self with a
vain conceit of continued content, even of enjoying perpetual peace; And
therefore, that the sudden seizure of sad discontents, and fearful
frownings of inexpected oppositions might not over whelme them, our Savior
Christ rouzes them up here, with a most patheticall praediction of their future
calamities verily verily I say unto you.

Diseases once discovered are accounted as half cured, and miseries foretold
as half prevented premonitio est premunitio, forewarning is thus a
fore-arming. Afflictions greatest augmenter is inexpectation: when thwarting
crosses come suddenly and unlooked for, they distract the mind and drive the
faculties from their due consultation of remedy; Thus the sudden falling of a
house is more perilous then the rising of a flood; for while of the former,
the hurt is unavoydable by reason both of the violence and precipitation, the
latter through the warning and appearance of it is coming is less dangerous,
less prejudicial; Tela previsa minus feriunt quam repentina. Christ therefore
that neither the sudden aspect of distasteful afflictions might distract his
chosen, nor yet the unlooked for access of cruel calamities might offend his
children, he forewarnes them Jo 16. 2.
here of them: They shall excommunicate you, yea the time shall come that
whosoever kills you will think that he does God service; Jo 16. 4.
But these things have I told you, that ye should not be offended; and these
things have I said unto you that when the hour shall come, ye might remember
that I told you them, For Verily verily I say unto you that ye shall weep
lament and sorrow.

O then put we not far off the evil day, but rather provide we for perilous
times, for much more hard is the winter to the grassehopper then the pismire,
who before having stored 1 Thessalonians: 5. verses 6 and 8.
her garner, is now able to withstand a famine. Let us not therefore sleep as
do others, but let us watch and be sober, let us which are of the day put on
the breast plate of faith, and love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet,
for verily verily I say unto you that ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow. And
this be briefly spoken of my first particular, the serious protestation, verily
verily I say unto you. The second follows, which is the sad Lamentation,
expressed in these words, ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow.

Ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow. These three words they have their several
significations: For first (...) ye shall weep imports a clamourous kind of
howling, as Mat. 2, 18. Math. 2. 18.
(...), In Rama was a voice heard, mourning, and weeping, and great howling,
Rachel weeping for her children etc. Secondly (...), ye shall lament or mourn,
denotes a continued course of sorrow and implies an habitual kind of
heaviness. Thirdly and lastly (...), ye shall sorrow or greive, signifies a
dumpish sadness or contristation of the spirits, [(...), and ne contristate]
and greive not the spirit of God Ephesians. 4. 30. Citius Ephesians 4. 30.
desint lacrymae quam causa lacrymandi: (so sometime Seneca) far sooner shall
watery tears be wanting, then cause of Seneca.
weeping shall cease. For indeed infinite are the causes that force the
faithful to weep and lament from birth to burial, yea and of exceeding
efficacy are the motives that make the righteous thus to sorrow even from
Cradle to Coffin: which as for brevity, so likewise for perspicuities sake I
shall endeavor to reduce to these six subsequent heads.

First therefore every true child of God shall and must 1 cause of weeping, our
own sins.
weep, both for the Remnants of sin remaining in him, as also for his own
actual sins daily committed against God. For this cause Saint Paul wearied
with miserable and continual conflicts, and as yet in part subject to sin
cries out O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of
death. Rom: 7. 24. And as original sin wrested this heavy Romans 7. 24.
exclamation from this holy Apostle, so likewise did actual sins wring from
that sinful woman (for so she is styled Luke 7. 37.) abundance of tears: they
turned her lascivious Luk: 7. 37.
looks to lamenting, and her wanton eyes to weeping. Yea and this was the
cause that made Saint Peter go out, and weep bitterly. Math. 26. 75. Flevit
amare ut lachrymae lavarent Math: 26. 75. Ambr.
delictum, tu similiter lachrymis dilue culpam, So Saint Ambrose, he wept
bitterly that tears might cleanse or wash away Ambr:
his offense, do thou in like manner purge, and put away thy fault with
tears: shed thou tears for thy intemperance, for thy impatience, for thy
anger, for thy malice etc.

Secondly ye shall weep for the sins of others too: and 2 cause of weeping,
others sin.
though it be true that the best of Gods children cannot weep too much or
rather indeed enough for their own sins, yet must they weep for the sins
of others also: like the widow of Zarephta who though she had not meal in her
ferkin nor oil in her cruse for the susteining of her self and her child, yet
spared some for the Prophet Elijah. And thus did 1 Kings 17.
just Lot weep for the sinful conversation of the wicked Sodomites; for he
being righteous and dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds, as 2. Pet: 2. 8.
For so great is the holy Indignation 2 Pet. 2. 8.
that Gods children bear against sin, and such deep impression of grief
does the perpetration thereof strike in the righteous, that if it were possible
for them to weep even rivers of tears, yet could not their sorrow be
exhausted, unless sin did cease; witness the man after Gods own heart,
mine eyes gush out with rivers of water because men keep not thy law Psalm:
119: 136. This was it that caused Saint Paul Psalm. 119. 136.
with sorrow and tears, to paint out the false Apostles in their colors Phil:
3. 18. For many walk (says he) of whom I Phil. 3. 18.
have told you often; why then (may some man say) do you tell us any more? Yes
and now I tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.
Yea Christ himself wept thus for Jerusalem Luke 19. 41, 42. And when he was
come Luke 19. 41, 42
near, he beheld the City and wept for it, saying, O if thou had even
known, at the least in this thy day, those things which belong unto thy peace!
but now are they hid frrom thine eyes. This, this (beloved) is a sure sign of
a good Nathaniell and an infallible token of a true Israelite, viz: to weep in
secret for the sins of others, yea and cry out against the wickedness
committed against God in the land. And the Lord said unto him (viz. the Angel)
go through the midst of the City, even through the midst of Jerusalem and set
a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn, and cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof. so ye may find it, Ezekiel. 9.
4. Ezekiel. 9. 4.


Thirdly, ye shall lament or mourn for the Judgments of 3. Cause of weeping,
Open and general Judgment.
God on the land take the Prophet Jeremy for a pattern, who in this case thus
cries out Jer. 4. 19. My belly, my belly, I am pained even at the very heart,
mine heart is troubled within me, I cannot be still: for my soul has heard
the sound of the trumpet Jer. 4. 19.
and the alarm of the battle, destruction upon destruction etc. and again
Chap. 8. 21. I am sore vexed for the hurt of Jer: 8. 21:
the daughter of my people, I am heavy, and astonishment has taken me. Nay
yet more pathetically does this Prophet declare his compassionate grief for
this people, and therefore as one that could never sufficiently lament their
destruction, he cries out, Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes
a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people. Oh that I had in the wilderness a cottage of wayfaring
men etc. as Jer. 9. 1, 2. Jer 9. 1, 2.


Fourthly ye shall mourn for the afflictions of poor Joseph; 4 Cause of
weeping, private and particular Afflictions.
and as feeling members one of another misery, ye shall lament for those that
are tossed from post to pillar, that are driven from house and home, (in a word)
that are for Christ's sake brought to great extremity. They drink wine in
bowls (says the Prophet Amos) and anoint themselves with the chief ointments,
but no man is sorry for the afflictions of Joseph Therefore now shall they go
captive, with the first that go captive, etc. Amos 6. 6. 7.
Amos 6. 6, 7. mine eye casts out rivers of water for the destruction of the
daughter of my people, yea mine eye droppeth without stay and cease not, Lam:
3. 48, 49. Lam. 3. 48. 49.


Fifthly, ye shall sorrow for the loss of dear friends, thus 5 Cause of
weeping, loss of friends. 2. Sam. 1. 26. 2 Samuel 18. 33. Jo. 11. 35. 6 cause of
weeping, our pilgrimage here,
David sorrows for the loss of dear Jonathan, woe is me for thee my brother
Jonathan 2 Samuel 1. 26. and he is likewise greatly perplexed with the untimely
death of his son Absalom 2 Samuel: 18. 33. thus Mary yea and Christ himself do
weep for Lazarus Io: 11. 35.

Sixthly and lastly, ye shall sigh and sorrow to because you are but as
Pilgrims here, sitting by the rivers of Babel, (the world according to Saint
Chrysostomes gloss, oppressed with various calamities) weeping at the
remembrance of your spiritual Sion. For therefore we sigh, earnestly desireing
to be clothed with our house which is from heaven, so Saint Paul, 2 Cor: 5. 2.
verily verily I say unto you that ye shall weep, lament, 2 Cor. 5. 2.
and sorrow. [Ye shall weepe] for your own sins, and 2 for the sins of
others: [Ye shall lament] 3 for the Judgments of God on the land, and 4 for
the afflictions of poor Joseph: [Ye shall sorrow] 5 for the loss of dear
friends, and 6 for your own bitter peregrination here in this world.

Pilgrimage you know is always perilous, Gods children then who are but
pilgrims here, must not expect an immunity we must through many afflictions
enter into the Kingdom of God, as Acts 14. 22. yea and all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, as 2 Timothy 3. 12. Acts 14. 22.
Dearly beloved think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 2 Timothy 3. 12.
which is among you, as though some strange thing were come unto you, as 1 Pet.
4. 12. In the world ye shall have affliction for the servant is not better then
his Lord, nor the disciple above his 2 Pet. 4 12,
Master, as Math. 10. 24. If therefore they have done these things to the
green tree, what shall become of the dry? verily verily Mat 10. 24.
I say unto you, that ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow. Luke 23. 31.


The reason is evident, for ye are not of the world says our Savior, Io. 15.
19, in the world therefore ye shall have affliction. concord 'twixt Christ and
Belial, nor is there Jo. 15. 19. 2 Cor: 6. 14. 15
any agreement 'twixt light and darkness.

Secondly ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow, because ye are by Christ the
adopted children of God, it is meet therefore that ye become like unto him in
affliction, who has already trod this path of tribulation.

weep, lament, and sorrow, because troubles are the surest tutors of
goodness; before I was afflicted (says David) I went astray, but now I keep
thy word. Psalm. 119. 67. How many would have died ill, if they had lived Psalm.
119. 67.
merrily without affliction? God has several ways to reduce his little
flock from the straggling by paths of destruction, yet I am persuaded none,
(none I say) more powerful then affliction, which sends the soul to
meditation, whereby she sees the worlds follies in such true colors of vanity,
that no sound discretion can think them worth the doting on. Ideo enim Deus
foelicitatibus terrenis amaritudines misoet, ut illa quaeratur foelicitas cujus
dulcedo non est fallax. Aug. super Mat. Sermon. 29.
For therefore does God intermingle bitter in gredients with his best
terrestrial blessings, that that blessing might be sought after whose
sweetness is not counterfeit. so Saint Augustine. And indeed we should surfeit
with the counterfeit sweetness of external affluencies, were not our
prosperities a little corrected with the bitter pills of atflictions: 'twas
good for me says the prophet David, that I was afflicted, that I might Psalm.
119. 71.
learn thy statutes. It Is noe small abatement to the bitterness of
adversities, that they teach us the way to heaven. Therefore it is that ye
shall weep, lament, and sorrow, viz. because troubles are the best, the surest
tutors of goodness.

Prosperity is not then an infallible token of Gods Church, Praesentis vitae
prosperitas innocentiae testis non est, quia multi ad perrennem vitam per
flagella redeunt, and plerique ad infinita supplicia prrducendi, sine flagello
moriuntur. so, Greg, in moral.
Greg. in moral: that is, the prosperity of this present life is no evident
witness of any man's innocence or integrity, because many by adversities whip
do come to everlasting life, and most of all that dye without it, are led unto
endless torments. The cross, the cross I say is the true character of
Christ's chosen, Math. 16. 24. Math. 10. 38. Mark. 8. 34. Luke. 9. 23.
if any man will be my disciple (says our Savior) he must take up his cross
and follow me.

Judge not then of any man by his outward appearance, nor difficile (says
Saint Hiero in one of his Epistles) imo impossible est ut praesentibus and
futuris quis fruatur bonis, ut and hic ventrem, and tibi mentem imple^^, Heiro
in Epist. quadam.
ut a deliciis ad delicias transeat, and in utroque saeculo primus (...) ut in
terra and in caelo appareat gloriosus: "that is, it is very hard yea almost
impossible that any man should enjoy both the good things of this life, and of
that which is to come, that he should fill his belly or satiate his desires
here, and his mind or will hereafter, that he should pass from delights unto
delights, that he should be happy in both ages, that he should appear both
glorious here on earth, and glorious hereafter in heaven." And Solomon renders
us a reason hereof, For the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as a
father does the child in whom he delights, Provtrb. 3. 12. If therefore ye
be without correction, Prove. 3. 12.
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and (...) sons. It Is the
Apostles expression Heb 12. 8. God indeed Heb. 12. 8.
had one Son sine flagitio, but never any sine flagello, one without offense,
but none without affliction. Hence is that of Saint Aug. in quodam Sermon:
Augustine. Nullus servus Christi sine tribulatione est; Si patas te non habere
persecutiones, nondum coepisti esse Christiann^, that is, "None of Christ's
Servants are without tribulation if therefore thou think thou think thou
have no persecutions, thou have not yet begun to be a Christian; for verily
verily I say unto you that ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow."

And must the Cross thus go before the Crown? O the^ Sion; say with holy
(...) in your afflictions, shall we receive good at the hands of God and not
evil? Job 2. 10. and with David, submit your selves Job. 2. 10.
to Gods good pleasure saying with him also, here am I, let him do to me as
seems good unto him 2 Samuel: 15. 26. Nei^^ 2 Samuel 15. 26.
dignemini, si mali in hoc mundo floreant and vos patimini, qui^ non est
Christianae religionis in hoc mundo exaltari, sed deprimi^ Mali nihil habent in
coelo, vos nihil in mundo: sed spe illius beni ad quod tenditis, quicquid in
via contigerit gaudere debet^ so venerable Beda, that is, Do you not disdain
nor repi^ Beda.
though wicked men do flourish in this world and you suffer, for it is not for
Christian Religion to be in this world exalted, but deprest, and kept under:
wicked men have nothing to do in heaven, you nothing in the world: But ye ought
rather to rejoice and patiently endure whatsoever shall happen to you in the
way, for the hope of that good unto which ye tend. Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew: 5. 10. How should this animate, Math. 5. 10.
how should this encourage all Gods children cheerfully to undergo all those
miseries which here they suffer, though they seem never so harsh, never so
grievous? especially seeing they cannot be compared with the recompense, that
shall be given us hereafter. If the threatening surges of the raging sea are by
Mariners slighted, if the tempestuous storms of frosty winter are by
husbandmen neglected, if cruel wounds and truculent slaughters are by soldiers
set at naught, (in a word) if heavy blows and dangerous stripes seem as
nothing, and are easily borne by stout and valiant champions, and that only
for the vain hope of attaining some perishing pelf, or atcheiving some
temporal conquest, Then how much more should the momentany, the light 2 Cor.
4. 17.
afflictions of this present life, (for so they are styled) be by us neglected,
and not easily only, but cheerfully endured, for whom is certainly prepared,
not a temporal, but an eternal weight of glory in the heavens? Wherefore let
us also, seeing that we are compassed with so great a cloud of witnesses, cast
away every thing that presses down and the sin that hangs on so fast: let
us run with patience the race that is set before us; looking unto Jesus Christ
the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the
throne of God. Consider therefore him that endured such contradiction of
sinners, lest ye should be wearied and saint in your minds; so the Apostle
Heb: 12. 1, 2, 3. and this of my second particular, Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3. various
acceptions of the world.
the sad Lamentation, Ye shall weep, lament, and sorrow. I pass on to the
third which is the mad exultation contained in these words, (...), but the
world shall rejoice.

The world shall rejoice; By world here is not meant the creatures, nor
glorious fabric of the universe; nor secondly the beleivers, the righteous,
or world of Elect; But in the third place, the unbeleivers, the ungodly, in a
word, the world of wicked and unregenerate men, of which our blessed Savior
speaks Io. 15. 18. If the world hate you, ye know it hated Jo. 15. 18.
me before you.

But what? shall children be beaten with the rod, and shall slaves go free?
shall children serve at the table, and shall servants sit down? shall Gods
dear children weep, lament* and sorrow, and shall the wicked worldlings
rejoice? Ye^ beloved, Truth it self has spoken it, and David seeing it
verified, ingeniously confessed his feet were almost gone and his tradings had
well near flipt. Psalm. 73. 2. It has indeed been Psalm. 73. 2.
always a great temptation to the godly, to see the wicked enemies of God in
prosperity, and to behold his dear children in adversity; wherefore does the
way of the wicked prosper* (says Jeremy) and why are all they in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? Ier: 12. 1. wherefore does wicked live (says Job)
Jer. 12. 1
wax old, and grow in wealth? Job. 21. 7. Certainly says David I have cleansed
my heart in vain and washed mine hands in innocence, Psalm. 73. 13.
for daily have I been punished and chastened every morning. Psalm. 37. 2.
Psalm. 73. 13.

Thus beloved (though God be just in all his works and holy in all his ways
yet) man is not able to give a reason of all his deeds: David himself saw not
the end of these men till he went into the Sanctuary of God, namely, how they
were set in slippery places, and though they seem to flourish for a while like
green bay trees, yet are they soon cut down like the grass, and Psalm. 37. 2.
withered even as the green herb; O how soon do they consume, perish, and
come to a fearful end! The righteous indeed shall be punished, but as for the
seed of the ungodly it shall be rooted out at the last. Psalm. 37. 29. Psalm. 37.
29.


(...), mundus autem gaudebit, But the rejoice. The vilest men upon earth (you
see) may have a time of mirth in this world: The wickedest wretches under the
cope and canopy of heaven may have a time of rejoyceing, a time of prosperity
here. Lo, says David,) These are the wicked, yet prosper they always and
increase in riches, Psalm. 73. 12. The earth (says Job) is given into the hand
of the wicked. Job. 9. 24. Did not cursed Cham rejoice a while? had not cruel
Cain a time of prosperity here on earth? had not the filthy Sodomites a time of
jollity in this world? Had not hard-hearted Pharaoh a time of mirth in Egypt?
breifely, had not hypocritical Saul, had not wicked Haman, had not treacherous
Judas their several times of rejoicing? And at this day with us, have not
blasphemous swearers, debauched Drunkards, profane Papists, and Neuteralizing
Atheist, have not these I say their several times of delight and pleasure
here? we cannot deny it, (...), mundus enim gaudebit, for the world shall
rejoice.

And is not this the Reason, namely because they have their portion here,
because their heaven is upon earth, in a word, because they have all the joy
here that ever they are like to have. Nam qui hic consolantur indigni tua
consolatione habentur; so Aug. in Soliloque, for they that are comforted here
Aug: in Soliloq:
with the worlds consolations are counted unworthy of thy heavenly consolations
hereafter. Son remember, says Abraham to Dives, that thou in thy life time
receivedst thy pleasures and likewise Lazarus his pains: now therefore is he
comforted and thou art tormented, Luke 16. 25. Luke 16. 25.


Secondly, wicked men have a time of mirth, a time of fatted up against the day
of slaughter. But I pass on to the objects of this worldly joy, and (as most
pertinent to my purpose in hand,) I proceed to show you, wherein Worldlings
delight in what the godly lament. so.
wicked men do thus rejoice.

Now the Object of the worlds Joy is fourefold: wicked men I say rejoice
especially in these four things: First in their own sins, Secondly in the
sins of others, Thirdly in the miseries of others, and Fourthly and lastly in
doing mischeife unto others.

They rejoice first in their own sins, Psalm. 10. 3. The 1 Their own sins,
Psalm. 10. 3. Moler. Com. in locum. Superbia (inquit) impios eousque provehit,
ut non tantum pravis suis cupiditatibus securi indulgeant, sed etiam spreto and
contempto dei judicio de sua cupiditate, and sceleribus glorientur, seque
omnireatu absolvant.
wicked has made boast of his own hearts desire, and the coveteous blesses
himself in his wickedness, (that is says Molerus commenting on the place,
The wicked rejoice in their sins, and contemning Gods Judgments, glory in
their wickedness; Such rejoycers (as they are,) Solomon derides Ecclesiastes
11. 9. Rejoice O goung man in thy youth, and let thy days cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart and in the sight of
thine eyes, but yet know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment.

But what? do wicked men rejoice only in their own sins? and does their joy
dilate it self noe further, then to delight in their own wickedness? O yes,
beloved, as not content with their own, they rejoice in the sins of others
too, which is the second object of the worlds Joy and wicked men's rejoicing.
Thus cursed Cham rejoiced at his fathers 2 Others sins.
nakedness. Gen: 8, 22. and I would to God that this rejoicing Genesis 8. 22.
were not so common amongst the carowsing Chams of these our days, who
impudently boast not only of their own immoderate quaffing and beastly
uncleanenesse, but also shamelesly glory in the weakness and infirmities of
others, O how many do by this means draw iniquity with Isaiah. 5. 18. 1 Cor.
5. 6.
the coards of vanity, and sin as it were with cartropes? But their rejoicing
is not good. so the Apostle 1 Cor: 5, 6.

Neither is the worlds joy confined only to these two, nor 3 Others misery?
yet can these limits comprehend the latitude of wicked men's rejoicing: for as
altogether void of compassionate humanity and quite destitute of humane
compassion (worse then brute beasts) they rejoice in the miseries of others;
which is the third object of the worlds joy, and wicked men's rejoicing. And
thus did the bloody soldiers rejoice in our blessed Saviors misery a little
before his passion, putting upon Math: 27. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, etc.
him ascarlet robe, and platting a crown of thorns on his head, bowing in
derision before him, with a HAIL KING OF THE JEWS, thus likewise the high
Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders, said, he saved others,
himself he cannot save: in a word, thus they that stood by at the time of his
extreme torment, on the cross, when he cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli
lamasabacthani, mocked him, with a this man calls for Elias, when alas they
knew well enough what he meant; they alluded to Elias name, not for want of
understanding the tongue but out of a profane, impudent, and saucy mockery,
thus rejoiced in his misery. Thus also was holy David in his woeful calamities
derided by wicked Caitiffs, Lord (says he) how Psalm: 94, 3.
long shall the wicked, how long shall the ungodly triumph? all they that see
me have me in derision, they make a mow, and nod Psalm. 22. 7, 8.
the head saying, he trusted in God that he would deliver him, let him deliver
him if he will have him. And again, I puton sackcloth Psalm 109. 24.
also and they jested upon me, they that sit in the gate speak against me,
and the drunkards make songs upon me. But what Psalm. 69. 11. 12.
need I spend so much time in illustrating this third object of the worlds joy,
and wicked men's rejoicing, when, alas, woeful experience daily demonstrates the
same, in infinite examples at home amongst our selves. May not every true
religious man, in his misery say with holy Job, there are none but mockers with
me. Job. 17. 2. Let any of Gods children be in misery, Job. 17. 2.
in any kind of calamity, and is there not instantly some insulting Shemei that
in stead of a comfort returns a curse? But let them know that the Lord will
recompense them their wickedness, and destroy them in their own malice. as it
is Psalm. 94. Psalm. 94. 23.
at the last verse.

The fourth and last object of the worlds Joy, and wicked 4. Their own private
working of wickedness.
men's rejoicing, is in doing mischeife cunningly and secretly to others. And
thus did wicked Doeg rejoice in his malicious slandering of and mischeivous
detracting from holy David. Ps: 52. 1, 2, 3, and 4 verses. Why boastest thou
thy self thou Psalm. 52, 1, 2, 3, 4.
tyrant, that thou can do mischeife? Thy tongue imagines mischeife, and is
like a sharp razor that cutteth deceitfully. Thou love all words that may
do hurt, O thou false tongue. In this do all slandering Sycophants rejoice,
yea and this is the object of the deceitful Tale-bearers Joy: How glad is the
one if he can but prejudice his neighbor, though it be by putting in the
paragoge, dicier for dici? And how merry is the other if he can but cunningly
mischeife his brother, though it be by false and forged accusations? Particular
instances in this case are but superfluous, when as the common course of the
world is a continual example. For Whence, I pray, proceed almost all jarres?
whence come so many heavy distastes, but from falls accusers, and flattering
Doegs? For without wood, says Solomon, the fire is quenched, and without a
talebearer strife cease: The words of a Talebearer are as flatterings, and
they go down into the bowels of the belly. that is, they take deep
impression, and are soon and easily believed. Prove: 26. 20, and 22. verses.
And thus much be spoken of the Objects of the Prove: 26. 20. and 22. verses.
worlds joy wherein wicked men do thus rejoice: A word or two now of the
qualities thereof or notes how to know it. Notes how to know the worldlings
Joy. 1 False.


The qualities of this wordly Joy, are two. First, it is a False joy. Secondly,
it is a Short joy. First I say it is a false joy. for the heart is heavy, in
the midst of it, even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness, as Prove. 14. 13. And like Belshazzars Mirth and Jollity,
it is mixed with trembling terror; as his at the hand writing on the wall, so
theirs at the ghastly checks of their guilty consciences. I appeal to every
man's particular conscience here present, whether he finds not, or at least
has not found by his own experience, this joy to be merely an induction to
grief. And therefore Solomon the wisest man that ever was gives it the name of
Madness. Ecclesiastes. 2. 2. I have said Prove: 14. 13. Dan. 5. 5, 6. Eccles.
2. 2.
of laughter thou art madness, and of joy what is this that thou do? It is
better says Saint Gregory in the words of Solomon, to enter into the house of
mourning, then the habitation of such rejoicing. If this beloved be not
sufficient to bring wicked-men quite out of conceit with this their mirth, or
rather indeed madness; nor enough to quail their courage in the eager pursuit
of such worldly joy, if yet it is venom lies hid under the garment of good
likeing, Let them know in the second place, that it is as short as false; and
though it may seem to tickle our senses for a while, yet it quickly slideth
and suddenly slippeth away, always leaving behind it occasions rather of
repentance, then of calling it again to remembrance. Know thou not this of
old, and since God placed man upon the earth, That the rejoyceing of the wicked
is short, and that the joy of Hypocrites is but for a moment? Though his 2 It Is
shortness. Job. 20. 4. 5, 6, and 7, verses. Eccles. 7, 8.
Excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet
shall he perish for ever like his dung, and they which have seen him shall
say, where is he? He shall flee away as a dream, and they shall not find him,
and he shall pass away as a vision of the night: so Zophar to Job, Job 20. 4,
5, 6, and 7. verses. How little a time did Herod enjoy his Herodias? Not
unfitly therefore is the lasting of this joy likened to the crackling of
thorns under a pot, no sooner flashing, but instantly fleeting. Ecclesiastes
7. 8.

Who then is there here present so deeply wedded to this Use.
worldly joy, that will not now choose rather with Moses to suffer affliction
with the children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season,
for so little a time, so short a space? Heb. 11. 25. What profane Esau will
loose his birthright Heb. 11. 25.
for a mess of poor pottage? I mean, will hazard heavenly mansions, for a
minute of earthly mirth? That will prefer one poor draught of the worlds
transitory Nepenthe, before his own endless drowning in eternal perdition?
Choose O choose rather, my beloved to weep, lament, and sorrow here with Gods
children, then with the world to rejoice; for then your sorrow shall be turned
into joy, which is the fourth and the last particular of my text, The glad
alteration, and comes now in order to be spoken of: of which but briefly
because I would not be too tedious.

(...). But your sorrow shall be turned into joy: This is good news indeed;
were it not for this, our hearts might have burst with grief, before the
glass had been out, or the Sermon ended: For if in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are then of all men the most miserable, witness Saint Paul.
1 Cor: 15. 19. Yea then 1 Cor: 15 19.
with David might we justly say, Certainly we have cleansed our hearts in vain,
and washed our hands in Innocence; for daily have we been punished and
chastened every morning Psalm: 73. 13. For what are we else, beloved, but as so
many common Psalm. 73 13.
balls banded up and down here on the racket of the world? Yet here is our
comfort, here is our consolation, Our sorrow shall be turned into joy. A glad
alteration indeed. It Is a good conclusion that makes the premises so to be
esteemed of: a sweet relish at the leaving off makes that draught delightful,
which at the first did taste unpleasant. Exitus acta probat: hence our English
proverb, That Is well that ends well. Better we know is a bad beginning that
concludes well, then a prosperous onset that ends in complaint. What then
though our beginings here be bitter? Sorrows overblowen are pleasant: Dulce
est meminisse laborum, That which has been hard to suffer is sweet to
remember: what therefore though we have here a wet and a watery Spring tide, we
shall be sure to have a clear and a joyful harvest; They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy: Your sorrow shall be turned into Joy.

The kinds of this joy of verity (for so Saint Augustine stile^ it) into which
our sorrow shall be turned, I find to be three* 3 Sorts of joy.
viz: in gaudium fidei, in gaudium charitatis, in gaudium aeternitatis. First
into the joy of Faith, secondly into the joy of Charity, and thirdly and lastly
into the joy of Eternity. First into the joy of Faith and of this joy we read
Luke, 1. 1 Of Faith. Luke 1. 46. 47.
46, 47. Where the blessed virgin breaks out into her Magnificat, My soul
(says she) does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my savior.
Secondly into the joy of 2 Of Charity.
Charity and love one with another; And such was Saint Paul's joy in Philemon,
love, Philem: 7. and in the Corinthians to^ Philem. 7. 2 Cor: 7. 4.
2 Cor: 7. 4. The Lord of his mercy in his good time turn all our sorrows
into this joy, This joy of brotherly Love, and true Christian Charity one
toward another; that soon we may again see how good and how pleasant a thing
it is for Psalm. 133. 1.
brethren to dwell together in unity. Thirdly and lastly our sorrow 3 Of
Eternity
shall be turned into the joy of Eternity, and of this joy we read, Isay. 51,
11. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord Isaiah. 51. 11.
shall return and come with joy unto Sion, and everlasting joy shall be upon
their head: They shall obtain joy and gladness and sorrow and mourning shall
flee away; This joy is permanent, and by Christ promised to all Gods faithful
servants: Math. 25. 21.
Euge bone serve, well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters
joy: where are things which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor
ever entered into the heart of man to conceive. as 1 Cor: 2. 9. Saint Aug:
meditating on this joy, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
breaks out into an O gaudium vitale, gaudium sempiternum and sempiterne
beatum, gaudium sine moerore, gaudium super gaudium, gaudium vinceus omne
gaudium, extra quod non est gaudium etc. That is, O living Joy, Joy eternal
and eternally blessed, Joy without sorrow, Joy above Joy, Joy excelling all
^oy, without which there is noe Joy etc.

And now beloved choose ye one of these two, either by Applic:
prosecuting still (with wicked worldlings) the vain plea^ures and delights of
this life, with them to weep, and lament eternally in the life to come, or
else by participating with the righteous in their sorrows, with them also to
partake in this joy of eternity, into which their sorrows shall be turned: Vbi
erit omne bonum, and non erit aliquod malum; ^i erit quicquid voles, and non
erit quicquid noles; ubi non e^^t Aug. in Soliloq.
host is impugnans, nec ulla illecebra, sed summa and certa se^ritas, secura
tranquillitas, tranquilla jucunditas, jucunda ^elicitas, foelix aeternitas,
aeterna beatitudo, beata Trinitas, Trinitatis unitas, Vnitatis Deitas, and
Deitatis beata visio. so Saint Aug: in Soliloq. That is, where there shall be
all good and noe evil, where there shall be whatsoever thou would have, and
nothing that thou would not have. Where there shall be noe enemy to resist,
nor any allurement to intise, but sure and ^^fe security, secure tranquillity,
tranquilliucundity, pleasant ^appinesse, happy eternity, eternal blessedness,
The Blessed Tri^^ty, the Unity of the Trinity the deity of that Unity, and the
blessed vision of the deity; unto which mountain of joifull happiness, and
happy ioyfullnesse, he in his good time translate us out of this vale of
miserable sorrows, and sorrowful miseries; even he who has so dearly bought
us, Jesus Christ the righteous, To whom with thee O Father and thy blessed
Spirit be ascribed all honor, and glory, power and dominion, might, and
majesty, both now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

