ROBERTUS STAPYLJONVS EQVES AVRATVS, IUVENALEM MUSAEUM* STRADAM, e PEREGRINIS
ANGLOS SVOSque PLVSQVAM INTERPRES REDDIDIT.
R. R.

W. Marshall fecit.

portrait

DE BELLO BELGICO.

THE HISTORY OF THE Low Country WARS.

Written in Latin by FAMIANVS STRADA; In English by Sr. ROB. STAPYLTON Knight.

Illustrated with diverse Figures.



LONDON Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Princes Arms in St. Pauls-Churchyard. MDCL.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, HENRY, Lord Marquess of
Dorchester, Earl of Kingston, Viscount Newark, Lord Pierrepont, etc.
MY LORD,
YOur Lordship, the best judge of Writers, will not I hope condemn me, for
inscribing your name to the History of Famianus Strada. He is indeed a Modern
Roman, but in happiness and freedom of expression, so like the Ancients, Livy,
Sallust, and Tacitus: that it is no injury to the past, or present World, to
say, their Age produced not his Superior, nor ours his Equal; since those that
have not arrived to his perfection may be good Historians; those that have,
eminent. The Fame of so great an Author, made me ambitious to interpret him to
my Country: not considering (for I as willingly acknowledge my Error as his
Merit) that I was to Copy a Principal, comprehending new and various
Narrations, Princes Letters, Speeches, Debates and Results of Cabinets and
Councel-tables, Battles, Descriptions of places, Characters of Persons, and
very prudent Observations, summed up in brief sentences. Besides, I found all
these apparelled in the most captivating Figures of the Latin tongue: not like
the French, Spanish, or other Languages of Commerce, easily reducible to those
now spoken; but hard to be rendered in any; especially in English. Yet after I
had engaged, that I might play my game to the fairest, I borrowed the invention
of Alexander Farneze, when he dissected Don John of Austria in the
Low Countries: and had him showed in Spain, new-joynted skinned and almost
spirited, to Philip the second. In imitation whereof, I took to pieces the
actions of Don John, Alexander Farneze, and the rest of their famous friends
and enemies, as they were described in Italy: and present them here to your
Lordship, like the parts of Don John's body, entire, although not breathing.
For which I can make no Apology, but that it is the fortune of this History to
be dedicated to Princes. And when the first Dedication was made to the Duke of
Parma; it concerned me to address the second to a person of like honor: and my
Genius directed me to such a one, in whom Eminence of Dignity is joined with
Eminence of knowledge, that affording me Patronage; this, reputation. For what
Ammianus Marcellinus reports of Physicians, that they were held learned, if
they had once been at Alexandria; we know to be true of Books if they come but
to have your Lordships Approbation: which is the highest aim of

Your Lordships humble servant, ROBERT STAPYLTON.

FAMIANVS STRADA to the Reader.
Who ever thou art, that shall vouchsafe to take my Book in thy hands, before
thou peruse it, give me leave to preface a few things. Thou have here a History
of mine, which I cannot exspect should be either praised or pardoned for
expedition, being nine years old, before I sent it to the Press: yet for that
very procrastination, I may hope another as great a favor from my Reader:
because it was out of my respect to him, that I spun out time in polishing my
work. For albeit, many years ago diverse persons (to whose Abilities no less
then to their Honors, none in Rome but yields) having read the first part of
my Annals, gave them far more then common approbation; yet they could not
persuade me (that know how great the difference is betwixt Humanity and
Judgment) to hasten the publishing of them: or, now they are published, not to
be an earnest Suitor to my Reader for some favorable Regard, due to my
Modesty, reverencing others judgments. This Civilitie I the rather hope, for
that my fortune is somewhat better, then ordinary Historians: For I give thee
Princes Letters, most of them writ with their own hands. I give thee
Ambassadors private instructions, secret Councels of War, Causes of
Designs, Notes brought in by Spies, clandestine conspiracies of Towns, and
many other Particularities, which either by Pieces, or collected into Diaries,
have been discovered to me by the very men employed. And were it not to
trespass upon the Readers Patience, I could (which many times I do) to most of
my Relations, annex the copyes of the Letters, produce the credit of the
Originals themselves, to prove matter of Fact; as evidently, as Deeds signed,
sealed, and witnessed. But all these, as they have in a manner opened to me a
Door to look into Councel-chambers, and Cabinets: Polybius lib. 3.
So the divulging of them, and especially explaining of Individualls (without
which Polybius thinks History but a mock-monument) must needs be so much
sweeter to the Readers longing, by how much they comparing common Notions
(which they have read in others, and therefore I forbear to mention) out of
them and me together will frame a more copious History. This likewise is the
cause, that makes me sometimes give an Account of particular Accidents; that
the Low Country war, no less known from the mouth of Fame, then penns of
numerous Writers, might be varied by such Additionals, pleasing for newness,
and not inconsistent with a particular History. This has likewise made me,
that as I have passed over some things cursorily, and unless some peculiar
passage were to be added to others Relations, almost quite omitted them: so
many times to bring higher deductions, I thought would be more acceptable, and
not done without many great examples. For among the Writers of the Roman
Annals (to say nothing of the Grecians) Tacitus, and Sallust, how often do they
piece out the small threads of their work, Tacitus.
and cover them as it were with an embroiderie. Tacitus in his Histories (the
five books omitting his Annals you may soon run over) refutes those Authors,
that say the chief Officers of Otho's and Vitellius his Army deliberated,
Whether it were not better, that they, refusing to fight for wicked Princes,
should choose a good one; and taking his hint from thence, speaks at large, Of
men's old and inbred Ambition to compass the Sovereigne power, Of its Original
in the City of Rome, Of the contentions between the Senators and Plebeians,
Of Marius, Sylla, Pompey: at length, But (says he) the repetition of our
ancient and present manners, has very far transported me now I return to the
course of my History, Proceed. Where he describes the burning of the Capitol by
the Soldiers, Lib. 3.
and subjoyns ^is own complaints upon it, accurately setting down, Who it was
that vowed it, who built it, who dedicated it; and who, when it was destroyed,
repaired it; though they were passages familiar to the people. Lib. 4.
What of Serapis? whose pedigree he draws, and with a prolix Digression
commemorates what opinions the Egyptian Priests held of her, not thinking it a
wrong to History. But he never conceived an Historian might be freer, then in
his description of the siege of Jerusalem. From whence he takes occasion to
speak of the Original and Manners of the Jews, so profusely, and so far, Lib.
5.
deriving them even from Saturn; heaping so many several things together; Of
Moses, Of that Peoples Religion, Of their Meats, Of the Sabbath, Of
Circumcision, Of the Eternity of the soul, Of Balsom, Of Brimstone, and other
specialties; as if he wrote the History of that Nation. And yet Tacitus keeps
within compass, if you compare him with Sallust, that is so frequent in
Excursions. Nay, he himself does not dissemble it: For having taken a large,
and indeed unnecessitated scope, at last ^ounding a retreat, he says, But I
have gone too carelessely, and too far, being nettled and vexed at the
Manners of the Town. Now I come to the matter. Sallust.
Nor did he keep to it for all this; but in the division of the King dome
between Iugurth and Adherbal, he amply discourses of Africa, and its
Inhabitants from their very beginning. Again, licentiously inveighing against
the Manners of Rome, he copiously relates the causes of Faction between the
Senate and the People, and with a check for his own flying out, he brings
himself again into the way. Yet what he adds to this Digression upon the By,
concerning the Leptitans, exceeds the other by many degrees. For having
mentioned the city of Leptis, when he had spoken of its Founders, of its
situation, and Language, he wheels about, and for a Corollary brings in an old
History, not at all appertaining to the Leptitans. For (says he) because
following the business of the Leptitans, I am come into this Region, I think
it not amiss to set down a noble and memorable action of two Carthaginians.
Which told, neither sparingly, nor timorously, he goes on again. But why do I
quote so many Presidents, when that one of Catilines Conspiracy evidently
shows, what liberty a Historian may assume? the Writer whereof so freely
digresses, and has so many Out-lets, and Parergons, that the additionall
Matter is much more then the fourth part of the History. Which being granted,
ours likewise, in case it be any where redundant, will (I hope) be fairly
interpreted by the Readers. As likewise that, which I have not forborne, whilst
I compare the ancient with the modern times; that is, like to like: Which, as I
am not ignorant the Latins seldom do, so I know it is familiar with the
Greeks. Indeed Polybius, not more properly the Writer then Master of History,
whilst he at large compares the Form and Situation of Sicily with Peloponnesus;
the Fleets of Carthage and Rome, with those of Antigonus, Ptolomey, Demetrius,
and others of former Ages; whilst he resembles the Republics of Rome and
Carthage, to generous birds fighting even to their last breath (to omit the
rest of the same kind, which, if you read but his first Book will presently
occur) truly, he needs not fear that goes in the steps of so authentic an
Example. Thus having rightly premonished and prepared Thee, I will no longer
stay Thee at the Threshold of my Work.

The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS.
The first Book.
I Enter upon the History of a War, The Proposition of the work.
doubtful whether to call it, The War of the Low-Countrey-men and the
Spaniards, or almost of all Europe: For to this hour we see it managed by the
Arms and Purses, at least, by the Designs and Counsels of so many Nations; as
if in the Low Countries only, the Empire of Europe was to be disputed. Wherein
many, How satisfactory it will be to many.
I presume, will be concerned, to read what their Contrymen, what their
Kinsmen have acted in the field. The rest, How rare to all.
though unconcerned, may yet desire to know, from whence a few Belgic
Provinces have had the confidence and strength, to fight for threescore years
together, with a most Potent King, on equal terms* from whence, upon the coast
of Holland, out of a few fisher-boats, A great State out of small beginnings.
there has sprung up a new State, which growing daily stronger in Arms, will
now brook no Superior by Land, and can have none by Sea: That in mighty fleets
have sent Plantations to the remotest parts of the Earth: That by their
Ambassadors, making Leagues with Princes, carrying themselves as not inferior
to Kings, have got a Principality more then ever Europe knew. The strange
fertility of the soil, even in the time of War.
From whence the Belgic soil, among the continual tempests and storms of
War (such as in far shorter troubles, have laid other Regions waste and
barren) affords so great plenty of all things, as if the place were as
violently bent to maintain a War, as the People; so that directly you would
think, Mars only travels other Countries, and carries about a running War,
but here seats himself. Some indeed have fancied, the King of Spain out of
Policy to spin out the Low Country War: The King of Spain fights in jest, as
some think.
for as a Prince (the great body of whose Empire must be spirited with a great
soul) they conceived he trains his Militia in these Provinces, afterward to
dispatch them (as the Turk does his Ianizaries) into several Climates. But
falsely.
As if his enemies should not be taught in the same school; and sure it were
more to his advantage, their arms should rust with idleness, then shine with
exercise.

Now the resemblance of our Age with the time-past, will give the silent
comparers no little pleasure. The Readers of our Annals must needs remember,
now Arminius, Cor. Tac. lib. 1. and 2. Ann. and lib. 4. Hist.
now Civilis, those two Whirlwinds of the Low Countries, the Oranges of their
times. The like principles of Rebellion will present themselves: The similitude
of accidents between the antie^t and these times.
pretending, and withal shaking off obedience to Tiberius and Vespasian:
courting the People with hope of liberty: the Provinces suddenly conspiring
against the Roman Garrisons: arms first taken up in Holland: aided by the
Germans, French, and Brittons: the Roman Legions tired out with dubious
fortune: most things set a foot again by arts so like, so much the same, that
unless you knew the difference by particular names, you would think your self
present in the old Belgic tumults. For in humane things, however times and
persons die, But our natures are the worse.
still the same Causes and Events revive. Albeit as we have exceeded the
Ancients in the quarrel of Nations and Religions; so we edge our spleen more
sharply upon this Whetstone, and execute our hatred with greater animosity.
Witness the Low Countries at this day.
What have our Low Country Armies left unattempted? Beyond Poetic miracles,
we have not only fought with mighty Rivers, Hom. Iliad. 21. Of the Duel
between Achillis and the River Scamander
but breaking the Cloister of the Sea, we have challenged Neptune himself? Our
Foot invade the Ocean, as if it were firm ground; we let in the Sea to make the
Land navigable, fighting in all the elements at once. And truly, (unless mine
deceive me, as every ones judgment sometimes fails him) never was war
continued with higher courages or attempts: nor have stronger sieges baffled
the forces of great Cities: or with daily slaughter was ever more blood drawn
and spent on both sides. Though the bodies of gallant men have floated on the
rivers of Simois and Scamander, Virg. 1. Aen. Gallanter men lost in the
Low Countries then either by the Greeks or Romans.
celebrated in Poets fables, and others famed for too true slaughter of the
Romans; yet more and more daring men have been cast up by the Mose, the Rhine,
and Skelde, and the rest of the Low Country Rivers, so often discolored with
humane blood, and strewed with mangled limbs of soldiers, swelling with the
ruins of great souls. How many foreign armies have miscarried here? how often
was the Belgic Sea covered with ships, the Land with horse and foot? and, all
these armies lost, greater forces have been raised again among our neighbors,
The Authors character of himself.
and furiously overspread the field? Yet after the expense of so many nations,
the wealth of Kings exhausted, the force of Europe joined against it,
Objection. It misbecomes a religious man to know things profane, and a Priest
to write of arms.
this Troy has held out many a ten years War, and yet not taken. But the
more earnest I am in designing so great a work, the more perhaps I shall expose
the Historians confidence to censure: who being a stranger to public business,
a man of the old learning, not conversant with his own times, will be argued by
many as disproportioned to the greatness of this War; Answer.
and being a Clergie-man, they will affirm it misbecomes him to treat of arms.
There are examples to the contrary Tit. Live. Cor. Tac.
I should give easy ear unto them, if all the writers of History had fought
with their wit, lead up Companies or commanded Armies; or that we had not
diverse, Dion. Halicar. and other Authors.
in the account of every age and nation, that being Churchmen have handled
these military arguments. And indeed, since there is such weight in the truth
of History, from which nothing takes off more then affection in the writer;
Moses. Berosus, Josephus, Eusebius. Caesar. Orns. Vill. Tit. Jov. Bemb. Mariana
Masseius, etc. and reason it self.
whence should we rather fear the faith of a relation, from one that is a party
and hardly dispenses with love and hatred? or from one that centred in the
middle, and professing holiness of life, either untouched with any factious
desires, or above them; and either keeps at distance the occasions of a lie, or
bears it from him? That I may speak something for my self, I hold not the
subject of this War inconsistan: with my course of life, Besides, Strada
says his Argument is joined with Religion.
Religion being the cause of both; nor do I conceive my self unfit either to
report the matter of fact, or to find out the causes. For though an exact
knowledge of Councils, and inspection into Cabinets, could not be The Emperor
Charles the 5th. Prince of ye Low=Countries.
To Vaughan (...)

portrait exspected from one of a sequestered life, or from the genius of a man
that loves to dwell with himself, at least never comes in Princes Courts and
listens to their whispers; my intelligence has been abundantly supplied, And
his intelligence out of Original notes and Expresses.
out of the memorials and original letters of men that either have themselves
done the business, or commanded such as did: So that I believe few have come
better furnished at any time for the compiling of an History; and though I am a
stranger to the Court and Camp, a man (as you may term me) of the shade, yet I
dare promise to produce more Cabinet counsels, then all the Civil and military
news-men. The Authors integrity.
But it were superfluous to make a passionate Preface of what faith, what
freedom I shall use, since all men equally pretend the love of truth, and
oftentimes none do engage their faith with more formality, then such as will be
sure to break it. And freedom not biased toward any faction.
For our age has almost lost the liberty of speaking, by the common fault of
Writers, whose ambition having an eye upon the frowns of Princes, laying the
fault on times and manners, bring flattery into fashion. I build upon my own
conscience, which I often examine, yet find it not inslaved to the commands of
Princes, or mercenary to their bounty. And I entreat them that vouchsafe to
peruse my work, The same affection he desires in his Reader.
that such a mind as they justly require of me in writing, neutrall and free,
such a one they themselves will have in reading, uningaged to faction. Least
the meat be rashly-blamed for curdling on a foul and sickly stomach.

Only thou, O God of Peace and War, This prefaced, he begins with imploring
^iviue assistance. See P^inies Panegyric page 1.
(for as well the writers of, as the actours in, business ought to begin with
Prayer) do thou guide my mind and pen, that not trusting in Prudence that
s^arches humane secrets, but in Wisdom that assists thy throne, I may perfect
a History worthy the purity of life which I profess, equal to the greatness of
the work I have designed, nor less then the exspectation that has long since
called me forth.

THe bloody War that grievously distempered Europe, 1555.
still continued between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Henry the second,
King of France, to whom their fathers with their Crowns had left their enmities
and animosities; But Mary Queen of England, immediatley upon her marriage with
Philip Prince of Spain, began seriously to mediate a Peace; and followed it so
well, as this year 1555. the Emperors and Kings Commissioners met at Callice;
and though the exspected Peace was not then concluded, yet there was laid a
foundation for Peace, The Emperors resolution to resign his Kingdoms.
in a five years truce. Then the Emperor, calling his son Philip out of
England, resolved to execute what he had long determined, the resignation of
his Crowns, and be Author of a Prodigy unknown in Princes Courts, When he
might reign to give it off. This secret divulged through the Low Countries,
brought men from all parts to Bruxels, and on the twenty fifth of October, the
day appointed for meeting of the three Estates, the Knights of the order of the
Golden fleece, and the Magistrates, The Emperor in the great Hall of his
Palace, A full presence of Princes.
commanding Philip King of England, Maximilian King of Bohemia, Elianor and
Mory sisters to Charles the fifth.
and Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy to sit on the one hand; and on the other,
Elianor and Mary Queen Dowagers of France and Hungary, with another Mary Queen
of Bohemia, and Christiern daughter to the King of Denmark Duchess of
Lorrain. King Philip made master of the Order of the Golden fleece.
First he created his son Philip, master of the order of the Golden-fleece;
then he commanded Philibert Bruxellius, one of the Lords of his great Council,
to signify his pleasure to the Estates of Flanders. The sum of his speech
was this, The Low Countries and Burgundy resigned to him in Bruxellius his
speech.
That the Emperor being admonished, by his daily decay of health, which had
much broke and brought him low, to settle his affairs in this world: resolved
to transfer that weight, which he could no longer support as became his own
and the Empires dignity, upon his son, both in vigor and wisdom able to
bear so great a burden. Therefore Caesar, wishing it may be for the happiness
of himself and the Provinces, resigned his Dominion of the Low Countries and
Burgundy, released the People of their ^ath of Allegiance, and voluntarily gave
the right and possession of the Low Countries and Burgundy to his son Philip
King of England. Whilst Philibert was gravely speaking this, I^terrupted by
Charles the fifth who repeats all his own actions.
The Emperor rises on the sudden, and leaning on the shoulders of William
Prince of Orange, interrupted his speech, and out of a paper he brought to help
his memory, as the Register of the Empire, he himself began to read in French,
The Prince of Orange in his Apology of the year 1571.
What he had done from the seventeenth year of his age to that day, nine
expeditions into Germany, six into Spain, seven into Italy, four into France,
ten into the Low Countries, two into England, as many into Africa, eleven
Sea-voyages, Wars, Peace, Leagues, Victories: and set forth the particulars
rather magnificently, then proudly. Moreover, The end of all Cesars designs.
That he had proposed to himself no other end of all these labors, but the
preservation of Religion and the Empire. Which hitherto whilst his health
permitted, he had by Gods assistance so performed, that Charles the Emperors
life and Reign could offend none but his enemies. Why he resignes his Kingdoms.
Now, since his strength and almost life was spent, he would not prefe^ the
love of Empire before the safety of his People. In stead of an o^d Bedridden man,
the greatest part of him already in the grave, he would substitute a Prince in
the spring of his youth, What be requires of the Low Countries.
of active strength and courage. To him he desired the Provinces t^ pay their
obedience, likewise to keep Peace among themselves, and be constant to the
Orthodox Religion; Lastly, That they would favorably pardon him, if he had
trespassed in his Government. What he promises to them.
For his own part he would always remember their fidelity and services in his
prayers to God, to whom alone he resolved to live for the short remainder of
his days. The Emperors speech to his Son before be gave him possession.
Then turning to his son, he said, If these Provinces had descended upon thee
by my death, I had yet deserved something at my sons hands, for leaving him
so rich and improved a patrimony. Now, since ^hine Inheri ance is not a
necessitated but a voluntary act, and that thy Father has chosen to die before
his time, that he may antedate the benefit of his death; all the interest thou
owe me for it, I assign it to thy Subjects, and require thee to pay it in the
love and care to them. Other Princes rejoice they have given life to their
sons, and shall give Kingdoms. I am resolved to prevent fate of this gasping
and posthumous favor: esteeming it a double joy, if I may see thee not only
living, but live ^o see thee reigning by my gift. This example of mine, few
Princes will imitate, for I my self in all antiquity could hardly find one to
follow. But sure they will commend my resolution, when they see thee worthy to
be made the first president. Which thou will be, if thou firmly retein the
wisdom thou were bred to, the fear of the Almighty, and (which are the pillars
of a Kingdom) the patronage of Religion and the Laws. One thing remains which
thy Father makes his last wish, That thou may have a son grow up worthy to
have thy Government transferred upon him, but yet have no necessity to do it.

Having spoken this, he embraced his son, that was upon his knees, striving
to kiss his hand, and piously and fatherly praying God to bless him, his tears
broke off his words, and drew tears abundantly from the eyes of the beholders.
King Philip humbly kissing his Fathers hand, then rising to the Estates,
excused his ignorance in the French tongue commanding Anthony Perenott
Granvell, Bishop Granvell answers for K. Philip.
Bishop of Arras, to speak for him; who in a most learned Oration interpreted
the Kings mind, as grateful to his father, so likewise affectionate to the
Low-coutrey-men, by his fathers precept and example. James Masius an eloquent
Civil Lawyer answered in the name of the three Estates. Masius for the Estates
replies to the Emperor and King.
Lastly, Mary Queen of Hungary resigned the Government of the Low Countries,
which she had managed five and twenty years for the Emperor her Brother. Qu.
Mary sur^enders her government of the Low Countries. Shortly after the Emp.
gives up all his Dominions to his soil.
So for that day the Session was adjourned. Two months after in a far
greater Assembly (for fame had further spread it self) the Emperor gave to his
son Philip at once, the possession of all his Kingdoms, Provinces, and
Islands, as well in our World, as beyond the Line. Finally, not long after, he
sent the Crown and Scepter of the Empire (all he had then left) to his Brother
Ferdinand (created many years before King of the Romans) by the hands of
William Prince of Orange, who they say, Ian. 17. 1556.
at first declining the Embassage, told the Emperor, in King Philips presence,
that he hoped better things from heaven, And sends his brother the Imperial
Crown by the Prince of Orange.
then to see his Master take the Imperial Crown from his own head, and send it
by him to another; whether it was love to the Emperor (of whose grace and
bounty he had many proofs) or flattery to King Philip, whom he knew designed
for the Empire by his father, who often to that purpose had treated with his
Brother Ferdinand. Who would have excused himself from being the messenger.
For Caesar to confirm the Spanish power of the House of Austria by accession of
the Empire, Mary sister to Charles the V, and Ferdinand 1556.
had many times by Mary Queen of Hungary, sounded his Brother Ferdinand if he
would surrender the Kingdom of the Romans to Philip, among other proposals
promising to share the Empire with his Brother, that ever after there should be
two Cesars of equal authority. But all this moved not Ferdinand.

Charles the fifth, from so great an Emperor now no body, The Emperor sails
out^of the Low Countries, August 1556.
leaving the Court to the new Prince, staid a while in a private house, till
the fleet was ready: then losing from Zeland, with his sisters Queen Elianor,
and Queen Mary, he sailed with a prosperous wind into the port of Lared^ in
Biscany. To follow him out of the Low-Countryes, will not be (I suppose) to
wander from the History, since by continuing a relation of the last passages of
a Prince of the Low Countries, and the last Prince born a Low-Countrey-man, I
may appear to be in the Low Countries still. However, September.
I presume the Reader will approve the bringing to light of this great
retirement, and secret of State, wherein I shall insert many things (that would
have been ill lost) into the Low Country Annals, taking off somewhat from the
following sad discourse, by the present commemoration of this softer story.

The Emperor was scarce landed, He arrives in Spain, the storm sparing him,
but not his ship.
when a tempest rising in the Harbor, scattered his whole fleet, and swallowed
up the Admiral herself that carried him: as if she bad farewell to Caesar and his
fortunes. It is reported, that when he came ashore, falling upon his knees, His
words when he landed.
he kissed the earth, and said, he did his duty to the Common Parent, and that
as he came naked out of his mothers womb, His admired constancy put to the
Test by the Spanish Lords.
so he willingly returned to this mother naked. But when he came into Biscany,
and from thence went to Burgos, being met upon the way by very few of the
Spanish Nobility (not to be attracted by Charles alone, unattended with his
Titles) then he first found his nakedness. But especially by his son.
Whereto was added, that his Pension of a hundred thousand Ducats (reserved
out of his vast revenues, for part whereof he had present use, to reward his
servants, and dismiss them) was not paid him, but he forced to wait for it at
Burgos, not without some indignation, Which alittle moved him.
till at last the mighty sum was tendered. Which affront as he could hardly
dissemble, Whereupon some thought he wavered in his resolution.
so it gave many men color to report, that the Act was scarce passed, when
Charles repented him of the resignation of his Kingdoms. Though others say, he
changed his mind upon the very day of his resignment; because many years after,
when Cardinal Granvell remembered King Philip of the anniversary day of his
Fathers resignation; the King presently replied, And this is likewise the
anniversary day of his repentance for resigning. Which spread by uncertain
rumor, went for current news, persuading the world the Emperor was not
constant, so much as for a day, to his unexampled resolution: Unless perhaps
King Philip thought not that commendable in his Father, which he himself meant
not to imitate. For my part, But those Censurers were mistaken.
in all my search into the books and diaries of his retirement in the two years
time of his private life, I find no mark of this kind of repentance; nor would
it have showed handsome, if the lively image of such magnanimity, should be
presented to succeeding ages, dressed up in the rags of penitence. But now,
carried in his close chair to Validolid, he staid there a while with his
Grandchild, Charles Prince of Spain, whose nature did not please him very
well. The Monastery of S. Justus.
Thence he retired to S. Iustus, a Monastery of Hieronomites, the seat he had
long since chosen. It stands upon the confines of Portugal and Castile, not far
from the City of Placentia, in a healthful air, made so by the sweetness of
the Vale, and circling Hills; but especially by the temperate Winters. Sex. Aur.
Vict. in Caius Czs.
Into this place (it is reported) Sertorius that most valiant General
retreated, when he fled the Roman Army, and that here he was treacherously
slain. Here, at the last, the Emperor Charles set bounds to his sea of cares,
and erecting his true Hercules Pillars, built himself a house joining to the
Monastery; the model whereof was upon his command, sent him a year before into
the Low Countries, The Emperors new habitation.
and approved of. It contained but six, at most seven Cells (for it pleases, as
one says, to know every thing that Princes do) of twenty foot in breadth and
length, right Convent lodgings; from whence was a prospect, and stairs landing
in a little garden, watered with a spring, planted with Citron and Lemon trees,
that shot up their flowers and fruits to the very windows. And this was the
Mausoleum, wherein that mighty Emperor, not contented with one World,
enclosed and buried himself alive; and to this narrovv compass was that Giant
lessened, that boasted to stretch his hand further then Hercules. So easily
will Nature shrink into her own stature and condition, if pride that puffs up
and distracts her, do but once evaporate.

Coming to this Monastery, Febr. 1557.
of threescore servants, chosen out of his vast Retinue, he sent the greatest
part to Serandilla, the next Town, intending to use them, if there should be
occasion; His family, and how accommodated.
keeping only twelve men about him, and one horse. His contempt of the world.
Nor was his furniture better then his attendance, but all measured by the
strict rule of necessity. And truly it was a miracle to see Charles the
Emperor enamoured with solitude, to forget his cares, to be constant to his
resolution, and so much estranged from his old customs and almost nature; that
neither gold, which then in abundance the Spanish fleet brought him from the
Indies; nor the noise of War, which had wont to be carried through Europe by
his Armies and Generals, by Sea and Land; could any way unfix his mind, for so
many years past used to the sound of War; How be disposed his time. His riding
to take the air.
or disturb his quiet, His gardening.
though upon the hearing of various events. His making of clocks or watches.


This Imperial Hermit so spent his time, that he daily bestowed part of it upon
his sick and languishing body, part upon God and his Soul. For sometimes he
rode up and down the grounds, with one footman; sometimes he quartered his
garden into little beds, set flowers, and planted trees with his triumphant
hands, Jannell. Turrianus, whose Mathematical inventions be much delighted in.
as once Dioclesian did at Salon, when he likewise had resigned his Empire. He
often practiced to make Watches (whose wheels he governed with more case, then
Fortunes wheel) learning the art of Iannellus Turrianus, the Archimedes of his
time: making many experiments of his Waterworks. Nay, it is said, the Aquaduct
of Toledo, which Iannellus had then modelled, was much advantaged by the
Emperors ingenious fancy. And such a form as they together had conceived in
that two years retirement, such was Turrianus his water-work, which after the
Emperors decease, by a new miracle of Art, drew up the river Tagus to the top
of the mountain of Toledo. This was the man that, in the Emperors solitary
life, daily recreated his spirits, (much taken with such novelties) by showing
unheard of Engines and Inventions: For often, when the Cloth was taken away
after dinner, he brought upon the board little armed figures of Horse and Foot,
some beating Drums, others sounding Trumpets, and diverse of them charging one
another with their Pikes.. Sometimes he sent wooden sparrows out of his chamber
into the Emperors Dining Room, that would fly round, and back again; the
Superior of the Monastery, who came in by accident, suspecting him for a
Conjurer. He likewise framed a Mill of iron that turned it self, of such a
subtle work and smalness, that a Monk could easily hide it in his sleeve, yet
daily it ground as much wheat, as would abundantly serve eight persons for
their days allowance. But these sports were more frequent at the Emperors
first coming. Afterward, warned by his disease, that still rung the larum of
death, His extraordinary care of his soul.
he more sparingly gave them admittance, only at such hours as his pain left
him: for now he made it his first care, often to come to Church at times
appointed for the Monks to sing Prayers: Joseph Seguenza in the History of his
Order, l. 1.
He often read Saints lives, and discoursed of holy things more frequently,
then he accustomed: he washed out the stains of his Conscience, by Confession
of his sins, and are the bread of Angels, though sometimes not fasting, for
which he had a dispensation (by reason of the weakness of his stomach) granted
by the Pope. By the Bull of Julius 111. 1554. Marc. 19
Nay, with a discipline of platted cords (so much prevailed the example of
others, and a mind once conqueror over it self) he put himself to constant
sharp penance for his former life. He disciplined himself.
Which Discipline King Philip ever had in great veneration, His whip reverenced
by his son.
and a little before his death commanded it to be brought to him, and as it was
stained in the blood of Charles his father, he sent it to his son Philip the
third: and they say, it is still preserved among the pious monuments of the
House of Austria. Lastly, upon occasion of those funeral Obsequies, which he
celebrated for his Mother, on the Anniversary of her decease, a new desire set
him a longing (if it were lawful) to celebrate his own funerals: advising
hereupon with John Regula, a Father of the Convent, and his Confessor: when he
told him, it was (though without president, yet) a pious and meritorious act;
he commanded immediately, that all funeral preparations should be made. A
Hearse was therefore set up in the Church, Aug. 30. 1558.
torches lighted, and his servants in black stood about it, the Service for the
dead being mournfully sung by the Religious men. He himself surviving his own
funerals, beheld in that imaginary last office, the true tears of his
attendance: He heard the Hymn, wishing him happy rest among the Saints; and he
himself singing with them, prayed for his own soul: till coming near him that
officiated, and delivering him the torch he held lighted in his hand, with eyes
lifted up to heaven, he said, Thou great Judge of life and death, I humbly
beseech thee, as the Priest takes from me this wax-light I offer; so thou at
last in thine own good time, wilt graciously please to receive my Spirit, which
I commend into thy hands, arms, and bosom. Then, as he was, in a loose
mourning garment, he lay down upon the floor, all the Church beginning to weep
a fresh, and as he had been laid forth to take their last farewell. Immediately
he falls sick.
It seems, the Emperor by these feigned Rites, played with approaching death:
for two days after his personated Obsequies, he fell into a fever, which by
little and little consuming him, Barthol. Miranda.
the Archbishop of Toledo gave him all the supplies by the Christian Church
appointed for the struggling soul, and the Monks that came frequently out of
their Cells into his Bedchamber, Soon after he died.
prayed God to send their Guest a happy convoy to the mansion of the Blessed;
and on the Eve of the Evangelist S. Matthew, Sept. 21. 1558.
in the eight and fiftieth year of his age (whereof he only lived two years,
with a great sense of Piety and Religion) he departed this life. His funerals
ushered with Prodigies in heaven.
His death was attended with conspicuous signs in Heaven and Earth: For a
while after he sickned, there was seen a blazing star in Spain, at first
somewhat dimm, but as his disease increased, so it grew in brightness, Observed
by Ian. Turrionus present at the Emperors death.
and at last shooting its fiery hair point blank against the Monastery of S.
Iustus, in the very hour the Emperor died, the Comet vanished. Nor happened
this without admiration; in the Emperors garden sprung a Lilly, which at the
same time put forth two buds: And in earth.
The one, as it is usual, blowing in the Month of May: The other (though as
well watered) gave no sign of laying its great belly all the Spring and
Summer: but that night wherein the Emperors soul put off the garment of his
body, the Lilly suddenly breaking her Challice, with an unseasonable and
unexspected Spring, began to blow. It was likewise observed by all, that this
Lilly laid upon the high Altar for men to view, was received as a happy and
white omen.

Thus Charles the fifth, when he had enjoyed his Fathers kingdoms forty
years, How long he reigned.
the Empire six and thirty, and himself two, after the resignment of all these,
left it doubtful, whether he merited more honor in so long governing the
Empire, and many Kingdoms, or in relinquishing them all together. Yet, I am not
ignorant, this Act was then diversely censured; and at this day, the Emperors
resignment is an argument for Rhetoricians to declaim upon in the Schools,
Diverse reasons commonly given for his resignement.
and Politicians at Court. But omitting the conceptions of these men, and such
builders of Castles in the air, I will give you the common and most probable
opinions.

Many had one reason before their eyes, to wit, his infirmity of the gout,
which from his fiftieth year gave him no intervals, but continually tormented
and forced him (as he professed at his solemn resignation) by a safe
prevention, both for his own and his kingdoms good, His fear of fortunes
mutability
to transfer the weight of that Government, which he knew himself no longer
able to sustain, upon a man in the full strength of youth and courage. The
subtiler people, that dive into the secrets of business, and slight all that
is visible, suspected that the Emperor, Peter Mexius in the life of Charles
the V. Thuanus, l. 26.
terrified with the fortune of Henry the second of France; held it safer to
encounter him with the youth of his son, ambitious and capable of government,
then with his own declining years and victories. They likewise observed, that
from the time he tried in vain to recover the Town of Metz, 1552.
from the French, and sat down before it with an army of one hundred thousand
men, whereof he lost no fewer then forty thousand; he contracted such inward
grief: especially having been forced a while before, by Maurice Duke of Saxony,
to save himself by an unhandsome, at least unaccustomed retreat: That for some
days he kept his chamber, and ever after his disease grew sharper. Hipp.
Chizzal. in his book entitled, The letters of Princes.
Nay, it was commonly believed, that Cesars fortune glutted and grown coy,
began to retire, and that the happy genius of this so long unconquered Emperor
was fled to Henry the French King: Caesar himself not able to dissemble it,
being heard to say: It seems, Fortune is the young man's mistress. And therefore
for his Device of Hercules pillars and the motto, More beyond; there was
painted a Crab-fish, the word, More on this side, a jeer agreeable with the
times. Some said, The Emperor did like a wary Gamster at Dice, who having
drawn a great sum of money in many hours play, held his hand betimes: and
suffered not himself to be stripped of all his victorious heap at one throw.
Contrary to this was the sense of others, That imputed Cesars act to his
immense ambition. His immoderate desire of glory.
For being of a spirit, as covetuous of fame as ever any since the first Cesars
times, when he conceived it arrived at the highest point of Glory, Francis King
of France. Henry King of Navarre. Clem. 7.
by so many victories over all kinds of enemies, and these carried with so
strange a fortune, that hardly any one took the field against him, whom he saw
not vanquished, nay (which we seldom read) bound and Captive: Bishop of Rome
P. M. Guliel.
at last he laid down and spurned away the greatest Crowns and Scepters of
Europe and America; Duke of Cleveland.
by this unusual Conquest, aiming at new Titles of Honor, not easy to be
equalled by Posterity. An obscure report was likewise spread abroad, J. Fred.
the Electour of Saxony.
That the Emperor was moved with the Complaints of his son Philip, daily
wounded with the scorn and riming Libells of the English, Ernest Duke of
Brunswick. Phil. Landgrave of Hellen.
That brooked not in their Island a Spanish Lord: the Common People therefore
called him not the King, but the Queens Husband: upon this accasion, he more
passionately represented to his Father his fortune and condition, to work him
the sooner to resign the Low Countries, having had some intimation of the
Emperors intent: His Sons complaints. Adrian. l. 13. of his History Thua. l.
16. Gabrera upon Phil. 2. l. 1. c. 5. and 8.
and like Children born of young Parents that come old to their inheritance,
impatiently exspected the good hour. But there are that make another
construction, and affirm, the Emperor pitched upon this Resolve, touched only
with Religion, and pricked in Conscience about many things, for which he
thought it best to make his peace betimes with the Divine Majesty, before he
was summoned to give in his accounts: His necessity to make his peace with God.
for the Emperors spirit, not altogether deaf to Piety, was struck with a sad
remembrance of diverse actions, That he had made a League with Henry King of
England, 1543.
excommunicated for his sake by the Bishop of Rome. For entering into a league
with Hen. 8. of Eng. contrary to his engagement to the Pope.
Wherein, the injury he received by King Henry's divorce from the Emperors
great Aunt, Queen Katharine: and his constant promise never to hold amity with
any heretical Prince, unless reconciled to the Church of Rome: Jov. l. 43, 44,
45.
were both weakly undervalued to advance his inexpiable hatred to the French.
Besides to have meddled in the cause of Religion, taking upon him the Popes
office, and commanding a book to be published in Germany, For determining
matters of religion.
which contained a confession of Faith: to the obsevance whereof all should be
obliged, till the Council of Trent were ended. Which Book, though in many
places it was agreeable to the Catholic Church, yet some were contrary, as the
marriage of Priests, and receiving the Communion under both kinds: for being
penned by a Juncto of Catholics and Heretics, as it often happens, it pleased
neither side. Lastly, at the storming and sack of Rome, he consented to the
Popes imprisonment, and would have had him carried into Spain, but that public
infamy forced him to decline it. Yet would he not own the woeful plundering of
the sacred City: nay when the news was brought him into Spain, he prohibited by
Proclamation, the public joy for his son Philips birth, and putting on
mournings, commanded an adjournment of the Courts of Justice. But what it was
in him, not only not to do justice upon those that robbed the Town and
Churches, but also to use their service for seven months together; For
imprisoning the Pope.
to keep the Vicar of Christ Prisoner in the in the Castle of S. Angelo, yea
close prisoner, and in so wretched a condition, 6. May 1527.
that an old herb-woman because pitying his cries she hid some Lettice in the
Castle-ditch which a boy was to give him up by a cord: Guic. l. 18.
The Captain of the Guard meeting her, furiously with his own hands hanged her
upon the Castle gates, 21. May 1527.
crucifying the eyes of the poor Bishop with that horrid spectacle. Finally the
Emperor having no sense of his so great calamity, Jov. l. 26.
compelled the Pope, as if he had been a profane enemy, to purchase his liberty
with a huge ransom. No doubt but such wicked deeds, as they were prejudged by
a common execration, so Charles the fifth acknowledged and condemned them in
himself, and their sting, left in his soul, caused that Prince (otherwise
religious) to do this last act for pacifying the offended Deity. To do penance
for these crimes be left the world.
Yet some there are that excuse the Emperor in point of crime, and lay much of
the fault upon the Age, the War and an armed multitude, whose fury, once
awaked, is not ever to be governed by one man's hand. This I find, was most of
the discourse of these times touching the Refignment of Charles the fifth: and
at this day it is credited or slighted with like faction and ignorance of
truth. It is probable there was a concurrence of many causes. But no rash ones
or unworthy the greatness of his Imperial majesty.
For my own part though I know great designs are driven on by many causes, as
great ships, by many oars; yet I cannot persuade my self, the fear of mutable
fortune, or any lighter cause, contributed to Cesars determination. Forasmuch
as almost ten years before his death, about the very harvest time of his
Victories, in his last Will and Testament made at Auspurgh, he mentioned the
Resigning of his Kingdoms, 1541.
and long before that time, I am well assured the Emperor was minded to divest
himself of all the cares and baggage of the world, 1542.
the better to make his speedy retreat to heaven. This was only imparted to
Francis Borgia Duke of Gandia, who afterward entered into the Society of Jesus,
with a severe injunction, that he should not reveal that intention to any
living, which the Emperor resolved to execute, as soon as the War gave him
any time to breathe. 1553. June.
Nor when he had surrendered the Empire were things in such a condition, July
1553.
to make him repent his fortune: for a while after, the siege of Metz was
raised, Terwin a strong Fort in the Low Countries, and Hedin where anciently
the Princes of Artois kept their Courts, were taken, and upon both places many
of the French Gentry slain. Nay in Italy, part of the Isle of Corsica was in
despite of the enemy preserved for the Genoueses, 1554.
and (which was yet happier) the City Siena was taked, 1555.
the French beat out of it, and almost out of all the Duchy of Florence. But I
believe what he had often designed was then resolved, The fear of death was the
chief motive of putting his Resolve in execution.
when his disease came to that heigh, that he often fainted away: especially,
when he heard of his mothers death, he began to make sure account his own fate
drew nigh: so that he was many times persuaded he heard his mothers voice,
calling her son to her. Which opinion took the deeper impression, 1555.
because Vesalius physician to the Emperor, stuck not to tell him (with
strange freedom in a man of his profession) that his life could not continue.
Andreas Vcsalius.
So as the Emperor made haste to do, what he had so often determined, lest
death that followed close, should prevent him. And at that time was often heard
to repeat the words of one of his Commanders (whose worth I better know, then
his name) that being an old Officer of Horse, He was quickened by a noble saying
of one of his Commanders.
and resolving to leave the world, when he petitioned the Emperor for a
discharge from service, who urged him to give a reason for his new resolution,
they say his answer was, That between the business of life, and day of death, a
space ought to be interposed. Which ingenious sentence printed it self in the
Emperors heart, that had been long upon the like meditation. But then, when
the end of his life was visible, he held it his best course to lay hold upon
that space, beyond which there is nothing. Wherein, neglecting the affairs of
others, he might only regard his own concernment: rescue himself, from
external cares, representing and confining himself only to himself, before the
hand of necessity should arrest and carry him to Gods Tribunal, guilty, in so
high a degree, of mortal happiness. To that purpose he retired into this
sanctuary, It is concluded the Emperors resolution came from heaven.
where solitude gave him leisure: and the sanctity of the place, encouragement
and assistance. Indeed, he that observes either his magnanimity in resigning
his vast Empire by sea and land, not leaving a span of ground Philip the Second
King of Spain, Prince of the Low Countries.
To: Vaughan sculp:

portrait subject to his power: or his constancy to the cloystered and private
life he had undertaken, in that two years time, wherein he extended his victory
over himself; or his holy end, which did not surprise him, but came when he was
prepared (which is the hardest task) for death in life: He, I say, must needs
acknowledge it to be no trifling cause, or unworthy of so great a soul; but an
excellently pious and indeed a heavenly motive that brought the Emperor to
this Resolve.

But whatsoever it was, King Philip, after his Fathers decease, The new Kings
first care.
disposing of his new Dominions, instead of Mary Queen of Hungary, substituted
in the government of the Low Countries and Burgundy, The Duke of Savoy made
governor of the Low Countries.
Emmanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy; who, besides his nearness of blood to
Charles the fifth, had given him many proofs of his experience in the Wars,
especially in those Provinces, against the French. Nor were his great abilities
less useful to King Philip, in the War that welcomed him to his new
Principality. For though the Kings, Henry and Philip, in the beginning of this
year, by the mediation of Mary Queen of England, The Truce between France and
Spain broken.
had made a five years truce at Cambray; yet by reason of the War, flaming
between the Pope and King Philip, the Truce within the year was broken: the
Spaniard laying the fault upon the French, Febr.
and the French upon the Spaniard. King Henry called into Italy by the Caraffi,
On what occasion.
embraced the specious pretense of protecting the Pope; but peradventure he
looked not so much upon the cause, as upon the issue of the War, Thuan. l. 22.
easily believing he should conquer this new and unexperienced Prince, having
at more then one Battle overthrown so old a Soldier, and so great a Conqueror
as his Father. And now the French having past the Alps under the Duke of
Guise's Command, fought for the Pope in Italy; December.
and at the same time, entering the Low Countries under the Conduct of Colligni,
The French invade the Low Countries. Ferdinand of Tolledo Duke of Alva.
plundered the Province of Artois. Whilst King Philip (the Duke of Alva
strongly prosecuting his affairs in Italy) on the one part prevailed with his
Wife; to denounce War against King Henry: on the other part, he commanded
Philibert Duke of Savoy, to make an introde into France; by whose valor and
conduct, June 1557.
he won that memorable Victory at S. Quintins, which put all France into a
shaking fit, Aug. 1550.
insomuch as the greattest part of their Gentry being prisoners to the
Spaniard, The Spaniard first was conqueror at S. Quintins.
the rest marched into Italy; it was the common fear, if the Conqueror came
on, he would easily possess himself of Paris* most of the Townsmen being fled
to the neighboring cities, as if the Spaniard were at their gates. But King
Henry commanding the Duke of Guise out of Italy, and raising a great Army,
(which is ordinary in France, where the children are bred soldiers) he soon
interrupted the Spanish triumph: Presently after the French recovered Cali^e.
for immediately he took Calice, (which Port the Kings of England used to call,
The Portall of France, Ian. 1558.
and so long as they enjoyed it, they said, They wore the keys of France at
their girdle) being all the remainder of their two hundred years conquest, that
was kept by the Englishmen upon the continent of France, which Kingdom in a
few days they were forced to restore to its ancient bounds, retiring to their
own within the Sea. But shortly after the Die of War ran on the Spanish side:
For King Philip perceiving the French Army to be divided, proud of their number
and success, having in hope devoured all the Low Countries; he himself divided
his own forces, part he sent against Paulus Termus (burning and spoiling the
Seacoast of Flanders) under the Command of Lamorall Count Egmont, the
gallantest of all the Low-countrey-men, who was General of his Horse at the
battle of S. Quintin, and a great cause of the victory. The other part of his
Army he sent into Savoy, to attend the motion of the Duke of Guise. Count
Egmont fighting a battle before Graveling, The Spaniard has another victory
at Graveling.
a port of Flanders, with great valor and fortune won the day: For whilst the
old soldiers of both Armies fought doubtfully for sometime, on a sudden the
French gave ground, and lost the battle: for ten English ships, Fortune seconds
valor.
as they sailed by, seeing the fight, struck into the mouth of the river of
Hay, and with their Cannon so galled the French on that side, July 1558.
where they held themselves to be impregnable; coming upon them with such an
unexspected and therefore a more dreadful storm from sea, that the Foot being
disordered, their fear was infused into the Horse, so as their Army being
routed, there scarce remained one of the whole number to carry home news of the
overthrow. For part were s^ain in the fight, the Duke and his great Officers
taken prisoners; the rest were either knocked down as they swam, by the English
(besides two hundred taken alive, and presented to the Queen, for witnesses of
their service at the battle) or by the Boors, in revenge of the plundering and
firing of their houses, killed without mercy. To their misfortune was added,
that the relics of the Army, The women's cruelty to the French.
scattered in places they knew not about Flanders, had their brains beaten out
by the women, that came upon them with clubs and spits, and (which is a more
dangerous weapon) armed with the fury of their sex; some almost railing them
to death; others pricking their bodkins into them, with exquisite barbarity
pulled them to pieces with their nayls, as the Bacchanals tore Orpheus. Thus
Henry of France, loosing two battles in one year, seeing his old soldiers
slain, and (which is of fadder consequence) the noblest of his subjects taken
prisoners, which are the strength of the French Militia; He willingly embraced
that peace, which so long as fortune smiled upon him, A Treaty of peace
between the Kings.
he had slighted: And King Philip moved by the accession of Calice to the
Kingdom of France, and his experience of the War, had the like inclination to
Peace. Just as we see, after the clouds have fought, and are broken, the Sun
breaks forth: nor ever shines a greater hope of Peace, then when a War is
seriously prosecuted, fury being as it were glutted and weary with the
slaughter. The honor of this Peace was attributed to Christiern, Concluded by
mediation of the Duchess of Lorain.
Duchess of Lorain, mediating between the two Kings, as cosen-germane to King
Philip, and by late affinity gracious with King Henry. Nor is it unusual to
employ that Sex in such transactions; for it is held a point of Civility to
yield to their solicitation. The news of this Peace (which after long dispute
opened it self with the Spring) in the city of Cambray, At Cambray, the
Peacemaking city.
was received with so great a joy of the Christian world, weary of the tedious
War, that higher expression of contented minds are scarce recorded in the
memory of man. April 1556.
They that compared this peace, with that concluded between the fathers of
these Kings, above thirty years before, To the general contentment. Charles
the V. and Francis the I.
mediated likewise by Princesses, and concluded (where this was) in the Town of
Cambray, a place destinated (as it seems) for peacemaking; shall find then no
common joy, because diverse Princes were not parties to the League, Aug. 1529.
and the war in Italy still continued. Whereas all the Princes of Europe being
equally comprehended in this Peace, an equal joy spread it self through all
nations, Alice the Kings mother, and Margaret the Emperors aunt The Peace
confirmed by marriage.
filling every mind with great hope of long friendship between the Kings: which
afterward fell out accordingly. A Marriage, was likewise made, the better to
confirm the Peace; which notwithstanding continues among Princes, no longer
then ambition suffers it, to which for the most part Kings are more truly
married.

King Philip ( Mary Queen of England being dead the year before) was offered a
wife that had been promised to his son Charles, Of the King of Spain to the
French Kings daughter.
Prince of Spain; Isabella King Henry's daughter, eleven years of age, who
because she was born when the peace was begun with England, and married to make
a peace with Spain they called the Princess Peace. In like manner Emman.
Philibert married King Henry's sister Margaret, The King of France his sister
married at the same time to the Duke of Savoy A Tournament at the wedding.
and had in portion with her all those towns beyond and on this side the Alps,
which France the first, and Henry himself had taken from him. But never did
France celebrate so joyful a Wedding with so sad a close. Among other
preparations there a Tournament, that is fearful pleasure and an honorable
danger: wherein one cannot think them to be in jest, that fight: nor to fight,
when they see all intended but for sport. It is an exercise the French
exceedingly affect, and they account it noble, as being a bold and warlike
nation. The Lists now set up, and scaffolded like a stage, were filled with the
best Tilters in Christendom; (for France challenged Europe at the breaking of
a spear.) Where the King is victor.
The two first days the King himself ran and had the Victory, but when he came
the third time in all his glory into the Lists, against the advice of the
Lords, encountering the Captain of his Guard, before his Bever was down, a
splinter of his Lance flying in his face, Gabriel Count de Mongomary, but soon
after wounded.
struck out his right eye, and shooting into his brain (the Queen and
Queen Mother with the Kings children beholding those unfortunate Revells) he
presently fell in a swound, and being caught in men's arms the whole stage
running blood, which but now rung with joyful acclamations and applauses,
suddenly turned into mournings and lamentations. The fifth day after, this
Prince no less valiant then religious, and every way worthy a better fate, Dies
July 2. 1549.
departed his life. And before the eyes of an infinite multitude, which it
seems he had proudly invited to his own funerals, he acted to the life, without
scene or fable, the Tragedy of mortal happiness. They say, His death foretold.
one that cast his nativity (as these kind of Predictions are commonly
produced, after the event) foretold this very accident. For Queen Katharine of
Medices, desirous to know the fate of her children of the Astrologer Gauricus,
Luc. Gaur. Thus. l. 22.
he answered her, the Kings head would be endangered by a Duel. Lod.
Guicciard. l. 3.
Others say, the very night before his misfortune, the Queen had the manner of
his death presented in her dream. But some who wisely observed, not without
admitation of Divine justice, The history of the Netherlands.
that the King, who in the beginning of his Reign, gave way to a serious.
Duel, between two young Gentlemen of great families, and with the Lords of his
Court sat to behold it: 1559.
should in an unfortunate mock Duel loose both his life and Kingdom. Howbeit
he was then penitent for the fact, Anonym. in that Hist.
and had made a vow never after to allow of any more such fighting: Thua. l. 3.
and 22. Vidus. Cavocius and Francis Vivonus.
and if in this last Tournament he sinned in the vain ostentation of his
strength, no doubt but he abundantly redeemed it, in that admirable and
Christian constancy of his soul in her extremest agony. The judgment of
prudent men upon the Kings fate.
Sure he had contributed much to the religious meekness of the French, if he
had buried this barbarous Recreation in his tomb.

This year (that I may enlarge my History a little) was fatal (if we may so
call it) to many and great Princes, A strange conjuncture this year of Princes
funerals.
that dyed one after another: especially since no contagion reigned among the
People, very few vulgar corpses being then buried: yet, in the compass of one
year, most of the Lords of Europe were entombed. There dyed the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and Henry the second of France, Christian King of Denmark,
and Christiern also King of Denmark, the last only surviving four and twenty
days. Queen Elianor sister to Charles the fifth, married first to Emmanuel
King of Portugal, then to Francis the first of France, Mary who followed her
brother Charles the fifth within less then a month, and a Queen of England of
that name, and Bona Sfortza mother to Sigismund Augustus King of Poland, the
other two were wives to Kings, one to Lodowick of Hungary, the other to Philip
the second of Spain. There died Pope Paul the fourth, attended by the funerals
of ten Cardinals, two Princes Electors, the Archbishop of Cullen, and the
Prince Palatine, Laurentius Priulus Duke of Venice, and Hercules Este Duke of
Ferrara: not to name inferious Princes, whose continued Obsequies filled the
Annual Register, so as that season seemed to be Deaths greater Harvest, King of
Rome.
when he cropped the heads of Nations, as Tarquin struck off the Poppy-heads.
King Philip therefore, having now concluded a Peace, departed with his Queen
from Savoy into Italy, (for King Henry's death had altered no part of the
agreement) and before his going into Spain to take possession of his Kingdoms,
he thought it best to settle not only the Civil and Military, but likewise the
Ecclesiastical State of the Low Countries.

Belgica, Of Belgium, or the Low Countries. Its Name. (...)
by Forreiners called Flanders, from the noblest part of it, and the
Low Countries from the low situation, or (as the Germans will have it) from
affinity with their language and manners, is known by the name of the lower
Germany: it is indeed a little parcel of Europe, as not much exceeding the
fifth part of Italy, Greatness.
nor above a thousand miles in compass: yet I hardly know any Country more
rich, or populous: The Prince making as much of Flanders as the Kings of
England (set by the revenues of the Church) used to do of that large Island.
Wealth. Guicciardine in his description of the Low Countries. Cities, Towns,
Villages, Forts.
It contains Cities, or Towns equal to Cities, above three hundred and
fifty: great Villages (to omit the lesser) above six thousand three hundred:
besides Forts, that stand so thick, as if the ground were sown with them: Yet
the ingeniousness of the People, and their contrivance is such, as their
variety and plenty of manufactures are more then can be used, in the narrow
bounds of this one Nation. The world has not a more industrious, Militia.
richer, or constanter Militia; so as Mars seems here to set up school, and
teach the Art of War, to people that come hither from all climates. Then what
unknown seacoasts and Regions beyond the Line, Navigation.
has not the Hollander discovered? as much as Nature by Land contracts their
limits, so much by Sea have they opened to themselves larger Countries, which
they have subdued and peopled, extending as it were the Suburbs of the
seventeen Provinces. Trade of clothing.
The Cloth and Stuff they make, not only fill (as great as it is) all Europe,
but far and wide, through every Nation of Africa and Asia, they daily bear
about the Low Countries: Nay, the West-Indians, trucking for their Linen and
Woollen, have learned the names of the Low Country cities. To conclude, we
seldom at this day admire the workmanship of any Engines, which the
Low Country men have not either invented, or brought unto perfection.
Heretofore their wits were indeed kept under and depressed, when their fortune
was as low as their Country: Now there is an other age, and other manners.
Their love to learning, their skill in Sea Fights, Inclination. Adv. Jien. in
his Tract of Holland, attributes it to the air they live in.
their gainful trade of Navigation, the well-ordering of the Commonwealth by
themselves created, their stupendous Fire and Waterworks (proofs of no
dejected natures) are scarce any where to be matched; I am sure so many
together are not to be seen in all the rest of Europe, as in this little plot
of the Low Countries. It is likewise proper to this Nation (if left to
themselves) to hate fraud, The Character of a Low Country man.
and by that credit which they know they themselves deserve, to measure others.
They are not greatly taken with presents, at least not long, using benefits
like flowers, that please while they are fresh: their sense of injuries is the
same; which they presently forget, and easily pass over, unless they conceive
themselves slighted, then their fury is implacable. They have likewise a
shrewd guess of their own strength, seldom undertaking any thing they do not
compass. Yet no people under heaven drive on a subtiler traffic, either by Sea
or Land, inhabiting both the Elements, and not obliged by the Laws of either.
In this they exceed, that how great soever their gains or losses are (a Common
case with Merchants) they pass it over with so little and dull a sense of joy
or grief, as you would think them factours for others, and not owners of the
goods, I suppose out of the native temper of their minds, and the air of their
Country that quickens them with colder spirits. But in maintaining their
liberty, they are very fierce, for they hold it an honor to undervalue all
things in respect of that: wherein they sometimes come nearer to
licentiousness, Belgium divided into 17 Provinces.
then liberty. The whole Region of Belgica is divided, according to their own
calculation, into seventeen Provinces, which not long ago were either by
affinity, or traffic, or arms, associated under the Government of one Prince.
Which come to one Prince three ways.
Philip was the first of all the Dukes of Burgundy, under whose protection many
more Belgic Provinces put themselves, then ever submitted to any other. Philip
the Good had them by affinity.
For Burgundy, Brabant, Flanders, Limburgh, Lucemburgh, Artois, Haynolt,
Namurs, Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, the Marquisate of the sacred Empire, were
solely in his possession. To these his son Charles joined Gelderland and
Zutfen, both which he first bought of Duke Arnold, Meyer l. 17. Charles the
Soldier by Purchase and the Sword
who disinherited his son Adolph, that kept him six years a Prisoner: then
after the death of Arnold and Adolph, he fought for them with the son to
Adolph, Pont. Heut. l. 1. But he lost some of them.
and won them in the field. But Duke Charles being slain at the battle of
Nantes, and the French King Lewis the Eleventh prosecuting the War against
Mary Daughter and heir to Charles, this Principality was lessened by the loss
of Artois to the French, and many other little Towns in Burgandy. And though
Maximilian by his victory at Guinigate, a little after his marriage with Mary,
Paulus Aemil. l. 10. and Pont. Heut. l. 2. Part Maximilian recovered by arms.
restored diverse of them to the Low Countries: yet when a peace was made
between him and the French, and Margaret Daughter to Maximilian, and Mary
espoused to Charles the Dolphin: the Counties of Ar^ois and Burgundy were, in
the name of her Dowre, The same Author in the same book and lib. 5.
cut off again from the Low Countries. But Margaret, being refused by Charles
when he came to the Crown, after that refusal had revived the War, Charles
posting into Italy to the Conquest of Naples, made a Peace with Maximilian and
his son Philip, Part by Treaty Guic. lib. 1. 4. 8. Belcar. l. 8.
returning Margaret and the Provinces he had with her to the Low Countries;
only he kept the Forts in his hands which his successor Lewis the twelfth,
wholly bent upon the design of Millain, rendered of his own accord. But those
of Gelderland and Zutfen, submitting to their Lords, and troubling the
Low Countries with incursions, especially the parts about Utrecht: Charles the
fifth having overthrown Charles Duke of Gelderland, Charles the fifth possessed
himself of all together. Pont. Heut. lib. 11. and 9.
entered upon them again, by the right of Conquest. But in regard the Wars,
often renewed upon his occasion, had been exceeding chargeable: the Emperor
annexed the Provinces of Utrecht and Overysell to the Low Countries: ( Henry
Baviere Bishop and Lord Utrecht willingly resigning them) and defending Groin
against those of Gelderland: The same l. 11. and Meter.
adding Cambray and Cambresey to the Province of Artois, enlarged the Belgic
Dominion. Guic. lib. 16. and Pont. Heut. lib. 11.
At length, after his victory at Pavia (by an agreement made between the
Emperor and the King) the Low Countries were freed from the jurisdiction of
the French King, who formerly was their Lord Paramount: so that Charles the
fifth of all the Belgic Princes had the greatest and most absolute command.
Now most of these Provinces, as once they had several Lords, And though to
have made a Kingdom of them, Guic. Meyer.
so after they were subjected to one, almost each of them had their several
and respective Laws and a peculiar form of government. Which they say was the
Principal cause that Charles the fifth, (when he was exceedingly desirons to
mould these Provinces into a Kingdom, which had been attempted by his great
Grandfather) gave off the design, Why he did not.
because they were so different in manners, language, customs, and emulation
incident to neighbors, that he thought it hardly possible to reduce them to
one kind of government, whereof a Kingdom must consist, none of the Provinces
consenting to yield precedence to any of the rest, or to submit to the Laws of
others as their superiors. The distribution of the Provinces
From hence was derived the custom for the Low Country Princes, 1546.
besides Governors of towns, 1556.
to place a Governor in every Province that should minister justice according
to their Laws and Customs. And King Philip was well pleased to have in his
power the disposal of the Provinces, The government whereof King Philip gave
to the Lords.
in most of which the Governors places were void: That he might remunerate the
valor and service of the Lords so often tried in the late Wars. He therefore
picked out the flower of the Belgic Nobility: choosing none, but such as either
Charles his Father or he himself had made companions of the order of the
Golden-fleece. L^cemburgh, a Province bordering upon France and Lorrain,
Lucemburgh to Count Mansfield.
and therefore more famed for slaughter then riches, he gave to Ernest Count
Mansfield, who had formerly been Governor thereof. 1559.
He was born in Saxony: for his military experience and fidelity to Charles the
fifth and King Philip, equally beloved of both. Namure to Count Barlamont.
Namures and Lymburgh neighbors on either hand to Lucemburgh (very small
Countries, but fruitful) he bestowed, the one upon Charles Count Barlamont,
Lymburgh to the Count of East-Frizeland Haynolt to John Lanoi Lord of Molembase.
that, with his four sons spirited like their father, had been always
passionately for the King: the other he gave to John Count of East-Frizeland.
But Haynolt, the seminary of the Belgic Nobility, was not at this time given
to the Marquess of Berghen op Zoome, what ever others write, but to John Lanoi
Lord of Molembase, who the next year dying, Margaret of Austria Duchess of
Parma, But he shortly after dying, it was bestowed on the Marquess of Berghen.
supreme Governess of the Netherlands, by her special letters to the King,
obtained that Province for John Climed son in Law to Molembase and Marquess of
Berghen, more gracious with Charles the fifth then with his son. In Flanders
(which they say is one of the Noblest and most potent Provinces of
Christendom) and Artois bordering upon Flanders, Flanders and Artois to Count
Egmont.
he constituted Lamoral Prince of Gaure Count Egmont a great Commander.
French-Flanders to John Momorancy.
That part of Flanders, which because they speak Wallom, or broken French, is
called French-Flanders: and the City of Tournay thereunto appendent, Tournay to
his Brother Florence.
had for their Governors the Momorancies, John and Florentius, this Lord of
Mountain, that of Courir. But over Holland and Zeland and the parts adjacent
that is the Districht of Utrecht: Holland and Zeland to the Prince of Orange.
Provinces of great strength by Sea and Land, 1559.
the King placed William of Nassau Prince of Orange, of great authority in the
Low Countries, yet no Low-Countreyman. To the government of West-Frizeland and
Overysell the King advanced John Lignius Count Arembergh, conspicuous for his
loyalty to his Master and his experience in War. Frizeland and Overysell to
Count Arembergh.
Gelderland and Zutfen formerly annexed to Gelderland were at this time
distributed like the other Provinces among the Low Country Lords, Gelderland
and Zutfen be as then assigned to no one.
as all Writers affirm. Yet, by their leave, the truth was otherwise: for the
King at his departure thence disposed of neither of these G^vernments. I
suppose it was, because Philip Memorancie Count of Horn, stood in competition
for them, who had once been Governor of both: to whose pretension it was
conceived Anthony Granvell Bishop of Arras was an adversary: the King, who
confided in this man's judgment, but yet wou^d not be present when the other
should receive offense, went into Spain, leaving these Provinces without a
Governor: that so he might spin out the exspectation of Count Horn, and weary
him with a tedious suit. And now tired indeed and hopeless to get it for
himself, he altered the name, and petitioned in behalf of his Brother the Lord
Montin, entreating the Duchess of Parma, the Governess, that she would please
to write to the King in favor of his Brother. She did so, putting in his name
among diverse others, by her commended to his Majesty: but at the same time in
cipher, she wished the King to approve of none for that Command, But afterward
he sent from Spain a Patent to Count Megen to be Governor of both.
but only Charles Brimed Count of Megen, who was immediately chosen. In no
less an error are they that affirm the King in this distribution, to have
assigned to the Prince of Orange, the Duchy of Burgundy, apperteining to the
Belgic Princes: when his Majesty approved and confirmed the present Governor
thereof, Marc. 25. 1560.
Claudius Vergius Lord of Champlitt: and it was the year following, And another
to the Prince of Orange, after the death of Vergius, Jan. 16. 1559. to govern
Burgundy.
when Claudius died, that her Excellence of Parma, by her letters to the King,
obtained Burgundy for the Prince of Orange.

The Provinces thus disposed (for Brabant is never commanded by any but the
Prince and his Vicegerent, the supreme Governor of the Low Countries) the King
began to order the Militia, and leaving Spanish Garrisons upon the Borders,
Brabant reserved for the Supreme Governor of the Low Countries.
he thought of disposing the Horse, the proper Militia of the Low Countries.
The ordering of the Militia.
They say it is very ancient, and was far more numerous. Charles the fifth
lessened it to three thousand; but then he increased it in the choice of Noble
and valiant persons: he armed them with half pikes and carabines, which so well
they handled, as the Low Country Troops were famous over Europe. Especially of
the Horse.
Philip, by his fathers example, divinding the Horse into fourteen Troops,
appointed over them so many Commanders of the greatest of his Lords, Whose
troops were famous througout Europe.
( viz.) all the said Governors of Provinces, ( Courir, and the Count of
East-Frizland excepted) Philip Croi Duke of Aresco, Their Commanders.
Maximilian Hennin Count of Bolduke, Anthony Ladin Count Hochstrat, John Croi
Count Reux, Henry Brederod Earl of Holland; all but the last being Knights of
the Golden Fleece. These ordinary Troops the King used to draw out of their
Quarters, according to the emergencies of War. And King Philip by experience
found these to be his greatest strength and best Bulwark against the valor of
the French. But the command of the Sea, and the Royal Fleet, he left still in
the hands of the old Admiral, The Admiral.
Philip Momorancy Count Horn; Philip Staveley Lord of Glaion, he made Master of
the Train of Artillery, both highly meriting in Peace and War, General of the
Ordinance.
and therefore at the same time admitted by his Majesty into the order of the
Fleece.

There yet remained a part of the Republic, by how much the more noble and
sacred, The disposition of Bishoprics, whereof there were only four in all
the 17 Provinces.
by so much the more tenderly to be handled. To the seventeen Provinces full of
People; because four Bishops (they had then no more) were not thought enough,
the King resolved to increase the number. I find it was endeavored by Philip
Duke of Burgundy, Prince of the Low Countries, he that instituted the Order of
the Golden Fleece, and dying bequeathed the establishment thereof to his Son
Charles, Many therefore had wished their number might be increased.
surnamed the Fighter [or Souldier] from his continual being in arms, which
altogether transported, and took up the mind of this warlike Prince. Nor had
Philip (grandchild to Charles the Fighter, Son to his only daughter and
Maximilian King of the Romans) more leisure to pursue it, by reason of the new
troubles of the Kingdoms, which he had in right of his wife Joan, daughter and
heir to Ferdinand the Catholic King. And though Charles the fifth son to
Philip, Which Charles the fifth went about to do.
made it his business, and put some threads into the loom; yet the great
distractions and war of the Empire intervening, the work was often at a stand:
and war upon war rising in Europe and Africa, The reason why he desisted.
rather deprived him of the means then affection to accomplish it. Unless,
perhaps, the Emperor grew slack, lest the erection of new Bishoprics, should
straiten the jurisdiction of his uncle George of Austria, Archbishop of Liege.
Yet among his last commands, he particularly left this in charge to his son
Philip. I my self have read a letter written in King Philips own hand to his
sister of Parma; wherein he says, He is induced, at that time especially, to
increase the number of Bishops, because the Cities and Towns of the Netherlands
daily grew more populous, and Heresy from their next Neighbors crowded in,
and got ground of them: and that his Fathers Counsel and Command, had made deep
impression in his mind, who taught him this, as the only way to preserve
Religion in the Low Countries. The King therefore, as soon as he was respited by
the War, His son Philip attempts it.
sent to Rome Francis Sonnius, a Divine of Lovain, a great learned man, (who
not long before had disputed at Worms with Melanchthon, Treats about it with
the Pope.
Illyricus, and others (by command from the Emperor Ferdinand) giving him in
Commission, together with Francisco Varga, the Kings Ambassador, to acquaint
Paul the fourth with his desires. Concludes with him.
After some months, when the business had been debated by a Court of seven
Cardinals, it was accordingly granted: The Pope inclining of himself to destroy
heresy, and neglecting no occasion of gratifying King Philip, Fourteen
Bishoprics were to be added to the four former.
to whom he was lately reconciled. So that he appointed fourteen Cities in the
Low Countries (besides the four former) for Bishops-sees, whereof three were
honored with the Prerogative of Archbishopricks, Whereof three Archbishopricks.
that is, Cambray, Utrecht upon the Rhine, and Maclin preferred before the
others at the Kings request: which seated in the heart of Brabant, near the
Princes Court at Bruxels, he had designed for Anthony Perenott Granvell,
purposely translated from the Church of Arras thither, because that man's being
near the Court, seemed to concern the public. In this manner the Popes Bull was
penned, and sent by his Nuntio, Salvator Bishop of Clusino, and Francis Sonnius
going for the Low Countries, who was enjoined to see the Decree executed; but
in other things belonging to the revenues and limits of Jurisdiction, they were
to do what to themselves in their discretions seemed meet. The men chosen for
those Dioceses.
King Philip having received authority, made an excellent choice of men for the
new Myters; all famour for the learned books they had written, as likewise for
their virtues and deportments in the Council of Trent. Such Bishops the Pope
joyed to approve of, and the people were ashamed not to admit. And because the
King would no longer defer his voyage into Spain, he left the care of limiting
and endowing the new Churches to Granvell and Sonnius: for the Popes Nuntio was
to follow his Majesty.

Before his departure, the King summoned the Estates of the Low Countries to
Gant: Of the Governor of the Low Countries.
many were of opinion, he would there declare a Governor for the
Low Countries, which he had till then declined: though others imputed the cause
of that delay to the Kings nature, perplexed and doubtful whom to trust with
the Government. Which procrastination daily added to the number of
Competitours, Various conjectures (as is usual with the people) who should be
the man.
and to the discourses of lookers on. Many of which, according to their
several dependencies, made sure account their friends and Patrons should carry
it: and together with this belief cherished their own hopes. Diverse that aimed
at no private advantage, did not so much named a Person, as a Governor: being
ambitious to be Statesmen, The major part conceive, Count Egmont will be
elected, a man of much same and merit.
though it were but in giving imaginary votes: as if they should have their
part in the Government, if they could but think of disposing the Provinces, and
fill a vancant place, by predesigning him that should be chosen. But Count
Egmont was the man, on whom the Low Countries fixed their eyes and wishes, a
Prince conspicuous for his experience in the Wars, and very active either in
the field against the Enemies, or at home in private Tiltings: and for shooting
in a piece at marks (an art of great account with that People) second to none.
Besides, he had a natural affability, and (which is rare) a Popularity
consistent with Nobility. But he was particularly famous for the late victory
at S. Quintins, a great part whereof the King acknowledged himself engaged for,
to Count Egmont: and for a later day at Gravelin; since when the
Low-Countrey-men had not wiped the enemies blood off their swords. In which
expedition as much as he transcended the other Lords that had command in the
Army, especially the Spaniards, so much (with all forreiners but them) he
gained glory to his Nation; and to himself the favor of others, by his own to
them. So that if a Governor for the Low Countries might have been voted by the
soldiers love, and the peoples consent, no man should have been preferred
before Count Egmont. But on a deeper sea, and with a more popular wind sailed
the Prince of Orange. Many think the Prince of Orange will carry it, a man of
greater power and wealth.
The greatness of the House of Nassau, equal fortunes; the principality of
Orange, subject to none: besides his other large possessions both in Germany
and the Low Countries; and his powerful alliance to most of the great families
of the North, his mother Iuliana being a woman of a miraculous fecundity: for
of her children, whereof the greatest part were daughters, she lived to see one
hundred and fifty that asked her blessing. Add to this his own merit: his
dexterity of wit, Not undeserving
and staiedness of judgment, far riper then his years: and his abilities both
as an Ambassador and a General. Then the great opinion the Emperor Charles
the fifth had of him, who employed him in his weightiest affairs. Upon these
and such like considerations, how could the Prince of Orange go less in his
hopes, then to be Governor of the Low Countries; a place which his cosen
Engelbert Count of Nassau enjoyed about an hundred years before: But he doubts
a repulse.
Yet doubting the Kings inclination, he had divided his suit: that if he
himself should meet a repulse, yet Christiern Duchess of Lorain might prevail,
whose daughter he hoped to marry, Christierna of Lorain is also designed for
the place.
intending (for that was his drift) that his mother in law should have the
Title, but he himself the Power. And indeed the Duchess of Lorain was every
way capable of the place, With general approbation.
as being daughter to Isabella, sister to Charles the fifth, and having merited
the favor of her cousen-german the King, by the Peace which she lately had
concluded with the French, upon conditions more advantageous to the Spaniard:
for which she was much honored by the Low-countrey-men. But whilst on such
kind of considerations, men's hopes and discourses were protracted and
suspended; But Margaret of Parma is preferred before them all.
behold upon the sudden came news, That Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Parma,
was sent for out of Italy to govern the Low Countries. Which though it happened
unexspectedly, yet could be no wonder to such as rightly judged. For on the one
part, it was in reason to be thought, the King at that time would not easily
trust the government of the Low Countries, in the hand of a Low-countrey-man.
Such as looked into it, might see cause sufficient. Particularly, Count Egmont
had a bar, by the unhappy memory of Charles Egmont Duke of Gelder; What hindered
Count Egmont.
who being of the French faction, and a professed enemy to the House of
Austria, Charles the fifth confiscated his Estate, and forced his heir to
render Gelderland and Zutfen. And diverse reports going of the Prince of
Orange's Religion (in which kind a suspicion only was enough to quash his
suit) the King would be sure never to commit the Low Countries What the Prince
of Orange.
to the faith of one gracious and powerful with the Germane* Heretics, both
as a neighbor and a kinsman, which might open them a pass into the seventeen
Provinces. What Christiern of Lorain.
Nay, even to the Duchess of Lorain the rumor of a Treaty of marriage betwixt
her Daughter and the Prince of Orange, was very disadvantagious, in her
pretension to the government: though it made more against her, that she had
married her son Charles Duke of Lorain, to the daughter of Henry King of
France. For they say, Bishop Granvel advised the King to look to it, lest if
she were Governess, the French coming in mixed with the Lorainers, might pester
the Low Countries. Perhaps he himself being a Burgundian, gave his Majesty
this counsel, for fear the Burgundians should be subject to the Lorainers,
their ancient enemies. Or rather, finding the King inclined to the Duchess of
Parma; he endeavored to express his zeal in preferring her, and so to
predeserve her favor. But to choose her, there was a concurrence of many
reasons. Before I Particularize them, let me speak a little of the Duchess her
self, and give you an account of her birth and education; together with her
deportment before she came to govern the Low Countries: Since the best
Historians use, not only to describe the Actions, Cic. l. 2. de Oratore.
but likewise the Fame of Persons: and are tied by the rules of History, not to
omit the Characters of their Lives and Manners.

Margaret eldest child to Charles the fifth; born four years before he was
married, Of Margaret of Parma.
had a mother of the same name, Margaret Vangest (as long after it came to
light) daughter to John Vangest and Mary Cocquamb of Aldenard, Her Mother. Her
mothers Parents.
persons of good quality in Flanders: Both which dying of the sickness, left
Margaret then but five years old, Education.
to her fathers dear friend, Anthony Lalin Count Hochstrat: who with his wife,
Elizabeth Culemberg, bred her as their only child. When she was grown a woman,
not only as a great Beauty, but as one that consecrated her beauty with
modesty, she was pretended to by many noble Suitors. Perfections.
But she dashed all their hopes with the rub of chastity, intending within a
few days to be a Nun. In the mean time, being invited to a Wedding, and
dancing there among other young Ladies of her quality; she found by too late
experience, that such as expose their beauty, set to sale their chastity,
especially if a great Chapman be at hand. The Emperor falls in love with her.
For the Emperor Charles the fifth, in his passage by Aldenard, honoring this
wedding with his presence, Margaret that came along with the Countess of
Hochstrat, surpassing all the other Ladies in his eye, was highly commended by
his Imperial Majesty, who while he commended, seemed to long for her: Insomuch
as one of his followers (of that ging of Courtiers, that have no way to merit
their Princes favor, but by slavish arts) catched her up in the dark, and
brought her to the Bedchamber. By her the Emperor had this Margaret we write
of. The Business was many years concealed by Cesars command, especially because
the same Courtier accidently had told him, that he took a great deal of pains
to persuade the Virgin, but could not get her for his Imperial Majesty, without
force and threatening: At which the Emperor was so moved, that giving the man a
sound check for it, he vowed, if he had known as much before, he would never
have touched the maid; and therefore commanded her delivery should be kept
private; Delivered of Margaret Anno 1522. whom Caesar conceals for her mothers
credit and his own. But at last it was discovered.
as well to preserve the Mothers honor, as his own. For the Emperor was not
prodigal of his fame in this kind, nor with pomp and ceremony brought his
by-blows on the stage. But the secret lay not long in the Embers, being
gossiped out by a woman, employed as a necessary instrument in such cases: She
imparted it to her husband, he, with the same secrecy told it to a friend of
his (for every one has some he trusts, as much as others can trust him) just
like the rain on the house top, which falling from one tile to another, and so
from gutter to gutter, at last is spouted into the high way. For when many are
of counsel in a business, what was every ones secret, becomes a rumor to the
people. Nor did the Mother think it amiss, after she was known to have a child,
that the father of it should be likewise known, as if her fault should be
lessened by the greatness of his name. And shortly the child appeared to be of
the House of Austria, by her Princely education.

The Low Countries were then governed for Charles the fifth by his Aunt
Margaret, The Infant is sent to be educated by the Emperors Aunt.
Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian the first and Mary Duchess of Burgundy.
The Emperor bred the Infant in the Court of his Aunt, under whom he himself in
his infancy had been educated. Till she was eight years old, the child was
fostered in the bosom of that Princess. After whose decease, she was sent to
Mary Queen of Hungary sister to Charles the fifth, And afterward by his sister.
who being left a widow by King Lewis, 1530.
had the government given to her. And her niece Margaret grew so like her, not
only in her private and public virtues: Her disposition.
but by observant imitation, the child had the happiness to get her very sense
and propensions, her gravity and mien. The Governess was much delighted in the
sport of Hunting, Her delight in hunting.
whereupon they commonly called her the Forestress: as the true Niece to Mary
Duchess of Burgundy, that constantly followed the Chase, till by a fall from
her horse she got her death. This Fate appears not only to be her own, but to
relate to Maximilian: whose other wife Blanca Sforza, while she was hunting,
was likewise thrown from her horse and killed. 1496.
The Duchess of Parma was so taken with this sport, and had so hardened her
body with exercise, that she fearless galloped after her Aunt over the lawns
and through the woods, before she was ten years of age. As she grew in years,
she grew to exceed her Mistress in horsemanship, she was then betroathed the
second time, to Alexander Medices of Florence, Caesar promises her in marriage
to the Duke of Florence.
she and her first husband Hercules Prince of Ferrara having never bedded. For
the Emperor, that he might win Alphonso father to Hercules from the French,
from whom he was offered great conditions by Pope Clement the seventh: Breaking
the match intended with the Prince of Ferrara.
Courted him upon the self same terms, confirming him in the Principality of
Mutina and Regio, and espousing his Daughter Margaret, then hardly four years
old, to Alphonso's eldest son, Hercules. 1516.
By these espousals the Emperor gained Alphonso, as the necessity of his
affairs required. But a while after, he being drawn again to side with the
French: and his Son Hercules married to Renata Daughter to Lewis King of
France. The Pope, upon his reconcilement with the Emperor, 1529.
among other articles of Peace, agreed that Alexander Medices (son to that
Laurence whom Leo the tenth, Francisc. Maria Feltrio.
deposing Feltrio, had created Duke of Florence) should be settled by the
Imperial Army in the Florentine Principality: and that to confirm him therein
the Emperor should bestow upon him his Daughter Margaret in marriage. Which
conditions Caesar willingly signed; partly out of respect to his Holiness, whose
injury he seemed to cancel by this benefit: partly in hatred to the
Florentines, that entering into the Lotrechian association against the Emperor
had put their City under the French Kings protection. Alexander was forthwith
possessed of Florence, and the Florentines dispossessed of their liberty. But
the marriage was not completed till seven years after, Pope Clement being then
deceased. Nay the match, by occasion of the Popes death, came into a
possibility of breaking, upon the solicitation of some great men in Florence,
The Florentines labor to break the match.
who by that seven years protraction imagining the Emperor wavered in his
resolution, treated with him, on great hopes and promises, not to admit of
Alexander for his son in law, but to restore the City to its freedom, which
they would only hold of the Emperor. But Caesar having past his promise to the
Pope in his life time, But in vain.
thought himself bound in point of honor to make it good after the Popes
decease. Especially because he suspected, that the Florentines leaned toward
the French. Nor was he ignorant, that a benefit more easily obliges
particulars, then a multitude: and that favors scattered in public, The
Nuptials, celebrated at Naples.
are received by all, returned by none. The Emperor therefore sending for
Alexander from Florence, to attend him at Naples: and to the Low Countries for
Margaret, who longed to see her Father returned from the War of Tunis; at a
Convention of the Estates and a great concourse of strangers, the marriage was
celebrated with military Revells: wherein the Emperor himself ran a Tilt,
habited like a Tauny-moor. But Margaret being received at Florence as their
Duchess, Soon after at Florence.
and the Nuptial solemnities iterated there: a great part of the body of the
sun was darkened at the Feast, With a strange Omen.
and terrified the Guests. Many held it to be ominous: who, looking with
discontented eyes upon the present state, 1536.
and making the heavens speak according to their wishes; compared the Dukes
fortune, to the suns splendor suddenly eclipsed. Nor did their conjecture
fail them, Her husband slain the same year.
for Alexander by the Emperors affinity grown proud, and therefore careless,
fell intemperately to love women, and so impolitickly, that being secure from
foreign force, he was, with the bait that pleased him, easily intrapped by his
kinsman Lorenzo Medices, of Counsel with him in his pleasures; and in hope or
under pretense of restoring Florence to her liberty, in the seventh year of his
Principality, before he had been a full year married, 1537.
he was slain. His successor sues to Caesar for Margaret.
His successor Cosmo (for the Duke died, but not the Dukedom) in the first
place, humbly addressed himself to the Emperor for his consent that he might
marry his daughter, Princess Margaret: thinking it would be a great support to
his new and shaking power. But he casts his eye on the house of Farneze.
But Caesar, resolved to make his best advantage of his daughters marriage,
having already obliged the house of Medices, by establishing that family in the
Dukedom of Florence: and having likewise laid an obligation upon Cosmo
himself, by confirming (though many opposed it) the Principality upon him:
sought a son in law among the Farnezes, then Princes, and gave his daughter
Margaret in marriage to Octavio, And marries his daughter to Octavio Farneze.
nephew to Pope Paul the third, and at that time created Prefect of Rome (in
place of the Duke of Urbin deceased) and presently after made Duke of Camertio.
To this end, the Emperor Charles the fifth and King Francis had an enterview
at Nice, Francisco Maria Feltrio.
endeavored by Pope Paul, who came thither in person, hoping by some means or
other to compose the difference. For as both these Princes studied to make the
Pope, who being powerful in long hoorded wealth and wisdom, no doubt but his
inclining to either side would turn the scales; so the Pope, vigilant for his
own advantage, took this opportunity to treat with the Emperor of a marriage
for his Nephew: especially since the news of Solimans fleet growing daily more
terrible, it concerned them both to confirm the Peace made between them and the
state of Venice, by an intermarriage in their families. The Emperor was so
willing to comply with the Pope, That he not only preferred his Nephew before
the Duke of Florence, (who then by his Ambassador renewed his former suit) and
before other Princes, which had the like ambition: but instantly making up the
match between his Daughter and Octavio, he put them together, though the Bride
had little joy of the wedding, despising her husbands unripe years. Therefore
jestingly she called it her Fate, to be married, but not matched; for when she
was a Gyrl of twelve, she must then have a man of seven and twenty; and now she
was a woman, a Boy of thirteen. For some years after this marriage, With whom
at first she corresponded not.
she had an aversion from her husband, not so much in contempt of his years, as
by reason of ill offices done by a Courtier, who having been her old servant
bare a great sway with her; and hating the Farnezes with more then his own
spleen, sometimes commending her first husband Alexander, sometimes aggravating
the Popes injuries to her father, nourished domestic discord: till at length,
1541.
he being removed, and Octavio attending the Emperor in his Wars, But
afterward He was indeared to her.
the mind of the Duchess began to change. For when the Emperor was to go for
Africa from Lucca, whither the Pope came to confer with his Imperial
Majesty, and had brought along Octavio and Margaret, though Paul the third
utterly disliked the voyage to Argeirs, yet he ventured his Nephew Octavio,
commending him to Cesars fortune: and designing in that one act to give Hostage
to the Emperor, and bring his daughter into a longing for her absent husband.
By means of his Absence and Hazzards.
And indeed after the misfortune of the War, wherein the Emperor was rather
worsted by the Sea, then by the Moors, the news of Cesars overthrow was
divulged in all places. And because no man could tell what was become of him,
and the Relics of his scattered fleet, it was constantly believed at Rome
that the Emperor was cast away: some reported they saw the ship, wherein
Octavio was abroad, eaten up by the Sea: which was the rather believed, because
when the Emperors escape was known, Octavio was not mentioned. 1545.
This first moved the Duchess, her love growing out of pity; as if the youth
flying from his wives frowns had run upon his Fate, Her love to him increased.
in the prime of his years and fortunes. But when the news came that he was
living, See the ninth Book.
and with his Father in law, only that he lay desperately sick; hope and fear
joined to bring her love and pity to perfection: till two years after (in all
which time he still kept the field and was never out of the Emperors eye) at
his return to Rome; as well his long stay from her, as his long service to her
Father speaking in his behalf, it is hardly credible with what longing and
affection his wife received and honored him. Not long after she having the
rare happiness to be brought a bed of two sons at a birth; by how much it
joyed her, (especially they coming at the same time to the Principality of
Parma and Placentia) by so much her love to her husband increased. Only, as
she was violently ambitious to command in chief, and therefore hardly brooked a
power divided with her husband; Not without some instrvening jarres.
so when discords sprang between them, she would not easily be reconciled. The
truth is her spirit was not only great beyond her sex: Her masculine spirit.
but she went so habited, and had such a garb, as if she were not a woman with
a masculine spirit, but a man in woman's clothes. Her strength was such, And
manly exercises.
as she used to hunt the stagg, and change horses upon the field, which is more
then many able bodied men can do. Nay upon her chin and upper lip she had a
little kind of beard, which gave her not more of the resemblance then authority
of a man. And, which seldom happens in her sex, and never but to very strong
women, she was troubled with the Gout. She was of a ready wit.
She had a present wit, and in action could steer to all sides with wonderful
dexterity: as having been of a child bred up in the Belgic Court, and
instructed in her youth by the adverse fortune of the Medices; Wonderful
discreet.
in her riper years accomplished and made absolute by the discipline of
Farnezes Palace, and the old learning of Pope Paul the third. Then for piety,
she had a great master indeed, And religious.
Ignatius Loyola Founder of the Society of Jesus: to whom she confessed her
sins, and that oftener then was the custom of those times. Especially at the
Eucharist.
By this man she was taught a singular reverence and devotion toward the
Eucharist, proper to the House of Austria. Whereupon one every year, in Passion
week, Her yearly Charity to the poor.
she washed the feet of twelve poor maids (which she commanded should not be
washed before she came): Then feasting them, waited herself at table, and sent
them away new clothed, and full of gold. Upon the other more cheerful
solemnity of Corpus Christi day, she gave very noble portions to poor Virgins,
and married them to good Husbands. Both these feasts she kept during her life.
With this breeding and these parts, Which juncture of excellencies principally
moved the King to make her Governess of the Low Countries.
the Duchess so won upon the King her Brother, that he committed the
Low Countries to her; knowing her to be a woman of great courage, and
excellently versed in the art of Government. Besides, his Fathers commands were
yet fresh in his memory, who loved her dearly, and on his deathbed earnestly
recommended her to the King. A second Cause thereof.
It seems, he thought this honor would answer the Fathers wishes, and the
Daughters merit: Withal, A third.
he hoped the Low-countreymen for the reverence they bare to the name of
Charles the fifth, would cheerfully obey his Daughter, born among them, and
bred up to their fashions; and that her Contrymen would therefore the better
digest her Government, because subjected people think themselves partly free,
if governed by a Native. Perhaps the King was content, in favor of the
Low-countreymen, to let them be governed by a Woman, hoping the Innovations he
had designed, would please, coming from a Lady, like an incision, that pains
the less when made by a soft hand. But besides these reasons given out in
public, there was other private cause. Octavio Farneze Duke of Parma and
Piacenza had long since been in the Low Countries, A fourth, more secret,
perhaps more true.
and there served a Volunteer against the French; at his return for Italy, he
was an earnest suitor to King Philip (to whom he delivered) his son Alexander)
that he would please to restore him the Castle of Piacenza, kept as yet with a
Spanish Garrison. The King, though he resolved not to grant his suit; yet lest
the Prince should return discontented (whom by long experience he had found
faithful and serviceable to the Crown of Spain, in his command against
Herecules the French General, in the War of Italy: and the obedience of whose
Cisalpine Countries, would great^y advantage Spain) conferred the Government of
the Low Countries and Burgundy upon his wife, acquainting the Duke with it, as
if he did it for his sake; assuring himself whilst those Provinces which he
looked upon with so much love and care, were in his absence committed to the
Farnezes* they would rest well contented with so high an argument of confidence
and affection. Nor did Octavio slight the favor; nay, as it often happens,
that a present bounty is the step to a future rise; he hoped, by the tie of
this Government, every day more to endear his Majesty to his Sister, and to
the House of the Farnezes. The King lessened not that hope, which he knew would
serve to make the Farnezes intentive to the Government of the Low Countries:
for by how much the Governess might advance his interest in the Low Countries,
as well because of her Religion as her Prudence, so much the gladder he was, to
have such Pledges from them. The King therefore not only kept his son
Alexander, to aw the mother* but he thought it concerned him to give the father
hope of the Castle of Piacenza; well knowing some men's natures are more obliged
by receiving one, then many benefits.

The Governess being designed, and new come into the Low Countries, his
Majesty met her on the way, Margaret comes into the Low Countries.
attended by Octavio Duke of Parma, her son Alexander, the Ambassadors of
Princes, the Deputies of the Provinces, and the rest of his Nobility, then met
at the Convention of Estates. Is saluted Governess.
After he had saluted his sister, as Governess for him of the Low Countries
Margaret Duchess of Parma and Piacenza Daughter to Charles the 5th Governesse
of the Lowcountreys
portrait and Burgundy, he brought her in great state to Gant; appointing her
Councels of State, Appointed three Councels.
of Justice, and of the Finances or Exchequer; giving her these precepts how to
use them. Instructed by the King.
That she was to make it a rule at the Board, whatsoever opinion carried it in
Council, should be maintained for the better out of Council, even by such as
had voted against it. After the resolution in Council What they were to observe
abroad.
For which he gave his reasons, Lest upon dispute there should grow
contestation, and the authors (when the Council was up) be engaged in
perpetual quarrels. Likewise, that strangers might not know who to thank or
complain of; The causes of this Command.
whence this benefit would ensue, That envy which uses to be levelled at
particular persons, would not be conceived, at least not practiced against a
multitude. There would be less heart-burning among the Lords of the Council,
and every one more freely vote according to justice and equity, because less
enforced to decline it by hope or fear. How she was to call the Council.
Another reason was, That if the Governess observed them to be divided into
faction, or packed together in a Conspiracy, she should then, breaking up the
Council, call to her a cabinet Council, which the King named, viz. Granvel
Bishop of Arras, Charles Count Barlamont, and Viglius President of the
Privie-Councel. Ulricus Viglius Zuichem.
This private meeting was called the Consult. Nay, upon any sudden accident,
when it would take up too much time, and be too dangerous, Several reasons
thereof.
to have it heard and determined at the Councel-table, the Governess was to
impart it to this Cabinet Council, where it would have a quicker dispatch, and
sometimes more advised: For the less number (the King said) would be less
tedious, and yet a few well chosen give as good advice. And then secrets would
not be brought upon the stage, and there would be little occasion for the
Ambitious to make speeches, and to maintain their opinions; because without a
Scene and admiring Spectatours, proud men do but coldly act their parts. The
greatest business are therefore agitated, out of the crowd, with less pomp, and
more advantage. Lastly, in these meetings, where (though all have equal right
to vote, and not equal judgment, yet) the major part carries it, it is easy
to find (because in a multitude) many that want either ability or honesty:
howsoever in regard their number is to be considered, not their reasons; the
more and not the better must prevail.

His Majesty having thus instructed the Governess, and assigned her an Annual
persion of thirty six thousand Crowns; The King after her instructions, gives
her a pension.
to increase the public joy in the assembly of the Estates at Gant, he
created eleven Knights of the Order of the Golden Fleece, And in a Chapter of
the Knights of the Golden Fleece.
in their places that were deceased: for so many wanted to make up fifty one,
the number to which Charles the fifth had multiplied the Order, whereas Duke
Philip the Founder, at first only instituted twenty five, and after added six
to make up the number one and thirty. 1516.


Lastly, 1433.
the King appointed a time to hear the Petitions of the Deputies to the
Estates: Where Granvel in the Kings name made a speech to them: 1429.
answered by Borlutius of Gant, Speaker for the Estates. Granvell gave reasons
for the Kings going into Spain, Declared Margaret Duchess of Parma, under the
Kings Majesty, He declares her Governess.
Supreme Governess of the Low Countries and Burgundy (she then sitting by the
King); Disputed for the Old Religion, against Heretics that corrupted it: And
in the first place earnestly commended the protection and observance of
Religion to the Governess, And commands to them Religion and Obedience.
till his Majesty should return to the Low Countries. Borlutius, after he had
presented the Estates humble thanks and promises of obedience to the King,
Hears the Estates Requests.
and Governess, delivered the Heads of their desires. That his Majesty by the
example of his Father the Emperor, would please to call out of the
Low Countries all foreign forces, and use none but their own Co^ntrey
Garrisons, nor admit of any Alien to sit in the Great Council. The King, giving
them fair hopes, And grants them.
promised to withdraw the foreign soldiers that remained (for he had already
freed them of the mayor part) within four months next ensuing: So dissolving
the Assembly, all his business in the Low Countries being now dispatched: Then
his Majesty goes into Spain. The Duk^^ of Savoy into Italy. The Duchess of
Parma to Bruxells.
From Gant he passed to Zelan^, and weighing anchors from the port of Ul^^hen
in the month of August, made a happy voyage into Spain. The Governess the
Duchess of Parma, and the Duke of Savoy having waited on the King aboard, the
Duke with his Princely Bride, took leave for Italy: Her Excellence retired to
Bruxels, the ancient seat of the Belgic Princes, and in September one thousand
five hundred fifty and nine, began her Government over the Low Countries.

The End of the first Book.
The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The second Book.
KIng Philips departure from the Low Countries fell out very inconvenient for
that new condition of affairs. The Kings unseasonable departure out of the
Low Countries before a perfect settlement was made.
For every change in Cities and Kingdoms, like young trees when they are
transplanted, had need of present looking to till we be sure they have taken
root. Doubtless it had been far better for the Netherlands, if the King (so
the necessities of Spain would have permitted) had stayed there for some time,
till he had seen at a nearer distance, the course and motions of things which
he had altered in those parts. And not to have taken them upon trust, from
others uncertain relations: For many times the water changes the taste, by
running long and several ways under ground, nor can he that drinks it a far
off, judge of it so well, as he that sits at the spring head, and has it from
the fountain. Truly the King had with more certainty looked into the designs
of men, and consequently the misfortune had been less, which after he left them
involved the Low Countries in a difficult and tedious war. The like
inconvenience in Spain when Charles the fifth went from thence to Germany.
And as when his father Charles went into Germany to be crowned Emperor, the
Spaniards immediately took up arms against his Lieutenants: so the
Low-Countreymen, when K. Philip went for Spain to take possession of his
Kingdom, after they had kept a foot a civil war between them and their
governors, at last the confederate Provinces fell off from their obedience to
their Prince. The causes of which evils I being now to represent: I must
confess, I never read of any tumult or war, 1520.
whose original was so variously and contradictorily reported by the People,
The Causes why writers differ^ about the Beginnings of the Low Country tum^lts
Ostentation of wit.
and written by Historians. I believe that some when they found the reasons,
that went current for causes of this war, fat too weak for the raising of so
great commotions, they themselves guessed at others, that rather agreed with
the writers wit, then the truth of history. Some again, have framed causes
according to their factions and religions, passing over all those in silence,
Faction* Ignorance of the difference between Beginnings and Causes.
that made against their party. Others, not so much to cozen the Reader, as
being cozened themselves with the show of pretended causes, ignorant how much
Causes and Beginnings differ, have failed to clear the originals of these
differences. When an Historian is obliged first to inform himself of the
beginnings of Peace and War, Which difference is principally to be observed and
explained by an Historian.
or of Seditions, and what their grounds and causes were; and in the next
place, to inform his Readers: lest they not understanding the difference of
causes and beginnings, should judge amiss of actions and events: and so History
the mistress of wisdom, So did the ancient and best writers. Fab. Pict. in his
Annalls. Tit. Live. l. 21. Polyb. l. 3.
become the handmaid of error. Nor was it an idle dispute among the ancient
Historians, what was the ground of the war wherein Hannibal was General for
the Carthaginians against the (...), because they knew it would be of great
concernment, that such as were to read the actions of Rome and Carthage, should
penetrate into both their coun^els, to understand things rightly; and to make a
far different judgment betwixt the Articles of Leagues, and Complaints of
Ambassadors, and betwixt the justice of the war in general. Taught by these
great examples, To follow whose examples it is easy, for a man acquainted with
Princes secrets.
I have thought it worth my pains, before I handle the Low Country war, of far
longer continuance then the war of Carhage, accurately to search and
distinguish the causes and beginnings: Especially because in these affairs, so
diversely censured in many men's letters and discourses, I can promise, out of
the peculiar helps I have had, a more exquisite and certain relation. It is not
to be doubted, but the liberty which people have long enjoyed, if it be
entrenched upon or invaded, The Low-Countreymens Privileges very great.
will cause insurrections. Nor is it unknown, that the government of the
Low Countries, came very near the form of free cities, by the indulgence of
their Princes: who had made them, by many and liberal Charters, though not
absolutely free-States, yet more then common subjects: especially those of
Brabant, Lud. Guicciardin in Descrip. Belg.
into which Province, we know, great bellied women came from the neighbor
countries to lie in; that their children might enjoy the privileges of
Brabant. You would think the husbandman had chosen this for a nursery for his
plants: and after they were grown up, and had sucked their first moisture from
that earth; then they were removed, carrying along with them the endowments of
that hospitable soil. From whence this evil had its Original because the King
trencht upon them three ways.
From hence, many writers derive the pedigree of their miseries; that the
Spanish soldiers contrary to the Kings promise, were kept so long in the
Low Countries, that fourteen Bishops added to four which they had anciently,
the episcopal jurisdiction seemed to be increased with breach of privilege to
the Provinces, that there was an endeavor to bring in new Inquisitions of
faith, and to impose an universal form of judicature upon the Low Countries,
which how they were the beginning of causes of their rebellion, with my best
care and judgment I shall now unfold.

King Philip had used his Spanish soldiers against the French, The retaining
of the Spanish soldiers (...) first Cause of their (...).
nor did the Low-countreymen complain of it as a grievance. But the war being
ended, The Low-Countreymen are aggrieved.
when he had sent a great part of his army out of the Low Countries, Instigated
by the Prince of Orange,
his Majesty retained yet 3000; over which the Prince of Orange and Count
Egmont had the command with show of honor; but indeed to take off the odium of
a forrein^armie, And exasperated by the Spaniards the (...).
by the popular names of their Generals. But it could not take it off; For on
the one part, the Generals themselves appeared to be discontented with the
honor, such as it was: Nay, Hence grew their (...) the King. (...) Cause is
(...) wholly to (...) to the Low-Countreymen.
the Prince of Orange prompted the Low Country men, not to suffer that
remainder of the Spaniards. On the other part, the Spanish soldiers were so
imperious and quarrelsome (as it often happens, especially in the Towns where
they are quartered) that it did not a little exasperate the minds of the
inhabitants, so as the Spaniard grew to be hated, and the King himself ill
spoken of, almost through all the Netherlands. Which mutual aversion, as I
shall never impute it wholly to the Low-countreymen, because they saw the
promise deferred of calling away the soldiers, with whom they had daily
quarrels; so I shall not easily condemn the Kings delay, for continuing them in
garrison: Not to the King.
partly, because his sister the Governess advised him to have a care, least if
he disbanded the Spaniards, the bordering cities might be encouraged to spoil
and waste the Marches; partly, because he himself, as he was of a jealous
nature, suspected the Low-countreymen had a plot, in pressing him to free them
of foreign forces. And the more earnestly, indeed contumaciously, that they
reminded him of his promise, the more slowly and cautiously the King thought
good to proceed. Whether the Belgic tumults are to be derived from this
fountain.
But whatsoever cause the King or the Low-countreymen had, yet he satisfied
them in this particular. For a little more then a year after his departure from
the Low Country, the Spaniards were sent for away, and all those stirs and
popular tumults vanished in a moment: So as they that make this the cause of
the Belgic troubles, have found out a very slight one.

The multiplying the number of Bishops, was a far stronger motive to rebellion,
Multiplying the number of Bishops, the second cause of Insurrection.
especially, for that after the death of Paul the fourth, it was thought fit to
change the orders he had made, concerning the revenues of their Bishoprics:
and they were to be endowed as it pleased the Popes Nuntio in the
Low Countries, and Pi^s the fourth at Rome: and that Bishops should succeed in
place of some Abbots when they died, and should have the name, estates, and
honors, formerly enjoyed by the Abbots; so as in the mean time nothing should
be remitted from the strict discipline of the Monasteries. The complaints made
thereupon.
But whether it was the multiplication of Miters, or the endowing of them; it
is not to be imagined how ill it took in the Low Countries with all degrees of
men. The former Bishops, as well the Low-countreymen, By the old Bishops.
as their Neighbors, complained, That by setting up new ones, those had their
Jurisdictions confined to narrow limits; these, that they were not only
straitened in their limits, but likewise in the revenues of their Bishoprics,
especially since this had been determined at Rome, without hearing of the
parties therein concerned. The Nobility were aggrieved, The Lords temporal.
that Bishops should come in place of Abbots, because being a degree higher,
they would be far more potent, and therefore it would not only derogate from
the Lords Temporal, but also from their liberty. Nor should they dare to speak
freely in the great Council of Estates, when those men were present, whom they
knew, as bound by oath to the Pope, would draw all businesses to Rome. Neither
was it for the Kings service, that they should bear all the sway, The Abbots.
who were the Bishop of Romes sworn servants. But no complaints were bitterer
then the Abbots and Monks, because none seemed juster. That they were deprived
contrary to all precedent, of the right and power to choose an Abbot out of
their own Order; that there ought not to be set over Religious men, that had a
certain Rule and form of life, men ignorant of Religious Discipline* And almost
all that stood for the Low Country privileges.
that indeed the means and authority of Abbots would pass to the Bishops, but
the care and trouble remain with some of the Monks; that truly at present, such
men were advanced to those Offices, as were eminent for piety and learning, but
hereafter those rich Deodands should be exposed for prey, to some of the
Princes followers and flatterers. Besides these common objections, two more
were in almost all men's mouths, That by the creation of new Bishops, the
privelledges of Brabant were infringed, and by degrees the tyranny of the
Spanish Inquisition would be introduced. The latter whereof, because it raised
particular troubles, I shall speak of it apart. But though I read the other
almost in all writers, yet what the words of the Charter should be, whereby the
King obliged himself so, as that he could not augment the number of Bishops, I
find in no Historian. For what some write, that the King swears at his
Coronation, not to increase the State Ecclesiastical, is not an ingenuous
allegation, because the Prince only swears to that kind of increase, whereby
he promises not to suffer the Clergy to receive the goods of Laymen, which they
call Mortmains, In 2. Addit. ad ^aetum introitum Principis Hispaniae. Artic. 24.
but upon certain conditions. This is far from the point in controversy;
therefore I held it fit to march further into their records, where I found one
Clause, that seems to make against the increasing the number of Bishops. Which
condition of their privileges, unless I had resolved to be a faithful
Historian, I might safely have concealed; because they themselves do not mention
it, that have, I am sure, written many things in mere malice to the Spaniard:
What those privileges were.
For King Philip being created Duke of Brabant, by his father Charles the
fifth, among diverse Privileges which in the Act of the Joyful Entry he
bestowed upon that Province, inserts this clause, That hereafter he will not
suffer any to entrench upon the Offices, Artic. ^6. And how violated by
increase of Bishops.
Lands, or Goods of Abbots, Bishops, or other religious persons within the
Dukedom of Brabant, under the name of a Commendum. But whilst, by the Kings
procurement, Bishops were entitled to the reversions of Monasteries, after the
Abbots deceases; the Brabanters seemed to have their Privileges broken, and
the people had occasions offered, that the proceedings which every one hated
for his private benefit, For which, many men rail at,
they might all in public fairly declaim against, by the name of Breach of
Privilege. Some therefore wondered, what was in the Kings mind or counsel, to
bring in new Bishops, and make a thing, displeasing of it self, far more
distasteful and odious, by taking their estates from the Monasteries. And
therefore they further said, That if the King proceeded to violate the
Propriety and Liberty of the Subject, And threaten the King.
the Brahanters had cause to defend themselves, and that the Prince ought to
remember, that when he made their Charter, he articled, Artic. 5. Some argued
for his Majesty.
They should pay him no subjection or obedience, if he entirely performed not
to them his Oath and Protestations. Yet some there were of a contrary opinion,
and by how much they saw the King endeavor it, with less benefit and greater
danger to himself; so much the more they commended his sincere religion, who in
this business looked upon nothing, but the good of his people. From Precedents
in other countries.
And indeed, What was there apparent that men could justly blame? the increase
of the number of the Bishops, or of their maintenance? As if the Bishop of Rome
might not do that in the Low Countries, which he had done in Germany and in
France, between which two Nations in the middle, Which makes against the
complaints of the old Bishops.
lies the Netherlands? Did not Boniface Bishop of Mentz, Legate for the Sea
Apostolic in Germany, when the multitude of Christians abounded in some places
(by the authority of the Popes Cregory the third, and Zachary) add three new
Bishops to the former? The very like cause there was among other reasons, for
doing the same in the Low Countries. Baronius, ann. 639. and 741.
But what motive was in France? the sacred jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Toulouse was so large, that one Pastor could not possible see the faces of all
his Diocese; and therefore it was divided into five Episcopal Sees, by John
the 22; Extrav. Solvator, de Praebend and Dignit.
not only no care taken of the Bishops of Narbon, Bourges, or Cahors, out of
whose estates both the Church of Toulouse, and some of these new ones were
endowed; but the Bishop of Toulouse, must of necessity loose much of his
revenues by the division of his then rich Diocese. That the neighbor- Bishops
ought not to have been called to Rome, and heard in a business of this nature,
their reasons for it being only their own profit and power, As likewise
against the temporal Lords.
is sufficiently apparent. Nor were the grievances of the Lords built upon a
much better ground, that is, they were discontented that they should be limited
in their bold disputes, about Religion and Monarchy, by the unwelcome presence
of the Prelates, whom they ought to honor as Fathers and Princes of the
Church, and to fear them as Revengers of Sacrilege. For when they alleged,
that they doubted the Bishops would be evil Counselors, and bandy against the
King, it was a pretense to cozen children with; they doubted themselves, that
if they should appear against the King, they should have these men for
witnesses and adversaries, that had received, and hoped for more from his
Majesty, then ever the Abbors did. Then the complaints of the Abbots and Monks,
And against the Abbots. Aubertus Miraeus in Notitia Episc.
were somewhat more then became them. It was not without precedent, that a
Bishop should succeed in the place of an Abbot. Let them look upon France, they
shall find that John the xxii, endowed the Bishops of Condom, Vabrince, and
L^mbere (to name no more) with Monastery lands. And if there should want an
example, yet when it was granted to a Prince by the Pope, that may command the
Monks, they might have been so modest, as to teach others obedience to his
Holiness. They might have remembered, most of their Manors and Lordships, were
the bounty of the Belgic Princes, which made it seem more just; so as the King
not making his own use or advantage of the profits thereof, but only employing
them for the good and benefit of those Provinces, the Abbots themselves ought
to have been as willing as the Prince, and contributed to the necessity of the
people, by so much more freely, by how much that Care is more proper to a
religious life: and not with unseasonable exclamations have corrupted a good
design, stirred up the people, and alienated the Popes and the Kings mind from
their patronage. For the great grievance, The literal sense of their
privileges.
that the King had broke their Privileges: First, they did not sufficiently
understand the difference, between a Commendum and the Annexion of
Church Livings. A Commendum being in the nature of a thing deposited, the other
given as to an absolute Lord. And therefore Commendums, if the possessour die,
revert to the depositor, as the Lord Paramount; unless they be passed over to
another by a new Commendum: but such as are annexed, do not revert, but remain
for ever to the Successor in that Office, to which they are appendent. For
which reasons there is no more taken from Monasteries by annexing, then was by
giving them in Commendum, because that which is annexed, does no more revert to
Monasteries, then that which was commended; forasmuch as what was once
commended, is conferred again from one to another, by the Pope, to whom it
reverts. Nay whereas Church Livings may be commended to non-residents, that
cannot which is annexed to a Bishopric. For herein Religion requires the
Bishops presence, far more then a Commendum; so as what might have come by a
Commendum to a forreiner, by Annexion was retained in the Low Countries. Whence
some infer, that they were not broken June 4. 1561. apud Arnold. Havens. de
novis Episc. l. 2.
The King therefore while he took care that Abbeys should not be given in
Commendum to Bishops (which was the provis^ of their Charter) but annexed to
their Bishoprics; did not in truth violate their privileges, which he had
sworn to maintain. But what need more words? when the case being put to the
University of Lovain, and studied by Doctors both of Divinity, and of Civil
Law; Jun. 4. 1561. Arnol. Haves. de nov. Episc. l. 2. and add the decision of
the Lovain Doctors, and necessity, the greatest of Privileges.
it was definitively resolved, that annexion of Livings, and likewise the
institution of new Bishoprics, was neither repugnant to the Kings oath, nor to
the laws. Again, they ought to consider the difference, that was then from
other times and manners: that while Religion was safe, the King altered
nothing* but when it was endangered, there can be no privileges to tie the
hands of Kings from supporting their dominions falling into ruin. The number
of pastors was the fittest remedy to defend the flock of Christ from wolves
breaking in upon them; and sure there is none so great an enemy to the King,
but must acknowledge and believe it. Nor could their endowments be proportioned
with less inconvenience then they were, by prudent men, to whom it was
referred, with the Kings approbation, and the Popes command. And that the King
was not obliged to summon the Estates General.
Nor was the Prince (which some required) bound to do it by the advice of his
great Council, for he held himself obliged to it by no law; and likewise his
reason told him, the States (in a thing distasteful to many, especially such as
listened to heretics their neighbors) would easily dissent, using the liberty
which they took upon them in public assemblies. Whereby he should not only
expose his Prerogative and Majesty to the dispute, but even to the contempt of
his people: and that he should vex their minds so much the more, by following
his design, when they once declared their public dislike, and passed their
votes against it. But the King might have provided for the new Bishops, or it,
upon a fuller survey he had found all other ways more difficult, yet he
himself should have maintained them out of his own* and not out of other men's
estates; without the trouble of his people, Nor out of his own purse to allow
maintenance for the Bishops. Especially when he gave them Pensions.
without any man's prejudice? As if it were not just, that the Bishops which
were to serve the Low Countries, should be provided for out of the
Low Countries. Nor did the King spare his Exchequer, allowing every Bishop
yearly one thousand five hundred crowns in pension, till sufficient maintenance
should be raised elsewhere. Albeit the King in giving them the Abbots goods,
did not directly bestow upon them other men's estates, especially since he did
it by authority of the Bishop of Rome, who is the true Administratour of their
goods. To conclude, this makes it plain, that although the King had given
perpetual pensions to the Bishops, it would not have satisfied these men, that
were not so much discontented with the translations or annexions of
Church Livings, as with the very number of the Bishops, which there being no
reason to condemn, but indeed to welcome, as a safe and ready help, it plainly
appears, in case the Brabanters, or other Low-Countreymen had took arms upon
this ground, to which side the beginning of those troubles was to be imputed.
Neither could this be the cause of rebellion. Whether the beginning of the
tumults may be deduced from hence.
The substituting of Bishops in place of Abbots when they should decease, and
annexing of their livings to the Bishoprics, was but executed in very few
Cities; because of their continual petitions (which I shall in due place
remember) presented to the Pope and the King. I am sure in Brabant, which stood
out the stiffest, the King at last consenting, there was nothing altered. Yet I
deny not, but those agitations of diversely minded men, lessened obedience and
duty to the Prince, which are the pillars of government; and foreshewed, in
case they should be further moved, the ruin of the whole. For nothing is so
pernicious to Monarchy, as when the people are taught publicly to contest with
their Prince, and to dissent from him, not only with impunity, but with
advantage.

One thing most of all troubled and exasperated the Low-Countreymen, The
Inquisition the third cause of Insurrections.
at first a suspicion, then an endeavor of setting up an inquisition against
heresy, to be confirmed by the Edict of the Emperor Charles the fifth. Which
in regard it is commonly thought, to have opened a door of war in the
Low Countries; it will be worth my pains be what it may be, to give you account
of it. Religion, as it was ever highly reverenced by all, as that which
preserves the Worship of God, and Concord of Men: so the Christian Church has
been always severe against the disturbers thereof. The first occasion of
introducing it into the Government of the Church.
This charge was first administered only by the Bishops, to whom it appe^tains
by Law. Afterward, perhaps because that sacred Office is engaged in many
cares; or because they are sometimes enforced to be absent from their Diocese;
or lastly, some of them may be negligent in the exercise of their authority,
and some happily ignorant; it seemed the best course, to delegate from the
Apostolical See, Judges extraordinary, of approved learning and piety, which
should have commission to hear and determine against heretics: whereupon they
were called the Apostolical Inquisitours. This I find begun by Pope Innocent
the third, who sent against the Albigenses, the Founder of the preaching Friars
Saint Dominick, that first executed the office of Inquisitour with much
applause. The custom was afterward received (almost in all that, and the next
Age) in many Christian countries, there being created in every Province Censors
of Faith, that should legally take notice of the violation of religion. The
different forms thereof.
Yet in all places were not the same Judicatories. Some had temporary
Inquisitours sent about heresy newly sprung up, and when that was
extinguished, their commission ended. In other parts a Tribunal was erected,
to which, questions of faith were perpetually to be referred. In other places,
the whole form of this judicature being rejected, none but Bishops themselves
were permitted to inquire of heretics. Nay, at Rome, the form was varied: for
sometimes all was done by the ordinary and Civil Magistrates, no Inquisitour
extraordinary; sometimes many, but then one or more of the Cardinals were of
the Quorum. Till Paul the fourth instituted a College of Cardinals,
Established in Rome Constit. 34. Licet.
by whose suffrages these controversies were to be determined; establishing
this course for ever after in Rome by a more venerable and sacred Court of
Justice. Not without Penalties.
And that it might more firmly continue, fear, the Beadle of the law, terrified
them from the beginning: penalties and fines being imposed upon, and exacted
of, the refractory: more easy ones by the Cannon law, and heavier by Imperial
Edicts. J, Manich, and l. Quicunque C. De haereticis.
For when the Emperors observed, besides the worship of God, that it concerns
the public Peace, whose Guardian the Prince is, that subjects should be
limited by Religion, and that they saw, when Religion was endangered, peace
could not live upon the foul and rough waves of heresy, they decreed, that the
punishment of traitors should be inflicted upon heretics, as enemies to
Religion, and by consequence to Peace. Provided notwithstanding, that the law
should not be executed till their trial, C. ut inquisitionis. de haereticis,
in 6.
and verdict were passed in the Ecclesiastical Court, to which the proper
cognizance of heresy belongs. Which though it was ever exercised in all
orthodox Countries, and in some places (according to sudden motions of new
perverse opinions) with greater diligence; yet no where with more exactness and
strictness, then in Spain: either out of the especial inclination of those
Catholic Princes, or by reason of contagious forreiners that mingled
themselves among those their subjects. In Spain especially from the year 1383.
Martin Luthers Heresy makes it every where strictly observed.
But this care of Religion was afterward increased, almost through all
Christendom, by reason of the troubles raised by one man in many parts, I mean
Martin Luther, the calamity of those and the following times. This mischief
that he had long studied to bring upon true believers, he had often begun to
attempt, and then changing his mind, as if not resolved (or rather waiting for
an opportunity) at last Maximilian the Emperor deceasing, Emp. Max. 1.
and Charles his Nephew succeeding in the Empire, his wickedness broke forth;
well knowing, that the beginning of a Princes reign is the best time for
Innovation; and likewise believing the Emperors young years to be ignorant of
government, and therefore despicable. Howsoever he made sure account his
Imperial Majesty would rather bend his endeavors to settle the affairs of
his Empire, then to maintain the rites of the Church; so courting the Provinces
first to revolt from the Church; and then (which is the next step) from their
Princes, and from the Emperor himself; he thus broke in pieces at once, the
Roman Empire and Religion. Which gave occasion to the Bishop of Rome to be
much more observant, and intent to questions of faith; and to Christian
Princes, as every one tendered his Religion and Dominions, to be more vigilant
therein. Indeed Ch^^les the fifth, whom Religion in her afflictions looked upon
as her only refuge, Gratian. Theod. Arcad. Honor. Martian. etc.
by the example of the Emperors his Predecessors, thought it expedient to
establish laws through all the Provinces of the Empire and Low Countries,
against the corrupters of the Catholic faith. Therefore whilst he was
conducted from Spain, through the Netherlands and Germany, to the Imperial
throne, with extraordinary joy and gratulations of men, and with all that noise
of his then smiling fortune; Charles the fifth his Edict against Luther and
heretics Leo ^.
in the town of Worms, at the Diet (or Parliament) of the Empire, Martin
Luther, condemned by the Bishop of Rome, was by vote of the Electors, and the
rest of the Princes and Estates of the Empire condemned and proscribed, and the
edict of his proscription the same year, one thousand five hundred twenty one,
was published through all the dominions of his Empire and Patrimony.
Nevertheless, Luther still persisted in his evil, nay, (as wickedness prospers
by sudden attempts) within a few months that contagion infected, at least
breathed upon, the most flourishing Cities of Germany. The Emperor in some
places punishing delinquents, Seven times the Emperor renewed it.
and renewing and enlarging his edict, which he applied seven times to that
violent and volatile disease. Moreover when he had desired and received Censors
of faith from the Pope, in reference to their authority and security, he passed
many Decrees; which are enrolled in the Imperial laws of the year one thousand
five hundred and fifty. But this new fate of Justice brought with it into the
Low Countries, more terror then observance; for though it were in some places
received, The Brabanters refuse the Inquisition.
yet the Brabanters, because they said their liberty was infringed, taking the
opportunity, freed themselves of the burden laid upon them, about the end of
the year fifty: at which time, partly the great meeting of Ausburg, and the
Council of Trem; partly war upon war rising in Africa, Hungary, Italy, Germany,
and France, drew Cesars cares another way. And although King Philip, when he
took possession of the Low Countries, King Philip confirms his Fathers Edicts.
instantly confirmed his Fathers laws and edicts by his own proclamation; it
little advanced the business, he being forthwith engaged in a sharp war with
France: which began the year he set forth that Proclamation, and held three
years after: till in the year fifty nine, as soon as ever he got a breathing
from the war, he re-applied himself to settle Religion. And leaving the
Netherlands, he commanded his sister, Commands the execution thereof to the
Governess.
the Governess, and Bishop Granvell, to take special care that his Fathers
laws, and the cautions which he himself had confirmed in behalf of the Popes
Inquisitors, should be punctually observed. This was the state of affairs;
these were the Edicts of Charles the fifth; these the beginnings and
proceedings of the Inquisitions against heresies. The Governess to the
Magistrates.
When the Duchess of Parma, as she was enjoined, bending all her care that
way, treated about it with Governors of the Pronvinces; but found by
experience, it was of much more difficulty to do things commanded, then to
command things fitting to be done. The Magistrates seemed unwilling to take the
business upon themselves; The Magistrates let it cool.
some of the Nobility offered their services doubtfully, others absolutely told
her, it was no good time to move that stone again, at which they had so often
stumbled. The Brabanters that had slipped the bridle under Charles the fifth, and
would not suffer King Philip when he was there, The Brabanters still refuse.
to put it on again; should they now halter themselves, called by a woman's
voice? The people know no mean or moderate course, The people differ in
opinions.
at first they are in amazement, then all confidence. Sometimes they fear,
sometimes they terrify; according as they are inflamed with the breath of
great persons, and the bellows of heretics. Nay, the common discourse
concerning the King, hinted to the people, and uttered as their own, was this:
Why he made so many new Bishops, The common discourse against the Inquisition,
and the Emperors Edicts. In the Lateran Council under Innocent iii.
if they were not to protect Religion? But indeed it was resolved by Councels,
that such Pastors as went slowly to work, in purging the ill fruits of heresy,
should be put out of their Episcopal office. Bishops should therefore look to
their own business, or else lay down their ill placed miters: which it were
better they had never put on, nor vainly frighted the Low Country with their
number: That Religion had flourished many ages in the Netherlands, only by the
care of the Civil Magistrate, without that pomp of the Popes tyranny, without
any of the Emperors Edicts. Why that new addition of Inquisitors? That for the
most part, it sprung from the ambition of Bishop Granvell, who that he might
have suppliants, sought to make delinquents: That Religion ought to be
persuaded, not commanded: That Charles the fifth had a most pions intention in
making those Laws, but experience demonstrated, the cause of Religion, and the
common good and state of the Provinces, was thereby nothing advanced, but daily
grew to be in a worse condition: That commerce was already obstructed;
Merchants had a stop of trading, to the great loss of the Low-countreymen,
especially those of Antwerp, whose wealth consisted in merchandise. Lastly,
that neither the Emperor Charles, nor King Philip, nor any other Prince that
had sworn to the privileges of Brabant, and promised not to impose upon the
Low-countreymen new forms of Judicature, could have power (if the Laws remained
in force) to compel them to suffer the severity of the Inquisition, and those
Edicts. But these rumors moved not the Governess at all; who continued to
execute the Law upon offenders. Tumults caused by fear of the Inquisition, and
punishment of Delinquents.
And the Council of Trent, then ended, was by the Kings command proclaimed in
the Low Countries. At which, in some places, the people openly stormed, and
rescued condemned persons, half dead, out of the hangmans hands; stealing to
conventicles in the City, and in the fields. Nay, many of the Nobility entered
into a kind of combination among themselves; partly to scatter libels in the
streets, partly to present petitions to the Governess by great multitudes; with
such tumult and success, that the Emperors Edicts had their edge abated,
delinquents were pardoned, and no one afterward endeavored to bring in
Censors of faith, where they had not formerly been. So that nothing was done to
oppose the Preaching-men, that had broke loose from their heretical
neighbors; and in the very market place declaimed against the Catholic Faith;
To which a company of Boors and rogues presently joining, rushed into the
Churches, robbed them, defaced the sacred Monuments; and lastly, fell into open
rebellion, without any General then declaring for them; but with strange
licentiousness, force, rapine, and plunder. Some men censure the King.
To this point it was come at last. And some affirmed that storm, which with a
sudden noise prodigiously fell upon the Low-countreyes, was raised out of the
peoples fury, caused by the severity of the Prince, who plotting at once to
entangle them in so many incoveniences by the Imperial Edicts, Questions of
faith, and the Council of Trent, Others excuse him.
had provoked the patience of the Low-countreymen. Yet others cleared the King
of any fault, as not being author of those edicts and questions, but only
confirming his Fathers Decrees, and those Pontifici^n^Censors of faith, which
Charles the fifth had called into the Netherlands. And that the King or
Emperor, C. Sane. 2. de Off. and Potest. Jud. lib. 1.. Qui^manda. tam. (...).
de Off. ejus.
when he brought in the Inquisitors, had not therefore broken the Low Country
privileges, by inducing a new form of Judicature; because their jurisdiction
not being ordinary, but only delegated, could not be called a new Judicatory:
And therefore they highly extolled the Kings religion, that respected the
authority of the Roman Bishop, and the Councels, far before the threatenings of
his turbulent and seditious subjects; nor held it imprudence, to be the first
that should oblige his dominions to that which had been decreed against
heresy, by the wisest Fathers of the Christian Commonwealth. But farther to
prosecute, in this place, diversity of men's judgments, would argue an
ambitious wit; especially, since I persuade my self, all I have hitherto set
down, did indeed contribute to the Belgic tumults, but were not the principal
causes of them. It is now my purpose clearly to explain those causes to you,
that such as read my history may learn, by the example of the Low Country men,
what it is that commonly imbroyls a State or Kingdom.

That which troubles the people, The first and true causes of the Low Country
Tumults.
and puts them into fury, seldom moves the Nobility: Yet Noblemen (as if the
same grievances pressed both parties) do often conspire with the Commons: not
to promote their Interest, or to make it a Common-cause; but by others
assistance, to rid themselves of private inconveniences; and to do their own
business, while they are thought to be only for the Public. Now the first
motive of the peoples tumults; without doubt had its original from Heresy;
which was brought in, partly by foreign Merchants, By Heresy among the people,
introduced three ways.
together with whose Commodities, this plague often sails: Partly, by the
Regiments of the Switz and Germans, whose service Charles the fifth, and King
Philip had long used in the former wars: partly, by the banished men and
fugitives out of England, F. Hieron. Pollinus, Hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 8.
which Queen Mary while she purged that Kingdom from heresy, prosecuting it
with her Proclamations and Penal Laws, cleared the Island of, at once; being no
fewer then 30000 persons, sent thither from other parts, whereof very many
planted themselves anew in the Low Countries. Heresy chiefly entering by these
ways, Cherished and augmented by the countries adjacent.
was cherished and augmented by the borderers, that trafficked with the
Low Countries; of whom, by commerce, they learned their manners, almost as
perfectly as their language. Nor did the Rhine from Germany, or the Mose from
France, send more water into the Low Countries, then by the one, the contagion
of Luther, by the other of Calvin, was importe^ into the same Belgic
Provinces. To say nothing of the Anabaptists, that came in sho^ls out of
Westphalla and Frizeland; because they were entertained as neighbors, and
accounted almost natives. A considerable part of the Commons being infected by
this means, and the better to maintain the licentiousness of their lives,
Whereupon the Netherlands grew to all licentiousness.
carrying themselves more saucily toward their Superiors, laid hold of the
first occasions to alter the government; and by degrees began those troubles,
which Heresy never fails to raise in States, and Kingdoms, Heresy the Trumpet
to Rebelli^m.
as we are taught by too dear experience. For Cities seldom change Religion
only, but as often as this sacred Anchor is weighed, so often the Ship of the
Commonwealth is tossed: and no wonder, for Heresy is the school of Pride, and
while by little and little is shakes from the mind Gods yoke it shows us in
like manner, how to defame and shake off humane government. Is it not plain,
that the wisdom of heretics at length ends in this point, Confession,
Fasting, Penance, etc.
that taking away such things as were somewhat heavier in the Catholic
Religion, and pretending Confidence in God (so ^lessening and blotting out his
fear) it brings men, now hail^fellows with God* to be of no Religion, Inclyning
men to Atheism.
and at last boldly to maintain there is no God at all. And he that is once so
persuaded, Whence follows contempt of their Sovereign Lords.
and has expelled him from his heart, whom Nature made his Lord, And tumults.
he will despise all other Lords with as little reluctation, as they that
revolt from their King, contemn his subordinate Magistrates. Indeed among
humane things I have always most admired, that in the Government of Cities and
Kingdoms; so many millions of men should be subjected and awed by one. This
consists in the Subjects consent, and that consent is grounded upon reverence
and fear, especially because it concerns particulars, that the generality
should be governed. But this pail of Government Heresy pulls up and opens;
whose trumpeters under the specious pretense of Christian liberty sound in the
ears of the people (not deaf to scandalous reports) continual invectives
against the Manners and Lives of Princes. Which Teachers having seasoned the
peoples minds with these holy Precepts, it is no marvel if they detract so much
from the Princes Power of ruling, and add so much to their own freedom from
obeying. Nature has planted in men, an aversion from their Lords, and an
impatience to be commanded; what will they do, blown by the daily breath of
preaching? and being safe and confident under the veil of Religion. The
Transalpine Countries are and will be a sufficient example to Posterity: Which
heresy has too often prea^hed into arms, by the sermons of a few seditious
persons, that have involved Provinces and Nations in never to be expiated
slaughter. So that what I said is evident, without wonderful change in the
Civil Government, Religion cannot be altered. And although heresy till that
time had not so crept into the Low Countries, What Occasions Heresy made use
of to raise tumults in the Low Countries.
nor was so numerous, that the faction could be greatly feared, many of the
common sort being uncorrupted. Yet when those very men saw the Bishops
multiplied; the Emperors Edicts published; and Inquisitours of faith imposed;
the heretics openly ringing in their ears, that all these conspired to destroy
their liberty, they all then joined their forces. For the Low-countreymen
always preserved their great Privileges and Franchises, and did more securely
enjoy them, by reason they had now been governed by female Princes for forty
years together. Add to this the last long War: in which time, Licentiousness
follows the Camp, and the Prince divides his Empire with the soldier: The
Low-countreymen therefore with long liberty and the late war grown stubborn,
mingled with heretics, and learning pride of those masters, no wonder, if
being more insolent then they used to be, when occasion was offered, they would
not only not hear the word of command, and cast off their new burdens, but
with erected spirits hoped for greater matters by the example of others. For
they looked upon France, where after the tumult at Amboyse, Another Cause of
the Belgic Insurrections, the alienation of the Nobility.
the heretics had extorted so great a liberty, as they grew formidable to the
Kingdom: and were to be sought to, for peace. But this spur of the people,
heresy, could never (as I say) have made such a progress in the Low Countries,
without the protection and assistance of the Nobility, for if heresy want this
Elm, she creeps indeed, but on the ground, and to be trampled upon. And most of
the Nobility were then in such a condition, and did so stomach the Spaniards,
Which grew principally out of Court-emulation.
that the Commons might (and not rashly) presume upon that aversion. Now the
cause of their indignation, was partly the defeat of their ambitions: partly
Court-emulations, which began with show of private hatred, even in King Philips
presence. In what esteem the Low-countreymen were with the Emperor.
Afterward, before the Governess, it proceeded by open enmity to public
ruin. For in the beginning of the Emperor Charles his Reign, the Low Country
Lords governed; the Low-countreymen had the best places at Court; the highest
commands in the Army. Afterward when many great persons, out of Italy, Spain,
and Germany, daily came in to Cesars fortune every day more flourishing, it was
necessary his graces and bounties should f^ow to many; And the greatness of his
Empire and Wars admitted many ^harers. Nor were the Low-countreymen troubled
at it; because they saw the Emperors inclination chiefly propense toward
them; and to contend with foreign Nobility, they held it an honor to their
Country. But when King Philip came from Spain, How they were looked upon by
the King.
guarded with a train of Spanish Lords; both in his Palace and abroad, as they
said, inaccessible; the Low-countreymen took offense at their being over
gracious with the King, jeering their manners and fashions, which the Spaniard
in all places punctually retains. Lastly, The difference of disposition between
Charles the fifth,
they were by degrees alienated from the King himself, who distasted them with
being so unlike his father. For the Emperor easily gave access and audience,
carrying himself like a private man, altogether trusting to his own Majesty.
And as he had a wit that could wind and turn it self all Ways at once, he did
so put on their Manners, that he was no less a German with a German, an Italian
with an Italian, a Spaniard with a Spaniard, then a Low-countreyman with his
native Subjects. Where on the contrary, And King Philip.
King Philip would be, and appear a Spaniard to all men; he spoke seldom, and
then all Spanish; and forbear to show himself in public, as if he meant,
appearing after retirement, to strike a reverence in the eyes of his beholders;
changing nothing of the mode of Spain, either in his apparel or other forms of
State. Now this, by minds once vexed, was accounted Pride and Contempt: as if
his diversity of manners were in scorn of them. It is reported, the Emperor
gave his son warning of it, and being offended at words used by some
Spaniards against the Low-countreymen; in the presence of the Prince of Orange
and Bossuvius, The Prince of Orange in his Apology Anno 1581.
he told the King, that he foresaw the counsels of some of the Kings flatterers
would one day hazard him the loss of the Low Countries. And although, after the
Emperors decease, the King was in war with France, and the Nobility employed
abroad, which quieted the stirs at home: The Belgic Lords deseated of their
expectations.
Yet the war being ended, the Discontent at Court grew so much higher then it
was, by how much the Low Country Lords thought the King more indebted to them,
for their valiant and faithful service in his wars. Nor were they satisfied
with his bestowing upon them so many Governors places before his departure.
Which caused their animosities against the King.
For such as were neglected, took it for an injury: and they that were chosen,
held it no great bounty, because they exspected a greater. But the Prince of
Orange and Count Egmont, as they were of vaster spirits then the rest, having
absolutely persuaded themselves, they should have the Government of all the
seventeen Provinces: when they fell, from that hope, whatsoever came short of
their wishes lost the title of a benefit. From whence sprung the
Low-countreymens fury; which is ever most dangerous to Princes, when men have
not what they hope for, though many times they hope for more then they should
have. It was not Pompeys Party that murdered Julius Caesar, but his won
friends: Lib. 3. de Ira, c. 10.
because (as Seneca says) he had not satisfied their unsatisfiable hopes. As
if when men are much obliged, it were a kind of affront not to be more obliged.
And afforded them matter of complaint.
And now in the private discourses of the Nobility this was their ordinary
matter of complaint, That the Spaniards had all the power with the King, That
the Low-countreymen were but the Spaniards shadows, that waited upon them, and
moved at their command; for the King transacted business of great concernment
by the advice of Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alva, Rui Gomez, and the Count of
Feria, his only cabinet Anthony Perenott Cardinal Granvel Counsessour of
Estate of Margaret of Parma
portrait Counselors, That the Low Country Lords were admitted to the
Counsell-board to pass things already concluded: and were pleased, like
children with form and ceremony. This was not the Emperors promise of his sons
bounty, nor what was due to their fidelity and service. Should they suffer
themselves to be turned out, and forreiners to be quartered in their houses,
and Low-countreymen to be despised, and thought so much inferior to the
Spaniards? Yet they endured it, while the King stayed among them; either
fearing the Majesty of their Prince, or else faithful even in anger. Nor did
they proceed further then private murmurs, save only their hatred to the
Spanish took a deeper impression in themselves, and by them was spread among
the people, that long since hated the very name of Spaniard. But when the King
went for Spain, and the Court was free from strangers; the Low Country Lords
persuaded themselves, The Lords distates aggravated by the power of Granvel. Of
Anthony Granvel.
they should bear all the sway with the Duchess of Parma, falsely, for they
found the malice of all the Spaniards in one man, Anthony Granvell; whose power
occasioning the open differences at Court, and consequently the public ruin:
it will not be amiss to show you, in this place, his pedigree and parts.

Anthony Perenott was born at Besanson a town of Burgundy, His birth and
parentage. His fathers Offices and estimation with Charles the V. Cardinal
Mercurius.
son to Nicholas Lord of Granvel, who was of mean parentage; and (as some say)
son to a Blacksmith; but a man of excellent endowments, and great judgment,
and succeeded in the place of Mercurinus Arboreus Gattinar, Chancellor of the
Empire, trusted with, and acting in, all the Emperors Defignes. For at the
great Convention of the Estates of Germany in Vangion, he sat President,
representing his Imperial Majesty; who sent him out of Spain to Trent, to do
honor to the Council, and to promise the Emperors presence there. Nor did the
Chancellor loose any opportunity, but in that famous meeting of all
Christendom, silently advanced the service of his Prince. He was the only man
chosen by the Emperor to publish his Decrees of greatest consequence in
Germany; to make peace between the petty Princes; and to work them to join with
the Emperor, in persuading the free Cities to give assistance to King
Ferdinand, to move the Fathers to end the Council, that he might at once settle
the cause of Religion, the Councels of War, and the Imperial Laws. In all
which employments, and the slippery Court affairs, he ever kept his footing
firm; and had the Emperors constant favor, for twenty years together, till
his very dying day. A rare end of a long continued power. He died in August,
An. 1550. His happiness in his issue. Anthony Granvels Abilities.
He was likewise happy in providing wealth and honor for his many children;
particularly for ANTHONY, whom he left Inheritour to his Office, and to the
counsels and favor of the Emperor. And indeed having the helps of a great
wit, and excellent learning, and proceeding with great applause in most of the
Universities in Europe; by his fathers instructions, he easily obtained the
perfect Art of business. So that when he came to be a Statesman, he presently
won upon the Emperors good liking; and made it appear, that he relied not so
much upon his fathers virtue, as his own. In many things he equalled his
father, in many exceeded him. Especially in nimbleness of wit, tiring sometimes
five Secretaries at once, with dictating letters to them, and that in several
tongues; for he understood seven languages exactly. Languages.
But his greatest excellency was his eloquence, Elocution.
wherein none of that Age surpassed him. He had audience in the Council of
Trent, for the Emperor Charles the fifth, and made a quick and handsome
speech, being then Bishop of Arras, of twenty four years of age, in his fathers
time. He was called to ^e one of the great Council of the Empire and
Low Countries: When the Army marched, he still attended the Emperor, and wore
arms. He was the Emperors Ambassador to Princes and Cities, Which did his
business.
and happily dispatched most of his business by the help of his Rhetoric; but
tempered with wonderful discretion: without which allay, all eloquence is but
the unseasonable overflowing of Wit, that cannot keep within its bounds. The
Emperors character of him to King Philip.
When Charles the fifth resigned the Empire, he commended Granvell to King
Philip, with a noble testimony of his merits, They say, the Emperor at his
departure for Spain, professed, that Anthony Granvel was the only man, whose
service he wished his son to use, His artifices to ingratiate himself with the
King.
in things of highest Concernment. But Granvell (knowing such Commendations to
be good while they are fresh, but that when our Parents memory grows out of
date, they often turn to hatred, as if they had in them more of Command then
Duty) hastened to merit the Kings favor with admirable dexterity. For though
it be difficult to please a Successor, commonly differing in nature and
manners: And he effected his design, being employed in things of highest
concernment.
yet Granvel overcame all that difficulty by Observance. And as he had a wit
that could easily new-cast it self into any mould, he transformed himself
immediately into the manners of the Spanish Prince. His studying to fortify
Religion against Heresy, in which he strangely hit the inclination of the
King; his mind neither greedy in seeking honors, nor unfit for them when
offered; his subtilty in decyphering the Princes mind, before he declared
himself in his Commands; conjecturing them by his looks: his abstinency by
night from sleep, by day from meat; his constant pains and fidelity, far above
the practice of the Court, did exceedingly engage the Kings affections to him.
His knowledge of the Emperors Counsels, likewise much endeared him to King
Philip, who by the same Compass meant to steer his Government. For which
reasons, in all his four years stay in the Low Countries, the King did nothing
either at home or abroad, made neither peace nor leagues, with Kings or
Nations; concluded no marriages; quieted no seditions; acted nothing that
related to Religion or the Church, but the Granvell, And by the King commended
to the Governess.
he delivered his commands. Nay, when the King went from the Low Countries into
Spain, he left this man to the Duchess of Parma, as a principal instrument of
State: and told her, it concerned the Low Countries, that she should use his
advice oftener then any other of the Council. And she did it, so that he had the
same place and esteem with the Kings sister, His favor with her.
that he had with the King. His power (which rarely happens) being thrice
successively confirmed. Seldom any private or public business passed, but he
was first heard to the point in agitation; and to hear him was to be surprised:
So dextrous he was, and his counsel so appliable to all occasions, His
dexterity in giving counsel.
that the Prince was free to choose, and thought himself Author of the
determinions, for which Granvel by his own judgment had prepared him; and
could not but love the Modesty of his inventions, not compelled (which is
unsufferable to Princes) to commend the wisdom of his Teacher. And though
Garnvell, under show of observance, arrived at once both to Power and Favor:
yet he seldom made any Dispatches in person, For the most part by Letters.
Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.
but (reviving the fashion of Augustus and Tiberius their times) by Letters and
Notes under his hand to the Governess. I have at this present a great volume of
his letters, which he sent her (though they were both in Town, and commonly in
the same house) to avoid, as I conceive, that jealousy the Lords had of his
power; or else, that his advices might be deeplier imprinted. But it is hard to
deceive the Court. And now no man doubted, but that all was transacted by
Granvell, both at home and abroad: and as it often happens, things he had no
hand in (when once his name was up for a Favorite) were believed to be his
doing. Indeed at first, the Prince of Orange, Count Egmont, The Lords first
scorn,
and the greatest Low Country Lords, did not much fear his power, because they
despised him as an upstart. But when his authority began daily to increase, and
all things to bend that way; nay, some of the Nobility to apply themselves to
him, and become his Creatures, then they took notice of him as a Competitour.
And then emulate him.
And because he seemed to stand upon even ground with them; they began to raise
batteries against him: at first civilly, showing themselves enemies within
compass. Afterward, interpreting the greatness of the Kings favor to him, by
the new honor of his Cardinals scarlet; and suspecting that he infused into
his Majesty a doubtful opinion of the Low Country Lords; t^en they extended
their malice beyond all bounds; and came to the Councel-board in presence of
the Duchess, rather to quarrel, then to give advice: having commonly no other
reasons for dissenting, Particular offenses taken against him.
but because Granvel had assented. And to exasperate them, fell out many
accidents which I shall here repeat together. Charles Count Lalin, Especially
by Count Lalin, Regnard. Florent. V. A. de init. l. 1.
and Simon Regnard, in the name of King Philip, had concluded a Truce for five
years with Henry the French King. The conditions whereof displeased the
Spaniard, and therefore Regnard was out of favor with King Philip, because
more in fault, as the rumor went. Regnard suspecting I know not by what
discovery, that by Granvels means the King was alienated from him, railing
every where upon the man, drew Count Lalin to side with him, because he was the
principal Commissioner, and therefore all reports of infidelity in that
Treaty, must chiefly reflect upon him. The infection of this conspiracy was
caught from Lalin, Count Horn. C. Megen.
by Philip Montmorancy Count Horn, (whose sister Lalin had married) and struck
to his heart, when Count Horn saw Charles Breme Count of Megen preferred before
him to the government of Gelderland; which repulse he took as received by
Granvels instigations. The like cause had Robert Brederod, who stood to be
Bishop of Cambray, and had the votes of all the Lords: against him Granvel
appeared, for Maximilian of Bergen, a man better meriting his favor, Lazarus
Zwend
who carried the Bishopric. At the same time Lazarus Zwend (that had been
General of the Germans in the war of Hungary, and at the battle of S. Quintin)
promised himself all his own wishes, relying on his intimacy with the Prince of
Orange, and Count Egmont; but they could not with all their power get him
admitted to be of the great Council: Granvel, as was thought, putting a rub in
his way. Which affront he very weakly showed himself sensible of, and
endeavored at all opportunities, to make his friends have the same resentment.
C. Egmont.
But the offense taken by Count Egmont was of an higher nature, because he
thought himself abused by Granvell in the Government of Hesdin: and after the
death of the Abbot of Trull, when Count Egmont petitioned the Pope for his
kinsman: and Granvel for himself, The Prince of Orange.
this man was preferred. But the Prince of Orange held it as a great indignity,
not only to be defeated of his hopes, for the Government of all the
Low Countries, by the practice of the Duke of Alva and Granvell; but that they
had so ordered it, as to hinder the marriage (to which he had long aspired)
with Christierne Duchess of Lorain: The Governess is for Granvel.
and though the Duchess of Parma labored to take off the opinion of Granvels
power, and to extinguish the envy toward him (contrary to the practice of some
Princes, that like it well, to have a servant on whom men may discharge the
hatred due unto their Masters) yet she could not persuade his enemies; But all
will not d^.
who interpreted this very endeavor of the Duchess, as the greatness of her
goodness to him. The Lords bandy against him.
Most of the Nobility having these and other private discontents, were so much
the more eager to bring down Granvels power, that is their common prejudice. In
council, they had long by compact and design opposed Granvels motions, rather
like his despisers, then the Princes Counselors. In their Letters to the
King, in Complaints to the Governess, they gave him the Character of a proud
man, one that hated the Nobility, and would in time be the destruction of the
Low Countries. They had already made him odious to the people, and persuaded
them, that the supernumerary Bishops, the reviving of the Emperors Edicts; and
the severity of the Spanish Inquisition, proceeded merely from this one man's
ambition: who by en^laving the Low-countrey-men aimed to enthrone himself. in I
know not what Principality. And the people heard them, because they hated him.
Nor did Granvel decline the opinion, He slights their calumnies.
whilst he alone solicited the cause of Religion, with somewhat more violence,
then caution. And as he was of a confident and high spirit, he easily slighted
all the threatenings and conspiracies of his Competitours; and declared himself
to depend wholly upon the Kings favor: unless perhaps he appeared to slight
them, left if he should seem fearful to be trod upon, they might think it
f^isible to tread upon him. The Commons concur with the Lords.
Hence the people (prone of their own nature to live licentiously, and prompted
forwards by their commerce with heretics) charged Granvel with all the Kings
severer proceedings, not more out of hatred to him, then out of love to the
Lords, whom they looked upon as Patrons of the Commons, and Assertours of their
Countries liberty. Therefore they adhered to them, and were ^at their devotion.
And the Lords (laying hold of this occasion of protecting the Public, The
Lords make use of them to trouble the Peace.
to revenge their Private injuries) had good hope to remove their Rival, if
what the King acted by him against the peoples minds, were made void by their
assistance Therefore some of them in the Provinces where they commanded, were
slow in advancing the Cause of Religion; and in publishing the Emperors
Edicts, enjoined them by the King. Others tacitly favored the multitude, and
persuaded them not to suffer a new Tribunal to be erected, to bolster up the
Romish bawbles, and the Spanish superstition. Some that preferred Ambition
before Religion, connived at the coming in of heretics from all quarters,
encouraged seditious conspiracies, and lastly, omitted nothing whereby the King
might understand, how much he had misplaced his favor, To make Granvel odious.
in trusting the Netherlands only to the pride of Granvel. By this means it
was presumed, And to displace,
they should see him removed from the Low Countries, and perhaps from the Kings
good opinion: or howsoever, it would subject him to perpetual danger of the
People and Tumults. Both which came to pass, At least to vex him.
and that at last which some of them never aimed at, I mean, In the interim,
the Heretical Faction is strength^ned, more then some Lords could wish.
the setting up of the Heretical party; the increase of licentious and
seditious persons; shame and fear of the Law by degrees cast off, and finally
reverence and fidelity to the Prince. And many honest men being involved in the
same fare, such a fire of mutiny and war was kindled, as afterward the blood
of the people, the ruins of Cities and Provinces never could extinguish. From
such small beginnings the greatest mischiefs often spring, and are precipitated
with a far greater violence, then could proceed from the strength of their
first mover. For it is most true, that to fire houses and to set bounds and
limits to the flame, Howbeit others of them desired the troubles.
is nor in one man's power. Yet some there were of the Nobility, that wished
those troubles, and at that very time, plotted the change of Government. Of
these were two sorts: Some either out of hope of a loose life, Th^se men were
of two sorts.
or infected by their wives (which they had married out of the cities (or
rather pest-houses) of Germane heretics, daily made William of Nassau Prince
of Orange
portrait less account of observing the Orthodox Religion; and therefore
inclining to the heretical party, impudently encouraged them, and hoped that
one day, they would master and put down the Catholic government. Others to
maintain their port and dignity, having consumed their private patrimonies,
were necessitated to make use of the public troubles. For not a few of the
Nobility (both in the former Wars, and afterward at Court,) accounting it a
dishonor to be outbraved by Forreiners, especially by the Spanish Lords, in
gallantry of apparel, or arms, in the train of friends and followers; in the
number and rich trappings of their horses; had at this Vie consumed vast sums
of money, the expense being more grievous to them then to the Spaniards, who
commonly had far greater fortunes. Therefore since on the one part, no revenues
would hold out to maintain these scenes of Pride; Both which at last
contributed to the ruin of the Public.
and yet they had still in their small fortunes, great spirits, sensible of the
honor of their Families. On the other part, while the heretics, to avoid
banishment, or the hangman (which was the business then in agitation) promised
to the Nobility money in abundance, and especially to the Governors of
Provinces. Diverse Noblemen, upon these hopes, easily revolted to them: and
neglecting their own private benefit, and the safety and tranquillity of the
state, by their cunning dissimulation mocked the endeavors of the Governess
and Granvell, in pacifying those tumults and seditions: which they in the mean
time very well approved of, as the Mart from whence their richest traffic came.

But the causes which hitherto I have numbered up severally, and showed them to
proceed from the Lords and Commons, Of the Prince of Orange.
did at last all meet in one point of concurrence in the Prince of Orange. To
demonstrate this, I will give you an exact account of his descent, his nature,
and by what arts he attained his power: a necessary narration, and I presume
not unpleasing to the Reader: that such as shall see him, almost for sixteen
years, General of great armies fighting with various fortune: may have his
manners, and as it were the Picture of his heart before their eyes. His
Ancestors came out of Germany, Into the Low Countries.
The house of Nassau in Germany was ever Princely, but when Adolphus of Nassau
was elected Emperor, he made it a Sovereign Family. Count Otho brought them
into the Low Countries, almost two hundred years ago, where they were
established by his nephew Engelbert the first, and by the nephew to the first,
Ann. 1292.
Engelbert the second. The Prince of Orange in his Apol. 1581.
That being great Grandfather, this great Uncle to William Prince of Orange.
Which Princes left him the inheritance of many towns in the Low Countries, and
other fair possessions, that came to them by marriage: which made him there a
person of eminence, Their power in the Netherlands.
afterward increased by the Principality of Orange, that descended from the
Chalons upon the family of Nassau. For his fathers brother Henrick, had a son
named Renatus, by Claudia Chalon si^ter to Filibert Chalon Prince of Orange.
Renatus after the death of his uncle Filibert, succeeded him in the
Principality upon condition, that he should change his name from Nassau to
Chalon. Anno 1544.
But he likewise dying without issue, the Principality of Orange, and the rest
of the great estate which he had in Burgundy, The birth of the Prince of Orange.
came to his Cosen german William, whom we now speak of, by the favor of the
Emperor Charles the fifth. William was born in the year one thousand five
hundred thirty three, Henr. Ranzou. in exemplis Astvol. Michael Airzinger in
Leone Belg.
the eldest of five brothers, and it is reported his father (whose name was
William) desired to know his sons fortune of Philip Melanchthon that was by
Chaldean rules, rather as a Professor then an artist, held to be skillful in
Calculating of Nativities. His Nativity calculated.
Who having erected their Schems told him, Williams fortune was not in all
parts alike proportioned. For at first, his stars would shine down honor
upon him him: afterward, he should lay his design for greater honors: but at
last, come to an unfortunate end. What his judgment was of the other four
brothers, I have neither heard spoken, nor seen written. Perhaps, because they
wanted success, they were passed over in silence: lest it might discredit his
art. Charles the fifth took him away when he was very young, from his father,
who had revolted to the Lutherans, and delivered him to his own sister, Mary
Queen of Hungary. As soon as his years permitted, His civil.
the Emperor made him a gentleman of his bedchamber, and was much delighted
with the constant waiting and conditions of the youth: because he was very
modest, and did not make vain ostentations of his service, nor omit any
opportunity to be serviceable: and that in a grave and serious manner; that he
might be thought more capeable then ambitious of employment. And military
education.
From the bedchamber, where he kept his place for almost nine years, the
Emperor made him a soldier, and General of his horse in the Low Countries.
Nay when the Duke of Savoy left the army, Called the ordinary Bands. Emmanuel
Fishberti Duke of Savoy.
he substituted in his place William Nassau Lieutenant-generall: though he
wanted years for so great a command, being not past twenty two, and was brought
in over the heads of many great Commanders, among others (which the Prince of
Orange himself admired) of Count Egmont: who besides his experience in the
wars, was twelve years older. Thenceforth, as well in peace as war, he was by
the Emperor valued in the first file of Nobility; and employed upon diverse
noble Embassages. His favor at Court.
Indeed, in the Emperors great resignment of his dominions; which was his last
act as a Prince, when he sent the Crown and Scepter of the Empire (as we have
told you) to his brother Ferdinand by the Prince of Orange, he clearly showed,
by that last honor he could do, the greatness of the affection which he bare
him. Some suspect him.
And though some, that suspected his nature from the first, often wished the
Emperor to look to him, and not to be over confident of his disposition; which
under the pretense of virtue, covered fraud and design; and that he should take
heed how he cockered up that fox in his bosom, that one day would devour all
his domestic Poultry. But the Emperor frowned upon and contemned these
aspersions, knowing they are ordinarily cast upon such as Princes favor. Nay
these rather confirmed him in the Emperors good opinion. Howsoever by making
honorable mention of him, The Emperor answers all Objections.
and commending the modesty and fidelity of the youth, the Emperor seemed to
discharge that envy. Perhaps he thought the Prince deserved it not; perhaps it
was the common fault of masters, that apprehend themselves to be no less
concerned in such invectives, then their favorites and servants; and without
looking into the business, make themselves patrons of the men, whose cause they
think their own. Yet in the Prince of Orange, at that very time, were symptoms
of a disease, And commends him to the King.
that should have been prevented, or at least observed. Which symptoms grew
more and more apparent after the Emperors departure. For though at his leaving
the Low Countries, the Emperor commended the Prince of Orange to his son
Philip, The King makes great account of him.
and King Philip both of his own accord and for his fathers sake, gave him many
testimonies of his good liking; for he made him one of the Order of the Golden
fleece, sent him t^ conclude a peace with Henry the Frensh King; and that done,
deliverec him for hostage. And to those large Provinces of the Netherlands,
which the King trusted to his Government, he added Burgundy, though far
remote. But what could all this work with him, The Causes of his Discontent.
that gave out, the King was obliged to bestow upon him the absolute Government
of all the Low Countries, for his pains and expenses, to defend the greatness
of the house of Austria. And in his Apology against King Philip, he took upon
him the boldness (after he had particularized the merits of his Ancestors
toward the Emperors Maximilian and Charles) to conclude, That but for the
Counts of Nassau, and Princes of Orange, the King of Spain could not have
loaded the front of his proclamation (wherein he proscribed him) with the
glorious titles of so many Kingdoms and Nations. Frustrated therefore of his
hopes to govern the Low Countries; and perceiving Granvell to be the great man
in the Dutchesses new Court, and fearing he should every day be less esteemed
by her, whom he would have prevented of her Government, by professing himself
to stand for Christiern Duchess of Lorrain, and endeavoring to bring her in;
he resolved to maintain his greatness by another way: and, provoked by new
indignities, His Design,
to act what he had long since designed. And though I have no certain ground to
believe, that at the very first, he laid his plot to revolt from his allegiance
to the King; yet I dare boldly affirm, he studied, at that time, some
innovation: whereby he might weaken the Kings Government; overthrow the Spanish
power; encourage the heretical party; by right or wrong advance his own honor
and authority; and if fortune made him any other fair offer, His Wit and
Manners.
to lay hold upon it. Indeed for altering of a Government, I know not if any
man ever lived, fitter then the Prince of Orange. He had a present wit, not
slow to catch at oportunities, but subtle; concealing himself, not to be
sounded, even by those that were thought privy to his secrets. Then he had a
rare way to ingratiate himself with any that but came to speak with him: Which
relished not of Courtship or Levity.
so unaffectedly he conformed to strangers manners, and served himself of
others ends; not that he stooped to the poor forms of complement, and common
professions of imaginary services, wherewith at this day men do honorably mock
one another. But showing himself, neither sparing nor prodigal of his
Courtship, he so cunningly contrived his words, that you could not but think,
that he reserved far more for action. Which begat a greater opinion of his
discretion: and gave more credit to his pretensions. Besides, though he was of
a proud and infinitely ambitious spirit; yet he so carried it to the outward
show, that he seemed to command himself, and not to be sensible of injuries.
But he was as subject to fear, as free from anger: Insomuch as he doubted all
things, thought every thing unsafe: but yet desisted not; because on the one
part his brain, fruitful in plots, if the first took not, presently made new
supplies; on the other part, his vast and immoderate ambition, The splendor of
his Family.
strangled all doubts and delays. But in the splendor of his housekeeping,
and the multitude of his friends and followers, he was equal to great Princes.
No man in all the Low Countries more hospitable, and that gave nobler
entertainment to foreign Ambassadors, then the Prince of Orange; which hugely
pleased the people, that delight to have the wealth and power of their Country
showed to strangers: nor was it distasteful to Princes, with whom he redeemed
all the opinion of his pride, by his humble and familiar invitations of their
servants. His doubtful Religion.
But for his Religion, that was very doubtful, or rather none at all. When he
was with the Emperor and the King, he seemed to be Catholic. When they left
the Low Countries, he returned by little and little to his Fathers heresy,
which was bred in him of a child: yet so, as while the Duchess of Parma
continued Governess, he rather appeared a Favourer of the heretical party, He
declares himself a Calvinist. Apology 1518.
then an Heretic. Lastly, after the Duchess was removed, he declared himself
for Calvin (for from a Lutheran, he was now turned to his opinion) not only as
a private Sectary; but as the great Defender of his Faith. Afterward he writ a
Book, His Apology, Anno 1518.
wherein he testified to all the world, That from his childhood, he was ever
much inclined to the Religion (which he calls Reformed: the seeds whereof his
heart always constantly retained; which at length ripened with his years. And
that all he did at home, or in the wars, related to this end, To maintain
Religion in her first Purity, assailed and shot at, with so many Laws and
Edicts by the Emperor and the King. Whether he wrote truth, and was indeed a
Calvinist in opinion; Whether from his heart or no, is uncertain.
or rather by that means sought to ingratiate himself with the men, whose
service he had use of, some have made a doubt: it is most probable, his
Religion was but pretended, which he could put on like a Cloak, to serve him
for such a time; and put it off again, when it was out of fashion. Truly, that
Religion was not much to be regarded, Ann. 1581.
when Authority was to be acquired, or established; are the words of his own
letter to Alencon, Brother to the French King; part whereof in its due place, I
shall insert. This, it was thought, he learned in the villainous school of
Machiavel, whose Books he seriously studied; as Granvel affirms in his Letter
from Spain, directed to Alexander Prince of Parma. William of Nassau furnished
with these Arts, how he employed them, in exasperating the minds of the
Low Country men, I shall now briefly open. He was Hostage for K. Philip, to
Henry K. of France.
He was hostage, as I have formerly said, to Henry the second of France.
Hunting with the King, they fell into that discourse, which he speaks of in his
Defense against his Proscription published by King Philip; wherein he glories
in the discovery which he made, of the plot betwixt him and King Henry: Ann.
1581.
who letting fall some words of the grand Design (but abruptly and obscurely,
He discovers both the Kings designs against the heretics.
lest perhaps he might reveal it to one, that was not of counsel with them) the
Prince of Orange, as he himself says, to wyerdraw the whole business out of
the King, takes upon him to have been long privy to the plot, which the King
easily believes, thinking the Prince in great esteem with his Master, and
seeing him his hostage there. He therefore freely tells him, that by the
Spanish Ambassador, the Duke of Alva, King Philip, agreed with him to destroy
all the families of the new Religion: which he was to see done in France, and
King Philip in the Low Countries: in which he likewise had erected a constant
Tribunal, where matters of Faith should be tried, which would be as good as his
Forts, to keep his people in obedience. The Prince of Orange finding the
design, which he knew to be King Philips, returned into the Low Countries.
There when he saw the Duchess of Parma made Governess, and Granvel joined with
her; the number of Bishops increased; and Inquisitors of Faith to be brought
in; he conceived this to be the design which King Henry had discovered to him.
And from thence takes his hint for Commotion.
And when he perceived that these new Decrees had filled the Cities with fears
and jealousies, and that no part of the State looked cheerful; he resolved to
make use of the opportunity: supposing, that if he should feed the beginnings
of these discontents on his part, as many already (corrupted with heresy)
would do on theirs; Ann. 1559.
that he should undoubtedly elude the designs of the Spanish. Beginning at the
Convention of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, out of the same Apology.
And now that he had some little glimmering of an exspectation, and began to
form great plots to bring all his aims to their desired ends, thus he set them
a work.

The King, Hoventius Momorancy, Lord Montany, Anthony Lalin Count Hochstrat.
at Gant, called a Chapter of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, in whose
Creation (because all authority was not in the King, as Master of the Order,
but in the joynt-votes of his Companions) that some might be chosen which hated
the King, (I suppose, Monting and Hochstrat) the Prince of Orange took a great
deal of pains, solicited, and prevailed with his Colleagues, to promise him
their several suffrages. And both these Lords now obliged, he meant hereafter,
as purchased by this favor, to make use of. Besides, when the Cities mutinied
(as I have told you) because Spanish Garrisons were left upon the frontiers;
Starting matter for sedition out of the Spanish soldiers.
he privately inflamed their fury; and argued with his friends of the pride of
those foreign soldiers, that under color of defending the Borders, labored
to put a yoke upon free Cities. Withal, he commended the loyalty of the
Low-countreymen, which notwithstanding suffered, for that strangers were
preferred before them. 1559.
And put it in their heads, In the some Apology.
that the Estates who were then to be summoned, should with great earnestness
petition the King, that his Spanish soldiers might be disbanded, by his
Fathers example, who never had any Garrisons in the Low Countries, but of
Low Country men; which accordingly the States were suitors for, with great
noise and clamor. And at that time, the King promised to satisfy them by word
of mouth, which afterward he really performed: the Prince of Orange much
glorying in it, who, in his Letters professed himself to have been the author
of sending away the Spaniards: and that by this act (which he accounted an
eternal honor to him and his Colleagues) he brought two things about: the one,
that he freed his Country from slavery; the other, that he opened (they are
his own words) the way to Religion. Only to his and their Crown of glory this
was wanting: that as they had turned the Spaniards out of the Low Countries, so
they had not shut the door upon them, locked it fast, guarded the Pass, and
kept them from all hope of ever coming back again. Yet he doubted not, but as
he had purged a great part of the Netherlands of them, so as they could call
nothing there their own, but the bones and ashes of their Countrymen; in like
manner he should quickly bring to effect, or at least endeavor it, that they
should all be banished out of the seventeen Provinces, and being compelled to
return to their own Country, should at last suffer the Low Dutch to enjoy the
liberty of their fortunes, Out of the new Bishops.
bodies and souls. Nor was he less active against the design of introducing
new Bishops; which (by the spirit of Calvin) he used to call hangmen, In his
said Apol. and so Granvel writes* Ann. 1582.
brought in to flea and burn mankind. And to that end, he applied himself to
the Abbots, some of which (instructed at private conferences, and emboldened
against the fear of any Magistrate) were for a great while his principal
instruments of discord. But he had not better success in any thing, then in
defeating the Emperors Edicts, and the Kings proclamations. For as nothing
more amazed the people, then the name of the Inquisition; Out of the
Inquisition.
so the Prince of Orange, in that fright, aggravating their fears and
jealousies, telling them of the breach of Privilege, the tyranny of the
Spaniards, the slavery of the Low Country men, most of them vain surmizes, but
yet working in minds inclined to suspicion: It is hardly credible, what an
odium he brought upon the Inquisition; how he turned the Peoples hearts from
the King, and made them hate the Spaniards. So that many (being persuaded the
freedom of their Nation would be lost, if this went on) would as soon have let
into their cities the Enemies of their Country, Out of Granvels power.
as the Inquisitours of Faith. The Prince of Orange, glad of this success, and
being (as I have said) enraged at Granvels power; absolutely resolved to join
with the People and the Heretics, who (he knew) hated Granvel, and he was glad
they did so. Out of the troubles arising in the Duke of Alva's government.
At length, new and far more implacable tumults rising every where in the
Low-countreyes, when the Duke of Alva was Governor; the bolder the people
grew, who then refused their pardons (offered by some Governors of Cities) and
publicly renounced their allegiance: the more high-hearted grew the Prince of
Orange. His hopes, which hitherto were uncertain and far off, now came near
and courted him. So that scorning the Court, he looked for greater and quicker
fortunes in the Wars. But the mischief daily increasing, seditious Citizens
joined with the Heretics; The mutinous Citizens and the Heretics desire to
have the Prince of Orange for their General.
part necessitated to avoid punishment, but the major part invited with hope of
liberty. That their pretenses might show more honest, and promise more safety,
under some one General; they looked upon the Prince of Orange, whom they knew
to be ambitious to command in chief, and therefore an enemy to the Spaniards:
besides, that he was seasoned with heresy, at least engaged by affinity with
Heretics, whose service he made use of. They likewise knew he had many strong
towns of his own, and that he would be supported by the counsels and wealths of
foreign Princes. And he himself was partly encouraged by his inclination to the
Heretics, (to favor which party, he was at home persuaded by his wife, Anne
daughter to Maurice Duke of Saxony.
his brother, and his friends; abroad by great Persons) partly out of hatred,
first to Granvel, afterward to the Duke of Alva, always to the Spaniards:
especially, because despairing of the Kings favor, he hardly saw any place
left for drawing back his hand, when he had cast the Die: partly, by the
opportunity of Command, which from all quarters was offered to him. He offers
himself.
Upon these motives he wholly revolted to them, for whose defense he had the
color of protecting their Liberties; with abundant matter of feeding his own
hopes. And thus, what neither the Prince of Orange, To the destruction of the
Public.
nor any General whatsoever could have done without a routiny of the People:
nor a mutiny of the People without a General; was effected by a conspiracy of
both, a sudden flame of Rebellion breaking out, which afterward continued a
long fire of War, equally pernicious to the Conquerours, and the conquered.

Wherefore, The Causes and Occasions of the Belgic ^nmults summed up.
to give you a full View of all at once; it is very considerable whether
Misfortunes succeed or meet. And as by the conjunction of stars, ill winds
they say are generated; so questionless there is a conjuncture of evils in the
destruction of Men and Kingdoms. The sudden inundation of Heresy, the peoples
dislike of the Spanish soldiers, the Multiplication of Bishops, the Revival of
the Emperors Edicts, with the punishment of Delinquents, the defeated hopes of
the Nobility, Granvels greatness at Court, because they all happened together,
easily raised those tumults and troubles. Nevertheless, all were not of one
Quality; for many of them seemed honester Pretenses then the rest; but two of
them did the business, Heresy and Ambition: though going under other Names,
borrowing elsewhere their occasions, and beginnings: For the Heretics having
made the People theirs, pretended the Privileges of the Low Countries; and
lest the Duchess of Parma, their Governess should oppress them, they put
themselves under the Protection of the Nobility. These gudgeons were greedily
swallowed by many; some set on by Poverty, more by their Repulses and Affronts,
most by the Power of Granvel. Nothing could therefore advantage them but
troubles, wherein they should receive Pay from the Heretics, and Employment
from the Governess: and by that means Granvels Power would decay for want of
Action. The peoples contumacy thus increasing with their strength, they
despised Government, terrified the Cities with seditious tumults, and
immediately after in many places, violated and robbed the Churches. Lastly, in
some places were discovered evident signs of subjects intending a Revolt,
which was now set a foot.

And thus much I have discovered of the Original of the Low Country Tumults:
which before the departure of the Duchess of Parma out of the Netherlands,
being laid and almost extinguished, revived again, far more fatally in the
Government of the Duke of Alva; whilst their Abettor the Prince of Orange, took
opportunity of the peoples falling into rebellion; but not likely to hold out
long, without a General: and upon their open defection from their Prince, he
long opposed the Spanish forces, as their General. Wherein how much the Spanish
erred in pressing unseasonable remedies; or the Low Country men in disobeying
their Sovereigne; I had rather you should gather out of the Narration of things
themselves, then out of the arguments and partial disputes of an Historian.

The End of the second Book.
The History of the LOW COUNTRY WARS. The third Book.
THe new Governess took care in the first place to send away the Spanish
soldiers. 1559.
For the Provinces complained (as I have showed you) that the four months were
past, The Spanish soldiers have Orders to depart.
wherein the King promised to free the Low Countries of foreign soldiers; and
yet, they were kept in Garrison: but the Duchess of Parma had put it off so
long, because she most confided in the valor and faith of the old soldiers,
if any troubles should arise at home, by the contagious example of their
neighbors, that were together by the ears about Religion. Which was the cause
that when the Low-countreymen denied their Pay, she her self borrowed money to
supply them. But the Low-countreymens complaints daily multiplying, they
alleged to the Governess, that the King had obliged himself in honor; and her
husband Octavio Duke of Parma (who never liked the stop of the Spanish army in
the Netherlands) at his departure into Italy, persuading his wife to let them
go; she writ letters to the King for his assent. And upon the receipt of money
from Spain, together with the Kings Commission, her Excellence drew out the
Garrisons from the border-towns, commanding them presently to march to Ulushen,
and to go abroad with the first fair wind, for Spain. But while shipping was
prepared, winter coming on, the Governess received an Express from the King, 4.
October.
enjoining her not yet to send away the Spanish Garrisons: but (as in her
discretion she thought fit) to spinne out time, Their Departure countermanded
by the King.
till the King sent his absolute determination. And I believe, his Majesty
always desired their stay in the Low Countries; yet perhaps he was more moved
to it, by new suspicions, collected out of Granvels letters, who having an eye
upon the actions of the Nobility, made an ill construction of their eagerness
to expel the Spaniards: and perhaps penetrated further into the Prince of
Oranges designs. But the Duchess could not at that time obey the King, by
reason the hatred and quarrel between the two Nations was then
irreconciliable. For the Spaniards were enraged because the Low-countreymen
were so violent to have them gone. Whereat the Low-countreymen rage.
And the Low-countreymen, vexed with new grievances, were the more fierce in
urging their departure. So as the Zelanders (in whose islands the Spaniards had
lain for a wind) being now grown desperate, And grow desperate.
resolved to work no more upon the sea banks: but though before their eyes the
water bore them down in many places, yet they said, they had rather have their
land drowned, then plundered. So, long since, Tacitus in his Annals. l. 13.
the General of the Ancibarians vowed to do, in the same place, against the
Romans. Nay they professed openly, in the Spaniards hearing, The sea should
swallow them alive, ere they would set foot out of doors to hinder it, as long
as foreign soldiers tread upon their ground. Yet the Governess to comply with
the Kings desires, delayed the Spaniards going aboard; and debated, how she
might call them back from Zeland, in her Cabinet council: Called the Consult.
and with some few others of approved faith, whom she joined to them. But all
things were represented full of mavelous difficulty. 1560.
For they could not be called back, before Towns were appointed for them to be
quartered in; The Consulters are of opinion the soldiers should not be stayed.
but those could not be appointed, without their Governors, who would, no
doubt, protest against it. Then it was to be considered, whether they should be
kept in their winter quarters in a body? but that would be insufferable to the
City that should give them quarter: or whether they should be dispersed through
the Provinces? but then they must be exposed to all injuries and indignities,
which the people (that contemned their small number) would be sure to put upon
them. It was likewise considerable, Where the Spaniards should have pay? since
the Low Countries had vowed to part with no money neither to them, nor their
own Countrymen, till the Netherlands should be cleared of foreign force.
Though the Governess knew this to be so, 1560.
yet that she might leave nothing unattempted; Or by consulting to gain time,
she brought the whole business to the Council table. But here the same votes
passed. Of the same mind were all the Council of State.
And as the number of Counselors was greater, so was their confidence. Some
affirmed the Cities, when they should hear of that delay, 1560.
would publicly claim promise of the King, and that the States would take it
as an huge affront, when they suspected the Kings word had failed them: some
alleged the complaints of the Merchants; Others the pay which the King owed
to the Low Country soldiers. Lastly, that their going aboard could not be
deferred, was the opinion of the whole Council, But only Granvell.
Granvell excepted, who opposed them all, either to please the King, or because
he thought it would conduce to the good of the Low Countries; or because he was
unwilling to be without such a guard, in case his Rivals should conspire
against him. But when he had held out as long as either his authority or
elocution could resist; Who at last consents.
at last, he yielded to number and weight of reasons. Perhaps he was afraid
that any thing should be carried at the Board without Granvels consent. Which
made him vote with the rest, and, as he would have it believed, willingly. The
Governess therefore, moved with the general suffrage, especially seeing them
daily grow more odious; which would make their presence a greater mischief to
the Low Countries then their absence could be: writes to his Majesty the Result
of that Council for Remove of the soldiers, slightly and perfunctorily, as to
the Cause, lest she might be thought to fear the Lords of the Council, unto
whom she read the letters, The Governesses Express to the King.
before the packet was dispatched away. Her private letter.
But by the same post she wrote to the King, in ciphers, That she was not able
to retain the Spaniards any longer. The Provinces being all resolved, that so
long as they saw themselves awed by the remainder of foreign soldiers, they
would not give a penny to the Kings Collectours, by way of Subsidy. That
Bankers and Merchants complained, that the Cities which had borrowed of them
great sums wherewith to pay the Spaniards while they seemed ready to depart;
when they saw them demurre upon their voyage, grew angry, and refused to pay
interest for the money. But as there was a general joy as soon as they knew
the Garrisons were drawn out, and shipping ready for them. This had quieted the
murmurs of the money-Masters, and fed the hopes of the Low Country soldiers,
that had fifteen months Pay due to them: which they were promised by the
Cities, as soon as ever the Spaniards weighed Anchor. But if their voyage
should be put off, and the Low-countreymen see them return from Zeland; she
very much feared the soldiers, defrauded of their exspectation, would keep the
highways, and live upon pillage. Nay, that the Cities, through which the
Spaniards had lately passed (not without quarrelling and fighting) when they
came back, would shut their gates, and man their works against them. As to the
jealousy of tumults among the French upon the borders, they had not yet
troubled the Low Countries, nor was it greatly to be feared that forreiners
would invade them in the deep of winter. That a more certain mischief impended
from the peoples discontents, and sedition at home; which if it should rise by
their neighbors example, the Low Countries could not be secured by three
thousand Spaniards. Nor was there at present so much money in the Treasury, or
hope of taking up so much, as would raise an hundred men for present service.
12. December.
Upon receipt of these letters, the King gave a more speedy then willing assent
to the desires of the Provinces; The King assents in these words.
and wrote back to the Governess, That she might (if she thought good) send
away the Spanish soldiers, which would be a seasonable supply in Africa, where
so many thousand Christians had been slain in the battle of Gyrba. That their
officers should be careful the soldiers landed not in a body, sending them
severally by companies and troops, some to Naples, some to Sicily. That he
himself would look to his engagements unto the Cities, and take order that the
money, lent by the Merchants, should upon bills of exchange, be returned them
in Spain. But the wind lying cross, and the winter proving hugely tempestuous,
the Spanish soldiers were constrained, for a time, to stay in Zeland and
Holland. At last, The Spanish soldiers sail for Spain.
the ill weather breaking up, about the beginning of the year, they weighed
Anchors, to the great joy of the Low-countreymen. And because the King had
enjoined the Governess, 1561.
that the Infantry of the Low Countries should from thenceforth be no more
commanded by the Low Country Lords; A new Model of the Foot.
under color of settling the Militia when the Spaniards were departed, she
revived the custom (used in the time that Mary Queen of Hungary governed the
Low Countries, but since intermitted) That the Commanders should be immediately
chosen by her self, to make them more obedient to their Governess. Nor gave she
Commissions to Colonels (which used to be the gift of the Nobility) but
signified her pleasure, that all Captains should receive orders from the
Governors of towns, so long as they quartered within their commands. And she
doubted not, but the Governors would be faithful, because they were placed
and displaced by her. So, for the present, cutting off the Colonells places
from the Militia, she conceived she had likewise cut off the authority of
mutinous soldiers, and the power of the Nobility. Nor had it been a vain
conception (as some thought) if she had withal provided, Touching foreign and
domestic soldiers.
in place of the Spaniards, some new regiments out of other Countries. For
although to bring foreign forces into the Low Countries, was contrary to the
desires of the Estates, and the Kings Promise; yet the Low-countreymen might
have been induced to admit them, (whilst the sending away of the Spanish was
in dispute) if the Governess had conditioned, That so long as their neighbors
were in arms, so long the borders should have their Cities (besides their own
train-bands) kept with foreign Garrisons. Certainly they had in general such a
longing to be rid of the Spaniards, as they would have agreed to any terms
whatsoever: and afterward the Governess might easily have suppressed the
tumults with those foreign soldiers. But being then engaged in troubles, the
Duchess endeavored to compose them for the present. Unless perhaps she were
deterred from entertaining foreign soldiers, by the emptiness of the
Exchecquer: fearing in that great want of money, if their pay should fall
short, forreiners would mutiny more dangerously then the natives; which, from
their Princes hand, might diverse ways receive correction.

The public joy of the Low-countreymen for the departure of the Spaniards, was
accompanied with private joy at Court, 1562.
for Granvels being created Cardinal: and the solemnity of the Prince of
Orange's marriage, solemnized in Saxony, whither many of the Lords were gone
along. For whilst he was present at the marriage of his sister, he had there
concluded a Match for himself (his first wife Anne Egmont being dead) with
another Anne, The Marriage between the Prince of Orange and Princess Anne
daughter to the Duke of Saxony.
daughter to Maurice Duke of Saxony, wherewith he preacquainted the Governess.
Who at first disliking his marrying into a Lutheran family, assured him, it
could never be approved of, either by his Majesty or her self, that he should
have a Lady born in a Lutheran Court, not only bred an heretic by her father
long since deceased, but whose zeal would be daily inflamed by her fathers
brother Augustus (who succeeded Duke Maurice in the Electorate) and by her
mothers Grandfather Philip Lantgrave of Hessen. Landgrave of Hessen.
But the Prince of Orange persuaded her Excellence he had taken order for that;
Anno 1550
and, by way of prevention had agreed with Augustus, Guardian to the Lady Anne,
that he would not marry her unless she turned Catholic; and that Augustus, and
she her self, under their hands and seals had Articled as much: though Philip,
her Grandfather, was against it, refusing the condition of altering her
religion: because he had a design, when that marriage should be broke off,
under color of Religion, to match his own daughter to the Prince of Orange.
The Landgraves Plot to break the match.
To this purpose he had treated with him by letters, promising for his
daughter, that he would accept the condition of her renouncing the Lutheran
faith. So little account they make of abusing Religion, whose profit is their
God. Discovered to the Duke of Saxony.
The plot being discovered and greivously complained of by Augustus, Philip
replied, (said the Prince of Orange) That he being but poor, and the father of
many children, it was not unhandsome for him, to receive conditions from
another: but it would be a dishonor for the Duke of Saxony, a Prince Elector,
to have William of Nassau give the Law to him: and therefore he had refused the
condition for his Neice, and accepted it for his Daughter; but this answer was
not satisfactory to Augustus, therefore to prevent him, he resumed the Treaty
with the Prince of Orange. And when the Prince of Orange had often professed,
That nothing was or could be so dear to him as his soul and honor, and duty to
his Prince; the Governess at last consented. But yet she gave no leave to the
Governors of Provinces to accompany the Prince of Orange (which he made his
suit) because she had use of their service at home; the French being in arms
upon the borders. 1561.
Notwithstanding, lest he should depart discontented, she permitted the rest of
the Nobility to go with him. And in the head of that gallant Troop he rode to
Saxony; followed by Florence Memorancy Lord of Montiny, who, in the name of the
Duchess of Parma, The Nuptials with Princess Anne celebrated.
visited the Bride: and presented her a diamond ring. The Prince of Orange at
Liepswich, a city in Saxony, having celebrated his marriage in the beginning of
August, (where the King of Denmark was present, and diverse other Princes of
Germany) immediately returned into the Low Countries; renewing his promise to
the Governess touching his wives Religion. Which Promise he as truly performed,
as she did the Faith she had sworn to him in marriage: being thirteen years
after taken in adultery, Afterward he sued out a Divorce.
and sent back into Germany by the Prince, who married Charlotte Bourb^n,
daughter to the Duke of Mompensier. Anno 1572
But his new marriage feast was kept in Holland, At Brill is Holland.
with more pomp then joy by the Prince of Orange, offended at Granvels scarlet,
which he had long forborne to wear: but now the Prince found him in his robes.
For Pius the fourth made him, Granvel made a Cardinal.
together with seventeen others, Cardinal of the Sacred Roman Church, this
year, upon the twenty sixth day of February, and within twelve days after, the
messenger brought the news into the Low Countries; soon after came one to
Machin that was to present Granvell letters from his Holiness, A Cardinals hat
brought to him.
and a Cardinals hat. But Granvel put off the receiving of those honors, He
delays his acceptance.
till he knew the Kings pleasure. He therefore dispatched a messenger into
Spain; 25. Feb.
I suppose, because he was sensible, that the Governess had used means to
procure him this dignity without acquainting the King with the contents of her
Letters to the Pope. Indeed she had not only concealed it from his Majesty
(who she knew would like well of it) but from Granvel himself. Though it had
been long in agitation between her and the Pope, as she afterward wrote to the
King. 12. July. 1562.
Therefore, fearing the King would conceive him to be obliged only to the
Duchess, Granvel would not accept that honor without his Majesty's consent,
and as it were from his Royal hand. Perhaps he had some little doubt that the
Duchess, at one time or other, would take occasion, by reason of that
Ecclesiastical advancement, to remove him from the Civil Government. And
therefore he thought it fit, to wait for the Kings approbation, who, by a
special and strict injunction had commended him to the Governess. But
whatsoever he thought, the Duchess liked not his demur upon it, and therefore
answered his letter to this purpose, 27. March.
That she condemned not his resolution, but her opinion was, The Governess
likes not his delay.
he should have done better to have put on his Cardinals Robes without delay,
nor did she doubt, but he would find the King of Spain of the same mind: and
that he would receive, with his Majesty's Letters, his Command to force him to
it. And though she was very glad the Popes Nuntio ( as Granvel wrote to her)
took it in the best sense: Yet he must have a special care, that neither the
Nuntio, nor any of his servants, should write to Rome: lest the Court there,
should take occasions to cavil at this kind of modesty, or lest the Pope
should take offense, as if his gifts should have their estimation from another.
In the mean time she heartily joyed him of his honor, which was joined with so
much good to Religion and the King; to which ends she had endeavored it;
knowing how advantageous it would be to the State of the Low Countries, if
things appertaining to Religion, should be transacted by him, in whom (among
other ornaments) his scarlet would advance his Authority. Yet notwithstanding
these letters from the Duchess, Granvel assented not, till he had answer out
of Spain; then he presently put on his Robes: and so, expressing his duty to
the King, without distaste to the Governess, He at last owns the scarlet.
he received honor from the one, and favor from the other. And hat sent him
by special favor from his Holiness.
Besides his Pall, the Popes Chamberlain, brought him from Rome, a Cardinals
hat, which is seldom sent to any; it being the custom to receive it only in
Rome. Which benefit Granvel ascribed to the Duchess, with exquisite thanks,
not so much extolling the greatness of the bounty, as the giver. And he said,
For which he gives the Governess his reasons: as she wrote to the King.
he had cause to reverence it, as the greatest of all honors, because therein
he adored the goodness of his Prince. But in his private discourse, he plainly
told the Duchess, That considering the Changes of man's life, he had accepted
of that Dignity. 29. Novem. 1564.
Especially, for that, if at any time he should leave the Low Countries (as he
saw a storm over his head, threatening him from the Lords) he might have a
place at Rome among the Cardinals, to which he might make an honorable
retreat. A design at this day hit upon by many, who knowing, That Power
seldom grows old at Court; and that Favor will as surely perish, as Life; are
willing to be advanced into this Order, not as ambitious, but as provident
persons; that in their greatest misfortunes, the Altar and the Church may be
their Refuge.

In the year following, 1562, 1562.
the Civil War of France reviving, the Kings commands came to the Governess,
The Crown of France, being endangered, succors are sent from the
Low Countries. Of the French Tumults.
enjoining her with all possible care and speed to send assistance to King
Charles against his Rebels. An Account of the Management and Original of these
troubles, will not (I suppose) trespass upon your patience; if I repeat briefly
from the beginning, not only what before this time was agitated touching these
succors, but the whole Progress of those French tumults; forasmuch as partly
upon private discord at Court; partly for that in public, which concerned
Religion, it was the Model of the Plot laid by the Low Country men, with so
like success of both Nations, that sometimes unless you be rectified by the
names of Places and Persons, you would not think you read the actions of two
Kingdoms, but of one and the same People. Moreover, some part of the French
Rebellion was carried by advice sent out of the Low Countries; whereof
Cardinal Granvel gave intelligence to his brother, Thomas Lord Cantonet,
Ambassador for the Catholic King in France. This being therefore a business
of no small importance, and because I would not interrupt my Narration of the
Low Country war, with inserting that of France: I shall here, as the matter
and place requires, with no vain not tedious Digression, comprehend the whole.

Heresy having long since poisoned France, had distracted it into factions,
and many men (contemning the old) had taken up the name of the new Religion.
The Lutheran Religion brought into France.
For although after Luthers pestilence reigned in Germany, France had a great
while kept it self free from the infection; yet in the year 1533, it was
attempted by some of Luthers Emissaries. For Francis the first favoring
learned men and learning (as commonly they do, Upon what occasion.
whose actions are worthy of a learned pen) resolved to erect an University at
Paris; The City of Paris.
sending proposals of great entertainment to the ablest scholars of Italy and
Germany. This opportunity Luther took hold of, and sent Bu^er and others of the
boldest of his followers, which by disputing in that confluence of prudent men,
might give an Essay to bring in the new Gospel. Nor wanted there some that were
taken with the Novelty: Especially, Its Favorers. Margaret of Valois, sister
to K. Francis.
because such as were questioned for Religion, had their recourse into
Aquitain, to Margaret of Valois the Kings sister, who perhaps out of hatred to
the Bishop of Rome (which had been infused into her in the family of her
husband Alibret, whom his Holiness depreived of the Kingdom of Navarre) might
lie open to the cunning of the Lutherans: perhaps out of ambition to be thought
a Wit, which she affected beyond the limits of her sex; or indeed (as she
herself confessed some years before her death, at which time she was a
Catholic) it was not out of the perverseness of her nature; but out of
commiseration to the condemned persons that fled to her protection, which made
her so earnest with her Brother in the defense of their new opinions. So that
for ten years together, she bolstered up Lutheranisme in France. It Is almost
extinguished ^y the King.
Though Francis the first was the more slow in eradicating it, by reason of the
Germans and the Swisse that served him against Charles the fifth; till being
grievously offended with the contumacy of the men, and their malice to
Religion, he published many Proclamations against them; not only threatening,
but executing his Laws, until at last he almost extinguished the name of
Luther in his Kingdom. Calvinisme succeeds.
But Calvin's stratagem succeeded somewhat better. Who immediately upon the
death of Francis the first (whilst King Henry was engaged in the Wars)
attempted France, by sending Libels from Geneva. And as he found the minds and
ears of many possessed with Luthers opinions, so he himself set the common
people agogge to understand his new doctrine: First among the Commons.
and the vulgar was very proud (for his Books were writ to their capacity in
the French Tongue) to be made Judges of Religion; and as it were to pass their
votes upon the abstrusest controversies of Faith. Lastly, as they that fall
from the highest point are easily tossed from one breach of the precipice to
another, till they come to the very bottom; having once departed from the old
Religion, they fell headlong from Luther to Calvin; many of them not resting,
till having disclaimed all worship, and not believing there was any God at all,
they finally stuck fast in the bottomless Abyss of evil. And notwithstanding
that Heresy first corrupted the minds of the People, Afterward among the Lords
(they being still the first that are swept away with a Plague) yet in a short
space it made way through the Commons, seized upon some of the greatest Lords,
and came into the Court it self, where it infected many persons of quality: as
that which was likely to be serviceable to the factious Nobility, Out of their
^mulation and envy.
for winning the peoples hearts, and drawing them to make head against their
Competitours, that grew still more powerful with the King: 1562.
For Mary stuart Queen of Scots (of the House of Guise To the Guises.
by her Mother) being married to Francis the second, much advanced the
greatness of the Guises: For the King but fifteen years old, Duke Francis and
his brother the Cardinal.
had use of others service, and these were fit to be employed: Especially
Francis Duke of Guise, and his brother Charles Cardinal of Lorain; he being an
experienced fortunate Commander abroad, and a prudent man at home; this eminent
for a general Scholar, deeply learned, but particularly of a subtle elocution,
and a Majestic kind of presence. But the more these Princes by their own
worth, and the Queens favor, were advanced; the more must others necessarily
be discontented, that either had been, or hoped to be the first in favor.
Principally the Bourbons, and the Colligny; not to name Momorancys, that bore
spleen to the Guises, Anthony of Bourbon King of Navarre.
but with more civility. Indeed Anthony of Bourbon; besides his being the first
Prince of the blood, took upon him (in the right of his wife Joan Alibret) the
title of King of Navarre: He was a man equally tempered for the Arts of War and
Peace; but immoderate in his pleasures, and therefore unfit to establish a
Dominion. Much more fierce and cunning was his brother Lewis Prince of Conde,
The Prince of Conde, brother to the King of Navarre.
constantly engaged and exercised in the War: yet with much more courage and
confidence, then either strength or knowledge. Gaspar Colligny and his brother
Andelot were of like nature; Gaspar Colligny, and his brother Andelot.
but because he was Admiral of the French seas, and this Lieutenant Genera^ of
the Foot, they were likewise in high esteem. These which I have named, with
others of inferior quality, though there was no tie of friendship among them,
yet because they were all concerned in one common Interest, easily conspired
together. All these were infected with Heresy.
And the Engine wherewith they meant to ruin the power of the Guises, was by
protecting the Heretical Party; who, they knew, hated the very name of Guise:
Especially some of them, having now forsaken the old Religion, desired to
appear not only Patrons of the Sectaries, but likewise of the Sect. Among
which, none more boldly professed and maintained Heresy, But the greatest
Professor of them was Joan Alibret, Queen of Navarre.
then Joan Alibret wife to Bourbon* and only daughter to Margaret of Vallois
and Henry King of Navarre. This Lady, because she saw her self deprived of her
Kingdom (of which Ferdinand the Catholic King had by arms dispossessed John
her grandfather, excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome) was transported with so
implacable an hatred unto Rome and Spain, Julius II.
and consequently to the Roman Religion, which she knew the Spanish so much
tendered; that she spared no pains; nor cost, to bear down the Popes Authority,
and the Catholic Faith in France. Heresy therefore supported by these eminent
persons, The Lord join with the heretical rabble.
spread it self so far over the whole Kingdom, that Henry King of France
(whose Armies were kept in action by the Spaniards in the Low Countries)
concluding a Peace with 1559.
King Philip, withdrew his forces and cares to compose discords at home, which
threatened to break out into a Civil War. But the death of King Henry hastened
on the mischief: For, as I said, his son Francis and the Queen and
Queen Mother, the more they used the faithful endeavors of the Guises,
against Heretics; the more they exasperated their enemies, and put them on to
use the proffered service of the Heretics, to suppress their power: Which
moved the Queen Mother, Against whom assistance is requested of the King of
Spain. And promised.
when her daughter Isabella was to go for Spain, to desire assistance from her
Son in Law King Philip, against the Heretics, and troublers of the Kingdom.
To which request she received a very gracious answer, with a magnificent
promise of men and money. Letters from the King to that effect being purposely
read before some of the French Lords, to strike them into a fear; did rather
increase their envy to the Queen Mother, and unite them against Spain. And now
against the Guises, and against the King himself were scattered Libels, as
forerunners of the tumults which immediately followed. Alibret exasperates her
husband against the Catholics.
And the Lady Alibret earnestly solicited the Cause: who remembering her old
quarrel, and impatiently longing for a Crown, rung in her husbands ears, That
he must not suffer this only opportunity of recovering the Kingdom of
Navarre, to slip out of his hands: That he may now make himself head of a
mighty faction, almost half the strength of France: That upon these terms, he
may exspect assistance from the Germane Princes, of the same Religion, from the
English, the Low Country men; besides such Catholics as were enemies to the
Guises, and by a strong conjuncture of all these, they may expel the Guises
out of France, advance the Heretical party, and no doubt, but at length they
may carry that army to the conquest of Navarre. Tit. Live. l. 1.
But this furious Tullia, was married to a milder Tarquin; so as the Duke of
Bourbon being cold, for all this fiery curtain-Lecture: his brother the Prince
of Conde, a Tarquin that well-matched the Lady Alibret* The conspiracy at
Ambois.
is said to have undertaken the Advance of the Conspiracy: and that he
engendered the tempest at Ambois, which for that time was dispersed by the
providence of the Duke of Guise. But new clouds of discontentments gathering,
at last the storm fell more fatally in showers of blood and civil war. They say
in that tumult the name of Hugonot was first brought up at Tours, Where and how
the name of Hugonot came up.
upon this occasion: It is a custom at Tours to fright children by telling
them of Hugh, Thuan. lib. 4. of his History.
who (they say) rides about the Suburbs in the night, pushing at all he meets:
And when the Heretics, that flocked to Tours, had their nightly Conventicles
in the Suburbs, because they durst not come together in the day time, they were
accidentally pointed out to the children, like midnight-goblins, and from Hugh,
by way of jeer, were called Hugonots. Though some derive them from another kind
of original. But whencesoever they had that denomination, it appears they
thought it a scorn to them; Gil. Geneb. lib. 4. of his Chronicle, and others.
and therefore they called the Catholics Papists. But these are only names, I
proceed to the matter, The Authors of the tumult at Ambois.
as it is recorded by them that wrote the History of those times. The first
design of the French tumults was laid at Geneva, by Calvin and Beza, holding
in that town a shameful and barbarous consultation, upon a day appointed,
suddenly to massacre King Francis, the Queen, the Queen Mother, the Kings
brothers, and all the Lords of the Court, The King therefore to curb this
insolence of the Heretics (maintained by some of the Nobility, for their
private ends and feuds) raised an army in France, called his forces out of
Germany, requested succors from the Duke of Lorain, and the King of Spain:
Succors sent from Spain. Limosin.
And indeed King Philip presently sent him soldiers out of Spain (which were
to join with the French Army at Limosin) intending to furnish him with more
men; but hearing of the death of King Francis, he put off his other supplies
till the next year, to which time the war it self was deferred.

The death of King Francis was attended with a great alteration in the state.
Strange fortune. King of Navar, Prince of Conde.
For the Bourbons, one of which was condemned to loose his head, and hourly
exspected the executioner; and the other banished the Court, and generally
thought to be oppressed in his brothers ruin, were presently made the
disposers of the Kingdom, the administration thereof being come into the hands
of the Queen Mother of the house of Medices, who was to govern for King
Charles, a child of ten years old; The Prince of Conde was restored by
Proclamation to his liberty, his offices, and the Kings favor. And the King
of Navarre as nearer to the Crown, by the prerogative of his blood, was
declared Constable of France: the Guises on the contrary falling as much from
their authority; The Hugonots increased in number and licentiousness; The
heretics imboldened.
and were by so much the more audacious, by how much they conceived it would be
more acceptable to the great Constable of France; who, by these troubles, hoped
to recover his wife's portion, the Kingdom of Navar. Granvels design.
But to case him of that care, and the Hugonots of their confidence, Advices
were privately sent out of the Low Countries, by Cardinal Granvell to his
brother Cantonet. Prospero de sancta Cruce came Ambassador to France from Pope
Pius the fourth, Sancta Cruz endeavors to draw off the King of Navarre from
the heretics.
and looking into the King of Navarres designs, he was of opinion, the man was
not troubled so much about Religion, as about the getting of a Kingdom, and
therefore might be drawn from favoring the Hugonots, if he might have some
hope given him of coming to the Kingdom by another means. Wherein Sancta Cruz
meant to sound the King of Navarre. But first he acquainted Thomas Cantonet the
Spanish Ambassador; and he communicated it to his brother Cardinal Granvell.
Then Sancta Cruz proposes to the Constable (what had formerly been agitated)
the restitution of Navarre: and undertakes, if he will but defend the Catholic
cause, that the Pope shall earnestly solicit King Philip; either to resign to
him the Kingdom of Navarre; or to give him, in lieu of it, something of equal
value: and that he doubted not, but King Philip (whose inclination he had found
at his being in Portugal, as he came from Spain into France) would comply with
his Holiness. This often confirmed by Cantonet, won the King of Navarre; who
resolved to treat with the Catholic King himself, and sent one of his meniall
servants, He is taken off, and sends an Ambassador into Spain.
Anthony Almeyda a Portugese, whom he knew to be gracious with his Countreyman
Rui Gomez Prince of Ebora then in greatest favor with the King. Rui gomez de
Silva.
But Granvell receiving intelligence of these proceedings from his brother
Cantonet, was very glad for the success of his design: but yet no less
solicitous (as he wrote to the Governess from Machlin) what the King would
answer to Almeyda, 4. April 1562.
because he conceived, upon that answer depended the motions of the greatest
French affairs. He had pre-acquainted Rui Gomez and the Duke of Alva, and let
them know That it was a nice point and fall of danger: By whom Granvel likewise
writes.
in the managery whereof they might trespass as much by forwardness and
violence, as by security and neglect. And therefore he conceived it best to
offer the Duke of Bourbon some such thing, as if he deserted them, might be
taken away again. After many overtures, Sardinia is offered in stead of Navarre.
the Kingdom of Sardinia was proposed to him in King Philips name. Whereto was
added the Admiralty, and a pension to maintain the office. Whether in carnest,
or no.
Which conditions though some commended, as good for both parties, because on
the one side Sardinia is a greater and richer Kingdom then Navarre; and, on
the other, in the midst of King Philips Dominions which at his pleasure might
command it. Yet some were of another opinion, and thought King Philip, who was
not prodigal of his Kingdoms, only baited him with the hope of Sardinia. For
to what purpose, should the Bourbons be brought into that Island, neighboring
upon Sicily and Naples: where they might revive their ancient factions in those
Kingdoms. Nevertheless the Pope did wisely in moving it, whether he hoped to
bring it about; or understood it to be labor in vain: because it would equally
conduce to the good of Religion in France, whether the King of Navarre was kept
from protecting the heretical party, by a true hope or a false. And truly by
little and little he was so averted from them, that he was not altogether so
kind, as formerly he had been to his wife Joan Alibret; which perhaps made some
affirm in writing, that the Spanish Ambassador endeavored it, A match between
the King of Navarre and the Queen of Scots falsely rumoured. Thuan. in his
History l. 28.
and treated with the King of Navarre to divorce himself from his wife, because
she was foully poisoned with heresy: and gave him hope of a marriage with Mary
Queen of Scots, by the help of her Uncles the Guises: and that he should have
with her, the Kingdom of Scotland, and likewise all Great Britain, wherein he
should be established by the Popes authority, and the King of Spains
assistance; Queen Elisabeth being deposed for heresy. But these were either
vain rumors, or contrived out of envy. Nor is there any color of truth, that
Granvel or Sancta Cruce could be ignorant, that heresy is not a sufficient
cause of Divorce; or that King Philip would offer the Kingdom of Scotland to
one he could not choose but fear, because of former enmity in the business of
the Low Countries: and his power to offend Spain for the future, 1562.
in case he should conquer that whole Island. Indeed two years after, when
there were Treaties between the same Queen of Scots, 1564.
and the Archduke Charles son to the Emperor Ferdinand, and Charles Prince
of Spain, The King of Spains Letter concerning the Queen of Scotlands marriage.
King Philip writ to Granvel, That he was well pleased The Archduke should, in
that, be preferred before his son. But if the King of France should think of
a marriage with her (whereof he had some intimation, that troubled him not a
little) then he should willingly consent to a match betwixt his son and the
Queen. Dat. 6. of August.
Out of which words it may easily be collected, What Philips mind was touching
the Kingdom of Scotland. Nay that the Spanish Ambassador did not so much as
pretend the Proposal of that Match to the King of Navarre, this assure me;
because when he communicated all particulars to his brother Granvel, (as I
observe in their letters) and often mentioned the business of Sardinia, there
is not one word of this marriage. But be what it may, it is certain Alibret
incensed against her husband (who daily grew more averse from the Hugonots,
Alibrets indignation.
and would not hear her when she was a suitor for them) in a rage left his
Court, and withdrew into some Towns of her own. The King of Navarre did not so
much neglect, The Guises power revives.
as his brother the Prince of Conde and the Collignies earnestly embraced the
patronage of the heretics, especially, because the Guises were restored to
grace and favor at Court. And now, such was the face of things, not only at
Court. And the Malice of their Rivals.
And now, such was the face of things, not only at Court (divided into
factions) but likewise all the Kingdom over: that arms were taken up to
maintain the different opinions in Religion, Either party prepares for war.
and all things seemed to boad a Civil war. To the Prince of Conde and
General Collignie the heretics from all parts sent assistance. Nor were the
Guises and Comestabilis Memorancy less aided by the Catholics. With whom the
King of Navarre joined himself; but he was brother to the Prince of Conde; the
King a child and ignorant of deceit. Mean time, Katharine of Medices.
the Queen mother was distracted between two factions, wavering, and fearing
the success of either. Things being in this condition, whilst King Charles
made all the friends and means he could, to help himself: King Philip sends
Foot out of Italy and Spain.
King Philip was extraordinarily careful to dispatch away succors to his
kinsman. Perhaps moved by zeal to Religion: perhaps solicited by his wife, who
trembled at her brother Charles his danger: perhaps jealous of the
Low Countries, lest the arms or example of the French, should there prejudice
his affairs. Therefore having raised three thousand foot in Italy, and made
John Anguisciola their Colonel, to be commanded in chief by Imbertus Platerius
Bordillon, Lieutenant General for the King of Spain in Piemont: May 2.
and dispatching as many more from Spain by the way of Navarre, he writes to
his sister Margaret, Governess of the Low Countries, presently to choose two
thousand horse out of the Low Country Militia, And commands the Governess to
dispatch away the Horse out of the Low Countries.
to march against the French Rebels; and if the Queen or the Guises shall
desire more men, The Belgic Lords oppose it.
to furnish them. The Governess reading the Kings letters at the Counsel board,
observed, that all the Lords were against sending assistance to the French. The
Prince of Orange and Count Egmont argued, that the horse was maintained by the
Provinces for a guard to the Low Countries, and to that end they were at first
ordained. Therefore to carry them out of the Low Countries, the Provinces must
give their consent: but that would be a work of time and exposed to much
danger; now especially when the Low Countries wanted additionall forces, and
ought not to have their own taken from them. But they had perhaps a higher
Consideration. Perhaps set on by the Prince of Conde.
For it was believed, at the instigation of the Prince of Conde, some German
Princes had threatened their neighbors the Low-countreymen, if they assisted
the Guises, enemies to the new Religion, they in defense of the Cause would
bring an army into the Low Countries. Nor do I think it unlikely, that both
the Prince of Conde attempted it, and the Germans undertook it. For on the one
part, the Prince of Condes faction was much troubled about the raising of those
forces in the Low Countries; as appears by a book then published, 1562.
and sent by the Spanish Ambassador Cantonet, April 4.
with letters to his brother Granvel; wherein they give the Heretics many
reasons, why the King of Spain should not assist the Catholics in France. June
30.
On the other part, the Governess by an Express to his Majesty informs him,
That the Low Country men, either terrified by the Germans, or out of some
other cowardly considerations, would hardly, nay could by no means be drawn; to
give order for the horse to march into France: and threatened mischief if they
went. In which letter she seems to touch, what I have here mentioned, the cause
of their dissent. And she her self (either despairing that the Provinces would
let them go, The Governess cools in the business.
or believing they could not be well spared from the Low Countries, equally
endangered by a war from Germany, and an Insurrection at home) pressed the
business more remissely at the Council Table: July 1.
When on the sudden came an Express from the King, wherein the Governess was
not a little chid for her delay; She is checked for it by the King.
and commanded, without further consultation, immediately to send away the
Horse. She, anxious how she might obey his Majesty in that particular, by the
advice of Granvel, changed the name, Instead of men she sends money.
not substance, of the Kings desires, demanding money instead of men: Which
being granted, she presently returned it into France to the Queen-wother, And
writes her reasons to the King.
and signified to King Philip the reason of her so doing, Not only because she
knew money would be far welcomer then men to the Queen (according as she her
self formerly intimated, and after the receipt confirmed) but likewise for fear
the Governess should loose both her endeavors and authority, August 31.
in pressing the Low Country men to that, which she found by experience was
not to be obtained; or if it were obtained, would be disadvantageous. That she
feared the Low Countries now their hearts were down, and that in Tournay and
Valencena were begun no inconsiderable stirrs about Religion; and no doubt but
they would increase, if the seditious once saw the Low Countries left naked,
without defense of their Horse. Lastly, for that some by their Place were to
conduct the Horse, whose faith she might very well suspect; it seemed to be no
less dangerous to trust them with Arms, then to show a diffidence in them, by
choosing other officers. The King received, rather then approved the condition
of the money, which the States had granted, and sending fifteen hundred horse
out of Spain to the Queen Mother, which the Governess was to pay, he
strengthened the Catholics in France. But before these succors came, the King
of Navarre, the Guise, and Momorancy, The King of Navarre enters Roan
triiumphant, and dies.
had taken Roan from the Prince of Condes men. The King himself, though
dangerously shot, lying upon his bed in a kind of Chariot, was triumphantly
brought into the City. But a few days after, his wounds bleeding afresh, in
the same sepulcher with himself he buried his hopes of the Kingdom of
Sardinia; which he had kept alive till his last gasp, to the great good of the
Catholics. Nor was the War prosecuted with less care, Momorancy commanding in
Chief, both Armies exceedingly increasing. For with the Kings forces were
joined 6000 foot sent from King Philip, and the fifteen hundred Horse, formerly
mentioned. And near to Dreux, A memorable Battle Dreux.
a Town in Normandy, they fought a battle; with great courage on both sides.
The Prince of Conde and Momorancy, both the Generals were taken prisoners, and
above ten thousand men slain: the Victory at last fell to the King, but with
more honor then joy. Such fatal wars issued from the liberty given to the
Heretics, and cherished by the ambition of the Lords. But these miseries of
the French, which I have related (for to that end I have related them) brought
the same mischief upon the Low Countries, The French and Low Country tumults
paralleld.
as any man will easily perceive that has leisure to compare the practices of
Heretics in both Nations, and the differences of either Court, the names of
Hugonots, and Gueses, raised in their several tumults: The Cardinal of Lorain
answering to Cardinal Granvel; the Queen Mother of France to the Duchess of
Parma in the Low Countries: the like conspiracy of the Nobility, the like
Edicts of their Princes, the plunder of Cities and Churches not to be
distinguished: all things in both Countries almost the very same, as springing
from the self-same Causes; save only, that the War was more suddenly begun by
the French, and more obstinately pursued by the Low Country men.

The first Low Country Towns that followed the example of the French, The
first Belgic tumults occasioned by French Calvinists.
were their next neighbors, Tournay, Lisle, and Valencena; which by their
sudden motions, plainly signified the subsequent ruin of the Netherlands. For
in October the year before, two French Calvinist preachers in the same night,
L^isle.
the one at Valencena, the other at Tournay, openly before a great assembly in
the Marketplace, delivered their new Gospel; and when they had done it, were
followed through the streets by the multitude, to the number of an hundred at
Valencena, and six hundred at Tournay, singing David's Psalms in French. At this
Psalm-singing and these night-sermons, tumults were raised in both Cities,
between such as favored and such as hated them. The cognizance whereof taken
from the Magistrates, was brought before the Governess; who commanded the
Governors of those Provinces, Florence Momorancy Lord of Montiny, and John
Gleme Marquess of Bergen (that were both at this time by accident in Breda, to
joy the Prince and Princess of Orange, newly come out of Saxony) forthwith to
return to their Governments, and use their best endeavors in what concerned
them nearest. The insurrection at Tournay quieted.
The Lord of Montiny posted to Tournay, with Christopher Assonvill and John
Blaser, whom the Duchess had joined with him, to examine the business: Where
he apprehended the owner of the house the Conventicles were kept in: and found
and burned many heretical books. A month after, Novem. 15. 1561.
hanging up Lanoy the night-preacher, Tournay was quieted. But at Valenciens
things fell out far otherwise: For though the Marquess of Bergen presently went
thither, That at Valenciens inflamed, by the Heretics escape of punishment.
and by the assistance of Filibert Brux^ius and Autrux (assigned him for
Adjuncts by the Governess) two preaching Calvinists, Philip Maillard and Simon
Favian, were committed to prison; deferring their punishment, contrary to the
Duchess command. Before the City was pacified, 1562.
the Marquess of Bergen went to Liege, to visit his brother Bishop of that
City: For which, being reprehended by the Duchess, and commanded back to his
Government, he boldly excused himself, That it was neither agreeable to his
place or nature, March 22.
to put Heretics to death. Which insolent answer, she wrote to the King,
commending in the letter the industry of the Lord of Montiny; and so comparing
the ones deserts with the dis-service of the other, made both appear the
greater. And indeed, that Heresy like other contagious diseases, is caught in
an instant, and must with expedition be prevented, as may be instanced in the
examples of Tournay and Valenciens. There by the present punishment of a few,
all being put in fear: here, by delay and negligence, the turbulent people
having time given to encourage them. For now that brace of Heretics (I spoke
of) had been in prison seven months, and the Magistrates were afraid to
proceed to judgment; because they saw the peoples affection daily increasing
toward them; and diverse bills posted up, that threatened mischief to the
Judges, if any harm came to the Prisoners. And many passing by the Jayl in the
night, were heard to cheer up the prisoners; and bad them fear nothing: for if
they should be led to execution, the people would rescue them. But the Duchess
informed of all this, taxed the Magistrates with the fear they had brought upon
themselves, by seven months delay; and seriously forewarned them, not to make
the disease incurable, by further delaying. Therefore according to the
Emperors Edict, Which at last are condemned.
sentence was pronounced, and the delinquents condemned to be burned. But
because some tradesmen were suspected, especially the Clothiers, the execution
was put off to a day, when they always used to be absent from Valenciens;
their custom being on Saturday night, to walk abroad into the fields, and not
to come back to town till Monday morning. Part going a feasting to the Villages
near hand, with their parents and their wives; part getting out of the way,
lest they should be observed not to be at Church with the Catholics. On Monday
therefore by daybreak, the condemned persons were brought into the
marketplace. Yet it was not so privately carried, but multitudes of people
followed: And Favean, when he came near the faggots, cried out as loud as ever
he could gape, But rescued by the Commons.
O Eternal Father: At which words the whole Marketplace made a hideous noise,
and suddenly strove to fetch off the prisoners, casting stones at the Officers,
withal breaking into the place of execution, they seized upon all the
instruments of death; threw about the fagots, and for very madness, And by the
Magistrate carried back to prison.
broke them into little pieces. Till the officers, too weak for the multitude,
were forced to carry the prisoners back to the Jayl, and to run for it
themselves, the stones flew so fast about their ears. Having freed their
companions, by degrees the peoples fury cooled; or rather, not knowing what to
do for want of a Leader, they met all in a peaceable manner: that you would
have rather thought them Petitioners, then Mutineers, singing David's Psalms by
Calvin's Psalter: then breaking out again into rage, David's Psalms turned into
French meeter.
they blamed their own sloth, and resolved to take their opportunity while the
City was in fear and trembling. Before I proceed, because the singing of
Psalms has casually been twice, and must be oftener mentioned, I conceive it
will not be amiss for the Reader to understand the Original thereof.

Among the Grooms of the bedchamber to Francis the first of France, The Author
Clement Marot.
there was one Clement Marot, born at Davean; a man naturally eloquent, of a
voluble fluent tongue, having a rare vein in French poetry, wherewith the King
was much taken, Ex. Florim. Hist. de ortu, etc. Haeres. l. 8. His Manners.
Dubious Religion.
and kept him as a choice instrument of his learned pleasures. But (as his wit
was somewhat better, then his conditions) by his acquaintance with the
Lutherans, he was suspected to have changed his Religion: and therefore fearing
the King would be offended, he fled to his Majesty's sister at Bearn, the old
Sanctuary for Delinquents. A while after, the King was pacified, and he
returned to Paris. Where he was advised by his friend Francis Vatable, the
Hebrew Lecturer, to leave the trifling subjects he wrote upon, and study divine
Poesy. His Translation of the Psalter.
Hereupon, he began to translate the Psalms of the Hebrew Prophet into French
stanza's, but so ignorantly and perversely, (as a man altogether unlearned)
that the King (though he often sung his verses, Forbid by his Majesty.
yet upon the just complaints of the Sorban Doctors and their severe censure
passed against them) commanded that nothing of Maro's, in that kind, should be
from thenceforth published. But being forbid by Proclamation, as it often
happens, the longing of the Reader and fame of the Work was increased: so that
new tunes were set to Marot's thimes, Marot flies his Country.
and they were sung like profane ballads. He, in the mean time, growing bold by
the peoples applauses, and not able to forbear bragging: for fear of punishment
ran to Geneva. And flying from thence, for new crimes committed, but first
having been well whipped for them, he died at Austune. Dies.
The success of this Translation of Psalms, moved Theodor Beza a friend of
Marot's (that wrote an Elegy in French upon his death) to join to the fifty,
Beza finishes Marots Work of the Psalms.
which he had printed, the other hundred in French meeter too; so the whole
book of David's Psalms was finished. And to make it pleasing to the people,
they had several tunes set to them by excellent Composers, that chimed so
sweetly, as every one desired to have the new Psalter. But many errors in it
being detected against Religion, It is published but prohibited immediately by
the Catholics. Retained by the heretics.
and the Work therefore prohibited, as well because the sacred verses of the
Prophet were published in a vulgar tongue by profane persons: as that they
were, dolo malo, bound up with Calvin's Catechism at Geneva: these singing
Psalms, though abhorred and slighted by the Catholics, remained in high
esteem with heretics: and the custom of singing Geneva Psalms in French, at
public meetings, upon the high way, and in shops, was thenceforth taken for
the distinctive sign of a Sectary.

The seditious Townsmen of Valenciens warbling in this manner (as I was about
to have told you) passed along the streets, The Valencenian Sedition renewed.
as if they meant to deliver a Petition. But making a stand in the
marketplace, they lifted up their singing-Master, and bad him preach ex
tempore. Immediately, either by the Preachers persuasion, or the increase of
their company, the mutiny was revived: and finding themselves grown strong
(for they were about two thousand) they would not part, without doing something
worthy such a Muster. Wherefore they resoved to pull down and burn a monastery
of Dominicans. But changing their minds upon the way (for they were tossed and
tumbled like billows in a storm) a fury possessed them, when they remembered
that the condemned persons had been taken out of their hands and carried back
to prison. They encourage one another either to rescue or revenge the Prisoners.
To what end had they raised this tumult, and frighted the town to no purpose,
if their associates should suffer death in the Iayl, which they had escaped in
the marketplace? no, they would look into the matter, break open the prison,
and either release their fellows, if living: or if dead, revenge them. They
forceably (...) them out of the Iayl.
So they cried, to the Jayl, to the Jayl. And thither they ran, forced the
doors, knocked off their shackles; and that they might appear to do nothing out
of contempt of Law, they only set those two at liberty, and kept in the rest
that were committed for other causes; sending word to the Magistrates, they had
only met to deliver their brethren, but if they might live quietly, and not be
troubled for their conscience, not a man among them would stir any more. In
the mean time, Michael Hovey, Deputy Governor of the Town, was sent by the
Magistrate to the Duchess, who amazed at the news of the sudden tumult, sent
Hovey himself immediately to Boldu^ a town near Valenciens, to desire John
Hennin, Count of that place (whom she knew to be faithful and industrious)
that he should instantly get into the City: and in the Kings name, till the
Marquess of Bergen returned, at discretion quiet the troubles, if any yet
remained. She commands him likewise to signify to the Marquess, in what
condition Valenciens was, whilst he neglecting his public office, minded
nothing but his private business. Soldiers are brought into the Town by the
Governesses Order.
But now the Marquesses Lieutenant (the Low-countreymen call him the
Count-governour) with two troops of horse (one whereof he took out of the
Bolduc, the other he himself commanded under the Marquess of Bergen) entered
Valenciens, the people not daring to attempt any thing against him. Thither
also with all speed marched the horse of Philip Croy Duke of Areschot, by order
from the Governess. Lastly the Marquess of Bergen himself, and the Count of
Bosch came into the town: and, contrary to their exspectations, found all
quiet, not so much as any sign of a Sedition. But Indeveltius, who was in
Commission with the Marquess to examine business of that nature, being sent by
the Magistrate to the Duchess for authority to pursue the fugitives, was
earnest with her, to take from that turbulent City both their privileges and
arms; and that, with the fines paid by the Mutiners for their composition, a
fort should be built to hold in the stiff-necked people like a bridle; and the
Valencenian; might be compelled to this, if her Excellence would but send one
thousand two hundred foot, A Council is called about punishing the city.
to the horse already in town. The Governess caused it to be moved at the
Council table; where the gentler vote carried it, That the fugitives should be
brought back to execution, and the authors of the Sedition punished: but that
the rage of the mad people should not ruin the honest Citizens. The milder
opinion carries it.
The Governess consented, the rather; because that City (as she wrote to the
King) standing much affected to the French, must have been unseasonably
provoked, whilst the French were in arms within sight of the town. But she her
self forbear, as much as was possible, to make any Levies: lest the sword, and
consequently the power should come into the hands of some of the Low Country
Lords. Yet, because nothing could be done in that City without soldiers, New
soldiers put into the Town.
she commands the Marquess of Bergen, to draw soldiers out of his several
Garrisons, not above thirty out of any one; and so on the sudden, to put two
hundred into Valenciens, giving it out, that company after company should
follow them, to aw the Town* that the Judgment, pronounced against the
offenders might accordingly be executed. The seditious executed.
The Marquess readily obeyed: And though the two seditious Preachers were then
escaped, a while after one of them was taken, and put to death; and the City,
terrified with the decrees of the Magistrates and the continual fresh supplies
of soldiers; within a few days, having taken the fiercest of the Mutineers
(or those that bragged most of their doings in the tumult) they were severely
punished. Valenciens quieted.
So for that time the mutiny at Valenciens ceased. The Governesses vigilance.
The Governess was not more glad of the success, then fearful of the
consequence, because such a multitude of Calvinists were crept into one City;
especially, because in other places, she saw the like beginnings and motions,
she was jealous lest Calvinisme, which then infected France, might be caught by
their neighbors of Haynolt. Her particular care of Religion in Frisland.
In like manner the commerce with Denmark, and the neighboring towns of
Germany, might corrupt Frisland with Lutheranisme. And though on the one part
Heresy had hardly touched any of the Lords of Frisland, but only crept upon
the ground among the Commons, as suitable to their capacities, being a rude
plain people, and therefore credulous; and on the other part, John Lignius
Count Aremberg looked very carefully to that Province; yet questionless the
disease would spread it self, and by degrees seize the Nobility, unless it
were prevented by strong Physic.

This seconded by Granvels advice, New Bishops brought in.
moved the Governess to bring in the designed Bishops into their several
Dioceses, that by example, word, and deed (which most conduces to the
advancement of Religion) they might be a stay and support to the people
committed to their charge. Indeed things were put into a handsome way; and by
the industry of Granvel, and the Nuncio (the one having the Popes Commission to
this purpose, and the other the King of Spains) they were received into the
Cities. The Brabanters will have no Bishops.
But the Brabanters stood out, and would suffer no change of Government in
their Provinces, though Cardinal Granvel pressed it very much: and delivered
his opinion for the present suppression of those tumults and designs, which
would grow daily worse and worse. The Popes Bulls were delayed at Rome.
But from Rome the Popes letters for the endowment of the Bishops (without
which nothing could be done) were not dispatched away by Francisco Varga the
Spanish Ambassador; not so much out of the humor of demurring, which is
natural to the Spaniards, as out of the Popes indignation, Pius IV.
incensed by the practice of some near about his person, who had taken offense
at Varga's carriage in the Court of Rome: and therefore the Ambassador was put
off. The truth is, he had insinuated himself into the secret (...) of the
Cardinals, which many of them stomack'd very much; and by his endeavors,
Cardinal Pacecho by diverse votes of the Conclave, had like to have been chosen
Pope, a dignity proportionable to his merits: his Chair being once lifted up by
the Cardinals his friends, as the custom is at the Election of a Pope. This
was perhaps remembered by some of the Popes Court, that were not yet reconciled
to the Ambassador, by whose means their master had almost lost the Papacy. But
from what cause soever these delays proceeded, The Abbots exasperated the
Brabanters.
the Abbots thereby had time given them (whom it concerned to avoid their
Reversioners the Bishops) to meet at diverse consultations about it: and to
desire assistance from the Estates of Brabant, and some Lords, which their own
private interests engaged, and to try all remedies that either counsel or fear
could find out, or opportunity present. The Brabanters send Agents publicly to
Rome, and privately into Spain.
And the Estates, because they could not prevail with the Governess, Their
Instructions.
resolved to send two Agents out of the Low Countries, the one privately to
Pius the fourth, about the end of the old year; the other publicly in the
beginning of the new year, to the King himself. To Rome they sent Moulin a
Civil Lawyer, of good account, to supplicate his Holiness, that the goods of
the Monasteries might not be given away to Bishops, contrary to the Doners
minds; and that the Monks might not be deprived of their ancient privileges,
to choose Abbots; lastly, that he would not permit the King to ordain any
Bishop, that should not be maintained out of his Majesty's Exchecquer. With
these instructions, private letters to the same effect were written to the
Pope, and other eminent persons, by the Prince of Orange, and the Marquess of
Bergen, whose Tutour Moulin was: and by his favor, which he still enjoyed,
continually employed in weighty affairs. Besides, Expedition money given them.
they furnished him with great sums of money, that his way at Rome might be
the smoother; and they allowed, that he might with some bounty purchase
patronage to the cause. To conclude, besides his expenses, they gave him to his
own use 1200 Florents, and as much to the other joined with him, for the honor
of the Emba^age: and if they got their business dispatched, The Governess
prevents them by Agents of her own, that came before them to Rome.
they were promised great matters at their return. But the Governess, from whom
nothing of all this was concealed; to prevent the Brabanters, writ to the
Spanish Ambassador Varga, to pre-ingage the Pope; to have an eye upon Moulin,
and to use his best judgment to frustrate that man's endeavors, that opposed
the good of Religion, and the pious intentions of the King. And into Spain
She likewise wrote to his Majesty, letting him know, that within few days
some men would come to petition him, in the name of the Brabanters; The Agents
for the Estates rerurn from both places without Dispatches.
and in January came Tserclasse and Nyssus: twice the King gave them Audience,
and in March following, returned them to the Low Countries with a doubtful
answer. Nor had Moulin any better fortune at Rome. The Agents for Antwerp,
Godfrey Streck, Pretour of the Town, Vrselt and Wessembeck, set forth in May,
to petition the King that Antwerp might not be compelled to receive a Bishop,
but they prevailed not in their suit. Yet still they in the Low Countries
practiced against the Bishops: For the Abbots wearied the Duchess with
complaints; and some of the Lords, especially Granvels enemies, encouraged the
discontented party. The States of Brabant stood as for their Lives and
Religion, The Brabanters will not give it over thus.
against the breaking of their Privileges. The common people would have no
Inquisition, no Bishops: And Philip Momorancy Count Horn, (who some months
since was returned from Spain, Count Horn writes for them to his Majesty.
and by the King commanded to write back) certified his Majesty, That the
complaints of Brabant were grown more violent then ever, June 2.
upon a rumor spread among the people (as it was supposed by the French and
German^ that without the consent of those two Nations, out of whose Provinces
some Low Country Diaceses had been enlarged, new Bishops could not be created
in the Netherlands: and therefore the Low Country men would do all they could,
to hinder their institution, for fear the French and Germans should come upon
them at once, and make sudden invasions by several ways. To this purpose he
wrote likewise to Erasso, one the King trusted with his secrets, a civil
Gentleman, and powerful at Court. But in the close of his letter he laid all
the fault upon Granvel, who ambitiously and weakly designed that, which could
never come to good effect. Indeed Granvel was an eyesore to many, and a ^emora
to their projects; and if I may freely speak my opinion, I believe there had
been little or no stirring or trouble about matters of Religion, Many
Low Country Lords assist them,
if the Nobility had not drawn another way. But some of the Lords (as I have
told you) took it ill that the Bishops were increased; that is, they conceived
it prejudicial to their own authority and freedom, especially when they met
in the great Council. The Heretics had engaged the rest, many upon private
discontents were alienated from the King. Discontented at the King, and at
Granvel.
But the most were incensed against Granvell, concluding him to be the author
of increasing the Bishops, because they saw him declare himself for their
coming in. Out of the hatred hereupon conceived, the Lords either absented
themselves from Council, or came thither to oppose the Cardinal. Their
principal Abettours the Prince of Orange, and Count Egmont.
These quarrels the Governess discovered at her first coming to the Government,
particularly in Count Egmont, and the Prince of Orange, each of them having
hoped to be Governor of the Low Countries; and therefore so much the more
sensible of their late repulse. But the Prince of Orange carried it more
closely. Count Egmonts liberty of speech.
Count Egmont a blunt soldier, open-breasted in his love and hatred, was so
far from dissembling; that in his own house he suffered his friends to speak
things derogatory to the Majesty of the King, of which the Governess was
informed, and gave the King intelligence by her letters; wherein she named
Simon Regnard, 4. October.
as an encourager of these unlawful assemblies, 1559.
a Counselor of great subtilty and volubility of tongue, Regnard sooths him
in it, Out of emulatition to Granvel, begun when they were schoolboyes.
nor of less authority with many of the Lords, especially with Egmont. There
had been an old emulation from their very childhoods, between this Regnard and
Granvell, in the Schools where they studied, because the one had the more
excellent, wit, the other the more plausible. And as the quarrels of wit use to
be irreconciliable among children; Mart. Delrio lib. 1. Tumult. Belg. Granvel,
Regnard.
these being now grown men, and the subject of their business changed, the same
contention held still in King Philips Belgic Court. But because in Dignity and
the favor of his Prince and the Governess, Granvell far out-stripped him; he
that was cast behind, had the more envy, in regard they had once been equals.
Continued when they came to Court, And there turnned into envy against his
Superior.
Regnard therefore finding a way open to mischief Granvell, through the hatred
born him by the Lords, began every where to solicit and dispute the cause of
the discontented Nobility; and by aggravating the indignation of such as were
his own friends, plotted in the mean time his private revenge. The Governess
fearing the sting of this Viper would secretly poison the State; This made
Regnard so active against Granvel.
she, to avoid shipwreck by a dry tempest, persuaded the King to remove him out
of the Low Countries, under color of some advancement; but it was deferred
till five years after, and when the storm was grown too boystrous, The
Governess therefore labors to have Regnard sent for out of the Low Countries,
Which at last, but too late, was effected.
Regnard was called into Spain, almost to no purpose, but only to show how
strong a disease grows by the delay of remedy. And although Count Egmont (who
was not of an ill nature, when he had no advisers) at the beginning of these
troubles, carried himself with obedience and fidelity to the Governess; yet his
private grudge to Cardinal Granvell interposing, he enrolled his name among the
Conspiratours, and sided with the Prince of Orange; who being at that time
grievously injured by Granvell, sought but to match his own indignation with
some other alike offended. The Prince of Orange sets on the Brabanters.
Now the Prince of Orange, to ingratiate himself with the Brabanters, casting
out words of these differences, especially of the new Bishops, said, There was
no other help for it, but that the Brabanters (who have no particular
Governor, but only such as commanded the whole Low countries) should petition
the Governess, to appoint them one of the Lords that should look into their
affairs, and only regard their interest. And some to please the Prince of
Orange, moved this at the board. His Ambition is checked by Granvell.
But Granvell, suspecting what was aimed at, bitterly inveighed against that
Counsel, and at last, What man soever (said he) undertakes their protection,
ought to consider with himself, that he is created Prince of Brabant, and
divides the Sovereignty of the Low Countries with the King. Who put a kind of
affront upon him.
Not contented thus, he moved the Governess a while after, when the Magistrates
were to be chosen for Antwerp, that the Prince of Orange should not be called
to Council, lest he should boast himself the Author of that benefit to the
Town: which neglect he deeply resented. Which occasioned the Prince of Orange
and Count Egmonts first complaints to the King, that they were neglected at the
Councel-board. That one ruled all.
This caused the Prince of Orange and Count Egmont, to write their complaints
to his Majesty; That they were seldom called to Council, and what concerned
their particular Governments never communicated to them, but all things
privatley determined by the advice of one or two: and then, they were called in
merely for a show, to consult upon the relics and refuse of Affairs, being
there contemned, here mocked. To say truth, it is a great incentive to anger
and dis^^^tent, and has raised mighty troubles in many States, when a Prince
imployes only one main in diverse Offices. For though a River swell by the
accession of waters; yet so long as it keeps it self in the Chanel, it is
injurious to none: but when it flows over the banks into the adjoining medows,
and intrencheth upon another harvest, then it is accused by the just grief and
complaints of the Husbandman. And Granvell was the man.
And indeed, Granvell was not limited to any certain employment. The Governess
both of her own accord, and by the Kings command suffering him to do what he
pleased. The very Expresses that came to her Excellence from Spain, or other
parts, were never brought to the Council, till she had privately, either by
conference or by letter, acquainted Granvell with the contents; who weighed
every thing with himself; and gave his judgment upon the particulars, then
returned them to the Governess, or to Viglius President of the Consult or
Cabinet-Councel, and he (omitting those heads which Granvell had marked with
his pen) read them to the Lords at the Councel-table: and though it was
privately carried (for Viglius was true to Granvell) yet because the Pr^nce of
Orange often received Duplicates of the Dutchese's letters, they found some
things were concealed from them, and therefore suspected all: complaining, That
business was malignantly communicated to them: and the Low Countries and the
King defrauded of much good counsel. But the Governess defends him in her
letters to the King.
But this moved not the Governess. She only gave the King an account of her
proceedings, putting him in mind of his letters dated June; wherein he enjoined
her, That whatsoever concerned England, December. 18.
or the Council of Trent; or Religion in general; should be, 1561.
as the Pope had advised, ^4. 1561.
privately debated; Yet I deny not (said the Governess) that in other things,
wherein the Provinces are interessed, sometimes the Lords are not admitted to
consult. As lately in choosing the Magistrate of Antwerp, the Prince of Orange
was not called; which I did on purpose, lest he should aim to increase his
present authority by that election. Notwithstanding, I cannot but acquaint your
Majesty, that it is not for our Honor to communicate all concernments freely
to the Council, lest the dangers, fears, and necessities wherewith I am
sometimes pressed, be laid naked before their eyes: and then, if any of them be
false, they may abuse that knowledge, by preventing our designis with contrary
counsels, and secretly hinder the success of our affairs. Howsoever as well in
these, as other things, all shall be done according to your Majesty's letters
and commands. But the King writing nothing to the contrary, the Governess
continued her former custom of privacy in her Councels. The Governess denies
her assent for summoning the Estates general.
Whereupon a rumor was spread by some of the Conspiratours, that there was a
necessity to summon the Estates general, to raise subsidies for his Majesty,
and to put the Low Countries into a posture of defense against their neighbors
the French, that were in arms. Some perhaps really intended it, but the most
only made use of that public remedy, to alter the present condition of the
Court. But the Governess, who borrowed the ears of many faithful persons, was
present at their Councels and conferences, almost in their very thoughts: and
cut off that exspectation, publicly professing that the King among his other
commands, left in charge with her, not to call an Assembly of the Estates till
he returned.

This harsh denial of the Governess was mollified, But gives way to a
convention of the Knights of the Order. Where the seeds were s^wn of a
conspiracy against Granvel.
by permitting (for this was another of their requests) a Convention of the
Order of the Golden-fleece. But as soon as ever they were met at Bruxels,
presently it appeared, that summons was not endeavored for the public, but
for their private Interests. For besides the meeting in presence of the
Governess, where they consulted about the preservation of the Low Countries
against the French; they had private discourse with the Prince of Orange, and
there it was resolved, they would no longer suffer the power of Cardinal
Granvel. To this engagement entered into by the great Commanders, the Prince of
Orange, Count Egmont and the Marquess of Bergen endeavored to get hands: and
severally sounded the Knights of the Order, but some refusing to sign an
engagement, against the Cardinal, it was laid aside. Especially, because the
Governess calling them more frequently to Council, and wearying them with
fresh employments, took from them all opportunity of meeting apart; and in
good time put an end to their public consultations. The result of the
Convention.
The result whereof was, that some of the Lords should be sent into Spain by
the Governess in her name to inform the King of the necessities of the Low
countries. Florence Momorancy, Montiny sent into Spain.
the Lord of Montiny, was chosen to go with letters delivered him by the
Gover^^ss, but penned by Granvel. He likewise received instructions for his
carriage, and four thousand crowns to defray the expenses of his journey, which
he began in June. But before Momorancy set forth, the Governess to make her
vigilance appear, The Governess dispatches a Messenger before him with this
private letter.
and to prepare his Majesty sent him by a sure messenger an Express in cipher
to this effect, That she, making it her business to look into the secret
consultations of the Knights of the Order, at last had got all out of Charles
Count Barlamont one ever found Loyal* that he assured her, June 14.
the indignation of the Nobility sprung chiefly out of these heads, What
Grievances the Lords pretended.
That they were persuaded his Majesty confided not in them; and therefore the
Governess called them not to her Cabinet-Councell, for as much as Granvel,
jealous of his power, had wrought the King to that suspicion: and had boldly
written to him, that he should never be absolute Lord of the Netherlands,
unless he cut off six or seven Noblemens heads. And that Granvel by his
letters had further moved the King to invade the Low Countries with a
formidable Army, and being so possessed of them, he might then impose upon the
Low-countreymen what Laws he pleased, by the right of Conquest. That the
increase of Miters, the first whereof Granvel wore, tended to no other purpose,
but to bring the Spanish Inquisition into the Low Countries. How the Governess
answered them.
To which words of Barlamont she had answered: That the Lords were not kept
from the knowledged of any secret fit to be communicated to them, as Barlamont
himself being one of the Council very well knew; Nor was Granvel ( whose
transactions when he was but a young man were approved of by Charles the fifth
and King Philip) so ignorant a Statesman, that now in his old age and
experience the King might not employ him: or of so rash a malice, that he would
offer to persuade his Majesty to take away their lives which he knew were dear
unto the King, and might be sure she would oppose him in it. Nor did that seem
less improbable and ridiculous which was said of his advising his Majesty, for
would any man make war upon himself, and with vast expense to purchase what
already is his own? Lastly for the Bishops, Granvel indeed sought to bring them
in, as the King had enjoined him, in pursuance of the Popes command, not to
make way for the Inquisition, but to protect Religion in a troublesome time.
The charge whereof (as of all things else, which conduced to the maintenance of
the Kings prerogative) because Granvel fearlessely undertook, despising all
men's murmurs, he was therefore hated ly many; as they should ever be that
stoutly defend the authority of their Prince. With these discoveries the
Governess pre-acquainted the King, and desired him in a little note by it self,
that he would use the service of some one of special trust in the decyphering
of her letter. The faith and freedom of Count Barlamont.
Though Barlamont himself, as he was open hearted, and thought, that in this
relation to the Governess he had both served his King and Country; being asked
by the Prince of Orange who took notice of his long stay with the Governess,
whether he had told her what private conference they had among themselves: he
ingeniously repeated his whole discourse with the Governess: Nor did the Prince
of Orange seem to take it amiss; I suppose, because he saw the grievances of
his own framing, were proposed in the name of a generality, which therefore
could not be imputed to him alone, but would receive authority from the
multitude. 27. July.
In the interim, the King advises the Governess, by no meant to suffer private
assemblies of the Nobility, The Governess is commanded to find out Some
expedient for setting the Lords at difference among themselves.
but to find out some expedient, that the public meeting of those men packt
together to destroy the quiet of the State, might be handsomely dissolved; and
that, keeping Spies upon the Prince of Orange and his Counsels, she should
still have him at Court and in her eye. And to set Count Egmont and the Prince
of Orange at variance was not thought very difficult, because they had formerly
stood at a very great distance, before their common hatred to Granvel united
them. What disparity betwixt Count Egmont and the Prince of Orange.
Count Egmont was of a sweet disposition, free of speech, and confident: the
Prince of Orange of a sower nature, not to be discovered, therefore to be
avoided. In this, you could not but commend his cunning; but the other better
kept his faith. P. Orange.
The one was an Ajax, a better Commander then a Counselor, C. Egmont.
the other an Ulysses, that could fight better with his brain, C. Egmont.
then with his sword. This had a great forecast, and always fixed his mind
upon the future, so that he was still fit for any emergent occasion. That,
seldom took care but for the present; yet upon a sudden misfortune was rather
unprepared, P. Orange.
then unready or unwilling to encounter it. You might hope more from the one,
and fear more from the other. C. Egmont.
You would rather choose the friendship of Count Egmont, and decline the enmity
of the Prince of Orange. And to demonstrate, that there was not the least
resemblance between them; Egmont had a well-featured face, a strong-timbered
body, and a look full of honor: the other was a thin-faced tawny-complexioned
man, and bald. Yet they were exceeding popular both; but the people loved the
one, and reverenced the other. P. of Orange. Which the Governess made use of to
divide them: and it ministered a double occasion.
The Governess, who exactly knew them, wrote to the King what she thought would
the soonest cause a division: and pointed out the best means to effect it, viz.
that the Kings Pay and his Munificence (about the sending whereof at that time
to the Governors of the Provinces, he had before consulted with her) should
not be distributed to all, but come only to the hands of the Prince of Orange
and Count Egmont; and the Count should have more then the Prince, that the
Prince of Orange might suspect him for his Rival in his Majesty's favor: and
the rest of the Lords, because they were passed by, somewhat resent it in them
both. This plot went on, and their ill-pieced conspiracy began to crack a
sunder: the Governess still having her irons in the fire. And to this purpose,
at the general Diet (or convention) of the Estates of Germany summoned by the
Emperor Ferdinand at Franckford to create a King of the Romans, some of the
Low Country Lords being to go thither in the name of King Philip; whilst all
the Nobility were in exspectation of the employment, the Duchess made choice
of Philip Croy Duke of Arescot; not because he was bred up in Germany with
Charles the fifth (as she declared her self at the Consult) and therefore was
likely to be well received by his brother Ferdinand: But because he was an
enemy to the Prince of Orange his faction, she honored him with that
Embassage, that others might follow his example on like hopes of honor. Yet
the Prince of Orange resolved to be present at the Diet, as a private man,
pretending business with the Elector of Saxony about his wifes portion, and
with the Emperor concerning his Estate. And though the Governess would not,
without the Kings consent approve of his journey, yet he departed; in such
have, as he would not tarry till his wife was brought a bed. The Princess of
Orange brought a bed of a Daughter. Montinys Embassage out of the Kings letter
to the Governess
Who three days after was delivered of a daughter, that was christened, by her
appointment, with the ceremonies of the Church, to the great satisfaction of
the Governess.

Montiny having twice had audience of his Majesty, prepared for his return,
and when he took leave, the King, whilst he commended to his care the state of
the Low Countries, as it were upon occasion of discourse, began to fifth him,
and charged him by his faith and sincerity, 23 Novem.
virtues he had found in him, to deal plainly, His Conference with the King. He
imputes the general discontent to the new Bishops and Granvel.
what he thought was the cause of those Grievances and Heart-burnings of so
many in the Low Countries. Montiny though he said he knew nothing, whereof his
Majesty had not been long since informed, yet as far as he could conjecture,
the reasons partly proceeded from the new Bishops put upon the Provinces
without the consent or privity of their Governors, and therefore the people
believed they intended to bring in the Spanish Inquisition: partly out of the
hatred conceived against Cardinal Granvel from the highest to the lowest, so
implacably, that it was to be feared, that at one time or other it would engage
the people in an insurrection. The King replied, that all this was indeed known
to him, The King gives his reasons for increase of the Bishops.
but that he admired the Low-countreymen could be moved with such vain rumors.
For seriously no other cause brought him to augment the number of the Bishops,
but only the necessity of his people, and the Council of his father Charles
the fifth. And that was not concluded so secretly or suddenly, as the Marquess
of Bergen could tell him, who had given his advice therein, and commended his
design when he waited on the King into England, at his Marriage with Queen
Mary. And that for his own part, it never entered into his mind, by that
adjunction of Bishops to impose the Spanish Inquisition upon the Low Countries;
Nor had Cardinal Granvel ever persuaded him to do it, or was so much as
acquainted with that purpose of his Majesty till he sent Francis Sonnius his
Ambassador to Rome. Desends Granvel.
He likewise assured him, they were much deceived that hated the Cardinal as
conceiving him, by private information, to asperse the Lords, for he did never
attempt it, Possesses Montiny with his Resolution to go in person to the
Low Countries. Montinies Relation in Senate
neither had his Majesty himself at any time discovered in Granvel any
malicious inclinations: which if he should hereafter find in him, or any other
of his ministers of State, he never should endure them. But, howsoever, he
hoped shortly to be in the Low Countries, and then to satisfy both his own
person, and the Provinces desires. Montiny thus dismissed by the King, returned
to Bruxels in December; 14 Day of December.
and reading to the Council his letters which contained the Kings pleasure for
settling the intricacies of the Exchecquer for assistance in future to be sent
to Charles King of France, Which they credit not.
and specially for defense of Religion; he added, of himself, 1562.
many arguments of the Kings affection toward the Low Countries; but to little
purpose. For in Montinies absence, they had conceived still greater jealousies.
The Prince of Orange and some others, reasoned against the promises made by the
Ambassador, for they rather trusted their own real, or (to justify their
discontents) pretended intelligence from their private friends in the Court of
Spain, then the professions made either by King Philip, or his sister. Their
indignation was augmented, because Montiny told them the French accounted them
Patrons of the Hugonots. The Lords offended at Granvel upon new suspicions.
About which scandal they passionately expostulated with the Governess,
affirming, it was only forged in the Cardinals workhouse. The Duchess
declared her self of a contrary opinion, and showed them, it was rather
invented by the French heretics and rebels, who to advance the authority of
their faction, would have the ignorant believe the Low Country Nobility were
of the same sect. To conclude, He despises his enemies.
they being more and more exasperated, because the Governess would not displace
their Competitour, that feared not their plots or envy, but proposing to
himself only the Kings favor, respected this Jove alone despising the other
petty Gods; (as if a man could be only struck with a thunderbolt, and could
not be killed by the hand of a common soldier: or that Jove's lightning were
not fed by the baser elements.) His Rivals plot against him.
the Prince of Orange and Count Egmont particularly agreed to write letters to
the King against Granvel, Some dissenting.
in the name of all, though all were not consenting: perhaps, because the
Governess had formerly scattered among them seeds of dissension: perhaps, some
of the Lords therefore differed in opinion, because they were not chief of the
Conspiracy. Indeed the Duke of Areschot, pressed by Count Egmont as they were
hunting, to join with the rest, denied to set his hand against the Cardinal,
or to prescribe the King how he ought to use his servants; and it proceeded so
far, that at last the Duke concluded, he would receive the Law neither from
Count Egmont, nor the Prince of Orange, to neither of which he thought himself
or his family inferior. The Counts of Aremberg and Barlamont then present were
much troubled at the accident, and lest it might come to more then words,
turned the discourse to another subject. Nor was there less heat between Count
Aremberg and the Prince of Orange upon the same occasion. 22. March.
Of both which passages the Governess certified the King. Letters writ against
the Cardinal to the King by C. Egmont. C. Horn. and the Prince of Orange.
But though by these Lords example, and for private reasons many withdrew from
the conspiracy: Yet were letters directed to the King signed by Count Egmont,
the Prince of Orange, and Count Horn; a Copy whereof (which the King afterward
sent to the Duchess) I give you verbatim out of the French Original.

Sir, We are infinitely sorry that we are at this present enforced to press
upon your Majesty's great affairs; but as well the account of our service which
we ought to give, as the mischief undoubtedly impending, will not suffer us
longer to be silent: especially because we hope this our intimation, as free
from any passion, will be received by your Majesty so graciously, and with such
remembrance of us, as we your affectionate servants have endeavored to
deserve. We likewise beseech your Majesty's pardon, if we write later, then the
exigence requires. When the greatest and wisest men consider the Government of
the Low Countries, questionless they cannot but hink it absolutely managed by
Cardinal Granvel; which has made so deep an impression in the hearts of the
Low-countreymen, that it cannot be hoped the opinion will be blotted out, so
long as he lives among them. Therefore we humbly desire, that, for our fidelity
which, Sir, you have ever acknowledged (to speak nothing of our services) you
will not be displeased to take into consideration, how much it concerns your
Majesty to ease the common complaints and grievances of your people. 1562.
For again and again we beseech you to believe, that the business of the
Low Countries will never have an happy end, so long as it is ordered by the man
they hate. Nor should we presume to write thus much, unless we had the
mischief in our eyes, to which if your Majesty apply not present remedy, the
whole state will certainly be endangered. Wherein, if ever your Majesty gave
credence to our words or actions, we beseech you now to credit our hands. This
indeed was the cause why so many of the Lords and Governors of these
Provinces, with a multitude of others desired to have it signified to your
Majesty, that our imminent destruction may be timously prevented: and your
Majesty will prevent it, as we hope; and the merits of so many Low Country
men, and their prayers for the safety of the public, will be more valued by
your Majesty, then that for one man's sake, you will reject the petition of so
many of your Majesty's obedient subjects. Especially since none of all this
number, but is so far from complaining of the Governess, that we give your
Majesty immortal thanks for so prudent a Princess. And that your Majesty may
not think, as some perhaps will suggest, that we have plotted this out of an
ambition that we our selves may govern, we all of us earnestly entreat to be
removed from the Councel-table, and affairs of State: it being neither
consistent with your Majesty's interest, nor our own reputation, that we should
come any more to Council with the Cardinal. But touching Religion, which is now
a thing of greatest Concernment, we promise in our own names, all that can be
justly exspected from good Subjects and Catholics, such as we profess to be.
And truly if the Lords had not looked into it, Religion had not been in that
tolerable condition wherein now it is: the minds of the Common people being
infected with Heresy, a disease hardly curable by the Cardinals authority or
example. Lastly, that we may no longer trespass upon your Majesty's weighty
occasions, we humbly beg you will please favorably to interpret what we have
signified, no less out of duty and alleagiance to your Majesty, then out of
fear that hereafter you might blame us, if any misfortune should befall the
Low Countries. Thus we humbly kiss your royal hands, and pray God long to
preserve and bless your Majesty From your City of Bruxels, the last of March,
1563.

LAMORALL EGMONT, WILLIAM NASSAU, PHILIP MOMORANCY.



These Letters thus signed by the Triumviri, Count Egmont secretly sent into
Spain to Charles Tisnac a Low Country man, and the Kigns Procuratour in Spain,
for business of the Low Countries. Of these letters the Governess preadvertised
the King.
But before the Dispatch was made, the Governess understanding what they had
writ, pre-acquainted the King. Nor was the intelligence she gave concealed from
the Conspiratours, Count Egmont charging the discovery upon Count Aremberg,
March 9.
as if he were fallen off; How the Governess came by her intelligence, causes a
grievous falling out between Egmont and Aremberg.
especially because there was difference between him and the Prince of Orange.
But he seriously denied, that ever he had spoke of it to any man living; nor
needed their project a discoverer, which they themselves in every place
vain-gloriously divulged. Yet Count Egmont insisting upon it, replied, That a
friend of his had assured him, it could not be revealed by any but himself.
Aremberg growing into a rage, And I (said he) assure you, he lies who ere he
be, that fathers this upon me; which I am ready to make good with my sword. May
5.
The Governess writing this passage to the King, forgot not to complain of
Count Egmont, that he whom his Majesty had accounted faithful above the rest,
could so far engage against him, as publicly to solicit and encourage others
to join their minds and endeavors for their Countries benefit and liberty. And
now after three months, the Kings Letters came from Spain, written by the hand
of Charles Tisnac, wherein his Majesty answered the demands of the Triumviri,
The Kings answer to the Letters sent from the three Lords, inviting one of them
to Spain.
in this manner; That he had received their Letters, and doubted not but that
they signified these things out of sincere affection to their Prince and
Country. For they had given many sufficient proofs of their fidelity and
service. But since they had not yet given particular reasons for Granvels
removal, and that it was not his custom to change any of his Ministers of
State, without proof against them: He should therefore take it well, if some
one of them would come over to Spain, and make him understand the matter; 1563.
for by how much they affirmed there needed the greater remedy, by so much the
less ought the business to be agitated by absent persons. June 15.
Besides these Letters, A private letter from his Majesty to Count Egmont.
the King wrote privately with his own hand to Count Egmont, that he should be
glad to hear from the Count himself, the causes that were not inserted in their
Letters. His Majesty likewise acquainted the Governess what answer in common he
makes to all three, and what particularly to Egmont; that he invites one of
them to divide them, and wishes it might be Egmont, because he, separated from
the rest, might be easily wrought upon, new molded, and so brought again to
himself, and his right reason. But none of the three would go.
But neither Count Egmont, nor any of the rest could be brought to go the
journey; perhaps thinking it below them, to undertake so great a voyage to
accuse Granvell: perhaps their guilty consciences durst not trust themselves in
Spain. Yet in their answers to the King, they laid the cause of their stay upon
their neighbors the French, For which they give reasons to his Majesty.
who having souffled up a kind of Peace at home, it concerned them to watch
whether they would use their Arms abroad: and while the people continued in
that Jealousy and fear; they held it impious to leave their Country, to
inform against any man. Notwithstanding, if the King pleased to send for them
upon other terms, they would immediately obey his Majesty's commands. In the
mean time, they would forbear the Councel-board, lest they should meet there to
countenance Granvels Actions. In all things else, they would never be wanting
to their Prince and Country. The like auswer was made particularly by Count
Egmont; who likewise humbly thanked his Majesty for his special grace and
favor to him. Granvel grows out of date at Court.
Whilst this was in agitation, Granvell tottered at Court: For it is hard to
stand long in a slippery place, if a man be iustled by many; specially when a
Prince is made jealous, as if his servants derivative power detracted from his
own ability to govern. Nor have the old Court-Engineers many better inventions
to crush the favor of their Rivals; especially with such Princes, as are
ambitious to be famed for wit, whether deserving or undeserving. With this very
stratagem, a few years after, Didacus Cardinal Spinosa, no less endeared to
the King in Spain, then Cardinal Granvell to his Majesty's sister in the
Low Countries, was cast down (they say) from the highest point of favor,
Aloyfio Cantera lib. 9. in the life of King Philip.
by such as knew the King loved his Ministers of State, so long as they carried
themselves as servants, and not as authors of his Counsels. And now the
Governess seemed to be altered in affection toward Granvell, The Governess
displeased with him, for three reasons.
perhaps weary of the man, as if he were her adjunct in the Government, if not
her superintendent: perhaps seeing her self in danger of being infected with
the peoples hatred, which he was incurably sick of: perhaps, at length she had
looked into him, and found him ambitious and envious, fomenting the divisions
between the King and his people, as she afterward informed his Majesty. August
29.
Which last reason, being contrary to the commendations she had so often set
upon Granvell in her letters to the King, whether it were true, and discovered
by the Governess upon long acquaintance: or that she knew it at first; but
then, as she concealed it in favor of the man: so now weary of him, and
fearful of imminent mischief, she revealed it: or whether misinformed, and
compelled by his enemies, she wrote thus to the King, I dare not absolutely
affirm. The Governess therefore, as she had resolved, She sends Armenterius
into Spain.
sent Thomas Arment^rius an old Courtier and Counselor into Spain, with an
exact account of business, part whereof he was to read to the King, and part to
insert in his discourse, if occasion were offered. Who was to inform the King
among other passages,
The heads were these, To let the King know the State of the Netherlands, and
the Countries adjacent; and how to that day the Governess had ordered the
Sacred and Civil Government: And when they came to speak of the combination of
the Lords against Granvell, Of the Lords complaints against Granvel.
that he should punctually tell the King, how the Prince of Orange, the
Marquess of Bergen, the Counts Egmont, Horn, Mansfeld, and Megen, came to her
in July last; and the Prince of Orange, On the 25.
after many complaints made in the name of the Estates, touching the present
condition of affairs, the appears so long due to the horse and foot, the Kings
Collectors undone with paying interest, and the complaints of the Merchants
thereupon; concluded, that since all this proceeded from the dominion of the
Cardinal, and his followers, they were resolved henceforth to come no more to
Council, not for any exceptions taken at the Governess, whose wisdom and
affection to the Low Countries they would always gratefully remember; but lest
they should contribute to those Acts passed, with so much prejudice to the King
and the Low Countries. Moreover, (which Egmont added) lest by coming to the
Councel-table, and yet not providing for the necessities of their Country,
they should loose the Peoples affection, together with their own reputation,
and consequently the Opportunity of doing his Majesty service. Nor would this
seem strange, if the King pleased to remember, that long since, when Charles
Count Lalin was President of the Council, Granvell being then Bishop of Arras,
refused to come to the Board, offended at the Counts Potencie. Then he should
tell his Majesty, that the Prince of Orange, and the Marquess of Bergen,
bitterly inveighed against Granvell, and the Arts he had used to make the King
believe, they juggled with Religion and their Prince. Nay, they very well knew,
that Telidan a Divine of Lovain (as he himself boasted) wrote to the King. That
the Low Country Lords were all tainted with Heresy; and that the very same
occasion of enmity, which the French Heretics took against the Cardinal of
Lorain, was now revived by the Nobility of the Low Countries. And that another
day, the Governess taking Egmont aside, he confirmed the same grievances,
wondering the King would suffer the Low Countries to be troubled for one man,
who was not so much as a Low Country man; and therefore both his fortunes and
affections were forreiners: neither had he taken the Oath of Allegiance to the
King; but partly to the Emperor, as born in an Imperial Town: and partly to
the Pope, from whom he had received his scarlet. When Armenterius should have
discoursed this to the King, he was then to acquaint his Majesty, what the
Governess answered to the particulars, according to his Notes containing the
summary of his Embassage. Of Granvells danger.
Lastly, she charged him, upon the same heads, to be sure to remember, That
Egmont had lately told her, it was by his only means, that Granvell lived to
that day; but that hereafter he would leave that care to the Governess, whom he
had now clearly informed, that the Cardinals life was every hour in danger:
and therefore when his Majesty should well consider, what Insurrections such
public crimes draw along with them, he would in his wisdom resolve how to
dispose of Cardinal Granvell. Septem. 13.
With these Commands; after a months voyage, Armenterius arrived in Spain; The
King at large hears him.
and as he found the King very desirous to know the State of the Low Countries,
accordingly at his first Audience he held him four hours together, in the
speech which he made out of his Notes. At which, Who first suspends, and then
alters his Majesty's resolutions.
as likewise at other not much shorter Addresses, he exceedingly satisfied the
King with the Governesses endeavors, first suspending (which seldom any man
could do) and finally altering his resolution, to retain the Cardinal in the
Low Countries. But whilst the King deferred his purpose, busied in the assembly
of the Estates of Castile, then sitting: and being likewise of himself a Prince
naturally jealous and apt to demurre; the Lowcountrey Lords, The Belgic Lords
leave the Court.
as if their suit were neglected, in the beginning of the new year withdrew
from Court; 1564.
all but Count Egmont, who told the Governess, the rest would not return till
Granvell was departed, with whom in compass of the same walls they would be no
more confined.

The End of the third Book.
The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The fourth Book.
BEfore the end of this year, 1564.
a sad uncertain rumor was raised at Madrid, A report raised that King Philip
was murdered.
and immediately dispersed through all the further Spain, Which he himself was
active to suppress.
That King Philip was pistolled. This report he was so far from sleighting
(though otherwise subject to delays) that he laid it, before it could pass out
of Spain; sending Duplicates of letters post both by sea and land, into the
Low Countries: wherein, under his own hand, he certified his sister, 4. January.
that in all probability this fame was forged by the heretics, upon some close
design set afoot by that treacherous kind of people. Withal he commanded her,
that if she did but hear the least intimation of such a report, she should
presently dispatch letters through the Low Countries, and so into France,
Britain, and Germany, to rectify the error; not only that his uncle the
Emperor, and his cousen-germane the King of the Romans, might be freed of
their fears: but likewise the insurrections prevented, for encouraging whereof
these reports, whether true or false, did equally prevail with men desirous of
innovation. But the Governess having certain intelligence, that he news was no
where divulged in those parts, would not mention it at all: lest she might
ingraft the opinion she endeavored to eradicate. Especially when she had
business at home of greater concernment; the Nobility being discontented, and
notorious Libells read upon every post, or passed from hand to hand; Scandalous
Pamphlets posted up, and handed through the Low Countries.
the remedy whereof was ever difficult, whether you take no notice of them, and
so invite them by impunity, or punish them; for neither way can extinguish the
memory of what is done, nor deter abusive writers from the like boldness.
And King Philip grown now more severe, 15. July 1561.
since the tumult at Valenciens from whence that liberty chiefly took its rise,
enjoined the Governess not to suffer such ignominious verses, that commonly
ushered in rebellion. But she quickly gave over her inquiry, 10. August. 1562.
fearing to take knowledge of the Authors, or to run the hazard (as she wrote
to the King) of struggling with so desperate a disease. Emblematicall
Cognizances given by the Lords-Conspiratours.
At this time besides those jeers against Religion and the Bishops, especially
Granvel, boldlyer vented because pleasing to the Nobility: there were added
dark ridding Emblems and Cognizances of the Lords, 29. Of March.
great symptoms, as many thought, of (...). The whole passage (as the
Governess related it to the King) I shall briefly (...).

The last year, in the beginning of December, the Lords Egmont, Bergen,
Montiny, and the rest of the Order, Invented at a feast.
were feasted by Gasper Schert^ I (...) of Grobendonch the Kings Receiver;
There, in their cups, they fell in a discourse, of the moderating of expense in
Liveries, whether it (...) question by accident (as the Duchess affirms upon
their own relations) or out of premeditation, In imitation of the Germans.
I leave to others judgment. They commended, upon this occasion, the Germane
fashion where all the year long they are waited on by men in the same leathern
breeches, and black cloth-cloaks, or coats with sleeves: nor have about them
any thing of gallantry; but that the pinnions of their sleeves, which they call
wings, are laid with silk fringe of diverse colors; spending their money much
wiselier, in their stables upon horses for service. This example pleased the
whole company, and they resolved to leave off their sumptuous and silken
Liveries, with all the pomp of their gaudy trains: and never after to be
distinguished by the several colors worn by their servants, especially by
their footmen; but that they would all give one Livery; and so it should not be
thought the invention of any particular person that desired to save charges.
And by the uniformity of their apparel, They throw the Dice who shall name the
Livery.
it would appear their minds were uniform. Some therefore proposing what color
would do best, they cast the dice who should choose, and the lot fell to Count
Egmont, who made choice of black cloth-coats with long sleeves, Egmont chooses
such as I told you were called silken wings: in which were imbroidered the
heads of men and hoods of diverse colors such as fools and jeasters wear upon
their coats. A pattern of these wings, that nothing might be concealed from the
King, 29. Of March.
the Governess sent him. And now imbroiderers and taylours shops were full of
these Coats and Cognizances, and the people looked and talked high upon the
matter: How the People interpret the Device.
nor are they always out in their conjectures. For some said the hoods
signified the Cardinal, who according to the habit of his illustrious, Order
wore such an hood falling upon his shoulders; and the heads, they guessed to be
the Cardinals and his adherents, among whom they numbered the Duke of Areschot,
Count Barlamont, and Viglius President of the Council; and they interpreted
the fools coats to signify, that the Low Country Lords were not fools heads,
as Granvel once called them, but that Granvel himself and his party might be
pointed at for idiots. Others rather thought those heads and fools-hoods were
brought in fashion by the Lords, as if they were contented to be called fools:
but yet they would have the Cardinal understand how (...) the fools were: and
to beware, least in that number there might be a Brutus. But the Governess,
though she made a better construction of these Emblems, yet feared that the
people, which she saw begin to grow discontented and mutinous, should divide
into factions and raise tumults: he was therefore very earnest with Count
Egmont and the other Lords, to give off their design, The Governess gets them
to leave off part of it.
and lay aside the new encouragements to insurrection. But because a great sort
of the coats, and above two thousand of the wings were already made: Which the
Lords supply with another Emblem.
her Excellence thought it would be well, if she could get them to leave out
the heads and hoods, the principal matter of offense; which with much ado they
did; and instead of the old, Count Egmont devised another Emblem, As the King
answered Egmont. Prince of Orange in his Apollogy 1481.
viz. a sheaf of arrows, which he said was the arms of the Kingdom of Castile,
(though it was not the arms of the Kingdom; but of the Catholic Queen
Isabella, and afterward given by the States of Holland when they were
confederate, and revolted from the King and gave out, that it signified the
concord of his brothers of the Order in their duty to his Majesty. What many
men conceived it to boad.
Yet this very change was censured by many that sung Granvels Dirge, expounding
it, as if the conspiracy were made now not with hoods, but arrows, and those
tied together in a bundle, and therefore not easy to be broken. Nor did the
Governess take notice of the alteration, hoping to cure the evil by contempt,
and having often found by experience, That some men's proud natures are enraged
if forbidden, but if left to themselves will in time recover. The King and
Occasion puts an end to these Rebuses.
By which connivence, the fashion of giving this kind of Livery was long
followed by the Lords: till the Kings command and other new accidents
interposing, it was quite left off.

In February Armenterius, long looked for, at length returned from Spain, 20.
and changed the face of the Governesses Court. Granvel sent for out of the
Low Countries.
For among other Mandates which he brought from his Majesty the first was, the
sending Cardinal Granvel, out of the Low Countries; to which the King finally
consented, that the Low-countreymen might not have so much as this color of
Grievance. For King Philip as he had no Courtier that governed him, Why the
King consented.
nor would have his favor to any one eclipse his own authority: so he advanced
and cherished diverse persons, but such as were very useful to himself and his
Kingdoms; among whom Granvel may deservedly be numbered. Yet because his
Majesty knew that, especially in the Low Countries, the power of forreiners
would not be long endured; and that he had an eye upon the example of the
French Court: and thought it best to do that, while his authority was entire,
which perhaps necessity might unhandsomly enforce him to; for quieting the
Provinces, he granted the Low-countreymens Petition, Why the Governesse wished
it.
whereto was added the approbation of the Governess either altered in her mind
or Counsels, and hoping by that sacrifice to the public odium, to gain the
affections of many of the Lords. Granvel presupposed as much by the change of
faces at Court.
This Granvel long since foresaw, and upon the return of Armenterius presently
observed the Courtiers, which used to adore him, would not take pains to stoop
so low, and that he had a thinner train and fewer suitors waiting at his gates;
diverse of his friends then forsaking him, when they were brought to the test.
Nor did Granvel upon receipt of the Kings letter decline his departure: No^ is
he at all dejected.
but very cheerfully showed himself ready to go whithersoever his Majesty would
please to send him. But seems to desire a discharge.
And before his departure, as if he were tired out with tedious cares, he was
often heard to argue with his friends like a Philosopher, Of case, and
retirement from the hurry of affairs; That he had long enough followed others
occasions; that a man broken with continual toil could not but wish for rest;
and that to one besieged with Petitioners liberty was not to be refused,
especially when he knew that Petitioners and flatterers met like
pitcher-carriers at a spring, which they drain and trouble; That favor at
Court has a better face, then inside; and that all humane things are found to
be far less in the possession, then they are fancied in our hopes. You would
think he discoursed this out of a mind armed against dangers, long foreseen and
exspected. Unless perhaps it was not constancy, but discontent, putting a face
of mirth upon his griefs; whereby he might at least defraud his Rivals eyes, of
that sad object which they looked for. Yet rather wishes to be removed to
Spain, and to that end solicits the Duke of Alva.
Indeed a few months before, when he saw his Remove inevitable, Who
deliberates upon it.
he wrote to his old friend the Duke of Alva, that if he must needs leave the
Low Countries, he would please to make it his suit to the King to send for him
into Spain. But the Duke was in great suspense, whether he should bring a man
to Court, that was not unpractised in Court-designes, and might happily precede
him in the Kings favor (for no virtue is less raised at Court, then that
which is most feared) or whether by the accession of a friend, he might
increase his power, or at least by using a man hateful to the Low Countries
October. 1565
(as Armenterius wrote to the Governess out of Spain) he might revenge himself
of his enemies in the Netherlands? At last moves for him.
this later reason carried it with the Duke of Alva; his fear was overcome by
his fury, the stronger motive to prevail with Courtiers, whom long prosperity
makes not more secure of favor then impatient of affronts. But prevails not.
But in vain the Duke solicited for Cardinal Granvels coming into Spain. For
the King had been lately persuaded by Armenterius, that it would be greatly to
his prejudice, to have the Cardinal in his Court: who out of his hatred to the
Low Countries would be suspected, in all their affairs to corrupt the Kings
commands, For Granvel is commanded into Burgundy.
which would be thought to be the Cardinals pleasure. His Majesty therefore
would rather have him retire into Burgundy, and to live not far from the
Low Countries, where He hoped in time to settle him again. Granvel was the more
willing to go thither, because he had the fair pretense of doing his duty at
Besoncon to his mother now old and diseased: in company of his brother
Cantonet; Thomas Perenot Lord of Cantoner. Whether at length he goes, giving
out, that he will return very shortly.
who having dispatched his French embassage was for the same cause traveling
toward Burgundy. Therefore not suffering his going away to be named till his
brother arrived at Bruxels, that it might seem he resolved of himself, and with
his brothers advice, to visit his Country, and not upon the Kings command to
leave the Netherlands; on the tenth of March he took his journey into Burgundy,
giving it out, that he would shortly return. 10 of Marc.
Likewise about this time, the Low Country Lords, upon letters from the King
commanding them to fit again in Council, 6 of March.
and more to regard the authority of their Prince, then their own hatred to any
private man, waited again at Court, to the joy of all degrees and qualities.
Save that it took off a little from the general contentment, Which report
spoiled the mirth of his adversaries. And troubled the Governesse.
that it was reported the Cardinal would come back; though many thought it an
idle rumor, invented by the man himself, who (as they said) was proud in
misery, and would not stoop, but even as he fled still threatened. But others
were not of that opinion, especially the Governess, that knew with how much
difficulty and reluctation the King had called him away. 29. of March.
By her letters therefore she acquainted his Majesty, That Egmont concealing
the Authors names had discovered to her a plot against Granvel, Who certifies
his danger and labors to keep him out of the Low Countries.
who, if ever he set foot again within the Netherlands, was to be murdered the
same day. The Low Country writers, out of uncertain reports name one Villet, a
Countreyman of Granvels that undertook to kill him. And the Counts Egmont and
Horn were charged, as privy to Villets intention, at their Trial in the year
1568. Besides in the private intelligence, which a Lady of quality from the
Borders sent into the Low Countries, I find this design against the Cardinal
mentioned; unles perhaps all this was feigned, to fright the Governess.

Granvell being gone for Burgundy, The joy for Cardinal Granvels departure, as
well of the People as the Lords.
the Town and the Court seemed quite another thing. The people that, as a
comfort to their low fortunes, use to behold with greediness the fall of
powerful men, especially of such as are Princes Favorites, because they
impute to these Privadoes all the severer mandates of the Prince; began now to
rejoice, as if they were freed of a heavy tax-master. In particular the
officious Courtiers joyed the Lords for having banished their Corrival: and
they themselves boasted, That now they had sued out the Governesses Livery, who
had lived long enough under a Guardian; That it was sufficient, they had for so
long time endured the insolence of a new man, an upstart, that triumphed in his
scarlet robes, for his Conquest over the Low-countryes. From thence forth, they
were much more observant to the Governess, came oftener to the Councel-board;
bestowed more time upon the Public. The Governess thinking it best to use that
opportunity, The Governess makes use of this alacrity in both.
pressed them to many things at once; particularly to continue the Subsidy of
the new year, for three years yet to come: which she had often, but in vain
attempted; and most of her Proposals were in a fair Way to be effected; But it
was d^sht again by new fames of the Cardinals Return.
when by letter after letter, coming from the Cardinal, that spoke of his
return into the Low Countries; and by increase of the faction of the
Cardinalists (for so they called the Duke of Areschot, Count Barlamont, and the
President Viglius) many men's minds were filled with fresh suspicion, and much
of their new joy and alacrity abated. For on the one part diverse of the Lords
said, They feared, (unless they pretended fear, to color their private
meetings) that if they should, removing all Obstructions, dispose things to a
good conclusion, Granvell upon a sudden would return, and boldly claim a share
in the success: On the other part, the Cardinalists more slowly followed the
Kings business; either offended at the Governess, or to endear the Cardinal by
his absence, and to make him the more longed for. That they may have no more
such frights, the Governess moves the King.
But the Governess persisted in her desires to bar all hope of his return, and
wrote to his Majesty many letters, Novem. 29.
wherein she did not a little tax the life of Granvell, I suppose to show she
had reason for consenting to his remove. Which was the cause, why an Officer
extraordinary was sent into Burgundy in the Kings name, to take the accounts of
the Exchecquer, and so by the by to examine Granvells actions. To send him away
to Rome.
At this Inquisitours return, the Governess made it her suit, forasmuch as the
Lords suspected, Granvells stay in Burgundy had too near an influence upon the
Low Countries, and that they likewise said, Though his person was absent, his
Counsels and Directions still ordered the affairs of State, his ghost as it
were haunting the Low-countryes, that his Majesty would please to free the
Provinces of that kind of fear; and send the man to Rome, the place he had long
since chosen, whither afterward Granvell went of his own accord, not by the
Kings command.

For in December the year following, 1565.
Pius the fourth deceasing, The rest of Cardinal Granvels life.
Cardinal Granvel came to Rome to the Conclave (it will not do amiss, He goes
(...) Rome to the Conclave.
I suppose, to let you know the further progress and end this great man) where
he was re-imployed by King Philip (the show, not substance of whose favor he
had lost) in soliciting all businesses at Rome that nearliest concerned his
Kingdom: with higher expressions then ever of his affection to the Cardinal.
By which is evident, what difference there is, between such as get into favor
with a Prince by accident, and such as are advanced by merit: for those if they
once fall, never rise: these their absence ingratiates with their Prince, and
necessity restores them to their places. Solicites the General peace of
Christendom Is created Viceroy of Naples. Delivers the colors to Don John of
Austria
And it fell out very opportunely for Granvel, who, being as ambitious of
employment, as prepared for present business (the League between the Princes of
Christendom, so often begun to be treated, and so often broken off, coming now
again in agitation) received from the King a large Commission, that together
with Francis Cardinal Paceco, and his Majesty's Ambassador John Zuniga, he
should upon what conditions he thought good, 1571.
make a league between Rome, Spain, and Venice, Labors and votes in the
Conclave for the Papacy of Gregory XIII.
which he (clearing the matters of controversy that daily were revived)
faithfully and actively endeavored on the Kings behalf. After this, he was
created by King Philip Viceroy of Naples, and delivered from the Pope to Don
John of Austria the Standard and commanding Staff, that declared him General
of the Christian Fleet. 1572.
After the Popes death, Into whose displeasure he shortly after falls, for
violating the rights of the Church.
coming to Rome, he so applied himself, that besides his advancing the Spanish
party, whereof he was chief, he was the principal cause that Gregory the
thirteenth, to the great benefit of Christendom, was created Pope. And yet he
exceedingly displeased that very Bishop at his return to Naples; where he
carried himself somewhat more harshly toward he Church, then could be
exspected from a Prelate of his Robe; but not otherwise then we see many sacred
and mitred persons do, that show themselves more earnest then the Lay-ministers
of Princes, to advance their politic Dominion. Whether it be their care to
decline the suspicion of being for the other party: or that their knowledge and
emulation discovers the abstrusest points that are to be opposed. Nor are they
less violent for being in holy Orders, familiarity and enjoyment taking off
their respect to that of which they are possessed. The Viceroy Granvell had
signed a warrant to his Officers, In a suit with the Archbishop.
to take out of Marius Caraffa the Archbishops prison, a notorious offendour;
whose cause Granvell said belonged to his Jurisdiction: For which fact, Marius
Caraffa excommunicated the Kings Officers, whereat Granvell being implacably
displeased, laid the Archbishops servants by the heels; and sequestered the
rents and profits of the Archbishopric: the Popes Nuncio Anthonius Saulio in
vain laboring against it, The Pope by his Nuncio justifies the Archbishop.
and threatening the Popes indignation if he persisted. Gregory the thirteenth
was exceedingly vexed thereat, especially because when this was done at Naples,
the like was attempted in Castile by the President of the Council, Didaco
Covarruvia Bishop of Segovia. His Holiness therefore commanded Saulio to go to
the Cardinal Viceroy, and directly tell him, That unless within so many days,
he would revoke and make null all he had done against the Archbishop and his
servants, he by the authority given him by his Holiness, would turn Granvell
out of the College of Cardinals. The Viceroy at last submits.
Which message (though some fearing the Vice-royes dipleasure, persuaded Saulio
to put in milder terms) boldly delivered according to his instructions, so
terrified Granvell, that he discharged the prisoners, and restored the Bishop
to his own. Nay, he gave the Archbishop a prisoner in exchange for the
condemned man taken from him, that occasioned the dispute, and had been
forthwith executed. Afterward he submitted to the Canons with much more care
and reverence. So you see Threats and Menaces, proportioned to the greatest
spirits, will at last humble them. Granvell having now four years governed that
Kingdom with great Prudence indeed, but not so great regard to Chastity, as
beseemed his age and scarlet, being in some measure reconciled to the Pope,
returned to Rome: From whence three years after, 1575.
he was sent for by the King into Spain (being then 62 years old) and the
Italian affairs of State wholly entrusted to his disposal; He is made
President of the Italian Council in Spain.
which was distasteful to some of the Grandees, whose weaker and lesser
judgments were eclipsed by his old and solid experience, His free carriage
toward the Grandees. And toward the King him self.
and looked on by him with a kind of scorn. I find likewise the King himself
was offended with him, Q. Curt. lib. 8.
whilst by too passionately extolling the Actions of Charles the fifth, and
instancing what he had done upon the like occasions, he seemed to urge them as
presidents for his sons imitation, with a freedom odious to Princes, which had
ruined many of Alexanders greatest Commanders, that spoke too liberally in his
fathers commendations. But Granvell knew he had to do with a Prince, enamoured
of his merits, whose favor toward him he had found rather suspended, then
extinguished; whereof he had this further proof, 1580.
that King Philip going to take possession of the Kingdom of Portugal, He
governs Spain in the Kings absence.
left Granvell to govern Spain: and returning out of Portugal, when he made
his entrance into Madrid, waited on by infinite multitudes, 1583.
and received with the acclamations of all sorts of people, he rode through the
Town with this aged Cardinal only on his left hand. The honor done him by the
King at his Return. His death.
Lastly, three years after Granvell returning from the City of Auspurge
(where he had married the Infanta Katharine, King Philips daughter, to
E^^manuel Duke of Savoy) being now seventy years of age, At Madrid.
departed this life at* Madrid the very day 28 years after the death of the
Emperor Charles the fifth. His corpse a little while after was carried to
Besan^on, and buried in his fathers Monument. His special Commendations.
The man is particularly remarkable to the favorites of Princes, because
without the help of flattery, for about forty years, with unspotted fidelity
he managed the principal affairs of a great Court, and being once outed, from
his fall rebounded with ease, and rose higher then before: because he was
gracious with a Prince that suffered him (a happiness seldom known) to enjoy
both favor and freedom to the last. But our present History bears older Date.

The Governess in the mean time, The Governess provides for Religion.
bent her endeavors to maintain Religion, which she heard went to decay in
many places: Commended to her by the King,
for the King by Armenterius enjoined her that in the first place: and since
then, wrote many effectual letters to the same purpose. Indeed that King
Philip did more then pretend to be careful of Religion, Seriously,
the letters (about a hundred of which I have) written with his own hand, or in
cipher to the Governess, do clearly testify. Wherein he never used
dissimulation, as in those that were read to the Council by the Governess; but
discovered to his sister without reservation, all his necessities, fears, and
secret thoughts. And in these private Letters, he so earnestly commends and
commits unto her the protection of Religion; that he plainly declares it was to
be her master-care, and all other Interests whatsoever, should give place to
it. With almost incredible care to root out Heretics.
Nay, many times he instructs her how to hunt out Heretics, and trace them to
their holes. His Majesty likewise had Catalogues of their names (which I have
by me, enclosed in his Letters) so exactly taken, as every ones condition,
neighborhood, age, and stature is to the life described, that truly it is
wonderful, how a Prince distracted and diverted with such a multiplicity of
State Affairs, could have the leisure to inquire out, for the most part,
obscure people, which a private man could hardly get time to turn his thoughts
and hand to. And by this means, as often as Catholics fled out of England into
the Low Countries, And with no little bounty to the banished English.
in whose behalf the Governess wrote to the King; with incredible celeritie
(besides his Pensions bestowed upon Priests of that Island, which for the cause
of Religion lived as banished men in the Low Countries) he divided among them
sometimes 2000 Ducats at once: sometimes more, sometimes less, always
something. Encouraged by this royal bounty, some Colleges of that Nation were
begun to be settled, to the great good of Catholics in Spain and the
Low Countries. The Governess therefore of her own accord, and by the Kings
command, labored to preserve Religion; and having the Nobility particularly
obliged to her for her late favor; she dispatched letters to this effect to
the Bishops and Governors of Towns, which exceedingly awaked their industry.

And now the Heretics were carried to prison, Heretics put to death with
various success.
and put to death: which terrified many, and those that died were often
reconciled to the Church. At Rupelmond, a Priest that was turned Heretic, when
he saw no hope to escape out of the Tower wherein he was imprisoned, A bold
fact of an heretical Minister.
fell upon a desperate design of firing the next room in which the Records and
Monuments of the Provinces were kept supposing that while the guards were
busied in preserving things that concernd the public, he might get away. He
acquainted his fellow prisoners, which were nine, with the plot; and now the
Tower was in a flame, which the soldiers presently extinguished, and the
Priest being taken, was, with the rest of his companions, but a little more
happily, But it saved him at last.
executed. For openly renouncing his Heresy, before the multitude that was
assembled to see him die; twice he cursed Calvin, and all the contrivers of
Heresy, and bad the good people take warning, how they came near that
plague sore, which the Devil had sent from hell to infect mankind; and so
professing he died a Catholic, his head was struck off. The Governess left out
none of these passages in her Letter to the King, August 13.
not doubting but they would be welcome to a Prince desirous of such news. But
at Antwer matters were carried somewhat more tumultuously. The punishment of
Fabricius the Apostate, out of her Excellencies letters, 8. October.
Christopher Fabricius was to be executed, who forsaking the Order of
Carmelites, married in England, The Executioners dexterity.
and had corrupted some citizens of Antwerp with heretical opinions. When the
Executioner brought him to the stake to be burned, suddenly as the faggots were
kindling, a shower of stones (cast from what hands was not known) fell upon the
place; the Hangman seeing his own danger if he stayed, yet resolving not to
leave the condemned man to the people, whipped out his sword, and when he was
half burned, killed him: then leaping down among the soldiers, saved himself
in the crowd. The mutineers thus defeated of their hopes, gave over for the
present; either unable to master the soldiers, or conceiving they should stir
to no end, the prisoner being dead. Yet, The people mutiny.
the next day, some of them lighting upon a woman, who (they said) first
discovered Fabricius, they made a ring about her, railed and threw stones at
her; and had killed her, but that she fled and hid her self in a neighbors
house. The same day Verses: were posted up in the Marketplace, writ in blood,
to this effect. That there were in Antwerp some that vowed shortly to revenge
Fabricius his death, whereof when the King had knowledge (perhaps with some
addition to the truth and manner) he severely commanded his sister, 25 Novem.
not to let crimes of that nature escape long unpunished. And her Excellence
causing one of the stone-casters to be hanged (for the rest, They are quieted
as they were all of the basest sort of people, were either fled the Town,
or lay there concealed) quieted the City for the present, rather by Terror,
then Punishment. But at Bruges, the very Senate offended at the same time far
more contumaciously; The Senate of Bruges affront the Inquisitour.
if we credit a Spanish Monk, who lay then privately in Bruge^, and sent
intelligence into Spain. September. 10
For the Inquisitour by his Deputy (the Pretour of the Town delaying to assist
him for fear of the Senate) had sent an Heretic to prison, guarded by three
Officers, the Senate presently commanded those Officers to be seized, and
committed them close prisoners, to be kept with bread and water, till
themselves had spoken with the Governess, and this was proclaimed by the
Crier in the Market place, the Heretic in the mean time being released; a
grievous vvrong both to Religion, and to the Inquisitour. The Senate did not in
very humterms acknovvledge their contempt; but posting to the Governess,
complained to her of the tumult that undoubtedly would have been raised by the
Inquisitour, in a City that would not suffer the Breach of any of their
Privileges: if they themselves, peradventure by a sharp, but yet by a safe
remedy, had not opportunely pacified the peoples minds. What was done herein
by the Governess, Novem. 25.
or what she ansvvered to the King, after she received his letters by the
Monk, I find not.

These and the like attemps (as I conceive) moved the Governess to consult, Of
the Council of Trent.
how the Decrees of the Council of Trent against Heretics lately brought into
the Low Countries (some of which were not yet clearly expounded) might be there
observed. For the King having many times wrote letters to her, wherein he
showed himself displeased with the Heretics boldness, and the connivence of
the Bishops: and having commanded his fathers Edict to be revived, which had
long lain dormant, the judgment being translated to Ecclesiastical persons,
The Governess replied, that although it would be very seasonable, in regard
that many of the new judges and inquisitours had not been more ambitious of
their places, then timorous in them; yet she said the Edict could not possibly
be executed, if the Council of Trent were received: by authority whereof the
cognizance of these causes was transferred to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal.
Besides that, The dilig^nce used by Pius iv. to get is to be received.
when Pope Pius had spent the most part of this year one thousand five hundred
sixty four in proposing and bringing in the decrees of the Council, Which was
readily done by King Philip.
earnestly commending their use and patronage to Christian Princes, it pleased
the King of Spain to be the first that gave his assent: not only out of his
Majesty's native piety, but likewise because that Council was called at the
request of his father Charles the fifth, 1536.
when he was at Rome: Paulo iii. Pont.
and therefore he conceived the maintenance thereof descended upon him by
inheritance.

But whilst his Majesty first took order to establish the Council in Spain,
The difference between the Pope and King. Onuph. Pan. in Pio iv. Adrian. l. 8.
Hist. Thuan. l. 35. Hist.
and then wrote to his sister to do the like in the Low Countries; something
happened at Rome; which it was thought would alienate the Kings mind from the
Pope, and consequently that no farther regard would be had of the Council
either in Spain, or the Low Countries. For there was an accidental Dispute in
the Council of Trent, whether the French or Spanish Ambassador should take
place; About the Spanish Ambassadors place. Which began at the Council of
Trent.
this would not endure the other should precede him, nor would he suffer this
to his equal. The controversy was for that present time composed, the Spanish
Ambassador being honorably seated apart from all the rest. But when the
Council was ended, upon the desire of Lodwick Requesenes King Philips Resident
at Rome; And being there composed, Was revived at Rome.
that the precedencie might be determined, Pope Pius, it being in re odiosa,
first began to put it off, and then advised Requesenes to give over the
contest: finally, he persuaded them severally and in private, to refer the
cause wholly to the sacred College of Cardinals; in the mean time, they were
to forbear the ceremony of coming to the Popes Chapel; The Pope not willing
to determine it. Puts it off to the Cardinals.
his Holiness supposing the contrary factions of the Cardinals would be a
means to make the suit depend for a long time, and free him of the necessity,
and so of the envy, of giving sentence. For, as he said very handsomely, a
Prince should imitate Jupiter who (according to the old tradition of the
Thuscan Soothsayers) has two kinds of thunderbolts, the prosperous he himself
uses to shoot, but for the unfortunate he calls a Council of the Gods.
Notwithstanding when men's minds are inflamed, they are like horses at full
speed, hard to be stopped; and both the Ambassadors took it ill, that the Pope
so delayed them, especially Henry Ossellie King Charles his Resident, who
thought himself by this means in a manner equalized, especially fearing least
the contention might be ended now, as formerly it had been in Ferdinand the
Emperors Court, where it was resolved the French and Spanish Ambassadors
should take place of each other by turns; which caused the French Ambassador
to leave the Emperors Court; and this perhaps might be a president for the
Court of Rome. But the Pope that the ceremonies in his Chapel might not any
more be intermitted, At last he explains himself. Whereupon the Spanish
Ambassador in a fury leaves Rome.
at last, upon the sacred day of Pentecost, commanded, that next the Imperial
the French Ambassador should take place. Whereat Requesenes, in a fury, after
he had in the Popes presence taken public notice of the injury in his masters
name; by his Majesty's command left Rome. This business held many in suspense,
This Accident troubled many. Especially the Governesse.
what king Philip would do, particularly concerning the Council of Trent, which
the Pope was so earnest with him to settle in his Dominions; and it exceedingly
troubled the Duchess of Parma, because she governed the Low Countries, which
among all his Ma^esties Dominions lay most open to the invasion of Heretics:
and therefore the Pope most of all desired that the Council should be first
established there. The Governesse therefore doubtfully exspected the Kings
pleasure in his next letters, and withal was somewhat more slack in punishing
Heretics; and some were absolutely of opinion, the Council of Trent should be
no more heard of in the Low Countries. The Heretics rejoice in hope the
Council of Trent will never be received in the Low Countries. But they were
deceived.
This rejoiced the Heretics, who jeered the wisdom of the Pope, that found so
seasonable a time to provoke the Spaniard, by whom if the Council were refused,
what Kingdom would obey the Canons made at Trent. Though some upon the same
premises, concluded otherwise, and said, the Popes justice was not shaken
either by hope or fear: nor did they doubt of the Kings piety and constancy,
or that a private offense could move him to put the Council out of his
Protection: which if he should do, the French would not fail to undertake it,
if it were but only because the Spaniard had rejected it. August 6.
And behold, Letters came from King Philip, which acquainted the Governess,
that the Dispute was ended, but far otherwise then he conceived the equity of
his cause, or his observance to the Pope deserved. That he had therefore called
away his Ambassador from Rome, A letter from the King offended with the Pope.
where he might not appear with honor, that being the last private business
he was likely to have with his Holiness: but for the public, or his service
and obedience to the Pope. and the holy Apostolic See, from which he would
never depart, he had commended those to Cardinal Paceco, Patron of the Spanish
at Rome, with whom she should hereafter transact all business appertaining to
the designation of Bishops and establishment of Religion: for defense whereof,
as likewise for propounding and imposing the Council of Trent upon the
Low Countries, it was fit her care and endeavors should not be slacked upon
any cause whatsoever. Yet careful to establish the Council of Trent.
And indeed the King having thus declared himself, she would easily have
brought it in, if she had not stumbled at the threshold. The Governess doubts
whether some Decre^s of the Council are not to be excepted in the promulgation.
The Senate would have it so.
For desiring the advice of those that had the care of souls, and of the
greatest Cas^ists in the Universities: and likewise putting it to the suffrage
of the Senate; they voted against the Council, and advised her not to propound
the Decrees, containing certain heads repugnant to Monarchy and the Privileges
of the Subject, unless the said heads were excepted. And this they urged more
freely and peremptorily, because they imagined, such confidence could not but
be acceptable to the King, which, under the pretense of liberty, served the
Princes ends, and yet exc^sed the Prince from any fault. But the King, whom the
Governess in every thing consulted, But the King will not.
liked it not: and therefore made answer, It was not his pleasure in
propounding the Council to his Subjects any thing should be excepted, lest
Rome, September. 30 Novem. 25
a City apt to prejudicate, should from thence have matter of censure, and
other Christian Princes, that looked upon Spain, occasion of imitation. For
that which is said in the Council, touching Sovereignty and Subjection, was
sufficiently considered, when the publishing thereof was disputed in Spain,
where all those difficulties were discussed. And as at that time no exception
was taken, but the Council absolutely proposed, only with a little moderation
to be used in the practice: so it should be in the Law-countreys, whither he
had sent a copy of the Spanish Proclamation, that his Subjects, throughout all
his Dominions, might obey him by one rule. The Governesse finds it difficult.
The Governess according to his royal Mandate, beginning to be active, and
endeavoring to put an end to what she had in the Netherlands begun; how sad a
commotion followed, in the end of the next year, when the people, 1565.
to the ruin of many, broke out into Rebellion, I shall in its due place
commemorate. Count Egmont sent into Spain.
In the mean time, the Governess seeing the difficulties of the Exchecquer and
Religion to increase: and that she could get nothing of his Majesty by
Letters, resolved to send some great man her Ambassador to the King, and
looking upon Count Egmont, as one, that, besides the Nobility of his birth and
his experience in the affairs of the Low Countries, she did believe would have
all things granted to his great and acknowledged merit: her Excellence
designed, and in the beginning of the year one thousand five hundred sixty
five, with the advice of the Senate sent him into Spain. Feb. 15.
And Count Egmont willingly undertook the employment, because (as he said to
the Governess and she informed the King) by the opportunity of this public
Embassage he should dispatch hi own private business with his Majesty. Having
therefore received large instructions, with the consent and hopeful
exspectation of all, many of the Nobility for honors sake bringing him on the
way, he set forward, the same day that Francis Hallevine Lord of Zeveghem
returned from Germany, The Lord of Zeveghem sent to condole the death of the
Emperor Maximilian.
whither he was sent by the Governess, in the name of King Philip, to the
Emperor Maximilian, his Empress, and the Princes of Germany; to condole the
death of his father, that religious Prince the Emperor Ferdinand, which the
Emperor Mazimilian took extreme kindly, and made great promises of service to
his uncle.

At this time the Prince of Orange had, The Princess of Orange brought a bed
of Prince Maurice.
by Princess Anne of Saxony, another son called, by the name of the Prince
Electour her father, Maurice. This is the Prince Maurice whom we must often
mention, not without the commendations of a valiant and cautelous General, who
(being chosen by the States Confederate in the place of his father lately
killed) after he had for two years commanded the Hollanders as a Prince, though
by another name, which is commonly the end of long Governments; dyed of grief,
conceived at the siege of Breda, Feb. 15.
when he saw, it must inevitably be taken. The Governess wrote to the King,
Christened with Catholic rites by heretical Godfathers.
that the child had all the Orthodox rites of Baptism: but that which most
troubled her was, on his Christening day they delivered him in tutelage to the
Prince Electour Augustus Duke of Saxony and Philip Landgrave of Hessen, both
Lutheran Princes: in whose names, two Lords, infected with the same heresy,
were his Godfathers. For even in this likewise, the Prince of Orange, who
always acted two parts, had something Catholic and something Heretical, to
please both sides, still attending their several fortunes as a neuter.

In the letters, the Duchess informed the King, Of the conference of K.
Charles of France and the two Queens at Baion.
what jealousies and reports were raised by the message which she had
communicated to the Senate, touching the meeting, that was to be upon the
borders of Aquitaine, between Katharine of Medi^es Queen Mother of France,
governing that nation jointly with the King; Feb. 3.
and her daughter Isabella Queen of Spain. For King Philip, For which the King
of Spain gave reasons to the Belgic Lords. And to the Princes of Europe.
by his letters, had commanded his sister to assure the Low Country Lords,
that nothing more was intended by that interview, then the satisfaction of King
Charles and his mother, being in their progress come so near the confines of
Spain. To the same purpose, he either wrote or sent Ambassadors to most of the
Princes of Europe, not so much as any Lord of Italy, or Spain, or any one
Minister of State, but was by instructions from King Philip acquainted with the
occasion of that conference. Yet many were jealous.
Yet all this took not away the Low-countreymens fears and jealousies, but
rather increased them; Especially the Heretics.
many, especially Heretics being apt to believe, that the Queen mother did not
this out of love to her daughter, but to lay the foundation of some great
design against the heretical factions, and the disturbances of both Kingdoms:
which they suspected the rather, because it was rumoured, King Philip would be
there in person. And indeed when Queen Isabella moved him, Who were troubled
the more fearing King Philip would be at the Conference.
to add to their contentment his presence; I find by his letters to the
Governess, that he was pretty well inclined to the journey: though she diswaded
him, and said it was below the Majesty of so great a Prince, to trust himself
to the power of the French, at that time, when partly the French Kings
minority, Why the Governesse dissuaded his coming.
partly the condition of a Quen-regent, made the subjects so contumacious
toward their Governors. Yet his Majesty replied, that if he were sure his
presence were necessary for the good of Religion, he was resolved, for Gods
cause, to decline no trouble or danger whatsoever. March 3.
Yet consenting to the going of his Queen, Duke of Alva.
and commanding Ferdinand Count of Toledo and Duke of Alva to wait upon her,
and present, in his name, to the King of France, the Order of the
Golden-fleece, he himself went not: Why King Philip was not present.
either diverted by many cares, September. 17
having then (as he wrote to the Governess) received intelligence that the Turk
besieged Malta: or else, to give his resolutions with greater authority at a
distance; which, I suppose, was the cause why he left it not in his wife's
power to determine any thing, Various reports touching the conference at Baion.
before she had, by her letters advised with him. But at this enterview, so
highly celebrated in the writings of all Scholars, even of the Poets
themselves, when in so great state and glory, King Charles and the two Queens
met at Baion, the French sleighting the Spanish pride, with greater pride; all
that was concluded, the more secretly it passed, only in presence of the Duke
of Alva; with the more confidence, do some writers (as if they had a blank
before them) fill up the space with wit, and deduce from hence, strange secrets
of State. Omitting such divination, out of the letters, September. 25
which I have, What they consulted of.
written in King Philips own hand, to his sister about that conference, this I
know. The Queen of Spain for diverse weighty reasons (no doubt by the command of
King Philip) had desired her Brother, and Mother, whom it nearly concerned to
preserve Religion then greatly endangered in France, and they, very well
affected to the cause, had laid their designs; the Queen Regent by the by
propounded some Marriages, wherein she would have engaged her Daughter, but the
Queen of Spain, and the Duke of Alva returned thereunto no absolute answer,
reserving the final determination of all things to King Philip. Lastly, upon
occasion of an Ambassador sent from Soliman the Turkish Emperor to renew the
league between King Charles and him, the French spoke of renouncing the said
League, and that their King should join with King Philip and the Emperor
against the common enemy. But this, though it was opportune, took no effect,
the Queen of Spain declining all overtures, but only, concerning Religion:
which she, at the Duke of Alva's earnest motion, again commending to them,
after they had embraced and kissed, they took their leaves. The Heretics very
much afraid Thuan. l. 36. Hist.
The Heretics (that guessed at their intentions) exceedingly fearing, lest by
the meeting of these Princes, as by the conjunction of malevolent Stars, An
Herre^a l. 12. c. 1. in the Life of Philip 11. and others.
was portended some fearful storm that would fall upon their heads. And indeed
that great massacre of the Hugonots, which seven years after was acted at
Paris, was they say plotted at this meeting, which I will neither deny, nor
affirm. The massacre at Paris thought to be designed at this meeting.
Though I am rather inclined to believe, that the mutual succors which since
this time we see have been often sent, by the French into the Low Countries,
and from thence into France, against the Rebels to Religion and their Prince,
together with the marriage five years after solemnized by King Charles and
Elisabeth daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, were concluded at this
conference. For King Philip, in the forementioned letter, gives an intimation
of mutual assistance to be from thenceforth given, to expel heresy out of
their Kingdoms: and plainly faith, the Queen had not directly declared her
self against the marriage, but left a door open to a new consulation; since in
regard of their tender years, the young Prince and Princess (he being but
fifteen, and Princess Elisabeth eleven) might very well stay a good while
before they married.

In the beginning of March, C. Egmont arrives in Spain.
Count Egmont came to Madrid, contrary to the exspectation and command of his
Majesty, who would have had his journey put off; Feb. 15.
I suppose, because the Governess had informed him that the Count was willing
to go, in hope of his private advantage. Yet the King received him very
graciously, answerable to the quality of so noble a person, and so great a
General, famous for many victories: and often with good approbation heard him
move for relief to the public necessities of his Country. Nay, when he
descended to his particular affairs, the King granted his suit, almost in every
thing. Finally, The Kings Answer and Commands.
his Majesty gave him large instructions in writing for answer to the
Governess, and that he might resolve upon more certain grounds he advised, in
that which concerned Religion, with Divines, April 2.
which to that purpose waited on him. In that Assembly of learned men, Having
first consulted the Divines, In this manner.
I have heard one that was present, say, The piety of the King was admirable:
For having summoned the greatest Schoolmen and Casuists, and demanding their
opinions touching the Liberty of Conscience which some Low Country Towns so
earnestly petitioned for: when many of them considering the present condition
of the Low Countries, said, That for the avoiding of a greater evil, much to be
feared, in Cities ready to revolt and shake off Obedience to their Prince, and
to the Orthodox Faith, his Majesty might, without offending God, allow his
subjects the free exercise of their Religion; He replied, That he sent not for
them to instruct him, whether such a Permission were lawful, but whether it
were necessary. And when they told him, they saw no necessity; then the King,
in their presence, kneeling before a Crucifix; And I, said he, pray and beseech
thy Divine Majesty, thou King of all men, O God, that thou will please to keep
me always in this mind, that I may never care, that the men which deny thee
for their Lord, may either be, or be called my Subjects: and then he opened his
determination concerning Religion in those Letters, which I told you were
delivered to Count Egmont. His Majesty checks C. Egmont, for the Cognizances
devised to affront Granvell.
But before he had his dispatch, the King dealt plainly with him, That he was
not a little offended at the last conspiracy of the Lords, when they gave the
Coats and Cognizances, wherein they aenigmatically threatened Cardinal Granvel,
that especially Egmont (reputed the Author of that invention) might therein
have shown, if not more fidelity, at least more discretion. Egmont excuses
himself,
But Count Egmont faithfully assured his Majesty, that it was mere mirth, and
childish sport at table, to make a jest to laugh at in their cups, not to be
feared by any man: that done, he omitted not to accuse the Cardinal as the
principal cause thereof, And accuses the Cardinal.
because he daily mustered those of his faction against the Nobility, and
therefore deserved to be requited with the like Assemblies. Yet in these
meetings (and this he often confirmed by oath) they did not so much as think of
any thing contrary to their sincere Allegiance to his Majesty: Nay, if he had
found any of their party an Enemy to the King; he himself would have been
first, though he were his own brother, that should have stabbed him to the
heart. This Discourse having passed between the King and Count Egmont (of all
which the King by a private Letter certified the Governess): Instructions were
given to the Count thus indorsed; Instructions of those things which thou,
Prince of Gavera, Count of Egmond, our Cosen, and Counselor in affairs of
the Empire, art commanded in our Name, to communicate to Our Sister the
Duchess of Parma. The Kings instructions delivered in writing to Count Egmont.
The sum of his large Instructions was this: At his arrival in the
Low Countries, after he had saluted the Governess from the King, and returned
her his royal thanks for her good Government of those Provinces, and for
sending into Spain the fittest man to negotiate for the Low Countries; he was
to deliver her this answer from his Majesty: For preservation of Religion.
That in the first place he was struck with unutterable grief, to hear of the
growth of Heresy; and that he was firmly resolved, and would have the whole
world know, that he would not suffer it within his Dominions, though he were to
die for it a thousand times. Therefore he desired the Governess to call a
Senate extraordinary, to which diverse Bishops should be summoned, particularly
Rythovius Bishop of Ipres, with the like number of Divines, and such
Counselors as stood best affected to Religion and their Country. The
pretended occasion should be to examine the Council of Trent; but the real
meaning to find out an Expedient, how the people might be kept in their ancient
Religion; For destruction of Heretics.
how their children might be virtuously bred up at School; how to proceed in
punishing Heretics, by some other course, that might take off the odium: not
that he meant to pardon them (for that he neither resolved to do, neither did
he think it would be acceptable to God, or safe for Religion;) but that he
might in their deaths prevent all hope of glorying, which was the cause of
their impious and wilful sufferings. Moreover the Senate was to be so ordered,
that the Council of Estate was to superintend the other two Councels of Law and
the Treasury, For regulation of the Council.
but nothing to be concluded, before the Governess knew their Resolutions and
Reasons. This was the Effect of his Majesty's Letters, delivered to Count
Egmont. April 2.
But he wrote others to the Governess, wherein he gave her to understand, That
it pleased him not, that the Authority of the Senate (wherein sat the
principal Lords of the Low Countries) be enlarged, which both straitens the
power of the Governess; and might open a way for diverse great men, enriched by
the Treasury, to change (as from other hands was intimated) the present form of
Government. For disposal of the moneys sent by his hand.
He likewise commanded Count Egmont to let the Governess know, That his
Majesty remembered the necessities of the Netherlands, which she had so often
moved him in: and therefore sent her, part in ready money, part in Bills of
Exchange, 60000 Ducats to pay the common soldiers, and 200000 to be
distributed among the Garrisons; and for the Governors of Provinces, and the
Magistrates pensions 150000, and that he would have returned her more, for the
fortifying of Towns, and disbanding of soldiers, if he had not been in many
places to provide for his Fleet against the Turk. But some of this money could
not be got of the Bankers, because they were not satisfied in Spain. Lastly,
commending the integrity of his Judges and Officers, he put the Governess and
his Subjects of the Low Countries, For signification of his Majesty's intended
journey thither.
in hope, that he would make a voyage thither, purposely to hear their
Grievances, and in person to redress them. The same day that his Majesty gave
these Letters to Count Egmont, Prince Alexander Farneze delivered by the King
to Count Egmont, who is to conduct him into the Low Countries.
he called in Alexander (son to Octavio Farneze and Margaret of Austria,
Princes of Parma and Piacenza) and delivered him to Count Egmont with these
words; Among other things which thou art to carry to the Governess, I trust
thee likewise with this Youth: do him those services, which the Son to my
Sister, and your Governess deserves. Count Egmont kissing the Kings hands again
for this special favor, departed the more pleased, because it would add to
the Governesses joy, for the success of his Embassage, that he should bring her
son, a happiness she had long desired. Indeed it rejoiced her very much; for
when she saw her son Alexander, so well bred, so lively spirited, The
Governesses joy upon the sight of her son. And news of a Match intended him by
the King
yet tempered with such gravity, as became one that had been educated in so
great a Court, under his uncle King Philip; she received infinite satisfaction.
Especially for that Count Egmont, together with her Son brought her the news
of a Marriage intended him by the King. Whereupon the Steward of her House, the
Lord Theuloi, was purposely sent into Spain, April 30.
to give his Majesty most humble thanks, for his Royal favors conferred upon
her, and her husband the Duke of Parma, by designing such a wife for their
Son.

King Philip had been moved about a match for Prince Alexander four years
before. Of Marriages treated for Prince Alexander.
His Father Octavio was inclined to marry him to the Sister of Alphonso Duke of
Ferrara, Daughter to Hercules the second and Rene Daughter of Lewis the twelfth
of France; because he thought it would be a great support to his Power, Duke
Octavio would match him to the Duke of Ferrarars sister.
to join in alliance with Princes so near neighbors to him; and he said, His
reasons.
(which I believe he had from Charles the fifth) That as in the Globe of the
Earth and Sea, the Moon is more predominant then most of the Stars, not
because she has a greater, but a nearer influence; so we should think of our
neighbors. And he maintained this opinion, as I suppose, more fervently,
because about that time Pope Pius the fourth challenged the Principality of
Camertio, which he intended to bestow upon Frederick Borromeo, his Sisters
son, lately married with his consent, to the Noble Lady Virginia Ruveria
Verana. Octavio therefore, weighing, in case this dispute might beget a War,
how much it concerned him to be in amity with the Duke of Ferrara, held it very
convenient to make up this Marriage. Nor did the Governess disapprove of the
design; The Governess is of the same mind.
but in her husbands and her own name, wrote about it to the King. But he,
either because he would have no affinity with a Duke of the French Faction; or
because he had thought of another Wife for him, October. 1.
and had already showed himself in it; answered the Governess in these words.
1560.
ILLUSTRIOUS Princess, The King dissents.
long since when I resolved upon the Treaty of a Marriage for your Son and my
Alexander ( for I esteem him as mine own Son) with the Daughter of our Uncle
the 1565.
Emperor Ferdinand; and names another.
I did assure my self, it would be very well received by you, Sister, and by
the Duke your Husband. Nor have your Letters altered my Opinion, December. 9.
or what was said to me by Ardinghell in favor of the match with Ferrara. 1560.
She that I have designed him, His Majesty's Letter.
is Daughter to an Emperor, and our kinswoman. The Duke of Ferrara's Sister
and Prince Alexander are of years so disproportionable, that it may cause
disagreement. Indeed I commend the Duke of Parma, that seeks the friendship of
his neighbors, by desiring to match into this family, but he ought likewise to
consider, that so long as he has me for his Brother and Protector, no man
dare presume to trench upon him. As he may well perceive by the late change of
things, when Pius the fourth gave over his attempt. For after I had taken care
to inform his Holiness of my resolutions, and how I am obliged in honor both
now and for ever, to maintain the Rights of the Farnezes: he answered me, He
would not only forbear to molest the Duke, but would be as much a Patron to
his Family, as I my self. But though I have commanded Ardinghel to signify
this to the Duke; yet out of my brotherly love, I could not but acquaint you
with it, that I might satisfy the near relation of our blood, 1565.
and likewise desire you to insert this my determination in your Letters to
your Husband: The King upon further consideration proposes Mary Princess of
Portugal. The Offer is embraced.
and with all possible speed to let me know both your resolutions. But while
the Father and Mother remained in suspense, and knew not which of these matches
they should wish^ the one being more noble, the other more advantageous; the
King upon second thoughts, pitched upon Mary Princess of Portugal, Daughter to
Prince Edward and Isabella of Briganze, Niece to King Emmanuel; and by his
Letters sounding the inclination of the Duke and Duchess; Edward brother to
John the III. son to Emmanuel.
the Match was at once propounded by the King, and approved of by all parties:
For at that time, the name of Portugal was glorious, a great part of the Earth
being discovered by their religious and fortunate Soldiers. And King Philip
was not only descended from this House of Portugal, by his Mothers side,
being Son to Isabella, and therefore Nephew to Emmanuel; but he himself,
almost twenty years before, married into this Family, to Mary Daughter to John
the third, Her Nobility both by Father
and Niece to Emmanuel. It was therefore thought an high honor to the
Farneze's, that one of King Emmanuels Nieces should be married to King Philip,
and the other to Alexander Prince of Parma. Especially because She and King
Philip were Brothers and Sisters children, and Mary of Portugal was in the same
degree of blood, both to King Philip and his Queen: And Mother.
besides, by her Mother she was of the noble familiy of the Briganzes, which
had often matched with the Bloud-royall of Portugal, and kept a House like a
Kings Court. But Prince Alexander was far more in love with the Beauty and
Virtue of the Lady, then with the Merits of all her Ancestors.

The fame of this Princely Virgin was spread through Spain, and most
deservingly; Princess Mary's peculiar commendations. Her wit and learning.
for she had such an understanding that it was reported, there was nothing she
did not comprehend. She spoke Latin fluently, and very well. She was a pretty
good Grecian; not ignorant of Philosophy, and excellent in the Mathematics. So
versed in Scripture, that she could readily turn to any Text in the Old or New
Testament. Sanctity of life.
But above all, she was admired for innocence and holiness of life. Nothing
pleased her so much in her hours of retirement, as the contemplation of things
Divine. And in her familiar discourse, she often quoted short Maxims out of the
Bible, or the Fathers; wherewith in the day time while she was at work, she
sweetly offered up her heart to God. Childish exercises.
Indeed she never put her hand to sowing, either needle work or imbroyderie,
but only to adorn the Altar, and for the use of the poor, Modesty.
that she might in both, adorn and cover Christ himself. Touching her modesty,
she was not only careful but proud of it, and said, Though women were to
conceal their other virtues, yet they might glory in their Chastity. Therefore
she forbear all public Shows and Entertainments: Care to preserve it.
as often as her Parents and the King her Uncle would dispense with her
absence. And in readding of the Poets, though she was very much taken with
their wit, yet she looked upon them with great fear, lest she might encounter
any amorous passages: and once, when she had took up Francesco Petrarch, and
had run over a few of his Verses, she threw him out of her hands. For the same
reason she could not be induced to let any Courtier lead her; or to lean upon
their arms or shoulders, the common garb of great Ladies, either out of pride,
or to be the better supported, going in high Chopines. These, and many other
virtues, commended the Match with Mary Princess of Portugal. The Governess
therefore, loosing no time after her Son Alexanders coming: sent the Royal
Fleet well manned to sea, The Low Country Fleet sent to transport the Bride.
and made Peter Ernest Count Mansfeldt, a great Commander, Admiral, sending
with a noble train of Lords and Ladies only the Count himself with his Lady,
Mary of Momorancy, sister to Count Horn, and his son Charles Mansfeld.
Weighing Anchors from Vlushen in August, about the beginning of September he
arrived at Lisbon, 14 day. Who left Portugal nobly attended.
and not long after, the Bride, attended by many of the Portugal Nobility went
aboard, but would not suffer them to hoyst sail, till she had sent for the
Portugeses a shipboard, and desired a Priest of the Society, who used to
preach to her, and to hear her Confession, that he would arm her and the
company with some Exhortations, September. 21
as an Antidote to preserve them from Heresy, Sebastian Morales afterward
Bishop of Japan. She is overtaken with a storm at Sea.
that had poisoned the Low Countries, whither they were bound. Which being
accordingly performed, by that eloquent and religious man, with a fair gale of
wind they failed out of the Port. But when they were upon the main, the billows
on a sudden growing angry, swelled, they knew not why, and the storm
increasing, the other ships being scattered, only one fell foul upon the
Admiral that carried Princess Mary, and having sprung many leaks, the poor
ship was left a miserable spectacle, the sea almost devouring her in their
sight, and within hearing. But Princess Mary moved with the piteous cries and
lifted-up-hands of the wretched drowning people p^esently called the Admiral,
She pitties and helps the poor creatures ready to be drowned.
Count Mansfield, and prayed him to vere to them, and take in as many men and
women as he could possibly, before the Vessel sunk, and (...) many Christians
should be cast away, whilst she looked on. The A^mirall told her it could not
be done, without endangering her Highness, and the whole ship. The Mariners
affirmed the same, particularly the Master, an excellent Pilot, but unskilful
in that Art of Navigation, which is directed by Divine hope. Then said the
Princess: But I, mark what my mind presages, do hope in God, if we do our best
to help them, that he will so graciously accept our endeavors, as it will
please him of his Goodness, to help us all. And this she spoke with such a
sense of Piety, and so sweet a look, that the Admiral durst not oppose her,
but gave order for the ship to succor them, which struggling and crowding
through the furious waves, at last came near them, and putting out her long
Boat opportunely saved them all; but the ship it self, out of which they
escaped, having obeyed the Princesses command, a little while after sunk before
their faces, only one man being lost in her. Nay, the very hour that Princess
Mary by Divine inspiration said, her mind presaged they should do well, the
rage of the winds abaited, and the scattered Fleet came together again. Though
within a few days, a new storm rising, Another tempest drives her upon the
coast of England. She refuses to send her service to Queen Elisabeth.
drove them upon the unhappy Coast of Britain, and forced them to put in at an
English Harbor. Where whilst they lay for a wind, Count Mansfoldt thought it a
fitting Civility, to send some Noble person to present her service to the Queen
of England, in whose Dominions they remained. But Princess Mary would not, she
said; hold any correspondence with the Enemies of the Church. And though others
pressed her to it very much, affirming that she might safely, upon such an
occasion interchange common courtesies, she was constant to her first resolve;
adding, that it was safest for her self, and best for the example of others.
Yet beyond all exspectation, at the same time, she courted a noble heretical
Lady, She invites an English Lady.
that came, among a multitude of the English, to see the fleet. For Princess
Mary casting an eye upon her, Begs her two sons of her.
and two fine boys, her sons which she brought with her, entertained her in
a very friendly manner: and finding, by her discourse, that she was the Mother
of many more children, she importuned the Lady to bestow these two upon her,
promising that she her self would be such a Mother to them, as it should not
repent her of the change. This she did, because (as she her self professed) she
was not able to suffer such a pair of young Innocents, that looked like Angels,
being corrupted with heresy, to be made Devils, and numbered among the slaves
condemned to eternal torments. And although Princess Mary could not prevail
with the Mother, But is denied.
in her suit for these boys; yet a few years after, God gave her the same
number of that sex: and it is probable that her desire of breeding up another
children to be Gods servants, 3565.
was recompensed by God himself with as many children of her own. One of her
ships fired accidentally.
Nor will I omit a memorable passage, that happened in the same Port, where one
of the Kings ships, by accident was set on fire, not far from the Admiral
where the Princess was aboard. And while some strove to quench the flame, and
some to save themselves, and their goods: she running out of her Cabin to the
Prow, made a little stop, and said* Well, and shall I lose my box of sacred
Relics? presently the flame approaching near her, Her care greater for her
Relics then for her jewels.
she ran back, and with a mighty courage plucked the box out of the Cabinet:
either forgetting or despising the jewels it contained, to an infinite value.
Presently returning again from her Cabin (for the fury of the fire was not yet
assuaged) a Gentleman met her, and stepping in, with great reverence, took her
by the arm, and beseeched her, whilst she might, to fly the danger. But she,
casting a frown upon the man, said, Sir, you were best unhand me. For her soul
then for her body.
As if she (...) more fearful to be touched by him, then by the flame: so,
unsuppo^^^, she went forward to the Prow, and the fire being presently
extinguished, they set sail for the Low countries. She lands in the Low
countries.
About the beginning of November, the fleet arrived at Ulushing, where she was
received, and attended, by such as the Governess had sent upon the sudden news
of her landing: 3. Day.
that train being augmented by the horse and foot of the several towns through
which she passed, till she came to Bruxels. Is conducted to Bruxels.
Where all sorts of people welcomed her with greater joy and gratulation,
because they heard she had so difficult and dangerous a passage. Octavio Duke
of Parma being, The Marriage solemnized on the Anniversary of the Institution
of the Order.
a few days before, come out of Italy, purposely to be at his sons wedding;
upon the next Saint Andrews day, appointed by Philip Duke of Burgundy for the
Anniversary feast of the Order of the Golden-fleece, which he instituted, and
commended to the patronage of that Saint; October. 8.
the Nuptials were celebrated at Bruxels, with such magnificence, as befitted
the Neice to Emmanuel King of Portugal, 1430.
and the Grand-sonne to the Emperor Charles the fifth; but likewise, with such
Christian Piety, as was exspected, Emmanuel K. of Portugal Paternall
Grandfather to Princess Mary Charles the fifth maternall Grandfather to Prince
Alex.
out of the opinion conceived of so religious a Lady, and made good by her
presence, beyond all imagination. Maximilian de Bergen, Archbishop of Cambray
married them. The King of Spain was present by Didacus Gusman a Silva his
Majesty's Ambassador to the Queen of England; commanded, for this reason, to
take the Low Countries in his way: Ambassadors of neighbor Princes were at
the wedding to joy them from their Masters. The particular joy of the Knights
of the Golden-fleece.
All the Low Country Nobility was there; the Knights of the Golden-fleece
expressed a particular contentment, because about a hundred and fifty years
before, their Order had been founded at the marriage of Duke Philip of
Burgundy, with Isabella of Portugal, and now at the like marriage of this
Princess of Portugal, they revived the memory of that Day in all kind of
shows and pleasures, seeming to forget their present discontents and factions.
So great was the gallantry of the Lords, and they so taken up with revells.

But after the nuptial feast was over, The Bride and Bridegroom leave the
Low Countries.
and the Bride and Bridegroom departed from the Low Countries: as if the Truce
were ended, they fell to their differences again. The narration of which
differences I shall wave a while, till I have, in reference to Princess Mary,
related some passages noble in themselves, but rendered more illustrious by her
royal Blood: and because they equally concern her husband Prince Alexander and
his posterity, She is welcomed into Italy with great magnificence.
which we must often mention in the progress of this History, therefore it
will be the best, in this place to sum them up together. Princess Mary now
come into Italy, was received with unusual pomp and ceremony. For drawing near
to Parma she was met by two gallant troops, 1565.
one of Lords, the other of Ladies, her husband Alexander being in the head of
that, and this led by his Aunt Vittoria Farneze, wife to the Duke of Urbin. On
that side, such a multitude of horses, and on the other, such a world of
Coaches, vying bravery and rich Liveries; that seldom has been seen a more
magnificent and glorious Show. But the Princess, Her example reforms Parma.
after she had been the second time thus entertained, applied her self to
serious matters, her example and endeavors, in a few days changed the face of
Parma. Her pious design to beg a Son of God.
And she her self many times having prayed to God for a Son to continue the
name of the Farnezes, accidently conceived a hope, that if she took up some
Orphan or beggar-boy, and bred him for Charity, she should compass her desire.
She therefore took up one in the street and bred him in her Court: and nine
months after, she was delivered of Ranucio. She prays for and obtains another.
But her hope proving as fruitful as her self, she resolved to beg of God
another Son, that she might settle the house upon more pillars; and directing
her prayer to our Lady, Ranucio Duke of Parma and Piacenza.
in the Church called the Scala, Prince Alexander by chance coming thither, she
turned to him, and said, Come, Sir, let us join our prayers to God, that in
obedience to his Virgin Mother, he will graciously please to give us another
Son. They prayed together with great faith, and within nine months after,
she brought forth Od^ardo, Cardinal Odoardo.
which was not the cause of greater joy in Prince Alexander, then it was of
admiration and reverence toward his wife, at whose suit, God had given him
both his Sons. From thenceforth, he more and more honored her Sanctimonie;
Prince Alexanders confidence in her prayers.
insomuch, as at the battle of Lepanto, boarding the enemy, with more valor,
then caution, and afterward being reproved by Don John of Austria, he replied,
He had at Home the Cause and Patroness of his confidence. Indeed she spent the
whole time of that war in devotion and penance for her husband. The education
of her children.
But for her children, because she knew they were granted her by Gods special
favor, she bent her study, while she lived, to season their tender years with
divine precepts: and when she came to die, was not so earnest with her husband
for any thing, Which she dying commends to her Lord. Qu. Blanch with an
excellent Prayer.
as to be careful of their education, using that very prayer to God, which she
heard was made by the Queen of France, Mother to Saint Lewis, In this moment of
time, which is my last, I pray and beseech thee, O Father of mankind, that if
my children be inclined to commit any fouler crime against thee, 1577.
thou will hasten their ends, and prevent their treason against thy Majesty. A
prayer worthy all mother-Queens, that would have no children, but such as will
acknowledge God, the Lord of all, to be their father, And so the eleventh year
after her marriage, dyed Princess Mary, no less admirable in her death, Her
patience in the pangs of death.
then in her life. For as in this, she was most nobly active, so in the other
she was most undauntedly passive, the only glory that remains for dying
persons. Her patience, and the strong assaults of the Devil, diverse, then
present, have set down in writing. A little after her departure, in a private
box within her Cabinet, The Form of her daily exer^^se penned by her self.
was found a short Diary written by divine instinct with her own hand,
containing the heads of her actions, every day, and almost every hour of her
life. In which may be seen (for it is printed, and bound up with her life) what
her judgment was, concerning Christian perfection; and how she applied her
self to that progressive rule, indeed so exactly, as the Houses of Portugal
and Farneze may glory in the beauty of her mind: and the example of Princess
Mary, may be set for a pattern to all princely maids and wives.

And now, The Low Countries in new trouble.
to proceed with the business of the Low Countries: The Governesse had begun
with great industry to execute the Kings commands, brought by Count Egmont out
of Spain; but receiving new letters from his Majesty at Validolid; June 2.
wherein he seemed to command the quite contrary to what he wrote by the Count;
the Governesse, amazed, was at a stand: and Count Egmont excessively troubled
in his mind, Count Egmonts complaints.
complained, That his authority and esteem would be lost among his enemies by
that change of the Kings Counsel; as if he had delivered one thing, and the
King enjoined another; that it seemed the Kings Councillors were in a way, if
they held on, to force the Low Countries into the receiving any form of
Government, rather then the present; though it were to put themselves in the
power of the Germans, the French, or of the Devil himself. For his own part, he
was resolved, if the King would not make good his determinations, to retire to
his own house: and leaving his Government of Flanders, to testify to the world
by his absence, that Egmont had no hand in the troubles of his Country. July
22.
When the Governesse had writ this to the King as she had it, from the mouth of
Count Egmont: three months after, she received an answer from his Majesty
dated at Segovia, ^n these words. October. 2.
That it was a false allegation of those men, who affirmed he had commanded any
other thing in his dispatch of Count Egmont, His Majesty's Letter touching the
punishment of Heretics.
then in his late letters from Validolid, therefore to express himself more
fully, In the first place, he would have the Anabaptists and other Heretics
put to death, of what families soever they were descended, and their
punishment, neither remitted, nor themselves reprieved. Since experience had
sufficiently demonstrated that a violent and volatile disease, The Inquisitours.
was but ill cured by indulgence or delay; Then, That he commanded the
Inquisitours of faith (a judicature neither new, nor unnecessary for the
Low Countries) to be every where with reverence retained, and assisted with all
the power of the Duchess her self, and the Governors of the respective
Provinces. And the Council of Trent.
Lastly, because the Council of Tre^t was now established in the Low Countries,
it was their duty to they the Decrees of the said Council, and likewise the
Imperial and Royal Edicts. Moreover, he desired the Governesse that in the
execution thereof, she would use her greatest care and industry: for as much as
no one living could do any thing more acceptable to himself, or more
advantageous to the Provinces. This was the sum of those letters, which the
Prince of Orange charged with all the calamities that befell the Netherland.
Out of which Heads the Governesse conceives an Edict.
And though the Governesse thought it a work of danger, to undertake so many
things at once, and therefore wrote many letters to be^eech the King to excuse
her; yet she attempted it, November. 9.
and by her Proclamation, commanded all the King had enjoined her; and advised
the subordinate Governors, in these words, as appears by her Edict speedily
sent to Ernest Count Mansfeldt, And sends it to the Governors of Provinces.
Governor of Luxemberg, the rest being only transcripts of the same. For
as much as nothing is dearer to the King, then the peace of these Privinces; and
that his Majesty desires to prevent the great evils wherewith we see many
nations afflicted that change their Religion. December. 18.
Therefore it is his Royal pleasure, A copy of the Edict.
that the Edicts of his father Charles the fifth, and his own, with the Decrees
of the Council of Trent, as likewise of Provincial Synods, be kept entirely.
That all Favor and Assistance be given to the holy Inquisitours, and the
Cognizance of Heresies left to them, unto whom it appertains both by divine and
humane Laws. This is the Kings command, who respects only the Worship of
God, and the good of his people; and hereof I give you notice, that you may,
without exception, embrace it your self, publish it to the Magistrates of your
Province, and take special care, that no man, upon any pretense whatsoever,
slight its due observation, you terrifying the con^umacious with those
punishments specified in our letters annexed to the Edict. And that you do this
with more facility; you shall choose some one out of the Senate, to visit and
superintend your Province, whether the Edict be punctually and justly observed
by the Magistrates and the People: you your self, together with the Magistrate
you make choice of, every quarter of a year, giving us an axact account of the
premises. And it shall be our part to endeavor that your pains may receive due
recompense and advancement. In short, partly the care of these Edicts, partly
of the late Marriage ended this year; which was the last of peace and
happiness that ever the Netherlands enjoyed.

The End of the fourth Book.
The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The fifth Book.
NOw comes in a year, 1565.
memorable for the open conspiracy of the Gentry, seconded by the mutiny of the
people, and the turbulent counsels of the Lords, the furious incursion of
Heretics, Sacrilege; with ruin of Religion, and no less ignominy to the
Authors. The Edict formed by the Governess, was sent and published in the
Kings name, by the several Governors of Provinces, What the Governors of
Provinces conceived of the Edict proposed.
but some of them first complained to her Excellence, protesting they were not
able to govern the people with that severity enjoined by the Edict. Nay, diverse
plainly told her, they would not be guilty of burning five or six thousand men
in their Provinces; whereof the Governess advertised the King, January 9.
warning him of the storm which she foresaw. The first sign and terror of the
Tempest lightened out of Brabant. For when the Chancellor of that Province had
propounded the Kings Edict to the Brabanters (who have no other Governor but
his Majesty's Lieutenant over all the Low Countries) Brabant first refuses to
obey the Edict.
immediately the chief Cities of the Netherlands, Bolduc.
that is, Lovain, Bruxels, Antwerp, and the Bus, assembling the Senate, and
petitioning the Chancellor, very violently and angerly, desired that their
Privileges might not be violated, to which in regard the Judicature of the
Inquisitours, and the Emperors Decrees were repugnant, they ought not to have
been so easily proposed by the Chancellor, nor could they possibly admit them.
The Governess having notice of the Petition, commanded it to be brought and
read at the Council Table. And though some held it a bold request, yet it was
her pleasure, the Annals and Records of Brabant should be searched, especially
the Commentaries of Francis Hulst a Brabanter, who first executed the Office of
Inquisitour in that Province. Upon sight whereof, Some condescension made, but
it gives no satisfaction.
answer was made. That because from the year 1550, this kind of Inquisition was
not used in Brabant, and that the King had declared his resolution, to innovate
nothing, therefore it pleased his Majesty there should be no change within
their Government; but only that the Decrees of Charles the fifth should be in
force, till it was otherwise ordered by the King. Which moderate Answer neither
satisfied the Brabanters, that promised themselves all their desires: and yet
encouraged those of Flanders, to present such another Petition to the
Governess. But her Excellence was by a special Messenger, engaged in business
of higher concernment. For she received fearful intelligence from a man, till
then unknown, Intelligence of many persons of quality in Brabant, that were to
enter into a League against the Edict.
but by the endeavors of Christopher Assonvill, a worthy Senator, privately
admitted to her presence; That many noble persons of Brabant had entered into an
Association, in case the King should by force impose the Inquisitours upon
their Province, that they would by force defend themselves: which confidence
was built upon a privy confederation betwixt them and certain forreiners,
principally Gaspar Colligny Admiral of France. Some such thing the Prince of
Orange a little while after wrote from Leyden to the Governess. March 29.
And the same was discovered to her by the Counts of Egmont and Megen, who
said, The Conspiratours had privately issued out Commissions to Captains and
Colonels; and that if need required, they had in a readiness above twenty
thousand men: But what manner of Conspiracy this was, and the Original of it,
I shall now demonstrate out of the Letters, which are in my custody, written by
some that were purposely appointed to examine the matter of fact. For when the
Governess, the year after this, by the Kings command sent certain persons,
hastily to inquire in the respective Provinces, who they were that had raised
or fomented this years tumults: they seized upon the Letters, Books, and Notes
of many men, out of which compiling a Treatise, they informed his Majesty and
the Governess, of the beginning and progress of this design. And in discharge
of what I have undertaken, partly from thence, partly from other Records, I
borrowed this which in short I shall deliver to you.

Long before the bloodshed of this year 1566, 1550.
some of the Nobility of the Low Countries, The Original of the Low Country
men's conspiracy, some Noblemens sons bred up Heretics abroad.
in particular some young Lords (none of which I can readily name, but only
Lewis of Nassau, brother to the Prince of Orange) sojourning for a long time at
Geneva, and such like Towns, were easily intrapped by the Heretics. For they
had only been so far instructed in Religion, as might serve to keep them
Catholics at home; but not abroad to teach them, if they should be
circumvented, how to distinguish truth from falsehood; and truly no man ought
to come near infected persons, without a Preservative about him. These young
Noblemen therefore having been new-catec^^^ed by Heretics, Which coming home
wish for liberty of Conscience.
when they returned to their Country, often spoke in commendation of foreign
Religions, and liberty of conscience: and found the people intentive and
inquisitive after new Doctrines. Nor did many of the Merchants wish a greater
happiness, The Merchants are of the same mind.
then this Liberty: for themselves were inveigled with the like strange
opinions, and consequently would have no one for Religion to be barred free
Traffic. These joining their Counsels, plotted, They consult together.
for which they had diverse examples, by degrees to shake from the shoulders of
their Country, the yoke of the Catholic Faith, that would not suffer any
other doctrine to predominate within their Cities. This design, When they
first set afoot their Design.
I collect, was laid in the year 1559, when King Philip, resolving to return to
Spain, commanded that his Fathers and his own Edicts (which during the Wars
could not) should now be strictly observed. Which happening in that conjunction
of time, when the Prince of Orange advised the Low Country men, Falling just
upon the point of time, whilst the Prince of Orange endeavored to expel the
Spanish.
to petition for disbanding the Spanish soldiers, lest by their means the
Spanish Inquisition should forcibly have been imposed upon them (as he himself
has left recorded in his Apology) I do not think it improbable, 1581.
that the Prince of Orange might be privy to matters then in agitation: Yet I
believe not, that upon the first conference of the Nobility and Merchants, 3566.
any thing was certainly pitched upon, For a long while they are quiet. Upon
accasion of the Council of Trent, they show themselves.
or the form of a Confederation conceived in writing, Nor is it likely, that a
Conspiracy of many persons, should for six years lie undiscovered. But then the
seeds of Rebellion were only sown, which afterward in the year 1564, when
Cardinal Granvell went into Burgandy, sprung up by occasion of the Council of
Trent, as I am well assured out of the said Notes and Letters. 1564.
Moreover, in that year 64, those Gentlemen and Merchants which met about it,
knowing that so great a weight could not be supported without arms, determined
to try the Heretical Princes of Germany, either to get their assistance, or at
lest to have some color for using of their names to aw the Governess and her
Party. And have r^course to the Princes of Germany,
For this cause they sent Agents into Germany, which had secret conference with
the Prince Electour Palatine, and brought all their transactions to Egidius
Clerus, a Lawyer of Tournay employed by Lewis of Nassau, and lying at Ausburg
only for this purpose, as appears by many Letters and Pamphlets of his
writing. About the beginning of 1565.
Whence it may be conjectured, that Prince Lewis himself was at the same time
in Germany, soliciting the same business. Which though it was concealed with
wonderful s^lence, till the end of the year 653 yet in the beginning of 66,
when the Edicts concerning the holy Inquisitours, After Promulgation of the
Edict they grow tumultuous, Printing Libels.
with the Decrees of Charles the fifth, and of the Council of Trent were
Proclaimed, which were by many accounted great grievances; then the
Conspiratours, pretending to maintain the Liberty of the Subject, with
incredible dexterity scattered Libels over all the Provinces (to the number of
five thousand, April 3.
as the Governess afterward wrote to the King) jeering, cursing, And Books
against the Inquisition, to stir up the people.
and railing at the Spanish Inquisition, and advising the people; Not to
enslave themselves to Tyranny, which all Nations, and as it were the general
consent of Mankind resists. That the Inquisition was not introduced at Rome
without a tumult; what then should be done in the Low Countries, armed with so
many Privileges against any Innovation whatsoever. Fears and Jealousies were
increased by preparation for a war, They are troubled with fears and jealousies.
made in Spain by the King: wherein the Duke of Brunswick, Pay-master-generall
for his Majesty in the Low Countries, was very active. The design was commonly
reported to intend the establishment of this new Judicature in the
Low Countries. Brunswick.
Though the Duke (as afterward it was evident) levied men only to defend his
own towns amidst the tumults then threatening the Low Countries; K. Philip.
the King, to supply Malta, and to oppose the Turk in other places Yet when the
Governess went about to persuade the multitude, she found it Labor in vain;
the Heretics disputing against her, and affirming That it was the ordinary
trick of State, to pretend war for one place, and fall upon another. So that
many men openly professed, they would fell their houses and land, and seek
their Countries lost Liberty in foreign Nations. They threatningly inveigh
against the Kings Edict.
At public meetings, in the Market place, and upon the Exchange, diverse men
were heard boldly to say, that against the cruelty of the Kings Edict, they
only wanted a General; which if once they should have, they would make the
King leave meddling with the Privileges of the Low Countries. The multitude
thus storming, the Lords neutrall or wavering, and the Heretics, that were in
danger of the Edict, stirring them up to muti^^ie, the Conspiracy was ripened.
Which matures Rebellion. The Governess to the King.


Nine Lords, that were not Officers of State, March 25
at Breda, a Town belonging to the Prince of Orange, An Engagement signed.
subscribed and propounded unto the rest a confederation penned by Philip
Marnixius Lord of Saint Aldegund, long since corrupted and now a corrupting
Calvinist. In the Preamble, they inveighed against the Inquisition, which being
contrary to all Laws divine and humane, far exceeded the cruelty of all
former Tyrants. The sum of the Engagement.
The Lords declared their sense of this indignity, the care of Religion
appertaining to them, as Counselors born; and protested they entered into a
league, to prevent the wicked practices of such as by these sentences of
banishment and death, aimed at the fortunes of the greatest persons: they had
therefore taken an holy oath, not to suffer the Inquisition to be imposed upon
the Low Countries: and prayed, that both God and Men might forsake them, if
they ever forsook their Covenant, Which they called, the Covenant.
or failed to assist their Brethren suffering for the Cause. Lastly, that they
called the Lord to witness, by this agreement they intended nothing but the
Glory of God, the Kings honor, and their Countries Peace. This is the sum of
their League, which either for the interchange or multiplicitie of their
promises was called the Covenant, and was afterward printed, that it might be
every where published, in diverse languages: with this Title (according to the
English copy) A transcript of the Covenant signed by the Lords and Gentlemen of
the Low Countries, Its Title or Inscription.
by reason of an attempt to impose upon them the Spanish Inquisition. Their
Emissaries were forthwith dispatched to the several Provinces, to acquaint
them with what was resolved, and to court the people, which took exceedingly,
Many take it.
For at their Assemblies, many were so violent, as when they but heard the
Spanish Inquisition named, not knowing any more of the matter, they set to
their names. These first.
The first that subscribed were Nicholas Ha^es Herald to the Knights of the
Golden-fleece, commonly called Tosond' or, a principal instrument in the
Conspiracy, Baronius Glibercius Lefdal servant to Count Egmont, John Marnixiu^
Lord of Tholose, March 24.
Ghisell, Meinser, and Olhain, as Anderlech steward to Count Megen wrote to the
Governesse. The number and quality of the rest cannot easily be described: they
that took Catalogues of their names, varying them, as they supposed it would
conduce to the augmentation of the fame, They brag of more.
or extenuation of the fact. Indeed Hames bragged to Anderlech, whom he
endeavored to bring into the faction, that he had a roll of above two thousand
noble persons names subscribed: But Anderlech abhorring the treason, not only
refused to subscribe, but thought it the duty of a good Subject, to discover
their proceedings to the Governesse. And though he found her not ignorant of
many of their names, and curious to know them all: yet he opened some things to
her, wherewith as his familiar friends they had privately acquainted him. That,
among others, the Duke of Cleve had signed the Covenant, with the Princes of
Saxony, Count Suartzemberge, Gasper Colligny, and many others. Besides some
Abbots of the Low Countries, and certain Lords of the Order of the fleece. I
cannot tell if this were given out to countenance the faction, but I am sure
the Rumor of the Duke of Cleve's Revolt soon vanished, as that of the
Companions of the Order increased; Some do it secretly or are but supposed to
engage.
and Count Megen that was one of the College, told the Governesse, that two of
his Colleagues (whose names he knew not) with diverse other Noblemen were joined
with the Conspiratours. But one of them might be well suspected; and the Prince
of Orange, Of which number was the Prince of Orange.
expressed himself very sensible of men's opinions, for he complained in Senate,
that he was commonly reputed one of the number of the Covenanters; the other
must be either Count Horn Admiral of Flanders, or Anthony Lalin Count
Hochstrat, Count Horn. Count Hochstrat.
as appeared by their conve^sation, out of which men ordinarily draw
conjectures. Nor doubt I but many others were reputed Abettors of the faction,
(as, besides the above named, it was thought Elisabeth Queen of England might
be one) though upon no other argument, The Queen of England.
but only their several interests in the troubles of the Low Countries. For
every one will allow of Cas^ians Maxim, That we may justly suspect those for
Authors, that are advantaged by the design. But, Only 400. Gentlemen declare.
it were superfluous to inquire after dubious or concealed persons, when enough
declare themselves, no fewer then four hundred of great quality, giving in
their names: whereof almost one hundred were Heretics, as Count Megen informed
the Governesse: besides Merchants, and others of the vulgar sort, Which had
four Protectours.
not to be numbered. The chief of the Conspiratours were, Henry Count Brederod,
Lewis of Nassa^, Brother to the Prince of Orange, Florence Pallantius Count of
Culemberg, a town in Holland, he himself being a Burgundian, and Willam de
Bergen Count of Bergen in Gelderland, all of that youth and courage as animated
them to high attempts; Brederod especially, who took place of them all: either
for his ancient Nobility, being descended from the old Earls of Holland: or for
the sharpness of his wit, which he used with great freedom against such as
were in authority; and it was therefore applauded by the people, and very
useful for the Mutineers. But the nobler and baser sort of the Party were not
all of the same mind, All these Conspiratours had not one aim.
no^ had the same ends, as it is usual in actions of this nature, For some
would rest quiet if the Pontifician Inquisitours were outed, and the penalties
of the Edicts qualified. Others had yet a further design, for the Liberty of
Religion. Many cared neither for Religion nor the Edicts, but only desired
spoil and pillage. Lastly, there were some that had yet an higher reach, and
aimed, by these troubles, to shake off their old Prince, and set up a new
Government. But all of them pretended and petitioned for the taking away of the
Inquisition, and a gentler execution of the Emperors Edicts against the
Heretics. And this Petition was presented in all their names to the
Governesse, March 15.
who by her letters certified his Majesty, as well of the public as private
carriage of the conspiracy. The Governesses diligence to frustrate their
designs.
Moreover* as she was ignorant of nothing that passed among them (for in their
Cities and private houses her Spies, which are the ears and eyes of Princes,
knew all they did, and gave her intelligence) so, making no show of fear, she
thought it best to strengthen her self, in case they should break out into
Rebellion. She therefore minded the people of their duty by her Edict, the
Magistrates by her letters, and she had her private, Confidents that viewed the
towns and their Fortifications. She caused it to be reported that the King
would shortly come in person. She sent Expresses post to the Spanish
Ambassadors residing with the Emperor, the King of France, and Queen of
England, to let them know what a conspiracy was set a foot in the
Low Countries, whereunto, as it was said the Germans, English, and French were
the Incendiaries. Shortly, she omitted nothing, that might either express her
knowledge of what was then plotted, She has intelligence of their resolution
to come to Bruxels which frights her very much.
or her courage to oppose it. At this time she had intelligence given her by
Count Megen, That about the beginning of April, some five hundred Gentlemen
intended to come to Bruxels, and present her a Petition against the
Inquisition, and the Emperors Edicts. Others told her (as commonly true
reports are mixed with falsities) that the conspiratours were resolved, unless
she gave them audience, to bring their forces into the Town, and carry away the
Governesse to Vilvord, there to detain her prisoner, till she had granted their
desires. Which though a^ first she laughed at, yet in the end (as it may be
gathered by her letters) she doubted, whether it would not be safest for her to
leave the Town, and retire to some place of strength. In the mean time, She
summons a great Council.
she summoned a fuller Senate then ordinary, to meet upon the twenty seventh of
March: not so much to hear their advices, as to sound their affections; and
lest they might turn her enemies, whom she did not acknowledge to be her
friends. Then writing new letters into Spain, she represented to his Majesty
the present condition of the Low Countries, complaining, that she had often
foretold it, but never could be heard.

The Governors of Provinces, the Knights of the Golden-fleece, and the Lords
of the privy Council, April 3.
met all upon the day appointed, and sat in Senate next day; where by the
Senator Filibert Bruxellius diverse letters were read containing, whether true
or false, the conspiracy of the Lords, and the Heretics designs. The
Governesse making a short speech, The Governesse asks the Senators advice
Whether the Covenanters were to be admitted.
That she had called that noble Senate, to prevent by their counsels and
endeavors the impendent evils, in the first place, asked their advice, whether
it were safe to admit those that were shortly to come to Bruxels led By Henry
Brederod. Then, what answer she should make to their demands, which Fame had
then divulged. Lastly, what course should be taken to dissolve that
confederation, and how the new motions of those turbulent men might speedily be
composed. The Lords came thither severally affected, many hated the
Inquisition, others had secret projects, and few but preferred their private
interest before the public. Duke Areschot and Count Barlamont answer
negatively.
Philip Croi Duke of Areschot and Charles Count Barlamont were of opinion, that
the Conspiratous should not be suffered to enter the city so many at once, For
what need of five hundred men to deliver one Petition? that they could not
think such pomp fit for suppliants: that they might send, out of their number,
some one of quality, to present their desires with less ostentation and envy.
Lastly, that either the Ports should be shut, which they rather inclined to; or
that, in the next place, there should be many eyes upon their behavior, and
such as carried themselves contumaciously to be forthwith punished. The Prince
of Orange is far their admission.
Contrarily the Prince of Orange (that hated those Lords as Cardinallists, and
especially Areschot, for the old contest of the Houses of Croi and Nassau about
Precedence) affirmed those fears to be vain, that were conceived against
persons not unknown to him, many of them being allied to him in friendship,
some in blood; that it would be a great indignity, if that were not permitted
to Noblemen which is lawful for the poorest peasant, to petition. To the same
effect, that no danger could be in their coming, spoke Count Egmont: Especially
since, Count Egmont concurs with him.
if they were to be resisted forcibly, or by the sword, he did not see how the
Governesse was prepared to encounter men already armed, and likely, by such a
repulse to be exasperated: Count Mansfeldt is against their coming.
That it was not safe to affront those we have not power to destroy. But though
Count Mansfeldt liked not the Popes Inquisitours in the Low Countries, yet he
said, it was ill done of those that by such mutiny and tumult behaved
themselves more proudly then became petioners; and added, that he had schooled
his Son Charles, who he heard was one of the Conspiratours. And indeed I have
a letter of his, March 26.
wherein with great fury he disclaims him for his son, unless he presently
renounce that league, and bids him otherwise never hope to recover his fathers
favor. But the youth being of a fiery nature, slighted those admonitions and
threatenings, belike he thought his Father was not in earnest, and therefore
would not leave his party for the present. The Counts of Aremberg, So are the
Counts Aremberg and Megen.
and Megen, had the same sense of the conspiracy and Covenant, as if by such
ostentation of their forces, they came to compel, not to entreat their Prince:
and concluded, That a Treaty of this kind should be rejected, or, to use milder
terms, put off. Nor could such a sudden confederacy last long, but in a little
time must necessarily fall asunder, for no Mutineers were ever constant to
their Principles, or to one another. The rest of the Senators spoke doubtfully
and moderately of the Covenanters, How the rest voted.
violently and plainly against the Inquisition. The same arguments, though in a
more obscure and remiss manner, were made against the Emperor's Edicts. By
degrees, Many of them complain of the King.
they fell to complaints against the King, The Prince of Orange particularly.
and pressed them with more confidence, because they knew he had then more use
of their services. The Prince of Orange said, he could add to those old
Grievances (but perhaps he feigned new ones, that he might have the more color
to desert the Kings interest, and to pursue his own) because he was lately
informed, some enemies to the House of Nassau, had moved his Majesty to take
off his head, and confiscate his estate: and that the King only exspected an
opportunity to sign the warrant. In these words.
Was this the reward of service done in the late wars by the Low Country
Lords, for defense of his Authority in the Netherlands? though he had now
sufficient experience, that King Philip looked not upon the Low Countries with
the eyes of his Father Charles the fifth. That the King had sent forty thousand
Ducats to the Queen of Scots to pay her soldiers, whilst the Low Countries
were greatly distressed for money, which his Majesty never thought of. That he
taxed not the King for the unseasonablenesse of that assistance, For the money
was lost, as we have told you.
nor the unfortunate success it had, but he feared the English, whose throats
were to be cut (if report were true) for that sum of money, would revenge it
upon the Low-countrymen. Especially since the money was come into the Q. of
Englands hands, Her Excellence endeavors to give him satisfaction.
driven upon that Island by a tempest. The Governess to break off his speech,
entreated him to forbear his private expostulations whilst the public business
was in agitation: and that he would not wrong his discretion so far, as to have
such thoughts of the King, who was the mercifullest of all Princes. That she
knew for certain, what was reported of that money, was the mere invention of
some seditious persons, intending, by such lies, to bring an odium upon his
Majesty; as well with his subjects of the Low Countries, At first in vain.
as with foreign Princes. For all this, the Prince of Orange would not make an
end, though he was at other times a rare dissembler, and had power over his
passions. But it may be, he thought it concerned him to speak on, lest it
should be imagined he begun without a cause. As if were an argument of just
anger, not to be friends upon the sudden. Following his example, neither Count
Horn, nor any of the rest were silent, but every one made his complaint.
Nevertheless, But at length he and all seem better contented and the Council
proceeding resolves to admit the Covenanters
qualifying them with gentle and gracious language, and putting them in hope of
his Majesty's royal favor, the Governess called them into the Senate; and by
the major-vote it was resolved, that the Covenanters should be admitted, but
without arms, and upon promise of their good behavior. And the Governors of
Provinces (through which it was supposed they would pass to Bruxels) were
commanded by their Letters, to acquaint the people with this resolution of the
Senate: Courts of guard were likewise appointed through the City, Centrees to
keep the gates, and a Garrison put into the Tower, lest there might be a tumult
among the distracted people. It being now almost night, the Senate was
adiourned till the next morning. At which time, At the Senates next meeting,
the Lords and Senators meeting in the House, the Governess fearing they would
fall upon private differences, and obstruct the business of the day, prevented
them with a speech, The Governess speaks to them in this manner,
which I give you, as she wrote it to the King. April 3.
If the approaching Evils could be cured with quarrelling and complaining, I
should not have desired you to take the pains of coming again this day to
Council, since we had complaints enough yesterday: scarce any thing being spoke
in public by the most of you, but what related to your private discontents.
But admit they were just, yet they loose part of that Justice if they be
importune; at least they avert the minds of the Council, and provoking their
spirits, hinder their discovery of the Truth. Brederod intends to petition Us,
in the name of his Confederates, for abolishing the Inquisition, and mitigating
the Penalties inflicted by Edict for the cause of Religion. 1566.
I now desire Advice from you, (of whose fidelity and discretion I have had so
good experience) what Answer I should return them. But before you declare your
selves, I think it will be neither troublesome to you, nor improper for the
business in debate, to prepare you with a few words. Of the Edicts.
I hear there are many that presume openly to cavil at the Edicts of the
Emperor my Father (for to the Inquisition I will speak anon) as if it were a
barbarous tyranny, not to be endured by Subjects. Truly whosoever says it,
not only injures the memory of that wise Prince, and most affectionate to his
Country; but wrongs your Order of the Fleece, this Senate House, and the
States General of the Low Countries: for by all your approbations and
consents, the Emperor passed these Laws, as no doubt but some of you remember;
and all may read in the Edict published the year 1531; upon which, all the rest
of his Decrees are grounded. Why then do they now accuse the severity of the
Emperor? Why do they condemn those Acts which they did once approve: and which
they know were established by the suffrages of all? What? because the disease
is more violent, must the remedy therefore be neglected, and that which reason
persuades? When the Gangrene of Heresy daily creeps upon new parts of the
Commonwealth, should we remissely use fire and incision? Of the Inquisition.
Nor was the Ecclesiastical power of the Inquisition against Heretics,
delegated for any other cause, but that the impudence of wicked men might be
abated by fear, or extinguished by punishment. I know there is a general
hatred against this Court of Justice, which for the present my meaning is not
to contradict or confute; Which she proves to be neither new, nor more severe
then former Edicts.
yet you know, this Tribunal is no innovation in the Low Countries: It is now
sixteen years since my Father settled it in these Provinces. But I pray, what
severitie is in this Censure of the Inquisitours, that is not in my Fathers
Edicts? Nay, if you will rightly consider it, they were much more severe; so
that his Majesty in his Letters, which three years since I read to many of
you, justly admires how the Low Country men could be so terrified with the
Spanish Inquisition; they being for the same causes of Religion, liable to far
more and greater penalties, comprehended in the Edicts of Charles the fifth.
Which Edicts, if they were wisely drawn up and passed, by the Consent of the
Estates; I see no reason why men should so bitterly and violently inveigh
against the Inquisition, that relates to the same thing in a more gentle
manner. Nor have I spoken this to control the freedom of Your votes, Then
leaves them to the freedom of their Votes.
they had and shall ever have their full liberty for me: Be you careful that
neither discontent nor faction may deprive you of that Liberty. So proceeding
to suffrages, many voted that nothing in the Emperors Edicts should be
altered. Some approve the Edict, and would not have the Laws altered.
Laws before they pass should be debated: after they are passed, obeyed. Nor
can a State be more endangered, then by the altering of their Laws: especially
since it concerned them in point of honor at this meeting, to make no
concession to the Heretics, who, if they prevailed in their first suit, The
major part dislike it, and would have a temporary alteration.
would never make an end of petitioning. Diverse others argued against it, very
passionately showing, That it plainly appeared those Imperial Edicts neither
provided sufficiently for Religion, which every day was less observed; nor for
the security of the State, which they saw was disturbed merely upon that
occasion. And yet the end and intention of Laws is, to preserve Religion and
Peace, but neither was effected by these Edicts. Why therefore should it be
thought unlawful, that some penalties should be remitted, some changed? The
Edicts by that means rendered more moderate, and the Subjects more obedient to
them. Truly it was more dishonor to a Prince to keep Laws in force, which his
Subjects will not obey; then to apply them unto their natures, Railing at
pleasure against the Inquisition, as hateful to all sorts.
and so keep his people in obedience. But for the Inquisition, it was apparent,
that none of any condition whatsoever, would receive it: insomuch that the
meanest tradesman of Antwerp, can show either a Musket or a Pike, which he
threatens to use upon them, that shall endeavor to bring in the Inquisition.
Nay, Injurious to the Bishops.
it was no little injury to the Bishops to have the cause of Religion, which by
Law appertains to their Jurisdiction, transferred to this late Judicature of
Inquisitours. But it is to no purpose any more to dispute this point, And
opposed by the Covenanters.
when the Covenanters are at the gates, before whose Requests be denied, it
must be considered, in case the Heretics joining with them, should offer to
storm the Town, whether we have sufficient forces to resist the people and
their Confederates.

Lastly, And they prevail.
the opinion, number, and faction of these men carried it: For though there
wanted not some that easily refuted all that was pretended in behalf of the
Bishops; yet hardly any one of the Senate thought this kind of Judicature
seasonable for the time: therefore after many heats, the business was thus
composed. The Resolution of the Council upon both the points.
Forasmuch as the Emperors and the Kings design reached no farther in these
Edicts and Questions of Faith, but only to preserve Religion in her ancient
purity; those remedies were only so far to be made use of, as might conduce to
its preservation. Besides, there was a twofold Inquisition, the one annexed to
the function of Bishops, the other granted by Commission from his Holiness to
certain Judges Delegates. Now the odium only fell upon the Popes Inquisitours;
which though brought into the Low Countries by Charles the fifth; yet he was
enforced thereto, by reason of the small number, and great negligence of the
Bishops. This being no longer a reason, To put down the Inquisition.
and men so much abhorring the name of this foreign Inquisition* so violent and
impolitick a Remedy ought not to obtruded upon refractory people. Therefore
without prejudice to Religion, some part of the Covenanters petition might be
granted. But lest they should seem to be overawed by the Heretics, or to
pass any thing in favor of them, So the Covenanters are to be answered.
this answer was to be returned: That they had no cause to trouble themselves
about the Inquisition, which was out of date; the Inquisitours themselves
forbearing to exercise their authority, having not renewed their Commission
from the new Pope, Pius V.
which they use to do, for the better confirmation of their power. Touching the
penalties which by the Imperial Edicts were to be inflicted upon Heretics,
And to qualify the Emperors Edicts.
they should not be repealed; but whereas most of them were capital, they
should be hereafter qualified; for the Bishops, the greatest Divines and
Lawyers, and the Inquisitours themselves had so advised: which Charles the
fifth would have consented to, if he were now living, who himself upon the like
difficulties, in the year 1550, at the request of his Sister Mary Queen of
Hungary, thought it not unnecessary nor unbeseeming his Imperial Majesty, to
rectify and moderate the Laws he had formerly decreed. Thus, for the present
the Conspiratours being graciously received, in a little while their meetings
would be dissolved (a work of great consequence) and in the interim, time might
be gained to agitate the public business without Tumults, and therefore with
more Authority. The Governess, though she wished better, Why the Governess
rather receives then approves this Decree.
yet approved the Counsel given, because she knew that in this juncture of
time, she must either grant something to the Conspiratours, or else forcibly
resist them. But this she durst not attempt, being unprovided of a General,
for she trusted not the Prince of Orange: and putting the question to Count
Egmont, he denied to draw his sword against any man for the Inquisition, or the
Edicts. For the rest of the Nobility, they either had not much more loyalty,
or had far less abilities. Her Excellence therefore told them, she would follow
their advice, and so answer Brederod and his Companions, that she might at once
both satisfy them, and withal reserve the Judgment entire to the King,
without knowledge of whose pleasure, nothing could be done in a matter of so
great importance.

Every one of these particulars she wrote to his Majesty by speedy messengers,
April 3.
beseeching him presently to resolve her what she was to pitch upon. The same
day about evening, the Covenanters came into Bruxels. The Covenanters enter
Bruxels,
They were full two hundred horse, apparrelled like forreiners, every one a
case of pistols at his saddle-bow. Brederod their General, Led by Henry
Brederod.
rode in the head of them, next him Lewis of Nassau, for the Counts of
Cuilemburg and Bergen arrived not till three days after. Francis Verdugo, a
Gentleman that followed Count Mansfeld, Publicly vaunting.
told the Governess, that Brederod bragged at his entrance into the City, in
these words: Some thought I durst not come to Bruxels; behold I am come to see
the Town, and will shortly* make another visit, but upon a new occasion. They
alight at the Prince of Orange's. Where with oLords, they fall upon turbulent
Proposals.
Then Brederod and Grave Lewis went to his Brother the Prince of Oranges house,
where the Counts of Mansfeld and Horn were come to wait upon them. That night,
no body being present but Count Mansfeld, Count Horn used many arguments to
persuade the Prince of Orange to send back his Order of the Fleece into Spain,
and thereupon Verdugo was commanded to bring the Statute-book of the Order,
that they might see in what words they had obliged their faith to the King, as
supreme Master of their Society. But Count Mansfeld interposing, Afterward
Brederod assembles the Covenanters at Cuilemburg-house.
nothing was determined. The same was moved another time, as Anderlech informed
the Governess. The next day Brederod, staying for the Counts of Cuilemburg and
Bergen, in Cuilemburg-House at Bruxells assembled his Confederates, to
encourage them in the enterprise they had undertaken. First, he showed them a
Letter, writ in Spanish, lately sent him, as he said, out of Spain: unless the
man, who wanted no subtlety, had peradventure counter^eited it; as he suspects
that wrote all these passages in cipher, to the Governess. In which letter it
was certified, that one Moro, a man known in the Low Countries, was with a soft
fire burned alive in Spain, which infinitely exasperated and enflamed the minds
of his Associates against the cruelty of such sentences. Then taking his hint
to come to the matter; as if he were to make a general muster of his Army, he
produced the Roll, signed by all the Conspiratours. Which he and Lewis of
Nassau reading unto the people, they answered to their several names,
professing constancy to their resolutions: For those that were absent (being to
the number of two hundred) they that were present being almost as many, engaged
themselves. Then he required them, in confirmation of the Covenant, An
additionall Oath taken.
every one to join his heart, and set to his hand again. Which was accordingly
done, and they all now the second time took the Covenant, their Oath being this
in substance; The form of the Oath.
That if any of the Covenanters should be imprisoned either for Religion, or
for the Covenant* immediately the rest, all business laid aside, should repair
to both or one of those that were to tender the Covenant in the several
Provinces, and that all of them, if need were, should presently take up arms to
assist their brethren. So he dismissed them full of courage and alacrity,
resolved next morning to attend the Governess; Which day being the fifth of
April, From thence they march to the Court.
the Conspiratours to the number of about two hundred, met again at
Cuilemburg-House, and from thence took their way directly to Court, marching
through the high Street, the whole City beholding the spectacle with amazement,
and many not well knowing by what name to call that new kind of Embassy. For
they looked not like Petitioners, that came to make demands in so confident and
imperious a way; especially being led on by Brederod and Nassau, that did not
use to supplicate: nor did they seem to be a Faction, or to pretend force,
coming with such appearance of simplicity, that rather showed like Friars going
in Procession. They rode two a breast, most of them matched in years: Brederod
and Nassau brought up the Rere. The Town took notice that one of the Generals
was lame, which many looked upon as an evil Omen, and not without much
laughter. Entering the Court, they found the Governess, (the Senate then newly
risen) speaking with some of the Lords; Brederod coming up to the chair of
State, after he had done his duty with the Ceremonies due to the Governess,
spoke in this manner: Brederod in the name of them all, speaks thm to the
Governess.
These Gentlemen of the Low Countries, now standing in your Highness presence,
and others of the same quality that will shortly follow in great numbers, are
come with me to let Your Highness know by their multitude, how earnest they are
in their demands, expressed in this humble Petition: and whilst you read it, I
beseech your Excellence to believe, that these honest men propound nothing to
themselves, but obedience and honor to the King, and safety in their
Country. And presents her a Petition consisting of three Heads.
When he had spoken this, Subjoyning these Complaints out of his Papers.
he presented the Petition, and said that he had something else to offer to her
Highness in the names of his Confederates; but lest he should mistake their
sense, if he might presume so far, he desired leave to read it out of his own
Papers. The Governess was pleased he should read his Notes, the sum whereof
was, That the Gentlemen were much aggrieved, because her Excellence had writ to
the Provinces of their League, as if it were made by a concurrence and
association with the French and Germans, pretending indeed the safety of their
Country, but intending only spoil and plunder. Which information given unto
the Governess, as it was an insufferable injury to the Low Country Gentlemen,
so they humbly and earnestly beseeched her Excellence to declare the Informers
names, and compel them to bring in their impeachment publicly, in a Legal
way. That if their Confederates be found guilty, they may be sentenced; or if
they be cleared and acquitted of the Crime, those informers, by the Law of
Retaliation, may have the punishment of Traitors. The Governess suppressing
the trouble and indignation of her mind, as well as she could, with a cheerful
look received the Petition, wherein it was prayed, that the Inquisition might
be abolished, the old Edicts repealed, and new ones made by the Estates of the
Low Countries. Her answer was, To part she answers.
She would consider of their Petition, and since it related only to the Kings
Honor and their Countries safety, they need not doubt but she would give them
satisfaction. But whereas they complained of her Letters written to the
Provinces, they had no reason for it: she did but what her place required
(having received intelligence from many hands, of a certain League made with
forreiners) in advising the Governors and Magistrates to be vigilant, lest
upon that occasion, their Provinces might be troubled, not so much by the
Low Country men, whom the King ever found loyal; as by the Borderers that
resorted to them. Without more words, she dismissed the Gentlemen, Part she
takes no notice of.
not naming her Intelligencers, which they exceedingly pressed, her Highness
letting such questions pass, as she had not minded them; or rather seeming
offended, that they should press her to reveal secrets of State. Nay, the same
day at evening, when a Senator in the House persuaded her Excellence, to give
in to the Covenanters the names of those Intelligencers; she answered somewhat
angerly, That she admired, that he, who refused to name his Author for things
which he himself a little while since had discovered, should now persuade the
contrary, that might be prejudicial to so many. In that Senate the Governess
read the Petition of Brederod, Put to the question, whether the Covenanters
should be required to set their names to the Petition presented to the
Governess.
and asked them if they had not altered their opinions. But when they had
debated it, they voted the same again, in other words. It was then disputed.
Forasmuch as the Covenanters had writ in general; We his Majesty's most humble
Subjects, whether it should not be required that every particular person
under-write his name, whereby the King might know, whom to thank, or rather
whom to be revenged upon. But it was carried by most voices in the Negative:
1556.
lest upon occasion of getting the names of such as were absent, Resolved, that
they should not be required to subscribe their names.
the Petition should be sent to the great Towns, and more drawn in. The next
day, the Confederates returning in greater numbers (for the Counts of
Cuilemburg and Bergen, were yet in time come post) the Governess returned the
Petition, which she had received the day before, together with her Answer writ
in the Margin; The Governess returns the petion, with her Answer annexd.
wherein she gave them hope, that the Inquisition should be taken away, and the
Edicts moderated, only she must first acquaint the King with their desires.
But because this did not satisfy them all; Florence Pallantius C. Cuilenburg.
William C. Bergen.
they withdrew to consult together, and having passed their votes, came back,
and in all their names Eustachius Fiennes Lord of Esquerd (for Brederod durst
not speak in public, unless he had conn'd his Lesson, or that he read it out
of his Book) giving her Highness humble thanks for that Answer, desired, that
she would please to certify, whatsoever had been done at this meeting of the
Gentry, was out of their duty to the King, and for his Majesty's advantage.
But the Governess expressly denying it, replied, Time and their Actions would
testify that sufficiently to all the world, and so left them.

The same day Brederod entertained the Covenanters at Cuilenburg-house and made
them a great feast, Brederod treats the Conspiratours.
but unfortunate to the very House where they were feasted, which for this
only cause was afterward pulled down and levelled with the earth. The invited
were about three hundred, and therefore more confident, In their cups, they
would have a title of honor given to their Association, and the like to their
General.
especially at the table in their jollity: Among other passages, they put the
question, how that Society should be named, and it pleased them to give it the
title of the Noble Concord: and they called their General the Restorer of lost
liberty. But these denominations after this feast were never heard of. Perhaps,
because they were of another mind when they were sober, and rejected those
titles, as liable to envy and offense: or perhaps, because a new and
accidental nickname was received with greater success, and easily cancelled
all those former appellations. For Brederod told Cuilenburg and Bergen, that he
himself, and diverse others which yesterday stood near the Governesse, heard
Charles Count Barlamont, whispering in her ear, What Gheuses signifies.
scoff at the assembled Nobility, and call them in French, G^eux, or as they
pronounced it, Gheuses, using that word of disgrace to encourage the
Governesse, as if she needed not fear Beggars and Rogues. But signify what it
would, they willingly accepted of the name, and for their King and Countries
sake seemed content in good earnest to be Gheuses and Beggars. Count Cuilenburg
stomacked this exceedingly; and so did many more, that either were not in the
presence, or else heard not Barlamont when he spoke it. Notwithstanding they
were pleased to call themselves by that name and from The Covenanters much
taken with the name of Gheuses.
thence to take the Arms or distinctive Mark of their Party. Therefore drinking
hard (Count Ho^chstrat by chance coming in) they animated one another by the
name of Gheuses, and then calling for great bowls, drank a health to the name,
and happiness of the Gheuses, crying long live the GHEUSES. Lastly, when they
were rising, Ensigns fit for the faction.
Brederod took a wallet that lay in the room, casting it over his shoulder as
beggars do: and holding a wooden dish in his hand, full of wine, drank to all
the company; and gave them thanks, for following him to that day with such
unanimous consent, and therefore, he doubted not, but they would for the future
continue in the (...) intentions and desires. For his own part, he would never
be of other mind. Nay he took it upon his honor, that he would die, if need
should be, for the generality of his Confederates, and for every particular
person. At these words, they doubled their acclamations, of, Long live the
GHEUSES. Then Brederod having taken off his dish, gave it and the wallet to his
next neighbor, and so when it was gone round, 1566.
and every one had drunk Brederods health, and repeating his words, Their
mutual devotement.
had devoted their own lives for the rest of their companions, they rose from
the table, and when the dish and the wallet were come again to Brederod, he
nailed them to the wall: and the rest following his example, every one drove in
his nail, and removing them, in a frolic, round about the room, they were
initiated with these ridiculous Ceremonies. At which time the Prince of Orange,
Count Egmont, and Count Horn coming in from Count Mansfelds house, They take
another touch.
where they dined, they fell to their cups afresh, and as they drank about, the
same wishes for the Gheuses were with great shouts renewed. The particularities
of this feast I had, out of private letters and notes, which, upon this
occasion were speedily conveyed to the Governesse, by those that heard most
of them from Sarnapulius Husband to Brederods sister. And being fox^d
Some say that these good-fellows after they were well fudled, to make their
clothes drink with them, cast wine upon one another; changed hats, and put them
on, the crown downward (being turned the wrong way like their brains) with many
such like Gamebols, which may easily be supposed in a multitude corrupted with
abundance of friends and wine. Own the style of Gheuses, proper for
Low Country Heretics.
This was the Original of the Gheuses, a name given in contempt to the
petitioners, as to a company of prodigal fools and rascals, which they took
upon them in their drink, and so styled their faction, with beastly clamours,
and such tricks as boys would be ashamed of. Afterward, it was translated
from their faction to their heresy, the next neighbor to it: and made the
proper name of the heretical Rebels in the Low Countries. And as in France
the heretics are called Hugon^ts, so in the Low Countries they are known by
the name of Gheuses. Nor did the drunkards so leave off, but the same day,
about evening, Grave Lewis, supping with his Brother the Prince of Orange,
where Brederod was, with Count Horn, and many more of the Covenanters; the
whole house made the same wishes for the Gheuses; 1568.
as two years after, Count Horn confessed, upon his examination taken by the
Duke of Alva. The Gheuses walk the streets.
Thus growing confident, they resolved, with great pomp, to carry the name of
Gheuses out of doors, to try if the people would be taken with the novitie.
Perhaps they observed, that some of the Lords approved of their proceedings: or
perhaps, they hoped, what they had done in private, would be commended, it may
be applauded, if they did it publicly, Accoutred like beggars.
inserting the Kings name. Therefore the Covenanters, for some days next
following, walked the streets in ash-colored cloth-suits. Some of them wore
little wooden cans, cups, or saucers (the beggars housholdstuff) in their hats:
But with gallant Medals.
some had this Impresse stamped in wax or wood, afterward cut in gold or
silver, which they hung like Medalls about their necks; on the one side whereof
was the King of Spains picture, Arnol. Haven. de novis Epise. and Franc.
Haraeus in An. Belg. Fideles au Roy Jusque a la beface. and An. Societ. Jesu in
Belg. and shaved like Turks. The city upon this occasion diversely affected.
Some good springs from this evil.
with this circumscription, but in French, Faithful to the King; on the other,
a wallet in an hand with this inscription, down to the wallet. Lastly, they
began to cut their beards, leaving only great mustachios, turned up like
Turks; I suppose their meaning was, to take away the contempt of their beggars
clothes, by the terror of their upper lips, and to show themselves at once
both humble and formidable. In the mean time, the City was full of doubts and
news. Many being glad the conspiracy went on, and hoping, by those tumults, and
the assistance of the Lords, to free themselves from the fear of the
Inquisition. Many only looked on, as at a play, and were glad they had seats
upon the stage, not caring what became of the actours; few there were, which
foresaw the mischief that ensued.

One thing of great advantage to the Christian faith, I find at this time to
have happened; which, the place minding me of, I give it in a word or two. ^.
Lipsius in D. Virg. Haev. de init. lib. 2. and Mich. ab Iffel. in H^st. sui
temp.
At Hall a Town of Haynolt, there is a rare and far famed Image of the blessed
Virgin Mary. Thither went Philip Croi Duke of Areschot, out of that devotion to
our Lady of Hall, which was hereditary to him from his Ancestors, for the
Low-countery Annalls attribute to his family the discovery of that Image. Duke
Areschot having done his devotions to our Lady of Hall, stamps hers and her
sons figure in a Co^ne and wears it in his Hat.
There he caused certain silver medalls to be cast, representing the Queen of
Heaven with her Son Jesus in her arms: and these, in opposition to the faction
of the Gheuses, he himself and many Gentlemen, that followed him, stuck in
their hatts, as an emblem or cognizance of their holy pilgrimage, and
Catholic Nobility. And when Duke Areschot appeared in Bruxells with this
gallant distinction, many of the Gentry, either out of devotion to the Mother
of God, or in imitation (as it often happens) of a fashion brought up by a
great person, Many imitate him.
wore the like medalls in their hats. The Governess commends him for it, to the
Pope J. Ant. Gabut in the life of Pope Pius. lib 6. cap. 2. Who gives
indulgences to all that wear those Medalls. Thus came Medalls into the Church.
To the great honor of the house of Croi. The Gheuses present a new Petition.
They say the Governesse much pleased with it, among other things which she
wrote to Pius the fifth, April 8.
exceedingly commended this piety of the Low Country men, especial in that
point of time; and Pope Pius, who received no less contentment, to encourage
the Low Country men's Religion, consecrated those Medalls, and (as he wrote to
the Governess) out of his Pontifician power, gave to them that should have such
Medalls, stamped with the Image of any Saint, indulgence and pardon for their
sins. It is reported that (the devotion toward these kind of figures
increasing in the Netherlands, and other orthodox countries, striving to follow
the Low Country men's example) the use of Medalls was upon this occasion,
brought into the Church, or at least, from hence they received their first fame
and luster; if it be so, this likewise ought to be recorded in the book of
Honor, that registers the acts of the Low Country Nobility, and particularly
placed among the Monuments of the house of Croi. But Brederod, before his
departure from Bruxells, returned to the Governess, two days after his last
address, to get his petition signed. There came along with him the Counts of
Bergen, Nassau, and Cuilenburg, heads to the faction of the Gheuses, and they
delivered a new petition, Angered at the Governesses delay.
containing their old demands, only with these additionalls, That the delay of
expecting the King of Spaines resolution, would be dangerous, in respect of the
incensed and furious disposition of the people. Truly they themselves, out of
that affection they owed unto their Country, could not but acquaint her
Highness, that the Low Country men's violent desires, would questionless break
out into insurrection. Howsoever, if her Excellence were resolutely bent, to
apply to such an imminent danger, so slow and so remote a remedy, they called
God and men to witness, what mischief soever came of it, the Low Country
Nobility should not hereafter bear the blame. She treates them with fair
language.
But the Governess, nothing moved withal this, promised to cut of all delays,
by sending speedily to Spain; and all occasions of tumults, by giving
instructions to the Inquisitours and Magistrates of Towns, to proceed with
greater moderation. Only she seriously desired them, that since they conceive
they have in this employment done their duty, And minding them of their duty
dismisseth them
they will stop here, invent no new designs, draw in no new partisans, nor
meet any more at private conventicles: otherwise she resolved to do her duty,
in maintaining the Ancient Religion, and the Kings authority in those
Provinces. Having received this answer, many of the conspiratours took leave of
the Governess, and presently departed from the City, leaving spies behind, to
give intelligence to the Covenanters, Brederod goes to Antwerp.
of all that passed at Bruxells; Brederod, Cuilenburg, and Bergen going out
together with 150 horse, April 10.
for a military farewell, discharged their pistolls before the City gates; and
so, the first of them went to Antwerp, and the other two into Gelderland. But
there was a post dispatched from the Governess, to the Magistrate of Antwerp,
to let him know of Brederod's coming, and to be a spy upon his counsels and
actions. And though the Magistrate certified the Governess, that Brederod
carried himself with great civility; May 14.
yet afterward she wrote to the King (having it seems better intelligence from
another hand) that about 4000 of the common people of Antwerp flocked to the
Inn, Where the people come to him in multitudes.
where Brederod alighted with 43. horse, and when he heard that such a
multitude were come to the house, he rose from dinner, and looking out of the
window, with a great bowl of wine in his hand, saluted them standing below in
the yard, in these words, You of Antwerp, He offers himself to be their
General.
here I am, that will, with the hazard of my life and fortunes, protect your
selves, and free your children from the tyranny of the Inquisition and the
Edicts. If your consent goes along with me in this glorious action, come on,
and as many of you as would have your liberties preserved, and me for your
General, pledge me this bowl with a good heart, and hold up your hands, in
taken that you accept of my good will. And is accepted.
Then he drank it off, and first held up his own hand, instantly the most of
them did the like, and lifting their hands with an odd kind of hum, signified,
that they took it as an argument of his love; and when he departed from the
city, the same rabble brought him on his way.

The rest of the Covenanters were but newly returned to the towns from whence
they came, The subtilty of the Gheuses slandering the Knights of the Golden
Fleece with the patronage of their faction. In a printed Declaration.
yet (lest they might seem to have carried their petition to no purpose) they
made it be reported through the Low Countries that their business was
dispatched. And to that end, they counterfeited a Declaration, subscribed by
the Knights of the Golden-fleece, either to induce the world to believe, that
they were protected by the Knights, or to make the Governesse jealous of the
Order. The Declaration was thus penned. The public faith concluded upon, at
Bruxels, by the Gentlemen of the League, and signed by the Knights of the
Order, the seventh of April 1566. We Lords whose names are underwritten, having
sworn by our Order, do promise to the Gentlemen chosen by the Estates and
legally sent into the City, that the Ecclesiastical Inquisitours, and the
other Magistrates shall, from this day, punish no man for his Religion, neither
by Imprisonment, Exile, nor death; unless it be joined with a popular tumult
and the ruin of our Country, of which crimes Be the Covenanters the sole
legal punishers. But this power of theirs only to be in force till the King
with the consent of the Estates of the Low Countries shall otherwise determine.
The news of this Declaration at first startled the Governesse, then she sent
for the Manifesto it self, The Governesse is at first afraid of this kind of
Artifice.
and read it. For though she rationally conjectured, that is was an impudent
lie, April 13.
invented by the Covenanters: yet she very much feared it would be such a bait
as might easily catch the people* prone to believe what they desire: or making
a show of believing, to color their delinquencie with an handsome excuse.
Which before it can come to be consuted leaves the impression of a wound.
At least she knew, that before the trick could be discovered, many insolences
might be committed against Religion, and the Kings Authority, which afterward
could never be revoked or rectified by any means or industry. And truly many
do spread abroad such forgeries, not out of hope they will continue long
concealed: for they have their ends, if they last but till the people that are
fooled with them, To which end such things published.
begin to pull the frame of the State in pieces, the Result whereof will be,
that when they come to see their error, at the same time despairing of their
^^^don, licentiousness and love of sin likewise increasing, they raise one
tumult upon the neck of another, cruel but cowardly: and imagining danger it
self to be the best remedy for danger. Many indeed make use of lies, as
builders do of buttresses and scaffolds. And serve the turn like temporary
scaffolds till the building be up.
For as they are useful whilst Arches are in making, but when they be
finished are cast away; so the subtiller sort of people devise falsehoods, to
no other end but to support their Architecture a while, which if completed and
able to stand alone, then they easily suffer their fictions to grow out of
date, to be pulled down and cast away, like props and scaffolds when the
building is brought unto perfection. And the Governess knowing it was now no
time for delays, Atlast the Lords denying that any of their Order was engaged.
sent for as many of the Order as could conveniently attend her (for it was
Passion week, and the major part had retired themselves to make their
Confessions in the Monasteries of their own Towns, according to the custom of
the Nobility) and showed them the Declaration; upon sight whereof, Count Egmont
and Count Mansfeld, who were the first that came, protested, that no part of it
was either done or said by their Companions of the Order. It was therefore
resolved, that expedition should be used whilst the multitude had only a taste
of the Error, She gives notice of the deceit to the Provinces.
but had not as yet swallowed down the Falsehood; and that they should not
expect till the wool dipped in Ink, were made incapable of another die. That the
Governors of the Provinces, and the Magistrate of every City and Town, should
be immediately informed of the truth; and a copy sent them of the Petition
presented by the Covenanters, with the Governesses marginall Answer. They were
likewise to take notice, that if any thing else were published by any
whatsoever, it was to be reputed as the Invention of some seditious persons,
endeavoring to beget domestic Tumults, and accordingly by the Kings Laws, and
Authority to be punished. These Letters, though presently sent into the
Provinces, April 25.
yet failed to undeceive the people: Whereupon she dispatches an Embassage for
Spain, nominating the Marq. of Bergen,
which in many places had already heard and believed the untruth, But not
timely enough to all Places.
to the great prejudice (as I shall presently show you) of the ancient
Religion, and the Public peace. Which forced the Governess to hasten the
Embassy into Spain, that was lately voted by the Senate. John Glime Marquess
of Bergen and Governor of Haynolt was named for the employment. But he,
whether his guilty conscience could not brook the Kings presence, or whether
the trouble of the voyage frighted him, at first refused to undertake it; then
was willing, so that another might be put in Commission with him; Florence
Momorancie Lord of Montiny was therefore joined with the Marquess. And the
Lord Montiny.
Both of them, because they doubted their business would not please the King,
were suitors to the Governess, to dispatch away a Messenger into Spain, that
should prepare his Majesty with the knowledge of their coming: in the interim,
they resolved so to order and spin out their journey, that the Messenger should
meet them upon the way, with the Kings Letters: wherein they might perceive if
his Majesty approved of their employment. Notwithstanding all this caution,
which their ill-presaging minds rather used for their security, then for their
Honor, they escaped not, but this Embassage cost them both their lives. They
had yet other unlucky Omens; for two days before they set forth, the Marquess
of Bergen, as he walked in the open Court of the Governesse's Palace, was hit
upon the thigh with a Ball of wood, by some playing at Pall Mall; and being
very grievously hurt, kept his bed, and was constrained to defer his journey.
You would think, this good office was done him by his Genius, who not contented
by other warnings to have pulled him by the ear, now laid him by the heels, 1.
montiny sets for^ard.
and kept him locked in fetters to ^inder his unfortunate voyage. But what Fate
has ordained for every man, is not so easily prevented, as foreseen. In the
mean while, the Governesse (it concerning her to loose no time) got the other
Ambassador, though against his will, to go before the Marquess of Bergen (who
should follow as soon as he recovered) and to acquaint his Majesty with the
state of affairs in the Low Countries, after the Gentlemen's petition was
delivered. To this purpose, besides letters, instructions, and other appendents
to an Embassage, her Excellence gave him a Book containing in eighteen chapters
the principle actions of that year, which she left to his Majesty's
consideration; and concluded, that only his presence would, with the least
hazard, settle the Low Countries. Yet before his departure, the Governesse (as
she had promised her two Ambassadors) sent away Fabius Lembus a Neopolitan, an
old Courtier, A Messenger, with private instructions, goes before him.
and faithful; with private commands, and notes, wherein she interpreted most
of that which she had given in charge to Montiny. She sent likewise a copy of
Charles the fifth's Edicts somewhat qualifyed in the penalties against.
Heretics, by advice of the Senators and Divines; likewise signifying, that
she had showed that qualification severally to the Estates of the
Low Countries, and that by most of them it was approved of; yet that she would
not publish it, nor propound it to the People, without his Majesty's consent:
but she earnestly beseeched him, to command it; and to defer his intention of
establishing the Popes Inquisitours. So on the seventeenth of May, she
dispatched Fabius Lembus thus instructed. In ten days after, Montiny followed,
and the seventeenth of June was by the King graciously received at Madrid and
diverse times had Audience. Yet before he could get a determinate Answer, he was
commanded to exspect his fellow Commissioner, the Marquess of Bergen: The King
gives no dispatch to the Ambassador.
nor found he the King inclinable to, or well pleased with his Embassage.
Indeed to divert his Majesty from consenting to the Low-countreymens desires
(though he was of himself sufficiently constant both to Religion, and his
opinions) Pius the fifth interposed his authority: by whose Nuncio, The Pope
moving him to revenge the Asfront offered to Religion.
Pedro Camaiono Bishop of Asculum (who had an eye upon that Embassy from the
Low Countries) his Majesty was continually solicited not to suffer the
Catholic Religion to fall in the Low Countries; but that he would personally
by force of arms, punish the disloyalty of that turbulent people. Who likewise
sends his Legate to the Goververnesse. That should extol her and promise
assistance from his Holiness.
And for this cause, his Holiness commanded Iulio Pavesio, Archbishop of
Surrentum, whom he sent Legate to the Emperor Maximilian, to take the
Low Countries in his way: and in his name to set a high commendations upon the
Duchess of Parma, for her zeal to Religion, manifested in her Government of
the Low Countries; wherein he should encourage her, by promising supplies of
money from the Pope, with his utmost assistance. For now a Cause was
controverted, for which he would not fear to stake his triple Crown. Delivering
his letters to Count Cuilemburg and the Prince of Orange.
Moreover, he was to advise with the Governesse, about delivering the Popes
letters to the Prince of Orange and Count Cuilemburg, exhorting the Count to
forsake the Heretics, unto whom, it was said, he adhered, and to reconcile
himself to the old Religion: and admonishing the Prince not to suffer with
impunity so many foul things, She advises him not to give the letter to the
Count, But to let the Prince have his, whom she undertakes to prepare.
as were committed by Heretics in his Principality of Orange, to the great
damage of all the neighboring Cities, December. 15. 1563.
especially Avignion. But the Governesse, whose counsel the Legate was
commanded to follow, did not approve of the delivery of the Popes letters to
Cuilemburg, least, as he was a youth of a weak and fantastical brain, he might
not value or receive them with due reverence. She said, he might safelier treat
with the Prince of Orange, in regard the like admonition, formerly sent from
Paul the fourth, had struck him with a fear of loosing his Principality,
nevertheless she would prepare him for the Legate. But for his liberal offer
of assistance from his Holiness, she acknowledged her obligations to the great
Bishop, and desired Pavesio to represent her, for that favor, kneeling at his
feet, and humbly kissing them: though she had not power to admit of his
promised supplies, In the mean time excuses her self for not receiving the
money offered by the Pope. Her Excellence gives the Legate a true description
of the Low Country Bishops.
unless the King would please to give her leave. But she assured his
Holiness, that the Cause of Religion should be always to her, as it had ever
been, dearer then her life. Lastly, touching the nature and industry of the
Low Country Bishops (for Pavesio entreated her to instruct him in that
particular) she very graphically discoursed their lives and manners, and gave
him their several characters, telling which deserved Rebuke, which Praise or
Pity. The Legate, finding all she said to be true, and the Prince of Orange
the easier to be wrought upon, (belike her Excellence had prepared him, as she
promised) admiring her industry and piety, Who is amazed at her Piety and
Prudence.
professed that he would publish in the Court of Rome, how Religion standing
now in the Low Countries on a dangerous precipice, was supported only by her
Highnesses vigilance and prudence. But the Factions and Tumults ceased not for
all this. The impudence of the Gheuses encouraged by hope of impunity.
The Covenanters being returned (as I have told you) into their respective
Provinces, and giving it out, that they had the public Faith of the Knights of
the Golden Fleece for their indemnitie; all those that had been banished for
heresy came back from the adjacent Countries, and such as had lain concealed
at home appeared again, magnifying the name of the Gheuses, calling them the
Assertours and Champions of their liberty, and putting themselves under their
protection. Their new Conspiracy.
Thus the number of the Covenanters was much increased, especially in Antwerp,
even the Merchants themselves began to wear the Habit and Cognizante of the
Gheuses. Nay there sprung up a new-brotherhood of the Common People, wearing in
their hats, besides the wallet stamped in silver, a wreathed pilgrims staff, And
new fashion.
the ends bowing acrosse, signifying (as I suppose) that they were to go a
pilgrimage out of their Country, and seek liberty in another Climate. This
conspiracy was spawned out of the other, it being the offspring (as the
Governesse wrote to his Majesty) of that two years before, The Original of
these kind of confederacies.
raised by the Lords against Cardinal Granvel, where they first wore hoods,
and then Darts. May 17.
But that which at the beginning was only private difference at Court, and the
ambition of a few, afterward turned into the public mutiny of the Provinces.
Great men, it seems, never can offend alone; and vices, whilst they pass from
hand to hand, are soyled with being touched, and grow still fouler. Neither did
the Governesses letters to the Magistrates, Not cured either by the Governesses
care.
concerning the counterfeit Declaration in the Lords names, 6. or 21. of May.
do any good: nor the Kings letter to the Governesse and the Provinces, about
that time received, wherein his Majesty promised, That having now secured
himself from the Turks and Moors, he would presently make a voyage into the
Low Countries, Or by the Kings letter gracious indeed.
and in person moderate the severitie (if any such were) of his fathers Edicts.
In the mean time, he rested confident that the troubles would be quieted by the
Lords endeavors, whereupon formerly relying, both his father the Emperor and
he himself never feared what their enemies could do: March 15.
and now, But unseasonably protracting the Grant of General Pardons to some
great ones.
he doubted not but their old loyalty would easily compose a sedition raised by
a few private men. 1570.
Only the pardons which the Governesse in her letters to the King, The
Low Countries over flowed with Heretics.
desired for certain persons, were by his Majesty, more resolutely then
seasonably put off till another time. In the interim, the evil increasing, and
the opportunity of applying a fit remedy being past, his Majesty lost the
Grace and favor he intended.

And truly mischiefs sprung not up severally, or by intervals; but completed,
and in a knot, 1566.
breaking forth all at once. For in the bordering Countries the
Master-hereticks watching how discord prospered in the Low Countries, that they
might take occasion to vent their outlandish wares and sell them the new
Gospel; flocking in crowds, the Calvinists out of France and the Lutherans and
Anabaptists out of Germany, invaded, and as it were attached their nearest
neighbor-towns. Privately at first,
First, they held their Conventicles in the fields by night, then, success
smiling upon them, fearing likewise that if differences chanced to be composed,
they should fail of dispatching what they came for; they thought it best, Then
openly preaching.
by way of prevention, to show themselves in the light; and before the people
(that ran to meet them out of towns and villages) boldly to preach against the
Spanish tirannie, against Religion corrupted by the Bishops, and for the pure
and sincere light of the Gospel. Three ^orts or Classes of them.
Emulation made them more impudent, Calvinists. Lutherans. Anabaptists.
lest the Calvinists (that had indeed fewer great persons of their faction, but
more Proselytes and applause (should be less powerful then the Lutherans. And
the Anabaptists being far more in number then the Lutherans, scorned to be
worsted by the Calvinists: or that the Lutherans should have more great
Protectours then both the other Sects. Therefore they made haste in zeal of
spirit to feiz upon Cities and Towns, as if they were to make new plantations;
every one being for himself, Catholics.
and all against One. Miserable and calamitous at that time was the condition
of the Low Countries, many of the noblest Provinces being suddenly hurried into
factions, What they were that came in. Infinite Resort to hear them.
and running upon the rocks of error. Whilst impure men, Apostates both from
divine and humane faith, whilst the scumme of their own nations, the Refuse of
Germany and France, promised themselves a kind of sovereignty in the
Low Countries, and ran up and down as if hell had been broke loose, filling all
places with turbulent sermons, infamous libells, hopes, fears, and jealousies.
Whilst such a multitude; first out of the next villages, but at last out of
great towns, came, with incredible desire, to hear these trumpeters of the new
Gospel; that once, in the fields of Tournay above eight thousand men were seen
at a sermon. Near Lisle they appeared in greater shoals. At Antwerp, in one
day, were gathered together thirteen thousand, next day fourteen thousand, And
to the Sacraments after the heretical way.
a while after sixteen thousand men. Lastly, taking more freedom in many
places, especially at Valenciens and upon the borders of Flanders, they married
people in the fields, and baptized infants after the Calvinisticall manner. And
that all this might be done with safety, they meet at these Conventicles and
Sermons, armed with pikes and muskets. I know the Reader will not a little
wonder to hear (what they say the Low-treymen themselves were amazed when they
saw) how the People^ zeal of hearing sermons came to such a height, Why the
people are so fond of sermons.
that neither the Magistrates by authority, nor their Officers by force, nor
the Laws by reverence, could contain them, but that men, women, and children
left their houses, and ^an like mad, to these Teachers in the fields. But all
the Auditory were not drawn by the same motive. Some out of zeal to heresy.
For many that had long ago banished the Catholic Religion out of their
hearts, went cheerfully to embrace the opinions of Heretics, and to join in
Communion with them: and in their violent motion, took others along, that knew
not well whither they wandered, but half against their wills, Diverse taken with
the Rarity.
shoved on by the crowd, like swimmers by the stream, I cannot properly say
they went, but were carried. Many were taken with the noveltie, 1565.
and a longing to see what kind of Religion those forreiners had brought from
Saxony or Geneva; out of which Countries, Many delighted with singing of
Psalms.
as it was reported, they had at a distance wrought so much upon the rest of
the Provinces. A great sort were drawn in, with the tunes set to the Psalms,
translated, as I have told you, into French meeter, by Marot and Beza, and now
sung at their great meetings in the fields according to Geneva mode. But most
of them itched after the ^landers and jeers of their preaching ministers. But
the most, with hearing them rail and jeer in the Pulpit.
Among which, as every ignorant Mountebank had some little smattering of
learning, and abounded in impudence, and the juggling art of catching applause;
so with greater lies and fooleries they raised against the Bishop of Rome, the
Council of Treat, and the Ecclesiastical Inquisitours, shamefully and foully
abusing all things holy; but yet so, as the peoples minds were tickled: who
clapped their hands, as if they had been in a playhouse; and measured things
that were spoken, not by a true estimate, but merely by the pleasure of their
ears. Nay, though some of the wiser sort, understood their fea^s of activitie,
and knew they told fables and gulleries, yet they were pleased to be deceived
themselves, meaning shortly with the same artifice to cosen others: and to
repeat those Sermons as truths, which they had by their own industr^e
discovered. Calumnies and defamations without any distinction of truth or
falsehood, are ever greedily entertained, and as greedily communicated. Lastly,
the Cities were by these incendiaries distracted into factions. Their audience
increased by several Countrymen striving to have their heresy preferred.
Those that bordered upon France favored Calvin, those neighboring to
Germany, were for Luther; both of them followed the Preachers, not out of any
will to be instructed in their Tenets, but only fiding with their own Nation.
Nor was the Governess less active all the while, but tried all ways possible
to obviate and encounter the increasing mischief. Which necessitates the
Governess to hasten away the Marq. of Bergen into Spain.
She sent the Marquess of Bergen, as soon as ever he was recovered, in all
haste to Spain, to give his Majesty an account of what he had seen with his
eyes; and to beseech him to think no more of the Inquisition; but that he would
please, and speedily, to mitigate the severitie of the Edicts, lest while they
consulted in Spain, the Low Countries should be lost. But the Marquess of
Bergen falling ill again at Poicto^^ in France, Who sickning by the way, Sends
the Steward of his house before with his Letters.
received instructions from her Excellence, to send some trusty messenger
before him, to deliver the King his Letters and Embassage. Which was done by
his Major^ domo, upon the 25 of July. The Governess was likewise informed by
the Magistrate of Antwerp, 1566.
that forreiners every day came into the Town, and pestered it extremely. Her
Excellence by Edict banishes Forreiners. But cannot resolve what course to take
with the new Preachers.
Whom her Excellence commanded to depart, by Edict, set forth by authority of
the Senate; and many persuading her, upon that occasion, to revive the penal
Laws against banished men, that should return into the Low Countries, against
scandalous Libellers, and such as read and kept their Pamphl^ts; as likewise
against all Conventicles and heretical Sermons; though a while she remained in
suspense, because on the one part, she knew there was no hope to master the
stubborn multitudes without soldiers, which then she had not means to levy,
and therefore held it more wisdom to wave those Laws, the contempt whereof she
had not power to punish: and on the other part, that she might not sit still,
and seem to sleep over so many affronts, with a kind of encouragement to the
tumultuous Rebels, She revives the Edict against them.
she confirmed and augmented the old Edicts. But all to little purpose; for the
Ministers still preached, and because they were silenced, were followed with
more eagerness: it being a fault in humane nature, Who were more followed
because prohibited. Especially at Antwerp.
to conceive things greater because prohibited. The worst disorders were at
Antwerp, that City lying between the French and the Germans, and therefore
exposed to their factions. Insomuch as a few days after the Edict was
published, when the Lutherans, according to their custom, met in the fields on
the one side, and the Calvinists on the other, these being no fewer then
fifteen thousand, their number increased their confidence, When the Sermon was
done, they set the preacher of Calvin's Gospel on horsback, and carried him into
the Town triumphantly, attended with a great guard of Horse and Foot. The
Magistrate not daring to oppose that fudden tumult, contented himself with
sending speedy intelligence thereof to the Governess, The Governess is desired
to come thither.
beseeching her Excellence (in regard that many thought those assemblies might
at last engage the City in some insurrection) by her presence there to give
assistance unto Antwerp. 1564.
And her Highness, She sends count Megen before her.
as if she meant presently to come, sent before her Charles Brimey Count of
Megen, a faithful and valiant Commander, enjoining him to make experience of
the strength and loyalty of the Citizens, what they would or could do, for
quieting those commotions; lest necessity might force her to be an eyewitness
of things, which she might with less danger to her Authority, hear of at a
distance. But upon a mutiny of the people
But upon sight of the Count, the Town began to mutiny: the people crying out,
That Count Megen was come to do a mischief to the Gheuses, and that Count
Aremberg was to follow with twelve Ensigns; and when those soldiers had
possessed themselves of Antwerp, then the Governess would appear, and at her
pleasure, together with the Spanish tyranny, erect the Pontifician Tribunal,
and put a Garrison into the Fort to aw the Town. Lastly, the Brabanters having
received that yoke, should be just so enslaved as the Millanois and Neapolitans
are in Italy, caught by the like stratagem. He is called away.
These tumults still increasing, the Governess called away Count Megen,
pretending it was necessary he should attend his Government of Gelderland. The
Town petitions for the Prince of Orange,
And when the Magistrate of Antwerp, by diverse posts, wrote to the Governess
fot the Prince of Orange, who was desired by the people, nor would they easily
endure another Governor, the Prince of Orange himself promising his utmost
fidelity and endeavors in that employment; the Governess not knowing what to
do, Who is made Governor of Antwerp.
seeing no way safe, at length, lest she might seem to distrust his integrity
and promi^es, and consequently, in that point of time, distaste so great a man
with a public repulse, she gave him Commission to compose the mutiny at
Antwerp. He was met upon the way, a mile without the Town, Multitudes of people
meet him upon the way.
by Brederod, with a great sort of Citizens of Antwerp; who saluting one
another with discharge of their pistols, they joined companies, and went on;
such multitudes of men, partly meeting them upon the rode, partly standing to
behold them upon rising ground, and tops of houses; that you would think
Antwerp had emptied it self of all the inhabitants. Yet the Prince of Orange
seemed not to be elated in his looks, perhaps conceiving it to be a point of
magnanimity: or rather, fearing that immoderate popular applause, might offend
superior Powers. He silences their shouts, and the Heretics acclamations.
And therefore, when that huge crowd began to sing Psalms in French, he
commanded them presently to hold their peace. Others in diverse places crying,
Long live the Gheuses: he often silenced them with his hand. Nay, those that
were got upon the walls, louder then before shouting out the same wishes for
the Gheuses; when he could not rule their tongues by signs, he grew in choler,
and swore by God, they were best consider what they did; for if they proceeded,
some of them should repent it. But the greatest presumption of the people was,
when he entered Antwerp; and rode through the streets, then in many places they
clamoured in this manner, Behold the man that brings us liberty. Behold the man
that brings us the Confession of Auspurg. We have no more need of the
Covenanters. This is ^e whom hereafter we will follow, this is he whom we will
petition to. But the Prince of Orange appeared much offended at these
expressions, especially in Brederods presence. Consults about a remedy for the
present mischief.
He lighted at the Palace, and that night consulted with the Magistrate, how to
reduce the people to their former duty and obedience; how to hinder the
Merchants from leaving the Town, which they resolved to do; and how to break
the meetings at seditious Sermons; for these were his instructions from the
Governess. Sermons in the fields frequented as much as ever
But whilst the remedies were referred to the Senate, the disease abroad being
fed with the same humor, increased, and it was thought, seldom less then 4000
men met at one Sermon, which exceedingly grieved the Governess, who by many
Letters, sometimes remembered the Senate and People of the promise, wherein they
obliged themselves to the King, For which she justly reprooves the Senate of
Antwerp, and tries several ways to make the Prince of Orange.
when (to avoid the imposing of a Bishop) they undertook to be more tender of
Religion, then ever any Bishop was. Sometimes she praised and encouraged the
Prince of Orange for his industry in preventing mischiefs; and withal
remembered him of the Duty of his place, his faith to the King, and engagement
to her self in this present Office; that many had ill thoughts of him, and the
occasion was now in his own hands either to inflame, or extinguish them: When
behold, upon the sudden, new troubles call away the attention of the Governess
to another quarter.

News was brought, that the Confederate Gheuses had a new design, and were
about two thousand. to meet at Centron, and in that City, A meeting of the
Gheuses at Centron, or San-Truden.
belonging to the Bishop of Liege, to resolve whether they should take up arms,
whereunto in every place they had animated the people. The report of the taking
up arms was false, but their determination to meet proved true. And Brederod
with the chief of the Covenanters, wrote Letters to the Towns about them, in
the end of June, summoning them to convene the 14 day of July. Lewis of Nassau
undertook to make the Bishop, sending unto him the Lord of Villers, They desire
the use and freedom of the Town, from the Bishop of Liege, Gerard Grosbech.
Which he denies
who in the name of Lewis and his companions of the League, should work him to
give way to their holding an Assembly at Centron. The Bishop excusing himself,
as bound by the Imperial Laws, not to suffer any such meeting in an Imperial
Town; wrote all that had passed, in cipher, to the Governess, and commanded the
Governor of the Town, not to admit them if they came. But the Townsmen
fearing, But the Townsmen let them in.
that if they did shut their gates against them, they would spoil their
Harvest, and fire the houses and Villages round about; without contest received
Brederod and his men into the Town. They convene in the City.
In this convention (begun about the middle of July, and ended the last day of
that month) two things were put to the question: The first, How they should be
secured, in case the King were minded to revenge himself upon them: and then,
Whether they should move for more, then was expressed in their Petition
delivered in April, touching the Edicts and Inquisition. Where they unanimously
agree to petition for their Indemnity.
The general vote was, that security should be demanded of the Governess; but
the other passed in the negative: some affirming that upon the grant of those
particulars for which they took the Covenant, they ought to proceed no farther.
Others said, That if they had success in their first Petition, they would
enlarge it, and desire, that no certain form of Religion might be prescribed
the people; but that every one might be left free, to serve God his own way.
Touching Liberty of Religion they differ among themselves.
Many were extremely offended with that abominable opinion, and thereupon by
degrees disengaged themselves from the Covenant (among which was Charles
Mansfeld son to Count Ernest) so as nothing was determined in that point. A
few Pages lower.
But whether the Heretics among themselves, The Governess sends Count Egmont
and Count Horn to break off the Convention.
unknown to their other accomplices, resolved upon that which presently followed
in the Netherlands, that is, the violation of holy Images, I shall in its
proper place deliver. Whilst these things were in agitation, the Governess sent
Count Egmont and the Prince of Orange, to fright the Covenanters and these
Assemblies; not that she was ignorant, how far either of them was to be
trusted, but that by such expressions of her confidence, and by making them of
Counsel with her, she might oblige them, and put it in their power to set
things right, and consequently to merit the Kings favor. They appointed
Brederod and the heads of the Covenanters to meet them at Duffle, a village
hard by Antwerp. And among other things, they admonished them, in the
Governesses name, tha^ they should forbear by those kind of Assemblies to make
any Innovation, till his Majesty sent his absolute determination concerning
their demands: but rather, These Lords remember the Covenanters of their
promise.
that by their authority with the Commons they should restrain them (as they
had promised) growing daily more and more stubborn and contumacious. Brederod
wrote the heads of this conference (which were nine) to his confederates at
Centron; who agreed among themselves, But they by a new message from S. Truden
make high demands from the Governesse.
to send Lewis of Nassau with twelve Gentlemen to present the Governesse a new
Petition, consisting likewise of nine heads, wherein partly they stood upon
their justification; and that so absolutely, as they refused the act of
Oblivion promised them by the Governesse, affirming what they had done was more
worthy to be published, then forgotten: partly they desired that the
Governesse, by her own letters and under the hands of the Knights of the
Golden-fleece, would secure them from force of arms, which as it was said were
preparing against them. Moreover, that she would give Commission to the Prince
of Orange, Count Egmont, and Count Horn to hear the Grievances of the
Covenanters, and to mediate betwixt his Majesty and them. Lastly, they moved
for a general Convention of the Estates, as the best expedient for restoring
peace to their Country. Otherwise, though against their wills, they must be
necessitated to have recourse to foreign help. These letters being read in
Senate, She puts them off for the present.
after every man had delivered his opinion, the Governesse answered Lewis and
his companions (that were called, by jeering people, his twelve Apostles) that
upon the twenty sixth of August the Knighrs of the Golden-fleece were to meet
at Bruxels, and she would advise with them about it. The Prince of Orange would
be made Governor of Antwerp, to enable him for ruling of the Town. And is made
Governor accordingly. with power to choose himself a Guard.
In the interim, the Prince of Orange returning to Antwerp; when no good could
be done there, certified the Governesse, that the Citizens had been earnest
with him to receive the Government of Antwerp, and for his security to put a
Garrison into the Town. The Governesse consenting to it, he not only raised
men, but was so bold, as to ask leave to have a Guard about his person, which
she likewise granted. And so to his great contentment he was made Governor,
meaning shortly to make himself an absolute Prince, by the too much indulgence
of the Governesse, who with these favors endeavored to engage the Prince of
Orange, or at least would have him believed to be of the Kings party. But this
concession was a great weakening in her Excellence.
But the despair of succors long looked for out of Spain, together with her
fear, increased her indulgence. Now at length, upon Montinyes sollic^tation,
the Kings letters came, The Kings letters wherein he grants the Governesse her
desires.
wherein those three particulars the Duchess had so often requested of his
Majesty, were all granted, but upon certa^n conditions. For his Majesty gave
way to the remove of the Ecclesiastical Inquisitours; provided the Bishops
were first placed in their stead: for he was resolved and fixed, not to leave
Religion naked, without a guard of those that should take cognizance of her
cause, and revenge her injuries. So limited, as gave the people no satisfaction.
It was his pleasure likewise, that the Imperial Edicts should be somewhat
moderated by his Council in the Low Countries; but it must be certified to,
and approved of by, his Council in Spain, before it should be published in the
Provinces. In the last place, his Majesty was contented that (...) Covenanters
and others should be pardoned; And so long a coming, as rendered them unusefull
to the King.
but the other two heads were first to be dispatched. But these remedies came
from Spain too late, when the face of things was altered in the Low Countries:
When the fury of the Heretics, plundering the Churches, and openly defacing
all venerable and sacred monuments of Religion, Of the plunder of Churches.
was to be incountered in another way.

And indeed that destruction (which I think was one of the greatest that ever
happened, if we consider the sudden mischief to Religion, the rage of the
People, From whence that Mischief came into the Low Countries.
their small number, and mean quality) from what parts or by whose Counsel it
was brought upon the Low Countries, is no more certainly known, then the causes
and original of a sudden plague. I should think by many letters I have read,
that in all probability it came thither from the Geneva Calvinists, their next
French neighbors: perhaps by accident, perhaps upon design; for so Peter
Ernest Count Mansfeld informed the Governesse, and she the King. The very same
intelligence she received from Pedro Ceballio, August 28.
an old Spanish Commander, who assured her, that the Prince of Condegrave; and
the three brothers of the Colygn the heads of the Hugonots, What forreiners
encouraged them.
to advance their own party in France while Heresy reigned in the
Low Countries, by their Emissaries, daily solicited the Heretics in these
Provinces to make some attempt, wherein they promised sufficiently to furnish
them with men and Arms. The like hope they had of the Queen of England. This
agrees with what was resolved upon at Centron by the confederated Gheuses, in
which number the Admiral of France and others of that nation being
comprehended, it was easy for them, upon this occasion, to trouble the
Low Countries. Besides these mysteries of State, Why the Low-countreymen joined
with them.
other things were plain to be discerned. For the people, partly corrupted with
Heresy, partly dreading the Inquisition, exceedingly favored the Heretics
that sought to overthrow that judicature. The confederated Gheuses willingly
took upon them the protection of the Commons, because many of the Covenanters
were birds of the same feather, and all of them ambitious to be Masters and
Tribunes of the people. The Knights of the Order, and the Lords, were divided
among themselves. Those that continued faithful to their Religion and their
Prince, were the weaker party: the stronger either declared themselves for the
Conspiratours, or at least were of their chamber-counsell. And now the
Governesse wrote to the King, August 28.
that she had certain knowledge of the Prince of Orange's design, by those
tumults to invade the Government of the Low Countries: and share it with his
fellow-rebells. Therefore, upon Assumption-eve, The day appointed for the
Picture-scuffle. The Place.
they began to rifle the Low Country Churches: first rising in the lower
Flanders, which lies between the river Lys and the West Sea. In these parts a
few of the rascal sort of Heretics met and joined themselves with some
companies of thieves, The quality of the Image-breakers. Their Instruments.
upon the day appointed for proclaiming war against heaven, lead on by no
Commander but Impiety: their Arms were staves, hatchets, hammers, and ropes,
fitter to pull down houses, then to fight withal: some few of them* had swords
and muskets. First the Villages are plundered.
Thus accoutered, as if they had been furies vomited from Hell, they broke into
the towns and villages about St. Omer, and if they found the doors of Churches
or Monasteries shut, forced them open, frighting away their religious
inhabitants: and overturning the Altars, they defaced the Monuments of Saints,
and broke to pieces their sacred images. Whatsoever they saw dedicated to God,
and to the Blessed, they pulled it down and trod it under their feet to dirt,
whilst their Ringleaders clapped them on the backs, and encouraged them with all
their force to destroy the Idols. Then the Cities.
The Heretics glad of this success to the first that ever they sent out upon
a party, left the place with speed, and with unanimous consent, shouted and
cried aloud, Let us to IPRES, that being a city much frequented by the
Calvinists. And they were drawn thither, as well out of hope of protection, as
out of hatred they bare to the Bishop of that City, Martin Rithovius, an
eminently virtuous and learned man, and therefore meriting the spleen of
Heretics. Whereupon they ran violently thither, gathering upon the way such
vagabonds and beggars, as joined with them out of hope of plunder. And as a
snow ball rolling from the top of a hill, grows still greater, by the access
of new snow, through which it passes, and wherein it is involved: so these
thievish vagabonds multiplying by the way, the farther they go, the more they
rage, and the more considerable their thievish strength appears. They are
received at Ipres.
And when they had pillaged a few small villages about Ipres, upon the very day
of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, the citizens of Ipres opening their
gates unto them, Deface and pillage the great Church.
they entered the town, and went directly to the Cathedral Church, where every
one fell to work. Some set ladders to the walls, with hammers and slaves
battering the pictures. Others broke a sunder the iron work, seats, and pulpit.
Others, casting ropes about the great statues of our Savior Christ, and the
Saints, pulled them down to the ground. Others stole the consecrated plate,
burnt the sacred Books, and stripped the Altars of their holy ornaments: and
that, with so much security, with so little regard of the Magistrate or
Prelates, as you would think they had been sent for by the common Council, and
were in pay with the city. With the same fury they likewise burned the Bishop
of Ipre's library, Burn the Library. Violate all things sacred.
and destroyed the rest of the Churches and Religious nouses of the town,
reacting their villainies, and because the first prospered, still presuming.
This sacrilegious robbery continued a whole day. The People, and the
Magistrate, diversely affected.
Part of the people being amazed to see them, not taking them for men, but
devils in humane shapes: and part rejoicing, that now those things were done
which they themselves had long ago designed. Nor had the Magistrate and
Senators any greater care of Religion. Perhaps this sudden inundation took
away their sense and judgment; perhaps, being privy to the plot, they, idle
and careless, kept their houses. Indeed the whole City frighted, like
passengers in a Shipwreck, beheld the destruction, never putting to their
helping hands. A new Party of Image-breakers in other Towns.
The next day, another party of Church-robbers, either kept for a reserve, or
taking example by what was done about St. Omer, S. Omer,
had orders to plunder Menin, Commines, Vervich, Menin, Commines, Vervich.
and other Towns upon the Lys, which they did with the like violence. All
things holy that were portable they carried away: the rest they cut in pieces
and burned. Thence passing the River, they came within the Liberties of Lisle,
many of the Townsmen joining with them; and having robbed a rich Monastery,
which they call Marquet, mad and drunk, some went to Doway, some to Seclin:
Encountered by the Secliners.
But the Secliners and other neighbor Towns, catching up any weapon that came
to hand, faced them upon their march, and showed themselves ready to punish the
injury offered to Religion, unless those thieves would take another way. And
defeated.
But they with the same impudence, striving to go forward, and to break through
them, the Country came in, and falling upon them, slew a great sort, and
routed the rest, making them fly in great distraction, forcing many into the
boggs, drowing some in the river, and carrying others into the Town in triumph.
But this was a slight revenge: when at the same time, almost all Flanders did
as furiously assault God himself, and all his Saints, no man resisting. The
news whereof much afflicted the Governess, who, in great grief of heart,
turning to Count Egmont, The Governess's words to Count Egmont.
that waited on her from the Sermon to her Privie-chamber, said, Do you hear,
Egmont, what good news comes from your Province of Flanders? Unhappy Woman that
I am, to see in the time of my Government, such indignities offered to God, and
to the King. And will you, in whose worth and fidelity his Majesty has
always put such confidence, suffer these foul villanyes to pass unpunished,
in the Province committed to your charge? His Answer.
and when he answered, That in the first place the Kings Authority must be
carefully maintained, and then Religion would easily be restored; the Governess
not without indignation replied, Her reply.
that his counsel was not just; but rather before all humane things, the honor
and worship of God ought to be preferred, the neglect whereof would be a far
greater misery, then the loss of any power or fortune whatsoever. This was her
opinion, and likewise the Kings, His Rejoinder.
who resolved to put nothing in balance with Religion. And when Egmont added,
That men were of another mind, who had estates in these Provinces, which they
feared to loose: Her Conclusion.
she concluded with the same constancy, that it was indeed to be wished, and
would be a more prudent course; to preserve both Religion and temporal Power:
but if one of them must go to wrack, the safety of Religion ought principally
to be respected; which, once lost, would never be repaired with the addition
either of Wealth or Empire. To this purpose her Excellence spoke in Senate
also, The Senates resolution upon the Exigent.
which she speedily summoned. Wherein it was decreed, that Maximil. Rassinghem,
who succeeded John Currier deceased, in the Government of French Flanders,
should immediately enter Lisle with the horse commanded by the Lord Montiny,
who was then in Spain, and not suffer the people, that had been plundering
consecrated Goods, to return into the town, before they had yielded up their
Arms, and that he had carried them to the Magazine. And notwithstanding Egmont
did not well approve of this kind of proceeding, but affirmed, that if the
Governess went by the way of Arms, this Insurrection would not be quieted, till
200000 men have lost their lives, yet she gave not off her resolution, but
answered, It were better that Roat, the dregs of mankind (if they would not
renounce their heresy) should be banished or destroyed, then they should be
suffered to commit such execrable wickedness; lest the good men of the
Low Countries should, at length, either be infected with their contagion, or
forced by them to fly their Country, in case the multitude prevailed.

Whilst these preparations were made at Court, A new Iconomachy at Antwerp
the rage of the Low Country Heretics was not laid, but like a storm, now
violently carried into this, now into that quarter, Begun with scorn put upon
the holy P^ocession.
terrified every Province, especially Antwerp. Where upon the day of the
Assumption of our Lady (for the Antwerpers have the Blessed Virgin for their
Patroness) whilst her Image in solemn Procession, was carried upon men's
shoulders, from the great Church, through the streets, the symptoms of that
disease appeared, which brake forth soon after. Some jeering rascals of the
meaner sort of Artificers, Mockery.
first laughed and hissed at the holy Solemnity: then impiously and
impudently, with mimick salutations and reproachful words, mocked the Effigies
of the mother of God, and had presumed to lay sacrilegious hands upon it, but
that by the care of those that ordered the Procession, it was set down, not (as
was usual) in the middle-Isle of the Church, but speedily conveyed into the
Quire. And next day (for base people grow bolder if they find themselves
feared) many came into the Church, and some playing their gambols before our
Ladies Chapel, asked her in scorn, why she had so early flown up to the roust.
Others ran about the great Church, threatening the Altars and Images; among whom
an impudent Rogue, a Sadler, got up into the Pulpit, and when this impious
Mimick had counterfeited the tone and gesture of a Preacher, desiring them to
reach him a Bible, And quarrelling in the Cathedral Church.
he challenged any of the Catholic Priests to come and dispute with him: and
whilst they received him on the one side with applauses, and on the other with
casting faggot-sticks and rubbish at him (which he threw at his audience again)
at length the scuffle increasing, as if they had been in the streets, a
Catholic Spipper, not able to endure the insolence of the fellow, ran up the
side of the Pulpit, and catching the Buffon about the waste, lustily tossed him
over to the ground; and he himself, in the heat of the brawl, avoiding many
blows made at him, was shot in the arm with a pistol-bullet, the rest, when
some cried, that the Officers were coming for fear of being taken, slipped out
of the Church. Notwithstanding the quarrel continued, and they met every day,
like Gladiators upon the stage, Whereof the sacrilegious people, shutting out
the rest, possessed themselves.
to cut and hack one another. Until upon the 21th of August, the Heretics
increasing in their number, came into the great Church with concealed weapons;
as if they resolved, after some light skirmishes for a few days past, to come
now to a battle. And expecting till Even-song was done, they shouted with a
hideous cry, Long live the Gheuses; Nay, they commanded the Image of the
Blessed Virgin to repeat their Acclamation, which if she refused to do, they
madly swore they would beat and kill her. And though John Immercellius Pretour
of the Town, with some Apparatours, came and commanded them to keep the Peace,
yet he could not help it; but the people running away to get out of the tumult,
the Heretics shut the doors after them, and as Conquerours possessed
themselves of the Church: Now when they saw all was theirs; hearing the clock
strike the last hour of the day, And singing Psalms fall to work.
and darkness adding confidence, one of them (lest their wickedness should want
formality) began to sing a Geneva Psalm, and then, as if the Trumpet had
sounded a charge, the Spirit moving them altogether, they fell upon the
effigies of the Mother of God, and upon the pictures of Christ and his Saints,
Breaking all things consecrated.
some tumbled them down, and trod upon them; others thrust swords into their
sides; others chopped off their heads with axes; with so much concord and
forecast in their Sacrilege, that you would think every one had his several
work assigned him. For the very harlots, And defacing the whole Cathedral.
those common appurtenances to thieves and drunkards, catching up the
wax-candles from the Altars, and from the Vestry, held them to light the men
that were at work. Part whereof, getting upon the Altars cast down the sacred
plate, broke a sunder the picture-frames, defaced the painted walls: Part,
setting up ladders, shattered the goodly Organes, broke the windows flourished
with a new kind of paint. Huge statues of Saints, that stood in the walls upon
Pedistalls, they unfastened and hurled down among which, an ancient and great
Crucifix, with the two thieves hanging on each hand of our Savior, that stood
right against the high Altar, they pulled down with ropes, and hewed it in
pieces; but touched not the two theives, as if they only worshipped them, and
desired them to be their good Lords. Nay, O Profane!
they presumed to break open the Conservatory of the celestial bread; and
putting in their polluted hands, to pull out the blessed Body of our Lord,
those base off-scourings of men, trod upon the Deity adored and dreaded by the
Angels. The Pixes and Chalices which they found in the Vestry, they filled with
wine prepared for the Altar, and drank them off in derision. They greased their
shoes with the Chrisme or holy oil; and after the spoil of all these things,
laughed and were very merry at the matter. My meaning is not, lest I should
scandalize mankind, nor suits it with History, to repeat all the foul actions
wherewith in this destruction of holy things, these traitors to God and his
Saints glutted their cruelty. What a great stately Church was this.
But the greatest wonder was, to see them make so quick dispatch: that one of
the fairest and greatest Churches of Europe, How small a number defaced it.
full of Pictures and Statues, richly adorned with about seventy Altars, by a
few men (for they were not above one hundred, as the Governess wrote to the
King, that she was certainly informed) should before midnight, In a few hours.
when they began but in the evening, have nothing at all left entire or
unprofaned. Truly, if the hundred men had not an hundred hands apiece, that in
so short a space demolished such a multitude of things, Some thought the Devil
helped his Children.
it is not unreasonable to believe (which I know some at that time suspected)
that devils mixing with them, joined in dispatching their own work; or at least
that the furious violence, which (in scorn of Religion) stripped the Altars,
mangled the Statues and Pictures, defaced the tombs, and in four hours time
robbed and laid waste so rich and goodly a Church; could not have any other
cause, but the immediate impulsion of those rebellious and infernal spirits,
that add both rage and strength to sacrilegious villains, Because none of the
Sacrilegious were so much as hurt in the doing it.
offering an acceptable sacrifice to hell. Especially because in such a hurry
and crowd of hasty laborers, whilst they run about the Church like Bacchanals
and Bedlams; whilst they mount the rounds of their ladders; whilst they with
great pains loosen the brass and marble; whilst they endeavor to spoil and
steal the richest things; none of all their number had so much as a fall, or a
knock, though such loads of stone and wood came tumbling down, and so many
fragments and splinters flew about; nor received the least hurt by the workmens
tools, which they ran with in their hands: it is no slight argument (as I said
before) to prove that by Gods permission, the Devil was the Surveyour of their
works, and by the assistance of his evil Angels, that enterprise, no less
difficult then impious, was instantly, without harm to any of them, and
therefore prodigiously effected.

But these sacrilegious thieves committed yet more villainy in the Town, From
the Church they fall upon the City.
presuming upon their fortune: For running out of the Church with hallowed
candles, And their number increasing,
triumphantly singing and crying, Vive le Gueux; they were received by others
that had lien concealed near the Church, exspecting encouragement from the
success. Their Companies therefore joining (for Booty invited them) Plunder
all the Churches,
still as they came to any Church-doors, they broke them open, spoiling and
carrying away all their consecrated furniture. They climbed into Monasteries,
And Religious Houses in the Town, With incredible security.
searched them, entered their storehouses, seized upon their meat, drank off
their wine, and took from them all their money, plate, and wardrobes, both
sacred and profane. And this impiety was acted with such impudence and
impunitie; that truly I know not well, whether the Reader will conceive more
indignation against those impious Ruffians, that without any reverence to God
or man, plundered consecrated places, and other men's houses at their pleasure,
destroying and stealing Church-ornaments, and Religious men's goods; or against
such as ought to have protected those sacred things, Terrifying the
Inhabitants. The Merchants keep their own houses, and there stand upon their
guard.
and against the Religious Houses themselves, that looked on, whilst these
Rogues with polluted hands abused and profaned all. But fear had possessed the
generality, this happening about midnight, when the City was in their dead
sleep, and so the more affrighted, being awaked with sudden and several kinds
of Outcries. And therefore, as unexspected and doubtful accidents ever strike
the greatest terror, Those that had the custody of things sacred, run away
from their charge.
many of the Merchants, fearing an universal plunder, shut their doors, and
barricadoed them. The Clergy, knowing themselves unable to resist a multitude
of thieves (not discerning how few they were) forsook the Churches, Religious
men dare not appear. All the Town in a fright.
and provided for their own safety. Nor had the religious Orders time to
collect their spirits in this common trepidation, when so many fled. In a word
men had no more consideration to defend themselves against this misfortune,
then against a thunderbolt, which every one wishes to avoid, but none labors
to oppose, The Nuns fly to their fathers Houses.
But the poor Nuns were in the greatest fright and amazement, whose Cloisters
were broke by these Hobgoblins, which making havoc of all things in their way,
and prying into every secret corner; whilst their fury or theivery kept them
employed, it was the only preservation of the holy Virgins, that getting on
their clothes of any fashion, escaped these sacrilegious dogs, and fled most of
them into their Parents houses. By which means, less mischief was done, then
uses to be committed in night-robberies. Their principal aim being to make
haste, The Sacrilegious make but one nights work of it.
and ruin all things in an instant. And truly their have was so great, that
the noblest Churches and Religious houses of Antwerp were profaned and pillaged
by the several parties of these infamous Rascals. Nay, when it was day light,
and that they saw the city, amazed with sudden fear, Both Catholics and
Heretics conceal themselves out of mutual distrust.
had made no preparation to suppress them: for both Catholics and Heretics
kept within doors; those fearing the Heretics, which they believed to be
masters of the Town: and these, in regard they knew the odium of the fact would
reflect upon themselves, and therefore feared the Justice of the Magistrate,
and to be assailed by the Catholics: but all were of opinion, the liberty
taken by these base Artificers, depended upon some superior causes; The
Church-robbers plunder with more licentiousness then before.
the Church-robbers secured by other men's terror, fell to plunder in the day
time, returning to the Churches and Monasteries, unworthily and basely fouling
the pure ornaments with their filthy souls and bodies; and buttering the Books
in the library, set them on fire. Then in mockery, arming the Saints statues,
they ran a tilt, and overturning them, insulted over them. And every where like
Conquerours, having as well surprised, Religion as the Town, they bore the
spoils in triumph. The Pillage continues for three whole days together. At
last the drowsy Citizens awake.
Three days together in Antwerp lasted that spoil and destruction of things
sacred: with so great a loss of rare pieces, drawn by the hands of Masters,
that some writers stick not to say, the great Church alone was damnified to the
value of four hundred thousand Ducats. But it being strongly suspected, that
after the spoil of Churches, hope of prey having multiplied this wicked rabble,
they would at last plunder the rich Merchants (as many times men fight more
eagerly for their houses, then for their Altars) the Townsmen thinking it their
best, no longer to stand neuters, especially perceiving the small number of
these Rogues, And taking Arms, Fright away the Sacrilegious.
appeared at their doors in arms, and (as if they meant to revenge the
Commonwealth) shut up all the Ports but one, out of which that damned pack of
villains ran, and poured out their fury upon the adjoining towns and villages,
where they exercised the same kind of sacrilegious freeboot.

While this was done at and about Antwerp, The like mischief at the same time,
Shaked all the seventeen Provinces, like an Earthquake.
the rage of these Traitors was no less, upon the very same days, at Gant,
Ondenaerd, and other towns in Flanders, from the river of Lys as far as
Schelt and Dender, all the Churches and holy Ornaments going to wrack. For this
destruction was more like an Earthquake, that devours all at once, then like
the plague that steals upon a Country by degrees. Insomuch, as the same
tainture and whirlwind of Religion, in an instant, miserably involved and laid
waste Brabant, Only sour excepted.
Flanders, Holland, Zeland, Gelderland, Friesland, Over-Isell, and almost all
the Low Countries except three or four Provinces, viz. Nemure, Lucemburgh,
Artois, Tac. l. 2. Annals.
and part of Haynolt. And as of old, in the reign of Tiberius Caesar, they tell
us that twelve cities were swallowed by an earthquake in one night; so in the
Low Countries, not the like number of Cities, but Provinces, To an infinite
loss.
by the Spirit, struggling and bursting out from hell, were devoured; with so
sudden, with so great a ruin, that the Netherlands which had as many populous
Cities, Towns, and Villages, as any part of Europe, within ten days, was
overwhelmed in this calamity: the particular Province of Flanders having four
hundred consecrated houses, Especially in Flanders.
either profaned, or burnt to the ground. Some thought this Pillage, a design
to betray the Low Countries.
So as indeed the Governesse could not but believe Count Mansfeld, who called
that conspiracy, a plot laid to betray all the Low Countries, by the Heads of
the heretical party in France: from whence came almost all these cryers of the
new Gospel. For by their practice the state of the Low Countries being
troubled, Martin Delrio in Alter. Belg. l. 1.
they might the more easily, as when an Army is confused at the first volly of
shot, send fresh men, that assailing the Provinces, Sen. Truden. l. 4.
already weakened, might totally subdue them. With this opinion theirs agreed,
Plotted between the French and Low Country Heretics.
who thought this impious plunder, acted with such consent and such impunity,
not to be accidental, nor the villainy of a few, but to be contrived by the
Heretics, and Orders given at Centron, that by one Massacre they might prevent
another, which they feared hung over their heads, With consent of the Gheuses.
ever since the conference of the French and Spanish at Baion: the chief of the
Gheuses giving way to it, that they might the sooner, by the fright of these
tumults, extort from the Governesse all which they had petitioned for. Indeed
when the Churches and Monasteries of Gant were rifled, the spoil having
continued for three days together, the like whereof happened at the same time
in Antwerp; An instance whereof, is Lewis of Nassau's letter.
a letter from Lewis of Nassau, and six others, were delivered to the
Ministers, Consistories, and Merchants of the Low Countries (for so ran the
superscription) wherein he advised them, that, in regard the cause of the
reformed Religion seemed now to be in sufficient security, they should oppose
themselves against the sauciness and insurrection of the people, confident
that, hereafter, no body would trouble them for the free Exercise of their
Religion: and they were to give credence to the Bearer, who was one Giles Clerk
a Lawyer of Tournay, his name being writ in cipher in the same letter. Upon
receipt whereof, they ceased from profaning the Churches of Gant. And his
Patronage of the Iconomachy.
Add to this, the words of Count Mansfeld to the Governesse, September. 8.
which she sent in Character to the King, that she was advised by Count
Mansfeld, to beware of Lewis of Nassau before all men living for he was the
wickedest Traitor in the world; to whom the Ministers and Elders of the
Heretics communicated all their Counsels, and that he carried in his hand the
spoil of Churches and religious Houses; and by this means, that turbulent
spirited desperate man hoped, to levy war against the King. And it is
evident, that Lewis was one of the first movers in all the Sacrilege
committed: it was by his encouragement, that the common sort of heretics would
not obey the Magistrate, but contrary to his command, furiously ran out of the
City to Vilvord, to hear sermons.

The Governess having notice from all parts, The Governesse calls a Senate or
Great Council.
of these sacrilegious actions, no less doubting the future, then grieving and
amazed at the present, speedily called the Senate, that being indeed the
ordinary, but many times a post-humous and ineffectuall remedy. Aug. 27.
The Prefects of the Provinces and almost all the Lords were there, but only
Philip Croi Duke of Areschot, and Charles Brime Count of Megen, he excusing
himself that he was not well, and this that he feared his enemies had a plot
upon him. Her Excellence spoke to them, in these very words (which she inserted
in her Letters to the King) Grief and her inbred Nobleness giving them vigor
and authority. To what condition the Low Countries are brought, Her Speech.
by the wickedness of a few men, we see, the absent will hear, and posterity
admire, to my great disparagement and yours. For I know many things will be
imputed to me, Princes names being always registered in the Calendar of public
calamities: and you are famed for so many noble actions at home and abroad,
that your names cannot possibly be concealed. Nor were the Netherlands so
entrusted to me, but that you had your parts in the Administration of the
Government. The particular Provinces committed to your trust; the Order of the
Golden-Fleece, wherein your Oaths and Names are upon Record, the Allegiance due
to their Prince from his subjects, amongst whom you are the chief, multiplyes
your Obligations to the maintaining and enlarging of his Royal Power. And yet
in these your Provinces, while you stand Spectatours, the Churches of God and
his Saints, founded by the ancient piety of your Princes, which your Ancestors
and your selves have adorned with victorious trophies, by sacrilegious and
impious traitors are burned down, and profaned, your Ancestors tembes
violated, the Statues of your Order, and your Coats of Arms, in many places
impudently thrown to the ground, trod upon, and broken. To omit their barbarity
to Virgins consecrated to God, robbing of their Nunneries; and for addition to
their contumelies, cruelly turning out of their cities and holy mansions, all
the Priests and Religious. But what kind of men are they that have raised this
storm in the Low Countries? What dregs of the people, what vile and abject
fugitives, and Apostates from Religion? cruel, but to those that fear them:
cowardly slaves if they themselves be terrified. A few Secliners and
Countrymen, accidentally taking Arms, destroyed a multitude of these Church
robbers. Did not one man yesterday, catching up a spear, when a great sort of
these Traitors were gathered together, fright them not only from a Chapel
which they threatened, but from the City it self? Will you suffer this
pestilence to rage without opposition, and to ruin the State and Peace of your
Country, and your Religion, before your eyes, and these troubles to open the
way unto a foreign Conquest? Nay, it is commonly reported, these villainies are
committed, some of you not only not resisting, but being also privy and
assistant to the plot. I am not ignorant, that such Calumnies use to be spread
abroad by wicked men, to make good Subjects less active in doing Justice upon
the enemies to Religion. And perhaps they hope to fright me with great names,
and so enforce my consent to their unjust Demands. What is fit to be done by
men of honor, look you to that; for what concerns my self, I religiously
profess, that no man's menaces shall compel me, to mix the new figments of
these people, with the ancient and Orthodox Religions established in these
Provinces. Nay, if the King himself, upon whose Grace and Pleasure I depend,
should dispense with the Low Country men, to be of what Religion they list,
(which how far it is from his Majesty's intention, none can be ignorant) I
would instantly depart the Low Countries, because I would not be an Agent in,
or Interpreter of such Indulgence. But if I were stayed by force of Arms (which
I hear they threaten) I call God to witness, I would offer my self to the
slaughter, and be torn in pieces, rather then suffer a Profession of Faith,
contrary to the Catholic Religion. To prevent all this, be it your care, my
Lords, I do conjure you by your duty to God, your Allegiance to the King, and
your Love unto your Country. And because gentle remedies will not prevail with
desperate people, and that they trust to the protection of the confederate
Gentlemen, let us at last receive the Arms and Assistance which you have often
promised, and ought long since to have performed. That when the King shall
come, who will be here very shortly, The diverse senses of the Senators upon
this Speech: some for, others against a War.
he may find these Provinces quieted by your means, and no less remunerate your
fidelity with his royal Bounty, then he will requite the perfidiousness of
others with severe punishment. This speech, made by the Governess, took
according to every ones several interest and inclination; quickening the
desires if found in their minds, but not introducing any new Resolve. Therefore
the Counts of Mansfeld, Aremberg, and Barlamont, all true to the Kings cause,
cheerfully offered their services: Egmont, Orange, Horn, and diverse others,
spoke against levying war; whose opinion carried a greater appearance of
Reason, because of the multitudes of Heretics, whereof there was above fifteen
thousand in Bruxels, it being unsafe for the present to provoke them by a
war. Their heat ended.
But the Governess cut off that dispute, and leaving the mention of Arms out
of her Speech, not out of her mind (for she resolved the War should be her
Great Council) she asked their opinions, how those troubles might be otherwise
composed. The Senate made this Decree, nemine contradicente.
The result of their two days consultation was, That the Gove^ness should
offer them an Act of oblivion for the time past, and security for the future
provided, that the Confederates should first burn the instrument of their
Association (they called it the Covenant) and afterward take an oath to be
true to the Catholic Religion, and faithful Subjects to the King for ever.

But the Governess delaying to set her hand to the Act, ^he Gheuses threaten
Bruxels and the Governess.
as if she were yet doubtful whether it should pass or no, more of these
turbulent people hourly gathering together, and being themselves tossed upon
the waves of sedition, thrust others on, that else would have sat still. And
they were heard to say, prompted by Lewis, brother to the Prince of Orange,
that unless the Governess would secure the Gentlemen Covenanters, unless every
one might have liberty to go to Sermons, and no man be punished for Religion;
the Governess should with her own eyes see all the Churches in Bruxels fired,
Who frighted, resolves to leave Bruxels.
the Priests murdered, her self imprisoned. And because this was said to be as
well privately intended, as publicly reported* the Governess resolved to steal
out of Bruxels and retire to Mons, a city of Haynolt, partly that she might not
be an eyewitness of the destruction of holy Images in Bruxels, partly that
being in a safe place, she might not be forced to accept of unjust conditions.
But is stayed by prayers and force.
But whilst Orange and Egmont, to whom she would needs bid Farwell, dissuaded
her from the journey, the news was all over the Town; and some of the Citizens
shutting up the Gates, others went to the Governess, humbly beseeching her,
that she would not by her flight, add to the impudence of wicked men, and make
the King condemn that faithful City, under the notion of Conspiratours
against his Majesty. Nor did she alter her resolution for all this, though a
great man informed her Excellence, The Prince of Orange expresses verymuch
trouble.
that the Prince of Orange speaking of her going away to some at Court, told
them, among other discourse, That if the Governess would leave the Town, and
consequently desert the State, he himself was resolved, his Towns and Fortunes
should not become a prey to any: That their French neighbors might easily
possess themselves of Flanders: and that long since, they pretended a title to
Artois, and Haynolt nor could the rest of the Provinces want new Lords. The
Governess more and more threatened.
But that which most of all troubled the Governess, was a rumor dispersed in
Bruxels, that she was the only cause why the Gheuses had not their Petition
granted, which she might do of her self, having received plenipotentiary
Authority from the King, to sign any conditions for quieting the Low Country
tumults. And that if still she pretended to exspect answer from Spain, putting
them off with such flammes, there were some in readiness, Ulricus
that seizing upon her, Viglius
together with Viglius, Keeper of the Seal, and Egmont himself, would extort by
force, what they could not obtain with modesty. Yet not suffered to depart the
Town.
Such reports as these, though at first the Governess accounted them vain
threatenings of the Heretics, which had cunningly named Egmont, to make her
think the Conspiratours hated him: And very much terrified.
Yet when she saw the same affirmed by many, that seemed utterly to despair of
any good; once more attempting to get out of Town, Makes some concessions to
the covenanting Gheuses.
and being staid again: Fear overcoming her, she at last was induced to grant
some of the Covenanters demands. Which, after other business, she wrote to his
Majesty, in these words. Now when I come to add what finally I granted to the
Covenanters, Giving the King this account by letter.
unworthy my Resolution, unworthy your Majesty's Religion; truly, the grief of
it peirces my very soul, and shame comes upon my face in blushes. I call God to
witness, who knows the secrets of my heart, that often and with my utmost
power I resisted them; many nights together I have not shut mine eyes, being at
that very time afflicted with sorrow, and a fever. Of the Causes moving her to
do it.
At last, besides the spoil of Churches, which I heard of, from other quarters;
when the storm hung over this City, and that so many openly rung in mine ears,
that the destructive spite to holy things would never cease til I should grant
two demands made by the Covenanters. When my house was besieged, my mind
languishing, and my body sick, sending for Orange, Egmont, and Horn, and
protesting before them, And of the particulars granted.
that my consent was extorted thereunto, I made a concession of pardon and
indemnity to the Covenanters, and to the rest I gave liberty to hear their
Ministers preach, only in places where they had been accustomed so to do;
provided they came unarmed, and molested not the Catholics. With a special
clause limiting these two Grants to such time, as the King with consent of the
Estates of the Low Countries would be pleased to allow. Blaming her own
indulgent Act and beseeching his Majesty not to confirm it. But rather to
vindicate Religion.
Yet to both these I consented not in your Majesty's name, but in mine own, so
as when you please you may avoid them, without the least blemish to your
Honor, which you have not your self engaged; and being ill-ingaged by me, you
should not, and (I hope) will not make it good. Nay, I beseech and conjure you,
Mighty Sir, by that which is dearer to you then your life, your care to defend
the Catholic faith; that immediately, not exspecting the convenience of the
Spring, you will please to come in person, and revenge the wrongs d^ne to
afflicted Religion, which now sadly and solely addressing her self to your
Majesty, exspects relief (which otherwise, she dispairs of) from that right
hand of yours, renowned for faith, and power, indeed, unless this one hope
remained, my life, which lingers in a miserable manner, would soon part from
me, though perhaps this hope it self will be hardly able to keep off death. She
in the interim secures her self and the Town of Bruxels.
Thus her Excellence (fainting under the burden of her grief) wrote privately
to the King, but publicly showed no womanish passion, and still intent to
affairs of State, gave Count Mansfeld Commission to govern Bruxels as her
Lieutenant, put into the town a new Garrison of horse and foot, fortified the
Count; left nothing undone, that either concerned her own or the Cities
preservation. And gets time to breath, upon the present alteration of affairs
by the endeavors of the Gheuses at Bruxels.
Indeed having made that agreement with the Covenanters, they gave her
jealousies a short breathing-space; for, upon the foresaid terms, taking a new
oath of obedience to the Governesse, they so ordered the matter, that upon the
day appointed the Gheuses attempted nothing against the Church. Nay, the Prince
of Orange returning to Antwerp hanged three of the sacrilegious villains, And
of the Prince of Orange at Antwerp.
and banished three more, setting open the great Church, commanding the Priests
to exercise their function, and boldly to instruct the people. Which had not a
little rejoiced the Governesse, Who afterward offended the Governesse, by his
grant of Churches to the Heretics.
but that, in the same letter which he about it, he enclosed two petitions,
delivered him by the Germans, that desired some Church in Antwerp, where they
might freely exercise the confession of Auspurg. This took off much of the
Governesses contentment, especially because, September. 3.
the day after, she understood, by other letters from the Prince of Orange,
that he, and the Senate of Antwerp, had permitted Heretics to preach in the
city, and to use all the other rites of Luther and Calvin, assigning them
three places for that purpose. For which he gives her reasons.
The reason whereof the Prince of Orange explaining, affirmed to the Governesse
(who very hainously resented it) in three letters, sent immediately one after
another, that he was extremely unwilling to make conditions with the Heretics,
September. 4.
but some considerations enforced him: September. 4. 5. 7.
First, that he might by this means restore the Churches and Churchmen to
security. Then, whereas no less then twenty thousand men used to go out of
Town to sermons, he greatly feared lest, at their return, some pragmaticall
knaves, gaping after pillage, might join with them, and (the multitude
prevailing) plunder the rich Merchants houses. Lastly, because the Heretics
already had sermons in Antwerp, therefore in pursuance of that agreement, he
had assigned them places in the city. But not satisfactory.
Notwithstanding, the Governesse liked not the proceedings of the Prince of
Orange; perhaps because she her self was guilty of too much indulgence, and
likewise in fear to be reproved for another fault: perhaps, because the Prince
of Orange had indeed given further allowance to the Heretics then they could
challenge by their articles, which licensed their Sermons within the walls, but
not their Baptism, Marriage, or other Heretical ceremonies. The like done at
Mechlen and Tournay by the Counts of Hochstrat and Horn who excuse themselves.
But whilst the Governesse chides the Prince, and wi^^s him to revoke his Act,
news is brought to her, that the Counts of Hotchstrat, and Horn had followed
the example of Antwerp, he at Machlin, this at Tournay, and both, rebuked by
the Governesse, gave her an account of their actions. Hotchstrat said, he could
not do withal, September. 8.
for the law was given to him by the enraged people, whom he found, at his
entrance into the city, barbarously spoiling the Churches. But Horn (of whom
her Excellence complained to the King, as of a greater Delinquent then the
rest, because when he had made suit for the Government of Tournay, it was
granted him upon certain conditions, which he engaged to observe, yet had broke
every particular) laid the fault upon the city, so full of Heretics, that of
five parts scarce one continued Catholic. The very same at Utretcht. And at
Bolduc.
The Governesse heard yet worse news from Utrecht, and worst of all from the
Bus: those having chased away the Catholics from the Churches, and these the
Bishop from the city. The Franciscans, at Antwerp, endangered by the Heretics.
A while after, the Prince of Orange certified the Governesse, that three
hundred of the common people at Antwerp, in hope of spoil taking arms, were
ready to break into a Monastery of Franciscans; but that he came in with his
horse, Septem. 17.
and scattered them. But the same wickedness prospered better at Amsterdam.
And turned out of doors at Amsterdam.
Where a few men of the poorest roguey sort of Heretics, but countenanced by
many and potent Citizens, rushing into a Church and Monastery of Franciscans,
and defacing all the consecrated things, beat and stoned out the Religious,
hurting the Consul of the town, and one of the greatest Senators, that
opposed them; and so made themselves masters of the Convent. The pious Act of
the Amsterdam women.
At which time, the women of Amsterdam did a memorable exploit. For while these
impious madmen running to all the Churches in the town, closely followed their
victorious beginning, and broke into a Chapel famous in those parts for
miracles wrought by the holy Eucharist: where they laid hands upon that
heavenly bread; the women, that were about the Altar, took to themselves men's
courages, rising up in defense of the blessed Sacrament, and resolving rather
to die then suffer that execrable rudeness. And what with threats, and
authority (for some of them were women of quality) what with force and
clamor, those barking hell hounds ran away, without so much as touching the
Altar, or tearing the Church-ornaments. These women are indeed worthy the
knowledge and commendations of posterity. Unless perhaps their praise may
seem a disparagement to the men. The impious act of the women of Delph.
But the women of Amsterdam merited not more honor, then the same sex deserved
infamy at Delph, a town in Holland. For a whole Regiment of them, undoubtedly
possessed by the Devil, knowing one another minds, upon the sudden, like
Bedlams or Furies, got into a Church of the Franciscans, broke the Saints
images, towsed and spoiled the holy Altar-clothes. From thence, with like speed
and rage, they furiously made their way into the Monastery it self, with such
violence, as if they had been the Snake-haired hags sent from Pluto, running
over the house, and rifling every corner; so as the Franciscans frighted with
the strange sight of these Bacchides, thinking this to be the prologue to a
massacre, (for it was rumoured that within two or three days all the Priests
should have their throats cut) part of them to save themselves, fled; and the
rest hid themselves. I know some were of opinion they were not women that durst
make this attempt, but men in women's clothes. Yet, that the women of Holland
might be so wicked, it is agreeable to their mannish principles in mastering of
their husbands. And that it was their Act, the Governesse (who shrewdly sifted
things out), affirmed; and, among diverse such like prodigies, Septem. 27.
October. 10. and 16.
whereof in many several letters she informed the King; her Excellence laments
the desperate condition of the Low Countries, that had no hope but only in his
Majesty's presence therefore she humbly beseeches him, The Governesse beseeches
the King to come with an Army.
if he meant to keep those Provinces, to cut off all delays; and by the example
of his father Charles the fifth, who marched through France into the
Low Countries in the deep of winter, only to quiet one mutinous city; now,
when all the cities were endangered, he would please himself personally to
come, and speedily with his Army to subdue that stubborn people, as his father
had done Gant: Gant 1539.
and to impose such laws upon them, as should stand, with the pleasure of a
Conqueror, and a Revenger. And now the King as appeared by other letters to
the Governesse, resolved upon a war. 14. and 24.
Therefore in two packets sent by his Majesty from Segovia dated in August, he
appoints her, the place, and number of men she shall raise and pay. Yet in his
first Express, And the King, after he had communicated the joy of his
Daughters birth.
before he opens his determination of levying forces, he acquaints her with the
Queens happy deliverie, who having been two days in labor, was brought a bed
of a daughter, baptized at the holy Font by John Baptista Castaneo the Popes
Nuncia, afterward Urban the seventh, by the name of Clara Isabella Eugenia. The
first of these names was given her from the Saints day on which she was born,
August 12.
the second from her mother, the third in honor of the martyr Eugenius, Clara
Isabella Eugenia.
Bishop of Toledo, whose sacred body, brought out of France, King Philip helped
to bear, the same day that he perceived his Queen to be with child. This is the
Isabella that, as she was born in the heart of the Low Country tumults; so
afterward being married to the Archduke Albert, Brother to the Emperor
Rodolph had the Low Country Provinces and tumults for her Dowry. Approves of
her advice.
His Majesty having passed these complements to his Sister, Directs her what
numbers to raise.
commands her to raise three thousand horse, and ten thousand foot in Germany,
and giving them two months pay, to have them ready, in case they should be
sent for into the Low Countries, And what Commanders to employ.
Of these horse she was to order one thousand to be raised, and commanded by
Erick Duke of Brunswick, five hundred under his Brother Philip, 250 under John
Barnise, the rest under John Valhant. The foot she was to distribute into 33
colors, ten whereof to Count John of Nassa^, brother to the Prince of Orange,
as many to Count Otho Erber stein, eight to Colonel Cremberberg, Sends
Commissions,
the other five to Captain Valdersong. For all these several Officers, the
King sent Commissions the the Governess; together with 300000 Ducats, part
whereof she was to distribute among the said Commanders: and part to others, if
more should be entertained; or any else thought fit to be nominated; And money
to the Governess.
in their places that were already chosen. For which purpose, his Majesty sent
her diverse blanks, signed with his sign manual. Giving reasons to the Princes
of Germany for his levies. Particularly to the Emperor.
Finally, lest any of the Germane Princes should make an ill construction of
his levying those men, he enclosed in her packet letters to them, acquainting
them all with the ground of his design, particularly the Emperor Maximilian,
to whom he explained himself both by Express, and by the mouth of his
Ambassador at Vienna, entreating his Imperial Majesty, for the nearness of
their love and blood, to assist with his authority those levies. But the
Emperor, Who disswades him.
because he had heard, that the Governess and the confederate Gentlemen were
now agreed, commending the wisdom of that policy, diswaded the King from those
Arms and Levies. Perhaps, because the Turk then threatening him, he could not
spare so many men: perhaps, because he thought it an honor to be the Arbiter
and Composer of other Princes quarrels. And offers himself to the Governess to
arbitrate the differences between her and the Covenanters.
Therefore in his Letters to the Governess, the Emperor promised her his
endeavors, if any thing was yet uncomposed. And wrote likewise to the
Covenanters to this effect, That he was much troubled to hear of their
difference with the Governess, and of the stirs that daily followed
thereupon: which because they were in the confine of the Empire, in the
Dominion of the King his Uncle, October. 13.
in Provinces so much by him esteemed, it concerned the Majesty of the Empire,
that he should by his assistance and authority assert the obedience of the
Subiect^ to their Prince. That he hoped these his endeavors would be
acceptable to the Catholic King, and he was sure, they would be safe for the
Confederates. Therefore he advised them in the interim, to attempt no
Innovation, but as Allegiance bound them, to compel the tumultuous people to
be quiet. This Letter, and diverse more of the same subject written to the
Lords, the Emperor sent the Governess to read, and as it should be needful,
to deliver. But the Governess sending copies of them to the King, a good while
exspected his Answer, But her Excellence prays his assistance in the levies.
till the stirs daily increasing, her Excellence receiving new commands from
his Majesty to levy foreign forces, gave thanks to the Emperor Maximiilian,
letting him know, that the present condition of affairs was such, as no
capitulation could be made with an armed Faction without arms. Wherefore
dispatching the Kings letters to the Electours of the Empire, and others,
especially to those that were to raise the men, she beseeched the Emperor,
that the Assistance which he had graciously offered in the Low Countries, he
would please to perform among the Germane Princes, and the Commanders there;
which would be now more opportune, and a far greater favor to the King. And
obtains more then she requested. Whereat the Pr. of Orange chases.
And truly the Emperor did not only this, but likewise by Edict prohibited,
and made it death, for any Germane to bear arms against the King of Spain.
Which among diverse others, how deeply it was resented by the Prince of Orange,
though otherwise subtle and close, he expressed at table, wine laying open the
secrets of his heart. For being invited by Gresser, Agent for the Queen of
England, after he had drunk soundly, And threatens.
the Prince began in great fury to inveigh against the Emperors Edict, That
the Emperor, and the King, and whosoever was of their opinion, deceived
themselves; that not only the Germans would take arms, but a great sort of
other Nations bordering upon the Empire. That the Danes, the Swedes, and many
others would not be wanting, which both would and could help the confederate
Low-countreymen. The rest of the Germane Princes return different answers.
Thus threatening in his rage, after supper he was mollified with a song. But
the Letters which I have mentioned, sent from the King and the Governess to the
Princes of Germany, were by them diversely answered. Triers and Mentz approve of
the Kings design, and offer passage to his man.
The Electours of Trier and Mentz did much approve of the Kings design against
the Rebels and disturbers of the Catholic Religion; promising their
assistance, as befitted good friends and neighbors, both Princes of the
Empire, and allies unto his Majesty; they would therefore give free passage
through all their Towns, and Jurisdictions, to such forces as upon this
occasion should, with the Emperors consent be raised. The like promises were
made by the rest of the Catholic Bishops in Germany. The rest of the
Catholic Princes do the like.
The Duke of Bavaria added, that all men were bound by force of Arms to oppose
such tumults, that as plagues laid cities desolate: and he desired his Majesty
would be very vigilant in it. The Landtgrave of Hessen, and others do the
contrary.
Far different expressions were returned from the heretical Princes; for the
Landtgrave of Hessen, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, excusing themselves in point
of Religion, which would not suffer them to prejudice those of their own
Profession, Novem. 11.
advised the Governess to seek redress without arms, only by allowing the
Confession of Auspurg, Especally the Palsgrave.
and Liberty of conscience. But the Count Palatine, Frederick the third, who
declared himself Defendour of the new Faith in Germany, wrote the most
confident and longest letter of them all. For he not only pleaded to the
Governess the cause of the Low Country men, and maintained their innocence;
but defying the Bishop of Rome, the veneration of holy Images, and the tyranny
of the Inquisitours, concluded, that Religion bound him, not to oppose his
brethren, professing the Faith of Ausburg, and the pure word of God. The
Landtgrave of Hessen, and the Palsgrave not thus contented, persuaded the Duke
of Brunswick, not to engage in a war undertaken merely for Religion, and not
to accept the Command of horse offered to him. Notwithstanding he took it, nor
did any other Commander invited by the King, refuse his Commission, but only
John of Nassau, brother to the Prince of Orange. Charles the ix of France
declares for the K. of Spain.
Nor did Charles the ninth of France, requested by the Governess, fail to
declare himself enemy to these insurrections, commanding by Proclamation, that
none of his subjects should presume to assist the Rebels of the Low Countries,
1565.
with relation (as I conceive) to the mutual promise of Assistance made at
Baion: and particularly fearing, if the Heretics should be masters of the
Netherlands, France would be overflowed with the same filthy sink. Who writes
thanks to the French King, and his intent of coming to the Governess.
I am certain King Philip sent him letters full of thanks, and likewise
signified to the Governess his Intention presently to begin his voyage, for
which all things being now in readiness, he only wanted health; for his
quartane Ague had not yet left him; though he meant not to exspect a perfect
Recovery, October. 2.
but to go forthwith to Madrid, that having settled his affairs, he might from
thence, contemning any danger to his life, A private meeting of the Lords at
Dendermund where they produce Of all which the vigilant Governess had exact
intelligence,
pass over into the Low Countries. This, which was likewise by Bergen and
Montiny, writ from Spain in cipher, began to be believed.

The minds of many were exceedingly troubled at the news, insomuch as the
Prince of Orange, his brother Lewis, the Counts Egmont, Hochstrat, and Horn,
met at Dendermund, betwixt Antwerp and Gant; to communicate the intelligence
which every one of them had received, concerning the Kings coming; and
thereupon to advise what general course was to be held. Though this meeting
was appointed, and came together with all secrecy, yet the industrious
Governess knew all their proceedings. Novem. 12.
And as multitudes of spies always attend a Jealous Prince, Letters,
signifying the Kings displeasure and resolution to be revenged on three Low
country Lords.
there wanted not that kind of men, Eves-droppers, and Hocus-Pocuses, the sum
of whose life is to know and not to be known, which pryed into all their secret
consultations and resolutions. And as far as she could understand, the
Governess wrote to the King, that by many Letters sent from Spain, and there
produced, it was confirmed, that the King incensed at the plunder and spoil of
Churches, was resolved to bring an army into the Low Countries, to punish such
as had either been principalls or accessaries to the fact. In other Letters it
was added, that the Prince of Orange, Egmont, and Horn, were believed at Court
to be the Advisers and Protectours of all these commotions, and therefore the
King aimed chiefly at their Heads. To this effect were read the Letters of
Francisco Alava the King of Spains Ambassador to Charles the ninth, written
from Paris to the Governess, and pretended to be intercepted, which certified
the Governess of the Kings coming with a potent army of Spaniards and Italians,
and of the new League concluded between the Kings, Philip and Charles, A fourth
Lord is added, falsely,
that his Majesty might be the better able to punish the Rebels, and four
Lords, that is, besides the forementioned triumvirate, Peter Etnest, Count
Mansfeld, as he himself told the Governess, he heard it from diverse reported.
but subtily.
Whether all this was cunningly given out, to move the people to despair of
pardon, or really writ from Spain, and by Alava, I leave to indifferent Judges.
Novem. 12.
Sure I am, that the Governess writing to the King, professed she had as yet no
certain knowledge of the Letters sent her by Alava, and said to be intercepted;
and assured Count Mansfeld, that he was in very great esteem with his Majesty,
and that lie was only invented to draw him from the Kings party. The Kings
coming being therefore ascertained by many men's Letters read in that private
Convention of the Lords, the question was put how the King might be prevented
from bringing his Army into the Low Countries. A Quere made whether they should
oppose the King with an army, or admit him.
And when on the one part several ways of resistance were proposed; on the
other part a war was feared, which they could encounter with no
proportionable strength; and that a third sort held it the best course to trust
to the Kings mercy, Both ways seem dangerous.
from which the major part dissented: herein their different opinions
concurred, that to oppose his Majesty's passage into the Low Countries, the
treason would be certain, the victory doubtful; and to admit him, were yet
more dangerous. For now the Breach was so far made, as it would be a madness
to hope for mercy, when they had received an angry and an armed Prince. They
must therefore either fly the place, and leave their country unpeopled to the
Conqueror; or they must set up a new Prince, under whose protection they may
live in safety. This last Proposal seemed the best, They resolve to change
their Prince.
and they might take a singular good occasion, if (now that the Emperor
Maximilian showed himself desirous to compose those differences) under color
of making him the Umpire, they secretly treated to put the Low Countries into
his hands; which would be less subject to censure, because in so doing they
should not strike at Monarchy, but only change their Monarch; Especially,
since they still adhered to one of the House of Austria. And this advantage
would ensue, that the new elected Prince would have so great an obligation laid
upon him, as if their Designs should happily want success, howsoever the
Emperor would be engaged never to desert them, without making their peace with
King Philip Having in this manner consulted, they left Dendermond, full of
cares and doubts, particularly Count Egmont, who either to draw more of the
Nobility to the cause, or that being yet unresolved himself, he had a mind to
try how his friends stood affected, wrote a letter to Count Mansfeld, Novem. 9.
wherein The sum of C. Egmonts letter to Count Mansfeld.
putting him in remembrance of what they had jointly acted in the beginning of
these troubles, he complained of Mansfelds abandoning their friendship without
any just pretense. Then he accused the inconstancy of the Governess, who would
not see that performed which she had promised to the Covenanters: but that she
her self had solicited the King to annull her Act. as forced, and therefore
pressed him to come with an Army, and make his seditious and rebellious
subjects a formidable example to posterity. Finally, Egmont assured him, it was
evident by many men's letters, which he had compared at Dendermond, that the
King resolved to cut off the heads of four Lords (in which number Mansfeld
himself was listed) to keep the rest in obedience. In the last place, he said,
he should be very glad by his answer to know what he would advise him to do.
This Letter Count Mansfeld privately gave the Governess, and with the same
fidelity showed her what he answered. C. Mansfelds Answer.
That no man could justly complain of him, when, from the beginning he went a
long with Egmont and the rest, upon no other ground, but because it seemed
advantageous to Religion, and their Country, that Cardinal Granvel should be
removed, the Inquisition taken away, the rigor of the Emperors Edicts
mitigated, and lastly a general Pardon granted to such as the Governess would
move for to the King. To all which particulars his Majesty having graciously
condescended, he saw no color of a grievance now remaining. He would therefore
freely speak his thoughts, (especially at his Request) that things were gone
too far, to the great contempt of the Divine Majesty, and scandal of the
Christian world. 1565.
That there was time yet left to make some kind of Satisfaction for offenses
past, that is, by so behaving themselves among the present troubles, that when
the King comes, they may meet him, not with a cloudie look, nor such a mind as
can be taxed by any. Touching the report of the Kings anger and intended
revenge, for his own part he feared it not. He had ever been, and ever would be
so faithful to his Sovereigne, that if he pleased to command his attendance in
Spain, he would instantly go thither, and having rendered an account of his
actions, hoped to receive from his Royal Master no little Grace and Benefit.
Nor spoke he this as if Count Egmont could not securely say as much; but that
he might daily add to this security, by cutting off all occasions of
suspicion. And having so often affronted the King, with pretending public
Necessity, they would now at length forbear to press their Prince, to govern
his Provinces by other men's directions. Lastl^, (for thus Mansfeld concluded)
if Egmont would hear his friends advice, he should remain his friend for ever;
if not, he was resolved to value nothing in this world equal with his Honor.
Having read these Papers, and highly commended the constancy of Count The
Governess sends abstracts of both Letters to the King, and writes in count
Mansfelds behalf.
Mansfeld, the Governess sent the heads of both letters to his Majesty,
beseeching him, that since he found so much faith in Mansfeld, especially at
such a time, he would be pleased abundantly to recompense him with the grant of
his just desires, a particular whereof she had annexed to the Letter. This,
moved by the Governess, might perhaps make one suspect these Letters to be
forged by Mansfeld, to ingratiate himself with her Excellence, and to obtain
with more facility those things, for which he had been a long and earnest
suitor to the King; or at least, that he had counterfeited, if not Egmonts
Letter, yet his own Answer to it: But many things offer themselves, Assured of
the truth of his intelligence.
which absolutely clear this doubt; as, Count Egmonts hand, well known to the
Governess; and her intelligence of the truth of Egmonts actions, which may
fright the greatest confidence in the world into a blush, that shall presume to
charge him with such a forgery. Add to this, the reputation and manners of
Count Mansfeld (which manners either absolve or condemn every one) far from
the least imputation of any such deceit; The Governess grievously complains to
the King, that her letters were betrayed in his Court.
and lastly, his constant adherence to the Kings cause. So as the Governess
justly confident in his integrity, commended him as much as she could possibly
to his Majesty; one thing she seemed to admire, that she found in Egmonts
Letter, the very words she had writ in cipher to the King. She therefore
complained to the King, that secrets were brought out of his Court into the
Low Countries. Was any of his Ministers of State so dull-brained, or open
breasted, to suffer these mysterious parts of Government to be scrued out of
his mouth or hands? or so ill-natured and perfidious, as to reveal the
Counsels of his Prince to the enemy? That she certainly knew many copies of
Letters she had sent his Majesty for two years now past, and diverse of the
Originalls themselves, were come to the hands of the Low Country Lords. How
destructive was this to his affairs? how derogatory to the Royal Dignity? She
therefore beseeched the King, that hereafter, he would either see her Letters
burnt, or give them in custody to faithful Servants, that would keep them from
the knowledge of such as were otherwise. But no course was taken to help it, so
great an influence the Prince of Orange had upon the Kings Council.
And yet I find, after this time, the Prince of Orange bragged to Christopher
Assonvil, that every word the King spoke, as well private, as public, was
faithfully conveyed to his ear in the Low Countries. Indeed these discoveries
cost much money; but money cannot be more fruitfully laid out. For it is the
Philosophy of Princes to dive into the secrets of men, leaving the secrets of
Nature to such as have spare time. For which he paid well.
Which being granted, what Councel-chamber can be impervious or inaccessible to
royal bounty, since the Court of so prudent and circumspect a Monarch was
bought by private Persons?

But the Covenanters not content with the ambiguous deliberations of the Lords
at Dendermond; A new Convention at Amsterdam.
the leading men, and such as could be suddenly got together, met at Amsterdam,
unknown to the Prince of Orange, (as he wrote to the Governesse) yet he was
near the town, but peradventure he connived. Where they resolve to beseech the
Emperor to be their Advocate to the King.
It is believed they agreed, at this meeting, to use their utmost endeavors to
keep the King from coming in with an army, and that, either by the mediation
of the Emperor Maximilian; or by a public Revolt from their obedience, to
petition with swords in their hands. And it fell out very commodiously, that
the Diet of the Empire was then to be held at Ausburg, And the Electours to
mediate for them to the Emperor.
where they resolved to petition the Emperor in the name of the
Low-countreymen: but in case he denied their request, then to address
themselves to the Electours, And if he deny them, then to deny to serve him
against the common enemy.
who might signify to the Emperor, that unless herein he would overruled the
King, they (the Electours) could not be able to give him assistance against the
Turk. Nor was it handsome, whilst the King visited the Low Countries with an
army, If no good could be done so, to make a league with the Swisse.
that they, destitute of men and money, should leave themselves exposed to the
injuries of bordering forces. If this succeeded not, they would venture upon
any thing, make a league with the heretical Cantons of the Swisse, and by
their assistance And to puzzle the Spaniards in their says by sending thither
Calvinisticall
Books and Ministers.
(which some say was promised) stop King Philips passage into Savoy. Nay more,
to find the King work at home, they would send to Sivill three thousand of
those Calvinisticall books, of which they had long since consulted with some
Calvinist-ministers (of these twelve were nominated) that should disperse those
Volumes throughout Spain, and turn the Kings mind from going into a foreign
Country. Whereof her Excellence premonishes the King.
This Expedient was committed to the managerie of a Spanish Merchant, lying
then in Antwerp, a hotheaded fellow, and malicious to Catholics. So the
Governesse wrote to the King, and added, December. 18.
that she would lay all the Ports to prevent that plague sore from sailing into
Spain. And is her self vigilant in the Low Countries.
But these deliberations, because sudden and full of fear, did more terrify,
then hurt. Yet in that Assembly this was resolved. The Gentlemen-Covenanters
(for men that are in like danger easily associate) conspired with the
Merchants, The Gentlemen and the Merchants promise to one another mutual
Assistance.
and the rest of the heretical people, and took the Sacrament on both sides to
this purpose, That the Covenanters should protect them, against all men, that
sought to restrain the liberty of Conscience: and the Merchants engaged to
furnish them with money, and their utmost endeavors, The Confession of Auspurg
only to be held forth.
for the common security. But lest the Heretics should be distracted with
multiplicitie of Sects, Lewis of Nassau wrote to the Antwerpers, persuading
them, for a while till things should be settled to lay aside private opinions
in Religion, all to give way to the confession of Auspurg; November. 7.
for so, not only the Electours, who professed that Religion, would be their
earnest Advocates with the Emperor: but likewise the Germane soldiers would
be hardly drawn to fight against the Low-countreymen, their brethren in
Religion; and it was done accordingly. For though the Calvinists hate the
confession of Auspurg, yet (as Religion among Heretics is not their own, but
accidental and translatitious) asking advice as far as Geneva of Theodore
Beza, and he approving this truce of opinions, they subscribed a new form of
discipline like that of Auspurg, which was to be presented to the Emperor at
the next Session: together with a Petition, wherein they prayed, that his
Imperial Majesty would please to patronize, and reconcile them to the King.
Consistories and the Heretics Republic set up.
Moreover they instituted Consistories (which are a kind of Parliament or
general convention) in many cities, according to the pattern of that now begun
at Antwerp, creating Magistrates and Senators, by whose advice (it being first
communicated to the Court of Antwerp to which they gave the pre-eminence) the
whole Republic of the Heretics was to be governed. They enter into league
with the Heretical Princes of Germany.
They likewise made a confederation with the Prince Electour Palatine, and the
rest of the Heretical Princes of Germany, enemies to the house of Austria,
and therefore ready to enter into any league, whereby they might hope, by such
troubles as these, to dispossess the King of Spain (as the Governesse informed
him) of the Low Countries. Novem. 21.
The Governesse was likewise privately informed by the Count of Megen, November.
4.
that Vesterholt was raising one thousand two hundred horse in Saxony for the
Prince of Orange. Arms promised them from France.
At the same time the Hugonots in France set on by Gaspar Coligni, consulted
about sending aid to the Low-countreymen, which was reported to be ten Cornets
of horse, and thirty foot colors; and these levies were to be made in
Germany, by reason of King Charles his Edict commanding that none should be
raised in France. Nay even from Constantinople.
All this the Governesse knew by private letters out of France. Lastly, at the
very same time, in the Consistory of Antwerp, letters were read dated at
Constantinople (from so many and so remote places were the Low-countreymen
encouraged to rebel, either out of malice to the Catholic faith, or to the
house of Austria) sent from John Michese a powerful man, From whence, Michese
the Jew incourages the Low Country Heretics.
and highly favored by the Turkish Emperor. Wherein he advised the Calvinists
of Antwerp, and inflamed their zeal, To proceed as they had valiantly begun, in
rooting out the Catholics; that the Turk had great Designs a foot against the
Christians, and shortly Philip King of Spain would be so engaged in a Turkish
war, that he would not have leisure to think of the Low-countreymen. And
indeed Michese spoke not this at random. Who this Michese was.
He was born a Jew, (for it will not be amiss to speak somewhat of the man, A
Jew that fled from Spain to Antwerp.
illustrious for mischief, and often mentioned in the history of Cyprus, and
other destructive wars) and when he was a youth, fle^ out of Spain, for fear
his ill-dissembled superstition might be discovered; and living long in
Antwerp, From thence to Venice.
he was much esteemed by many persons of honor, particularly by Mary Queen of
Hungary, then Governesse of the Low Countries; from thence impudently stealing
away a maid of noble parentage, he went to Venice; and there had the confidence
to treat with the Senate, about assigning a place for the Jews, And from Venice
sailed to Constantinople.
in some of the Islands belonging to that Signiorie: his Suit being with scorn
rejected, first he made a voyage to Constantinople, and there married a rich
Jew; then he passed into Cilicia, to Selimus, the son of Soliman, Where he
ingratiated himself with Selimus.
and finding the Prince in a vacancie of affairs, or not disposed to serious
business, being altogether inslaved to his pleasures; Michese, as he knew all
the points in the compass of Luxury, feeding him every day according to the
variation of humor, to the height of appetite with exquisite and new delights,
became one of his Minions, or Privadoes: and by how much he excelled in the art
of flattery, or the artifice of pleasures, by so much he preceded all others
in the Princes favor. Therefore Sultan Soliman was easily entreated by his
son, to grant (what the Venetians had denied) a City and Territory for the
Jews. Nay Selimus after he came to the Crown, made him of his Council of
War: much about the time, when the Moors in Spain resolving to take up arms,
implored the assistance of the Turkish Emperor, to a people of the same
Religion, that in hope of aid from the Turk, intended a war against King
Philip. Nor was the Emperor Selimus averse from sending an army into Spain;
And moved him to assist the Moors in Spain ready to begin a war.
and whilst Michese advised him to it, because he saw it pleased Selimus, his
son in law, Achmet (who had infinitely indeared himself to Selimus, by his
rare policy used in concealing his father Soliman's death at Zighet) he
doubted not but the design would shortly take; Of which he advertises the
Low-countreymen.
and therefore, by that which I have mentioned, animated his friends at
Antwerp, putting them in hope of a rebellion of the Moors. But Mustapha and
others voting for a war with Cyprus, Michese came over to their opinion, And
promoves a war with Cyprus.
and when the Emperor was doubtful which way to incline, Michese alone turned
the scales, and carried it for Cyprus; so great was his envy to the Venetians,
In hatred to the Venetians.
whose incivilities and scorn he often with much passion mentioned. And in hope
to be King of Cyprus.
Besides he had a foolish hope to be created King of Cyprus, vainly grounding
upon some words spoken by Selimus at his table. And that his endeavors might
be answerable to his Counsel, they that wrote the history of that war
affirm, De^^gneth the siring of Venice Ant. Mar. Gratian. de bell. Cypr.
it was he that laid the plot for blowing up of the Arcenall at Venice, which
not only shook the foundation of the city, and beat down the buildings round
about it, with a huge destruction of men; but even the neighboring towns and
cities were afraid they should be shattered with that Earthquake. Those that
gave fire to the powder, being sent from the Turk, by advice of Michese, to the
end that so great a loss might weaken the Venetians, and render them in no
capacity for the war. And if, a few days before, the better part of their
powder had not been shipped away for Corcyra that City, the fairest in the
world, had been utterly ruined: and one man had, in a moment, ended the war
of Cyprus. So great a fire can spleen kindle in any man's bosom, raised even in
the midst of the water. The Lowcountreymen by his letters animated.
Among the Low-countreymen Michese his letters and encouragement did no little
mischief. For this news putting them in heart, Begin to collect money.
it was decreed by the Consistory of Antwerp, that whereas an opportunity was
now offered to strengthen their party, they should make up among themselves as
great a sum as possibly they could, to be ready upon all Emergencies; which
was with great zeal immediately put in execution. Which they subtly offer to
the King.
At which time Count Hochstrat (Lieutenant Governor of Antwerp for the Prince
of Orange) sent a Petition to the Governesse, delivered him by the Heretics of
that city, wherein they desired liberty of Conscience for themselves, and
their brethren, for which they offered the King three hundred thousand Florens,
which was supposed to be the Artifice of some, that they might with less
suspicion go to and fro to gather money; and in the mean time, both deceive the
Spaniard, that would be easily tempted with so much gold, and likewise their
own party, that would more willingly open their purse for obtaining the free
exercise of Religion, then for the maintaining of a war. Unless perhaps that
vast sum was offered to set forth the greatness of their faction. And
therefore many copies of the Petition were sent about the Provinces, subscribed
by the Gentlemen and Merchants that engaged for payment of the money: thereby
to advance their reputation and to fright the Governesse with so great a power.
But her Excellence, The Governesse contemns their offer.
nothing moved with the vain noise of their wealth, did not so much as
vouchsafe an answer to Hochstrat. The Petition it self she sent to the King,
Novem. 18.
to quicken him upon so many provocations.

In the interim she her self, The same of the Kings coming staggers the
Conspiratours. Whom the Governesse endeavors to work upon with letters and
promises.
knowing all that passed in their Consistories and Assemblies, when she saw
that diverse of the Conspiratours, believing the news of the Kings coming, grew
very fearful, thought it best to make her advantage of that fear; and
therefore writing letters to them, full of affection and confidence, instructed
the messengers to make them large promises to some, which she knew were no
enemies to Religion, she wrote letters upon those blanks the King had sent her
signed with his sign Manual; wherein suiting her words to the times, she
exhorted them to defend the Cause of Religion to keep the people in their
ancient Duty and Obedience: Not without Artifice,
and these were to be so delivered, that they should not be altogether
concealed from such as were not invited, whereby jealousies and differences
might arise among them. And success.
And it happened very conveniently, that at the same time, the Governesse
received some letters from the King writ with his own hand to the Prince of
Orange, and some other of the Low Country Lords, expressing much affection to
them, which she presently sent to the press, and had them published; the
result of all this was, That partly out of fear the Lords would desert them,
whose resolutions the Confederates perceived to waver: partly out of hope,
which they were full of, because they saw themselves courted and honored by
the King: partly out of malice to others, which as they thought suspected and
hated them; diverse of the Covenanters, leaving the public meetings of the
Conspiratours, returned to their own houses, to follow their private business:
or came over and submitted to the Governesse, Whereupon, the Governesse having
recovered her spirits,
striving rather to merit the Kings favor, then his indignation. Which great
defection elevating her spirits, the Governesse resolved to use her utmost
force and policy to scatter their seditious Congregations. Begins her great
business with Prayer and Fasting.
And to begin the right way by craving a blessing from God, she wrote letters
in the Kings name to all the Bishops and chiefest Prelates, to appoint in all
their Cities Fast-dayes, and public Prayers, and to use all other means for
appeasing the Divine wrath. To the French King she notifies the Hugonots
preparations for a war.
She likewise sent an Agent into France to Francis Alava, the King of Spains
Ambassador, to inform him of the preparations made by the French Hugonots: and
another into Germany, to the Emperor, to pre-acquaint him with the Petition,
that was to be presented at the Diet, To the Emperor the Low-countreymens
intentions to petition him at the Diet: and how the Electours threaten him.
and to give him intelligence how he was threatened by the Electours, Augustus
Duke of Saxony, and Frederick Count Palatine. And truly Count Mansfeld would
have offered the Emperor, that he, himself would either convert the Duke of
Saxony to his Allegiance; or take away the power of his disloyalty, by
employing the sons of John Frederick, that bore an inveterate malice to Duke
Augustus, for depriving their Father of the Electorate: and if they should be
encouraged to take arms, no doubt but they would involve all Saxony in a War,
Count Mansfelds advice upon this point. Which the Governesse commends but makes
no use of.
and Augustus would have enough to do, to extinguish the fire in his own
Dukedom, without scattering it in another Dominions. But the Governesse could
not at that time spare Count Mansfeld, she therefore held it sufficient to
commend his design, and to inform the King of it, and his readiness to serve
his Majesty, pretermitting no occasion to name him for the advance of the
Counts former Suit; and perhaps he himself had an eye upon it, when he made
this offer, which undoubtedly would more advance his favor with the King, then
his trouble in Saxony. Thus many proffer huge service to such as they know will
not accept it; especially if they think themselves able to do their business
without the profferer's help. She increases the soldiery.
Moreover it was Mansfelds plot (the Counts of Aremberg, and Megen, being of
the same opinion) that the number of soldiers should be increased in the
Low Countries, and the Governors attended with greater Guards: and presently
the Governesse directing her Letters to them, December. 15.
advised them severally, And writes to the Governors of Provinces, to take
away the Heretical meetings and exercises, in this manner.
Not to suffer the Heretics to have any more meetings. That she knew besides
their Sermons, that were with limitation permitted, they held I know not what
Consistories, and setting up Schools for Children, bred them to impious
Opinions. That they married, buried, and baptized in a new manner, published
filthy Books, and posted up Pictures in mockery of God and the King: and at
their Calvinisticall Suppers, the multitude then meeting, solemnly professed,
that they had broke the League with Catholic Religion, and were resolved never
to make a Peace, but constantly to endeavor the extirpation of it, Root and
Branch. And yet, was it possible, men should so far forget all Modesty and
Shame, as to affirm that these abominations were licensed by the Governess,
when she permitted them Sermons? That she was not so foolishly wicked, as not
to distinguish things so distant, or to suffer so execrable impiety. Therefore
in the Kings name, she commanded the Governors of the Provinces, that as many
as they should apprehend at any Heretical meetings, Sermons only excepted,
they should proceed against them as Traitors to the King, and disturbers of
the public Peace. Which Letters she seconds with an Edict somewhat severer
then her custom was.
To these Letters she joined an Edict, which clearly explained every particular
thereof, and imposed penalties upon the contumacious, somewhat more sharp and
severe, then well consisted with her nature. I suppose, Grief made a deep
impression in her mind, as if all that mischief came of Sermons, which her too
much fear and lenity had toleratrd. Wherefore her Excellence, December. 16.
sending the King a Transcript of the Edict, said, She was forced to use that
rigor, because the detestable carriage of the Heretics, contrary to
agreement, so required. And she hoped, if their other exercises were once
suppressed; that Sermons, whenever the King would declare the grant to be
void, and disallow them, would be likewise banished the Low Countries. Egmont
only dissenting.
She added, that when the Edict was penned, all the Privy Council consented,
but only Egmont, who said that Edict would be an Alarm to the Low Countries:
Whereupon the Conspiratours hasten their design for a War.
and indeed either upon that occasion, or because the Church-robbers, and such
as met at Sermons in prohibited places were punished; they hastened the war
which they meant not should begin, till a long while after. To this end, they
met more frequently in their Consistories and Committees, many Letters passing
by the hands of Gyles Cleark to the confederate Gentlemen, and from them to the
Merchants and Consistorians. By all which it was finally resolved, that
whenever the Governess should use force, they would be ready to take the
field, making their levies partly in Saxony, Brederod made General.
partly in the Palatinate: but the Palsgraves offer should be first embraced.
Commission for General was given to Henry Brederod, 1567.
with a list of the names of Antwerp Merchants that engaged for money to raise
men. With Lewis of Nassau, who solicits friends, and collects money in Germany
and the Low Countries
Brederod immediately named Collectours, and made Philip Marnixius of S.
Aldegund, Treasurer of the Army. Lewis of Nassau undertook to solicit Augustus
Duke of Saxony. For though Saxony was then embroyled in a War between John
Frederick (son to the late Electour John Frederick) and his cosin-germane by
the fathers side, Augustus Duke of Saxony, de facto; yet Lewis liked the
employment, because he hoped by authority of the Germane Princes (that were
active in it) the difference would be soon composed, and he should from thence
be furnished with stout and well armed soldiers for the Low Countries. But
because the war continued, But the Governess puts rubs in their way.
John Frederick despising the conditions of Peace, and that the Governess
(knowing the Covenanters design) to trouble Lewis his negotiation kept some
faithful Agents in Augustus his Army, which lay before the city of Goth,
therefore the Covenanters not relying upon this slow assistance, met at the
Prince of Oranges City Breda, They meet at Breda.
where these three things were decreed, as the Governess sent the King
intelligence by Alphonso de Lapes a French man; Endeavoring to draw Egmont
into their new League. By Letter.
That they should frame a Letter to invite Count Egmont to join with them; give
an account of their proceedings to the Governess by a new Petition, and in the
mean time levy men even in the bosom of the Netherlands. And a Letter was
writ to Egmont, by the Prince of Orange, Hochstrat, and Breder^d, desiring him
to give in his name to their Association: for by this new conjuncture, they
promised to silence the preaching Ministers in the Low Countries; whereby they
would either take away any pretense of the Kings coming with an Army, or else,
if when all things were quieted, his Majesty (though entreated) should come
armed into the Provinces; they might justly unite their endeavors and forces
to stop the Kings passage, and preserve their Country from Tyranny, which by
the rigor of punishments, building of Forts, Spanish Garrisons, and forcing of
the Low Countries was certainly intended. But they persuade not.
Egmont imparted this to a friend, either out of love, or for advice, or
perhaps that he might acquaint the Governess with their letter, and his answer;
for he likewise showed him h^s absolute denial to join with them.
Notwithstanding the Governess confided not in Egmont, who, as she now feared
all things, suspected this to be merely artifice and deceit. But Brederod, They
offer to bring a new Petition to the Governess.
who was to present this Petition from the Covenanters, desired a safe conduct
from the Governess, for himself and forty horse; which she, long since
offended at such Treaties, absolutely denied, Feb. 2.
and commanded that if he came to the gates, they should give fire upon him.
Not admitted. It is sent.
Whereupon Brederod contented himself with sending the Petition; and with it
his particular complaint. Containing many complaints.
The Covenanters remembered the Duchess, that in August last they met by her
command, to disarm and quiet the people. They complained, that by letters
directed to the Magistrates from her Highness, they were prohibited to exercise
the Ministry of the Gospel in those places where they were allowed to have
Sermons; when notwithstanding that under the notion of Sermons, all other rites
were comprehended. For it is the solemn custom where Sermons are permitted,
there likewise to tolerate all appendences to the same Religion; and they
accordingly explained the toleration to the People, and promised them the free
use of Sermons, and all their other Rites, of which freedom the People being
now debarred, they claimed promise of the Covenanters and every day implored
their faith, by new Expostulations and Letters, some of which they had annexed
to this Petition. Lastly, they were amazed and grieved to see the Low Countries
every day frighted with great forces, themselves expelled the Cities, watched
in the fields, and every where reputed for enemies to the State. All which
being inconsistent with their own Loyalty and Honor, and the Tranquillity of
the people; they humbly prayed her Highness, that according to her Princely
word obliged under her hand and seal, she would both secure the Covenanters and
suffer the People to hear Sermons, and those things which always go along with
Sermons. For the better effecting whereof, 1566.
they humbly desired, that her Excellence would please to disband the soldiers
lately raised, and call in her Edict contrary to the capitulation. And many
demands.
For which they should be so much bound to his Majesty and her Highness, that
both their Dignities should by them be ever valued far above their own lives or
fortunes. But otherwise, in spirit they foresaw a great destruction of the
people and the imminent ruin of the Nation; the foretelling whereof, and
laboring to avert it as much as in them lay, would hereafter free them, if not
from sorrow, yet from any crime. This Petition the Governess communicated to
her Privy Counselors, Febr. 16.
and a few days after, by their advice, returned answer to Brederod (withal
commanding it should be printed and published) the heads whereof I shall
briefly give you. She understood not, But the Governess in her Answer grants
them nothing.
she said, who those Gentlemen were, or those People of the Low Countries, in
whose name this Petition was presented; when many of those Gentlemen that
petitioned in April last, did not only profess themselves to have received
satisfaction; but daily came to offer their services to the King. That she
only tolerated Sermons, and that so much against her will, as may testify how
far she is from giving them power to appoint Consistories, create
Magistrates, to levy taxes, to collect above twenty hundred thousand Florens,
to confound the marriages of Catholics and Heretics, and consequently their
Successions and Honors. Besides the Calvinisticall Suppers which they had, and
Congregations; in most part whereof, since they detracted from the Authority of
the Prince, and his subordinate Officers, and sought by degrees to introduce a
new Commonwealth, they might see how likely it was that these things (which
they call only Ceremonies of Religion) should be permitted by the Governess,
to the so great Dishonor of God and the King. That indeed she had capitulated
with them, and that the capitulation was and shall be observed; but not in
things prejudicial to Religion, and the Royal Authority. But why should they,
that complain of the breach of Articles, pass over in silence, That since
their own agreement in the month of August, so many faithless and
sacrilegious Villainies have been done; Churches destroyed, Religious Persons
turned out of their Monasteries; Heretical Gospellers from foreign parts, by
force of Arms brought to preach, in places where their Sermons were never heard
before; Cities and Provinces by their Letters or Emissaries solicited to mutiny
and rebel; and diverse other foul things committed, whereof the Petitioners
themselves were Authors: for under their Protection, the people have presumed
to seize upon his Majesty's Magazines; to expel his Officers; at the ringing
of a Bell, to muster in the fields; to destroy Monasteries and Gentlemen's
houses with fire and sword; to possess themselves of Towns, and marking out
all Catholics for the slaughter, the Governess her self not excepted: they
would have made a general Massacre in the Low Countries, if the Traitors
Letters to them of Valenciens had not been intercepted, and so their horrid
Design by Gods goodness prevented. That by the premises they may perceive how
unseasonably they petition for her Edict to be revoked, and the Soldiers
disbanded, that is, in other words, for Justice to be disarmed, and exposed to
the injuries of the wicked. Let them not cozen themselves, she would do neither
of both; but was resolved to guard the Commonwealth, if need should be, with
new Laws and Soldiers: and not to lay down, especially at this time, the sword
that God puts into Princes hands. She therefore advised them to forbear
meddling with Public Affairs, and every one to mind his private business, that
they may not shortly force the King at his coming to forget his native
Clemency. That she her self will use her utmost endeavors, to save the
Low Countries from the Ruin threatened by these popular Tumults, which they
have raised.

The End of the fifth Book.
The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The sixth Book.
BUT whilst the pen was thus employed, C. Brederod prepares men and arms.
Brederod raised some Forces at Antwerp, and upon receipt of these Letters from
the Governesse, made have to increase his number; of which he carried with him
above 1400 to Viana, a Town of his own in Holland, fortified to that end a
little while before. So do the rest of the Confederates.
Part of these men marched by land, part was transported in seven Ships,
followed with a Uessell laden with Arms and Ammunition. It was said that
William Count Lume a Marcha, Escanbechius, Villers, and Malberg were to bring
thither 1500 horse from the Covenanteers; and that Lewis of Nassau was likewise
expected there, with the German Forces under his Command; that having mustered
the Army at Viana, they might send them into several parts, as occasion should
require.

This rejoiced the Heretics, The Heretics rejoicing
who now openly bragged that at length their cause was well followed, and the
Nobility revolting from the King, had cut off all hope of pardon; That it was
not to be doubted, but that besides the Counts Hochstrat, and Horn, Orange
himself would declare for them; nor durst Brederod presume as he had done, but
that he relied on higher powers: And many flattering up Count Brederod.
though it was conceived, that amidst those troubles, he aimed at the
Principality of Holland, whereunto he pretended a Title, and to that private
end used the Assistance of the Lords. His Ambition was flatter^d by the
Covenanteers, but in the mean time every one had their particular Design.

Wherefore a while after, The first revolt of the Cities.
most of the principal Cities of the Low Countries, Bolduc.
Antwerp, the Bus, Vtrecht and Maestriecht, Amsterdam, Groeningen, Tournay
(besides Valenciens and others) by the increase of their Soldiers seemed to
threaten a desertion from the King. Vtrecht.
Anthony Bomberg of Antwerp fell upon the Bus, Mastriecht.
a Town of Brabant, Bomberg one of the Conspirators invade Bolduc.
and took it by the help of the Heretics that were the stronger party: he
was lately fled thither, out of the storm of the French commotions, wherein he
served under the Prince of Conde; from thence being rebandied to his Country,
as he was of an Unquiet restless Spirit, he bounded again into the Belgic
Tumults; and increased the number of the Covenanteers. But the Governesse
having formerly sent Merodius, Lord of Peter Semy, and Scheiff Chancellor of
Brabant, to settle the Motions of that Town, when she heard they Could not do
it, her Excellence commanded the Count of Megen, to draw toward the Town with
some Troops of Horse: directing withal Her Letters at the same time both to
the Citizens of the Bus, and to her agents there, Graciously conferring with
the Citizens about receiving a Garrison into their City, and restoring it to
the ancient Privileges; and giving Instructions to Her Agents for pressing it
to the Magistrates. The Letters were intercepted by Bomberg, And coz^ning the
Citizens enrages them against the Governesses Agents.
in place whereof he counterfeited two others, as written from the Governesse
proudly to the Citizens, and deceiptfully to her Agents: and when he read them
to the Magistrate, having given out among the people, that the town should
have been betrayed by Merodius, and the Chancellor, the furious Multitude
flocked about their Houses, railing upon them for Traitors, and besieged them
a day and a night, till Bomberg had ripened his Plot. Who taking the incensed
Rabble before their fury cooled, the rarest time for Mischief, persuaded them
that Count Megen was the principal Traitor, And against Count Megen.
and that they should therefore come upon him whilst he expected but the word
for entering of the Town. They easily believed that Count Megen would attempt
it, to revenge the private Iniuryes done to his Town of Megen by those of the
Bus: which being their neighbors and the stronger, had oppressed them. Bomberg
therefore takes upon him the Command in chief; and instantly raising 800 men,
and planting some great Cannon on the walls when the Count marched up, he
unexpectedly fired and beat him back, Whom they beat from the Walls.
with the loss only of his Plot upon the Town, and an affront received,
which he deeply resented.

Count Megen, C. Megen enters Vtrecht,
not having then sufficient forces to lay seige to so strong a place, marched
to Vtrecht; for this was in his Orders from the Governesse, and the charge was
stricter, because she feared that Town, by reason of the neighborhood of
Viana, which was the general Rendezvous of the Covenanteers. And they of
Vtrecht, because their lands daily s^ffered by the incursions of Brederods
Soldiers, willingly received a Garrison from the Count, and by his directions
presently built a Fort upon the bank of the River Leck, right against Viana.
Nor was Brederod less acti^e, but in the interim having settled Viana, and C.
Brederod Amsterdam
and being called to Amsterdam by the Gheuses, he came thither disguised, and
then in his own opinion his hope stood fair for the Principality of Holland.

At the same time James Marnixius, Toulouse aims to be Lord of Zeland
Lord of Toulouse, one of the Covenanteers shipped 600 men at Antwerp in three
bottoms, and sent them down the water into Zeland; March. 2.
hoping, whilst other parts were in combustion, unobserved in the Tumult, and
assisted by the Pretour of Middleburgh, to possess himself of Vlushing, and
the whole Island of Walcheren, which is the Head of Zeland. But the Governesse
was before him, for she had made Cattey a faithful and valiant Gentleman,
Governor of Vlushing, and commanded him to carry some Regiments from the
Marches of Flanders, and draw them out in order of battle before Walcheren.
Therefore when the Tholousians came within sight of the Island, But is
disoppointed.
they were easily beat back; and vainly expecting Brederod, who was kept in
action by Megen, (that appeared with his horse sometimes before Amsterdam,
sometimes before Viana) they fairly passed the River again into Brabant, but
at Ostervell, a village near Antwerp, He makes a stand near Antwerp.
they made a halt; and aiming at things above their strength, pitched their
Tents upon the banks of Scheldt, and there entrenched: From whence he frights
the neighbors.
and daily increasing with multitudes of Exiles and Outlawes that fled unto
them for protection, they sent them out in parties to the adjoining Towns and
Villages; where they robbed and fired the Churches, returning to the Army
loaded with spoil; and frighting or encouraging Antwerp: according to the
several factions within the City. But the Governesse particularly fearing
Antwerp, Beavor is sent against him with this command.
lest Toulouse might bring in his Army, and strengthen the Gheuses, calling to
her Philip Lanoy, Lord of Beavor, a noble and industrious commander, she said,
I call God to witness, I am unwilling, and with much reluctation forced to a
War; the Fame of Uictory, (a glory, that has wrought with many Women, and
might with me, out of the sense of my Fathers invincible and martial Blood) I
never aspired unto, in my Province of the Low Countries. But since with
stubborne-natured and implacable wicked men, neither by indulgence nor pardon I
have been able to effect any thing, but only the lessening of my Authority
and their fear; truly I should not lay to heart either the cause of Religion,
or of the King and Country, if I should not at last, by making new examples,
punish their perfidiousnesse, imboldened by my too much Lenity; and by force of
Arms (which through your valor I may easily effect) endeavor to destroy
these Enemies and Rebels, sometimes bringing in Heresy to raise Tumults,
sometimes plotting to take Arms and breaking into open Hostility. Courage
therefore, Beavor, for I have chosen thee, to revenge this Treason to Majesty
Divine, and Humane. And since it is necessary to be speedily at Ostervell, take
thy Commission and be gone; fight with Toulouse, whose tumultuary Forces
without opposition plunder the Country, terrible only to such as entertain
them. Be sure that pity move thee not to give them quarter upon any terms;
but those wicked men that have committed unpardonable Villainies, do thou,
without pause or mercy, destroy with fire and sword. Having thus instructed the
General, her Excellence commanded him to take out of the Garrison of Bruxells
300. Musketteres, and join to them the Flanders Horse, lately called back from
Wallacron, under the command of Valentine Pardieu Lord of Mott, Valentine
Pardieu.
with the Foot companies of the Counts Aremberge, and Barlamont. Besides, she
gave him many of her own Lifeguard, and enjoined him with this Army to march
against Toulouse. The Prince of Orange hinders the Antwerpers from Sal^ying.
The Prince of Orange that governed Antwerp, imagining what the Governesse
would do, had took order the day before Beavor came to Ostervell, that the
Bridge between that and Antwerp should be broken: lest the Gheuses sallying out
of Antwerp, should help the Tholousians (as he signified to the Governesse by
Marius Carduin) or more probably lest, to succor Beavor, the Bridge should
give passage to the Catholics, whose cause he could not desert, nor would
defend. Also by his command, the next day, all the ports of Antwerp were shut,
the Citizens wondering what should be his reason; They fight at Ostervell.
when on the sudden hearing the thunder of Cannon hard by the Town, The
Citizens of Antwerp.
they ran to the walls, and saw a Battle fought at Ostervell. They knew the
Ensigns of both Armies, See the Battle from the walls. They act their
different wishes to both sides.
displayed along the River side, and almost heard the cries both of those
that charged, and fell. Nor did all the Town behold that Martial Scene with
the same wishes, but shouted according to their several inclinations, with
diverse kinds of clamor, as if they had been upon a Stage: sometimes
chearefully encouraging their Party, sometimes doubtful, and crying shame
upon them, they shook their hands and moved their bodies, as if they
themselves were really in the Field, striking or avoiding Blows. Till the
routed Tholousians fled. For Beavor had been so quick in his march, that
coming upon them before they could well arm themselves, The Tholousians
defeated.
and repair to their Colors, they had scarce time to put their men in Order
of Battle. Yet for a while they stood. At first their number imboldened them,
and at last their Houses and Fortifications saved them. But those being fired,
part of them were burnt in their own dwellings; some few slain in the Field,
but the most forced to leap in the River, and either drowned, or as they swam,
shot in the backs. Toulouse himself despairing of Releife or Pardon took a
Barn, and was there burnt. Their General burned.
There fell at this Battle (the first that was fought with the Low Country
Rebels) 1500. of the Gheuses. About 300. were taken prisoners, and all put to
the Sword by Beavors command, because it was conceived the Antwerpers would
sally out, and assist the Remainder of their conquered Friends. And indeed when
the Calvinists saw their Brethren routed, The Calvinists would have sallyed out
of Antwerp to help their Fellows. But finding themselves locked in they grew
rageous.
and put to flight (for it troubled not the Lutherans, who hate Calvinists
far more then they do Catholics) presently taking up Arms, they marched
directly to the Bridge to succor their distressed Party. But when they found
the Bridge broken down, and saw the Ports shut up, they ran through the
Streets, as if they had been drunk, and cried Arm, Arm. And in four hours
space 14000. men were come together, having neither any certain General, nor
resolution whether to make way through the Ports, or turn their fury upon
those that kept them in. They say Toulouse his Wife, in Antwerp, helped forward
this combustion. For understanding the Defeat and Danger of her Husband,
Tholouse's wife sets them on.
(his Death as yet she knew not) almost out of her wits, she ran about the
Town, howling, and crying to the Calvinsts for Assistance or Revenge. And now
the Prince of Orange (with Count Hochstrat (meeting these furious Rebels, The
Prince of Orange opposes them with danger to himself.
doubted not by the Majesty of his presence, and their great opinion of him,
easily to quiet this Distemper, and began to give them reasons why the Bridge
was broke, for fear the conquering Army, having a Party within the Town,
should make themselves Masters of it. But the rest of his words were drowned
with hideous cries and Railings. They called him Traitor to the Cause, and
then he found by experience, The Insurrection of the Calvinists increases.
that Majesty without strength is not safe among the incensed multitude. Nay
one of those Calvinisticall Rogues set a Pistol to the Prince his breast, as if
he would give fire upon him: so much dares the basest Rascal animated by his
contagious Fellows. The Prince of Orange therefore thought it well for the
present, if he could get off; for the number and boldness of the Calvinists
increased. And now seizing upon the Merian Bridge, and taking the Cannon out of
the Magazine, they drew them upon their carriages, They take up Arms.
and planted them against the Court, resolving to set up a new Magistrate;
madly and barbarously proclaiming that all the Clergy and Religious should be
turned out of the Town. Nor less active on the other part, The Catholics and
Lutherans march against them led by the Prince of Orange.
was the Prince of Orange, who taught by his late danger, commanded six
Companies of the Garrison Soldiers to guard the Pi^zza, and the Mint, and
drawing after him a huge sort of Lutherans, joined them to the Catholics,
whereof no less then 8000 had armed themselves. The Catholics and Lutherans
formed into a Body, with Colors flying marched to the Palace of Justice, and
there made a Stand, ready to defend it, if the Calvinists should attempt any
thing; and these, as if they would fight, came on, and presenting their Muskets
seemed to expect the word. When the Prince of Orange, attended by all the
Senate, and a strong Guard of Soldiers, The Calvinists terrifyed.
came to the Calvinists, and with a commanding countenance, advised them to lay
down Arms, if they had any Demands to make, they might be more easily obtained
without Tumult: if they did otherwise, he swore he would be a perpetual Enemy
to the name of Calvin. Whereat the Calvinists seeming to be dismayed submitted,
as if it were in Honor to the Prince; when indeed they found themselves much
too weak for the Catholic and Lutheran Forces, to which the Italian and
Spanish Merchants flocked in great numbers armed, fearing they should finally
be plundered by the Calvinists, who had either to that end begun the Tumult, or
at least would so conclude. Therefore Hostages being given and received on both
sides, and quieted upon conditions
the Calvinists upon certain conditions (which both they and the Prince of
Orange took their Oaths to see observed) for the present laid down Arms:
which notwithstanding were shortly taken up again, both by the Calvinists and
Lutherans, when they heard of the Siege and Danger of Valenciens, The seige of
Valenciens.
occasioned in this manner.

Among the towns that after the Church Robberyes, refused to submit unto
authority, one was Valenciens, animated by a strong faction of Heretics, The
Condition of the City.
and by their own nature; being like the rest of the people of Haynolt,
impatient of Subjection; insomuch as they have a proud Proverb, that Haynolt is
only subject to God, and the Sun. And they were the freer, because of their
Vicinity to France, which being considered the Valencenians were ever ruled
with a gentler hand, but with a more attentive eye. The Governesse was very
fearful, lest the French if they stirred at that time might first lay hold
upon this key to the frontiers, especially because they knew that one Grange of
Narbon a Calvinist Minister by his French Lectures had now confounded all in
Valenciens, and much increased the commerce between the Valencenians, The
Valencenians commanded by her Excellence to receive a Garrison.
and the French. The Governesse having many times written to the Magistrate
about it, at last, when she found her self strong enough, she sent an express
commanding him to receive a Garrison into the Town, of those men commanded by
Philip Norcarmius of St Aldegund, Lieuetenant Governor of Haynolt for the
Marquess of Bergen then Ambassador in Spain: December. 1567.
And that by these Soldiers nothing was intended but the Authority of the
Magistrate, and Concord of the People. They seem willing,
Norcarmius coming to the Town in the Evening was met by Commissioners from
the Magistrate of Valenciens, affirming they had ever been and ever would be
faithful to the King, and to the Governesse; withal they demanded, how many
men he would quarter in in the town, desiring him to be contented with as few
as might be. But in the morning, But at their appointed time fly off.
at the time when they had promised to receive his Garrison, new commissioners
came from the Burghers and told him, that by the industry of the Heretics
running all night from house to house, the People had changed their minds, and
were resolved not to admit the Garrison, and to write their Reasons for it to
the Governesse. But Norcarmius terribly offended with that Inconstancy and
affront departed, threatening Ruin to the City. Their Messengers he carried
away Prisoners, but because that was against the Law of Nations, four days
after he sent them back, by command from the Governesse. For these Reasons.
And indeed the Town presented her Excellence their Reasons for not admitting
a Garrison of Norcarmius his men, as well because they feared he would Use them
cruelly, and like Enemies, by reason of his different Religion; as likewise
they were persuaded that Garrison was to have come in, without the consents of
the Prince of Orange, Count Egmont, Horn, and Hochstrate. But if those four
Lords would engage, for the Security of the Town, it should immediately
submit. Which offended C. Egmont.
This touched Egmont to the quick, who of the four was only present when these
Letters were read in Senate, he therefore professed, that he and his Colleagues
had grievous Injury done them by these men. And much more the governesse.
But the Governesse thought her self most iniuried, her Power being looked
upon as inferior to the Authority of these Lords. Therefore implacably
offended, Who resolves to beseige them
she resolved to revenge this Scorn, and no longer expecting the kings
Presence; sent for Norcarmius, and Cressonerius an excellent Engineere,
determining by their advise to lay speedy S^ege to Valenciens, appointing
Commanders, and giving Order for all necessaryes. But first sends again to
them to receive a Garrison.
By Norcarmius she sent a Letter (writ in the Style of Anger) brief and
decretory, to be delivered to the Magistrate, before he should at^acque the
Town; wherein she commanded the Valencenians in the Kings name immediately to
receive four Troops of Horse, and as many companies of Foot yiedling
Obedience to Norcarmius, Governor of their province; which if they refused to
do, she declared them Enemies to their King and Country. And upon their
refusal declares them Rebels.
They obstinately stood out, and therefore, by the Kings Edict, were
proscribed, and their Goods confiscated. The Reasons of this Proceeding the
Governesse wrote severally to the Provinces; That she had often admonished the
Valencenians, Writing to the Provinces.
not to suffer the Heretics, December. 14
contrary to her agreement with the Covenanters, 1566.
to possess themselves of Catholic Churches, and to preach within the City:
nor to protect the Heads of the Conspiracy, Guy Brare of Mons.
especially Grange and his Companion, five years before condemned at Tournay;
if they could not do it of themselves, 1567.
then to receive a Garrison from Norcarmius to that end; but they contemning
both these Proposalls, SHE in the King^ name declared them Tratours, and
besieged them, to bring down their pride: Commanding upon pain of death, that
no one, either with Advise, Arms, money, or otherwise should presume to assist
them, or go armed within their Liberties, or be present at any of their
Meetings; and that whosoever should do the contrary, did it against his King
and Country. The Gheuse^ every where perplexed.
This News troubled the whole Faction of the Gheuses, and because it much
concerned them to encourage their Friends in such an Exigent, presently Letters
were directed from the Consistories of diverse Cities to the Valencenians
bidding them be resolute, and fearelesse, for shortly the besieged should be
relieved: and the besiegers called away to quench a fire kindled in another
place.

Nor were these vain Brags. The Tournay-Gheuses take up arms.
for a few days after, not far from Tournay, 4000 of the Gheuses took the
Field, Under the command of Sorean. Their Design was to take L'isle the chief
City of French Flanders. They were put upon it by certain Consistorian
Merchants, With a design to surprise ^^isle.
great rich men and dwellers in that City. The Plot was so laid, that upon a
day when Maximilian Rassinghem Governor of L'isle must necessarily be out of
Town, December. 22.
the calvinists should go, as they were accustomed, 1566.
to their Sermons in the Fields, and in their Return the Soldiers of Tournay
should come in mingled among them, 1567.
the Merchants undertaking to have an eye upon the Citizens of L'isle, that
they did not in their Coming back shut the Gates against them. The
Armenterians conspire.
In the mean time, to keep Rassinghem, away, some Foot Companyes, of the
Town of Armenter, Their Plot discovered.
had Orders to plunder the Country about Lisle The Governesse having
intelligence of the whole Design, writ in good time to Norcarmius, (Lying
before Valenciens) with part of his Forces to oppose the enemies Practice,
first acquainting the Governor of Lisle with his advance. Rassinghem falls
upon the Arment^rians.
Rassinghem had already heard of the Soldiers of Armenter, and without further
delay, choosing out 150 Foot, and about 50 Dragoones, fought with them near the
Village of Waterloch. The Armenterians were 300 and odd, most of them fresh
water Soldiers, with a Captain more ignorant then themselves, one Cornelius a
Calvinist Minister, that from a Smith, was become a Preacher, and from a
Preacher a Soldier: 1567.
Nor did he then with any more skill handle his Arms, then he used to do his
Text. Destroys them.
For at the very first Charge, being frighted, relinquishing his men, this hare
in a Helmet fled out of the Field. Two hundred and thirty of his Disciples were
slain, and presently stripped of their arms, leaving Rassinghem Victorious
without blood. And following his Victory enters Lisle.
Who with his Triumphant Soldiers laded with the Spoils of the enemy entering
into Lisle, the news of that sudden execution made the fear of the City
greater, then his honor by the Defeat of such an inconsiderable Enemy. Their
consistoriall Counsel was therefore now at their wits end; and the Soldiers
of Tournay hearing of the Armentarians Overthrow, From thence pursues them of
Tournay.
retreated from Lisle to Lanoy, which shutting their Gates against them, their
General Sorean endeavoring to take the Town, gave Norcarmius time to
overtake him. But before Norcarmius came up, Rassinghem understanding by the
Armenterian Prisoners that the Gheuses of Tournay were marching toward him,
raising as many of the Country as he could upon the sudden, resolved
instantly to fall upon them, not imagining that Norcarmius besieging Valenciens
had the same Design. The Error.
And it fortuned that Rassinghem sending out some Scouts, 1567.
as the manner is, to discover the strength and motion of the enemy, they fell
upon the like number of Horse sent by Norcarmius to the same intent, (...).
and as night and suspicion doses the mind, either Partly mistaking their
fellows for the enemy, fired upon one another, and one or two being shot,
retired, frighting and affrighted. While this Accident held Rassinghem in
suspense, Norcarmius comes first upon the Place.
Norcarmius, by other means understanding the Enemy to be near Lanoy,
presently marched thither, and going to order his men for a Bataille, her
perceived the Gheuses too weak for the open Field, by little and little fell
back into the lanes trenched with Ditches, and bulwarkt with Woods. Wherefore
he sent thither three Companyes of musketteers, Fights with the Gheuses of
Tournay.
with some Pikes mixed among them, which he him self followed with the Horse.
The Gheuses stood the first Charge indifferent stoutly, and shot off some small
Fieldpieces that guarded the mouth of the Lanes. Nay, thought many fell, they
filled up their places with fresh men, and without much Difficulty taking the
Advantage of those Straits beat back the Norcarmians. Makes a great slaughter
of them.
But at last, the Avenue being opened by the Pikes, the Horse and Foot
breaking in, they gave back, 1567.
were routed, fled, and in the Flight (more Dangerous then in the Battle)
were killed like sacrificed Beasts: A few, with their General Sorean, but
dividing themselves, escaped through the woods. Norcarmius, with the Loss of
only six men, having taken nine of the Enemies Colors, twenty Fieldpieces,
and two Barrells of Powder, though it best to follow the Opportunity, C^mmand^
Tournay to receive a Garrison.
and to march with his men (now fleshed, and, desirous of Victory) up to the
Walls of Tournay: and sending a Trumpet to the Town, commanded them, in the
name of the Governesse, to receive a Garrison of his men: if they denied, or
paused, he would use his Victorious Arms. The Townsmen hearing, The City obeye^
by such as fled out of the Battle, that their Army was defeated, being
struck with the sudden and armed Summons of Norcarmius the Conqueror at
their Gates, and Fear within their hearts, depriving them both of time and
reason for consulting, they yielded to mercy. He entered the Town
triumphantly, He enters as a Conqueror.
and forthwith disarmed the people, sending Soldiers from House to House
(which he did afterward through all the Signiory of Tournay) that took away
their Arms, and carried them to the Magazine. Then he imprisoned the
Incendiaryes, Punishes the Citizens.
and restored the Bishop and Clergy to their Honor and Authority. Lastly he
put down the Consistoryes, and prohibited all such kind of Meetings, the
common Forges of Sedition, thereby absolutely disinabling the Heretical
Faction in that City. This done, by Command from the Governesse he made John
Croy Count of Reuse Leiutenant-Governour of Tournay for Montiny, who was yet in
Spain; so leaving eight Foot Companyes in the Town, Returns to the Seige of
Valenciens.
besides 450 Garrison Soldiers in the Fort, he returned to the Siege of
Valenciens, and was ready to storm it when the Governesse should command. But
she being to consult the King, presently after the render of Tournay, The
Governesse consults the King about storming of the Town.
with the News of the Victory, writ to his Majesty her Resolution to take
Valenciens by assault, because the beseiged adding Obstinacy to Rebellion, had
made diverse Sallyes out of the Town, and beat up the Quarters of his
Maiestyes men, as in Contempt of the King. His Majesty will not give way to it.
His Majesty though he disliked not the Siege, yet intimated, that he should
have better liked noe Siege; now since it was gone so far, February 1
it concerned his Honor to continue it: but it likewise concerned his clemency
and Affection to his Subjects, to forbear the Battery of the Town, and
putting them to the Sword: lest the fury of the Soldiers should destroy the
Innocent, together with the guilty. The Governesse should therefore try all
ways to win the besieged to yield without fighting, which was feizible,
witness the example of Tournay. But if the Rebels stubbornness could not be
broken, but only by Arms; his Majesty would not have the Town stormed, before
his pleasure was known, and two Regiments come out of Germany. But these
cautions were given to no purpose, the besieged growing every day more
obstinat. Whereupon the Governesse protracts the siege and draws a line about
the Town.
Therefore the Governesse commanded Norcarmius to make his approches nearer, to
look more narrowly unto the cutting off all Victua^l, and commerce: and to
present his Cannon and Army as prepared for a general Assault; so by frighting
and wearying the Enemy, to spinne out time, till the German Regiments should
arrive, commanded by Oberstein, and Scouwenberg. She likewise writ to the King,
that Mercy was fruitless, that she and the Senate thought it necessary before
they were better fortified or relieved to take the Town, Febr. 17.
which Norcarmius was of Opinion might be effected in eight days; She Presses
the King by Letters.
and that Delay would be dangerous, lest the Gheuses (being enraged all over
the Low-Countryes, and upon the Borders of France) might have time to raise an
Army. 1567.
But all this moved not the KING, March 13.
who dispatched back his Adviso with more then ordinary speed, The King wishes
her to deal more gently with the besieged and gives a rule for it.
that they should hold off, and rather take the Town by Fear, then by the
Sword; perhaps starved and wearyed, they might yield: yet if there was no
remedy, but to force them (which he must leave to their Judgment that were
upon the Place) then he would have these commands principally observed. First,
that raising their Batteries and planting their Cannon, they should prove them
with the^^ Preparations and Forerunners of a Storm; leaving them in the mean
time some space of Repentance. Then if they yielded not, they should storm the
Town, and do the Duty of Soldiers: but yet forbear to do execution, not only
upon Children, Old-men, and Women, but that no Citizen whatsoever, She obeyes.
should be killed in cold blood. The Governesse well weighing this letter,
though she knew it was more merciful then opportune (because about the same
time a Company of sacrilegious Villains, sallying out of Valenciens, had fired
cerraine Monasteries that stood near the Town, and brought the plunder of
them into Valenciens) yet mindful both of his Majesty's, and her own
moderation, And sends to them Count Egmont, and Duke Ar^^chot.
she resolved to leave nothing unattempted. It was told her, the Valencenians
bore an implacable hatred to Norcarmius; she therefore sent to them two of the
Lords, Lamorall Count Egmont, and Philip Croy Duke of Areschot: to see if they,
by their Authority, could bring the Town to consider of their Safety. Who
persuade them to obe^ie^ce.
These Lords sending for the Valencenian Commissioners gently admonished them,
to lay down their Fury and Obstinacy that would not secure them, when their
Walls should be battered with the Cannon; for to that day, their City had
stood, not by their strength, but by the King's and Governesse's Mercy. That
they found by sufficient experience, how vain it was to expect foreign Aid.
That the French stirred not in the Quarrel, and if they should, it would be
neither handsome nor advantageous, for the Low-country-men to be assisted by
their ancient Enemies. The Consistories of Antwerp, being distracted into
factions; what had they yet done? These of Tournay had taken Arms, but were
withal suppressed. They of the Bus and others, had enough to do to look to
themselves; all the hope left them must be in Toulouse, but he and his whole
Army (let them not deceive themselves) were destroyed by Beavor, in the sight
of Antwerp. Who could be now expected or from whence, to come and raise the
Siege? They ought therefore to redeem their pride by their Repentance, and by
their Duty, and Obedience to prevent (whilst yet they might) their Princes
Indignation, and their Countries Ruin. Proposing conditions
Having premised this, they read the conditions offered by the Governesse; that
the Valencenians should render their City, and receive a Garrison, That after
their rendering the Town, and receiving a Garrison, those that would obey the
King, should have Liberty to remain in Valenciens; the rest immediately after
the Surrender were to depart the Town, but in vains.
carrying with them all their portable Goods. The Commissioners reported this
Offer to the Senate and the People, which were prepossessed with wicked
Counsels; their hearts hardened, especially with Grange's Sermons, a man
eloquent with a mischeife to the Public; They were confirmed in their
Obstinacy by a Rumor that Toulouse had the Day, and Beavor was fled, cunningly
given out by the Heretics, to amuse the Town, and hinder them from crediting
Toulouse his overthrow, at least to suspend their belief, so long as the
Commissioners treated. Who returning to Areschot and Egmont, they, when they
saw nothing was done by the Valencenians, and themselves slighted, in great
fury threatening the Town, presently dismissed the Commissioners. And Egmont
(whose military heart, and therefore more sensible of a Provocation, was
grievously offended at the Obstinacy of the Besieged) that very day and the
night following, with Cressonerius in his Company, viewing the Walls, and
sounding of the Ditch, assured the Governesse, that Valenciens might be taken
in a very little time. A gene^all Ass^^lt resolved (...).
But for as much as the King^s commands were obeyed in admonishing and
terriying of the Town, and that her Excel^ence heard the German Forces were at
hand, specially being vexed with the News of a Sally made by the Valencenians
in the night to beat up Quarters, she commanded Norcarmius, that making his
Approaches still nearer, without further Delay, yet according to the King's
Instructions, The (...) of Valenciens.
he should storm the Town. Valenciens is no less strongly then pleasantly
situated, part thereof standing on a rising Ground, and the rest lying on a
Level, environed with Walls, Towers, and Ditches; the River Schelt running
through the midst of it, and falling into the River of Rouell, 1567.
they flow round about the Walls: and make the Place almost inaccessible. But
Norcarmius, knowing he had to do with an ignorant Enemy, and that the Town was
like a strong Body governed by a weak Soul; finding the Ditch to be narrow in
some places, and the Banks by negligence fallen down: with a great and
gallant Resolution began the Assault; and calling in part of his Forces, that
were set to keep the Pas^es, Norcarmius. takes the S^b urb^.
and to cut off Provisions, under the C^mmand of G^spar Lord of Bill, Gaspar
(...) Lord of Bill.
he took M^ns-gate, a Port of the Suburbs, in the ^ight. From thence, with
some Companies of Haynolter^, piying those that came upon the Walls with
Musket Shot, so as none du^st put out their Heads, Cressonerius with wonderful
dexterity raised a M^unt, scaled the Walls, (...).
and with the loss of very few of his men, ob^erving the discipline of War,
he faced and beat the Enemy from their Works. And so dividing his Forces under
the Commands of M^ximilian Count of Bolduc, (...)
Charles Mansf^ldt Son to Count Ernest, and Egidius Lord of Hierg, (...)
he gave the general Assault; first making his Battery with 10 pi^ces of great
Cannon, then with 20. besides other lesser Guns, with so great an Impression,
that within less then four hours space their prime Works about the wall
were beaten down. The Citisens terrified with such a beginning, sent two
Trumpets to entreat, that Norcarmius would please to give safe Conduct unto
their Commissioners to treat for the present Render of the Town. They sen^
Commiss^ners (...) of surrender.
He gave them leave to come, but nevertheless the Cannon still played upon the
Battery; which hastened the Commissioners, that were 20. who came about
Sunsetting to the General, promising to yield up the City upon the same
Terms, which three days before were offered by Areschott and Egmont. Which
are not accepted.
But Norcarmius laughing at them, said, Belike you think your condition to be
as good to day, as it was three days since. Valencenians, you are wise too
late. I never use to article with a conquered Enemy. All that night he
continued the Battery, giving them no time to repair the Breaches made in so
many place^, that now the Ditch being filled up with the ruins of the Wall,
the Soldiers might enter on even ground. But about two a clock in the
afternoon the Valencenian Commissioners returned, They yield to mercy.
and without any exception yielded the Town and themselves to mercy.
Norcarmius sounding a Retreat, just when his men were got up the Wall, and in
hope to sack ^he Town, sent a Countermand, enjoining them to contain
themselves within those Bounds of Modesty, which by Order from the King the
Governesse had set down. The Battery held 36. hours without any in^ermission.
It is reported, that 3000. Cannon were shot into the Town, doing g^e^ter
Execution upon Walls, then Men. The same day, being Palm Sunday, and making
good the Omen of that victorious name unto the Conqueror, Norcarmius ent^rs
the Town.
Norcarmius entered the Town, with 13. Companies of Foot: and was met in the
Streets with multitudes of women and Children with green boughs in their
hands, lamentably crying to him to have Compassion upon the Town. He sent them
away, with gentle Language without the death of any man, or plunder of any
house, though the Wealth of the Town was a great Temptation, their Contumacy
meriting Destruction. Disarmes the Citisens.
The General went to their Court, and first according to his Instructions,
disarmed the Townsmen, and took from the City their Cannon (which were 50) and
all the rest of their Munition. Punishes them.
Then he caused Inquiry to be made for the Boutefeu's and Ringleaders of the
Rebellion, with the Heretical Preachers, and immediately laid 36 Principal
rebels by the Heels: but could not take any one Minister, for they were slipped
out of the Town, though the Ports had presently been shut up, or guarded with
Soldiers; but being apprehended at St Amands, they were brought back, and
committed to prison. Afterward, the Citisens were beheaded, their Teachers and
some of their Soldiers hanged. Lastly the Magistrates, and Treasures, and all
other public Officers were removed from their places; Takes away their
privileges.
their Charter and Privileges forfeited, till the King pleased to restore
them. 2. April.
The Governesse, writing all these Particulars to the King, and annexing a List
of the Commanders and Soldiers Names, The Governesse commends the Conquerors
to the King.
that had done most gallant Service in the Siege, humbly craved Leave to
remunerate their Valor and Fidelity out of Delinquents Estates, that the
Soldiers might reap the Fruit of their Victory and Modesty, and others be
taught their duty. How highly Norcarmius was famed for restoring the ci^i^^ and
sacred State of the Town.
Valenciens being in this manner settled, and all consecrated Places restored
to their pious Uses, the Bishop of Arras likewise sent for out of Artois, and
eight Companyes charged upon the Town, that He might keep the people in the
fear of God, and they in Obedience to the King: it was wonderful to see, what
a glorious name Norcarmius had got, and what an alteration it made among the
Rebels, and Heretics of all degrees, when they heard Valenciens was taken;
insomuch as it was commonly reported, that in this one Town were found the
keys of all the other Cities.

In the mean while, 15. March.
her Excellence receiving a new express, signifying that Ferdinand of Toledo,
Duke of Alva, was to come a little before his Majesty. Whilst in the
Lowcountryes all went as well as she could wish, she thought it best to press,
what she had long since designed, a Protestation from the Magistrates and all
Officers of Peace and War, The consternation of the Rebels.
wherein they should swear, without exception to obey any that should be
appointed in the Kings name. The Oath required of the Lords.
Which she did; not to sound any ones mind, Why the Governesse imposed it.
for she could well distinguish the Kings Friends and Enemies; nor in hope to
oblige the Unfaithful, which she knew was not to be done by any Tie; but that
she might with less envy displace such men as should refuse the Oath, or put
them to death if they broke their Faith: by which means the King at his coming
might find all parts of the Lowcountryes pacifyed. The Governesse set this
afoote in the beginning of the year, and acquainting the Senate with it, told
them, she would take it as a special Service, if the Lords would give Example;
which the rest would easily follow. Who took it.
The first that Voted for it, and promised to take the Oath, was Peter Ernest
Count Mansfeldt, then the Duke of Areschott, and the Counts Egmont, Mela, and
Barlamont, who afterward performed what they then promised. But Henry
Brederod, whom the Governesse, C. Brederod refuses,
by express Messengers, and afterward by Letters, urged to take this Oath of
Allegiance, 2. Febr.
as he that was both the Kings Subject and a Commander under him of a 100
horse, of those 1400 raised for the Saftety of the Provinces, a great while
kept off, at last, because he was commanded to lay down his Commission, And
his command of horse is taken from him
complaining that he was unworthily and injuriously dealt with, refused the
Oath, and sent back the Horse. The Oath was likewise refused, but with more
Civility, by the Counts Hochstrat, and Horn, because they said they had sworn
their Allegiance some years before, and that they hoped was sufficient.
Hochstrat was at Antwerp Lieutenant Governor there for the Prince of Orange,
who was then in Holland, and from this City gave Orders for Machlin, And from
Count Hochstrate the Government of Mechlin.
whereof he was Governor in his own right. Therefore her Excellence that had
long had an eye upon Hotchstrat, as a man not to be trusted, gave away the
Government of Machlin ^o the Lord Semer, 6. Ian.
one that was sound in Religion and Fidelity: and wrote to Hochstrat, 1567.
how she had provided for that City; which, the Gheuses having lately had a
plott upon it, required a Governor that should be there resident. Who
dissembles his indignation against the Governesse.
Hochstrat, as if he Understood not the Governesses Anger lest he should seem
likewise sensible of his own Offense, in his Answer gave her infinite thanks
that she had then eased him of that burden, only whether he should lay down his
Commission before the Senate of Machlin, 12. Ian.
or by Letter signify so much unto them, he expected her Highnesses Commands:
and if she further pleased to substitute another at Antwerp in absence of the
Prince of Orange, he should take that also for a special Favor. But discovers
it to Count Man^feldt.
But writing to Count Mansfeldt he laid aside dissimulation. 15. Ian.
For when the Governesse had returned, that she better liked his writing to the
Machliners about the Resignation of his Government, and that Count Mansfeldt at
the same time wrote him a Letter to the same effect, counselling Hochstrat as
his Kinsman (for they were married to two Sis^ers of the Momorancyes, In these
words
Hochstrat to Elionor, 20. Ian.
and Mansfeldt to Mary) by all means to pacify the Governesse, he answered
jeeringly, That he was much bound to him, who having so many Employments,
whereby he much eased the Duchess in her Government, 1567.
could yet descend so far as to think of his poor Kinsman, and to Vouchsafe
him his Advise; which Advise notwithstanding, he needed not, knowing well
enough what was to be done. In the mean time, he joyed him, of those great
Employments, which shortly would be increased beyond his ambition, 18. March.
by the coming of so many Whelps out of Spain and Italy. The Prince of Orange
likewise ref^ses the Oath, and of his own accord resignes his Govern^ments.
The business with the Prince of Orange went slowlyer on, and with more
trouble. For he refusing the Oath, among other Passages wrote to the
Governesse, that she would please to appoint a Governor for Holland, Zeland,
and Burgundy, since he understood it was the King^s Pleasure that he should
resign. This held the Governesse in Suspense, because she was not willing he
sold declare himself an Enemy before she had sufficient Forces to subdue him.
The Governesse sen^s Bertius to him.
She therefore sent to Antwerp, John Baptista Bertius, her Secretary, that
found the Prince of Orange only employed about his private Occasions, and
having presented his Letters of Credence from the Governesse, Wh^ gives him
Reasons for taking of the Oath.
He made it appear by many Arguments, that the Prince of Orange's
determination to resign his Commands, could not be approved, either by the
Governesse or any of the Lords, not only because it would be disadvantageous to
the Lowcountryes, and dishonorable to the Prince of Orange himself, but
likewise because such kind of Governements conferred by the Kings immediate
Commission, can neither be taken away by the Governesse, nor resigned by him,
without the King's Leave. That therefore he should presently resume his
Offices, and consider it was no rash Determination of his Majesty, in this
common Disturbance of the Provinces to require, that their Governors, by a new
Oath, should testify their Fidelity and Allegiance. The Prince of Orange
hears and answers him with Reasons.
The Prince of Orange replied (in the presence of Count Hochstrat, who came in
by chance) that for many and serious considerations, which he had as yet
communicated to no man, he refused this Oath. First, because the like was never
required of any former Governor; The first.
then, The Second.
for as much as he had long ago taken an Oath of Allegiance to the King, as
other Lords did that lived within his Majesty's Dominions, it might be thought
he had broke his first Oath, The Third.
in regard he was put to swear again. Moreover, because he had sworn to
preserve the Privileges of his Provinces, if peradventure he should be
commanded to the contrary, he could not obey the Order, being tied by Oath not
to do it: and yet he bound himself to obey it, if he should now swear to do
what he should be commanded in the King's name against any persons whatsoever.
The Fourth.
Add to this, that in the Form of the Oath the Emperor was not excepted, to
whom as a feudatary he was obliged, and would not bear Arms against him; Nay
more, there was no exception of his Sons and Friends, as the Duke of Cleve, and
diverse others, The Fifth.
against which he would not fight. Another Reason was, for that many Edicts
were daily published, making it capital for all such as were not Catholics;
which Edicts should never be executed by his Authority, for his Heart would not
suffer him to inflict such punishments, as men were now liable to, for their
Religion. Nay, if he should take this Oath, he might be compelled, in the last
place, to put his Wife to death, because she was a Lutheran. The Last and
indeed the true Reason con^^rned the Duke of Alva.
Lastly it was to be considered, that he who commanded in the King's name,
might be such as it would not be consistent with his quality and Honor to
obey; and here, with Indignation, he named the Duke of Alva, and said no more.
For as it was reported, the Duke of Alva's coming troubled him exceedingly, his
other Reasons only were pretended, and because invalid, therefore multiplied.
Nor would the Prince of Orange have lost his Government for an Oath, but he
thought it unsafe to trust himself in the hands of that Spanish Duke, by
nature melancholic and cruel; and out of an ancient Emulation betwixt them,
too likely to carry himself proudlier in his Command; or if he should be
civil, yet the Prince of Orange could never brook a man, from whom he must
receive Common Civility in the nature of a Pardon. But Bertius sufficiently
instructed as well by nature, as by the Governesse, Bertius replies to every
Particular Allegation.
answered him prudently to every particular, He said, it was no wonder, in
regard the Provinces were not troubled in the time of their former Governors,
that no such Oath was required of them, That to take the same Oath again, was
not by a new Profession to repair the Violation of an old Vow, but to raise
greater Alacrity in new Dangers. That to preserve the Privileges of the
Provinces, the King had noe less obliged his Faith, then the Prince of Orange
his, and therefore it concerned his Majesty to be careful, that nothing should
be commanded, which was Breach of Privilege. Nor was the War in agitation,
against the Emperor, or Empire, or the Duke of Cleue, all which he was assured
the Governesse would very willingly let him except in his Oath. That the Care
of the Edicts and Penal Laws against Heretics should not be committed to
him, much less should he be enforced by any ones Command to Punish his wife.
But persuades not.
Thus Bertius endeavored to overthrow the Prince of Oranges Reasons without
mentioning the Duke of Alva; perhaps doubtful how to answer that Point,
perhaps because, upon the naming of his Wife, the Prince of Orange replied (not
expecting till he came so far as Alva) that he knew the King, when he arrived
in the Lowcountryes, would not suffer any man's Wife to be of another Religion;
therefore, for his own part, he was resolved to remove into Germany with his
Family, before the King's Coming, lest if he did it after, it might be supposed
he was rather banished, then that he departed of his own accord: nevertheless
in what place soever he remained, he would live as became a Subject to his
Majesty, never omitting any thing that might conduce to the Kings Honor. Yet
brings him to a conference.
Bertius seeing him not to be wrought upon, at least, not able to make a Peace,
desired a Truce, praying him (for this was part of his Instructions) that
before his Departure he would give a meeting to Count Egmont, and any other of
the Lords that he himself would name: whereunto he willingly condiscended, and
appointed Willebroc, a Village between Bruxells and Antwerp for the Place of
Conference. Nothing done.
Where on the one part the Prince of Orange, The Prince of Orange's farewell
admonition to Count Egmont.
on the other Egmont, Mansfeldt, and (by Command from the Governesse) Bertius
also met; and after they had treated diverse times of the same things, they
departed, having concluded nothing. They say, the Prince of Orange, before he
went, taking aside Count Egmont: spoke of the present Dangers, and entreated
him to withdraw, and by no means to stand this bloody Spanish Tempest that hung
over the Low-countryes. And when Egmont, confident in his own merits, and
scorning Danger, disputed against his opinion, and how the King's mercy would
pardon all, if he found the Low Countries quieted; This Mercy of the King (said
Orange) that you trust to, will be your ruin; My Soul presages (I wish it may
be false,) that you are to be the Bridge the Spaniards will tread upon in their
coming over to the Low-countryes. At which words, as assured of his Prophesy,
and that he should never see Egmont again, he held him hard in his Arms, and
so, both weeping, took their last Farewell. Next day, His Letter to the
Governesse
he wrote a Letter to the Governesse, Entreating her, that she would please to
remember the King, April 4.
and make a gracious Interpretation herself of the Pains he had taken now,
and long since, both in Peace and War for his Majestyes Honor and Advantage.
And that he himself wheresoever he lived would always be her Highnesses most
faithful Servant. Immediately he removed with his wife and Children (all but
his eldest Son, He leaves the Low countries.
Philip whom he left a Student, in Lovaine) to his City of Breda, many of the
Nobility waiting on him. Having staid there awhile, he retired to Cleueland,
and about the end of April, to Dilemburg, the ancient Seat of the Nassau's.
And Egmont, though he was troubled at the Parting of his Friend, soon after
grew cheerefuller then ever. For now being quit of his old Rival, and
therefore assuring himself of the first Place in the Governesses Favor, he
began to offer his Service, and to be active in public Affairs. First taking
the Oath, as he had promised, in the form wherein it was administered, Egmont
takes the Oath.
and putting down the Consistoryes in the lower Flanders, Ioynes with the
King's Party, declares himself an enemy to the Covenanters.
he in person, with six Companyes of Foot disarmed diverse Towns, and showed
himself so averse to the Designs of some of his Colleagues, that by Count
Hochstrats Servant, their usual Messenger, he advised them to attempt nothing
against Religion, the King, or their own Honor; if they did, he would hate
them worse then a white Scarf, Their Friendship with him is broken.
which was the ordinary Wear of the French Horse. This made Hochstrat and the
rest send to him for the Originalls of all the Letters and Petitions which he
had at any time received from them, returning him those he had sent to them, an
undoubted Argument that their Friendship was dissolved. Notwithstanding, the
Governesse was fearful, Whereupon follows a great change.
that all this might be cunningly dissembled. But whether Egmont did it bona
fide, now hating the proceedings of the Covenanteers, or whether he complied
with the Governesse, to take off the ill opinion conceived of him, now upon the
King's Approach, certainly it was of much advantage to the Catholic cause.
Many renounce the Covenant.
For many of the Covenanteers, the Prince of Orange having left them, and
frighted to see Egmont with some of the greatest Lords fall off, the rest
growing jealous of one another, every man shifted for himself, and either
personally or by friends petitioned the Governesse for their Pardons, and bound
themselves, as they were required, by a new Oath. Not long after, Hochstrat and
Horn wrote to the Governesse, promising to take the Oath in her presence, nay
the last named sent a Copy of the Oath enclosed in his Letter. The
Conspira^^u^s leave the Low-countryes.
The Counts Culemburg and Bergen had now left the Low-countryes: Lewis of
Nassau followed the Prince his Brother. So, that Fear had severed the four
principal Confederates, excepting only Brederod, who still lived in hope. This
caused an universal dejectedness and consternation of the Merchants, and
Heretics, complaining they were deserted, contrary to the Covenant; Especially
the Heretics.
and crying the Nobility had betrayed them. This caused diverse, especially
Ministers, to fly; this encouraged the Governesse to use expedition, that
whilst the Heads of the Conspirators were timorous and at difference among
themselves, she might the more easily reduce the stubborn people to their
ancient Obedience.

And now by command from the Governesse, The Recovery of Maestricht.
Norcarmius with ^1. Companies of Foot, and 10. piece of Cannon was to attaque
Maestricht, in Brabant. But they of that City hearing of the Surrender of
Valenciens, immediately turned out of Town all the preaching Heretics, and
factious Teachers. Then, understanding that Norcarmius drew near, they
forthwith sent Commissioners to the Governesse, to beseech a pardon for what
was past, promising for the future to continue faithful to the King, and
Bishop. For part of Maestricht is subject to the Bishop of Liege, and part to
the King as Duke of Brabant; The Governesse gave them a short Dispatch, and
referred them (soundly chidden) to be answered by Norcarmius. The Bishop of
^iege intercedes for the Town.
The Commissioners were no sooner gone, but Messengers came from Gerard
Grosbeck, Bishop of Liege, assuring the Governesse that the Heretical Sink at
Maestricht was now clean swept, That many of the Citisens with the Magistrate,
even when that Plague was hottest, kept themselves uninfected, That the Gentry
and Communalty were not past Cure, as plainly appeared by the sudden change
made in the City, converted, chiefly by the endeavors of one of the Society,
He^ricus Dionysius.
sent for from Colen by the Bishop; which Father daily chalenging the
Heretical Doctors to dispute, and daily confuting them, had brought them to a
perfect Recovery of their old Religion and Allegiance. And therefore the
people, if they might but have a pardon, would satisfy for their Delinquency
with more earnest Observance, and were now ready to receive a Garrison: though
the Bishop himself did not conceive any necessity for making it a Garrison,
the Firebrands of the Rebellion being now extinguished. Or if her Excellence
were concerned in honor not to alter her Determination, that one or two
Companyes would be sufficient. That he himself for his own part, had pardoned
those of Maestricht, with promise to be a Suitor in their behalf for the like
pardon from the Governesse; the rather because he considered himself not only
as their Prince, but as their Father, well knowing the mercy of the Governesse.
Why the Governesse denies him.
Who thanking the Bishop for his message full of kindness and charity, told
them, it was not in her power to imitate their Master's Example: the King
having taken from her all Authority of pardoning Offenses of this nature: but
she was confident, they might hope no less from the Kings Clemency. In the
mean time, it was necessary, that a new Garrison, which she might confide in,
should be put in into Maestricht to prevent the practice of Traitors, that
made sure account of that Town, lying no less convenient to receive Succors
out of Germany, then Valenciens for Aid from France. She had therefore
commanded Norcarmius to take Maestricht; but first to advise with the Bishop:
and to that end, she had sent Turius Secretary of her Privy Counsel to give
him notice of their March. The Messengers replying, that Maestricht was not
like other Towns of the Low-Countryes, because part of the Jurisdiction
appertained to the Bishop. The Governesse answered not that particular, for she
used sometimes to return Silence for an Answer, saying, these that had not ill
ears, would be sufficiently answered by not being answered. The Army in the
mean time made long Marches, with cheerfulness proper to Conquerours, and
invited forward by the hope of Plunder. Maestricht yieldes.
But the Maestrichers were as quick in yielding, and excepted against nothing
which Norcarmius, in the Governesses name, commanded. Who entering the Town,
Norcarmius punishes them.
took the keys from the Magistrate, and all their great Cannon and Munition
from the City, disarmed the Townsmen, hanged the Author of the Rebellion in the
Marketplace: and leaving Egidius Barlamont with part of his Forces in
Garrison, he with the rest marched toward Holland, as the Governesse had
appointed, to join himself with Charles Brimey Count of Megen.

The Citizens of the Bus, Of the Render of Bolduc and Antwerp.
doubting which way the Conqueror would take, were so much the more fearful
of the Governesse, by how much they knew they had more justly merited her
indignation. For by her Edict she had proclaimed them Enemies to the King, for
their uncivil usage and detaining of Merodius, and Scheiff Chancellor of
Brabant, which she had sent unto them; for expelling Count Megen, and admitting
Bomberg: which Edict confiscated the Wealth of the City, and deprived them of
all their Privileges, till such time as they should return her Commiss. They
of the Bus fear the Governesse's Army.
The Townsmen though at first they slighted her Decree, And labor to appease
her.
yet at length better advised by the nearness of the Danger, But cannot d^e it.
unknown to Bomberg, beseeched the Governesse to grant a safe Conduct for
certain Commi^^. of theirs to attend her Highness in the name of the City.
Which she denied to hear of, unless they brought along her own Commissioners
that were kept Prisoners at the Bus. Shortly after, the Chancellor and
Merodius, being set at Liberty, arrived at Court, and told the Governesse, that
Bomberg distrusting his Faction, daily mouldring away, had left the Town with
a band of men, the Citisens being compelled for what he had acted to give their
Approbation, and to pay a thousand Florens in the name of a Donative. As they
were speaking, came in Commissioners from the Bus, desiring a general Pardon;
that the Edict might be revoked; and that a Garrison might not be imposed upon
them. But the Governesse, offended with those proud Demands, answered, That
their Message looked not like a Supplication made by Delinquents, and so put
them off, till another Nor suffering them to come any more into her presence,
she commanded them, by the Chancellor and Merodius, to return home, and teach
their City not to Article with her for a Surrender, but to receive a Garrison
as she commanded. And that remembering their Offenses, they should leave
themselves and their fortunes to the Kings Mercy. They yield to mercy.
The Governess was animated, as well by the late Victory, as by the present
Forces come from Germany, wherewith the Bus being terrifyed, sent back their
Commissioners rendering themselves to the Governesse without Conditions, only
they beseeched her, that to prevent quarrel between the Townsmen and the
Soldiers, they might have a Garrison of their own Countrymen. And they
received part of the German Army and their General Col. Schovenburg, who,
together with a Senator joined in Commission with him by the Governesse,
ordered the Common wealth; repealing indeed the Edict, but suspending both
Punishment and Pardon till the King's Coming. At the same time the Governesse
was attended by Commissioners from Antwerp, 18. April.
craving Pardon for their past Delinquency, Antwerpe sues for pardon,
and promising that the Town, now freed from the factious Inhabitants would
hereafter be obedient Subjects. And truly, which they deserve for turning the
Heretics out of Town, It being a very difficult work
though the Antwerpers were the last that came in, yet they deserved the
greatest Commendations, and much more their Pardons; because the best of the
Town were forced to sweat hard for it, before they could remove the swarm of
Heretical Preachers. For albeit most of them were ignorant people, rather
wicked then subtle, their Greatest understandings reaching no higher then
Taverne-Politicks; yet they were grown so numerous and so strong by the
Assistance of wicked and factious Persons, and had so captivated the affections
of the Commons, that they were become absolute Masters of the Town, and could
not be outed but with great pains and Trouble, and with a miserable and
manifold vexation of the City. The Body of one that is possessed with the
Devil is not more deadly tormented, when the evil Spirit is expelled by the
power of the holy Exorcist, then all Antwerp was shaken by the Threatenings and
Curses of this Legion of Ministers and Fugitives: that long strugled, The
Governesse will not grant their Pardon unless they take a Garrison of her men.
and at last was forced to leave it. But the Governesse though she was glad at
heart to see Commissioners from so great a City, yet dissembling her Joy,
grievously rebuked them; and said, there was no talking of a Pardon, till they
had received a Garrison: that done, she promised them, to use her best
endeavors, in preferring their Supplication to the King. In the interim she
would forbear to punish that contumacious and rebellious City, excepting only
the chief Rebels, and the Sacrilegious people. As soon as the Commissioners
were returned with this Answer, They yield upon her Excellencies own terms.
they were sent back from Antwerp to offer the Town, and said, the Citisens
were in the power of the Governesse, if she pleased to Command a Garrison they
would receive it. Her Excellence, much commending their Resolution, replied (as
if she meant it for an Honor to them, which she intended for securing of the
Town) that she would come in person to Antwerp, and honor with Her Presence
the Rendition made by her dearest Subjects. She sending her Army before^
The next day she commanded Count Mansfeldt to go before with 16 Ensigns, of
her best Foot, And he for fear of a Mutiny among the people, being to guard
the Passages, with Cannon planted at the turnings of the streets, entered the
Town, as if he were to storm it: and securing the Marketplace and every part
of the City with Musketteers and Cannon, he received the Governesse; who came
about the end of April, with great pomp, not only waited upon by his Soldiers
that were 1200. but by the Magistrates, Governors of Provinces, Knights of the
Golden-Fleece, and Senators of the three Estates; Entering the Town in manner
of a Triumph, Enters the Town Triumphantly,
with great concourse and Acclamations of the people; Attended with all those
eminent persons, her Highness went directly to the great Church, dedicated to
the blessed Virgin Mary, where she beheld the mischief done by those damned
Villains, which had defaced that goodly Building. The sight wereof drew tears
from her eyes; but now, occasion being offered for some kind of reparation, it
partly qualified her grief. Therefore causing Te Deum to be sung, she
publicly gave thanks to God, and privately to the blessed Virgin, that
without war or blood so great a City was returned to their Religion and their
Prince. Restores things sacred,
Then she applied her self to regulate the Commonwealth; wherein her first
care was to do right unto the Church: and sending for the Bishop of Cambray,
the Altars and Churches, which the sacrilegious had either pulled down or
profaned, began to be new built and purified with Canonical Ceremonies, and
(which was best of all) furnished with active men, And orders the Civil
Government of the City.
fit for the Cure of Souls. Afterward looking upon the Government of the
Town, she examined who were Authors of the Rebellion, and what Magistrates
had been negligent, or false: and a Particular was brought her of all the
Arms, which she took from the People.

While the Governesse was thus employed, An Embassage sent from the Princes of
Germany,
she heard, Ambassadors were come from the Electours of Saxony and
Brandenburg, from the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquess of Baden, and the
Lantgrave of Hessen, which Princes the Heretics, that had lost all and fled
out of the Low-countryes, used as their last Refuge for Assistance. Which the
Governesse would gladly have put off,
The Governesse imagining what their business was, sent Scaremberg her
Secretary for the German tongue, to meet the Ambassadors, and to desire, that
they would pass no further, because their coming could not, at that time, be
seasonable, either for the City, not yet thoroughly quieted, or for the
Governesse, taken up with the Care of settling it. That for the present it would
be best to acquaint him with the heads of their Embassage, and they themselves
might come at another time more opportunely. But they are admitted,
But they, affirming that would not consist with the Dignity of their Masters,
were admitted: and under pretense of attending them, Courtiers and Soldiers
were put upon them for Guards and Spies. And heard,
The next day, they had audience, before the Lords, and one of them, after he
had spoke a formal Preamble, Speaking out of a Book,
read a Book, written in High Dutch, that with many tedious and odious
calumniations, concluded; that the profession of Auspurg, being more agreeable
to the word of God then the Catholic Religion, ought to be received in the
Lower Germany, at least not prohibited by Edicts and penal Laws; The
Governesse was therefore desired by the Princes of the Higher Germany, that the
People, otherwise inoffensive, might not be troubled for their Religion, and
exposed to the Tyranny of the Spanish Inquisition and other censures of Law.
The whole Presence being moved with indignation at his words, he gave the Book
to the Governesse. Her Excellence, when the Ambassadors withdrew; advising
about it in Council, infinitely displeased, delivered her opinion, that they
should be returned without Answer. But it was thought more civil, that
Secretary Scaremberg, should answer them in these words. To whom she returns
this Answer.
That the Ambassadors preamble concerning Religion, was not worthy of a Reply.
What they had said in excuse of the stubborn Rebels and Church-Robbers,
demonstrated, that the German Princes gave less credit to the King of Spaine's
and the Governesse's Letters, then to the complaints of seditious men; whose
innocence belike appeared in Sacrilege, forcing of Magistrates, and stirring
up the People to Rebellion. Therefore from the Governesse, they should admonish
those that sent them, to give the King leave to govern his own Subjects, and
not by their patronage of Rebels to foment discords within another Prince's
Jurisdiction. The Ambassadors replied, they came only to entreat for their
Brethren of the confession of Auspurg, that were not Rebels; but they had no
answer to that point. They are dismissed, all of them unsatisfied,
And four days after their Arrival, they returned, seeming very much
discontented all, but the Ambassador of Saxony, who, unknown to the rest,
told the Governesse, Save the Saxon Ambassador.
that his Master by others persuasions was overruled in the sending of this
Embassy, for he himself was affectionate to the House of Austria, and it was
his desire to be so accounted. The Covenanteers go down the wind in Holland,
The Ambassadors were not gone out of Town, when news came that the
Covenanteers were overthrown in Holland, and Brederod forced to depart the
Country, 4000. of those Rebels under the Command of Andelot, Vinglius, and
Lefdale, had possessed themselves of Holland, vexing and plundering the
Country: Most of which, Out of which they are beaten by Count Megen,
thinking to surprise Amsterdam, were met by Count Megen with 13. Companyes of
valiant Soldiers that not only spoiled their project of taking the Town, but
also pursued and forced them into Waterland, a marish part of Holland, and
therefore inaccessible. Yet they were affraied that to this very place they
should be followed by Megen, with whose Forces it was reported Norcarmius would
join. Therefore they took shipping for Frizeland, but were carried, the wind
lying against them, into Gelderland: from thence dispersing themselves into
several Countries, they all escaped out of the King's Dominions. Only one
Ship, Their Plandershippe taken by Count Aremberg's men.
laded with the Spoil of the Holland-Churches, and manned with 120. Soldiers
(aboard which was Andolott, Vinglius, and the two Brothers, Gisbert and
Theoderick Battinburg) either by violence of the Storm, or practice of the
Master Duncher Harling, came into the hands of Ernest Mulart, who had Count
Aremberg's Commission to give chase to the Fugitives with a nimble Pinnace. The
Soldiers lost all their Arms and plunder, some of them their lives. The
principal Commanders were by warrant from the Governesse imprisoned, some at
Harling, others at Vilvord, and a few Months after, when the Duke of Alva was
Governor of the Low-Countryes, they were put to death. Of all the confederates
only Brederod yet remained, proud in the hope of recovering Holland: C.
Brederod the remaining Conspiratour at first braves the Governesse,
and glorying that he alone was head of the Covenanteers. The Governesse
sending him a command to depart from Amsterdam, Brederod not only refused to
obey, but likewise detained the Messenger, her Secretary Turrius, who in the
King's name charged him forthwith to leave the Town; but he would not so much
as hear the Royal Edict read, and taking away the Secretaryes Letters and
Notes kept him in his House. But the Magistrate offended at his dishonorable
proceeding, and frighted with news of the Render of Valenciens, sent away
Turrius by night, At last his heart fails him,
without acquainting Brederod. Who, seeing the Gheuses every where beaten and
destroyed, the Covenanteers flying or making of their peace; and all the
burden both of the Danger and Hatred to lie upon himself, trying to get his
pardon, but in vain; and lastly, hearing how the rest of their Forces in
Holland were either routed, or slain; out of heart, and frighted with the
Report of the King's coming, he fled his Country, and for the present waved his
hopes of the Principality of Holland. And he departs the Low-Countryes,
With expedition thereof settling his Affairs, and leaving a few of his
Servants in the Fort at Viana, his patrimoniall City; with his Wife and the
rest of his Family, he arrived at Emden, a City of East-Frizeland, at the mouth
of the River Eems: Being received with no great honor at Emden, May 1.
he went to Breme in Westphalia. Desirous to change place again; and
uncertain as well in his Resolutions, as in his Journeys, because he found
himself mocked with the Hope of a Crown, and not able to digest the disgrace
of being only titulary Prince of the Covenant: And this life.
whilst he was raising some Forces in the County of Schouwenburg, and
soliciting the Count of that place, Iustus, to declare himself against the
Low-Countryes, he sickned, and falling into a distraction, dyed raving, Holland
submits.
in the Town of Schouwenburg. After Brederods Flight all Holland was reduced.
For not only Viana by speedy Messengers sued for their Pardon and a Garrison,
though they obtained neither: (their pardon being deferred till the King's
Arrival, and the Governesse signifying her pleasure that the works of the
Town should be slighted and the Fort dismantled, that was built contrary to
her command) but likewise Amsterdam, Leyden, Harlem, and Delph made it their
humble and earnest Suite, some to Count Megen, some to Norcarmius, to send them
Garrisons. So does Zeland,
The like did Middelburg and the other Towns of Zeland, as also Groening, The
Groine and Frizeland,
Daventrey and all Frizeland, submitting to their Governor Aremberg. Lastly,
there was no City, Town, Fort, or village of the Low-Countryes, And all the
infected places of the Netherlands
that did not strive to turn out the Heretical Doctors, and seditious
Incendiaries, yielding themselves to the King's Pleasure and Mercy. Yet was the
Governesse no less vigilant or secure, notwithstanding all this prosperity,
having for many years had the Experience of good and bad Fortune: The
Governesse puts Garrisons into all the Towns rendered fines them, designs
Forts,
Wherefore being more careful to establish, then, for the present, to enjoy
her Felicity; she placed Garrisons in the Towns, that were rendered, ordering
the Cities to pay the Soldiers, as a Fine for their Delinquency. In some
places she modelled Forts, particularly at Antwerp, where she her self
designed the Situation, Executes the principal Rebels, repaires the
CatholicksChurches, destroys the heretical Temples.
nor was it altered by the Duke of Alva. The Church-Thieves and principal
Rebels were arraigned, condemned, and hanged, and the Churches repaired with
their confiscated Estates, or with the remainder of the public
Composition-money. Heretical Temples built in diverse Cities, she commanded to
be pulled down, which the people did with so good a will, that at Gant (which
is almost incredible) a great Lutheran Synagogue in one hours space was
levelled with the Ground. And this with wonderful contention and alacrity of
the People.
You would think these were new Cities and new People, which a few months
before, having been zealous to the cause, and stood Body and Soul in defense
of the Heretical Party, were so changed, as to offer their service in pulling
down of their Temples, as if that could excuse. Indeed they destroyed the
Monuments and Memorial of their Fault with such speed, especially in the
Province of Flanders, that the beams of the Churches which they ruined, served
for Gallowses to hang their late Worke-men and Audience. Thus, Lastly she
restores the Low-countryes to their former tranquillity.
the fire kindled by the peoples discontents, blown to a flame by the Bellows
in the Pulpit, fed by the Emulation of the Lords, and finally scattered abroad
by the faction of the Gheuses, devouring and destroying the Lowcountries, was
so damped and extinguished by the Governesse; that Religion and Obedience were
every where restored, the Heretics restrained by punishment, or forced to fly
the Country; some few getting their Pardons, others forfeiting their Estates,
The Gheuses were made Gheuses indeed
and living in Banishment: so as the Covenanteers were reduced to poverty and
the wallet, that is; they were made true Gheuses, and at last all the
Lowcountryes enjoyed their ancient Peace and Tranquillity. Many Families leave
the Lowcountries which very much troubled the Governesse,
One thing amidst so many happinesses did not a little afflict the Governesse,
who observed that multitudes of Lowcountrymen, which could not make their
peace, frighted with report of the Army coming out of Spain, daily left their
Habitations, and to the great damage of the Cities, carried away their
Merchandise, and Manufactures, and consequently the Gains, into other Nations.
Wherefore she had often entreated his Majesty, For remedy whereof she sollicits
for the Kings presence there.
that either he would give her Authority to pardon and settle the Provinces, or
else (which she thought would be best) to come himself among his Subjects, now
quiet, and willing to obey: not terrifying them with an army, but receiving
them to mercy. And the Later of these two Courses the King indeed in many of
his Letters to the Governesse promised to make use of. But how he came to alter
this real or pretended Resolution, and in stead of Coming in Person to send
Ferdinand Toledo Duke of Alva, his Lieutenant thither, because it was the great
business of Spain, and for a whole year agitated at the Council Board; I
will here with my best industry give you a full view of those Proceedings.

The Governesse from the very beginning, Touching the Kings expedition for the
Netherlands which the Governesse holds necessary.
desired the Kings Presence, and wrote out of her experience of the present
Evil, and her foresight of a greater yet to come, that it was incurable
without an Application from his Royal Hand; which the Lowcountrymen would take
for a Favor, lest they should be forced to endure torments inflicted by a
Servant. Many Spanish Lords of the Council were of the same Opinion, nay Pope
Pius the fifth wrote Letters, and sent Peter Camaianus Bishop of Asculum, to
persuade him to pass with an Army into the Lowcountryes, Pias the 5 th.
Persuades the King to go,
where, no doubt, his presence would compose the Motions of his Subjects, and
timely prevent the private Designs of some great Persons. But if, 1566.
in such a precipitate Mischeife, And Prophesies.
he should either delay his going; or act there, by any of his Ministers of
State: he much feared the Lowcountryes might change their Religion, and the
King lose the Lowcountryes. K. Philip assents and prepares for the journey.
His Majesty upon these and the like Advises from the Netherlands, Spain, and
Rome, resolved to go in person, Commanders were listed, Shipping provided, and
his meniall Servants, that were to attend him, named. Whereof he gives notice
to the Princes of Europe,
And lest this warrelike Preparation might be get a Ielousy in the minds of
princes, his Majesty satisfied them by his Ambassadors of his true Intent in
that Expedition against the Lowcountrymen. The King of France was desired to
give the Spanish Army Passage through the Provinces of Narbon and Lions.
particularly
To Emanuell Filibert Duke of Savoy, upon whom he much relied; the King sent
John Acugnia, to advise with him, what time, and by what way, he he would
direct him to bring his Army; and which were the most dangerous Places for
Ambuscadoes: and to entreat him to send his Majesty a Chart exactly describing
the Cities and Forts, by which every day his Soldiers were to march, with the
local intervalls and dimensions; who therefore desired the whole Country
between Savoy and Burgundy might be accurately measured and put in Colors; To
the D. of Savoy, whose directions His Majesty desires for the safety of his
March.
to which end Gabriell Cueva Duke of Alburcher Governor of Millaine, should
send him Captain Campin an exquisite Enginere, with a painter and a Surveyer,
lest his Majesty might might upon the way encounter any thing new, upon which
he had not preconsidered. 1567.
But the more earnestly and formally the Particulars were requested, Yet all
this was dissembled as Strada conceives,
the less they were intended for Security, being only to amuse the world: and
in all these Punctualityes and curious Accommodations for his March, there was
nothing of substance, all merely Show and Color. Nor can any man persuade me
that King Philip, For these reasons.
a subtle and ambitious Prince, would at that time, leave his chief strength,
when he found some beginnings of the Rebellion of the Moors, and was inwardly
so much offended with his Son Charles, Prince of Spain. For should he take his
Son along into the Low Countries, and bring the Lords a Patron for their cause,
which the Prince was thought privately to favor? or leave him behind, and trust
him with Spain, which it was likely he would involve in Tumults when he was
left to himself, whose fierce nature even his Majesty could hardly moderate in
the time of peace. But the King concealed these Reasons, How the King was
advantaged by this dissimulation.
and with new Preparations fed the Rumor of his Voyage, thereby to keep the
Lowcountry-Lords in more obedience, and to have the fairer Pretense to put off
the Emperor (whom the Lords as it was said meant to make Arbiter) from
interessing himself in the business of the Lowcountryes: and by the fame of
an Army to deter others from fomenting the Faction of the Gheuses. The King
was h^lpen in his dissimulation by a quartan Ague, A part well acted.
which holding him long, was thought to be the Cause of his Delay, especially
for that he still continued his care and provisions for the Voyage. Yet not so
well but some saw through it.
Though some of his nearest Servants knowing all this to be but Pageantry,
suspected his Ague likewise to be fained. But when the King was recovered, and
that by Letters from the Governesse his Majesty was certified of the Rebellion
of some Towns, The Governess presses the Kings coming with new Arguments.
and Danger of all, unless prevented by his Coming: quickened with Grief and
Anger, he made all things ready with such formal Have, And persuades him,
as not a Servant in his Court, no not the Lowcountry-Embassadours, the Marquis
of Bergen and the Lord Montin, tha^ had often Laughed at the Comedy of the
Royal expedition, did now doubt the truth of it: Though Strada is of opinion
that all was but juggling for these Reasons.
yet still the King did but act his part, and was not serious. For among other
dissuasions from his Voyage, Letters came from the Governess giving him
intelligence; that the Lords were resolved, if the King (as they heard) would
bring an army into the Lowcountryes, that they themselves would call in
foreign Assistance, and casting off their Allegiance oppose his Entry. Which
howsoever he dissembled, or publicly seemed to slight, questionless he that
was so jealous of his Crown and Honor, must needs be very sensible how much
both would be endangered, if by carrying an Army thither he should teach the
Lowcountryes how to arm, so render himself contemptible to his Subjects; and
to the neighbor Princes, that would look on, or perhaps secretly assist the
Rebels. Therefore in the last Consultation which he held about it at Madrid, A
Council about the Kings going.
his Majesty would only have it put to the question, Whether he should go
without an Army, which some persuaded: or take his Forces along: which the
Popes Nuntio earnestly advised. The Counselors and their Characters.
Among his Privy-Councell, which then were numerous, and great Statesmen,
because the King greatly relied upon their Judgments; there came to the Board
Ferdinando Toledo Duke of Alva, Roderick Gomez a Silva Prince of Ebora, both of
them very powerful with the King: D. Alva. Rui. Gomez. P. of Ebora.
but as Favor took place of Estimation, he was greater in his Majestyes
Account, this had the greater Honors conferred upon him. Cardinal Spinosa.
There was likewise Cardinal Spinosa, who from very mean beginnings, was
advanced to be chief Inquisitour and President of the Council of Castile, and
had been of so high Authority in King Philip's Court, that he was called the
Spanish Monarch. There was also Gomez Figueroa, Duke of Feria Manr. de Lara.
Antonio de Toledo.
Duke of Feria, John Manric de Lara, and Anthony de Toledo Knight of St John's
of Jerusalem and Prior of Leon: all excel^lent and active wits. But Feria,
besides the vast indowments of his mind, exceeded them all in handsomnesse and
sweetness of disposition. Manric was conspicuous for Prudence: the Prior for
Religion. Fresneda the Kings Confe. or. Antonio Perez.
Then sat Bernardo Fresneda the Kings confessar, a Franciscan; Anthonio Perez
Privy Seal, and diverse others, most of them Councillors of approved
integrity, and such as seriously intended their Prince's Honor; which
notwithstanding, as every one was of a sour or gentle temper, they interpreted
according to their own inclinations. Thus it is that all men form their
Opinions; and the Vote which nature extorts, we think is given to the Cause,
when indeed we give it to our Humor. Why the King was there in person.
The King himself sat in Council, to moderate by his presence the public
and continual Iarres between the Duke of Alva, and the Prince of Ebora,
contending no less for superiority at the Board, then for pre-eminence in
Court. Or rather his Majesty came in person, that if any one (which he heard
was designed) should move for his Son to be General, he himself might break
off the proposal. Manric. de Lara.
And there was one that persuaded the sending of an Army, remembering his
Majesty of Tiberius Caesar, that left foreign Wars to the Managery of his
Sons. The Prince of Ebora's opinion.
But immediately Prince Roderick, who very well understood the King, as if he
approved that part of the Advice for the King's Security; took the Speech out
of the others Mouth, and by degrees brought it to this, That he could not but
think it unseasonable to exasperate quiet and obedient Subjects with an Army:
thereby engaging the Heretics their Neighbors to assist their Brethren; That
the Fire of Civil War is carefully to be watched, especially in such a place
where they are near, that feed the flame, and they far off that must
extinguish it, though indeed it can never be extinguished without the
Conquerours's Loss. For in the civil Ruin of Cities, Men, and Fortunes, the
Prince loses whatsoever is taken from the conquered. The Offenses till that day
committed by the Lowcountry-men, were sufficiently punished and subdued by his
Majestyes Sister: and if any thing were unsubdued, it was their minds, not
their their bodies, but those should be conquered not by Arms, but Favors;
being more agreeable to the King's Clemency, and to the nature of the
Lowcountry-men, of whom his Father Charles the Fifth was wont to say, There is
no people under Heaven (so they be fatherly used) that more abhor servitude,
or more patiently endure it. Then summing up the expense of an Army, the
Dangers, the Jealousies of Princes, he concluded. That nothing was so intricate
in the Low-countryes, or ravelled into such hard knots, but might be easily,
and gently untyed, without drawing of a sword to cut it. Certainly foreign
Troubles might be composed at distance by a Prince, without diminution to his
Authority, reserving his presence for cases of extreme necessity; This
Counsel of Roderick Gomez was the sense of a man potent at Court, whose
principal Aim was peace and quiet; and his greatest Policy to prevent a
War, where the business, Fresneda and Perez vote with the Prince.
and consequently the Power should be transferred to others. Of the same
opinion was Bernardo Fresneda a plain and sweete-natured man: and Anthonio
Perez a Creature of Prince Roderick's. But the Duke of Alva was for Arms and
Revenge, The Duke of Alva's judgment quite contrary.
as the only cure for Wounds given to Religion and Royal Authority. For by
other Artifices and facility nothing was effected, but the taking away
obedience from the King, and fear from the Rebels. At first the
Low-country-men desired only to be freed of the Spanish Garrisons, and
protested nothing else was wanting to quiet the People. But when our Soldiers
were disbanded, were the people quieted? or the rather, and with the more
confidence did they not demand that Granvell should be removed from the
Governesse and the Helm of State, which he protected: never desisting, till
with base Libells, ridiculous Fooleryes, and traitorous combinations, at last
they extorted their desires. But peradventure when one man was cast overboard,
it laid the wind which raised that popular Tempest? No rather, as
Licentiousness more easily increases then begins, having now got ground, as
men imboldened by our Gentleness, they publish scurrilous Pamphlets against
the Multiplication of Bishoprics, the Revivall of the Emperours's Edicts, the
Council of Trent, and the Pontifician Inquisitours; they petition, but with
their swords in their hands; they fright the Governesse with Threats, and weary
the King's patience with obs^inate and impudent Messages. Whereupon the King,
out of his clemency, considering himself as a Father, was pleased to moderate
some of his Decrees: and the Governesse to grant something more then she should
have done to such base Petitioners. For what wrought her Indulgence, but only,
that when they had obtained their Requests, by not obeying they forgot
themselves to be subjects, unlearned their Principles of Obedience, and shaking
of Allegiance to their Prince, made an Association of the Provinces, as if the
number of offenders should secure them: and undervaluing all things humane and
divine, in comparison of the Liberty they had once tasted off. Indeed his
Father Charles the fifth, who was not ignorant of the Low-country-men's
natures, had then demonstrated how they should be used, when omitting all
milder remedies he chastised his rebellious Countrymen with Arms, and so
reduced them. But now it was not one City, but all the Provinces had conspired
against God and the King. Nor because the Rebels sit still for the present,
are their hearts therefore brought down, but will resume their Arms, when
they are not awed by the Terror of Revenge. For the most venomous Serpents may
be safely handled in Winter: not that they have less Poison, but because they
are more unactive; it being now known by experience, that for the same man to
be an Heretic and a good Subject is incompossible. Thus his riged disposition
argued; particularly discoursing how an Army might be raised and conducted, and
disputed all the policies advantageous for that Expedition, which he, being an
old General and the rest of the Lords no Soldiers, Spinosa and many others go
along with the Duke.
was of all the council only able to argue. And his Judgment was confirmed by
Cardinal Spinosa, who made a grave Speech, complaining how the Holy Court of
Inquisition was violated in the Low-countryes: The rest were of the same
Opinion; all but the Duke of Feria, The Duke of Feria opposes him,
who being nearer in Blood then Affection to the Duke of Alva, and of a milder
nature, differed from him altogether: not denying but the Low-countryes needed
some kind of Remedy (wherein he dissented from the Prince of Ebora, The sum
of his Speech.
with whom in the rest he concurred) but that Remedy should rather be applied
by dexterity of Counsel, that by force of Arms; which would be more
honorable to the Prince, as if he made it not a business to settle his
Dominions, not making himself a party, and whilst fought with his subjects
allowing them for his Equals: and more safe in relation to his Neighbors, and
Enemies, that would no doubt, make use of the Low-country-Insurrections to
moulder away the Spanish Power by their own Victories. Nor did that Allegation
of the Emperors taking of Gant, Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alva Governor of
the Low Countries.
To* Vaughan sculp

portrait sufficiently conclude; the Stubbornness of one City might be easily
broken, when the rest of the Low Countries were obedient: now almost the whole
began to waver, and in the same common cause and danger were ready to associate
in their defense. Many circumstances made for that war, which dissuade from
this. Then the Germans were the Emperor's Subjects, the English his
confederates, and the French his Inviters. Now, all those being obliged by no
Right of Empire, or tie of Alliance, many of them differing in Religion, all
concurring in envy, as they will quicken our troubles, so they will retard our
Assistance. Therefore for the present omitting the thoughts of Punishment and
War, let some be sent into the Low-countryes, that may narrowly observe and
bring us a true Account of the present condition of the Provinces: and let us
in the interim give the Subjects Rest, and time to come to themselves; and take
heed, we do not unseasonably teach them to use those Arms against his
Majesty, which they have employed so often in his Service. Prince of Ebolo.
These considerations nearly resembling those offered by Prince Roderigo, I
suppose the Duke of Feria purposely kept back, till the Duke of Alva had
spoken; that bringing them in as a new opinion, he might side with Roderic
Gomez whom he much affected. The King seems to suspend his sentence, till
their several Interests had brought them to be of o^e Mind.
But the King, though he plainly favored the Duke of Alva's Resolution, yet
being many did oppose it, deferred or seemed to defer the declaring of
himself so long; till every ones benefit should reconcile their diverse and
clashing Opinions. Thus bodies are daily formed, when after long contention of
the Elements, some parts being remitted, others consumed the whole is made
adequate. For Roderick Gomez labored to keep the King in Spain; but though he
disliked his going into the Low Countries with an Army, as dangerous, howsoever
unnecessary, yet he found this advantage in it, that if the Duke of Alva should
be General (which he easily supposed) it would remove his Rival from Court,
and engage him in no slight Difficulties. But Alva though, in the first place,
he endeavored to draw the King from Spain, making sure account he should
wholly govern him in the Army: yet he was well enough pleased to be trusted by
the King, though absent, with the whole War; and to leave Roderick Gomez
behind in whatsoever degree of place or Favor. For as it troubled him to see
the King value his Merits, less then the others person: so was he ambitious of
some Employment, where War and the Field might put a difference between those
whom Peace and the Court had equalled. Their Opinions therefore meeting in this
point, The King resolves to send one before, to make way for his own march
the King without further delay, declared, That he had long thought of a
Expedition into the Low-countryes, and whatsoever was alleged to the contrary,
altered not his Resolution: but yet he would not go, till some one sent
before him, should enter the Provinces with an Army; not to affright the
Obedience or Peace of his Subjects with those Arms, but to use them as a Guard
and Ornament to the Prince. Names the Duke of Alva for the employment,
Shortly after calling for the Duke of Alva, he gave him the Command in Chief
for that Expedition, the rest of the pretenders willingly yielding to him, an
old General, famous for many Victories. When he had received his Commission,
Provides him an Army in Italy,
the King immediately wrote to the Viceroyes of Sicily, Naples, and Sardinia,
to draw out three Regiments from their Spanish Garrisons, to be sent to
Millaine in the Gallyes of Garcia de Toledo. To the Governor of Millaine his
Majesty wrote to io^ne unto them a Regiment out of that Province, whither the
Duke of Alva would shortly come with his new Spanish Levies, that should supply
the Garrisons from whence the old Soldiers were selected. Likewise to the Duke
of Savoy the King had formerly sent John Acugnia, and now dispatched Francis
Ibarra: that, Writes to the Duke of Savoy to victual his men,
as the other desired a passage, so this might procure Victual for the Army.
Moreover Count John Anguisciola went Ambassador to the Swisse, and Anthonio
Mendoza to the Duke of Loraine, To the Switz and the Duke of Loraine to give
them passage.
acquainting them with his Majesty's Intentions, and desiring Leave for the
Royal Army to pass without Molestation through their Territoryes. For the
King had changed his Resolution of sending them by Lions, Charles the ninth of
France excusing himself, pretending the Civil Wars, and consequently the
unsafenesse of the Passage. Indeed the Report of the Spanish Army terrified
many Countries, particularly Geneva, Lion. Car. ix. Geneva terrified with news
of the Spanish March.
who were made believe that Pope Pius had agreed with the Duke of Alva, in his
March, to turn his Forces, as he might easily do, upon the Geneveses: and
they were assured the Duke of Savoy would not lose so good an Opportunity. That
which I imagine bred the Suspicion was the sudden Embassage of Bernardino
Mendoza sent to the Pope from the Duke of Alva, Ber. Mendoza l. b. a.
whilst he stayed in Millaine. Wherefore Geneva not only requested Aid to the
common Cause from Bearne, They send for assistance from the French Calvinists.
whose turn would be the next, but likewise from all the Calvinists of France,
as from a Plantation of Geneva; especially from the Prince of Conde, Head of
the Faction. Who g^ad of that Occasion to make Levies, The Prince of Conde and
the Colligni promise them protection.
promised and sent Assistance to Geneva under the Command of Mombrune. And the
Prince himself with Gaspar Colligny began their public Musters in France,
prete^ding to King Charles a fear the Spaniards, Raise men and persuade the
French K. to fight the Spaniard.
that accounted them as Enemies, had a design to take them unprepared. Nay
they would have persuaded the King to raise an Army, and not let slip such an
Opportunity (as fairer could not be) to revenge himself of a Nation that ever
hated France. It was true, that the Spanish Army, both for the Goodness of
Soldiers and Nobleness of Commanders, was a most select and considerable one,
yet in their passage through the Straits and over the Mountains; on the one
side by the French, on the other by the Geneveses and Swisse, they might easily
be distressed and cut off. And then all King Philip's Spanish and Italian
Forces being overthrown, as it was not to be doubted, but either a way might
be opened to recover Millaine, left naked of old Soldiers: or it was but
marching into the Lowcountreys, and that people willingly would receive the
French, to whose Arms they must acknowledge themselves obliged for their
delivery from the Spanish. But if neither of these Projects took effect; yet
certainly for many years a war was not to be feared from those, that having
lost such an army could not in a long time recruite. The Prince of Conde added,
that if it would please the King to raise forces for that war, he would bring
his Majesty 50000 men. Thus under a specious color for the public safety,
they offered his Majesty the Army which they had privately designed for their
Rebellion, like true Hugonots, who call that the Kings Security, The King of
France finding the Hugonots design, stirrs not.
which is indeed his Captivity. But the French King knowing what they aimed at,
lest by provoking a Potent Prince, he might at one time be engaged in a
Foreign and Civil War, replied it was neither agreeable to the Honor nor
Valor of the French, to circumvent a King, near to him in Affinity and
Freindship. But to secure his Kingdom from the Spaniards, in their March, he
would give Order for the raising of a new Army. Withal, he signified to King
Philip the Condition of his Civil Discords, by reason whereof, he could not
promise Security to his Forces if they came. And now the Duke of Alva
transported in the Galleys of Andrea Doria and Cosmo Duke of Florence, with his
new Spanish Soldiers that were to supply the old Italian Garrisons, arrived at
Millaine; where falling into a Fever he was forced to remain. Falls sick at
Millaine.
At which time upon notice of the Army which the Duke of Alva was to bring into
the Lowcountryes, The Governess likes not the coming of so great an Army,
whereupon she writes thus to his Majesty.
and that the King himself would follow (for so it was reported) the Governesse
endeavored to dissuade his Majesty from coming in a Warlike manner, which
would be of no use, but to imbroile the Provinces again. That the Lowcountreys
were at present in a peaceable condition, returned to their Religion and
Obedience; nor wanted they strength and Men, 12. April.
by which as this Condition was acquired, so it might be preserved and
increased by the King's presence if he came alone: but if he brought a new and
mighty Army, what would it import, but great Expenses to the King, and noe
less Poverty to the Lowcountryes? Upon the very Rumor of a foreign Army
diverse Tradesmen and Merchants familyes were now departed; and when they heard
of the Armies nearer Approcahes, more would leave the Country, because they
knew there would be noe Trading in a time of War and yet they must pay
Sessments and great Taxes for maintaining Soldiers. Besides the Fear of the
People, that cannot but think these Forces to be their Executioners; the
indignation of the Nobility, whose good Service, in quieting the late
Commotions would seem to be slighted; and the certain Relapse of the Place
into Heresy, that would return into the Lowcountreys with a Lutheran Army out
of Germany: and (which out of the premises she prophetically concluded) it
would cause, by that inexpiable Hatred and antipathy between the two Nations,
a bloody Civil War for many Ages. Wherefore she earnestly beseeched his
Majesty, that laying aside this unseasonable Design of Arms, he would come
peaceably into the Provinces, more like a father, then a King: and that by his
presence and Wisdom he would add to these happy Beginnings what was only
desirable, Continuation. This Letter the Governesse sent by an Extraordinary,
Gaspar Robley Lord of Bill and Governor of Philipvill, that being presented by
a person of Honor, it might have more Authority with the King. The King.
But it never moved him, who replied his Army should come into the Lowcountreys
for no other End but to establish peace. Madrid.
And this was writ to the Governesse, in the King's name, 21. May.
by Rui Gomez a Sylva Prince of Ebolo, who likewise sent her Excellence News
of the Marquess of Bergen's Death, Returns his reason for sending of an Army.
which happened in the Kings Absence from Madrid.

John Glimee Marquess of Bergen Op Zoom, Of the Marquess of Bergens death.
a City in the farthest part of Brabant, was the last year, sent from the
Low Countries into Spain, with Florence Momorancy Lord of Montin, nor was his
Embassy very well received, the King being excessively enraged at the Violation
of their Churches and Defection of their Cities. His unfortunate Embassage.
Therefore the Marquess begging leave to return very often, but still in
vain (because the Governesse had privately advised the King not let the
Ambassadors go, so long as the Troubles lasted) when he had now sufficiently
discovered the Plot upon him, both by his Delays at Court, and his mock-hopes,
as if he should every day return into the Low-countryes with the King; weary
of the Employment, and struck with the Duke of Alva's being chosen General, he
fell sick: and despairing of his Recovery, sent for the Prince of Ebolo, His
sickness.
his old Friend, to whom (they say) he grievously complained of the King, and
prayed he would deliver to his Majesty these words, from a dying man that
should no more speak for himself. That it much grieved him, His complaint of
the King.
not only to have no value put upon the many painful services he had done,
but likewise to see himself suspected, and looked upon as an Enemy; yet he
hoped that his Fidelity, and the perfidiousnesse and calumn^es of his Maligners
would once, though too late, appear. A while after, having settled all worldly
business, May. 21.
on the one and twentieth of May he dyed, some say poisoned as if no man
frowned upon by his Prince could dye a natural death. His death, whether
poisoned or no?
For my part, I mean not to affirm it, otherwise then as a Conjecture. He was
equally beloved, His Title, Offices and Employments.
by Charles the fifth, and his Son Philip: from him he received the title of
Marquess; this for his gallant Service at Saint Quintin chose him out of all
the Low-countrey-Lords to go over with him into England to his Marriage with
Queen Mary: at his return, he created him Knight of the Golden-Fleece, and
made him Grandven^ur (or Justice in Air) and Governor of Haynolt. In which
Province, because he seemed not, according to his duty, seriously to advance
the Catholic cause (though he himself was seriously a Catholic) the
Governesse was then much displeased with him; His impeachment, after his
decease, found guilty of High Treason,
and a few months after his Decease, being for the same attainted of High
Treason, he was condemned by the Duke of Alva. The Governesse receiving the
news of his Death, Her Excellence in the King's name takes Bergen op Zoom.
speedily, that is within eight days, written, as I said, from the Prince of
Ebolo; immediately, before the Report could be divulged, sent Mandevill with a
select Company of Firelocks, framing a Letter to the Lady-Marquesse of Bergen,
That she heard the Heretics of that Town offended with the late Edict, May 30.
endeavored some Innovation, therefore she had in haste dispatched Soldiers
to guard her, and the City: and to make them the welcomer, had chosen out of
her Ladiship's Uncle Beavor's Regiment Captain Mandevill, whom She had
commanded to receive Orders from her Ladyship. The business is not touched.
Her Husband's Death she mentioned not, lest it might lessen the Favor, and
move a suspicion of the thing intended. But when she sent away the Captain,
being a man of approved Fidelity, she discovered to him, that he was, in the
King's name, to possess himself of the Town. He should indeed serve the
Lady-Marquesse, in any thing that might be for her safety; but if she refused
his Soldiers, or commanded them to depart the Town: he must tell her, he
could not do it, without acquainting the Governesse: In the mean while, by
writting Letters and expecting Answers, he should spinne out the time, May 21.
till his Majesty expressed his absolute pleasure. For the Prince of Ebolo from
the King, May 31.
and afterward the King himself, had writ to the Governesse, The Kings
pleasure touching the Estate and Heir of the Marquess of Bergen.
that she was to bring the Marquesse's cause to a Trial, and if he were found
to have been privy to the Tumults and Rebellion, his Estate should be
confiscated, otherwise it should descend to his Heirs. The King added, in his
own Hand, That whereas the Marquess had declared his Sister's Daughter his
Heir, who was said to have no good Catholic Education; the Governesse should
find means to get her out of her Father's hands, and breed her, till she were
married to that Kinsman, unto whom the Marquess had by his will disposed her.
The City she forthwith seized, but the young Lady her Mother was a great while
fearful to deliver. A solemn Procession at Antwerp.
And after the Governesse had been present at the Procession, wherein the Body
of our Lord and Savior was carried through Antwerp, then solemnized with more
exquisite preparations and Pomp then ever, and followed with such multitudes
and Reverence, that one would think they had not so much as conversed with
Heretics; The Governesse troubled at the Duke of Alva's coming, many
aggravating her displeasure.
her Excellence, leaving Count Mansfeldt and 13. Companies in the Town, with
the rest and a great Train of Lords returned to Bruxells, there to expect the
Duke of Alva, whose coming every day more afflicted her; and many that loved
him not aggravated her distaste, telling her that by his Pride, all which she
had with so much pains and wisdom reconciled and composed, would be presently
put into confusion, and he would make Troubles, which it might be thought he
was come from Spain to quiet: whilst the Honor and Settlement, only due to
the governesse, would by his vainglory be numbered among his Triumphs. The
Governesse therefore not only expressed to the King her Resentment, in her
Letter by Gaspar Robley: She writes to Alva to disband part of his Forces.
but likewise writing to the Duke of Alva to congratulate his Arrival at
Millaine, June 15.
she let him understand the State of the Low-countryes, and wished him to
advise, whether it would not be a greater Act of prudence to disband part of
his Army, then by those unseasonable Forces and Expenses to irritate the
Low-countryes, which were now reduced to Obedience: such a Remedy in most men's
Judgments being too strong for the Disease. But the Duke of Alva pretended the
King's command. He answers that it is not in his power, Rui Gomez.
And the Prince of Ebolo by Robley, who was dispatched from Spain, June 30.
about the end of June, answered her; That the King was careful of his
Sister's Estimation, purchased of all the world, for governing the
Low-countryes with so singular wisdom in so dangerous times, Writes to the
Governesse the cause of the Duke's coming.
taking Cities, subduing Rebels, and at length, vigorously reducing all the
Low-countryes to their Religion, and Loyalty. Nor was Alva sent to rob her of
any part of that glory, wholly appropriate to her Highness, but that by
serving her with his endeavors and counsels, what was gained might be
preserved, with less troubles to the Governesse, and no envy that could
reflect upon her for punishing of Delinquents. But nothing so much satisfied
her, as the King's-Letter sent by Lopius Gallus, after Robley's departure,
wherein giving thanks to his Sister for so industrious and wise an
Establishment of Peace, July 1.
he said, he would shortly better express those thanks, The King promises his
personal presence.
in person, longing exceedingly to be an Eyewitness of her virtue. And, among
other commands, enjoined her to have in readiness at least eight Sail of
Ships to meet him, whenever an Express came of his weighing Anchors. A
Fleet made ready to transport his Majesty.
And the Governesse in good earnest provided the Ships, the Senate decreeing,
that for the King's happy Voyage public Prayers should be made; which
nevertheless his majesty meaning to stay at home, needed not, as some said;
Public Prayers for his happy Voyage, All to no purpose.
comparing him to Tiberius Caesar, who gave out from day to day, that he would
leave Rome; and suffered the Empire diverse times to make the like
supplications for his good Journey and Return, long busying the Roman
Provinces with that Expectation. Suetonius in Tiberio.
But the belief of the King's Expedition was to be maintained with such new
Scenes, or else the Play would have been spoiled. Howsoever the Duke of Alva,
equally distasteful to the Nobility and the People, would have been much worse
received by the Low-country-men, if they had not persuaded themselves by these
appearing hopes, that the King himself would shortly follow.

And now the Duke of Alva having perfectly recovered his Health, The Duke of
Alva musters his Army.
when he came to Ast, Asta in Piemont.
took the general Musters of his Army; which being greater in worth, then
number (though fear among the timorous had multiplied the very number) he
found to consist of 8700. Foot, and but 1200. Horse. For the Duke cared not
for multitude, What Horse and Foot.
which commonly is a hindrance to the March, but desired to have stout men, and
valiant hands, not many names: meaning afterward to increase them more
opportunely in the Low Countries, where without danger he might add to his old
Army, as to a body strong in nerves and bone, as much young flesh, that is,
untrained Soldiers, as he pleased. The Foot, in a manner all Spanish, he
distributed into four Legions, in regard they were raised out of four
Provinces, Four Spanish Colonels,
commanded by so many Spanish Colonels, conspicuous for their abilities in
war. Alphonso Vlloa Alph. Vlloae. Sanchio Lodo^ nius,
led the Neopolitan Regiment, consisting of 19. Colors, viz. 3230. men. Sancho
Londognios had the Millaine Regiment, comprehending under 10. Colors, 2200.
The Sicilian under as many Ensigns contained 1620. commanded by Iuliano
Romero. Juliano Romero.
The like number of Sardinians were mustered under Colonel Gonsalvo
Bracamonte, Ferdinand de Toledo Prior of Castile, Gonsalvo Brachamonte.
of the Order of Saint John's of Jerusalem, Ferdinando bastard-son to the Duke
of Alva.
Bastard Son to the Duke of Alva, was General of the Horse, that were
Spaniards, Italians, and Epirots. The Campe-Master General was Chiapino
Vitelli Marquess of Cetona, Chiapinio Vitelli Campe-master.
an old General famous for many Victoryes, and upon the King's request, sent
by the Duke of Florence to serve his Majesty; who likewise borrowed of the Duke
of Savoy Francisco Paciotto of Vrbin, Melzius l. 1. c. 7.
Count of Montis-Faber, an admirable Engineere and rarely skilled in
fortification. Francisco Paciotto Engineer Gabriel Serbellio, Master of the
Ordinance. Antonio Olivera Commissary General of the Horse, who first brought
this Office into the Low-countryes.
The General of the Train of Artillery was Gabriell Serbellonio, a Knight of
Saint John's at Jerusalem, Prior of Hungary, a gallant Soldier, and a most
excellent Cannoneere. To these great Field-Officers was added Commissary
General of the Horse, a new command lately instituted by Ferdinando Gonzaga
Governor of Millaine, and General for Charles the fifth: and at this time,
the Duke of Alva first brought that Office into the Low-countryes, bestowing it
upon Anthonio Olivera, descended from that Marino Olivera, whom Pedro King of
Castile sent for out of France with some other Commanders, to beat the Moors
out of Spain, and Anthonio was well able to discharge the place, having been
an old Soldier both in Italy and Africa, and being then a Colonel in
Millaine, from whence he first brought into the Low-countryes the Name and
Office of Commissary-Generall of the Horse. No less gallant men were the
Captains of every Troop and Company, Charles Davalo Son to Vastius Commander
in chief, Charles Davalo
with his Brother Piscario in the Battles fought in Piemont and Millaine,
emulating therein the ancient Glory of his valiant Ancestors. Bernardino
Mendoza.
Bernardino Mendoza, then famous for his valor, Camillo a Monte.
afterward for his History. Camillo a Monte (Brother to John Baptista Marchio
sent before into the Low-countryes) who trayled a Pike under his Uncle,
Chiapinio since he was twelve years old. Christopher Mondragonio, Christopher
Mondraegonio.
that had served under Charles the fifth in his Italian, African, and German
Wars, and is said to be one of those ten Spaniards, that with memorable
Bravery, holding their Swords between their teeth, swam the River Albis, taking
the Boats from the farther Shore, and bringing them back to the Emperor
through a Tempest of Shot, made a Bridge of them to pass over his Army, a very
advantageous Service that hastened the Conquest of Saxony. Sancho Avila, Sancho
Avila. Curtio Martinengo.
bred up to the Wars from a boy by the Duke of Alva, and till death his
constant Follower. Curtius Comes Martinengo, Nicholao Basta, Francisco Verdugo,
Nicholao Basta Francisco Verdugo.
and diverse others, almost all old Soldiers, that had seen many several
Services, and won as many Victoryes. The Army divided into Tertiaes.
Having mustered his Army, he divided it into three parts, and so marched over
the Cenisian Mountain, the highest ridge of the Appenine, into Savoy. The Van,
wherein was the Neopolitan Regiment with five Troops of Italian and Spanish
Horse, was led by the Duke of Alva himself; The second Division consisting of
Londognio's Regiment with four Troops of Spanish horse, was commanded by his
Son Ferdinando. The Marquess Vitelli brought up the Rere, containing the
Sicilian and Sardinian Regiments, and two Troops of Epirots. The Front of every
company, by a new invention, was flanked with 15. Supernumeraryes, armed with
Musketoones, A new Invention.
and Rests, wherein they laid the battle, that could not be managed by the
hand. For before his time such huge Muskets, as unmanageable, were drawn upon
Carriages, and only used at Sieges, from whence being translated into the
Field, and those that carry them mixed with the lesser Musketeers, they have
been found extraordinary serviceable in Battles. Gabriel Serbellonio and
Francesco Ibarra were sent before with some Companyes of Soldiers and
Artificers: this to provide Victual, he to examine the way, and to prepare
Quarter. They had Orders from Vitelli, Their March.
that the Army marching in three Divisions, the second should still lodge upon
the place from whence the first was moved, and when this dislodged, the last
should have Quarter there. And thus in June, by short Marches, over the Alps
and through Savoy, the Army came into the County of Burgundy, where it was
increased with 400. Horse, all young Burgundians. Passing through Loraine,
about the beginning of August, Strict discipline.
the Duke arrived in the Low Countries, offending none in his Passage, nor
being himself offended by any one. Though the French appeared in Arms upon
the Marches of Burgundy, and Colonel Tavan by command from the French King,
with 4000. Foot and some Troops of Horse for defense of the Borders, still
costed the Spanish Army. Indeed I do not think, that ever any Army marched so
far, and kept stricter Rules of Discipline. So that from Italy even to the
Low-countryes not only no Towns, but not any Cottage, was forced or injuried.
Exemplary P^nish^ent.
Only one crime in their Entrance to Loraine was committed by three Dragoones,
driving away as many Weathers from a Flock of Sheep, who, upon examination of
the Fact by the Duke of Alva, were immediately condemned to be hanged, and the
Sheep sent back: yet upon the intercession of a Loraine Captain sent from his
Duke to meet the Duke of Alva on the Borders, two of their lives were pardoned,
in honor of the Duke of Loraine: and the third was hanged up by lot, for they
cast Dice upon the Drum-head, and it was his fortune to dye, that enticed the
other two.

When the Duke of Alva came to Theonvill in the province of Lutzenburg the
Counts Alberick Lodronio, Otho Oberstein, The Duke of Alva enters the Low
countries
and Schowenburg received him in the head of their German Regiments with
Volleys of Shot, and general acclamations. He is saluted from the Governesse,
To whom he had sent,
There was present Charles Barlamont and Philip Norcarmius, he Governor of
Namure, this of Haynolt, both come from the Governesse to salute the Duke of
Alva; who had sent Francis Ibarra to present his Service to the Governesse, and
to receive her directions, in what Towns the Army should be quartered. Wherein
though the Governesse differed from the Dukes Opinion, because she would have
Bruxells a City always faithful to the King, He quarters his men in the
Low Countries.
exempted from this burden; yet he pretending the security and honor of the
King, who was to be resident in that City: lodged his Army part in the suburbs
thereof, part at Gant and in other neighboring Towns, Lodronio with his
Regiment (which had twelve Ensigns, and under every Ensign 300 men) was sent
to Antwerp, and Count Mansfeldt, whom the Governesse by order from the King had
made General of the German Horse, was commanded to disband his
Lowcountry-Souldiers, and resign his Government of Antwerp to Lodronio. A
little while after, the Duke of Alva, attended with many Lords that met him on
the way, entered Bruxells, and went directly to Court, where he cursorily
kissing the Governesses Hand, retired to Culemburg-House, leaving the Palace
to the Governesse. The next day he sent her the Kings Letters, and a Copy of
his Commission, wherein the Command in Chief for the Militia of the
Lowcountreys was conferred upon him, the administration of civil Affairs
remaining wholly in the Governesse. The same day waited on by a great train of
Horse and his Household Servants, 22. August.
he went in that state to visit her Excellence; the Courtiers (that found the
Governesse was, His visit to the Governesse in great state and with much
Reverence.
or would have had her discontented) observing how they looked at this first
Ceremony. Indeed the Governesse that had, for some days before, the grudging
of an ague, having made an offer of going forward to Receive this stranger,
pretended her Fit, or else it was thought to come very opportunely to take
down Alva's Pride: who in public omitted no Complement or Veneration due to
the Daughter of Charles the fifth, He shows her part of his instructions.
and Sister to his King: but when they were alone, he produced somewhat a
larger Commission; not only giving him power over the Militia, but Authorizing
him to fortify what Places he thought fit; Omitting his larger Commission till
a fitter time.
to displace Magistrates and Governors; to examine and punish the causes of
the late Tumults. And when the Governesse demanded if he had any further
Instructions, he said yes, a few more then could be opened at one meeting, but
according to future Emergencies they should be imparted to her. She appears
satisfied,
This Answer seemed not to move her, she then commended the Kings design, in
case it were so handled, that Peace newly restored to the Lowcountries like a
tender plant were not spoiled with diging too deep about it* She added, that
she thought it would do well if next day Copyes of the King's Letters should be
read in Senate, which was done accordingly. But writing to the King, she
complained, that the Duke Alva should come with such absolute Authority, But
complains to the King.
and so great an Army, that being greatly prejudicial to her Honor, 8.
September.
this to the newly settled State of the Lowcountreys. For already about 100000
men were fled out of the Provinces, carrying their money and goods into other
Princes Dominions; either fearing to be oppressed by Forreiners, or dispairing
of mercy, or thinking to avoid future calamity. One thing both comforted her
and the people, that is the King's Coming, who was so certainly expected by the
Lowcountrymen, that four days before, she had sent into Spain Wacken,
Admiral in the place of Count Horn, with nine Ships well manned, to attend
his Majesty: but if peradventure he should alter his determination, and think
it better to defer his voyage till another time, she humbly from her soul
beseeched him, that he would please of his goodness to free her, (that now for
nine years had governed the Lowcountries) from further care and charge of
those Provinces. But that which made her much more earnest in the same suit,
was the sudden Imprisonment of Count Egmont, and some others.

The Duke of Alva resolved to begin his Government with the Attaindours of
some of the Lowcountrey Lords, Of the Attain^dor of Count Egmont.
that when the eminent persons were removed, the People might have nothing
whereon to fix their eyes. At first therefore he carried himself obligingly to
the Lords, Alva uses him to draw in Count Horn.
in particular to Count Egmont, by whose example, he aimed to bring in Count
Horn, that stood upon his guard, and was desirous to hear of Alva's
Beginnings at a distance. They say, when, presaging his own death, he shunned
the sight of Alva, Count Egmont chid him for his fear, and undertook he
should be no worse used then he himself. He summons the Lords to advise about
the public.
The Event shortly verifyed these his ominous words. But when Alva saw that
Count Horn was wrought upon, he sent for Hochstrat and the rest of the Lords
to Bruxells to consult about regulating the Commonwealth: and he set forth,
but being newly recovered of a Sickness, whilst his Coachman went an easy
pace, as he was Commanded, hearing what had happened, he drove back again with
a powder. The rest of the Lords came to Bruxells the ninth of September. The
rest he surprises by other means.
That very day, the Duke appointed two Captains, Andrew Salazar, and John
Espuc without tumult to arrest John Casembrot Lord of Backersell, Especially
Casembrot
one of the Covenanteers, who could in all probability make the greatest
Discoueries, as being Secretary to Count Egmont. The Colonells Count Alberick
Lodronio and Sanchio Londognio received Orders, And Strall.
on the same day to bring to Bruxells Anthony Strall, Consul of Antwerp, one
very intimate with the Prince of Orange. And lest the City, wherein he was one
of the most popular and richest men, should mutiny, and rise in his behalf,
Alva desired the Governesse to write to the Magistrate of Antwerp, that the
Consul was sent for to Bruxells to advise with the Duke of Alva concerning the
State of Antwerp; she did so, and Lodronius after he had taken the Consul,
delivered the Letter to the Magistrate, who fearing himself made them lay him
in a Cart covered with many Pieces and packs of Cloth: but he was scarce out of
the port, The Lords advise with the Dukes very unadvisedly.
when Lodronio advertised by a Spy, seized on him. While these things were
acting, the Duke at Culemburg House sat in Counsel with the Lords Areschot,
Egmont, Horn, Mansfeldt, Aremberg, and Barlamont. There was present Ferdinand
Son to the Duke of Alva, Vitellius, Serbellonius and Ibarra. Alva purposely
spun out time in Consultation, expecting news of the taking of the Consul,
and Cassembrot, and therefore, sent for Count Paciotto into the Senate, to
resolve them about the platform of the Castle at Antwerp. When he knew his
Commands were executed, he dismissed the Lords. As the rest were going out, the
Duke took Count Egmont aside, Count Egmont arrested and disarmed.
as if he had private business with him: and many Commanders showing
themselves out of the next Room, Alva said Egmont I arrest thee, thou art the
King's Prisoner; in his name diliver up thy sword. The Count struck at the
sudden Arrest and seeing such a Company of armed Men about him, yielded his
sword saying and yet with this I have often, not unfortunately, defended the
King's Cause, adding noe more words, the Captains had him into a drawing
Room. At the same time, So is Count Horn.
Count Horn was by the Dukes Son, who seemed to wait upon him down the
Stairs, commanded to resign his Sword, and yield himself Prisoner to the Duke
of Alva by the King's Command; immediately the Captains that stepped in,
disarmed and carried him to the other side of the House. In the mean time
Sanchio Avila Captain of the Dukes Lifeguard, had drawn up his men to
Culemburg-House, and secured the Streets: the City being amazed, The City in a
Maze.
not knowing what this Face of Terror meant. But when they understood that
Egmont and Horn were imprisoned by the Duke of Alva: at first Grief took
away the People's Tongues, then they found the Duke of Alva's Plot, and were
angry at Egmonts Credulity. Many said, that in the Captivity of those Lords the
Lowcountreys were inslaved. This wrought in them a greater admiration of the
cautelous Course held by the Prince of Orange, and they ioyed in his Safety, as
if thereby the Lowcountreys were not left altogether Destitute. Nay Cardinal
Granvell at Rome hearing of the doings in Bruxells, asked the Messenger,
whether the Duke had taken Silence (so he called the Prince of Orange) when he
answered, Cardinal Granvells* saying.
no, he was not taken, Granvell (they say) replied, If that one fish has
escaped the net, the Duke of Alva's Draught is nothing worth. But because all
this was done without acquainting the Governesse before it could be divulged,
The D. of Alva sends his excuse to the Governesse,
the Duke sent the Counts Mansfeldt and Barlamont (whom he knew she Favored,
and were yet in his House) to tell her Excellence what was past, and to excuse
his secrecy; for he had concealed it by the Kings command, to the end that no
part of the Odium might reflect upon her, who was concerned to preserve the
love of the people under her Government. But this gave no satisfaction to the
Governesse, Not satisfactory.
and though whilst they were present she smothered her indignation, yet
deeply resenting it, she began to doubt, that many such actions might happen
for the future; and the power being transferred to Alva, she her self should
only retain the title and formality of Governesse; that the Government might
appear to be in one of the House of Austria. Therefore upon receipt of new
Letters, signifying the King had put off his voyage for Six months longer,
20. August.
that is, till the beginning of the Spring: her hope then failing, and being
daily tormented with sore fits of the Colic, she sent her servant Machiavell
to the King, and disputing the imprisonment of Egmont and Horn briefly
without complaint (lest she might seem distasted at it) she beseeched his
Majesty in regard of her Infirmities, 11. Sept.
which made her unfit for cares of State, She sues again to be discharged of
the Government.
to license her departure from the Lowcountries rather then stay her there with
such limited and almost no Authority. Whether it were advantageous to the King,
or handsome for her whom the King vouchsafed to call Sister, to be subordinate
to another, She humbly submitted to his Majesty's Consideration; For her part,
she resolved, so long as she lived, to be wholly Governed by his Majesty's
Pleasure, as became his most humble Servant. This notwithstanding, the
Governesse omitted nothing which appertained to Civil Affairs. In the interim
she is very active in it.
For by resolution of Senate, which she summoned, the Duke of Alva being
present, By her Edict she stops such as were leaving the Lowcountries.
she endeavored to stop the Lowcountry-mens Flight, which daily and still in
greater numbers slipped away; and ten of the richest Merchants of Tournay
intending to go into England, by her Command weere clapped up prisoners, and
their Goods in the Port of Vlushing imbargoed and confiscated. A while after,
the French Embassadou^, as she lay upon her bed, coming to kiss her Hands, and
making a grievous Complaint that Multitudes of Lowcountrymen flocked to the
Prince of Conde, She publishes another in favor of the French Ambassador.
and others that intended a War against the King, she published an Edict
against all Lowcountrymen that should assist the French Rebels. The
Ambassador not thus contented (by Command from King Charles, who was now
almost ruined by his rebellious Subjects) moved the Governesse for some present
Forces out of the Lowcountreys. Who likewise moves for forces out of the
Netherlands to suppress the new Troubles of France.
And indeed it was but a reasonable Request, for though the Causes of this
War (which the French Historians call the second Civil War of France) were
not all different from those of the first, yet the Prince of Conde and
Colligny, Occasioned by the Duke of Alva's March.
the heads of the Faction, grounded their pretense upon the Passage of the Duke
of Alva's Army, who faining to march another way, intended the Invasion of
France, to destroy those of the reformed. Religion. For, in the Conference at
Baion, they said, it was so articled, between Charles the French King, his
Mother Katherine of Medices, and his Sister Isabella Queen of Spain; where
the Duke of Alva was in person; In pursuance of which Agreement the Governesse
formerly had persecuted and quelled the Heretical Party in the Low-countryes,
and now Alva himself was come with a strong Spanish Army; that at the same
time King Charles might ruin the Hugonots in France, and the Spaniard their
Brethren in the Low Countries. Wherefore the French Hugonots raising great
Forces, as if they would revenge wrongs received, Great Mischief done by the
Rebels.
or at least stand upon their guard for the future, first, they seized diverse
Towns and Cities, then laid a Plot to take the King himself, lying at Meaux:
who very hardly escaping in the night, and received into Paris, there they
straightly besieged him, and cut off all Supplies by Arms or Victual,
endeavoring to bring their Prince into their Power. At last drawing out their
Army, they gave him battle at the Town of Saint Denis, and though they left
the Field and fled, and the Catholics, by consequence had the victory, yet it
was a bloody one, the King's General Annas Momorancy being slain.
Notwithstanding, they made greater Levyes (for Heresy daily increased) and
receiving strong Recruits from Germany revived the War. Which moved the King
of France, besides the men raised through his whole Kingdom, to desire aid
for the defense of Religion, out of Italy, Germany, and (as I said) out of the
Low Countries. The Governesse doubts whether she may grant the Embassador's
Request,
But the Governesse not willing to grant Assistance, without knowing the King's
pleasure, gladly referred it to the Duke of Alva; who remembering the Agreement
for mutual Succors made at Baion, and thinking the French Embassadours'
Motion both honorable to the Spaniard, But the Duke of Alva makes no
difficulty of it,
and opportune for kindling Enmity between the Low-countrey-men and the French
Heretics, whose minds would be distracted to see an Army come against them
from the same place whence formerly they had supplies, he answered the
Ambassador, that the Senate had decreed Auxiliaryes as he requested, which
should forthwith march away: and acquainting the Governesse with it, he gave
the charge of 2000. Spanish Foot, and 1200. Horse, Who furnishes him with men
makes Count Aremberg their General,
most of them Gentlemen of Haynolt and Artoys, to John Lignius Count of
Aremberg. Some write, that the Duke offered himself to be their General, but
such Assistance (as it was likely to do) would have begot a jealousy in the
French, that he came not as a Friend, but as a Spy: therefore as not expedient
for either Kingdom, And offers himself to lead them,
that he should be absent from the Low Countries, it was by the Ambassador
modestly refused, and then Alva substituted another in his place. Howsoever it
were, about the end of November, But the French decline that Offer from a
Spaniard.
Aremberg departing from Cambray (three days supplications being made before
he went, for his happy Expedition) joined his Forces with the Marquess
Villeirs at Amiens, from thence marching up to the King's Army, he did his
Majesty great Service in many Battles; till the French Differences partly
settled by a Treaty, he was commanded back to the Low Countries by the Duke of
Alva, who then especially needed such a General, and such an Army.

About that time Machiavell returning from Spain brought her Excellence the
King's Letters, Of the Governesse's departure from the Low Countries
wherein after he had signified, that three days before, October 10.
his Queen was brought a bed of a Daughter (this is the Infanta Katherine,
married to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy) he consented to her Departure from
the Low Countries; The King gives her leave to go,
professing he allowed of it, as his Sister's desire, not for the benefit of
the Provinces; for the governing whereof wisely and undauntedly in times of the
greatest difficulty, he gave thanks to her virtue in selected Words, She
delivers to Alva his Commission,
promising abundantly to remunerate the Service. Upon the receipt of this
Express, her Excellence delivering to the Duke of Alva his Commission for the
Government of the Low Countries, And signifies her departure to the Princes her
neighbors
sent by the same Machiavell out of Spain, and giving notice to the Spanish
Ambassadors, with the Emperor, the French, King, and Queen of England, that
they might inform those Princes of her going, December. 7.
she wrote to the Estates of the Low Countries, that some things, which she
could heartily have wished to have spoke in a public convention, Writes about
it to the Estates,
before she departed from the embraces of her people, must be supplied (since
now she had no further Power from the King to summon them) by her Letter;
wherein setting down briefly, but not sparingly nor falsely, all she had done in
her nine years Government, and by what means the Troubles, continuing for two
years past, were before the end of April so composed, that she had reduced all
the Low Countries, by the Help and Advise of the good Subjects, to the King's
Obedience: She prayed them, unanimously to endeavor the preservation of the
State in the same condition, and to persist in the Religion of their
Ancestors, and their Allegiance to their Prince: from whose merey it was to be
hoped that even the Tratours themselves would be gently punished. That she had
in her Letter to the King delivered her Opinion concerning it, and would write
again to the like effect, before she departed from them: nor would she
heareafter fail to use her utmost power with her Brother for the Good and
Peace of the Low-countrey-men, whom she so entirely loved. And accordingly, a
while after she wrote in this manner to his Majesty. Sir, The happy Delivery of
my Lady the Queen (for which good news I humbly kiss your hand) rejoices me
beyond expression, And answers the King thus.
to see the propagation of that great Blood, December. 20
worthy of immortality. But that whilst you give me leave to depart, you are
pleased to increase your royal Favors, by adding, that for my Governing these
Provinces to your mind, you your self (so much it pleases your Clemency to
descend) are greatly obliged to me; I must confess, nothing could more content
me: since in all I have done, I only proposed to my self your Majesty's
satisfaction, that being the Rule to all my actions. And if I have my End, I
must account my Labor gloriously bestowed. I will not deny, but in this almost
nine years space, I have gone through many and grievous Difficulties, most of
my Counselors being either at variance among themselves, out of their
ambitions Emulation: or their Fidelities by me suspected, at least their Enmity
to the Spaniard, so that it was inconvenient for me, not to hear their Advise,
and not safe to follow it. Yet that amidst all this darkness, and the
subsequent Tempest of Rebellion, the Commonwealth was steered and peaceably
brought into the Harbor by a woman's hand, but by no humane influence; it is
only, (which I I must acknowledge and reverence) your Piety, for whose sake the
Divine Goodness has assisted me in governing the Low Countries for you. But
now since by Gods grace things are reduced to such a condition, that nothing
remains but to punish the Authors of the Troubles, I cannot omit to signify
to your Majesty, what it is that may chiefly overthrow this present happy
State. Fear of punishment threatened by such an Army, as it has caused many,
despairing of Pardon, to fly into other Countries, to the great prejudice of
this; so I doubt, it will force the rest, whilst their flight is stopped and
they as it were besieged in the Low Countries, to break out into more
dangerous Factions and Insurrections. Terror is not the way to beget reverence
in the Low-countrey-men. They that advise this rigid Course (I wish I may be
deceived) will purchase Spain more Envy, then Authority. I am sure it will
bring to the Low countries, first, eivill War, then forreiene Forces, and
finally Desolation. Therefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty, that, in
contemplation of God's Mercy and your own, you will contract Revenge into a few
Examples; and rather desire the Repentance, then the Punishment of your
Subjects. So God Almighty long preserve your Majesty, and the Queen, my Lords
the Princes, and your little Daughter. In the mean time the news flying about
that the Governesse was to go away, Complements sent to the Duchess of
Parma, By the Provinces, And neighbour-Princes, Especially by the Queen of
England.
there came daily from all parts of the Lowcountreys men of the best quality in
the name of the Provinces, professing their own Grief, and the general Loss;
and praying earnestly, as the manner is, for her happy Journey. The neighbor
Princes by their Letters and Ambassadors did the like; but they were all
exceeded by Elizabeth Queen of England, who should hereafter (as she writ)
want the neighborhood of so good and dear a Sister; perhaps out of love to
the Governesse, or it may be out of hatred to her Successor the Duke of Alva.
Febr. 10.
In February, when she was ready to set forth, the King having assigned her a
Pension of fourteen thousand Ducats, She departs the Netherlands having a
Pension assigned her by the King And leaving a great desire of her Return in
the Low-countrey-men's hearts, Which they expressed in their discourse.
and the Duke waiting upon her to the Marches of Brabant, the
Low-countrey-Lords into Germany, she arrived safe in Italy: where in a mighty
concourse of People, her Husband the Duke of Parma in great State received her;
who left in the Low-countrey-mens hearts a deep Impression of her goodness,
which the following calamities so much augmented, as they stuck not in the
presence of Alva and Requesenes (which Princes Successors seldom hear) to
make an honorable, glorious, and almost upbrayding mention of her Actions. Nay
at Doway, when Margarett Duchess of Parma out of her love to Learning
repaired the Franciscans College, and that her Arms, as the Custom is, were
set over the Gates, the People never passed by but they bowed, and put off
their Hats. But their Longing then principally showed it self, 1574.
when the Low-country-men, Out of the Letters of Juan Gang. Fransican, and
others.
writing to the King, earnestly desired to have the Duchess of Parma for
their Governesse again, as there only Stay and help, in their Afflictions: And
soon after the Death of Don John of Austira, she, with her Son Alexander
joined in Commission, returned to govern the Low Countries.

The History of the LOW-COVENTREY WARS. The seventh Book.
THUS far I have writ of the Lowcountreys, though not flourishing in Peace,
1568.
yet not imbroyled in continued War. A proposal of the following (...)
Howsoever, their Troubles were composed at last, and their ancient
Tranquillity restored. Now I must open the prospect of a History, where you
will read the public Rebellion of the Provinces, great armies on both sides,
greater Hatred, and many Generals and Soldiers falling in the Quarrel. Nor
am I ignorant, The couse is ^^mmo^^ he^ged upon the Duke of Alva out of (...)
to him
that the Cause of all this Mischief is vulgarly imputed to the Duke of Alva;
for before he came Governor to these Provinces, his name was hateful to the
Lowcountry-men. It is reported when the Emperor Charles the fifth, meaning to
revenge himself upon Gant, asked the Duke of Alva what Punishment, in his
Opinion, For his words to the Emperor.
they deserved? He answered, that his Majestyes stubborn Country deserved
utter Ruin. The Emperor offended at this cruel Answer, commanded him to go
to the top of a Tower, and from thence take a View of the whole Town, then he
asked him, how many Spanish Skins would go to the making of such a Glove
(for Gant in French is Glove) but finding the Emperor by his look to be
displeased, Alva durst make no Reply. This Passage, because interwoven with the
Honor of the Prince and City (whether true or false,) was easily believed by
the Gantois, and from them dispersed with an Odium upon Alva, through the rest
of the Lowcountreys. And by the manner of his Coming he increased the Opinion
of his Severity, entering the Provinces with an Army, as if his design were to
Conquer them: For bringing again the Spanyerds.
bringing Spanish Soldiers again into the Low Countries, awing the Towns
with them, and with the Forts he built; sentencing Count Egmont, For con^enning
and banishing the Lords.
a man generally beloved; and Count Horn* Admiral of the Seas; summoning the
Prince of Orange with other of the Confederates to answer their Impeachments.
And, it is said, he persuaded the King, that he should not out of Lenity, (of
which there had been too much already) pardon any man for the future. And
indeed if his Majesty had granted the Petition made by the Prince of Orange,
that his own and his Friends causes might be heard by the King, as Master of
the Order of the Fleece, not by the Duke of Alva and his Council, many think
they had hardly at this time begun the War. But the sentence of the enraged
King (condemning the Prince of Orange and his confederates of High Treason, and
confiscating their Estates) being pronounced by an odious Minister, Out of all
which some deduced the Cause of the War.
and so the Odium reflecting upon the Judgment it self, may seem to have
constrained their taking of Arms, upon a just resentment; and consequently,
that the miserable and long War ensuing, should rather be charged upon the
Spaniards, then the Low-countrey-men, as some say; but what are they? men of
that number, which, says Polybius, conceive the Causes and Beginnings of a
War to be the same. l. 3. Hist.
For my own part, But improperly.
as I will not deny, but that Alva's cruel and hateful Government was the
Occasion and Beginning, so I assure my self it was not the Cause of the War:
A more probable deduction.
For the cause was much deeper grounded. Indeed the Prince of Orange's Ambition
to command in chief, exasperated with grief and Anger, heightened by the
access of Heretics and opportunity of a Party, men of all qualities engaging;
this was the Cause, which, if it had not then and from that Original taken
fire to kindle a War in a little more time, and from another Place, would
have found combustible matter. Nor can occasion be long wanting to Improbity.
But the Prince of Orange his Fact was so fortunate, as to find Patronage in the
Hatred of another. For he, upon the Sentence pronounced by the Duke of Alva
against him, his Brother, and many great persons, took up Arms, with so much
the fairer pretense, by how much it seemed not only just, but glorious to
defend himself, to recover his own, and to vindicate his Associates, his Son,
and Country in their Rights and Liberties. In the Relation of which War
managed by the Duke of Alva, and his Successor Ludovico Requesenes, How the
Author means to write the Governments of Alva and Requesenes.
I shall contract my self; especially where I have no more, nor no certainer
Intelligence then others. For which two Reasons I have enlarged my discourse in
the Duchess or Parma's Government and shall do, in that of Don John of
Austria, and of Alexander Farneze: For I can promise many Animadversions
concerning them, out of the Monuments of Letters in my hands, which are not
common. Yet in this Summary, if there be any thing, (as I presume there will be
diverse) which I know, and is unknown to others; I shall not fail to give it
you at full.

Some thought the future Calamities were presaged, Presages of the future.
by a Boy borne at Liege, A monster born at Liege.
with two Heads, four Feet, and as many Hands, portending as they said, the
Monster of a Confederation to be made out of the joint Forces of sundry
Nations; which soon after came to pass. This Terror was increased in minds
already disposed to fear, by a Fire immediately after happening in the City of
Machlin. A Fire at Mechlin.
For a spark falling among the Gunpowder, at the Mills, by accident, or
perhaps upon design, took hold of 60. Barrels, with such a horrid thunder and
Earthquake, that in most of the Cities of Brabant the men and houses trembed at
the dreadful noise. Though in regard these Powder-Milles used to be distant
from Towns, there were but few men slain; yet there might have been fewer,
and would be daily, if as we sever seditious persons, lest by coming together
they set the State in a Combustion; so the Elements that make Gunpowder were
kept a sunder. The Fort at Antwerp.
But Alva more moved with the Loss, then with the Prodigy, laid the foundation
of a Fort at Antwerp, modelled by the great Engineere Paciotto, approved of by
the Judgment of Serbellonio, raised by the hands of 2000. Workmen, with
extraordinary Speed and Success, because he used but one man's contrivance,
and one man's counsel. It Is Figure, of five sides,
It was built in the form of a Pentagon, at every one of the sides was a large
bulwark, to four of which, the Governor gave his own name, and titles,
Ferdinando, Toledo, Duke, and Alva, the fifth he suffered to be called
Paciotto. But this Fort, though it long continued a pattern to all the new
Plat-formes of Europe: The Architect.
and that Paciotto got himself a great name by it, being from thence called
the Inventour of the modern Fortification; yet it was not by all men equally
esteemed, as for other Causes, The Site by some disliked.
so particularly for the Situation, upon that bank of the Scheldt which
looks toward Brabant, in so much as when the Enemy from Holland attacques
the Town, it cannot beat them off; as it would have done, had it been placed
on the other side the City, against the mouth of Scheldt, Hier. Conestag. li. 2.
opposite to Holland. But it is excused by some, that say, when Alva built this
Fort, Defended by others.
he rather considered how he might defend himself from the Town, Adrian.
Sropernus contra Conestag.
then the Town from the Enemy. And they add, that the place was discreetly
chosen, as opportune for the bringing in contribution from those Provinces
subject to the Spaniard, which indeed is most considerable in the building of
Forts: a convenience they had wanted in case it had looked toward Holland. But
with arguments ill suited
Though, I suppose, Serbellonio had not this in design. For when he raised
this Fort, Holland was no less obedient to the King, then Brabant: and
therefore he would have provided for contribution from both. But I conceive by
that Site he intended the Security of the Fort it self. The reason why it was
built in that place.
For when all the Level between that and Holland lies so much lower, that the
River is kept off by huge Piles of wood, lest it should overflow the Fields and
Villages; it had been very inconsiderate, to have fortified where the Enemy
tearing up the Wood-piles, the very water would have besieged the Place, and
have forced it to yield. To which danger it is not subject, being seated on the
higher ground. Though afterward when the Low Countries were divided, and
Holland brought into the power of the Enemy, that fell out, which was not at
first thought of, the Advantage of bringing into the Fort Supplies out of the
Provinces in obedience to the King of Spain.

At the same time, The Council for examination of the Tumults.
from the council of Twelve, nominated by Alva to determine without Appeal
the causes of all Delinquents in the late Tumults, by reason of their frequent
Sentences of Death, called the Council of Blood, The Duke of Alva summons the
Belgic Lords to answer their Impeachments.
William Nassau Prince of Orange, Anthony Lalin Count Hochstrat, Florence
Pallantius Count Culemburg, William Count Bergen, Henry Brederod, and the other
Lords fled out of the Low Countries, were upon Alva's command, summoned to
hear their Accusations and Impeachments, read by the King's Advocate, and to
clear themselves of the crimes charged against them. They protest against his
proceeding.
But they, presently sending a Paper to the Duke of Alva, wherein they denied
his Council to be a lawful Court of their Companions of the Golden Fleece,
held it their safest course at a distance to defend their Common cause. The
Prince of Orange sues for the Patronage of the German Princes.
The Prince of Orange made suite to the Emperor Maximilian, and implored his
and the German Princes Assistance, that by their Authority, the Difference wit
the Duke of Alva might be composed. Unless perhaps he did it, that under
pretense of making his Peace, the Spaniard might not look into his
preparations for a War. Who treat with Alva, But in vain.
Nor did Caesar, or the Princes of the Empire deny their Patronage to the
Low-country-men. But the Duke of Alva answered to the Letters written by
Maximilian, and to the Duke of Bavaria's Ambassador, (whom the rest of the
German Lords, as one respected by the King, had chosen to represent their
Desires to the Governor) that he did not this of himself, but by command from
the King; and so hastening their cause to a Hearing, yet expecting the number of
days given for their Appearance, when within that time none of them came in,
the Duke of Alva, The Duke of Alva gives sentence against the Lords,
according to the power deputed to him by the King in that case to hear and
determine, pronounced the Prince of Orange, his Brother Lewis, and the rest
that were summoned by Edict, guilty of High Treason, and confiscated their
Estates. Likewise he put a Spanish Garrison into Breda, a Town of the Prince
of Orang'es, Sends the Prince of Orange's Son into Spain, where Amb. Morales
was his Turour, a great Philosopher and Divine.
and taking his Son Philip-William, a Child of thirteen years old, from the
University of Lovaine, where he was a Student, sent him into Spain: where
under the name of Catholic Education, the name of Hostage was concealed. This
the Prince of Orange seemed passionately to resent, execrating with continual
and public Exclamations, the cruelty used to a boy of thirteen, whom neither
his own Innocence, nor the privileges of the University of Lovaine, could
protect from Injury. The Prince of Orange appears enraged. In his Apology
Yet many, upon very good Grounds conceived his Son's Captivity was pleasing to
this subtle Prince, measuring all things by his own Advantage. For if the King
of Spain prevailed, and consequently he himself should lose all he had, yet
his Majesty might be merciful to the boy, bred up a Spaniard; 1581.
but if, But is not so,
as he hoped, it should otherwise fall out, he had a younger Son, Maurice,
Companion in his Father's Fortune, The Council of twelve condemns diverse
others.
and Heir to his Estate. By the said Council of twelve, all such were
particularly condemned, as the Duke of Alva, upon Examination by Inquisitours
sent through the Provinces, found to have violated Churches or holy Pictures,
or to have assembled at Sermons, Consistoryes, and turbulent meetings, or to
have conspired against the King; either by wearing Cognizances, and owning the
names of Gheuses, or by taking Arms, or lastly by assisting the Rebels with
their Endeavors, Counsels, or Forces. Yet the wiser sort thought this to be an
unseasonable Course: and that rather, till the Heads had been cut off, the Body
should have been gently handled and laid in a sleep lest if it should be in
motion, Alva razes Culemberg- house.
that agility might easily decline the blow made at the head. With the like
fury the Duke of Alva commanded them to pull down Culemburg-House, Where the
Gheuses first received their Denomination: and upon the place setting a
Marble-pillar, writ upon the Basis, as a monument to posterity, in four
Languages, these words, In this Area stood the House of Florence Pallantius,
ruined in memory of the execrable Treason hatched therein at sever all times,
against Religion, the Roman Catholic Church, New terror from Spain, By
reason of Prince Charles his misfortune.
their King, and Country. This Spectacle was rendered more horrid by the late
news from Spain, that Prince Charles was imprisoned by the King his Father's
command; and that Florence Momorancy sent (as you have heard) into Spain by
the Governesse, was by warrant from the King a Prisoner in Segovia. It was
thought the same objections were against him, that were against his Brother
Count Horn: but the Prince lost himself by his Favors to the
Low-countrey-men. And the Lord Montiny ^ death. Of Charles Prince of Spain.
Indeed the Judgment upon Montiny was certainly known, he being condemned a
year after, to lose his Head; but the cause of Prince Charles his Death, which
happened in this year, the more uncertain and obscure it was, the more
litigiously do Writers strive to examine it, most men having a natural
Ambition to search into Secrets, and pass by things before their eyes.
Whatsoever I my self have by my Industry discovered that concerns Prince
Charles, I shall impartially unfold, not regarding the conceptions of others.

Charles prince of Spain was of a furious and violent nature, His disposition.
and noted to be so from his Childhood, at which time being presented by some
Hunters with Levorets, he killed them with his own hands, that he might have
the pleasure of seeing them gasp and dye. The Venetian Embassado^r took
notice thereof, What conjectures were made from it.
and from thence made a Judgment of the Child's barbarous inclination; with as
much probability, as long ago the Areopagites censured the Boy that put forth
the eyes of Quails. Quint. 5. ^9.
This I have read in the Letters touching the Affairs of Spain, writ by the
said Ambassador to the Senate of Venice And the Prince himself daily
manifested the truth of these conjectures, by his cruel and monstrous
disposition, not being at many times Master of himself; as the Archbishop of
Rossana the Popes Nuntio affimed, writing to Cardinal Alexandrino. I. B.
Castanco afterward Urban VII.
And the Child grew more headstrong by reason of his Father's absence; and the
indulgence of Maximilian King of Bohemia, Feb. 4.
who, with his Queen, Mary Daughter to Charles the fifth, Aloys. Cab in Philip
the 2. l. 2. 6. and 8. and Adrian l. 19. and 20. Hist.
governed Spain for King Philip. This his Granfather Charles the fifth
perceived, when after the Resignment of his Kingdoms, returning out of the
Lowcountryes into Spain, he grieved exceedingly to see the Nature and
Education of his Grandchild, Charles the 5. liked not his Grandchild, Aloys.
Cab. in Philip. the Second. 2. l. 6. P. Charles sent To Alcala to study.
then but eleven years old. But King Philip having tried many Remedies, at
last made experience of the University of Alcala, sending his Son Charles
thither, accompained with Don John of Austria, and Alexander Farneze, Prince of
Parma; in hope that conversing with such a confluence of learned men, as his
body by the change of air, so his mind might recover by the change of Company.
but Prince Charles being removed from his Father, not from himself, the
sickness of his mind altered not with the Place, but somewhat increased by an
accident: for falling form a high Ladder, Lies at the point of Death.
he pitched upon his Head, and hurt his brain so dangerously, as the
Physicians despairing of his life, they were ready to lay him out, Recovers
miraculously.
when the Body of the blessed Didacus being brought into his Chamber, as he was
a dying, King Philip (who had come post from Madrid) vowed, that if the already
beatified Didacus recovered the Prince, he would be an earnest Suitor to the
Pope to give him the title of Saint. Whereupon immediately, beyond all
expectation, he was restored to life. How unlike to his Father.
But this wrought no cure upon the Manners of the phantastique youth,
altogether differing from his Father. Which made King Philip more harsh toward
him, Their mutual aversion out of the Letters of Castan. the Popes Nuntio to
Car. Alex. 30. April.
and the Prince better pleased with any thing then his Fathers Sight. This
Averseness grew as the Prince did; and the King daily more offended and
distrustful of his Son, from time to time put off the Match concluded beweene
Prince Charles and the emperor Maximilian^s Daughter; forbidding him to meddle
with Affairs of State, Upon these two points.
in that point of time, when the Prince thought it but a modest Ambition for a
youth of twenty two to expect the Crown. From hence sprung his Hatred to his
Father's Favorites and Counselors which he thought were Spies over him, Out
of the same Letters to the same person, 4. Feb.
and told all he did to the King, advising his Majesty to defer the Match,
and to lay Commands upon him not to act in public business: His hatred to
his Fathers Servants.
for which he sometimes threatened them with Revenge. From hence likewise
sprung his Favor and Patronage of such as he knew had offended his Father,
and were by him deserted, especially the Low-countrymen; His Patronage of the
Low-countreymen.
whose Ambassadors, the Marquess of Bergen, and the Lord Montiny were very
gracious with him, and often privately called into his Bedchamber; and it is
reported he defended their Cause more passionately, More violent then it ought
to have been, His purpose to go for the Low countries
then became him: making them a Promise that he would himself go into the
Low Countries to settle those Provinces. And whereas the Governesse formerly
complained to the King, that many Letters of high concernement, written to his
Majesty in Spain, were returned into the Low Countries to their hands against
whom they were written, I think it not improbable, that it might proceed from
that Familiarity between the Prince and the Low-country-Embassadours. His
Endeavors to hinder the Duke of Alva's Belgic Expedition.
Sure I am, when the Duke of Alva being to go for the Low Countries took his
leave at Court, and came to kiss the Prince's Hand, his Highness cast a
terrible frown upon him, and replied, No man should go thither but himself.
And when Alva said that he was sent before by the King, to quiet the Tumults
raised in the Lowcountreys, where it was not safe to venture the Heir apparent
to the Crown, The Prince in a rage drew his Dagger, saying, I will prevent thy
Journey. The Duke hardly declined the Blow, and, when he saw the furious youth
strike at him again, grasped him hard between his Arms, in the posture of a
suppliant, kneeling, and beseeching him not to offer Violence to an old and
faithful Servant: but still notwithstanding his youth and fury, the Duke held
his Hands: till the noise of their Struggling brought in the Waiters, that were
but on the other side the Hangings, then the Prince withdrew. From this time,
he resolved, whether his Father would or no, Out of the said Letters to the
same man.
to pass into the Low Countries, and from thence to Germany to his Mistress;
April. 30.
acquainting his uncle Don John of Austria and two others with his Resolution,
earnestly desiring them to go along. Don John showing him how difficult it was,
He reveals his Design to Don John, Marquess Pescaria.
and indeed impossible to be effected, when he saw his persuasions wrought not,
and found the Prince obstinately bent upon the voyage, imagining the King would
know it by some other, Duke Mid. Riosiou.
to whom the rash inconsiderate youth would impart his Counsel, he himself
engaged the King by the Discovery, Who first disswades him. Afterward
acquaints the King with it.
fearing if he kept it secret, he might be held accessory to the Princes
Flight. The King commending Don John's Fidelity, and being informed of his
Son's Intention by many others, and lastly by Raymont De Tassis his Majesty's
Principal Secretary, hearing that he had laid Horses at several Stages for
the Speeding of his Journey, The King seeks help from God, And Counsel from
prudent men what to do in the Case of his Son.
remained in a sad suspense: yet before he would fix, his resolution, his
Majesty commanded Prayers and Supplcations to be made in all Churches of the
Town, and desired the Advice of certain great learned men, well known unto
him. The Opinion of Martin Azpilcueta Doctor of Nav^rre the famous Casuist
(for this of all the rest I have only seen) was briefly, 1456. Paul. Aemil.
in Gar. 7 and Haraeus in ^hilip the Good, Who being to take ^ost by break of
day, Was seized at midnight.
that the King could not, without grievous sin, neglect the safety of his
Kingdom; but it would be neglected, if he permitted the Prince to go away, who
afar off, and therefore more confidently and and publicly handying against
his Father, would distract the Kingdom into Factions and Parties; just as it
happened to Charles the seventh of France, upon the difference between him and
his Son Lewis, when he fled into Burgundy. But the Father was put out of his
doubts by his Sons have, who, as Raymond brought word, had appointed the next
day for his Departure. Rui Comez. Prince of (...). Comez Figueroa Duke of
Feria, Anthonio de Toledo Priour of Leon, and Aloysio Quisciada.
Therefore the King would no longer deliberate; but taking a long the Prince of
Ebora, the Duke of Feria, and two others, about tewlve a clock at night entered
his Son's Bedchamber, who was fast asleep, and taking away his Sword, which he
had laid under his Pillow, ba^e him rise immediately, and blaming him that
having frustrated so many gentle Remedies used by his Father, he had forced him
to a sharper course, but more seasonable for his Son, he opened his Cabinets,
and took out his papers, A guard set upon him in his Lodgings, his Infelicity,
discharged his old Servants, and gave the Prince in custody to some of his
own choosing And now the unfortunate Prince, who but a while since was
continually waited on by the Lords and Grandees of Spain, striving to kiss
his Hand; seeing himself guarded by a few men, and those Enemies, that
observed his words, his looks, and almost dived into his Thoughts: after six
Months, when he found his Father not moved with Embassages in his behalf from
the Princes of Europe, and Petitions presented from his own Kingdoms: falling
into a Sickness, caused partly by an obstinate Refusal of his Meat, partly
by his sometimes intemperate eating, and drinking Wine too much cooled in Snow,
besides the distempers of his mind, His religious Death.
if he were not poisoned, he dyed upon Saint James his Eve. Out of the Letters
of Castan the Popes Numcio to Card. Alex. 27. July. Didacus de Chiaves.
Four days before (having for a long time equally slighted the cure of Body
and Soul) God turning his Mind, he called for his Ghostly Father, and
confessing his Sins, with great compunction, sending one to his Father to
beg pardon for his Disobedience, holding a hallowed Candle in his hand, gave
up the ghost. I know this Relation will not please some, Causes, that might
sound probable, for the imprisonment and death of Prince Charles.
that greedily swallow down the foulest Surmizes, without any distinction or
respect to Truth or False-hood: for whose palates, if I were minded to dress
my Discourse, I might instance the Rebellion of the Moors at this very time,
and make Prince Charles their Incourager, and say, that he solicited Selimus
the Turkish Emperor, by Michesius the Jew; The Rebellion of the Moo^es in
Spain.
fled out of Spain, as I have formerly related. I might like-wise move a
jealousy, that the Faction of the Low country. Covenanters was assisted by
Prince Charles, The Belgic Faction countenanced by him.
and might interpret that to be the reason why they resolved to send into
Spain many thousands of Calvin's Catechismes translated into Spanish, whereof
the Governesse (as I told you) sent Intelligence to King Philip: and Pope Pius
the fifth wrote to his Majesty, Ant. Gabie. in (...) l. 3. c* 3*
that some Chest fulls of them were found at Lions and Toulouse. 1566.
Nor should I pass over the Death of Queen Isabella, Wife to King Philip, Too
much familiarity with the Queen his Step mother, A Plot to murder his Father
there being but a few months between the Prince his Death and here is, as if
their too much Familiarity (for Isabella should have been married to Prince
Charles) had been the cause of both their fates. Lastly, I might tell you, how
the Prince had a design upon his Father's life, either out of affection to the
Crown, or hatred to the King, grounding my conjecture upon common fame, which
spread to far, that to my knowledge this verse of Ovid was used to that
purpose in the Low Countries; first applied, as they say, by Opmerus: FILIVs
ante DIeM patr Ios InqVIrIt In annos.

Wherein both the Prince's Fact, Lib. 1. Metamor^h.
and the year of his Death, MDLXVIII.
are expressed in numerall Letters. But this kind of learning, as dark and
intricate, I willingly leave to those Writers, But all these Causes were
uncertain, Or rather false
that by Interpretation of such Oracles are ambitious to be famed for
acuteness of wit, and divination; they seeming to me, besides their
uncertainty, to have no color of Truth. For not to speak of the Love betwixt
the Queen and Prince, which if it had been true, the King to break that
League would have hastened, not put off, the Princes Marriage with his
Cosen-german; if the Prince had plotted any thing against his Father, he might
every day have executed it by himself, and with his own hands: as being
young, and coming resolved against an unprepared old man: or if he would have
raised Tumults and called in help, no doubt but he had needed many hands: and
consequently, when the Prince fell, those of his Party (I suppose) could not
have stood; yet the Princes Death was the loss of no man's Life. Nay the King
to lessen the envy both of his Son's Imprisonment and Death, knowing himself
aspersed by diverse persons, in particular, by Mary the Empress, the Prince's
Aunt, and desirous to match her Daughter to the Heir of so many Kingdoms,
would he not have pretended the cause of such Severity to have been his Son's
impious Designs? Notwithstanding, in his Letter to the Empress, January 21
he denied that his Son was found guilty of any ^reasonable Intention, but
said, it was fit he should be imprisoned for his own, What the King wrote
concerning his Son's Imprisonment.
howsoever for the Kingdome's Good. And a few days after his Son's Commitment,
sending the President of his Council of Castile to the Archbishop of Rossana,
the Popes nuncio, Didaco Cardinal Spinosa.
he assured the Bishop from the King, there was no other reason of that Change
January 24
(as the Bishop himself wrote to Cardinal Alexandrino in the President's
wrods) then his Majesty's Resolution to prefer Religion and the Safety of his
Subjects before his own blood, What he caused to be divulged privately.
which compelled him in a manner, to sacrifice his only Son: lest he should
have been more than ungrateful for the great benefits God had bestowed upon
him. And publicly The said Nuncio to the said Cardinal.
Afterward his Majesty inserted in his Letters to foreign Princes and to his
own Kingdoms, that the Rumor spread abroad of a Plot which his Son had upon
his life was idle and false. But this fortune proved peculiar to the two
Charles'es, January 27
the Grandfather and Grandchild* that the one's Desire to resign, Charles
the fifth, and Prince Charles.
and the other's to invest the Sovereignty, very much busied the wits of
Writers. The Low-countrey-Lords and Commons affrighted with the King's foreign
and domestical Severity; every man as his conscience accused him, The
Low Countries in great fear, An Ambuscado laid for the Duke of Alva.
shifted for himself, few hoped for Pardon, many thought of Arms and Revenge.
In so much as Alva himself hardly escaped at the Monastery of Greene-vaile, to
which he was going in devotion: an Ambush being laid in the woods, by Ressorius
Nohott to surprise him by the way. And when he came thither, he was in danger
to have been murdered in the very Monastery by Charles Ressorius, his Brother,
who had taken the habit of a Monk, pretending fear of the Duke.

But now the Prince of Orange professing himself the King's Enemy, The Prince
of Orange's first Expedition out of Germany into the Low Countries.
made his Addresses to the Princes of Germany, and partly for Religion, partly
for Kindred's sake, moving them to take Arms, with his Friends in the
Low Countries and France; it was so ordered, that the Provinces were to have at
one time a tripartite Invasion. From Iuliers the Nohots the Brothers, Dui,
Forces sent to begin the War. Out of Iuliers. Out of Artois. Out of Frisland
Villers, and others were to pass the River of Mose, under the Command of
Count Hochstrat. Francis Cocquevill that to the Low-countrey-Exiles had joined
some forces raised upon the Borders of France, was to fall upon Artois.
Frizeland was committed to Lewis and Adolph Brothers to the Prince of Orange,
and to Iustus Schouwenberg. The Prince himself being, after these Beginnings,
to follow with a strong Army; had chosen Brabant for his Headquarters, many
having great hopes, that he would shortly beat Alva and the Spaniards out of
the Low Countries. But Hochstrat's Forces received first a Repulse by Sancho
Avila, The first Army defeated by Avila.
beyond the Mose, and afterward, joining Battle with him, a Total
overthrow: Villers and Dui being took Prisoners. Cocquevill's Army, The second
by Colonel Cosse sent from King Charles of France.
against whom the French King at Alva's Request, had sent Cosse a Colonel of
Horse, was forced to retreat into the Town of Saint Valery, and there
defeated, the Commanders carried to Paris and beheaded. Thus was John Lignius
Count Aremberg Governor of Frisland General at ye Battle of Hilligel.
portrait thanks returned by the King of France to the Duke of Alva for sending
Count Aremberg with his Auxiliaries into France, and the agreement made at
Baion on both sides religiously observed. But in Friezland the business began
in a far different manner, The battle between Count Aremberg and Lewis of
Nassau.
Lewis and Adolph of Nassau, with other Commanders, had entered that Province,
and Possessing themselfes of Dam and some other Towns made a halt near the
Bay of Dullart, which Bay was gained by the Sea, with a memorable destruction
of thirty three Villages swallowed up by the salt water at one time. 1277.
To stop them here, Aremberge's men victorious at first.
Count Aremberg Governor of Friezland met them with the Sardinian and Spanish
Forces, of Gonsalvo Bracamonte, and his own German Regiment, whereto were
added some Companyes of the Gentry of Haynolt, and Artois, newly arrived from
France: And indeed he was very fortunate in his first Skirmishes, Commanded by
Scemkey. Charles Duke of Gelders.
the Spaniards being particuarly encouraged at the sight of Dam (out of which
thirty years before the Emperors Army had beaten the Duke of Gelderland, and
won a famous Victory) with like valor they regained the Town, putting to
flight the Nassavians. The next day Aremberg coming up to them, lodged his Army
near Winschot, and the Abbey of Hilligel, The place where they fought.
well knowing the place was full of blind Pits covered over with Rubbish and
the water standing in in them. Aremberg would have put off the fight. Curtius
Comes Martinengho. The Span^ards rail at him.
Therefore considering himself to be the weaker in Horse, and that Nassau had
the advantage of the place, he only skirmished with them, and though Lewis
offered him battle, yet declined it, expecting the Count of Megen with
Martinengho's Horse which lay at Groening. But in the mean time, whilst
Aremberg, as if he did but play with Nassau and meant not to hurt him, was
publicly censured by the Spaniards, desirous to fight a Battle: the
General not able to endure ill language, professing that such precipitation
would hazard all, regarded Rumor more then Safety, and leading out his men
(rather following them) avoided as much as he could the Pits of water; He
joins battle.
but not aware of an Ambush laid by Count Lewis at the bottom of a hill, set
his men in battle and began the fight. Where resolving to stop the mouths of
those base Detractors, Out of the Letters of Mic. Barbanson to the Duchess of
Parma.
by a clear evidence of his Courage and fidelity, beholding Adolph of Nassau
valiantly rallying his men on the other side the field, he put spurs to his
Horse, 30. May. Delr. l. 1. Alt. Belg.
and charged him; and though he was shot by the way, yet the fiercer for his
wound, first discharged his Pistol at Adolphus, and then ran him to the heart
with his Sword; With his own hands kills Adoph of Nassau. By whom he himself
is mortally wounded.
and Aremberg himself, his Horse being first killed, and he mortally wounded
by Adolph, reviving the example of Brutus and Aruns Tarquin's Son, fell dead to
the ground, Adolphus dying not far off. The rest of Count Aremberg's Army,
ignorant of the ways, falling upon Ambuscadoes, were by the Nassavians either
cut off, or miserably shattered, dearly paying for their unseasonable Valor.
Ti^. Livy. l. 2. The Spaniards put the sword.
And though upon the place was lost the flower of the Spanish Army, seven of
their Ensigns, and five Captains being slain, and the six Cannon of the
Groine taken (which had their names from the first six Elements of Music) with
great Sums of Money for the Soldiers Pay. Yet all the rest was nothing, V^
Re Mi Sol Fa La. The merits of Count Aremberg.
compared with the sole loss of John Count of Aremberg. He was of the House of
Lignius, called Lord of Barbanson, before he had the Title of Count of Aremberg
by his Wife, a German Lady. No Commander was ever famed for more Valor and
Fidelity, which moved the Emperor Charles to make him Knight of the
Golden-Fleece: and King Philip, to trust him with the Government of the
Provinces of Friezland and Overysell. Lastly the Emperor Maximilian created
him a Prince of the Empire. Yet the Constancy of a General which he ever
maintained in all former Battles, he quitted in this last, not being able to
suffer abusive Tongues. The like impatience a few Months before caused the
Death of Momorancy Constable of France, a man equal to the greatest; only that
he might not be suspected, as some taxed him, to spare his Cosen the Prince of
Conde, or his Kinsmen the Colligny's. Just so Count Aremberg to silence the
Slanderers of his Fidelity, cast himself away, fighting and dying more
valiantly then wisely, lest there might be a Jealousy upon his Faith. His
death diversely reported
I know some relate it otherwise, and impute this unhappy success to Count
Aremberg himself; who either in contempt of the Enemy, beaten in the last
days Skirmishes, or ambitious of the whole honor which he would not share
with Count Megen, precipitated his own and his Armies Fate: as it is likewise
written in vulgar Histories, that he was slain not by the hand of Count
Adolph, Thuanus l. 41. and others. Count Megen dyed not at this time.
but of a Common Soldier. But I follow Authors that were present at the
Fight. And easily I shall prove their mistake, who affirm in their Writings
that a few days after, when the victorious Nassavians were forced to raise
their Siege from the Gr^ine, Count Megen dyed shot with a Musket-bullet; who,
notwithstanding, four years or there about after this Battle, governed
Friezland by commission from the Duke of Alva, in the place of Count Aremberg
deceased. The name of Charles Brime Count of Megen is read in the Inscription
of Anno. 1572
a votive Monument erected at Leovard, January 8.
when he was Governor of Frizland, Pierius Vinsemius in his Hist. of Friezland,
in memory of his escape from that fearful Deluge of water in the year 1571.
And not till the 8 of January, the year following the Inundation (as I find
recorded in the Annals of Friezland) dyed Charles Brime, But four years after,
a great Soldier, and for his knowledge in civil business much esteemed by
the Governesse Margaret of Austria.

The death of Count Aremberg encouraged not the mind of the Prince of Orange
and the Confederates more, then it exasperated the Duke of Alva, and hastened
his March into Friezland, to prevent Lewis of Nassau from joining forces with
the Prince of Orange. The Duke of Alva proceeds against the impeached Lords and
Gentlemen,
But the Duke fearing that in his absence some Tumult might be raised in favor
of the Lords his Prisoners, freed himself of that suspicion: especially being
enraged for the loss of Count Aremberg, and at the news brought him that
Grave Lewis had hanged many Spaniards in Revenge of his Brother Adolph's Death.
And though diverse of his Friends did not so well approve his Resolution, His
friends dissuade him,
but endeavored to persuade him there was no danger of a Tumult in the
Low-countryes, so long as he had for his Security such Hostages as those
Prisoners. And that it was no more to be doubted, that the Low-countrey-men
would out of their affection forceably attempt any thing for the Liberty of the
impeached Lords; then it was to be hoped, that the same affection would
dissuade them from stirring, lest by a popular offense they might wrong those
Noble-mens private cause. Yet the Duke of Alva despising this Advise, as one
that long experience had made jealous, and of his own nature was averse to
other men's counsels, which he looked upon with the aspect of a retrograd
Planet, especially when they offered themselves; on the first of June, First,
he puts to death 19.
Nineteen noble Covenanters were condemned of High Treason, by the Council of
twelve, and by the Duke of Alva's Order beheaded in the Sand-market at
Bruxells. Eight whereof dyed religiously, the other Eleven like Heretics as
they were, obstinately; and therefore the bodies of those were buried, but the
other (all but four Lords) being tied to Stakes, and their Heads set upon
Poles, were left in the Fields, and the same course was afterward taken with
the rest. For the next day, in the same place, Then others, Risorius. Carloi.
Dui. Villers.
four Gentlemen more suffered the same death, in which number was Villers and
Dui, Commanders lately taken at the Battle of Iuliers: and though both of
them dyed equally good Christians, yet not with equal sense, for Villers
publicly protested, that Alva had condemned him to free himself of the
Obligations Villers had laid upon him: but his Judge himself should not long
be unsentenced. Contrarily, Dui gave humble thanks to the King and the Duke of
Alva for that end, and prayed the people to pardon and pray for him. Likewise
at Vilvord, Anthony Stral, late Consul of Antwerp, Yet more.
Casembrot Secretary to Count Egmont, and others, imprisoned for the same Fact,
were in the same manner condemned and beheaded. The Provost-Marshall that gave
order in the Duke of Alva's name for their Execution was John Spel, John
Groneit Spel, Prevost de Campagna, on Drossart rural.
a great stickler in Causes of Life and Death, who, a while after, being found
guilty of many heinous crimes, was by the Duke of Alva's command hanged up, to
the great Joy of the Low-countrey-men. But these punishments seemed only to
usher in the Death of the two Counts; the last Scene of whose sad Tragedy was
acted with a great Terror to the Fammianus Strada.
Spectatours, and (which the Author wishes had not been) with their greater
Indignation.

The Counts Egmont and Horn had now been prisoners for nine months in the
Castle of Gant. Many intercede for the Counts Egmont and Horn.
In which time I find all possible means used to the Duke of Alva, to the
King, to the Emperor, to the Princes Electors, and to all the Companions of
the Golden-Fleece, without whose joint consents it was pretended none of the
Order could be put to death. But they that most earnestly solicited the cause
were Mary Momorancy, Sister to Count Horn; Mary wife to Count Mansfeldt.
and Sabina Palatina of Bavi^r, Count Egmont's Lady. And indeed her Petition,
Sabina Countess of ^gmont.
sent into Spain by Octavio Duke of Parma and his Wife Margaret of Austria,
cannot well be read by any one without commiseration. Either where she
remembered the King of the Customs observed in the causes of his Companions of
the Order; October 1.
quoting the Laws, and instancing Examples; or where She puts him in mind of
the several painful services done by her Husband, Her humble Petition to the
King.
even before he was 18. years of age, both for the Emperor Charles, and for
King Philip himself: The many undaunted hazards of his Life at Algiers, in
Gelderland, and in his wars with France. Lastly, she humbly prayed his
Majesty, to be merciful, and not suffer an unfortunate Mother, and eleven
innocent Children, with so sad a loss and Disgrace, to wander through the
World, a miserable and continued example of humane Calamity. Notwithstanding,
the King's Advocate proceeded to the Examination of witnesses, The King's
Advocate still follows the cause against the Prisoners. Charges them both,
taking four months of the nine to prove the Impeachment, and leaving to the
Prisoners the other five months, for their defense. The whole process, if I
had time to give it you as it lies by me, in a volume: I doubt not but I should
in this place satisfy many, covetous of such novities. But I hold it more
agreeable to the History's Honor, and the Reader's have, to set down only the
heads. It was charged against the Counts, Egmont, and Horn, Among diverse
other things, With these Particulars. The sum of their Indictment.
that they had plotted with the Prince of Orange and other Noblemen, to
dispossess the King of the Low Countries, and to divide the Provinces among
themselves. To that end, were their endeavors of expelling cardinal Granvell,
who looked into their Designs. Nor would they leave off their Aenigmaticall
Cognizances of Hoods, and Arrows, the manifest signs of their Conspiracy,
till they had enforced his Majesty to call the Cardinal out of the
Low Countries. That they did not only know of the Covenant; but that
Casembrot, Egmont's chief Secretary, who had made his Lord privy to his taking
of it, was not only not turned away, but did his ordinary meniall Service, as
before. And Horn, who was obliged, as Governor of the place, to have assisted
the General Beavor, sent by the Governesse to drive Villers and the rest of
the Covenanters out of Tournay, had consulted with the Magsitrate about the
expelling of Beavor. That both of them were professed Patrons to the
Covenanters, the Consistorians, and Merchants, promising them to live and dye
with them. That they treated at Dendermond with the Prince of Orange his
Brother Lewis, Count Hochstrat, and some few consederates, to stop the King's
passage into the Low Countries, and were often present at such Meetings. That
they opposed not the Gheuses, when they plundered Churches, which
Picture-scuffle was begun in Flanders Count Egmont's Province. And that Count
Horn had suffered some of them at Tournay to escape out of prison; by name,
one of the chief Incendiaries, Ferdinand Martin, more then once committed to
the Jayle for Sacrilege. That they had not been adying to Magistrates of
Towns (whereof they themselves were Governors) requiring their Assistance
against those Violaters of holy things. That they had explained the
Governesse's Commands against Heretics, contrary to the Governesse's mind,
granted them Churches to preach in, and done other things (of which many
Particulars were instanced) contrary to the Duties of such persons as were
Governors of Provinces, Privy Counselors, Knights of the Golden-Fleece, and
Subjects to the King of Spain. For all which, lawfully charged, and proved
against Egmont, and Horn, He concludes this to be matter enough for Sentence
of Death to pass upon them.
the Kings Advocate earnestly moved the Court, that Sentence might be
pronounced against them, as Traitors, their Estates consiscated, and they
condemned to lose their heads. To this Egmont and Horn (as both their causes
were of the same nature) premised, that saving to themselves all advantages in
Law, which bound them not to render an account of their Actions to any, but to
the King, who together with the Companions of the Order, was the legal Judge
over the Knights of the Golden-Fleece; they answered severally, but so, as to
the greatest part of the Charge they pleaded, not guilty. Many things they
interpreted; some they confessed, but alleged they were done legally. That
they had consulted about changing of their Prince they absolutely denied; and
Horn very much complained, as if he were wronged with such an imputation. As
to that of consulting to bar the Spaniards entrance into the Low Countries;
Egmont denied not, but that in the meeting at Dendermond; some such thing was
spoken by Lewis of Nassau, the rest dis^enting; and therefore it was not
necessary he should advertise the Governesse of a conference, wherein nothing
was concluded. How they proceeded with the confederate Gentlemen, they
explained. That they made some Concessions to the Covenanters, the
Picture-breakers, and Heretics, but such as they were forced to, by necessity,
and the good of Religion, which without doubt had been otherwise subverted in
Flanders, C. Egmont's Province.
wherein no less then threescore thousand men went armed to Sermons. Nor
without a Toleration would they ever have restored their Churches to the
Catholics, as they did* No^ was it less needful to give some way to them at
Tournay, and in Tournacese, Count Horne's Province.
the Heretics being there the stronger party. That they justly opposed the
Cardinal, as pernicious to the Government of the Provinces. That Casembrot was
retained in Egmont's Family, for the Service he undertook to do against the
Church-Robbers. That Tournay being then well pacified had no use for Beavor,
and therefore they consulted about sending him away, especially being requested
so to do, by those of Flanders. Thus in order severally, and respectively,
they answered to the other parts of their Impeachment; which if I should but
run over, would be an infinite work, Count Horns particular charge consisting
of 600. heads. How they cleared themselves I define not. Some of these Heads
the Governesse had objected against them to the King.
Truly I know many of those very Objections were made against them both, to his
Majesty, by the Governesse. Nay their design of dividing the Provinces I find
to be discovered even by the Bishop of Osnaburg, in Westphalia, who gave
intelligence thereof to the Governesse by Cobell one of his Council; adding
that he heard it long since from Count Suarzemburg cosen to the Prince of
Orange, August. 20. 1566.
and by George Holly a German Colonel, when they were merry at Supper, where
they said the King of Denmark would put in for a share. All which the
Governesse inserted in her Letters to the King, as we have related in the year
66. Notwithstanding the people giving their Judgment, The People do not
think them guilty but conceive all this to be the malice of C. Egmont's
Rival, Alva. Whom the Count had foiled.
either out of hatred to the Duke of Alva, or out of love to Count Egmont,
acquitted him, and laid all the fault upon Alva, as one that envied Egmont, his
old Rival in the Wars. They likewise reported, that he bare a grudge to
Count Egmont, because, long since, the Count won many thousand Crowns of him
at Dice: and afterward, in a public Solemnity, when they shot at marks for
a wager, the Duke of Alva lost it, the Low-countrey-men shouting for Joy, that
one of their Nation had the victory over a Spanish General. Which Stories
either false, or little trifling matters, yet remembered by the vulgar, were
brought in, to foment their pity. And I verily believe in the process of this
Trial, The Duke of Alva not so culpable in this, as some imagine. In Adriaenus
Stope^^s.
a greater Odium was cast upon the Duke, then he deserved. Nay I have read, how
it was affirmed by very worthy men, that after their sentence was brought out
of Spain, Alva wrote to the King; that he was every day slower to put it in
execution, because he foresaw what mischief would ensue: and that the King,
incensed against Egmont (partly for the promise of his Faith made when he was
in Spain, but not performed, partly for the many complaints against him, See
the year, 65.
writ to his Majesty by the Governesse, and aggravated by Cardinal Spinosa,
then the great man at Court) blamed the Duke of Alva's Slackness, and commanded
him according to former Order, forwith to dispatch him. Yet the Duke deferred
execution, til the Prince of Orange invading Brabant, he was forced to meet him
with his Army. Perhaps this Relation may not gain like credit with all
persons; but howsoever no man's Malice to Alva, shall deter me from writing
what I have from good hands receive'd As also the peoples Favor to Egmont,
Whether Count Egmont bribed by the Rebels, connived at them.
shall not make me omit the clearing him of a Crime, which I find by many
objected against him, That he received great Sums of money, which made him
wink at diverse things acted in his Provinces, such as he being a military
man, and not considering of what dangerous consequence they were to Religion,
did not imagine to be so prejudicial to the Church. Yet this offense, not
touched in his Impeachment, wherein nothing was pretermitted, The Duke of Alva
pronounces Sentence of death upon the Counts Egmont and Horn.
either by negligence, or out of Favor, I suppose to be a Fiction. Howsoever
Egmont and Horn were brought from Gant to Bruxells the third of June, and by
the Duke of Alva President of the Council of twelve (the King having enabled
him by peculiar Commission to exercise Authority over the Knights of the
Golden-Fleece) Sentence of Death was pronounced against them, and Martin
Rithovius, Bishop of Ipres sent to acquaint them with it, and assist them in
their ^ast necessity. And Egmont, though it much troubled him he should come to
an end so far below his Merits, yet collecting himself, as became a Valiant
man: July 1.
and only careful of his Wife and Children, wrote in French to the King. Count
Egmont Letter to his Majesty after Condemnation.
The Copy of which Letter sent by Christopher Assonvill, to the Governesse, I
here give you; Sir, since you are pleased that Sentence of Death must pass
upon your humble and faithful Subject and Servant, who never aimed at any
thing but your Majestyes Service; for advancement whereof, as my past Actions
testify, I neither spared my pains nor fortunes; but to a thousand dangers
have exposed my life, which never was so precious to me, but that if it might
any way be offensive to your Majesty, I would a hundred times before this have
exchanged it for death. Therefore I doubt not, but when you shall fully
understand the Carriage of Business in these parts, you will clearly perceive
how injuriously I have been used, whilst they have persuaded your Majesty
against me, in things that never entered my Imagination. I call God to witness;
and I pray that he will revenge it upon my soul, that must this day appear
before his Iudgment-Seat, if I have neglected any part of that, which I
beleive'd to be my Duty toward my King, and Country. I therefore beseech you,
Sir, I, that shall petition your Majesty no more, that for the Reward of all my
painful Services, you will please a little to commiserate my Wife, and eleven
Children, with the rest of my Family, which I have commended to some few
Friends yet left me And presuming your Majesty, out of your native Clemency
will not deny me this, I go to suffer death, which I willingly embrace,
assuring my self my end will give many satisfaction. From Bruxells the fifth
of June, at two of the clock after midnight, in the year 1568. Your Majesty's
most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subject and Servant, prepared to
dye, Lamorall Egmont. This Letter for the King he gave to the Bishop of Ipres;
All night long Count Egmont prepares himself for death. He is brought to
execution the next day about noone.
and confessing his sins to him, spent the rest of the night in reconciling
himself to God, and arming of his mind to suffer. The like did Count Horn,
assisted by the same Prelate, and other Divines. In the morning, being
Whitsun-Eve a Scaffold, hung with blacks, was set up in the Marketplace,
guarded with the Regiment of Iuliano Romero, whereon were laid two Cushions,
before a silver Crucifix. About Nooneday Count Egmont was brought thither,
accompanied with the Bishop of Ipres and Romero: after some few prayers, he put
off his Damaske-Gowne, threw away his Hatt, and speaking a few words to the
Bishop, fell upon his knees before the Crucifix, and his nightcap being pulled
over his eyes, the Executioner that lurked under the Scaffold, Beheaded
and was once (as it is said) his footman, In the same place and manner died
Count Horn.
struck off his head. Presently after, Count Horn with the same constancy was
by the same Executioner beheaded; both their heads being for two hours set
upon two spears, for the City to behold. Their Bodies were immediately carried
into the next Churches, and the day after, together with their Heads, sent to
the chief Cities of their own Provinces, and there honorably buried. The
miserable Death of Count Egmont (for he was generally beloved) was lamented by
the Low-countrymen Strange lamentation for C. Egmonts death
with greater Spleen, then Sorrow; Some whereof despising danger, dipped their
handkerchers in his blood, and kept them, either as Monuments of Love, Not
without Threats.
or Incitements to Revenge. Others kissed his leaden Coffin, and without any
fear of an Informer, publicly threatened Vengeance. Insomuch as diverse
Person noting the Low-countrymen's Violent affections to his Memory, And
presages.
and their detestation of the very name of Alva, said, that by Egmonts death
the Confederates were first established: and foretold, that all the
Lowcountreys would in a short time, contrary to the Duke's Expectation,
Confirmed by a portent from heaven as was commonly believed.
be involued in Tumults. This Prediction gave credit to the report, that
presently after it rained blood in the Fields about Lovain: the Multitude
easily believing, what their Hatred supposes to be done in Heaven. From hence
sprang the hatred to Alva.
And indeed there are that doubt not, but it would have been more policy in
the Duke to have made their Execution private, and not presented that
distasteful Scene and Pomp of Egmont's Tragedy to the people. For they do
ill, that make the Favorers and Pittyers of the Cause Spectators of the
Punishsment. But Alva resolving to make an Example of Terror, which he then
thought necessary, slighted Hate or Envy. A saying of the French Ambassador,
Charles ix. Count Egmont's Elogie.
It is reported the French Ambassador, who privately beheld the Execution,
wrote to King Charles, that he had seen in the Marketplace at Bruxells his
head struck off, whose Valor had twice made France tremble; intimating the
loss of the French Nobility at Saint Quintin and Graueling: the first of which
Battles was almost, the second altogether purchased by the Courage and
conduct of Count Egmont. He dyed in the forty sixth year of his age, leaving
by Sabina of Bavier (to whom he was married at Spires in presence of the
Emperor Charles the fifth eight, Daughters and three Sons; the eldest
inheriting his Fathers Virtues; the second nothing but his Hatred to the
Spaniard; the third, who was faithful to the King, only left Issue to the
Family. He had a Brother that followed the Emperor Charles into Africa, and
dyed in Italy: a Sister married to Count Vadamont, Mother to Frances Wife to
Henry the third of France. The Nobility of his House was ancient, their Power
much greater once, when the Dukes of Egmont were Lords of Gelderlandt. He took
his name from Egmond a Town in the farthest part of Holland near the western
Shore, of which he still wrote himself Count; though he was Prince of Gavera a
Town upon the bank of Schelt, not far from Gant. Charles the fifth created
him knight of the Golden-Fleece, King Philip trusted him with the Government
of the most noble Provinces of Flanders and Artois. He was a man for the
Heroical Virtues of his mind and body, worthy a far better Fate; though the
very infelicity of his Death (as Compassion looks upon all things through a
multiplying Glass) did not a Little increase the opinion of his Virtues. The
merits of Count Horn.
Nor was it any disadvantage to his Children, restored by King Philip to all
their Father's personal and real Estate. But Philip Count of Horn, who was
likewise Knight of the Golden-Fleece, dyed four years elder then Count
Egmont: his Brother the Lord Montiny being for the same Cause condemned and
beheaded in Spain, whither he was by the Governesse sent Ambassador with the
Marquess of Bergen. Nor was Count Horn of a less noble family then Count
Egmont, being descended of the French Momorancyes, and had courage equal to
his Honor, as appeared at the Battle at Saint Quintin, and in the
magnificent discharge of two great offices, of Admiral and Captain of the
life Guard. He first tryled a Pike under the Emperor Charles the Fifth, to
whom he was a Subject for Horn, an Imperial Castle between Gelderland and
Brabant, whence he had his Title of Count, though he was possessed of many
other Towns, and Castles within the Kings Dominions. Indeed his death could
not have been moderately lamented, but that Egmont had consumed all men's
Tears.

After this, the Duke of Alva The Duke of Alva's Expedition against Lewis of
Nassau.
resolved to move speedily to Friezland, sending before, with part of his
Forces, Chiapino Vitelli Vitelli defends Groening.
his Campe-Master-Generall, who entering the Groine Valiantly defended that
Town, against Lewis of Nassau that sat down before it. Then the Duke in
person, having paid a Soldiers Duty to Count Aremberg, Count Aremberg's
Fanerall.
and with the sad Military Ceremonies waited on him to his Grave, went about
the end of June from Bruxells to Antwerp, leaving Gabriel Serbellonio there in
Garrison, with eight Companyes of Germans for defense of the Fort and Town. At
the Bus he stayed till Cressonerius came up with seaenteene Fieldpieces;
marching Alva's March. Boldue.
thence, in the beginning of July, he passed the Mose at Grave, from thence he
went to Arnhem in Gelderland, and so to Daventry in Over-Ysell, where he rested
a while, till his Scouts He sends out his Scouts.
should bring word, if the Bridges were strong enough to bear the weight of his
Cannon: they had not rid far, but hearing Drums beat a pretty way off, and
presently discovering four Ensigns, they galloped back to the Duke, and told
him, the Enemy was coming hard at hand; though he could not well believe it,
yet because his Scouts of several Nations brought the same Intelligence, he
forthwith commanded his Colonells and Field- Officers to set his men in
Battalia, and sent out others to discover the Enemies nearer Aproaches and
their number. Their ridlculous mistake.
These were no sooner in the Field, but they saw four gallant Banners
displayed, and as many Wagons covered with Canvasse, and green Boughs, in
which a Bride, married that morning, who dreamed not of a war, was riding
toward the next Village; with a great sort of country fellows leaping and
playing about her. When this News was brought to the Army, they made not
better Sport at the Folly of the Scouts, then they did, at the simplicity of
the Country people, when an Army was so near them; and all that sudden
preparation for a War being changed into Mirth, they entertained the Bride in
her passage with a Volly of Musket Shot. Occas^oning a military Proverb.
The memory of this Accident is still fresh in the mouths of the Wallons, who
ever, when they send out their Scouts, if they show any Fear in their Return,
ask them, in a military Ieere, if they have seen the Bride. But the Duke of
Alva, angry at this delay, and sharply rebuking them that were the Causes,
entered the Groin Groningen.
on the fifteenth of July about Noonday, and at that very hour without
alighting or changing of his Horse, he himself, attended with a few others,
rode on, to discover the Enemy, that lay three miles from the Town. At his
return, leaving the Duke of Brunswick to keep the City, by day-breake (for it
was time to be quick) he marched against the Enemy. His Foot were almost 12000
his Horse 3000, The number of Alva's Army.
most of his Captains and Officers old Soldiers and Commanders. Nassau Lewis
of Nassau's Forces.
had as many Foot, but was weaker in Horse, and hearing of the Duke's Approach,
had retreated six miles, and entrenched His Trenches.
himself with sudden works cast up in a watrish Ground. The Duke followed
him, and commanded Gaspar Robbley Lord of Bill to take 1200 Spanish Assaulted
by the Spanish.
and Wallon Musketteers and Dragoones, and fall upon the Camp at two several
Quarters, not so much in hope to beat them out of their Trenches, as to try
their Strength, and hold them play, till Cressonerius brought up the Cannon.
But such was the Fury of the Musketteers, or rather such was the Cowardice of
the Enemy, especially being puzzled with a Mutiny of the Germans, The
Nassavians run.
that running away on both sides from their Cannon, they strove who should fly
fastest. The rest, firing their Carriages retired, and many, while they
retreated, Many lost in their flight.
observing no Order nor Command, either sunk with their Horses in the Bogges
and ditches, or basely casting away their Arms were trampled upon by such as
followed the Chase. Above 300 of them were slain, of the King's men but nine;
and doubtless the Execution had been greater, if the Duke had not sounded a
Retreat, fearing lest in that dark weather his Soldiers, by an error not to
be repaired, might be engaged in blind cosening holes, and pits, which the
Country was every where full of. But five days after, his Excellence
completed his Victory. For commanding Caesar Davalo, Brother to the Marquess
of Piscario, and Curtius Comes Martinengo with some Horse to chase the
Fugitives: he himself, with his Army, returned to the Groine, about one a
clock at night, and before it was day, the Duke, that could not sleep out an
opportunity, marched again into the Field, and on the 21. of July pursued the
Enemy.

Nassau made a halt in the entrance of West Friezland, July 21.
at the Village of Geming, The Battle of Geming.
between the Bay of Dullart and the River Ems, at his back he had Embden a City
that took part with him: from whence by the River Ems he might expect
provisions, and his Brother the Prince of Orange coming out of Germany. About
him were many Marshes, and the way so confused, by reason of the water, that it
frighted the pursuers Only on his Front, amidst the low and sinking mudd, there
was one passage upon the top of a strong Bank that over looked the swelling
Billows, and ran directly into the Camp The Site of Lewis of Nassau's Camp
Dicco.
and Village: which a venue was made inaccessible by ten pieces of Cannon
planted in the mouth of it. Thus had he chosen and guarded the place where he
encamped. But fear can never be sufficiently entrenched. Their fear was
increased by a second Mutiny of the Germans, Their Fear made the greater by a
second mutiny of their Soldiers.
that began to be seditious before their former loss. For when diverse
Companies of theirs, because they were not paid, came about Nassau's Tent,
Which coming to the ear of the Spaniards.
railing and crying that some of their Contrymen were ready to die for
hunger, having in two days space not eaten a bit of bread: and therefore
threatened to go over to the enemy, Iustus Schouwenberg promising that next day
they should have four French-crownes a man, the mutiny was quieted: but this
money (the Duke as I said falling so suddenly upon them) could not be paid;
the Soldiers therefore, in their stand at Geming, after their flight, claimed
promise, and mutined more fiercely; which the Duke understanding from the
Prisoners taken, and the news being purposely divulged through the Army, so
inflamed the Soldiers courages, that almost all the Captains, with great
contest which Nation should be honored with the Service, begged leave to fall
upon their Cannon, the greatest danger of the War. The Company of Lopez
Figueroa, that Marched on the Duke's left hand when he led the Army along the
River Bank, Dicco.
was commanded to try their Fortune; the most whereof were armed with those
huge Muskets that hardly could be managed upon Rests, which, as we said
formerly, were first brought in use for Field-Service by the Duke of Alva. And
whilst the Duke made show as if he would charge the Enemy in the Front, Some
make an appearance of charging the Nassavians in the front,
covering his men from their Cannon with Gabions, [or baskets filled with
earth] in the mean time keeping them in play with some light Assaults, they
that were to attempt the Cannon falling upon their knees and pouring out their
prayers to God, Others ^ss^ile them on the s^^ke.
(which they repeated after Figueroa, remarkable for his devotion to the
Mother of God,) waded through the Mud and Water, and came upon the Flane of the
sleep hill where the Cannon was planted. Few at first guarded the place, as
that which secured it self: presently, fresh men coming in to help their
Fellows, after a sharp conflict, they took the Cannon, and opened the only
Avenue by which the Spanish Army could march up to Nassau. And take their
Cannon, opening the way for their fellows to do execution.
This advantage being close followed by the Duke, he sent men, that not only
took their Camp and beat them out of their Works and Trenches, but that in
their Flight, along the higher and lower grounds, as far as the River Ems,
for six hours together did execution upon them, July 26.
for (as Hubert a Valle that was present at the Battle wrote to Margaret of
Austria) never men fought either with greater Cowardice, The greatest that ever
was, Equal to the Enemy's cowardice.
or stubbornness: if it were a Fight, and not rather a mere Slaughter. Many of
the Germans throwing their Arms to the Ground, as if they meant to strike,
were killed so much the sooner; Many were swallowed in the Bogges and Fennes,
into which they crowded and thrust one another as they ran; Many were cut to
pieces offering their backs to the Sword, as guilty slaves do to the Whippe.
But the greatest part were drowned in the River Ems, whereinto they leaped,
though they could not swim, and were loaded with their Arms, which immediately
sunk them. Only a few good Swimmers made sport to the Spanish Army, that from
the banke-side shot them with their Muskets, like so many Ducks. The news of
this Victory in a wonderful manner comes to the Groine.
They say, those that accidentally sailed in the Bay of Dullart, seeing such
abundance of Montero's swimming down the water (for the Sea, that ebbes and
flows at certain hours, when it was low water drew away from the River the
Spoils of the dead bodies) knew that a Battle had been fought and great
execution done, in the adjoining Fields: and by the fashion of the Montero's
much differing from other men's hatts, and worn by the German Soldiers instead
of Helmets, they supposed the Spaniard to be Master of the Field. Bern. Mend.
l. 3.
By which means, when the messenger presently dispatched from the Duke of
Alva, came to the Groine, Groningen.
beyond all expectation and Faith, he found the Town already acquainted with
the news, the Merchants and Mariners having told them of the victory. Tit.
live. (...) 1.
Thus, long ago when the Romans The like happened among the old Romans.
fought with the Sabines by the River of Anio, they at Rome seeing the Sabines
Arms floating upon Tiber, into which the River Anio falls, prevented the
Messengers by their foreknowledge of the joyful Tidings. Touching the number
of the slain, The number of the slain,
the Reports of those, present in the Fight, were diverse; The most credible
is, that there fell six Thousand of the Enemy, and no more then Seventy of the
King's men. Though twelve miles in length being strewed with Carcasses of men
and Horses, presented it as a huge and horrid Slaughter to the eye. The Spoil
The Spoil,
was likewise great, twenty of the Enemies Ensigns taken, ten great Cannon,
and those six musical Fieldpieces lost by Count Aremberg, with a vast
quantity of furniture belonging to Nassau, Hochstrat, and Schouwenberg; in a
word, all their Carriages and Baggage came into the Spaniard's hands.
Hochstrat, the day before the Battle was carried sick out of the Field.
Schouwenberg fled in the beginning of the Fight. Of Nassau the Rumor was at
first uncertain, The subtle Flight of Lewis of Nassau.
for his Arms and the Suite he wore that day, were brought to the Duke of
Alva: afterward, it was known, that changeing his Clothes he swam the River;
and left those he put off; purposely in the Field, that they might imagine him
slain. In this Province of Friezland Germanicus Caesar conquered Arminius,
Tacit. l. 2. Annals. The Resemblance of this Victory over Nassau, to that of
Germanicus Caesar over Arminius in the very same place.
by the banck of Visurgus, another River of Friezland, the memory of which
overthrow was now revived. Just so, the Romans for their Sport killed the
barbarous people swimming the River, till they were weary with the Sport; so
Arminius fled disguised; so the Battle continued till dark night; so the
Fields, for as many miles, were covered with dead bodies. Nor was the Monument
less proportionable, which either General out of the Enemies spoils erected
for Posterity to behold. Only when the Roman set up a Trophy, his modesty
omitted to name himself: Of this Spanish Trophey you will read m^re in thi^
book and in the beginning of the eight.
the Spaniard boldly put in his own Title. Fame therefore in that Inscription
inserted the title of Germanicus, but envy in this, soon blotted out the name
of Alva. I know some that account this victory a miracle, wrought by the
Prayers of Pius the fifth, who both by Letters and Supplies of money had
animated the Duke of Alva against the Gheuses. Indeed Christopher Assonvill,
This Victory attributed to the prayers of Pins v.
an intimate Counselor of the Duke's, describing the Battle writes, that
when he considered the place chosen by Nassau, on the one part to be so
fortified by nature and Art, as might well have contemned a greater Army: July
27.
on the other part, to be taken by so sudden a storm, and so few men, he
could not think this victory less then a Miracle. Who gives God thanks for it
with great solemnity,
And the Duke of Alva, after he had won the Field, the first think he did,
dispatched away a Messenger that very night, with the news to Pope Pius; who,
as he had devoutly prayed to God for good Success, so now having obtained his
desire, commanded three Thankesgiving-Dayes to be solemnly kept in three of the
greatest Churches of Rome, which was accordingly performed with great
Solemnity, and the addition of Cannon-shot and Bonefires. Whether it may be
thought a Miracle,
But though I will not say this was miraculous, in regard a far less mutiny
and consternation uses every day to work stranger effects: yet when I look
upon the attempt of the Spanish Forlorne-Hope, The Piety of the Span^sh
Soldiers,
how they being to run the apparent hazard of their Lives, when Lopez Figueroa
advised them to call the Communion of Saints to their Assistance, falling on
their faces and imploring, after an extraordinary manner and with many zealous
Prayers, the Patronage of the Blessed Virgin, and the Tutelar Saint of Spain,
fearlessely and fortu^nately among the enemies Cannon began their Conquest;
truly out of these premises I may boldly conclude, that if at this Battle
there was more then humane help, the Devotion of the Spaniards called down
Victory from Heaven, and their heroical courage merited such a Day.

In the Return of the conquering Army, a bold and wicked fact was committed,
that greatly took off the Generals and his Officers Joy. The Sardinian The
fury of the Sardinian Legion,
Brigade marching in the Rear, when they came within sight of the place, where
awhile before many of their fellow Soldiers were lost unfortunately, together
with Count Aremberg; their Blood rising, they resolved to be revenged, and
leave a memorable example of their fury; For before day-breake they fired they
fired the next Villages: Revenging Count Aremberg's death with the firing of
many Villages.
beginning at the Town where they heard the Spaniards in their flight were by
the Countrymen betrayed to the Victorious Nassavians. From thence dividing
themselves, they dispersed the fire among the Towns adjoining, which so
kindled, the Houses being built of combustible materials, especially the wind
conspiring with their Wickedness, that from the Bay of Dullart to the farthest
prospect of West-Friezland nothing was presented to the eye but dreadful
Flames. 1566.
The Duke of Alva The Duke of Alva punishes this burning Brigade.
amazed to see the Country burn, and suspecting it to be a Stratagem of the
enemy, when he sound that it was the Villainy of his own men, commanded the
whole Army to stop the Brigade that had fired the Country, and calling before
him their Colonel Gonsalvo Bracamonte reproved him for suffering at the
present that Mischief to Friezland and the King, (for they had burnt some
Towns that were his Majestyes Patrimony) and for their former Contumacy,
whereby they had importunely forced their valiant General Aremberg to fight
Some of the Soldiers which began it, According to the old military form.
he commanded to be hanged upon the place; others, especially the
Supernumeraryes of the Brigade, which seemed to be accidentally involved in the
Fault, and Colonel Bracamonte himself, he adjudged to change their Militia,
Val. Max. l. 2. cap. 2. de Discipl. milit.
for this was a kind of warlike penalty, still retained out of the Discipline
of the Ancients, that often degraded their Soldiers, a Horseman to a Footman,
and a Footman into an Archer, to make them sensible of their Errors by
disgrace. But this was no great Punishment to the ordinary sort, that were
received into other Regiments with little or not disadvantage. The Captains,
Lievetenants, Ensigns, and above all the Colonel was aflicted with the
Igno^iny, who were all to be reduced into the Rank of Common Soldiers.
Therefore some of them, particularly the Colonel resolved rather to leave the
War then fight with such dishonor. But the Duke of Alva, satifyed with what
they already suffered, a while after restored the Colonel to his Command. The
Brigade being in this manner punished, but the Losses of the province
unrepaired, which were rated at no less then a Million of Crounes; How great a
loss the Country hadby this fire.
Victorious Alva entered the Groine upon Saint James his Eve, whose assistance
he had found in the day of Battle: Alva returns victorious to Groningen.
Orders the affairs of that City.
and commanding the Townsmen to receive Gniffius long since designed Bishop of
the place, and Count Megen Successor to Aremberg in the Government of their
province: for defense of both by the directions of Vitelli and Paciotto, the
Duke began to build a Fort like that of Antwerp. Things thus ordered in
Holland, he was met in his return to Bruxells by his eldest Son Federico The
coming of Duke Federico Alva's Son.
Duke of Oscha great Commander of the Order of Calatrava, who brought him from
the King 2500 Foot, and a good sum of money, a necessary Supply against the
Preparations of the prince of Orange.

For now the Prince of Orange was upon his March with a vast Army raised in
Germany, The Prince of Orange's Army raised by the joint assistance of the
Princes of Germany.
diverse of the heretical Princes willingly associating in hatred to the
Spanish House of Austria. This League was advanced by by a general indignation
upon the news of Count Egmont's and Count Horne's death: the Envy to Alva
thereupon increasing: and much aggravated, by a Book against His Tyranny,
written and published by the Prince of Orange. How great this Army was,
There was in his Army when he mustered it at Aquis-Grane 28000 men, that is
16000 German Foot, and 8000 Horse; French and Low Dutch 2000 Horse; and very
near as many Foot. How paid,
To the Germans the Prince Elector Count Palatine, the Duke of Wirtemberg, and
the City of Strasburg had promised four Months Pay; to the French and the
Low-countreymen a Spanish Merchant at Antwerp had engaged for 1800 French
Crowns a month, during the said term. To maintain the Horse was undertaken
partly by the Prince of Orange and his Brother, partly by the very Commanders
of Horse, Casimire Son to the Palsgraue, Count Suarzemburg, two of the Dukes of
Saxony, Count Hoc^strat, and William Lume William Lume's Vow.
one of the Counts de Marca; the last of these, a deadly Enemy to the
Catholics is said to have made such a barbarous Vow as once Cl. Civilis (who
likewise commanded the Hollanders) that he would never cut his hair till he
had revenged the Deaths of Egmont and Horn. The fame of this Army,
With these Forces the Prince of Orange, sooner then could be imagined, passed
the Rhyne, and incamping along the bank of the Mose not far from Maestricht
filled the Low Countries, with strange Reports and Terror. Which Alva seems
to contemn.
Indeed the Duke of Alva in appearance extremely slighted such Rumors, being
a notable Dissembler of military Dangers, and one that feared nothing more then
to be thought to fear. So that when a Captain with very much Trouble in his
Face, amplifyed the News, and told him, how many Princes and Kings had entered
into League against Spain: His answer to a soldier frighted at the number of
Princes confederate against the King of Spain.
among whom he numbered Denmark and England; the Duke answered merrily, he
knew what account to make of that League, nor was such a conspiracy of Rebels
any way formidable: the King having more Princes that took part with him. 1565.
For with the King of Spain was confederated the Kings of Naples, Sicily, and
Sardinia,, the Duke of Millaine, Prince of Burgundy, and the Low Countries,
besides the King's of Peru, Mexico, and New Spain: but herein the
Confederations differed, that in theirs the dissimilitude of Nations and
dispositions and (if no other obstacle) their several Intersts must needs
cause disagreement, and in a little time dissolve the union. Whereas in this,
what pleased one pleased all, and consequently it would be eternal. And truly,
Alva was not so jealous of a foreign Enemy, as of the Natives, knowing
himself hated by a great sort of them; Alva suspects the Lowcountrymen in
general.
nor could he think the Prince of Orange durst ever have attempted to bring a
War into the Lowcountreys, if he had not been invited and assisted by the
Low-countreymen. Particularly the Wood-Gheuses.
Especially when so many Robberies and Murders had been done upon the high way
by the banished Gheuses. Which because they sheltred in the Forests were called
Wood-Gheuses. Wonders in Heaven.
The common Terror was increased by a fearful apparition in the Air of two
Armies in Battalia, Christ. Asson. vlt. Se.
seen on a clear night to brandish their glittering Pikes, as if they were
ready for a charge. The Prodigy, because seen in diverse places, was believed;
and therefore more such stories were daily told; The D of Alva s^a^es at
Maestricht to attend the Prince of Orange's Motion.
which made Alva look to himself. So that fortifying the Froatier Towns and
those he most doubted, he hastened with his Army to Maestricht, that from
thence he might encounter the Prince of Orange's Designs, and by keeping the
bank of Mose hinder him from passing the River. But the Prince of Orange
passes the Mose With rare Artifice and celerity.
But the Prince's subtilty and boldness carried it. And this was his first
Stratagem in the Low-countrey-Warre, wherein he plainly showed, how great an
Enemy declared himself against the King. For his Horse finding the River
foardable between Rurimond and Maestricht; the Mose being then accidentally at
a low Ebb, the Prince helped his Fortune with Art, in this manner. He tied his
Horse together, and made them stand cross the River, l. 7. bell. Gall. l. 1.
bell. Civ.
to break the Stream (as Julius Caesar did, when he passed Ligeris and
Cicoris: and some others of late time have done) by this means the force of
the Current being abated and repelled, he commanded his Foot to wade over
silently in the Evening: and that night with inobserveable speed, or rather by
an incredible Attempt he deceived the Kings Guards, and safely arrived on the
father Shore with his Army. which was so sudden and unexpected news to Alva,
Beyond the D. of Alva's imagination.
that when Barlamont told him the Enemy was come over, the Duke asked him, if
he thought them to be an Army of Birds, that had flowne over the Mose. But the
Prince of Orange entering Brabant, The Prince offers battle to the Duke.
and confidently incamping within six Miles of the Spanish Army, the next day
drew out his men, and with Drums beating and Trumpets sounding, faced and
offered Battle to the Duke of Alva, Vitelli holds it best for the D. to fight
him.
whose Campe-Master Chiapino Vitelli was of opinion, that the Enemy, wet with
the River, and weary with their March, should have been fought, before they
had encamped; nor did he as yet think the fight was wholly to be declined: but
that it concerned the Spaniards in point of honor to make some Attempt upon
the now ins^lting Germans, The Duke is otherwise resolved.
and let them know the Valor of the Royal Army. But the Duke (foreseeing that
money could not long hold out to pay so great an Army, which would therefore
moulder away, especially upon the approach of winter) resolved, with the least
hazard to himself, to elude the enemy. His principal design was to keep them
from getting into any strong Town, lest they should make their Pay out of the
Plunder of the Country. And will go no higher then light Skirmishes,
yet scarce any day passed, but (as the Armies lay close the other) they had some
Skirmishes, and Fights, commonly about victual; the Prince of Orange's men
being still the Challengers. Which Fights how they were managed, and with what
daily success, I could particularize. How Strada comes to know the
particularities of those little fights.
For Raphael Barberino Knight of Saint Steven, an eminent Commander, and a very
great Mathematician, sent to Rome Diaries of all Actions in the Camp, directed
to his Brothers Francesco Barberino, Proto-Notary Aposticall, and Anthonio
Barberino Father to Pope Urban the Eight: under which Prince, no less supreme
in Learning, then Religion, it is my happiness to write this History. But out
of those Letters, whereof I have Copies, I hold it best to give you only some
choice Passages; omitting the rest that were either of the same kind, or not so
remarkable.

The third day after he had passed the Mose, the Prince of Orange advanced to
Tongeren: thither presently marched the Duke of Alva to defend the Town;
neither incountring nor declining him, only having an eye upon his Motion and
Designs. It fortuned, that Vitelli, with two Troops of Horse, Two Troops of
Vitelli's horse intercepted.
about Sunset going to discover the Enemy, fell upon an Ambuscado, and with a
rout and the loss of some men, returned safe to the Army: Vitelli himself
escapes,
only the Mare he rode upon, had a slight hurt, and because he loved her above
all the Horse in his Stables, she being an excellent galloper; that night, when
he was set at Supper with his old Friend and Companion Raphael Barberino,
Chafes at the mischief done to his Mare,
telling him with much vexation how fearful he was to lose her, he threatened,
Threatens to be revenged for it,
if he lived one day longer, to make the Enemy repent that ever they hurt his
Mare. Nor was it a vain brag: for next morning by break of day drawing out
some horse, most of them Spaniards and Burgundians, And accordingly falls upon
the Prince of Orange's Rere, Does very great execution.
when he observed the Prince's Rere to March at a distance from the Army,
dividing his Forces and giving half to Camillo Gonzaga Count de Novellaria, he
fell upon the Enemy, with such a sudden violence, that he killed about 400.
of their men, lost only fifteen of his, and took, besides diverse Wagons
laden with Arms, and Ammuniton, 150. of their Horse; Takes 150. Horse,
and bringing in triumph to to the Duke of Alva, said, His Merry saying to the
Duke Still the P. of Orange uses all provocations to bring Alva to a Battle.
Look you, Sir, how many Horses my Mare has foaled. Notwithstanding, the
Prince of Orange the very next day offered battle to the Duke, but he
assuring himself, the enemy would sooner want meat and money then confidence,
held it his safest course to break them with delays; which inraging the
Prince, sometimes with Crosse-Marches he turned upon the Duke, sometimes, to
draw him on, sounded a Retreat, as if he were affrayd his men had gone too
far; and a while after, fired the Towns and Villages, in sight of the Enemy,
to bring the demurring Spaniard to a battle. But this Hannibal found a Fabius
Cunctator, Who is not moved, but places the assurance of Victory in Delay.
Chiap. Vitelli.
one that could be moved neither by the desperate fury of the Enemy, nor by
his own men's impatience, and almost down right Railing (for this Dictator had
likewise his Master of the Horse, that was eager to fight) nor lastly, by the
invitation of any prosperous fortune. But as a prudent man looking upon the
Future, he preferred not Rumor before safety, and would rather have the
victory, which he promised himself, slow and secure, then dubious and bloody.
Especially, after he had intelligence that shrewd signs of discord appeared
in the Prince of Orang's Army. The Orangians mutiny.
Nor was the Duke of Alva deceived in his conjecture. For the Prince of Orange
having, but to no purpose, sounded the affections of many Cities, from whence
he hoped for Money and Ammunition, had not been a full Month in Brabant before
his Soldiers mutined, Captain Malburg being slain in a heat by his own
Company, The Prince of Orang's danger
and the Prince himself had a Pistol discharged upon him, but, the bullet
lighting upon the Scabberd of his Sword, escaped the Danger. The rage increased
in the Camp, Recruites sent him out of France.
and would not easily have found a stop, but that news of Succor out of
France gave hope to the Prince of Orange, and struck fear into the Mutineers.
His Army therefore moved with all possible speed to receive the French Forces,
conducted by Francis Hangest Lord of Ienlis, consisting of 500. Horse and 3000.
Foot.

In his March, Of the Fight (...) the River Geta.
the Prince of Orange took Centron, in the Territory of Liege, The Prince of
Orange having taken Centron or San Truyen intends to pass the River, and join
with the French Auxiliaries.
where he found plenty of victual, besides the great sums of money for Fine
and Ransom paid him by the Abbot of that Monastery, Thienen.
and diverse other persons of quality. From thence he went directly to Tienen,
to join with Ie^lis that was come within three miles of the place. But because
the River Geta ran between them, to secure the pass, he placed some light
horse upon the bank mixed with Musketteers. The Duke of Alva that never left
the Enemy, was at his back with an Army of near upon 16000. Vitelli led the
Van, and finding the Prince of Orange his Design, sent Barberino on the spur
to the Duke, who brought up the Rere, to let him know in what condition the
Enemy was* and how easily he might be routed as he passed the River. Alva
commands Vitelli not to engage.
The Duke commanded him not to fight, The Prince passes the River leaving part
of his Forces behind.
till he had more certain intelligence. But the Enemy wading over with part
of his Army, was now possessed of the farther bank, and had left behind, under
the command of Colonel Philip Marbet Lord of Lovervall, two thousand
Firelocks and 500. Horse, most of them Gascoignes and Wallons, men chosen out
of his whole Army, to keep the King's men in play with continual skirmishes,
till their fellows were got to the other side the River. Which Vitelli charges.
Vitelli, angry to see the Victory slip out of his hands by the Generall's
Delay, with a great part of his men fell upon the Regiment lest, commanding
Barberino to gallop to the Duke, and acquaint him with his Resolution. The Duke
of Alva disliked it not (rather because it was already, Alva sends to his
assistance his Son Duke Federico,
then that he wished to have it done) and turning to his Son Federick said,
thou see that Hill made good by their Horse, thither thou must; fire upon
them from this opposite Hill with six Field-Peices, and with some commanded men
chosen out of that Wing of Spanish-Horse and Foot, beat them from their Post.
Federico did more than his Father bad him, He takes the Hill.
for he drove them from their Vantageground, and joining with Vitelli turned
his Cannon upon them, which very much contributed to the Victory. The Fight.
For now they fought with like but not with equal Forces, because such of the
Princes men as had not yet passed the water, terrified with the charge, and
fearing Alva had come on with his whole Army, Vitelli would gladly have pursued
them beyond the River.
sometimes resolved to take the River and fly: sometimes encouraged by better
men, returned and fought, that between the irresolution of fighting and flying,
so many were slain, as Vitelli doubted not, but if all the Spanish Army might
pass the River, the Enemy that day would be totally destroyed, and therefore
took great care to let the Duke of Alva know so much; who standing on a higher
ground very sparingly sent down his men. Nor was Barberino (that of himself,
as well as on Vitelli's Command desired to fight) less careful to deliver his
Message, Barberino sent to signify his desire to the D. of Alva.
and use his best persuasions to the Duke for the taking of that opportunity.
He told him, the valiantest of the Enemy were slain, and the rest apparently
conquered, for their hearts were gone; therefore if the whole body of the Army
advanced, before they were reincouraged by joining with the French, no doubt
they would be clearly routed. But Alva angry at the have made by Vitelli, Who
orders the cont^ary, very much offend.
as if he meant to force him to a battile, like one that loved his own ways,
and therefore brooked not another man's Advise, said to him, you will not then
let me dispose of the War? get you back immediately to Vitelli, The Fight
renewed upon the River-bank,
and command him to stop his men upon the bank, and no more send to me about
fighting; for thou, or any man else that shall presume to advise me in this
kind, I swear by the Kings head shall never return alive. Upon this Answer
Vitelli and Federico ordering their men to pass no further, turned all their
fury against such as stood, strongly maintaining the Fight with Hochstrat, nor
was the face of the Enemy's battle alike in all places, here they were
frighted and fled, and both sorts being slain, despair making them valiant
they renewed the battle, and retarded the Victory. The Orangians cut to
pieces.
Some of the prince of Orange's Men, that followed, Colonel Lovervall's
Colors, looking like fresh supplies, turne'd head, and with the violence of
dying persons desperately charge'd Vitelli with a strong Impression opening and
shattering the Body of Horse that stood close about him, Vitelli, Vitelli's
valiant gallantry,
that neither stirred from his Resolution, nor his ground, charged Colonel
Lovervall, in the Head of his Men, grievously wounding him; then fell upon his
Cornet, and wresting the Colors out of his hand, lifted them up adding fresh
courage to his men, and not only cried, Victory, but won it; they say, when he
brought the Cornet to the Duke of Alva, the devise whereof was pillar a with
his motto, Highly commended by the Duke of Alva.
Valor cannot fall, till Conquered by a greater Valor, the Duke before many
great Commanders, The number of the slain.
said, truly Valor it self is this day conquered by the valor of Vitelli. In
two hours were slain no less then two thousand of the Enemy, most of them by
the Sword, the common end of battles. Some men of quality were taken
prisoners; among whom was Colonel Lovervall, hurt in three places, afterward
put to death at Bruxells. Count Hochstrat's death.
But he whose loss more troubled the Prince of Orange, then all that fell that
day, was Anthony Lalin, Count Hochstrat, shot in the battle, and presently
set upon a fresh horse, who being carried off by his own Soldiers, not long
after, publicly professing himself a Catholic, dyed. Of the King's men
very many were wounded, but it is sufficiently known that only fourscore were
slain. A hundred and fifty of the Enemy still kept in a body, The remainder of
the routed Forces surrounded in a house, Which the King's men fire,
and possessed themselves of a house hard by; resolved, as if they had been in
the Fort at Antwerp, not to yield, but upon Treaty and Conditions. And when the
Royalists, that were to march away, could not get them out, the Duke commanded
them to make a Ring about the house, and set fire upon it; immediately two
Soldiers drove to the door a Cart loaded with hay, under which they secured
themselves, and firing it with their Matches, the house was easily burnt down,
Their several kinds of death
involving those within it in unavoydable Ruin. It was a cruel and miserable
Spectacle to see some stifled with the flame, fall with the house: whilst
others striving to make their way, ran furiously upon the Soldiers bended
Pikes, like wild Boars upon the Huntsmen Spears; many reversed their Muskets
and Swords shooting and killing themselves, Some of them dispatch one another.
or one another, to prevent the Spaniards Triumph, or glory in their deaths. In
the mean time, part of the beholders of this Gladiator-like madness pitied,
part hissed at them, and laughing gave the Enemy thanks for saving them so much
labor and loss of Powder and Bullet: wishing all their Foes might die as
gloriously. Opinions touching the Enemy^^ being suffered to pass.
Many of the Royal Army were of opinion, that if their whole forces had
fought, as Vitelli proposed, the Enemi's strength would have been broke in that
one battle. But Alva, besides that he was naturally selfe-opinioned, doubting
the situation of the place, and faith of the Low-countrey-men, resolved to play
his game warily. And now the Prince of Orange recruited with Succors out of
France, might probably have repaired his Losses, if he had not found by
immediate experience, The Prince of Oranges Army grown greater, and likewise
his Necessities,
that his Soldiers were increased, and likewise his misfortunes: as being
daily more and more straightened for want of Victual. Wherefore his hope failing,
which had persuaded him and his, that if he could enter Brabant with an Army,
diverse Cities that favored his quarrel would presently revolt; nay finding
those very Cities as well provoked as fortified against him, Strange to see how
often he changed his Quarters st^iving to take some Town or to circumvent the
Duke, But all in vain. He thinks of goi^g f^r France, It kept out of ^^^ege,
^lunders the Country about it, And diverse Villages in Hayno^t, Does some
mischi fe to the D. of Alva.
after he had encamped himself nine and twenty several times, and still saw
the Duke of Alva marching on his Flank, who being an old Soldier still got
the advantage in ground, and might at his own pleasure hinder him from coming
to any City, but by no force nor policy could himself be drawn to hazard the
fortune of a battle: advised by Ienlis and the rest of the French Commanders,
he resolved to join himself to the Prince of Conde, at that time reviving the
third Civil War of France* Especially because Gerard Grosbeck, Prince of
Liege, not only denied him passage into Germany, but commanding his soldiers
to man the Walls and discharge their Cannon, frighted the Prince of Orange
from the Suburbs; Which Affront He barbarously revenged, by firing certain
Monasteries, and so marched with his Army into Hay nolt, where he plundered with
extraordinary cruelty, the Villages and Houses of many Gentlemen that had
signed the Covenant. It was supposed he did it, because they promised to serve
in the War, and came not. But at Quesnoy, fighting above the rate of his
usual Skirmishes with the Duke of Alva, that constantly followed him, ever
cutting off some part of his Rere: he routed some Companies of Spaniards and
Germans, and slew many of them, Sancho de Avila, and Caesar Davilo that
endeavored to make them stand, Is prohibited to enter France.
being themselves sore wounded. This was some revenge for his former Losse^.
But at his entering into France, by a threatening Message from King Charles,
delivered by Colonel Arthur Cosse, who with his French Brigade guarded the
Borders, he was commanded not to come upon French ground with his Army. Which
notwithstanding, he marched on, but was constrained to alter his determination
by a furious mutiny in his Camp, his men refusing to bear Arms against the
King of France, and demanding pay of the Captains with their Swords in their
Hands The Prince afflicted with so many Miseries at once, And his hopes there
f^iling returns into Germany.
increased by the extraordinary sharpness of the Winter, and considering his
uncertain condition, that had neither any place of strength, nor money to pay
the Army, as he had promised: selling part and pawning the rest of his
House-hold-stuffe, and Ammunition (which was all he had now left) the Soldiers
were by that means somewhat pacified, and he, with part of his Forces, having
disbanded the rest, about the years end returned into Germany, to wait a more
auspicious time for renewing of the War.

But the Duke of Alva, now freed from the war, sent into France to the
Assistance of Charles the ninth against the Heretics, 2000 Horse, and 3000
Foot under the Command of Ernest Count Mansfeldt to return thanks to the
King, The Duke of Alva having (...) himself of the Prince of Orange, sends an
Army into France under the command of Ernest C. Mansfeldt To very good purpose.
Ber. Mend. lib. 4.
for declaring himself against the prince of Orange. And Count Mansfeldt's
Service did not a little contribute to the Victory at Monconture, where his
valor was particularly inflamed with Emulation of Lewis of Nassau; who that
day leading the maine battle of the Hugonots, Count Mansfeldt that had the
opposite Command, though his Right Arm was shot, first forced Nassau's Horse
to make a stand, and then routed them. But the Duke of Alva having as he
designed it, beat the Prince of Orange out of the Lowcountreys, without a
general day of battle, and with little Loss to himself: in the beginning
of January made his triumphant entrance into Bruxells appointing a public
Thankesgiving-day for his fortunate Success. His Glory was increased by the
Honor of an Ambassador from Rome, who presented him from Pius the fifth a
Helmet and Sword richly set and inchased with Gold and precious Stones,
solemnly consecrated by his Holiness, and sent to the Duke of Alva, He enters
Bruxells triumphently. The Pope sends him a Helmet and a sword.
as to the Champion of the Catholic Religion. This ext^aordinary Present he
received with great devotion in the Church, at the hands of the Bishop of
Machlin, Which he received with great state.
whilst he was celebrating divine Service. The rest of the day was spent in
tilting and such warlike Sports. May 1.
But all the Beholders were not joyful at heart, And as great Envy.
many being touched either with Grief or envy, and some that wished the Prince
of Orange should have lost the Victory, would not have had it won by the Duke
of Alva. It added to their indignation, that a Tilt-yard was made of that very
place, where a few Months before the Low Country Lords were beheaded. They
stomackt him yet more, because, being more ambitious of Honor with Posterity,
then fearful of Hatred from the present times, he commanded the Cannon taken
from L^wis of Nassau, He erects his own Sta^ue. ^^s F^shion.
in the battle of Geming to be melted: and made himself a Trophey of the
brass, to be set up in the Fort at Antwerp. It was his Effigies in complete
Armor, bareheaded, his Right Arm naked, and his eye upon the Town, treading
upon two brasse-Statues, signifying two of the three Estates of the
Low-countreyes, the Lords, Signification ^n Apolog. An 1581. Designer.
and Commons; as the Author of the Design, Arias M^ntanus affirmed, and the
Prince of Orange interpreted, laughing at the Pride of Alva, that erected
himself a Statue trampling upon the Nobility and People of the Low Countries.
These two prostrated Figures, had many Hands, and were armed with Petitions,
Purses, Axes, and Torches: their faces Vizarded; their Ears and Necks hung
with little dishes and Walletts, the Accoutrements of the Gheuses. Upon the
Marble pedestall was this Inscription. Inscription.
To the most faithful Minister of the best of Kings, Ferdinando Alvarez, Duke
of Alva, Governor of the Lowcountreys for Philip the second King of Spain,
because extinguishing Combustions, beating away the Rebels, restoring
Religion, executing Justice, he settled Peace in the provinces, this Statue was
erected. The sides of the Basis were cut into diverse Emblems, below was
written, Iungeli^g his Workmanship out of brass taken in the Field. It was
wonderful to see with how general a Hatred and Envy this Statue was looked
upon. The Low-countrymen inwardly fretting, as if they were daily conquered in
that Monument, W^^l^man James Junge^ing.
and their Nation daily triumphed over. The very Spaniards themselves were angry
at the Duke, This rendered him extremely o^^ous to the Lowcountrymen. And to
the Spanvards Ho Gabr. l. 8. c. 12.
that chose rather to sing his own Peter Ernest Count Mansfeldt Governor of
Lucembure Campe-master at ye Battle of Gemblac General of the French
Expedition.
portrait Praises, The Court of Spain scorns him for it. Rui Gomez.
then to hear them spoken by others. Nor was there any subject of discourse
more frequent in the Court of Spain. The Prince of Ebolo deriding his old
Competitour, for calling himself most faithful Minister, because he inverted
the Honor due to his Prince, and transferred it to himself. This made some cry
up the modesty of the King, who a few months before, when a rare Italian
Statuary offered that, without expense to the King, he would set up his
Majesty's Arms, and Portraiture over the gates of every City in Lumbardy; the
King, commending the man's good will, answered, The more, compa^ing his
confidence with the K^ng's Modesty. Ant Herrera l. 3. 2. part of his History.
he had rather have a Worke-man that, with any expense whatsoever, could set up
his Image in Heaven. Which words of the Prince were infinitely extolled by the
Court policy, that Alva for setting forth himself so vain gloriously, might
be the more eminently scorned. Nay the structure was not very pleasing (as it
is said) to King Philip, by whose command, four years after, The King
himself is displeased.
it was removed. Perhaps the King did it, to take away the Low-countrey-mens
Distaste; or rather his own, offended that another should have a Monument
raised out of a Victory won by his Majesty's Army, and which his own purse
paid for. And it was conjectured, Alva had knowledge of the King's displeasure,
because the other Statue (for he had two of the same model, cast by the same
Worke-man) was not sent into Spain, Which Alva was not ignorant of, Mich. van
Is^elt in his Hist. and met. l. 3. 6. Belg.
as he once resolved.

But nothing so much incensed the Provinces against the Duke of Alva, and the
Spaniards, Of the Taxes he exacted, The tenth, The twentieth, And 100. part The
cause of these impositions,
as the new Taxes, being the tenths of all commodities to be sold, and the
twentieth part of goods immovable; but the hundredth part of all, the
Low-countrey-men were to pay at once. For thus they said the Exchequer might be
replenished, which the War had emptyed; and likewise the Provinces secured.
Because Spain, engaged in a long War with the Moors, and now setting forth
a chargeable Fleet against the common Enemy, could afford small supplies. Nor
was it reason to expect any thing from King Philip, and unseasonable to divert
him, wholly applying his Endeavors and Expenses for the Defense of
Christendom. But the Estates, that to settle these Taxes were summoned to
Bruxells, would not yield to the Tenths, The Estates de^^re him to remit the
tenth part.
because they should thereby lose their Traffic, the only subsistence of the
Low Countries. Indeed how could the Merchants and Artificers brook the payment
of many tenth parts out of one Commodity? for before Cloth, or Hangings, and
other Stuffes were woven and put off their hands, they must pay the Tenths of
wool, so for thread, then for weaving, and dying, and such like parts of
manufacture, and thus the price of Commodities being enhansed, they should have
no buyers: the Worke-men would go to other Nations, and the Low Countries be
reduced to extreme Poverty. The Duke of Alva might consider what advantage it
had been to England, since the Low-countrey-men, above 200. years ago, But
Alva is not to be moved.
forced by an inundation of the Sea to leave their Country, had taught the
English the art of Weaving, which before they understood not. Many other
Manufactures were yet in the Low Countries, not known to their Neighbors, A
contest between the D. of Alva and the Queen of England. M. Isselt's Hist and
Me^eran. l. 3. and Thuan l. 44. and Meurs. l 5. and B. Adrian. l. 20. and
Aloys. Caberera. l 8. Hier. Conest. l. 3.
whereby they would be greatly enriched if the Worke-men should go and live
among them. All this prevailed not with the Duke in the midst of his command,
victorious, and no enemy appearing; who therefore assured himself the
Low-countrey-men would easily obey.

But the Queen of England in the interim somewhat startled him, and made Alva
think of a new enemy. A Biscaine man of war with four Pinnaces sailing out
of Spain, and bound for the Low Countries convoying of money to pay the Duke
of Alva's Army, a vast sum (200000. Ducats, as some Writers affirm,
according to others 40000. nay there is one that says 800000.) forced either
by a tempest, or for fear of Pirates, came into an English Harbor. The Queen
resolving not to part with that Treasure, Occasioned by her interception of his
Moneys,
first commanded an accoumpt of it should be taken, then causing them to
unlade; under pretense of the Kingdome's necessity, it was carried to the
Exchequer: Guerrao Despeo the Spanish Ambassador, and his Majesty's Admiral
Stephano Serra protesting against it, to no purpose. The Duke of Alva bitterly
resenting the Injury, made an Imba^go in the Low Countries, He seizes the goods
and ships of the English in the Low Countries, So does her Majesty, the
Low-countrey-men and Spaniards commodities in England, The Queen will not
admit of his Ambassador.
arresting all the English Merchants Goods, and Ships: May. 20. 24
the like was done in Spain. On the other part, the Queen of England seized
upon all the Commodities of the Low-countrey-men, and Spaniards; so as they
were upon the very point of Proclaiming War on both sides. And Christopher
Assonvill sent into England by the Duke to demand the money, and to compose the
matter in controversy, found the Queen so offended and enraged, that he was
commanded back to the place from whence he came, the Queen refusing to treat
upon conditions with Alva, or any man else, but the King himself. She was so
peremptory (as I have read in Assonvill's Letters) because show knew the Moors
intended to rebel in Spain, and the Germans were again preparing to invade
the Low Countries: she her self, in the mean while, being enriched with daily
Prizes taken from the Low-countrey-men and Spaniards. At the very same time 14.
The Portugall-Fleete with their Indian Frieght taken by the English.
Portugall-shippes, laded with Indian Merchandise, Ignorant of the Quarrel
between the Nations, thinking they might pass securely, were surprised by the
English: and it is not to be imagined how much that Booty inflamed those
Islanders with a desire to continue a difference so advantageous. Which made
the Spaniard the more earnestly to labor the composing of it. A new Embassage
from the Duke.
And to this end Thomas Raggeus was sent into England, on whose prudence the
Duke of Alva much relied, who was afterward, when the King knew him better,
made his Treasurer. Raggeus, though he could not prevail with the Queen, that
was resolved to keep the money, yet so won upon her, as she was no longer deaf
to an Agreement. The Queen's Answer.
Then the Duke sending over the Marquess Vitelli with Raphael Barberino, and
his Secretary Turrius, the Queen received them more graciously, and publicly
explained her self, that she understood the money appertained not to the King,
(whom she never had any Intention to wrong in any kind) but to the
Genoa-Merchants: that she had use for it at the present, and would hereafter
return it to the owners faithfully, Barberino's Relation.
and with interest. This Answer was reported to the Duke of Alva, from the
Spanish Ambassador and Vitelli, by Barberino, who advised him (notwithstanding
the Queen intended not Repayment, since no Merchant could demand the Money) to
take into consideration whether the Low-countrey-men or the English would be
more prejudiced by the Quarrel. And further told his Excellence, that he had
taken notice of 80. Low Country and Spanish Ships under Arrest in the English
Ports, their lading daily decaying, and imbezelled. And therefore the
Ambassador and Vitelli held it best, that matters should not be aggravated
with new causes of offense, for they hoped that in a little time, the fury of
both sides being allayed by mutual Losses, at last with equal Dissimulation
they would fall to their ancient intercourse. For the Duke's better
satisfaction therein, The Original Strada says he has by him.
he delivered him a Breviate, wherein he had stated the controversy. All this
was truth, as afterward appeared when the contestation being ended, the loss
of the Low Country and Spanish Merchants was found so far to exceed the
damage of the English, as these were forced to refund above 200000. Florens.
Nevertheless Alva would not desist, either from revenging the Injury done by
England, Nothing is concluded.
or from exacting the Tribute he had begun to demand of the Low Countries.
That, he thought, concerned the King in point of honor: and though he knew
this for the present would hinder the Exchange and Traffic, yet he hoped those
Losses would be soon repaired. Especially, since his money was interecep^ed by
the English, he held it just to ask Supplies from the Low-countrey-men, for
whose benefit that money should have been employed. When the Duke therefore to
his Requests and Admonitions added Threats, and the Estates pretended the
People's wants; there was a note subscribed with an unknown name scattered in
the Presence, The D. of Alva proceeds in exacting Tribute from the Low Country
men.
directed to the Duke of Alva, Who refuse to pay Taxes.
in these words; that if he acted Themistocles, and to raise money brought two
Goddesses, Persuasion and Violence; they would play the Andrians, Plutarch, in
Themestocles.
and to prevent Payment, interpose as many, and as great Goddesses, Poverty and
Impossibility. Thus while the Contest was kept a foot, on the one part with
Petitions and Complaints; on the other, with often varied Edicts, Feb. 1570.
and Commands; and yet, the year ended without any thing concluded; at last,
the Duke of Alva in a Rage advertised the Provinces, Whereat he enraged writes
threatningly to the Provinces.
That the State was committed to him alone, and he only would be careful of
it. In the mean time they ought to obey his just Commands; and call to mind,
that diverse Cities engaged in the Rebell's cause might be fined, if he so
pleased, in far greater Sums then he demanded. Now therefore with
cheerful obedience they should redeem their Delinquencies; the rather, since
he looked not after the money for his own use, or to send it into Spain to
the King, but only therewith to defend and secure the Low Countries against the
danger of the times. He likewise took away the privileges of diverse
malignant Cities, And proves as good as his word,
charged others with Garrisons, and struck fear into them all. They yield to
the Duke in some things for the rest they p^tition the King.
In so much as most of the Provinces consented to the 100. part; some commuted,
and bought out that Tribute with ready money: But many taking time to
deliberate, dispatched Agents into Spain^, petitioning to be eased of the tenth
part: but the hundredth part (more they were not able) they offered to pay.
Which Affront though Alva deeply stomackt; yet fearing the power which his
Enemies at Court had with the King, July 16.
he thought it best to dissemble his indignation. And to win the Peoples
hearts, Sent to him
he resolved at that instant to publish, what he had long deferred, March 25.
a General pardon for the late Tumults.

Three years before, Margaret of Austria had earnestly solicited the King to
grant them This Pardon; A general Pardon long since desi^ed by Margaret of
Parma.
because she saw, that every day many Low-countreymen in fear of punishment,
either left the Provinces, or there conspired with some of their own Faction;
as if with their Number their Safety would increase, because a Multitude is
easiest pardoned, and where all offend, none suffers. But the King, Sent too
late by the King to Alva.
not sending the Pardon under Seal, till two years after, to the Duke of
Alva; and he delaying Publication till another year; And yet the Promulgation
by him deferd. The Fore n^one Ceremonies at the Promulgation.
both of them lessened the favor, by protraction Howsoever Alva omitted
nothing that might gloriously set off that benefit to the Lowcountrymen. For
going to Antwerp, he commanded Supplications to be made in the great Church of
our Lady, he himself in a rich habit (after Sermon, Pra^ers. Sermon in Low
Dutch Ma^^e.
which was preached in Low-Duch by the Bishop of that City) being present with
all the Lords of the Council, at the Archbishop of Cambray's Mass. Toward
the end of the Sacrifice, the Archbishop read Pius the fifth his Letters,
wherein he absolved all those that had complied with the Heretics. The Popes
Letter read. An Oration in French.
Upon which subiect-matter the Bishop of Arras made a Speech in French,
exhorting the people to give thanks to God for that mercy of the Pope and
King, and for the endeavors therein used by the Duke of Alva, their Governor.
Whilst he amplified this point, he was taken with a sudden qualme, and
carried out of the Pulpit, Interrupted.
diverse persons making a superstitious Construction of the Accident, as if he
had undertaken a cause that Fortune favored not. In the Evening the Duke,
attended with a great Train of Lords and Gentlemen, The afternoon Pomp.
came into the great Marketplace, filled with an infinite Crowde (his
Soldiers guarding the Streets, Out of Count Mansfeldts Letters to Marg of
Parma 9. of August. A stage in the Marketplace. The Duke upon a Throne. The
Crier reads the K. Letters in Low Dutch and French, But so low that few hear
him. Out of the Letters of Christ. Assonv. to Marg of Parma. July 17. And fewer
like of what they hear.
and standing mixed among the Townsmen.) Then his excellence ascending a Theater
sat down in a golden Throne, (having on, his hallowed Sword and hat, which I
told you were sent him by the Pope, precious both for their Consecration, and
their Iewelles,) and commanded the Crier, that stood by him, to read the King's
Decree; wherein his Majesty granted the Low-countreymen an Act of Oblivion, and
Indemnity, The man read it in French, and Low Dutch, but with such a hoarse
vnaudible Voice, that very few understood him. Which was perhaps an Accident;
perhaps, so ordered by the Duke, who had rather the Low-countreymen should
measure the benefit by the greatness of Pomp, and the glorious News of a
General pardon, then by the Decree it self, containing so many Exceptions.
But the just contrary happened. For the people upon sight of so magnificent a
preparation, promising themselves all they could desire: whatsoever fell short
of their Expectation, they accounted as taken from them. Besides, the Multitude
that looked on, and could not get near the theater, not knowing how far the
Pardon extended to particulars, were easily deceived by such as watched there,
on purpose to extenuate the Kings Favor. And many of those that stood nearest,
by reason of Clauses of Exception, not yet thinking themselves sufficiently
secured, were observed to depart very melancholique and doubtful: and contrary
to the Duke of Alva's Expectation, no bonefires were made that night, to
signify their Joy and thanks. In the mean time Princess Anne, daughter to the
Experour Maximilian, Princess Ann Espoused to K. Philip. August. 11. Anne
Daughter to the Empe^rour Ma^imilian and Isabella Daughter to King Henry. The
Duke of Alva desirous to attend her Highness into Spain* and to leave his
Government of the Low-countryes.
came into the Low Countries, she having been after the death of Charles
Prince of Spain, 51 Septem.
to whom she was promised, The King assents.
espoused to his Father Philip; And nominates his successor Who was long a
coming.
it being fatal to that Prince to have his designed W^ves, either taken from
him in his life time, or after his death enjoyed, by his own Father. The Duke
of Alva was an earnest Suitor to the King, for leave to wait upon the
Princess into Spain, thinking it would be an honor on so good an occasion to
quit the Low Countries, which, by beating the Enemy, he had sufficiently
preserved for the present: and secured, as he thought, for the future, by the
Forts which he had built. And though at first the king consented not, yet in
the end, displeased at some thing done by Alva in his Government, and that he
had not, as he was commanded, published his Royal Pardon for those Tumults (if
Count Mansfeldt, long since alienated from Alva, wrote truth to the Duchess
of Parma) his Majesty resolved to call him away from the Low Countries, and
named his Successor, of the Blood Royal, Iuan de la Cerda Duke of Medina
Celi, Viceroy of Navar, who notwithstanding, came not till two years after,
and then presently resigning the burden of the Low Country War to another,
he himself returned into Spain. At which time it was the common news, that
Cardinal Granvell, joined in commission with Mary Princess of Portugal, Wife
to Alexander Farneze, should succeed in the Government of the Low Countries:
though all their Wishes were fixed upon her mother in Law, Margaret of Austria
Duchess of Parma. But the Duke of Alva (before the designation of his
Successor) leaving the business of conducting the Queen into Spain to
Maximilian Count of Bolduc, Admiral of the Belgic Seas; and sending in his
own Place, his Son Ferdinando de Toledo, Caesar Davalo and Mondragonio with
his Regiment, (all of them a while after returning into the Low Countries, but
only Caesar Davalo, who served Don John of Austria in the battle of Lepanto
and the War of Tunis) In the mean time the Duke himself fell In the interim
Alva returns to his Demands of the 10 and 20. parts.
again upon his demands of the tenth, and twentieth part; on conditions, which
he had often altered, and the people as often refused, with like wilfulness
of both sides. The Low-countreymens obstinacy was increased by their
intelligence, that Alva had but a little time to stay among them, which the
People wished, and therefore easily believed: so as their fear of a falling
man was less; and his indignation greater, in regard he thought they insulted
over his departure.

Another cause of their dissent, An Inundation in the Low Countries. November. 1
was the new and sudden Calamity of the provinces. For upon All Saints Eve,
the Sea excessively swelling and in some places overflowing, in others bearing
down the banks; such a prodigious and unheard of Deluge covered certain
Islands of Zelandt, a great part of the Seacoast of Holland, Greater then any
in man's memory.
and almost all Friezland: as that Inundation which forty years before is said
to have swallowed up threescore and twelve Villages, was not so high as this by
a foot. There was not only an incomparable loss of Fortunes, What a
destruction is made.
but of men. In the very compass of Friezland twenty thousand persons were
drowned, See Pier. Winsen. l. 2. Hist.
sunk and swept away, at the rising and falling of the water, (which at both
times was alike merciless) whose bodies with the Carcasses of Cattle,
House-hold-goods, and broken ribbs of Ships, floated over the Fields, the Land
now being indistinguishable from the Sea, and, as they affirm, presenting to
the eye a model of Noah's Flood. I find in the History of Friezland that many
men, who had climed to the tops of Hills and Trees, ready to give up the
Ghost, were timously saved by boats, which the Magistrate sent out to gather
up the remainder of the Shipwreck. Among the rest, upon a hill by Sneace they
found an Infant, carried thither in the Cradle, A rare Accident.
lying besides a Cat, and soundly-sleeping, neitherin fear of Shipwreck, This
calamity draws off the Duke from in^isting upon the Taxes.
nor the Flood. The Duke of Alva moved with this loss of the maritime parts of
the Low Countries, Some persuade him to desist altogether.
for some months forbear to press the point in Controversy, not resolving
absolutely what general future Course to hold. For his Court was divided in
opinions, Arguments were held on both sides, the wiser sort disputing, That his
reason deceived the Duke, who persuaded himself, the Treasury could be
supplied by the Excise, which would impoverish the Provinces, therefore was not
likely to continue long. That the Duke had done ill, to boast in in his Letters
to the King, how he by a compendious way, by Excise had found out the Golden
Mines of Peru: for, he would have noe better fortune then King Antigonus his
Treasurer, Arh^n. l. 3. Dipnos.
who upon the discovery of a Kind of Spaw at Edepsus, which cured such as
drank the water, when he imposed a Tribute upon all that used it, his
Coveteousnesse was immediately deluded; the Well and impost drying up together.
And the like Tribute, being set upon Merchandise in the Lowcountreys, would in
like manner lose them all the benefit of Trading. How much more considerate was
Charles Duke of Burgundy, that when he thought to impose the hundred part upon
all vendible Commodities; being told what prejudice would follow by the
departure of the Merchants transferring the Mart into some other Coun^rey,
abrogated the Innovation. And when Commerce was gone, what could remain to the
Netherlands, but solitude from their own poverty, and slavery from their
enriched Neighbors. Others argue, that it was just and Necessary,
On the contrary some arg^ed, that the Treasury being exhausted by a War
maintained by the Spaniards not willingly but upon compulsion, necessitated by
the Tumults raised within the Provinces, it was therefore requisite the
Provinces should defray the Expense, especially at this time, when the English
threatened them with hostility. And diverse merely put a trick upon the Duke of
Alva,
Others, as they had put the Duke upon the Project of the tenth part, so they
affirmed, that it concerned him to be constant to his resolution: pretending it
was for his honor, but indeed aiming to bring upon him the Envy and hatred of
the Low Countries, in order to his Ruin. Whose Counsel, as suitable to his
rigid nature, he obstinately followed. At length He qualifies the Edict and
proposes it the third time.
Wherefore threatningly complaining, that the Low-countrey-men were so
stubborn merely in contempt of the King's Majesty; April.
without further delay, The City of Bruxells refuse it with notorious contumacy.
he commanded the Edict tempered and qualified with new moderation, Alva.
provides against them Forces and Halters.
(but now immutable) to be published at Bruxells, where by reason of his
presence he expected their rediest obedience. See further in the Prince of
Orange's Apology. 1581.
But they unanimously resisted. But sudden News diverts him,
In so much as they shut up their Shops, and all that day the Bakers, So that
he is forced to leave the design of Taxes, Which had infinitely prejudiced the
Duke, and occasioned the Rev^ls of the Low Countries far more then all his
cruelty.
Butchers, and In-keepers would sell nothing. The Duke passionately enraged to
see before his eyes, in the principal city and place of terror, such
confidence in the people; that very night, commanded some of them to be hanged,
upon their Signe-Posts. And now the Soldiers were in Arms, and the Hangman
ready with a Rope, when the Messenger that brought news of the taking of Brill
by the Gheuses, like a god coming down upon the Stage, untyed the knot of that
intricate and dismal Tragedy. For Alva struck with that unexpected loss, at
last gave over the odious dispute; for two years together continued with no
other fruit, but that, aggravating their hatred to the Spaniard, it ripened the
Plot of their Revolt. Indeed it plainly appeared, how great a provocation to
Rebellion Taxes are, when people having other grievances, have that burden
added. For the Low-countrey-mens complaints of Alva's Pride and Cruelty went no
further then hate and execration; so that lately when the Prince of Orange came
with an Army, the Cities, though offended with the Duke of Alva, sent no
Assistance to the Prince. For punishment falls but upon a few; and by how much
it spurrs on the multitude with hatred, by so much it curbes them with fear.
But Taxes are accounted every man's particular Loss, and they that be
therewith grievously oppressed, lose their fear together with their fortunes;
and not regarding future prejudice, seek a General, merely to defend
themselves from present injury and damage. This has been the familiar
practice of other Nations, The Hollanders anciently free from Tribute, Taci^us
de Moribus Germanorum Idem l. 4. Annal.
but particularly of the Low-countrey-men, whereof the major part, The exaction
whereof caused their Rebellion against the Romans.
especially the Hollanders, were anciently exempt from all Taxes and
Contribution; being reserved by the Romans, like their arms, only for the
wars, as we read in their History. Nor of old was there any other cause of
their Rebellion under Tiberius Caesar, but that Olennius their Governor
inhaunsed the small Tribute which they formerly paid, and when it was
inhaunsed did severely exact it. With whom their prayers and petitions not
prevailing, their refuge was a War, which for many ages they obstinately
maintained against the Roman Generals. And truly when I look upon the
Counsels of the Prince of Orange, 1570.
that so often cast the Dice in hope to win the Government, And now for the
same reasons the P. of Orange sollicits their Defection, Having often tried
other ways to bring them (...).
it seems his Fortune never smiled, till the occasion of this Tribute was
presented. For he stirred a little in the time of Margaret Duchess of Parma,
raising those Insurrections about the Bishops, the Inquisitours, and the
Council of Trent. Yet these being composed by the King's grace and goodness,
and the greater part of the Lords adhering to the Governesse, fearing Count
Egmont especially would not suffer him of his Friend to become his Prince, he
durst proceed no further at that time. But when the Duke of Alva by his
Severity lost the hearts of the Lords, and among the rest had impeached and
condemned the Prince of Orange, then he joined the common cause, as he strove
to make it, with his own: and openly took up Arms, safe in point of
reputation, because there was one to whose execrated name the War would be
imputed. As last he compasses his desire
But the Cities being terrified with the sudden punishment inflicted by the
Duke, the Prince of Orange found by experience, that in the new Impression of a
fear (whose first Fit is the strongest, and by continuance lessens, till it be
shook off) it is to no purpose, so long as the humor that has weakened the
people, is undigested, to solicit them to rebel. The People being imboldned
upon the news of the Duke's present departure.
But when the Cities, as well those that continued faithful to the Spaniard,
as those that stood suspected, were pressed to pay Taxes, the hatred of the
Generality increasing, overcame their Fear; the people growing more confident
when they heard that the Duke of Alva must be gone. Then the Prince of Orange
knew his time was come for maturing a Rebellion; and founding of that
Government which he had long designed. Therefore whilst Alva fixed all his Care
upon raising the Taxes, the Prince of Orange laid hold of the opportunity to
draw the people from their obedience to the King: and encouraged by the secret
Intelligence which he had with many Towns, ready to revolt, levied Soldiers
at his leisure; and kindled such a fire of War in the Low Countries, as for
so many years space could never be put out with the ruins of battered Cities,
nor extinguished with a torrent of blood.

The War was begun upon the Sea of Holland, The Duke of Alva's Loss at Sea.
as if they had now already found their strength, and were sensible from the
very first in what part they should establish their Dominion. And
notwithstanding this Rebellion was often intended and attempted by the Gheuses,
as well those of Corporations called the City- Gheuses, as the High-way-men
called the Wood- Gheuses, The Water- Gheuses, Their General,
yet the Water- Gheuses (for so they were commonly called) were they whose
fortunate Audacity carried it. The Commander in chief of these Water- Gheuses
was Count William a Marcha, Baron of Lume, professing his enmity to the Duke of
Alva, in his Colors; wherein was painted ten pieces of money, to inflame the
fury of his men by putting them in mind of the tenth part. His Principal
Officers,
The first that took Commissions with him were, William Blosius Treslong,
Lancelot bastard Son to Brederod, They turn Pirates,
Bartholomew Entese, Sonoi, and diverse others. These had Letters of Mart from
the Prince of Orange, and orders to scour and rob the Seacoast of Holland,
and Friezland. And out of hatred to the Spaniard, and desire of Free-boote,
whereof the Prince of Orange was to have a fifth part, they executed their
Orders, and robbed from the mouth of the Ems to the English narrow Seas: where
if at any time they met with Ships too strong for them, or fled before a
Tempest, they commonly secured themselves in some English Harbor. Are
prohibited the Ports of England.
But the Queen her self refusing to protect them, as common Enemies, upon
request made to her by the Duke of Alva they, having boarded and taken a
Biscaner, were by tempest driven into Vorna an Isle of Holland, Vorna.
the People supposing them to be Merchants cast upon that Coast by the Storm.
They take the Town of Brill.
Where, imboldened by their late perils they fell upon the Brill, a Port-towne
of Zeland, and before the Townsmen were aware that they brought War, not
Merchandise, with unimaginable success, no man resisting, they took the
Place, upon Palme-Sunday: and Lume leading them on, broke the Saints Images,
in pieces; April 1.
and omitting no kind of Irreverence to holy things or Orders, Destroy all
things Sacred. Beat the Spanish forces. Gulielmus Blosius Treslong.
so fortified the Ports, that when Count Bolduc Governor of Holland by Alvas
Command came against them, they not only gave him a strong Repulse, but
likewise Willam Treslong with incredible Confidence fired some of his Ships
accidentally severed from the Fleet. Upon report of the taking of this Isle,
as if the Scarlet Colors had been hung out for Signal of battle to the
Provinces, A wonderful change follows.
it is not to be told what wonderful changes through all the Low Countries
immediately insued. For many Cities favored the Covenanteers, some invited
them, others stood neutrall, and would neither admit of Alva, nor revolt from
the King. A few were sensible of their Allegiance, Durdrecht or Dort revolts
from the Spaniard.
and took arms for the Spaniard. Dort, the Chief City of Holland, when Count
Bolduc fled thither, and demanded entrance for his men; it being cunningly
given out, that the Spaniards were upon their March to distraine for the tenth
part; would not let him in, but shut their Gates against him as an enemy.
Vlushing a port Town of Zeland, And Vlushing.
and the bulwark of the Ocean, upon an Exhortation at Mass made to them on
Easter day in the morning by the Parish Priest, who hated the Spaniard, and
persuaded them to maintain their Liberty, turned out the Spanish Garrison,
with such a popular fury, as they hanged Colonel Alvarez Pacecho, John
Treslong.
Kinsman to the Duke of Alva at Treslong's request, in revenge, as he said of
his Brothers death, four years before, beheaded by Alva's Order: and the
Heretics themselves were earnest to have him put to death, that Vlushing might
not hope for pardon, from the Governor's just Anger. A while after Enchuysen
lying over against Friezland, And Enchuysen.
which among the chief Ports of Holland had till then continued loyal,
revolted from the Duke. Enchuysens example was follwed by Horn, And almost all
Holland.
Alcmar, Edam and other Towns of North-Hollandt. And in South- Hollandt, And a
great part Zeland being now out of fear of the Duke of Alva, and jeering him
for the loss of Brill.
Goude, Oudewater, Leyden, Gorcom. So that besides Amsterdam and Schoonhoven,
that were still faithful to the Spaniard, the Duke of Alva lost almost all
Holland, and a great part of Zeland, which had so shaken off the terror of his
name, that they wrote public Libells against him; and as soon as Brill was
taken, pictured him with a pair of Spectacles put upon his Nose, by Lume
standing behind his back: for the Low-Duch call Spectacles Brills, and they
have a jeering Proverb when they hamper a man, that they put Spectacles on his
nose, and a Snaffle in his mouth. These Figures therefore signified, that Alvas
Severity was now bridled. But they that made them little dreamed, what a world
of Mischief hung over their heads, The revolted Towns put themselves into the
Prince of Orange's power.
in the hand of this great General, one that despised such ridiculous toys.
And though some of the Cities I have named, wavered at the very first, resolved
to rebel, not resolved to whom they should submit: yet partly despairing, out
of the greatness of their crimes committed against the Church and Churchmen;
partly out of an obstinate determination never to endure the new Taxes, they
finally came in, to the prince of Orange; and as if he had been their King,
Lume moving it, took an oath of Fidelity to him. From him they received their
Garrisons, Their new Commonwealth
Shipping, and Arms: he disposed of all places of Government, made Laws,
bestowed an ordered the Revenues taken from the Clergy; such Multitudes out of
France and Great Britain flocking thither in hope of plunder, that within
less then 4. Months, in the Port of Vlushing lay a Fleet ready rigged, The
predatory Fleet very much increased and constantly victorious.
and manned of a 100. and 50. sail, which made diverse bold Attempts upon
Towns and Ships of the Spanish party; wherewith in ten years space, during
which time they had many Sea-sights, the Hollanders were but once overcome, to
be for ever after Conquerours, as the Spanish Historians themselves affirm.
Bernard Mend. l. 16.
So that it seems these were but prelusory Victoryes, by which at this time
the Hollanders Strength by Sea exceedingly increased. Thus at last the water
brought forth this new Commonwealth; Ambition being the Mother, Heresy the
Midwife: and Terror like Thunder, making her fall in Labor before her time.
Truly when this last Occasion of Rebellion was controverted, Making the Taxes
their Pretense.
the Bishop of Namure, writing to Margaret Duchess of Parma, concludes, that
the tenth and twentieth part was the price wherewith the Prince of Orange
purchased the Maritime Provinces, July 24. Anno 74.
and his new Principality. But in this so thick and sudden a Defection of
Cities, though the news of loss upon loss extremely vexed the Duke of Alva,
Many other Towns revolt. Doesburg Zutphan, Harderwick, Oldden sal, etc. Lewis
of Nassau takes the City of Mons, assisted by the French.
for in Zupthen, Overysell, Gelderland, and Friezland, the Success of the
Prince of Oranges Kinsman William Count Bergen was no less fortunate; the
Cities and Towns there being partly taken by storm, partly submitting out of
Affection, or Fear. Yet whilst the Duke of Alva only thought of keeping out
the French and prepared against a Land-Winde, not against a storm from Sea;
nothing more amazed him, then to heart that Lewis of Nassau had taken Mons the
chief City of Haynolt, by the assistance of the French: May 25.
because he doubted this was the beginning of a war which (it was commonly
reported) Charles K. of France, With their Kings leave procured by Gaspar
Coligny.
persuaded by Lewis of Nassau and Gaspar Colligny, had designed against the
Low Countries. For King Charles having concluded a Peace with the Hugonots, and
received the greatest of their Faction into his Favor and Grace at Court,
suffered himself, Who with too much confidence trusts himself to the King.
as it was said to be overruled by the Admiral Gaspar Coligny, so far, as to
send forces into the Low Countries to assist the Nassaus. And now the Drum was
beat for them in France, and because Colligny was to be General by the Kings
appointment, he invited to Paris the Flower of the Heretical Nobility, under
pretense of doing honor to the King of Navarre at his marriage with the King
of France his Sister, but indeed hoping to strengthen himself by the access
of those Lords; diverse of which, and those the subtillest of the Faction, were
loath to trust themselves in the Kings power, and wondered that Coligny who a
few years before, when the King sent for him to Court, returned answer, that
in France there was no Count Egmonts, should now with so much confidence come
in person, and be the Decoy to bring his fellows to the Royal City, and into
the King's hands. Notwithstanding the Admiral, because he saw Mons taken by
the French, the Peace with Spain broken, and a Peace for that end concluded
with the Queen of England: not doubting but the designed war would follow,
Endeavors to win the Low Country Lords. And makes high offers to Vitelli.
raised as many forces as he could possibly get among the German P. labored to
undermine the faith of the Low Country L. and by a certain Instrument of his
tried to corrupt Alva's Campe-Master Vitelli, promising him the place of
greatest honor and benefit in the French Army, if he would in time come over,
and serve the King of France, ready now to possess himself of the
Lowcountreys. And And after his first Repulse, when Coligny sent again, and
showed himself as impudent a Buyer of another faith, as he was a Seller of
his own: The Marquess Vitelli's noble carriage.
Vitelli, enraged at the receipt of more Letters, by the fame Messenger; in his
presence, sealed as they were, threw them into the fire, and bad him get out of
his sight, and carry back that Action for an Answer to the Admiral his Master.

The Duke of Alva informed by Vitelli, Of Mons recovered by the Duke of Alva.
and advertised from the Spanish Ambassador in France, of the Designs and
hourly proceedings of the Heretics at Paris, though he could not at first
believe the King of France to be an enemy, J. B. Adrian. l. 18. and Thuan. l.
36.
being privy (as some write) to the King's Plot against the Heretics: yet
hearing of the loss of Mons, he thought it best to confide in the King no
longer: therefore neglecting the War from Sea, he sent his Son Federico, and
Chiapino Vitelli, with part of his forces before, to besiege Mons; he himself
with the rest of his Army resolving immediately to follow. Duke Federico
attacques the Town.
When Federico came near the Town, some commanded French Horse sallyed out,
lest the Spaniard should sit down without resistance. The French bravery.
Indeed they conceived it a punctillo of honor to give the Enemy proof of
their valor before they be coopt up within Walls and works; Though in that
skirmish Vitelli was shot in the left Thigh, which was no little grief to the
King's men: The Spaniards pitch their Tents.
yet they lodged the Army in the place he had appointed. The next day, after
they had entrenched themselves, they found in their quarters certain Women of
Mons that came, Women-spies.
under color of selling herbs, to discover the strength and resolutions of
the Spaniards. Punished.
All which, by Federico's Order had their petticoates cut off above the knee,
Bern. Mend. l. 6. 2. Reg. c. 10.
a military punishment, wherewith the Spanish use to shame that Sex: not unlike
the old custom of the Ammonites; and being first carried through the Camp,
and laughed at, they were with this Disgrace sent back to Mons. The Abbey
D'espine taken by the Besiegers
A while after the Monastery D'espine, which was fortified by the Town, in
regard of the near distance, was twice assaulted by the Spaniards; who at
last, after hot dispute, beat out the Garrison, and took it. The Armies sent
by Coligny to relieve the Town.
The Admiral this while omitted no endeavors to relieve the besieged, listing
Horse and Foot upon the Borders, and appointing for their Commander in chief
(as he said by order from the King, John Hangest Lord of Ienlis (Brother to
Francis de Ienlis lately slain.) Who though advised, Gives battle to
Federico,
by a letter sent post from Lewis of Nassau, not to fight till the Prince of
Orange was joined with him: impatient of Delay, and of a partner, that must
share the honor of delivering the Besieged, and being encouraged by the
cheerfulness of his Army consisting of six or seven thousand; at St. Gislen,
not far from the Town besieged, with more Valor then Discretion he gave
Battle to Duke Federico, who omitting no duty of an Active General, Is
defeated.
defated him with the loss of almost all his men. Vitelli's bold venture.
That day the boldness of Vitelli was admired, who not being as yet cured of
his wound, and neither able to go nor stand, nevertheless could not be
persuaded to keep his Tent, but made himself be carried upon a hand-barrow
which he saw by chance, and so sitting ordered the battle with the General
Federico, planted the Ambuscadoes, and did all that belonged to the
Campe-Master's place. Thuan. l. 54.
Then appearing in the head of the Army among the thickest of those that
fought, his voice, John. Meu. l. 7. and Ber. Mend. reckons but twenty Prisoners
put to death.
his hand, and even his presence was very much conducing to the Victory: though
his wound festring upon the cold he took, his recovery was despaired of, and
it had like to have cost his life. Ienlis they say, lost twelve hundred men,
the Spaniards no more but thirty. Ienlis himself and six hundred of his
Soldiers, whereof about six score were Gentlemen, coming into the Spaniards
hands, part were imprisoned in the Forts next adjoining, Those that escaped the
^ight knocked in the head by the Boores.
and the rest hanged up. Such as fled out of that unfortunate battle, and hid
themselves in the Woods, were by the Country people whom they had cruelly used
awhile before, with like cruelty murdered. But Federico, whose name grew
glorious from that Field, returned with his Victorious Army to the next
Village, to give public thanks to Saint Leocadia Patroness of Toledo The
victorious Army full of ^olli^y.
(whose body at that time was there preserved) spending the day in warlike
pomp. And to fill Spain with the news, the Duke as haughty in Ostentation,
as in Action, sent Captain Bobadilla to the King to gratulate his Majesty for
the victory won by his Majesty's Arms and Influence.

In the mean time, The second expedition of the Prince of Orange from Germany
into the Low Countries to relieve his brother Lewis.
the Prince of Orange, animated with fame and hope of the rebellious Provinces,
was the more confident to march the second time against the Duke of Alva: and
bringing into the Field 6000 Horse, and 11000 Foot, in the beginning of July
passed the Rhine, and the Mose, and storming Ruremond in a cruel manner,
entered Brabant, forcing a passage into Haynolt, to relieve his Brother Lewis.
In the way, he traversed his ground to Lovaine, a City faithful to the King,
He takes Ruremond by storm, Passes by Lovaine for a sum of money, Mechlin
yields.
but forbear to use violence against it, upon the Receipt of 16000. Crowns.
Mechlin having a while before refused a Spanish Garrison, and therefore unable
to make resistance, yielded. The same fate had Nivell, Die, Sichem, Thienen,
and other Towns, that either out of Fear or Love submitted to the Rebels.
Bruxells, constant to their Loyalty, kept out the the Prince of Orange. He
takes other Towns in his March. Bruxells holds out, Guelm a Mar. Lud. Gulielm.
Dendermund and Oudenaerd were stormed and plundered; Many Villages, not strong
enough to resist, redeemed themselves with money. And indeed the Lowcountreys,
if ever, at this time were truly miserable, being invaded by foreign Armies, by
Sea, and land. The Seacoast was spoiled and harressed by Lume. The parts
bordering upon France by Lewis of Nassau. Four Armies of the Enemy at one time
harressing the Low countries Pouring their fury upon things sacred and the
Priests
Those confining upon Germany by Count Bergen; and the Inland-Countrey by the
Prince of Orange. Nor did they only take Towns, kill such as made resistance,
and rob houses, with the Licentiousness and Avarice of Soldiers, but with
barbarous Inhumanity spared no age nor modesty: tyrannizing over the Rest and
Monuments of the dead, which they spleened as much as the Living: especially
holy things and Persons; no money could buy the Lives of Priests, but with
exquisite and shameful cruelty they were tortured to death. Some Writers
expressly describe this Priest-Shambles, which the Gheuses, and and Lume of
all the Gheuses the bloudyest Butcher, set up in many Cities, with as much
glory to the Sufferers, as dishonor to the Judges and Hangmen. And though in
some places the King's Army (Sacrilege excepted) used their Victory afterward
with great Cruelty. Gu^ie^m, (...) de crudeli^^^^.
Yet because the Gheuses began to them at Brill, and likewise, In 21. Mart.
Gorcom. Sur. in com. Arnold.
contrary to their faith obliged by oath, had plundered Amorsfort; the severity
of the Spaniard seems to be somewhat more pardonable, as done by Example.
Havr. l. 15. de erect. Episc.
I am sure, for this very reason, the Heretics in their own Annalls do
confess, the Prince of Orange's men were infamous in the Low Countries: Johann
Meurs. in Orang. l. 7. and others.
and he himself that was thought at first to have taken arms for Protection
of the Netherlands, against the Tyranny of Alva, This makes the Prince of
Orange's Army illspoken of* He hastens to Mons,
now by making no distinction between Friend and Enemy, grew to be generally
hated; the people complaining that they were fallen among a multitude of
Tyrants. But the Prince of Orange, slighting the distaste of the Cities, came
into Haynolt, within sight of the besieged, in the month of August; where he
found the Town straightened, and as it was commonly thought, not able to hold out
long against the Spaniards. Admires at Alva's Trenches,
He wondered much to see the fortification of the Leaguer, no less strong for
mastering and keeping in the Garrison, then inaccessible to the assaults of any
that should come to their Relief. Diverse pieces of Cannon played upon
Bartimont-Port, from a hill which with a work running on the left hand, and a
line from thence, almost enclosed the Town; many little Redoubts at convenient
distance standing on the Bulwarks, which flanked one another, and secured the
whole. Tryes to break through in vain.
These Intrenchments whilst the Prince of Orange vainly endeavored to pass,
being entertained with some pickeering (for Alva was resolved not to venture a
battle) The Joy in the Duk's Camp,
he heard about evening in the Spanish Camp a great joy expressed by three
Vollyes of Shot, and the cheerful sound of Drums, and Trumpets, the light of
Bonefires shining through the Army: whereat being very much troubled, his Spies
brought intelligence, that two days before, For the Massacre at Paris.
by King Charles his Command, the great Massacre of the Hugonots was executed
at Paris: which because it happened at the Marriage of Henry King of Navarre
Henry IV.
(afterward King of France) and Margaret Sister to King Charles, upon Saint
Bartholomew's-Eve, the Massacre it self was called Bartholomews-Eve or the
Parisian wedding. Gregory XIII.
A strange attempt it was indeed, A Thanksgiving day. upon the same occasion,
at Rome.
but a just punishment of Traitors, conspiring against their King. The Pope
when he had the news sent him from the Cardinal of Loraine, set apart a day
of public Thanksgiving to God the just Revenger, in the Church of Saint
Lewis, and published a Bull of extraordinary Indulgences to such as should pray
for the heavenly assistance to the King and Kingdom of France. Which causes
the Prince of Orange his Despair,
The Prince of Orange amazed at the sudden accident, and doubting the Event
of the War; because the Admiral Coligny and the rest of the Heretical
Princes being murdered, no Aids from the King of France could now be hoped
for, by these of the adverse Faction; held it his best course to try the
fortune of a battle with the Duke of Alva, before the news of the Massacre
came to his Soldiers ears. But Alva still cautelous kept himself within his
Trenches, And retreat from Mons,
and from thence safely battering the Town; the Prince of Orange, when he saw
he could neither make any impression into his Camp, nor draw him out, fearing
lest the French Commanders the chief strength of his Army, upon notice of the
Massacre at Paris, should change their minds and leave him; wrote to his
Brother Lewis, That he should provide for himself, and give way to his fate;
and so retired with his Army to Mechlin: not without some loss received as it
commonly happens in a Retreat. His Camp assaulted in the night by Spaniards
in their (...).
For almost 200. commanded Spanish Foot, and about 800. Horse; all of them so
habited, as they might be distinguished by one another in the dark; broke
into the enemies Camp in the night, and killing their first Centrees, fell
into the Tents that were next at hand, with great Terror and Slaughter; and
before the Enemy could bring their men together, no less then four hundred of
them were slain, or burnt (for they fired their huts that were thatched) and
with this victory retired. Doubtless the Execution had been greater, but that
the fire, which at first affrighted them, presently after discovered the
Stratagem; Their confidence, The Prince of Orange's danger.
whereupon many Spaniards, as they were easy to be known being all in white,
were cut off; some of which, running before their Companions, got as far as
the Prince of Orange's Tent, who had a Dog lying by him on the bed, that
never left barking, and scratching him by the face, till he awaked and rose: in
the mean time his men came in. The rest of the night was spent in fear and
care, by break of Day his Army moved, and he by long Marches passing the Rhine
came to Delph in Holland. Septem. 19.
Not long after, Lewis of Nassau (who was the most astonished and stricken at
the Admiralls Death, Mons yielded to Alva.
because he had persuaded him to trust himself to the King upon his Royal
word) yielded up the Town to Alva, upon no contemptible Conditions; and went
to Dilemburg, His just commendations for that victory.
the chief Seat of the Counts of Nassau. Alva having taken the Town ere he
had lain three Months before it, though at the same time whilst he besieged it
he himself was besieged by the Prince of Orange, it so much advanced his fame,
by conquering Enemies on both sides him, He recovers all the Prince of Orange
had taken.
that he recovered all the Prince of Orange had got in Flanders and Brabant,
The sack of Mechlin.
with more speed, then Clemency; fining some Towns, and sacking others.
Particularly Mechlin a very fair and rich City awhile before yielded to the
Prince of Orange, was exposed to the fury of the King's men, that pillaged it
for three days together. But even that Calamity wanted no good Presidents. The
Soldiers carried most of their Plunder to Antwerp, and sold it, according to
their ordinary course, dogg-cheape. Whereupon a priest of the Society of Jesus,
Peter Trigose.
exceedingly beloved by the Townsmen of Antwerp, meeting some Factours, his
Friends, told them of a great bargain to be had, and fit for Christian
Merchants, if with their money they would redeem the Plunder of Mechlin, The
charity of the Antwerp Merchants toward the Plundered.
which the Soldiers had sold for little or nothing, and return it to the
Owners at the Price they themselves paid for it: for so the men in misery would
be less sensible of their loss, which, if it came into the Brokers hands,
John Boter. in vita Albani and ex Hist.
would cost dearer. And in the mean time the Merchants should be no loosers in
their money, but great gainers in their fame even among men; but with God no
doubt this kind of Traffic was most advantageous. Societ. Jesus
These religious Merchants liked the Motion. Ann. 1572.
The greater part of the plundered Goods were bought for a small Sum; not
standing them in above 20000 Florens, whereas they were prized at 100000. At the
Rates, which the Merchants paid, the Owners had them again; only some few
Parcells, their Proprietaries not appearing, were distributed among the poor.
Nay (as there is a certain pleasure in relieving the necessitous) the same
Merchants making a Purse, upon the same Priest's Exhortation, bought great
store of Victual, and therewith lading a ^hip sent it to the Poor at Mechlin.
The Soldiers piety.
In that Ship (which is more to be admired) I find the Soldiers, persuaded by
the same man, besides other household stuff, laid aboard above a hundred rich
Vestments, which they freely presented to the religious men and Women. But
notwithstanding the Duke of Alva escaped not the Peoples Curse's for that
Plunder. Alva strives to clear himself from the Infamy of Sacking Mechlin.
Though by his Letters, soon after published, he laid the fault upon the
perfidiousnesse of the Mechliners, who, to frame a pretense for yielding to the
Prince of Orange, had a while before refused a Garrison from the King. But in
Gelderland Federick acted with no less Valor, then Dispatch, The Victory won
by Duke Federico.
though with more Cruelty then his Father, His storming and plundering of
Zupthen brought such a Terror upon the rest of those Provinces, that Count
Bergen, before victorious, within a month after flying, (all the Rebels
Garrisons being mouldred away) left him the whole Country. This while in
Zeland Colonel Mondragonio with 2000 commanded men, And Mondragonio.
chosen out of the whole Army, passed his Foot over the Sea, that was about
five Miles broad, and with admirable Courage raised the Siege before Tergoes at
the Mouth of the Schelt; Goes October. 20.
and partly killing, partly routing the Enemies Forces, took the whole Island
of Zuid-Beverland. Which exploit is rendered much more gallant, because
Mondragonio doubled it with another of the same nature, but of more danger,
passing his men to Schelt an Isle of Zeland, the naming whereof shall serve
instead of a further Relation of this great Attempt. Ann. 72.
But the destruction of Nardem upon the Borders of Holland brought a far
contrary Success to the victorious Federico. The destruction of Nardem,
For howsoever that Town by reason of their foul Rebellion, and ^iding with
the Heretics, deserved to be made a singular example: yet the Revenge exceeded
their demerits: for being all put to the Sword, even the weak and innocent,
their houses fired, and their Walls levelled with the ground: Which make the
Spaniard odious. Mich. Isselt. in Hist. sui temp. Fran. Har. in Annal. Belg.
and a^^ fere omnes.
it was not a Punishment, but a Crime. The news of that Ruin augmented by the
cunning of the Gheuses, was told with so much, not terror, Of the Siege of
Harlem.
but hatred of all the Hollanders, never to be forgotten toward the Spaniard;
as their minds being hardened with despair, they were resolved to suffer any
thing, rather then do what Alva would command them.

Particularly Harlem, a noble City of Holland (which Federico had attaqued,
invited by the convenience of the faithful Town of Amsterdam) not only with
scorn rejected the pardon he offered them, but receiving a new Garrison from
the Enemy, to cut off all hope of Reconciliation, publicly renouncing the old
Religion; breaking the holy Images, violating and robbing the Churches, they
held out eight months Siege, with equal contempt both of the enemy and their
Lives, Federico despaires of taking it, His Father chides him.
In so much as Federick despairing of success would have returned into
Brabant, but that Alva grievously offended at his Son's Irresolution, wrote to
him, that if he thought of going, he himself, though he were carried in his
bed, would come, or (in case his Sickness so increased that he were not able
to remove) he would send for his Wife out of Spain, and give Her a Commission
to be General instead of her Son. But though the young Duke, out of
countenance with this Reproof, used all kinds of Stratagems to take the
Town; yet they, every day more bold and stubborn, omitted nothing defensive
or offensive, daily showing their contempt by new reproachful, and insolent
expressions. The Harlemers provoke the Spaniards with new Scorn.
Many times they hanged their Spanish Prisoners over the Walls in sight of the
besiegers. And when the Leaguer shot into the Town a ma^'s head, with this
writ upon it, the head of Philip Conin that came with 2000. The Spaniards jeere
to the Town.
men to relieve Harlem: and afterward another, with this Inscription the head
of Anthony Painter, that betrayed the City of Mons to the French: those of
Harlem, in requital cutting off the heads of eleven Prisoners barrelled them
up, and in the night rolled the vessel into the Spanish Camp, Their Answer.
with this direction writ upon it The Citizens of Harlem to the Duke of Alva,
that he may have no farther pretense to make war upon them for the tenth
part, have paid ten heads; and for Interest, because they have been long in
his debt, have sent him the eleventh. Moreover with impious Scorn they set up
Altars on the Bulwarks, dressed them with Saints Pictures, and putting on Copes
and Vestments, sung Hymns before them, as if they were offering their
devotions; and on the sudden, their sport turning into fury, they took the
Effigy: Their mocquery of holy things.
of Priests and Religious men made of straw, and first whipping, then stabbing
them, cut of their heads, and threw them into the Leaguer. There were some that
set up Saints Images, and Christ's the Prince of Saints, for marks to the
Spaniards, when they were ready to give fire: Not unpunished
and by such mockery frighted the pious Soldiers from shooting. But their
sacrilegious Pageantry escaped not unpunished. August 1.
For it was observed, from that very time Harlem fell into a miserable
condition: which grew worse and worse, till in a most wretched manner, They
yield to mercy.
consumed with famine, they were by God's just judgment, forced to yield to
mercy. For it is evident, that of 1600. Garrison-Souldiers (to which number they
were reduced when the City was rendered, whereas at the beginning of the Siege
they were 4000.) scarce 700. Very many put to death,
escaped with life. The other 900. with almost 400. Townsmen, most of them
Incendiaries to Rebellion, Alva's Son.
principal Instruments of Heresy, being adjudged by Federico de Toledo to be
put to the sword, or hanged, or drowned (which fatal Spectacle continued many
days) they dearly paid for their jeering God Almighty. The Siege of Harlem
was memorable for many Passages. The remarkable Accidents happening at this
Siege.
They revived the ancient invention of Carrier-Pidgeons. Carrier-Pidgeons.
For a while before they were blocked up, they sent to the Prince of Orange's
Fleet and to the nearest Towns of their own party, some of these Pigeons,
which afterward being dispatched away when necessity required, with letters
fastened under their wings, remembering their several Masters houses and their
young ones, they flew back to Harlem. By these winged posts the Prince of
Orange encouraged the Townsmen to hold out for the last three months: till one
of them, tired with flying, lighted upon a Tent, and being shot by a Soldier,
ignorant of the Stratagem, the Mystery of the Letters was discovered. After
that accident, no Pidgeon could fly over the Leaguer, though not of that kind,
but the Soldiers would strive who should kill her. A Regiment of Women.
The Harlemers likewise had a gallant Regiment of Women, that in repairing the
breaches, and defending of the Works, might compare with the industry of the
men. Their Colonel was only Goody Kemava, a woman of a manly spirit, near
upon 50. years of age. Under her command and conduct they were imboldened to
do Soldiers Duties at the Bulwarks, and to salley out among the Firelocks, to
beat up the Spanish Quarters, to the no less encouragement of their own men,
then admiration of the Enemy. The wilfulness and cruelty of the Harlemers.
Yet nothing was more admirable, then the Townsmens obstinacy, who,
notwithstanding they had lost three great Armies, and had hardly any shelter
within their Walls, shot through, as they say in ten thousand, three hundred,
and sixty places; yet would not hear of a Treaty, or conditions. And when the
Garrison was brought to a small number: both day and night upon the Walls they
so well performed the duties of many, that if at any time the King's men
chanced to appear never so little above their Trenches, they were in a moment
taken off with Musket-bullets, and those shot, as for a wager, from many parts
at once. Nay, I have heard, that the Spanish Soldiers partly to mock the
enemy, partly to make them spend their powder, would many times put their
Helmets upon faggot-sticks, so as they might be seen but to cock above the
Works: which in an instant were shot at and hit by the Besieged. Lastly,
though they were enforced by famine, for the two last months to eat Mice, old
Shoes, and every nasty thing: yet they lost not their fury, resolving to sally
out, and rather die fighting, then, by yielding to mercy, have their throats
cut like beasts; and they had done accordingly, but that as they marched out of
the Port, their Wives and Children, with pitiful Shriekes and embraces,
stayed them. To conclude, The Siege of Harlem and Sancerre.
the Siege of Harlem was rendered Illustrious by the resemblance it bare to the
Siege of Sancerre. In the same month, Sancerre in Aquitaine was besieged, and
Harlem in Holland. 1573.
Both these Cities were Rebels to their King, and their Religion: both,
Compared.
because at first they were in vain attempted by the Royal Party, were no
more assaulted, but carefully close besieged. The Women of both Towns, with
like courage took up Arms: there was a kind of Kennava at Sancerre that
persuaded and gave example to the rest. Both Towns showed like obstinacy, that
holding out ten Months, foolishly hoping for relief from the Rochellers; this
as long, and as idly, relying on the Prince of Orange. At last both Garrisons,
conquered by Famine, in the same Month of August, almost upon the same day,
rendered themselves: Sancerre upon Articles, Harlem to Mercy. But in that, more
were hungersterved, above five hundred perishing for want of food; insomuch as
a Girl of three years old newly dead and buried, was most horridly dug up,
and eaten by her own Father and Mother. In this, Thuan Hist. l. 55.
more dyed by the Sword, for it consumed no less then thirteen Thousand, and
diverse Persons of great quality. How many Royalists were slain and hurt at
the siege of Harlem.
For there was lost of the King's part, the Governor of Graveling
Cressonerius, that noble Engineire, General of the Artillery for this
Expedition; Bartholomeo Champio of Pisaura, no less famous for his quick
design in fortification, which appeared in many places; but France had the
best proof of his Skill at the Siege of Roan. Roan 1562.
Besides those that were carried off the Field wounded, and halfe-dead: as
Norcarmius Governor of Haynolt, Valentine la Mott Successor to Cressonerius,
Iuliano Romero, Gaspar Bill, Roderick de Toledo, all great Colonells, and their
General himself, Duke Federico Son to Alva: with about twelve Captains more,
and Multitudes of Common Soldiers; whereof the Spaniards confess they lost no
fewer then four Thousand. How many Covenanters were killed. Bern. Mend.
Of the Confederates were slain Willam Bronchorst, Baron of Battemburg,
Lieutenant General to the P. of Orange; Vbaldo, Riperda Governor of the
Town and Garrison of Harlem, Lancelot Brederod, Derdeindius Gallus, and Peter
Iansen, all exquisite in the art of Fortification. Hadrian Iansen, Martin
Prutius, Lambert Wirtzemburg, and other principal Commanders. Lume
discontented.
Whereunto may be added the banishment of Willam A Marcha Count Lume. For he
(as no man will take a fault upon himself) when he had fought unfortunately at
Harlem, charged the States with his Misfortune, His Commission taken from him
by the Prince of Orange.
because they were slack in paying of his men, and almost in plain words
threatened to fall upon them with his Army. Therefore by Command from the Prince
of Orange, who (as I conceive) looked not with equal eyes upon the man
boasting himself to be the sole Infranchiser of Holland; he was put out of his
Lieuetenant-Generalls Place, which was conferred upon Willam Battemburg, and
being reduced to the quality of a private man, with Entesius and others of his
Followers, was committed Prisoner. He is imprisoned.
And after his release, being convicted of a Plot against the States (of whose
ingratitude he published his Complaint in Print, That he who had freed the
Maritime Provinces, and taught the world by experience that the Spaniards were
conquerable, should be rewarded by the Hollanders with such Usage) he was
condemned, Banished the Low Countries.
as well by the Prince of Orange's Sentence, as by a general Odium, to depart
the Low Countries. Arnold Havensius l. 1. de nov. Episcop. An. Carner. in Hist.
Belg. l. 5 and Fran-Harzus in Annal.
And four years after, when he had once more taken up Arms, against Don John
of Austria, losing the battle of Gemblac, he fled to Leyden, and there bitt
with a mad dog, or poisoned at a feast, dyed this wickedly stout man. The
surrender of Harlem, as it is the common fate of Conquest gained by long
Sieges, He dies.
brought more Fame then benefit to the Spaniard. For the Army being not a
little wasted, and retarded with some mutiny, D. Federico forced to raise his
seige of Alcmar.
Duke Federico sitting down before Alcmar, upon the approach of winter, was
forced to leave the Seige. Nor was there any better fortune at Sea. The
confederated Gheuses in a Sea Fight taking Maximilian Henin, Count of Bolduc,
Governor of Holland, and Zeland, and Admiral of the Belgic Seas, Count
Bolduc Admiral of the Spanish Fleet beaten at Sea.
an active Soldier, and very intimate with the Duke of Alva. In that Fight, it
is reported Count Bolduc's Admiral (the Hollonders called her the Spanish
Inquisition) forsaken by the rest of the Fleet, for 28 hours together fought
with twenty sail of the Enemy, ^eute^ apud Haraeum in An^l. Gallantly
fighting.
and her men brought from the Number of 300 to 80; and those all but fifteen
wounded, at last was forced to yield. Yet this loss was recompensed with some
Towns reduced by the Spaniards in South- Holland, Aldegund, the Prince of
Orange's intimate friend, taken prisoner.
and at the Hague they took Count Philip Marnixius Aldegund a man of great
place and account among the Confederates: November. 17
insomuch as the Prince of Orange threatened, whatsoever was done to Count
Aldegund should be suffered by Count Bolduc.

In the mean time Lodovico Requesenes came from the Government of Millaine
into the Low Countries guarded only with two Regiments of Italian Horse, under
the Command of Mutio Spaganio and Pedro Busto. He was by the King appointed
Successor to Alva, because Iuan de la Cerda declined the Government, The Duke
of Alva resignes the Lowcountries to his successor Requesenes.
despairing that any good could be done in the Low Countries; so leaving both
the Burden and the Envy upon Alva. And he with his Son Federick returning
immediately to Bruxells, delivered the provinces and Armies to Requesenes; and
December being now begun, imbarqued for Spain, after he had six years
governed the Netherlands. And goes aboard for Spain.
All the Heretical Commanders were not equally pleased with his departure; The
diverse senses touching his departures of the Heretics.
it troubled some of them, who conceived his Fortune was decreasing, The Prince
of Orange, And of the Catholics,
and that the people could be moved to Rebellion with no stronger Provocative,
then their Hatred to the Duke of Alva. But the Prince of Orange, that
Publicly hated, and privately admired the Duke, was glad to be so rid of
him: never hoping to compass his Designs, whilst he had Alva for his Enemy.
Nor were the Catholics all of one mind. For some thought his Departure a
happiness, being irreconciliably distasted at him, because (as they said) he
had found the Lowconntreys brought to a peaceable Condition by Margaret of
Austria; and by his Cruelty to the Lords, and Exactions upon the Commons, had
left the Provinces troubled and exasperated; and they feared, that, as from
thence Holland and Zeland took occasion to revolt, so the rest of the
adjoining Provinces, infected with the same Contagion would have shortly
renounced their Religion and Obedience. But others, in a kind of middle way; as
the Romans said of Augustus Caesar* Sextus Aurel. in his ^ife.
that he should either not have been borne, or not have dyed; affirmed, that
it was to be wished, Alva had either not at all come to the Lowcountreys or had
not departed at that time, when the Prince of Orange had fortunately matured
his Plot, and could not be taken off by an amicable way, nor broke more surely
by any Arms, then his; who no less prudently then valiantly, when the Prince
entered the Provinces with such great Armies, had twice beat him out. But the
King of Spain, He is graciously received in Spain by the King.
contrary to the Low-countreymen's Expectations, and the Desires of some
Spanish Courtiers, But the Cour^iers think the King dissembles.
very graciously received the Duke. Though some were not moved with such
Formality, knowing it to be king Philip's Custom, to Countenance before others
what his Ministers had done, But supposing, that his Indignation, then raked up
in Embers, would in time break out: and that it did so, some years after,
when the Duke was confined to Vzeda. Wherein they were deceived.
I confess, I rather think the greatest part of Alva's Actions in the
Low Countries was done by Order from the King, and therefore merited not his
displeasure: or if he did err, his Service was more considerable, then his
Error, in the King's account: into whose Favor, as the access was rare and
difficult, so the possession was firm and lasting. The true cause of Alva's
confinement.
And that there was evidently no other Reason for the Duke's Confinement, but
because his Son Federico had promised Marriage to one of the Queen's Maids of
Honor, and by his Fathers Advise, married another Lady: whereupon the King in
a rage, banished the Duke of Alva to Vzeda. His excellent temper of mind in
that calamity,
Which Misfortune (and what greater could happen to a man in the highest Grace
at Court) manifested beyond al men's Imagination, the wonderful equal Temper
and Gallantry of his mind: and though he was accounted a great person whilst
he stood, yet being fallen like a prostrate wall, was thought greater lying on
the ground. Certainly he deserved, that his Misery should at last be turned
into his Glory. How great an honor it was to him in the end.
For after the decease of Henry the last of the Kings of Portugal, King Philip
resolving his Army should move thither, and doubtful whom to make General,
passed by many, that stood fair for the Employment, choosing the Duke of Alva,
He is called from banishment to be General against Portugal.
not without the admiration of the world, to see him trust a man discontented
by long Banishment, to command in Chief in the greatest War he ever
undertook. Nay it is reported, that Alva himself glorying to the Messengers
that brought his Repeal, said, he wondered, that for the Conquest of a Kingdom
his Majesty should have use of a fettered General. His words to the Messengers,
Diverse thought this more proudly spoken t^en became an Exile, but the King
took it well; as he that looking upon his Actions, easily pardoned the
freedom of his Words. Nor was the King deceived in Alva, He conquers,
who fortunately managing the War amidst the great discords of the Portugeses,
forced the Magistrates and Nobility to swear Allegiance to the King of Spain.
Wherein whilst the Duke overtoyled himself, at Lisbon he fell desperately
sick, the King coming often to visit him on his death bed: and the Sacraments
being adminnistred to him by Lewis of Granada a wise and religious man, And
dies,
he departed this Life. Whose death with many other Funerals, happening in the
height of that Prosperity, The King's expression.
grieved the King so much, that he was heard to say, he nenever had greater
experience of the incertainty of humane things: because, when his fortunes were
raised to so high a pitch, by the addition of many Kingdoms; Didaco Prince of
Spain.
he was then deprived of the Heir apparent to his Crown, Anne the Emp.
Maximilian's Daughter.
of the Queen his Wife, Alva's Elogy, His Father,
and of this his great and faithful General. And truly the Duke of Alva,
descended from great Warriors, had military Prudence by a kind of Inheritance.
His Father was that Garzia, who in the African War, being created Admiral,
in the Isle of Gerben (where about 3000. Spaniards fell by the Sword and
Famine) whilst he together with Pedro Navarr General of the Landforces, 1510.
endeavored to stop the flight of his men, wresting a Pike out of the hand of
a common Soldier, and valiantly fighting with it, His Grandfather.
was slain by the Moors. His Grand^Father was Federico Cosen German to King
Ferdinand, who, as he was more active then his Son Garzia, so he did more
gallant things. For he gloriously put an end to the War of Granada, where he
was General of the Royal Betick Army, and with the same courage defended the
Appennine, and all the Borders of Spain, against the French. Lastly it was his
fortune to join the Crown of Navarre to the Spanish Empire. He himself
greater then his Progenitors
But Alva himself far transcended all his Ancestors in the virtues of a
General. The Age wherein he lived, had not any other that commanded in chief
so long and in such various places. The common saying among Soldiers, that a
good General is never long-lived, was sufficiently confuted by the Two great
Generals of that time, Alva and Annas Momorancy paralleled,
Annas Momorancy Constable of France, and this of whom we speak, Ferdinando
Duke of Alva. Both of them constantly followed the Wars from their Infancy,
even to their decrepit Age: he being almost fourscore, this 74. years old,
enlarging their honors by continual employments. Momorancy under four Kings
of France fought eight Battles; in four whereof he commanded in chief. Alva
serving the Emperor Charles the fifth, and his Son King Philip, in Germany,
Africa, Italy, the Low Countries, and Portugal, was General in the greatest
expeditions. But the French man was more active by the Genius of his Nation; by
his own, more unfortunate: as being seldom Master of the Field, three times
taken prisoner, and at last slain. The Spaniard oftener by delays then
Fighting, gained glory out of the Success of his Actions. In warlike Abilities
they are accounted rather equal, then like. But Alva was as good a Soldier at
Court, The Duke of Alva a good Courtier,
as in the Field. Who though he was by nature and continual conversation in
the Camp, grown rough; and like a Soudier either carelessely regarded not, or
proudly contemned the Offices of Court-shippe, which gave offense to some; yet
Princes dislike not their Ministers Austerity, rendering them inaccessible to
the subtle Flatterer. Much affected by the King.
And Alva by that Soldier's freedom, speaking as if he would fight for his
Master as well at home, as in the Field; advanced himself in the King's favor
merited by his Fidelity and long service. But rather inwardly then in show,
Yet by this kind of favor, he got more private estimation, then public
honor. So that when he was called from banishment to be General in the War
with Portugal, though he was an earnest Suitor to the King, that in his March
he might kiss his Royal hand, being not yet fully assured of his Pardon, his
Request was denied. And at the same time, when the Nobility of Spain were sent
for by the King to swear Allegiance to Didaco Prince of Spain, though the
Duke moved for Leave to be present at the Solemnity, yet the same stern nature
of the King would not admit him. So much his Majesty confided in the man, How
much the King relied upon his Faith,
he thought that Alva might be uncertain of his Favor, yet He secure of the
Fidelity of Alva. Whose obedient Loyalty seems to merit the Honor he had, to
die in the King's special Grace, in his Court, and almost in his Arms: and,
having to his own wishes ended the War, among the Applauses of victory, to
be carried to his Grave, in Triumph. Undoubtedly he was comparable to the
ancient Generals, in military Abilities; What soyled his Fame.
if the Odium he contracted by too much Rigor, Pride and Scorn of others, as
at present it obstructed the Current of his Virtues, had not likewise taken off
something of their reputation with Posterity.

Lodovico Requesenes, Great Comendador of Castile Governor of ye Lowcountreys
portrait

The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The eighth Book.
IN the beginning of the year 1574, 1574.
Ludovico Requesenes, Requesenes begins his Government of the Low Countries
great Commendador of the Knights of Saint Iago, in the Province of Castile,
began his government; most men conceiving extraordinary hopes of him, grounded
as well upon his Civil, The hopes conceived of him.
as Military Prudence, appearing in the course of his great employments both in
Peace and War. It was likewise believed, that with his facility and
modesty, virtues set off by comparison with the Duke of Alva, he would
exceedingly gain upon the Low Country men's affections. Nor was he himself
negligent of fame; but partly upon Design, partly by the Kings Command,
endeavored to make himself popular. And the people were presently much taken
with him, Mart. Delr. l. 1. Belg. Turb.
for punishing the Insolences of some Garrison Soldiers, but especially for
pulling down and removing out of sight the armed statue of the Duke of Alva; He
takes away the Duke of Alva's Statue. To the great joy of the Low-countreymen.
his other statue by the Kings Command being sent for into Spain, to the
Antwerpers very great contentment. Insomuch that some were glad his statue had
been erected, that they might see his punishment in the demolishing and
carrying it away. The Zelanders besiege Middelburg.
But Requesenes for all this could not raise the Rebels from their siege of
Middelburgh. That City, the head not only of Walcharen, but of all the Isles
of Zeland, was yet kept by Colonel Mondragonio, who with frequent sallies and
little fights, rather to make show of confidence, then out of any real trust
in his own strength, had now for almost two years defended it against the
Zelanders. To mollify that people (incensed against Alva, but said to be
well-affected to the new Governor) when Requesenes had often sent them very
kind Letters, by messengers assuring them of the Kings mercy, all would not do;
for having made themselves masters of many small Towns, the success ticing
them on, they placed greater hopes in their own stubbornness, then in the Kings
unfruitful mercy; and according to the custom of the world, held it better to
be knaves and gain by it, then to be honest gratis. Wherefore the Governor,
Requesenes sends a Fleet to relieve the town.
lately advertised by Mondragonio, that famine would compel him to deliver up
the Town, rigged a fleet of sixty sail at Antwerp, dispatching them away to the
relief of Middelburg. And because there were two passages by two arms of the
River Schelt, he divided the fleet between Avila, and Glime Vice Admiral in
the place of Beavor, appointing him Iulian^ Romero, for his adjutant. That is,
Hound.
Avila was commanded to take the left hand way to Middleburg by the Hondt (so
they call that division of the River by reason of the barking water) and Glime
to steer upon the right hand down the Schelt. Which is met.
The Prince of Orange, understanding this incountred them in like manner. For
dividing his fleet, with part of the himself lay at Anchor before Middelburg,
exspecting Avila: and sent the rest to the Isle of Thol, under the conduct of
Lodwick Boisot Governor of the Sea coast of Holland, Fought with.
to fight with Romerio and Glime. Boisot (for the Prince of Orange and Avila
looked on, at a great distance) meeting the Spaniards at the mouth of Bergen,
Bergen op Zoom.
gave them battle: which at the first was improsperous and bloody to him, one
of his eyes being shot out; the Master of his Admiral slain; and his stoutest
Soldiers wounded. But the Zelanders, And defeated.
(having the advantage in greatness and number of ships and skilfulnesse of
Pilots) at last with multitude oppressed the Royallists: Glime was slain:
Romerio narrowly escaped in a long boat: part of the ships ran aground, and
part were fired in the sight of Requesenes, that from the Peer of Bergen,
beheld the event of that unfortunate battle, with infinite grief to see his
men so lost. The enemies conquest was followed with the present surrender of
Middleburg, Middleburg rendered.
almost the only town that held out in Zeland. Feb. 18.
By which Render Mondragonio gained such honor as we seldom read parallelled.
The Fame of Mondragonio.
For when he had drawn up his conditions so, as that if the Zelanders would
transport his Soldiers, Mariners, and Engineers, with all their Cannoneers,
and Artillery, and the Religious men and secular Priests, with all their sacred
furniture (both sorts likewise carrying away all their housholdstuff, and
baggage) and land them in the nearest parts of Flanders: he would then prevail
with Requesenes, that Aldegund, at that time a Prisoner, one the Prince of
Orange highly esteemed, and three other persons, such as Aldegund should name,
within six months, should be returned into Zeland; but if he could not prevail
with the Governor, then he, before the exspiration of that term, What strange
confidence the enemy reposed in him.
would render himself prisoner to the Zelanders; They gave so much credit to
his Parole, as the conditions being accepted, though without any hostage given,
they doubted not, but that, if the Governor disapproved of this agreement,
Aldegund and three more exchanged for Mondragonio Jacob Simon John Pettin
Franciso Citadella.
Mondragonio would not fail of his promise to return; whose Captivity they
knew would satisfy for many Aldegunds. But the Articles were by Requesenes
confirmed to the contentment of all parties. For immediately Aldegund had his
liberty, and by his appointment Simons, and Pettin, two Colonels, and Captain
Cittadella an Enginier, 1430.
Grandchild to that Francesco Cittadella, who commanding the Cittadell of Lucca
for the Prince, Largil. to Marg. of Parma.
Paulo Guinichi, when he lost his Principality restored the Cittadell to the
Commonwealth; for which Act the people, leaving out his Surname of Iacobio,
called him Cittadella, and inserted into his family the remembrance of his
merit: March 5.
from which, his posterity were at once both named and praised. What the
Prince of Orange made of Middelburg Largil. to Margaret of Parma.
But the Citizens of Middelburg, as it was in their Articles, redeemed the
plunder of their town with three hundred thousand Florens paid to the Prince of
Orange: who, notwithstanding, is known to have made out of Merchant-strangers
goods a million of Florens more. But this loss at Sea, the Spaniard stronger
by land, immediately revenged. March 5.


Lewis of Nassau Brother to the Prince of Orange, The Forces and design of
Lewis of Nassau.
with his youngest Brother Grave Henrick, and Prince Christopher Son to the
Count Palat^ne of Sancho Avila Governor of the Fort at Antwerp General at ye
Battle of Mooch
portrait the Rhine, brought out of Germany seven thousand foot, and four
thousand horse, and having attempted, in vain, to pass the Mose, made a halt
in Gelderland, as if they looked back toward Germany: but indeed, waiting an
opportunity for the taking of Nimmeghen, that they might in that City receive
the Prince of Orange coming from the Isle of Bomell. The Spanish army followed
him on the other side the Mose, commanded by Sanchio Avila, an old Soldier,
trained up in Alva's discipline: who thinking it opportune, before those
succors came that were exspected from the Prince of Orange, The Battle of
Mooch or Monich, how suddenly Avila fought him.
to fight with the Nassavians (quartered in the village of Mooch between the
Vahal and the Mose, entrenched only with a slight line) passing his army over
on a sudden, and putting them in rank and file presented the ennemie at once
with war, and slaughter. Which was indeed continued, The execution done upon
the Nassavians.
(by reason of the Royallists anger for the late execution done upon their men)
during the space of two hours, with so much fury, that almost their whole army,
part killed, part taken prisoners, were destroyed: and their three Generals
Lewis of Nassau, The death of the three Generals.
his Brother Grave Henrick, and Prince Christopher, either slain fighting, or
trod under the horses feet, or stifled in the Fens (for their bodies never
could be found) miserably perished altogether. I find in some Histories, Lewis
of Nassau's death otherwise related. France Haraeus in his Belgic Annals. His
Character.
that Lewis, after he had lain a while among the dead bodies, crept out as
far as the Mose, and there unknown as he washed his wounds, the Countrymen
looking for booty, barbarously killed and stripped him. He was a man addicted to
war, endowed with a military eloquution, but of a turbulent spirit: And as
his brother the Prince of Orange and he were twins in affection, so in prudence
they seemed utter strangers: this being inconsiderately violent, and making
war rather in hot blood, then with advice, had often (and deservingly) the
experience of ill fortune. The Spaniard took all their Colors, Artillery,
Tents and Carriages, with little or no loss to themselves. To whom this
victory is to be ascribed.
Now the honor of this victory (as it is common in all good successes) was by
many challenged: the Soldiers preferring their Commanders with great contest
of several nations. The Spaniards attributed the glory of the day, solely to
their General Avila, who as wisely as expeditiously gave battle. The
Low-countreymen to Aegidius Son to Count Barlamont and Lord of Hierg, who
with his Reserve of horse, when a Squadron of their men gave ground, fell in,
and restored the battle. The Italians to Giovanni Raptista Marchioni, who
dividing his Lanceirs into many little Troops, galled the enemy so subtly,
and so often, in the Flank, that he overcame by art the far greater number.
For my own part, as I doubt not but every battle is won by many men's
valors, so I am confident this was chiefly gained by Montius, because King
Philip for this very service assigned him a yearly pension of five hundred
crowns. The common soldiers valor not to be excluded from their share of
praise.
Though poor soldiers are but hardly used, when all must be ascribed to their
Commanders: as if in a fight, the eyes were only to be praised because they
first mark out a place wherein to wound the foe: and that nothing were due to
the hands, that dispute and determine the Victory. I am well assured, that
Pedro Antonio Perotti of Sasso Ferrato, The beginning of the battle Petr. Ant.
Perotti.
a man no less noble by descent, then worth, very much contributed to that
overthrow, which I find certified to the King both in public and private
letters by Francisco Valdez a Spanish Colonel of foot, Lud. and Melz. lib. 4.
c. 2.
highly commending the Gentleman, because valiantly and no less fortunately he
began the fight. He commanded that day the company of Comillo a Monte, who had
another charge. The Raiters disordered.
In the front of Nassaus army there fought a Regiment of five hundred horse,
whereof three hundred were of that kind of Raiters, which from their many
pistols and other iron weapons are called Ironists. 1575.
Giovanni Baptista a Monte being to encounter this party, commanded Perrott
with one of those Troops to begin the battle, who choosing out sixscore
Lanceirs charged them with so much violence and judgment, that the Raiters
being disordered in the Front (an accident which has lost many Fields) sixty
of them were severed from the rest, which he (assisted by a fresh Troop) easily
mastered, though they in a strong body recharged and fired, in hope to recover
their Post; but their Retreat was obstructed by his pikes, and they to a man
all slain. Whereupon the whole Regiment growing into extreme trouble and
disoder, it was, no doubt, the first step to the victory. Lewis of Nassau
falls in with his horse. But is routed (which seldom happens) by the Lanciers.
For Cornet after Cornet falling in, they were routed, and upon the point of
flying, when Lewis of Nassau with a selected Troop came upon the spur to
relieve them; but he being intercepted by Bernardino Mendoza, and Anthonio
Olivera, that joined their Troops to receive his charge, he not only not
repressed the fear of his men, but flying with them, was forced to yield to the
impression of the enemy. Some Writers say, this was the first battle, Benard
Mendoza. l. 2.
wherein the Lanceirs routed the Carabines. But I observe, that in the battle
near Renty-Castle in Artois, the Emperors Raiters were worsted by the French
Lanceirs. Perotti's valor.
But Perrotti in this likewise had the greatest honor of the Field, because
when he had broke his Lance, going to draw his sword; and perceiving that it
was shot from his side, he catched a Raiter in his Arms, wrested his sword out
of his hand, and killing him with his own weapon, made his way through the
thickest of the enemy; where being shot through the reins, he would not yet
leave the field, whilst the victory continued doubtful, but when it was
absolutely won, almost dead, he was carried off the Field. Yet within a while
he recovered, with so much the greater joy to his fellow soldiers, because
most of them had spoken his funeral praise. To the fame whereof, he added so
much by his valiant actions under the Command of Alexander Farneze, that from
his excessive strength and courage he was surnamed the Palladine of Italy.

The fruit of so great a day was almost lost by a furious mutiny of the
Spaniards. The first Mutiny of the Spaniards. Out of the Bishop of Namure's
letter to Marg. of Parma.
A great part of the Army had much Arrears due to them, some full three years
pay; which Sanchio Avila, before the battle, freely promised; but when the
business was done, put them off; not having so much money, and being naturally
severe. For the Soldiers, whose animositie was raised both by their Victory
and Cause, the readier they were before in running the hazard of a battle,
July 24.
the more implacable they were after in demanding of their pay. Against Avila
who detained their Pay.
Wherefore they threatening their Commanders, joined in a body; and when Avila
came and began to rate them, they fiercely asked him, The expostulation of the
Mutineers.
Where the faith of his promises was? where the care of a General? that not
only not regarded the benefit of his Soldiers, but likewise slighted their
Requests. But Generals and Colonels never fail to preach military obedience.
When they command, poor soldiers must run upon the mouth of the Canon, suffer
wounds and death, commonly for no other end, but to blunt the enemies swords:
many times if fagots be wanting to fill up ditches, they must do it with their
bodies. Nothing it seems is more inconsiderable then Soldiers lives. And is it
lawful for a General, every hour to require the soldiers lives, but not
lawful for them to challenge their livelihood, and many months Debentures of
the General? is there any kind of workmen that may justlier demand their wages
then they, that serve not under another command with ordinary labor and
sweat, but with the expense of their bloods and lives? Avila flies.
They objecting this against their General, with their swords in their hands,
Avila not able to withstand the multitude, when by no promises he could appease
the once deceived Spaniards, was enforced to fly. Then laying their heads
together, almost three thousand of the old soldiers, after the manner of
seditions, created them a General, whom they called the Electo, casting their
Militia into a new model; and dividing the Offices of War among themselves,
They march to Antwerp in hostile manner. Despise Requesenes his messengers.
in order of battle marched to Antwerp, the better sort in vain opposing them.
Nay, they despised the Messengers, which upon the news of their mutiny, were
sent by Requisenes, to assure their Arrears, one of which Messengers being a
Jesuit (his name was Pedro Trigosio, a very eloquent Spaniard, and in great
esteem among the soldiers) when he had made a very sad and long speech to
them, they answered him in short, And only demand money.
First tender the money, and then we will hear you preach: we have had Words
enough, we require money. And if the Blood we have spent for the King were in
one scale, They enter Antwerp.
it would easily weigh down our Pay put into the other. When the Jesuit would
have proceeded, they beat up their Drumms, and with Colors flying, entered
Antwerp, the soldiers that were in the Fort not sticking to admit them: and
quartering themselves in the richest Citizens houses, they peremptorily
threatened Requisenes, Their threats.
who upon their requests and menaces had now sent out of the Town the Garrison
of Walloons, that if he would not pay their arrears, they would be their own
Pay-masters. And when he had appointed a certain day, yet failed; with new
fury, as if they had been deluded, they ran armed to the Court of Justice,
where their Electo was hearing causes, Their solemn Oath.
and there presently setting up an Altar, when Mass was done, they all bound
themselves by oath to obey the Electo, and not to lay down arms till they had
their pay to a Maravedi. Which very Act passed not tumultuously in that tumult,
but orderly and gravely, as if there had been no sedition. So must armed rage
be ordered, lest it rage in vain. Nay, they set up a Gallows on the place, and
made Proclamation in the Electo's name, Their Edict against plunder.
That whosoever for the future stole or plundered, should be immediately hanged:
which was so punctually observed by the soldiers, two of them being instantly
trussed up, that Antwerp heard of no more such offenses. This present form of
modesty, They are paid.
and their past moderations so won upon men's affections, that partly the
Antwerpers assessing themselves at certain rates, partly Requisenes out of the
Kings Treasury, with the pawning of his own Plate and Hangings; the Merchants
likewise making up their Pay (for yet there was not money enough) And quieted.
with pieces of Silk and Cloth, after 47 days abundantly satisfied the
soldiers. The pious liberality of the mutineers.
One memorable Accident I cannot here omit, especially coming to my knowledge
from the persons by whom it was occasioned. When Requesenes had paid the Army,
they being flush of money, were followed, as the custom is, by many poor
people for their alms, particularly by the begging Friars. And most of the
soldiers then full of gold (for some had got three years Debentures, some
four) either out of that Nations inbred piety rowards Religious Orders, or
that when wealth comes on the sudden it is less regarded, were so liberal,
that the Franciscans for their part got four thousand Florens. How much the
Franciscans ^ad of them.
But when the soldiers took notice, that among all the Religious which had
tasted of their bonnty, no one of the Society of Jesus came unto them, to which
Order, for their constant pains in the Camp, and their extraordinary care of
the sick soldiers, they acknowledged themselves chiefly obliged: they sent one
of the Army to encourage the Fathers, They invite the Jesuits.
in that public Donation, not to let themselves only be pretermitted. But the
Fathers giving thanks to the Messenger, Who refuse to come at them.
when they could not otherwise put him off, at last absolutely denied to take
any thing of those men, till they had restored all their plunder to the true
owners. The Army nothing at all offended, or retarded, choosing two of their
number for Collectours, gathered a very great sum, They send money to the
Jesuits College.
and sent it to their College, assuring themselves ready money would not be so
refused, as when it was only promised. The Fathers admired the soldiers
constancy, whom they imagined to have been displeased with their former
Answer: and Ceremonies having passed on both sides, held it their duty to
instruct those preposterously pious men, and in a friendly manner to rectify
either their error, or their contumacie. Therefore one of the Society, in
great credit with the Army, went to them, and speaking freely, An exhortation
made them by one of the Society.
made them understand, That his Order refused not their Liberality, as if it
would not come seasonably to supply their necessities; but God Almighty was not
pleased with those that give out of other men's fortunes. They should remember
themselves how long, and how profusely they had lived in Antwerp, keeping
possession of the Townsmens houses; how threatningly and licentiously in the
beginning of the mutiny, some of them had seized upon the citizens Estates. Why
then should they seek out persons profusely to bestow their money on, and in
the mean time injuriously pass by those to whom it was justly due? Rather in
that distribution, they should use care and method, and relieving the wants of
the poor Townsmen, recover the good opinion of the City, and save their own
soul, and reputations. The fruits of it.
This was not spoke in vain to the soldiers, that likewise by this Argument of
Bounty, endeavored to excuse the necessity of their past actions. They give
and restore very much to the Citizens.
Wherefore some of the chief among them, either touched with Religion, or to
cancel the Ignominy of Sedition, by a new example, gave largely to the
Citizens, and began to restore many things got by violence: with so great
admiration and applause of the Magistrates, that they ordered a Public Speech
should be made to the People, wherein the Army should be praised, and the pains
taken and moderation used by the Fathers of the Society, specified and
commended. But Requesenes not yet confiding in the Army, having pardoned and
buried the memory of their fault, sent them back to the siege of Leyden, Leyden.
which the year before was begun by the Duke of Alva: the Governor being now
dis-engaged from much fear and care, which out of a vain presumption of the
Armies obedience, he had imprudently brought upon himself, and all the Royal
party. Unless perhaps it was done by confederacy, A suspicion that the
soldiers plunder was Requesenes his design.
to supply the present wants of the Exchequer, as some then suspected, says
the Bishop of Namure, in his Letters to the Duchess of Parma. Requesenes
therefore detaining the Spaniards a while at Bruxels, July 14.
till he in the Assembly of the Estates, March 8.
had published an Act of Indemnity sent them by the King: April 6.
with less preparation then was made by Alva, July 24.
but with more Liberality, though for the unseasonableness, not much greater
fruit; they commanded by Francesco Valdez returned to Leyden, A general pardon
proclaimed. Of the siege of Leyden.
with more Resolution then Success.

And Valdez at first taking their Outworks, and some Forts near the Town, and
cutting off Provision of Victual, had almost brought the City, full of
Inhabitants, to extreme necessity. Notwithstanding, he wrote a kind Letter to
the Citizens, showing, that he understood their wants, yet offering them very
fair conditions. Valdez invites the Town to a Re^ndition.
But they proudly and barbarously answering, They barbarously refuse.
that They would not want sustenance whilst they had their left Arms, He draws
his line nearer.
for those they would eat, and use their right arms to defend their Liberties.
Valdez hastening his approaches, daily straightened them so much, that at length^t
caused a great tumult in the City, the Townsmen in every street dying for
hunger; insomuch as the people having lost their patience, threatened the
Consuls, that unless they rendered the Town, they themselves would open the
gates to the enemy. Valdez, upon notice hereof, that he might fall upon them
whilst they wavered in that discord, Resolves upon a general assault. Why he
puts off the day appointed.
resolved, upon the third day, to give a general assault. In the mean time he
failed not to go the Hague, a neighboring city, where his Mistress lived, a
noble Lady of that Country (married to him not long after) whom he was then a
suitor to, often waiting upon, and courting her, according to the freedom used
in the Low Countries. By chance, the day before he was to storm the Town,
Valdez feasted his Mistress at the Hague: and observing her to look sad,
importuned her to acquaint him with the cause; She said, It was not possible
but she must be in great anxiety, having before her eyes the image of Leyden,
designed to spoil and plunder the next day. For so many funerals of her
friends and acquaintance, as must necessarily be involved in the public ruin,
were they not sufficient at the present, with only Fear and Imagination, to
banish all joy from her mind; and afterward when she had news of the success,
to give her heart a wound incurable? Valdez, lest he should loose the hope of
his marriage, beseeched her to be more cheerful, and made her a secret promise
to recall his orders for storming, and for her love to spare the lives of that
obstinate City. Which he promised the more freely, in regard he knew the Town
would fall of it self, though he held his hand, and saved his soldiers blood.
For very hunger would make them yield, and the thought of it would be taken as
a favor from him; though he did it upon his particular design. Indeed the day
after he had omitted the assault, the difference increasing between the People
and the Citizens, they consulted about sending Commissioners to Valdez. When
the Countrey-people that had long watched to help the Leydeners, hearing of
their danger and disagreement, finding all attempts to free the Town fruitless,
resolved to follow the counsel of despair. The site of Leyden.
Through the Liberties of Leyden, and the adjacent country, many Rivers flow,
with various windings and turnings, the Rhine it self divides and washes the
streets, the Ysel and the Mose, this runs as far as Rotterdam, that to Goud,
and from thence to Leyden, with swift currents: which with the confluence of
those greater channels, lest at a high tide they should pour the mixture of
their own and the seas fury upon the land, are banked in, The fearful design
of the neighbors to Leyden.
as if a line were drawn before them, Who breaking down the banks, let in the
sea.
by the industry of men. The Hollanders therefore writing to their friends at
Leyden, by Carrier-pidgeons, what they intended, made holes through the bank,
and slighted that Bulwark of the Continent, raised against the salt and
fresh water tides, by the labor of so many years; and with the Mose, the
Ysell, and the Sea it self, rushing as from an ambush on the level, they
covered their native country with a deluge: So as the ruin (estimated at
seven hundred thousand Florens) made way for ships to sail the meadows;
overflowed the Leaguer of the Spaniard: and they which dwelt forty miles off,
(a thing hardly credible) brought supplies of men and victual to Leyden. And
truly that new face of the Sea, They sail over the woods,
spread among Groves and Villages, and Fleets sailing through woods, as if
trees had grown into ships, might have been delightsome to the Spaniards, like
a Show in a Roman Theater, where the Scene was miraculously changed, and Ships
fought to make them sport; if they had not likewise beheld their danger, from
that unwonted spectacle, and the Auxiliarie forces of that confederated
element, had not been directed against themselves: so that all hope was cut off
for taking the Town, And over the fields to Leyden
now victualled by so many Ship-ladings of Provision. For to bring relief, it
was wonderful to see how many sail appeared, furnished with men and ordnance,
from the neighboring Ports and Islands, by a general confederacy; and with
no less hatred to the Roman Religion: which many publicly gloried in, wearing
half-moons in their hats, How great a Navy came.
with this motto, Rather the Turk then the Pope. The Fleet that came in to
them, was no fewer then a hundred and fifty sail, well appointed for the war,
The besiegers besieged.
manned with at least twelve hundred, besides Seamen. Yet the Spaniards wear
not at all dismayed; and though the sea beat them out of their lower Forts,
Their constancy.
they held the rest so obstinately, and wrought so hard, that in some places,
Bern. Mend. l. 12.
when they wanted spades to cast up earth against the water and the enemy,
they dug with their swords, and carried the mould in their breast-plates,
The like wonder of old.
and helmets. The like, upon the same necessity, was done of old in the same
Country, Caesar. lib. 5. de bell. Gall.
by the Nervians, when they besieged the winter quarters of Quintus Cicero,
Paul. Oros. l. 6.
using for want of other instruments their weapons instead of spades, Sprink.
Uloet.
and their cassocks for wheel-barrows. But their danger hourly increasing with
the water, The Spaniards retreat.
which rose to a great height, at the full Moon especially, blown up by a
storm, the Spaniards that were rather now the besieged, then the besiegers,
upon a sudden fear, apprehended by Valdez, who too late repented the lost
opportunity of taking the Town, about midnight, having nailed their great
Canon, and sunk them in the ditches, Not without loss.
after four months raised the siege. Nor did he fly without loss, the enemy
chasing him with Grapples in their hands, that is, long poles headed with iron
hooks, or hooks at the end of long ropes, wherewith they angled for the
Spaniards, grievously wounding them, and drawing up many of them prisoners to
the Ships. Bern. Mend. l. 12.
At which time, it was an admirable passage, that of Pedro Ciaconio, The
exploit of Pedro Ciaconio.
Bongia's Lieutenant. This man running before his fellows to defend a Bridge,
was struck at from one of their boats with four grapples, which catching hold,
drew him up dead to all appearance. But when they had him aboard, and that he
saw them (being six or seven) busy fishing for others, he rose at their backs,
and taking a hatchet that by chance lay before his feet, with his full strength
(for he was only dragged by his clothes, his flesh being scarce touched)
knocked down one, then another, so a third; the rest astonished at the fury of
the revived man, leaped into the water, Ciaconio left alone in the Hoigh, as it
was laded with corn provided for the distressed Town, brought it in for some
kind of comfort, to his vanquished fellow soldiers.

The misfortune of the siege was augmented by a fresh mutiny of the Spaniards;
A second mutiny of the Spaniards.
for having lost their hopes of the Sack of Leyden, promised them, instead of
Pay. Against Valdez, as if he had betrayed them at the siege.
And their sedition was increased by a report, that Valdez their General
bribed by the city of Leyden, forbore to storm it. And though Valdez was not
guilty of that crime, for Avarice never had power over him; and the Hollanders
then were simple, and knew not how to treat with bribes; notwithstanding the
rumor was believed, or rather forged by such as were ignorant of the true
cause, but would not have the improsperous success imputed unto themselves.
And they were glad of such an occasion to demand pay of their General, They
take him prisoner.
full of money as they thought. Utrecht.
The flame of this tumult brake forth on a sudden from the breasts of very near
four thousand, He procures money, and therewith pacifies them.
who seizing upon and imprisoning Valdez, The Spaniards prosperous fortune.
substituted in his place another Electo: and though the news of his bribery
forthwith vanished, yet they, marching toward Utrecht, entered the Town; nor,
till by Valdez his means their pay was sent from Requesenes, would they be
quieted. But the Spaniards not long after redeemed their honor, lost by this
second Mutiny and their flight from Leyden, with taking (near the Isell, and
in the borders of Gelderland) under command of Hierg, Mich. ab Isselt. Hist. of
his Times.
Governor of that Province, the towns of Bura, Montford, Oudewater, and
Schounhoven: and a little before that in Holland under the command of Vitelli,
between the Rivers of Ukall and the Leck, Lerodam, and the neighbor Towns,
Asper, Huchel, and Worcom over against Gorcom, Supplies brought by Altempse.
with other Towns and Forts round about: to the great benefit of the Royal
party; increased at the same time by the coming of Hanniball Count Altempse,
with a Regiment of four thousand foot, raised in Germany by order from
Requesenes, who attributed much to the known virtues and warlike abilities of
Altempse. An old soldier of great abillties
He was sisters son to Pope Pius the fourth, Clara Medices. Jacob Medices.
bred up in the wars from nine years old by his uncle the Marquess of
Melena: in the prime of his youth he served the house of Austria; and was
afterward in many expeditions under the Emperors Charles and Ferdinand, and
Philip the second of Spain, in Germany, Italy, the Low Countries, His danger in
his march.
and Africa. But he was the more welcome to Requesenes, because Fame had
reported him slain by the way, and his Regiment dispersed: and there was
something in it. For whilst he rode before his men, only with two or three in
his Company, just as he entered the Low Countries, he was set upon, by almost
600 soldiers, which had run away from the battle of Mooch: and being wounded
in two places, valiantly charged through, and got clear off. Requesenes
therefore opportunely leaving these forces to guard Brabant (when the Treaty
of Peace was come to nothing, that had been agitated by the Royallists and
Nassavians at Breda, and on the Emperors part by Gunter Count of Suartzemburg,
the Prince of Orange his sisters son) bent his whole care immediately to make
his fleet ready for a voyage long since designed.

For when Requesenes took notice, The expedition into Zeland, why undertaken by
Requesenes.
that the Rebels (almost quite excluded from the Continent) sheltered
themselves in the Isles of Zeland, he resolved to carry the war as far as
Schelt, not through the open Sea (for in number of ships he was inferior to
the Enemy) but by the Straits lying between the Low countries and those
Islands, where he was told in some places men might wade over. The site of
Zeland.
For Zeland being cut into Isles by the Schelt and Mose, the Rivers that divide
them are not very deep, and the Sea that mixes with those Rivers ebbes in some
parts so low, that they often see a miserable prospect the tops of villages
long since drowned and ravished from the Earth, The chief Officers employed
Avila.
and consequently at such times no ships can pass. The Land service therefore
he assigned to Sanchia Avila, and that by Sea to Christophero Mondragonio,
Mondragonio, Vitelli under Alva.
the Marquess Vitelli, Camp-master, commanding in chief. Requesenes by their
advice, encouraged likewise by the example of those that foarded the Sea to the
relief of Goes, 1572.
appointed Guides for the army consisting of four thousand and the way they
should march, Scouwemburg 's men.
that is, The soldiers. The way.
first to Bergen, Arand commanded to sound the sea.
then to Tole, next to the Isle of Philipland, from thence to Duveland; and so
to Schelt, the head of Zeland, and of that expedition. And because they were to
have certain knowledge which places would bear shipping, and which might be
waded, that charge was given to John Arand, an Ensign of undaunted courage, to
get able and honest men to try the Foards: Barbetino to provide shipping.
and Raphaell Barberino a strong and active Gentleman, was commanded to take
the depth of the Seas and Lakes, and to provide Ships that should draw water
answerable to the deep and shallower parts. Now Arand (learning of the Skippers
and Fishermen, Arand's Account of the passage.
that under the waters were hills of gravel, on the ridge whereof, those Seas,
seeming inaccessible, might be passed on foot) brought a good account of the
way to Requesenes, Barberino's inventions,
and gave him assurance that it might be done securely; and Barberino not only
built ships for transportation of the soldiers, flat bottomed Boats, Wherryes,
and close decked vessels, all accommodated to the several fathomes of the
water: but likewise by Vitelli's Command, who for a few dies had some fits of
an ague, raised for present Service Works and Fortresses at the entrance of
Zeland, Who for a while supplies Vitelli's place.
in the mouths of the great Rivers, secured the carriage of victual to the
Camp, and did much besides that concerned Vitelli's Office, Commended by
Vetelli.
so opportunely and expeditously; as Vitelli gave him at once both Orders and
Thanks for it: and after the business was dispatched, writing to a friend, he
denied not, but that many things were attributed to himself, The Army posses to
Philipland.
which were due to the wit and industry of Barberino. In this manner the
design being dexterously carried, the soldiers weighed Anchors from Antwerp,
and passed with the stream down the Schelt to Bergen ap Zoom, thence to the
Isle of Thol upon the edge of Brabant, and there went aboard other vessels that
conveyed them into Philipland, a desert Island. From thence to Duveland.
But how they should get from thence into Duveland, What and how great the
possage is between these two Islelands.
where the enemy had a strong Garrison, was a matter of great consideration.
This Isle of Duveland (which forty years before was overflowed by the Sea, and
not long after drained by the industrious inhabitants) is distant from
Philipland four miles by Sea; which, because at low water it carries no ships,
and therefore was not passable to the enemies fleet, the Spaniards were to wade
over by the direction of such Guides as knew the Foard. How dangerous for the
foot.
For though in some places certain parcels of firm land appeared among the
waves, yet the way was not altogether firm, but undiscernable hollows, and
blind confluences of Rivers were said to be interposed. Yet great soldiers
make suit for the employment.
Many soldiers of the Army therefore in a warlike gallantrie offered
themselves to undergo the hazard, Who were chosen.
seeking glory in the danger. But the principal Captains and oldest soldiers
were for the most part chosen, especially, as the custom is, those that were
forwardest to advance the expedition; Isidoro Pacecho, Hieronimo Seros^uequio,
this Governor of Bergen, he of Goes: Osorius Ulloa an old Commander of Foot.
Barberino, Aranda, Guiralto, and others, to the number of 1750, Their number.
most of them Spaniards, some Low-countreymen, the rest Italians, and Germans
(besides pioners and Smiths almost two hundred) all men of undaunted
Resolutions, such as preferred Honor before Life. Nor was the Prince of
Orange, The Prince of Orange waylays them.
(who had intelligence of Requesenes his design) less active; With men And
ships.
but sending for Boisot Governor of Zeland, furnished him with men, part
whereof were to keep Duveland, and part Zericzee, against which, the war was
intended. And near to Duveland, where the Sea is narrowest, he placed certain
ships to gall the Royallists in their passage. Finally, he contrived a Fort in
the midst of the Sea to oppose their going over. And a fort raised in the water.
For some flat bottomed Boats were set forth, With new and wonderful invention.
which at a high tide might come up to the Foard where the Kings men were to
pass, and running aground upon the ridge of earth the vessels themselves might
block up the passage whilst the men in them presented the Spaniard from the
Cannons mouth with death inevitable. The Kings men not at all dismayed.
Yet the selected soldiers not knowing the danger, Their habit.
or deliberately contemning it, when the hour of low water approached, put off
their armor and clothes, contenting themselves only with shoes and trouses,
hanging their knapsacks about their necks, or sticking them upon their pikes to
keep them from the wet: Their provision of victual and arms.
one end being full of cheese and shipbisket, the other of gunpowder: some
besides their swords carrying pikes, others long hatchets, some muskets, some
spades or pickaxes. Thus furnished, Alabard.
they were brought to the place by the rest of the Army, They make ready for
the work of danger and death.
that openly encouraged them, but privately commiserated the Regiment devoted
unto death. And indeed how could they but be sacrificed, that were in the first
place exposed to the cruelty of that merciless element; and in case it spared
them, yet must be marks for the enemy to shoot at, through whose Chiapino
Vitelli Marquess of Cetona Campe-master general
portrait dismayed at the loss, arrived about the break of day in Duveland.
Where instantly putting his men in order for an Assault, with the same courage,
increased by the late danger, when he had in few words animated his men (for it
was not difficult to put them upon any resolutions whatsoever, that were
resolved to die) he gave them both the Word, The Spaniards fight
and his Example to fall upon the enemy struck with admiration of their bold
adventure, though he was fresh and had the advantage of his works, the
Royallists weary, and their heads giddy with the Sea: yet with incredible
valor quickened by the very despair of hope (for the water and the enemies
ships had stopped their passage back) they did not only beat them from their
works, And conquer.
and scatter them, but at the first onset killing Charles Boisott Governor of
Zeland, the rest losing their spirits when they saw their General fall, they
possessed themselves of the whole Island. By which it appears, there is no such
conquering weapon as the necessity of conquering. The enemies fleet put men
into Sceldt.
When the enemies fleet, that rode close by, saw this; for fear of Schelt,
which they knew the Spaniard so much labored to reduce, and had from Duveland
but a short cut thither: presently sailing to Schelt, they left the way free
for the Commanders that staid in Philipland, Avila, Mondragonio, and Peralta;
who immediately landed the rest of the army in Duveland. The mutual
gratulation of the Victors.
So soon as they arrived, The wounded soldiers provided for.
with great joy embracing their fellows, and as it were welcoming them to life:
first they took care for the wounded, most of which were Gentlemen: And after
Vitelli had ordered them to be sent by Boat and Wagon to Amsterdam, presently
others, instead of the hurt and slain, offered themselves to wade the Sea the
second time, The Kings men wade the Sea again into Sceldt.
with greater alacrity then before, because the first voyage had so well
succeeded. And Mondragonio (who formerly marched through the Sea to Goes)
leading them, and with his old resolute courage conquering the gulfs and
quicksands, in the sight of the enemies (that admired him, and called his men
Sea Monsters) arrived in Schelt, the principal Isle of Zeland. Fight the
Islanders.
But the Spaniards having with some difficulty beaten the Garrison at their
landing in the Island, and with the same violence taken certain Forresses (with
the loss of Gabriell Peralta, Take a great part of the Isle.
whose too great spirit more stoutly then cautiously engaged him) they found a
little stop at Bommen; The death of Peralta.
strong both in situation, Besiege Zericzee.
and defendants: yet taking it at last, they marched with all their forces in a
body to Zericzee, the chief city of the Island, and head of the war. Where
being often repulsed (for the Town was exceeding well fortified both by the
nature of the place, and the late supplies which they had from the fleet) by
Vitelli's advice, and Requesenes his command (who were now come in person to
the Leaguer) they drew a line about the Town, and chained up the ports, that no
carriages should pass. Lastly, At last take it.
after the grievous incommodities of winter (sometimes being almost drowned
with the sluices let out by the enemy) Feb. 1.
when they had foiled the Prince of Orange, Crimpen.
who from the siege of Crimpen, now rendered to him, brought his victorious
army thither out of Holland, mending with massyer links the chains which the
enemies ships with their iron beaks had broke asunder, having likewise sunk
their General Lodwick Boisot, after nine months siege, Zericze, conquered
first by famine, yielded to Mondragonio, The death of Chiapinio Vitelli.
affording him more Fame, July 1.
then Benefit. But Requesenes and Vitelli, so desirous of that day, lived not
to see it. Vitelli whilst he was busied at the siege of Schelt newly recovered
of a sickness, and going from one place to another in his Sedan, by chance or
on purpose was overthrown; and falling from the works, the weight of his flesh
and years struck the breath out of his body: presently he was carried to his
tent, and growing worse and worse, they conveyed him to the next Fort, where
providing, like a Christian, for the health of his soul, which was all that
could be done for him, Why the soldiers were not much troubled for the loss
of him.
in the fifty sixth year of his age he died: but was not greatly mourned for in
the army, the soldiers being weary of the long and tedious siege, and
therefore out of charity with Vitelli as Author of it. Yet his corpse brought
into the Leaguer was honored (as the custom is) with military pomp,
Requesenes grieved exceedingly.
and afterward laid in the ground at Antwerp by Requesenes, with great sorrow,
as more sensible of his loss. But the Senate and People of Antwerp expressed
the greatest love to him, And much more the City of Antwerp. that ordered his
Funeral to be at the public charge of the Town.
decreeing his funerals to be at the public charge, His body was carried to
his Country.
and extolling him in an Oration as far from flattery, as the necessity of
flattering him. Lastly, his body was carried into his own Country, and there
by his Countrymen magnificently intombed, in a Chapel of the Franciscans
founded by his Ancestors. Cliapinio Vitelli was born at Citta di Castello in
the Duchy of Spalato, his Father, Nicolao Vitelli, his Mother, Gentilina a
Staffa of Perugia; his house it self, a Family of soldiers. For they were his
Progenitors that first taught the Italian horse the use of Carabines, His
Parents. His first service Harieden Barbarossa King of Algier.
and their foot the discipline of marching in the form of a Cockle. And he
himself gave the first proof of a spirit equal to his forefathers,
encountering Harieden Barbarossa Admiral of the Turkish fleet, when he
haressed the Seacoast of Siena, filling Italy with Blood and Rapine. To oppose
him, Cosmo Duke of Florence sent Vitelli General of his horse, who not only
defended the town of Orbatello, which others thought untenable, when Harieden
having burnt Port Hercole, was come close to it: but likewise beat the Turks
from the maritine parts, and forced them to quit Thuscany. Which styled him the
Preserver of Thuscany against the Strozzis and the French.
For which service he being cried up by the inhabitants as the deliverer of
Thuscany, 1554.
was with all military applause entertained at Florence: The Duke himself
allowing him to ride through the city in a Coach drawn with four horses, (the
first they say that was ever seen in Florence) in manner of a triumph.
Answerable to this noble beginning he proceeded in the Florentine war,
sometimes commanding the foot, sometimes the horse, sometimes being at once
General of the Spaniards and Germans. He was the first that entered Florence
in a Coach.
Especially at the taking of Port Hercole, and fortifying the town. Which last
victory, being the absolute conquest of Siena, as Duke Cosmo ascribed it solely
to Vitelli's Conduct, His several military offices.
so that magnanimous and munificent Prince, bestowed upon him Cetona, The
Honors conferred upon him by Cosmo Duke of Florence.
a town belonging to Siena, of which place he created him Marquess; and a few
years after when his Excellence instituted an Order of Knights dedicated to
Saint Stephen the Bishop, because upon his day the victory was obtained, the
Duke himself, master of that fraternity, chose Vitelli among the first
Knights, 1556.
and made him the great Commendatore of the Order. 1561.
Whence his fame spreading through Europe, great proposalls were made him by
many Princes. Insomuch as the Duke of Alva, when he marched against Pope Paul
the fourth, offered to make Vitelli General of his horse, but he refused the
place, because he said, he had bound himself by vow, His Vow.
when he first resolved to be a soldier, never to bear arms against the Sea
Apostolic. He is made Camp-Master to the Duke of Alva and marches with him
into the Netherlands.
And returning from the war of Malta, for defense of which Island he was, by
Philip the second of Spain, sent with 2500 volunteers; he was by the same King
invited to serve the Duke of Alva, then upon his march for the Low Countries,
and made Camp-master to his army, so happily, that among all the Kings
Low-countrey-forces, in that field of Mars either at a Council of war, His
nimble spirits notwithstanding his gross body.
or in a battle no man la^d or expedited a stratagem comparable to Vitelli.
And truly it was a kind of miracle to see a man of that corpulency, not only
active in mind, but likewise endued Fleet they were to pass, with no other
Gabeons to defend them, but their bodies; and if they escaped both these
dangers, yet a third remained from the Island-garrison, that looked for them
standing safely on the Banks and Rocks; a very unequal encounter, wherein if
they presently prevailed not, when the tide came they should be drowned, the
enemy in the mean time sitting at his ease, This adventure and Cesars of
foarding the Thames parallelled. Caes. lib. 5. Bell. Gal.
and laughing at them. So as this adventure may not only be compared with that
of Cesars soldiers; when they, with their heads only above water, waded the
Thames, with such violence, as the enemy not able to resist the force of his
Legionaries, and Horse, forsook the banks and fled. But these men's courage is
so much to be preferred before the Cesarians, by how much fewer the Spaniards
were, and had no Horse to flank them, nor the water free; but ventured on the
sea possessed and maintained against them by the enemy; and likewise in that
they went on so, as in case, they should be routed, there was less hope of
coming off, the way being impassable, save by boat: and lastly, by how much
surer they were (having the enemy on the front, and the sea (a crueller enemy)
in the rere) that if they did not forthwith conquer, they must certainly be
conquered. And now the magnanimous Battalion, when it was low water about
midnight, entered the dreadful chanel. The Kings men wade the sea Ulloa leads
the Van.
John Osorius Ulloa led the Van, the greatness of whose mind equalled the
valor of his followers. Gabriel Peralta, brother to the Marquess of Falcesio,
an ingenious and dexterous Commander, brought up the Rere; Peralta the Rere.
that consisting of twelve hundred, this of five hundred men; the Pioners with
one hundred Musketeers marched enclosed between them both. The Pioners in the
middle.
And because such as knew the foard, betwixt the quicksands and whirlpits, The
order of the march.
showed them certain little spots of solid earth, whereon but a few could rest
at once, therefore they went two or three a breast, with incredible confidence,
Requesenes on the shore, and by him a Priest praying for them.
wrestling with the waves up to the armpits. Requesenes stood upon the shore,
and with him a Priest, praying for these poor souls to the Prince of the
Celestial Militia, Christ Jesus, that being the night to his own day. Mich.
Hernandes a Jesuit.
Nor prayed he in vain: For the blind and darksome night was on a sudden
illuminated with clouds kindled in the Air, burning Meteors, and all the other
fiery prodigies of heaven. Prosperous ostents from heaven.
Especially a flame in the form of a Crown, inclining toward Requesenes,
attracted the greedy eyes of the soldiers, Issest. in Hist. Belg. Thuan. l.
60. Met. l. 5.
ignorant of the cause of such Meteors, and raised their spirits with assurance
of success. Osorius taking occasion thereupon, turned to his men and said,
Meurs. in Orang. l. 10.
Do you not see, my fellow soldiers, how the Army of Heaven goes along, M.
Hernandes told that of the Crown.
how they join forces with us, how they guide us to Victory, and boad revenge
upon our foes. Indeed before I embarked upon this Adventure, weighing in my
mind the immensness of the danger, Whence Ulloa takes a hint to encourage his
men.
I prayed with much anxietie, and was not (I must confess) so ambitious of a
conquest, as an honest and not an unrevenged death. But now fully encouraged, I
correct and enlarge my wishes, confident we can meet nothing impervious to us,
or insuperable. Though our attempt be great, my mates, yea so great as almost
exceeds belief, that we should pass a foot to an enemies Island, through seas
where Ships hardly dare adventure, and have no other Oars to land us, but our
hands. Nor can we be censured as desperate, or unadvised, if every one consider
not his own strength, nor the present danger of the Ebbs and Flows; but lifting
up his eyes to heaven, take the number of our Auxiliaries, and their
confederate colors flying in the air. Let him look how the Element fires upon
the enemy: nor can all the water of the Sea extinguish those Grenades. We have
the day, my mates, wherein the heavens are concerned, as much as we. God is
well pleased with our labor: and whilst we have so glorious a General
yonder, we carry Victory with us, and the cause of Victory. Cheared with this
Oration, The soldiers animated, hasten their march.
the soldiers, who had conceived the same hope of celestial Assistance,
animated likewise with the unwonted aspect and invitation of the heavenly
bodies, thought they might safely follow where the elementall torches guided;
and with great expedition, left the tide should increase, hastened toward
Duveland. But are retarded by the straits.
But what haste could be made by almost two thousand men, through those straits
that would scarce hold four a breast. Nor was it a little discouragement to
behold the enemies ships appear against them, And by the enemy sallying from
their ships.
which though they shot a far off, and therefore seldom hit; yet the boldest
of their Seamen sallying out by the foards which they exactly knew, encountered
the Royallists with a new and a mad kind of fight; for both parties that hardly
saw each other for the waves, now dicharged their Muskets a far off, the fire
flashing through the water; now hand to hand with their spears and staves beat
one another from the higher ground, and were ^umbled down into the next Gulfs
and Whirlpits. And by the ships themselves.
But the destruction was greater and more unavoidable from the Ships, that lay
cross the foard, against whose soldiers armed with muskets and long hooks,
whilst some of the Royallists skirmished in their passage, others in the mean
time got by. But not without much delay. And with no small loss of the Kings
men, could these rocks of the Enemy, and this dreadful tempest be avoided:
Wherefore the tide rising and raging, The Rere forced to return.
Peralta with the Rere had gone but a little way, when the swelling water, now
up to their necks, forced them to return, and the Pioners and
Low-countrey-musketeers, marching between them and the Van, The Pioners drowned
or shot.
in despair to get back, and endeavoring to follow the foremost, were partly
drowned, partly slain by those we mentioned in the ships. Nay, the enemies
whole Fleet now coming on with the tide, shot them so securely, that the very
murderers (sensible of their own frailty subject to the like disasters)
commiserated them, as unfortunately and inconsiderately cast away; The enemy
reproves them in this manner.
and reproving them, called out, Whither do you go, you wretches? Why ar your
undefended bodies so frantickly exposed to wounds? What madness, or what hope
of gain could hire out your lives to the Spaniards, that they should turn you
like water-dogs into the Sea, to make sport for your enemies? Thus at once they
both killed and pitied them. The number of those that perished
Of all the two hundred and fifty in the middle, only nine escaped. Among the
rest that were lost of the first company (being twelve or thirteen) Isidor
Pacecho died most gallantly: The virtue of Pacecho.
For shot through the body, his soldiers running to take up their Captain on
their shoulders, His last words.
he coming to himself again, said, Go, fellow Soldiers, go, and do not out of
your care of me, that am now but a dead man, hinder the march of your fellows,
with these untimely Ceremonies. I die in a brave attempt, not unhandsomely, nor
unhappily, as I hope and pray that you may make it. So this stout man, when his
life failed him, yet retained so much spirit, that even dying he encouraged
others. Truly, I am not so much affected to the ancient, Pacecho compared with
Cesars Centurion.
and regardless of our modern men, Petieius.
that I can easily prefer before this Captain, that of Cesars Petreius, who
in the siege of Gergovia wounded to death, Caesar. l. 7. Bell. Gal.
falling refused the help of his company, and told them, They labored but in
vain to put life into him, that had now lost all his blood and strength: they
should rather go to their Contrymen, and whilst they themselves were yet
safe and had time, join with the rest of their Legion. Pacecho.
For, as the like contempt of Life, and care of the Public safety was in both,
and their last words the same; undoubtedly the Spaniards act was greater then
the Romans* since this; when they were beaten from a siege, only taught them
how to fly; he, The Vanlands in Duveland.
when his followers were fighting with the Sea, persuaded them to the conquest
of a Province. But Osorius with the rest of the forces, nothing dued with great
agility of body; 1576.
so as in the field you could not say, that to the prudence of a great
Commander there wanted the dexterity of a common soldier. How he took down his
belly.
But because he found himself grow so fat in his middle age, that he was glad
to have his huge belly tied up in a scarf fastened about his neck, the man that
would loose no part of a soldier, of his own accord gave over wine, and drank
vinegar all his life time after, which so exceedingly brought down his belly,
that he folded the loose skin in form of a breastplate, and was found to weigh
less by eighty seven pound: His only fault.
but as much as he advanced the glory of his Nations discipline of war in the
Low Countries; so much he detracted from the fame of the Italian modesty, and
piety.

The Marquess Vitelli's funeral was within a few days followed by the death
of Ludovico Requesenes; The Elogie of Requesenes, ex Annal. Arag. Hier. Zuri.
a man in whom concurred the honors of the House of Zunica by his father, and
of Requesenes by his Mother. For from his father Iuan Zunica, His progenitour.
great Commendador of the Knights of Saint Iago in the Province of Castile,
descended upon him that honorable Office. 1440.
And from his mother Stephania Requesenes, he had his name and Barony, she
being the only daughter of the house of Requesenes, that had inheritance in
Catalonia. For Bernardo Requesenes took his other daughter by the same wife
along with him, when he went Viceroy into Sicily, and she still continues in
the ancient and illustrious family of Anthonio Requesenes Prince of Pantellana.
His maternall Ancestors famous Sea-Commanders.
But Ludovico from his mothers side, derived not only his surname, but his
skill in Sea Fights proper to the name of the Requesenes: For his
Great-grandfather Galcerano Requesenes Governor of Catalonia, King Ferdinand's
Admiral, ended the War of Aenare, having in a sea fight utterly defeated the
Torellio's Lords of the Island. 1480.
Another Galcerano son to the former, Count De Trivento and Avilino, and his
brother Berlinguerio, he in Naples, this in Sicily, succeeded in their Fathers
fame and Office of High Admiral to the Catholic King. And Berlinguerio's
son inheriting both his Fathers Place and Virtue, overthrew Arias Soliman's
Fleet at Pantellana; and sent back to Pope Leo the tenth, His own Sea-services.
the streamers which Arias had taken out of the Galley of Pope Julius the
second. Ludovico Requesenes furnished with these great domestic examples, when
Don John of Austria had his Patent for High Admiral, was by the King chosen
under the name of his Vice Admiral, to be the young man's Superintendent. 1569.
Soon after, by the same King, in the War of Granado, 1571.
he was appointed to defend the Seacoast of Spain, with soldiers brought out
of Italy, against the Incursions of the Moors assisted by the Turkish Emperor,
Selimus. Ant. Maria Gratia. de Bell. Cypr. l. 4. and Thuan. l. 48. Hist.
And in the battle of Lepanto he was by the King made Vice-Amirall to Don-Iohn
of Austria; but with such authority, as Don John was commanded to hear
especially and follow his advice. But though Requesenes was active, and a
fortunate Soldier; yet I know he was vulgarly accounted a better Gownman, His
Civil Offices.
and more skillful in the arts of Peace. 1564.
Which opinion he gained as well by his gentle and modest nature, as by his
great Offices of State, 1573.
Embassages, and the Government of Millian, wherewith he was entrusted by the
King. His difference with St. Charles Boromaeo.
Though some differences betwixt him and St. Charles Boromeo Bishop of the
City, much blemished his name; Carol. a Basil. S. Pet. l. 3. c. 2. Joan. Petr.
Gussan. l. 3. c. 3. Of whom be asks forgiveness by his servant.
and some thought that the cause both of his unfortunate administration of the
Low Countries, and of his untimely death. They say, Requesenes in his sickness,
sent to the Bishop, earnestly beseeching him (whom he called the holy man) to
vouchsafe him the expiration of the sacred Cross; a passage, which because I
do not certainly know, I mean not to affirm. This I am assured of, when
Requesenes went from Millain into the Low Countries, 1575.
without any public reconcilement with the Bishop, (for to the Church he was
reconciled by the Breve of Gregory the thirteenth) upon the way, touched with
Religion, he sent one of the principal Gentlemen of his Train, piously and
humbly to crave pardon of the Bishop (then Cardinal) for what was past. The
good man willingly embraced his desire, and promised he would earnestly pray
God to grant it. His Government of the Low Countries not so unfortunate as many
think.
But among Requesenes his disasters, I cannot justly reckon his Government,
wherein he was often Conqueror, and (which was beyond any former victory)
after a memorable foarding of the Sea, took Zericzee, thereby separating
Holland and Zeland, so facilitating the recovery of both those Countries to the
Royallists; and finally, left the enemies forces fewer and weaker then he found
them. His great Error.
I cannot excuse him of one fault, that to aw the mutinous soldiers, he gave
way to the Low-countreymen for taking up Arms, which afterward they were
unwilling to lay down. His soldiers much more to blame that mutined so often.
But nothing more obstructed Requesenes his success, then his own soldiers,
who demanding their pay, not so unjustly, as importunely, in two years mutinied
three or four times, corrupting their own victories, Their third sedition was
the occasion of his death.
and occasioning Requesenes his fate. For when Requesenes heard how the horse
in Brabant mutinied, whilst he lay before Zericzee, fearing left some of the
foot should make the like attempt, which might be the beginning of some great
Commotion, Out of the relation of Christop Assonvil.
riding thither post, the next day after he came to Bruxells, he was past all
hope of life. Instantly therefore, lest the Provinces might suffer by the
intervall of Government, Being near his end he names a successor for the Civil
Government.
he named Philip Count Barlamont Governor of the Low Countries; and Peter
Ernest Count Mansfeldt General of the Army; commanding his Secretary to draw
up and bring him their Commissions, And a General for the Army. But dying ere
he had signed their Commissions, March 5. of his Age fifty year.
which though presented to him, yet because he died before they were read and
signed, were held of no validity. And the Government of the Low Countries,
according to their ancient custom, remained in the power of those Lords, they
call the States, till it should be otherwise ordered by the King: who for some
time, doubted whether he should allow that form of Government or no. The
Government rested in the great Council.
For Gregory the thirteenth (who had mutually agreed with King Philip to assist
the Queen of Scots, then a Prisoner) being to nominate a General for that
expedition (for it was undertaken in the Popes, Which the King doubts to
confirm.
not the Kings name, lest it might distaste the Rivalls of the Spanish
Greatness) his Holiness made choice of Don John of Austria, The Pope
proposing Don John of Austra. Mary Queen of Scots.
famous for Sea victories: And therefore advised the King, by Ormanetti, who
was trusted in the transaction of that business, to send his Brother into the
Low Countries, wanting at that time a Governor: who would be in great esteem
with the Low country men, that honored the memory of his Father Charles the
fifth; Nich^lao Ormanetti Bishop of Padua.
and might from thence pass with a Fleet into England, where he, if any man,
might exspect success. He likewise articled with King Philip, For these reasons.
that the Queen of Scots (if it pleased God they freed her from captivity)
should be married to Don John, with the Kingdom of England for her dowry,
which would be a fair title to the Island for the House of Austria to ground a
War upon. The King disliked it not (though he more approved of the
Expedition, Notwithstanding the King lets the Senate govern.
then of the General) but instantly resolved and promised the Nuncio to send
his brother into the Low Countries. But his Majesty thought it not amiss to
protract his Brothers going for a while, Persuaded thereunto by Opper upon
these grounds.
that he might see how the Low-countreymen would govern the Low Countries:
moved hereunto by Ioachim Opper a Low Country man, his Secretary for the
Netherlands: who delivered his opinion, that the Low Country Lords would no
doubt be infinitely careful of the Commonwealth, and would now themselves
apply to the evil, that remedy for which they had so often solicited the
King: 1576.
Who by confiding in them, would for ever oblige the hearts of the Low Country
men. Especially, in that his Majesty well knew the Principal Senators, Duke
Areschot, the Counts Mansfeldt and Barlamont, and the President of the Senate
himself Viglius Zuichom, were men of most undoubted Religion and Loyalty. But
to govern by a Committee (that I may not accuse the Kings prudence from the
event) was then unseasonable. An unseasonable resolution destructive to the
Lowcountreys
For in the most troubled State, the most present remedy is for one man to
rule. Truly this indulgence of the Prince, did more hurt to the Low Countries,
then all his severity, as appeared by the immediate ruin of the Provinces.

For the people freed from a Spanish Governor, The Belgic war occasioned by
the Peoples contempt of the Senate.
would not acknowledge a new one in the Senate; or rather greatly feared not a
power divided and diminished among many. And the Lords despised the government
of their Peers, and easily deluded their discordant Votes and Orders. Some
enemies to the Spaniard, And their private differences.
desirous of revenge, fomented this difference of the Lords; especially the
Burgesses for Brabant and Haynolt, whom Requesenes had larely called to
Bruxells: For these, as they were chosen underhand by means of the Prince of
Orange, in regard of the Authority wherewith those Provinces entrusted them,
hugely distracted the Senate. And though both parties pretended the Kings name
and cause, yet their Designs and Counsels were so different, that some of them
were vulgarly called Spaniards, others Patriots or Protectours of their
Country. And as the word Country infinitely takes the People, with a
counterfeit and deceiving image of Liberty, it was not to be doubted but in
case of a War, the major part of the Low-countrey-men would adhere unto this
party. As also by another mutiny of the Spaniards, from the Relation of
Christ. Assonvil.
Nor was occasion long wanting to mature the mischief. For when they had taken
Ziriczee, after Requesenes his death; the Germans and Spaniards clamouring for
their pay (for that Island had afforded very little money) it was resolved on
by the Senate for easing the Low Countries of the burden of foreign Soldiers,
Because the Germans were paid, and not they.
to pay and cashiere the regiment of Hannibal Count de Altempse; because there
having lately been a breach between him and the Governor of Antwerp, Frederick
Perenot Lord of Campin, about the Garrison, it was feared lest public mischief
might ensue. An injury they very much resent. Mart. Delr. l. 1. Turb. Belg. and
others.
In the mean time, the Spaniards, that took Ziriczee under Colonel
Mondragonio, when they saw themselves passed by, and the many months pay which
was promised them, issued out to others, interpreting (not falsely, as some
said) that it was done out of malice to their Nation, and they thereby
necessitated to an Insurrection; First, as if he looked not into their
business, And are exasperated by the complaint of Count Altempse
they threatened Mondragonio: then hearing of the complaints made in the Senate
of Bruxels, by Count Altempse, who publicly affirmed, that he was casheired,
not for any danger to the Town of Antwerp, nor with relation to his fouldiers
importunity for pay, which he himself, a fortnight longer was able to have
satisfied: but only by the subtilty and spleen of the Lord Campin that excluded
soldiers faithful to the King, and so weakening the Spanish party, intended
to betray the city to the Prince of Orange. Whereupon the Spaniards, troubled
at the public danger, and the more exasperated, by their private injury, in
regard they demanded but what was due to their extraordinary labors, and
unprendented courage in wading through the sea, seized upon their Captains, and
chose themselves a General in Mondragonio's place. Whereto they were animated
by the example of the horse, and recruited by the accession of Valdez his
Regiment. They sent letters therefore to the Senate at Bruxels, They demand
their Pay of the Senate.
threatningly petitioning for their money. Nor did the Senate deny it, the
major part being Royallists. But the Burgesfes of Hoynolt and Brabant, long
since bought (as I said) with the Prince of Oranges money, Which being craftily
denied.
interceded in the name of their Provinces, pretending public necessity. And
whilst the Senate, partly affrighted with their protestations, partly entangled
in cross votes, deferred their payment; the Spaniards thinking their menaces
contemned, took up their Colors in fury, They march in hostile manner into
Brabant.
crying, Away for Brabant. And having left Ziricze guarded with a few Wallons,
quitting Schelt and Duveland, (Islands they had conquered, with so much glory
to their Nation) they ran up and down Brabant threatening, but not resolved upon
any determinate design, the Cities generally trembling and in amazement,
exspecting where that storm would fall. They refuse conditions offered.
But having first rejected the conditions, which Count Mansfeldt, meeting them
near Asc, brought from the Senate: then, sending away Iuliano Romero, who for
the same cause came from the Spaniards, without so much as hearing him speak:
afterward shaking their swords and presenting their muskets against Francisco
Montesdocha, they commanded him to come no nearer: They take Aelst.
and lastly on a sudden possessed themselves of Aelst, a town in Flanders not
far from Bruxels, hanging the King Officer that opposed them, before the
Gates: openly professing they meant to keep Aelst as a pledge, A tumult in in
Bruxels.
till their Arrears were paid. When this news came to Bruxels, with addition,
but false, that they had plundered the Town, and put the People to the sword;
the minds of the citizens were so incensed, as that searching the Town for
Spaniards, by chance they met a servant of Hieronimo Boda, Called Scriban by
Francis Harve in his Annal Belg.
a Spanish Senator, whom the Low-countreymen hated above all the rest, because
he had in many things been the Governor Requesenes his instrument; and at that
time stoutly spoke for the King in Senate; this poor Servingman they slew, A
Spanish Senatou's servant slain.
foully mangling his body, and would have fallen upon Roda himself, Alphonso
Vargas, and Iuliano Romero, if they had not presently (instructed by the
danger) retired to Court. The Senate declares the Spaniards Enemies to the
State.
In like manner i^ being reported, that the Spaniards bragged they would march
from Aelst, and storm Bruxels, unless they were paid, by order of the Senate;
the Lords (for they said the multitude, would not otherwise be appeased)
declared the Spaniards that kept Aelst, Rebels and enemies to the King and
State, permitting the people of Bruxels to take up arms in defense of their
City. By which example many Cities of Brabant and Flanders, The Low-countreymen
permitted to take arms against them.
because they pretended to be in like fear of the Wallons, and Germans, in
Garrison among them, by like indulgence of the Senate, and encouragement from
the Burgesses, took arms. But the Spanish Commanders fearing this to a general
conspiracy of the Provinces against their Nation, whilst they busied
themselves in preparing for a war, suspected and no less suspecting, on both
sides the causes of mutual hatred were increased; and each party looking upon
the other as an enemy, Avila complains of the Senate.
they became enemies indeed. For when Sancho Avila, who was the ablest soldier
and greatest man among them, being Governor of the Fort at Antwerp, The Senate
lays the fault upon Avila, out of Christ. Assonvill.
by letters directed to the Senate, complained, that the Cities were in arms;
and tumults, under the color of remedy, fomented: and the Senate in like
manner returned answer, that Avila, An Edict published by the Senate against
the soldiers in Aelst.
without making his addresses unto them, had increased his Garrison, and
therefore Required him to slight them: in a short time they broke out into open
hostility. For it was by a new Edict of Senate decreed, that no man should
presume to assist the seditious Spaniards at Aelst, with any kind of help or
council: Avila sends ammunition to his Countrymen in Aelst.
notwithstanding Avila, though he was offended with their mutiny, yet for fear
they might be circumvented by the Low-countreymen, furnished them with powder
and three fieldpieces. But very opportunely at the same time, The Civil war
for a while put off by the Marquess of Havres arrvall.
Charles Croi Marquess of Harve, Brother to Duke Areschot, returned from
Spain, with the Kings letters to the Senate, wherein he promised very suddenly
to send them Don John of Austria, their Governor. Which not a little retarded
the beginning of the civil War; especially, since both the parties labored
to avoid that imputation, and therefore severally strove by speedy messengers
to prepossesse the mind of their new Governor. Yet, forasmuch as the Royal
party in the Senate, In the end of August.
knew this truce could not long continue, being opposed by the Burgesses; after
John Baptista a Boscho, whom they had sent post into Spain, they carefully
dispatched away, Maximilian Rassinghem, Vasseur Lord of Moriemsart. The Senates
Letters to the King out of Christ. Assonvill.
and Francis Vasseur, protesting to his Majesty, That the Authority of Senate
could not bridle the hatred of the people, so much enraged, that scarce a
Tradesman in the Town, or a Ploughman in the Country, but spent his time in
buying armor, and muskets. Nor was the multitude kept in order by the
Garrison-souldiers, who wanting pay, and allured with hope of plunder, by
pillaging Towns through the whole Country, and threatening all the Provinces,
unmeasurably increased the Tumults. That in the Treasury was not money enough
to pay them. That they themselves had received from his Majesty, by the hand
of the Marquess of Havre, seventy thousand crowns: and a little while before,
as many: but this sum, which was all that in six months could be got from
Spain to supply the Low Countries, would not serve for one months pay.
Howsoever they themselves had to that day, as well as they could, maintained
the Commonwealth, relying upon his Majesty's promises, and the late hope of Don
John's coming. Who, if he staid a while longer, no doubt the mischief would
break forth into a public and irrevocable ruin. For hitherto, they had
governed the weather-beaten State, and stopped the leaks whilst they were but one
or two. Now, if whole planks were sprung, it was to be feared, that the Ship
splitting, all the Masters care will come too late. The King commands Don John
to take post for the Low Countries.
This free expression of the Senate, though it moved the King to send Don John
post into the Netherlands; yet as it is commonly the fortune of all Spanish
have, he arrived too late, to the destruction of the Public. For in a violent
sickness, there is not a more certain sign of death, then if remedies be
applied sparingly, and out of time; especially if there be somewhat from
without, which by fanning the inward humors poisoned with immoderate heat,
instead of cooling, more inflames them. In the interim the Prince of Orange
makes use of the differences among the Royalists.
For the Prince of Orange, who conceived there could not be a happier
opportunity for him, then the present discord of the Kings Governors, used
all his industry; and by frequent letters and messengers from Holland, he,
that was ambitious to govern, courted the Senators and Governors of
Provinces, with the usual word, that signifies nothing, Liberty. Solicits the
Governors of Provinces. Particularly Duke Areschot.
They say his Emissaries moved Duke Areschot, that he being the greatest person
in the Senate (for when the King gave the Senators their Commission for the
Government of the Low Countries, Areschot was first named, as Prince of the
Senate) would use that greatness for the benefit of his Nation, and
opportunely lay hold of the honorable Title of his Countries Deliverer. Nor
would there be any great difficulty in the enterprise, if they two united
themselves, and to strengthen the tie of friendship should confirm it with a
double marriage, Count Buron eldest son to the Prince of Orange marrying the
daughter of Duke Areschot, and his eldest son the Prince of Cimace, the eldest
daughter to the Prince of Orange. It was likewise conceived, that Areschot,
Mart. Delv. 1. Turb. Belg.
from that time, deserted the Spanish party. The Senators opinions touching
those of Aelst.
But howsoever, it is evident, that diverse Noblemen, and many Senators, that
were formerly Neuters, moved by the late proceedings of the Spaniards at Alest
(for they had taken the Fort of Likerch, near to Bruxels) entered into a league
with the Prince of Orange, which presently appeared in Senate, that upon news
of the Spaniards threats and approaches united themselves with the Burgesses of
Brabant and Haynolt. Some would have them destroyed by arms.
For when some delivered their opinions, that such frequent mutinies of the
Spaniards and their late menaces against the Royal Senate, should be chastised
with arms; and others voted on the contrary, Others, not to be provoked, and
these spoke prophetically.
that they should rather be appeased with the money due unto them; that there
was no fighting with such men, as would sell their skins at a dear rate; that
the Spanish Commanders, which held most of their Forts, would not suffer their
Countrymen to be cut off by such a combination, nor themselves and the King to
loose the strength of so many old soldiers; nay, that the King would be
offended, if a war, without his knowledge, But their sense was rejected.
should be raised against his men. It is not to be imagined, with what
animositie, and almost downright railing, this suffrage was resented by the
people of Bruxels. And being likewise by the Senate cunningly made believe,
that some of the house conspired with the Spaniards, and treated about the
Surrender of the town; they all cried, to Arms, with such fury, The People
create a new Governor of Bruxels.
as they instantly required to have William Horn Lord of Hese, that mortally
hated a Spaniard, declared Governor of Bruxels, and Commander in chief of the
Militia. And he, under color of pacifying the multitude, By his Orders, the
Senators that were held to be of the Spanish Faction were taken into Custody.
but indeed to strengthen his party, commanded Glime Governor of the
Wallon-Brabant, with a band of soldiers to seiz upon the Court; who breaking
open the gates, took out of the Senate the Counts of Mansfeldt and Barlamont,
the President Viglius, John Baptista Boischot, Christopher Assonvill, Aloysio
Delrio, and many other Senators which they commonly called Spaniards, and
committed them all prisoners; lest they should (as he said) promote Councels
pernicious to the public Peace. Which being injuriously and imperiously acted,
not only against the greatest persons, but even against the Senate it self,
and consequently against the Prince, whose Person that Order represented: The
authority of the Senate falls to nothing.
the authority of Senate absolutely fell, and that day was the last wherein
the Royal Senate governed; the foundation of that power being then first laid,
which ever since has remained in the States of the Low Countries, A new form
of Government to Deputies of the Estates.
revolted from the King. For though others, chosen in their places that were
removed, seemed to carry the face of a Senate, yet all the power was in the
Burgesses, at whose pleasure they were nominated and moved, like wooden Puppets
with a Vice. Henceforth, most matters were ordered in a hostile manner; the
decree of Senate furiously passed for turning the Spaniards out of the
Low Countries; the Estates General summoned; the People commanded to take
arms, and every one taxed at a Crown, The beginning of the Association of Gant.
that should refuse.

But though all this was done, not only without consulting his Majesty, but
likewise (as they well knew) against his will (for he had often forbid the Four
Provinces offer assistance against the Spaniards.
summoning of the Estates) and therefore seemed to be no obscure beginning of
Rebellion. They crave succors from their neighbors in order to the Spaniards
expulsion.
Yet it was concluded with so universal a consent of the Provinces, that
within a few days, Brabant, Haynolt, Artois, and Flanders, sending their
Commissioners about it to Bruxels, agreed among themselves, and took an oath
mutually to assist each other against the Spaniards. That done, they sent
diverse noble Persons to entreat assistance of the neighbour-Princes, against
the tyranny (as they called it) of the Spaniards; Their Agreement with the
Prince of Orange.
in the first place to the King of France, and the Queen of England; then to
Cleveland, lastly, to the Prince of Orange in Holland, with whom they were to
make a League, Who assists them in the recovery of Gant.
if he would join his forces with theirs, to besiege the Castle of Gant held by
the Spaniards. The Prince without delay furnishing them to their desires, the
Castle was taken, Other Provinces associated with them.
for which they delivered into his hands the Town of Newport, lying upon the
Seacoast of Flanders. With the said Catholic Province, Holland and Zeland,
that were of the Heretical faction, associated, and in all the several
Articles of their League begun at Gant, there was not the least mention of
their Sovereign. The Convention at Gant.
Into this City invited by the Royal Senate, came not only Ambassadors from
the Princes their neighbors, and Commissioners for the Provinces, but the
Deputies of the Low Country Prelates. Who, though of diverse factions and
Religions, but a while since at deadly feud among themselves, and besprinkled
with the yet fresh blood drawn in the wars of Holland and Zeland; Their
wonderful unanimity against the Spaniard.
all this notwithstanding, to that Head, which of twenty five was the
principal, That the Spanish Soldiers, and all forreiners should be forthwith
expelled from the rest of the Provinces, for ever confederated with Holland and
Zeland; they so unanimously consented, and so much the desire of Liberty,
thereby hoped for, prevailed; that all of them, among whom were diverse
Royallists, The Kings party and the Ecclesiastics joining with the
Consederates.
and many Clergymen, more eagerly then advisedly swore and signed this
agreement. So as one would think the Low Country men at this day to be the
same that inhabited the place in Cesars time, which calling a Council about
ejecting the Romans, Septem. 30.
the consent of the Provinces was so universal to vindicate their Liberty,
The like consent of old in expelling the Romans.
as they were neither moved with the remembrance of Benefits nor Friendship,
but every man followed the war with the utmost abilities of his purse and
courage. The Conspiratours were much daunted at the event of the first battle,
wherein Glime, General for the States, Caes. l. 7. de Gal. Bell.
boldly encountering the Spaniards, The Confederates troubled at Glime's slight
and loss.
betwixt Lovain and Tienen, was routed by Alphonso Vargah's horse, with so much
greater disgrace then loss (for not above three hundred of the Glimeians were
slain) by how much they had confidently promised themselves victory, inviting
their neighbors, no doubt to see the show. But they were yet more astonished
at the news which a while after came to Gant, Much more at the recovery of
Maestricht by the Spaniards.
That the Spaniards had recovered Maestriecht, put the citizens to the sword,
and plundered the Town: For they of Maestriecht had no sooner corrupted and
drawn to their party the Germane Garrison, turning out the Spanish, having by a
trick seized and imprisoned their Colonel, Francisco Montesdocha; but Martin
Ayala, Montesdocha's Lieutenant-Colonell, Governor of Wiccha (which is the
other part of the Town beyond the Mose, joined to Maestriecht by a Bridge) sent
word how things went with the Spaniards to Ferdinand Toledo, who by accident
was coming thitherward with some Foot from Dalem, and timously arriving at
Wiccha, with united forces they marched up to the Bridge: But preceiving Canon
planted in the front of it, A military Invention.
they pitched upon this sudden resolution; As many women of the Town as they
could lay hold of, they took and placed before them for a breast-work, and so
faced the Bridge with their Muskets couched under the women's armpits, ready
to fire upon the enemy. And whilst the Citizens were afraid to shoot, lest they
might kill their kinswomen and friends, before they should hurt the Spaniards,
they heard that on the other part of the Town, Alphonso Vargah having burned
down Bruxels-Port, had entered with his Horse. Whereupon most part of the men
running to defend their houses, the Spaniards took the Bridge, the Germans
yielded, and Maestriecht was recovered.

When this news came to Gant, Of the sack of Antwerp.
for fear the like should happen at Antwerp, setting aside the business of the
League for a while, the Deputies of the Estates speedily repaired to Bruxells,
and with consent of the Senate, ordered new Levies to be made. And at the same
time, just as they could have wished, Count Egmont, son to Lamorall, with
great joy and gratulation of the Estates of Brabant, From the Emperors Court
where he had remained since his fathers death.
arrived at Bruxells. To him therefore as, one that would be sure to revenge
his Fathers death, they committed the greatest charge of the Army; the rest,
part to the Marquess de Havre, part to Goingny, Caprias, and Bersen,
dispatching them away to join with Oberstein's Germane Regiment at Antwerp. The
Deputies of the Estates send forces into Antwerp.
The Town was governed by Frederick Perenot Lord of Campin, the Garrison by
Otho Count Oberstein, both upon late differences, offended with the Spanish
party, and therefore ready to receive the soldiers, sent from the Deputies of
the Estates; amounting, besides Count Egmonts Regiment of Walloons, to the
number of three and twenty Foot Compaines, and fourteen Troops of Horse. The
Antwerpers thus recruited, resolved to guard all avenues from the Castle to the
Town. The Town raises a battery against the Castle
And (because the Spaniards had the Fort, from whence they terrified the Town)
by the advice of Campin they drew a line, beginning and finishing a Sconce on
such a sudden, that within four and twenty hours it was in some places sixteen
cubits high; above twelve thousand men and women sweating at the works. Nor was
Avila, Governor of the Fort, less diligent to call in the Spaniards, at Lire,
and Breda, with the rest that quartered nearest to him. The Burgundians, The
Spanish from all their Qu^iters come to Antwerp.
and some other Horse and Foot, immediately marched thither, commanded by
Iuliano Romero, Anthonio Olivera, and Francisco Valdez. At the very same time
Alphonso Vargas came from Maestricht with his Horse, So do the Mutineers from
Aelst.
though he understood nothing of these passages; and almost at the same hour,
as it were by appointment, the Spaniards of Aelst with their Electo (not upon
any invitation, Of Cannon and Powder.
which they always had rejected, but as I suppose in thankfulness for the
Provision lately sent them from Avila) beyond all exspectation arrived. All
received into the Fort.
They were every man received into the Fort, absolutely persuading themselves,
that God in good time had brought them thither, Christ. Assonv. in his Relation.
to revenge the Kings cause, betrayed by the Royal Senate. And when they had
refreshed themselves with a little meat, they resolved to make a sallie. The
fury of the Mutineers.
Only among all the rest, they of Aelst, though they had marched fasting four
and twenty miles, and scarce drunk one cup of wine, yet fierce and implacable,
swore, They would never eat till the Town were taken. These furious words were
made good by their courage: for upon the signal given by Avila (their number
was about five thousand Foot, A sally from the Castle.
and six hundred Horse) the Suttlers and Scullions bringing straw and fire
behind them, The City-forces beat out of their Trenches.
and casting it where it might be useful; they assaulted the enemies trenches
with such violence, the Fort in the mean time thundering against the Defendants,
that the ditch and works, manned by very near six thousand men, were taken,
chiefly by the incredible valor of the Aelostanians. They entered the Town by
three several ways; The Spaniards enter the Town. The Garrison at odds among
themselves.
so as the Citizens being amazed, and the Garrison at variance among
themselves, whilst every one provided for his own particular, the public being
neglected, private ruin likewise followed. And though the Spaniards advancing
by Saint Michaels street, were valiantly opposed by Count Egmont and his
Forces, Count Egmont would have made resistance.
yet they being untrained raw men, and their Commander himself no very old
soldier, he was not ableto resist the Spanish Veterans, But is taken prisoner.
who beat him with a great slaughter of his men, into the Monastery of Saint
Michaels, where he was taken prisoner by Iuliano Romero, and instantly carried
to the Castle; more gallantly, as it seems, then fortunately, intiated in the
first rudiments of War. But the fight being renewed at Court, The Citizens fight
stoutly.
the Victory for a great while continued doubtful. For the Townsmen defended
their goods and houses with much more resolution then forreiners and
mercenaries; so great an encouragement is wealth unto the owners. Whilst they
kept the Magistrates houses, and at pleasure shot the Spaniards, without danger
to themselves; sometimes fallying, and presently retiring, diverse Spaniards
were slain, among the rest Damiano Morales, a Captain of great valor. Till
such time as Alphonso Vargas having defeated all that made head against him,
brought his Horse through Saint Georges street, and sending them to the
Marketplace, where the greatest crowd of Citizens were gathered; which, part
killed, part maimed, were forced to retreat into the Palace of Justice, and the
houses adjoining. Near the Palace of Justice.
Out of which places whilst they shot and interrupted the course of the
Victory, in an instant two of the black guard, Which the Spaniards fire, and
become Masters of Antwerp.
with nothing but a little straw fired the Palace, though built of solid
Marble; and with an infinite loss of men, that building, one of the fairest in
Europe, and about eighty houses, most of them full of rich wares, was burned
down; Novem. 4.
the spoil being divided between the soldiers and the fire. Count Egmont
Caprius Gogny.
Then the principal Town-Commanders being taken, and their stoutest soldiers
slain, whilst the rest either cowardly ran from their posts, or more basely
joined themselves with the Conquerours and Plunderers; the Spaniards possessed
themselves of Antwerp, which had none left to defend it. And to whatsoever fury
or avarice prompted the licentious soldiers, they acted it upon the enemy,
that exceeding rich city, with blood and rapine. The Deputies of the Estates
advance the association of Gant.
In the mean time, the Deputies of the Estates, and the Senators ignorant of
these proceedings, and confident, as if they had secured Antwerp, returned to
Gant, and applied their best endeavors to the framing of a general
Association. When upon the sudden, news coming of the sack of Antwerp, Hearing
Antwerp was lost, they hasten the firm conclusion of their League.
it increased beyond measure their hatred to the Spaniards; and mad upon
revenge, they forthwith concluded their League; glad only of this, that they
seemed to be necessitated to it. And then sending back Rassinghem, And send a
Messenger to acquaint the King with their proceedings.
who was lately come from the Court of Spain, to acquaint his Majesty with the
sedition and cruelty of the Spanish souldilers: they by him excused the common
Confederation made aginst them; which forasmuch as all the Estates of the
Low Countries, as well the Clergy, as the Laity, accounted the only remedy to
preserve the Peace of their Nation, they doubted not, but (the times
considered) it would be approved of by his Royal clemency, that wished the
Peace and Tranquillity of his People. Nor were the Spanish Commanders less
solicitous how to possess the King; The Spanish Commandrrs likewise send one
to his Majesty.
but sent a Messenger at the same time, to acquaint his Majesty with the
subtle practices of the Low Country Lords, with the violence they had used to
the Kings Officers, even in the Senate; with the usurped authority of the
Deputies, their summoning the Estates; Who informs the King of these
particulars.
and likewise to set before his eyes the imminent defection of the Provinces.
That indeed the Spanish soldiers had offended, in taking Aelst by way of
Caution for their pay. For which offense, but especially for their long and
invincible stubbornness, they were declared enemies, the Spanish Commanders
never interposing in their behalf. Notwithstanding they very well knew, that
occasion of taking Arms against the Spaniards, and not paying them as well as
the Germans, was the politic contrivance of some Lords. But whatever end the
Lowcountrey men had therein, they had forborne at first to take notice of it.
But when they understood that a bloody League was made against the Spaniards;
Soldiers out of France, and England sent for into the Low Countries; and a
Peace concluded with the Prince of Orange, an Enemy to Religion, to his King,
and Country; truly they held it their duties with united forces to oppose the
Confederates, lest they expelling the the Kings soldiers out of the
Low Countries, should likewise shake off (which they had now in design) the
Royal Government. That the sack of Antwerp was lamented by all men, but
merited by the City, having received, contrary to their faith obliged by Oath,
the forces of the League, and attempted to besiege the Castle: so as the
Spaniards could not defend themselves, and the Fort, without calling in their
fellow soldiers: though some, oneby by divine Providence, came unsent for.
Who, if they behaved themselves more fiercely, or cruelly in defending the
Fort, and beating the Enemy out of the Town; that was done upon a sad
necessity, when they must either kill or be killed. Yet that it is not easy to
hold men's hands, when Victori^ shows them both Revenge, and Booty. But,
howsoever they excused their military licentiousness, The Plunder of Antwerp
made the Spaniards adi^us.
common Fame absolved them not, but reported their valor in taking the city
against twenty thousand Defendants, How miserable a pillage it was.
to be no greater, then their covetousness in plundering that richest
Port-town of Christendom, for three days together; forcing the richest
Citizens and Merchants to redeem their merchandise and goods, out of which they
made twenty hundred thousand pistols. Many c^using sword-hilts, helmets, and
breasts, to be made them of pure gold, but discolored, lest they might be
taken notice of. And those poor men which entered this rich city, went out
rich men and left it a poor town, as the Low Country Historians say, with an
odious commendation of the Spanish courage. Unless in this, as in other
things, they have exceeded the truth out of their hatred to that Nation. The
principal Actors in it.
Though I am not ignorant, that the Captains and common soldiers occasioned
for the most part these disorders, the Colonells and superior Officers having
all shares in the fault, not all in the spoil. Nay I am assured that Sanch^
Avila Governor of the Castle restrained the rage of many both by command and
punishment. And Camillo a Monte, The moderation of Camillo a Monte.
one of the first that took the town, when he had secured the Florentine
Merchants, and might have had a great sum of money of them, out of so much
wealth took nothing but a little bitch, as if he strove by his continence to
expiate the transgression of their plunder. I likewise know the destruction of
Antwerp was not the crime of the Spaniards alone; but the Low-countreymen,
Burgundians, Italians, and Germans, had every one their part in that tragic
desolation: and diverse of them acted more barbarously, then the Spanish.
Indeed some great moneyed men taken by the Spaniards, when Cornelius Vanindems
soldiers would have had the prize, were as they say betwixt despair and envy
cruelly murdered. The wretched condition of rich men.
Among whom Giles Smissart a rich Lapidary, and therefore more greedily
searched for by the plunderers, was miserably used, who at last being found
out, and buying his life and fortunes of the Spaniards, for ten thousand
Florens, could not avoid death so. For a company of Germans coming in, that
saw themselves defeated of the profit they gaped after, a quarrel growing
about it, one of them thrust him through the back with his pike. See the
unhappie fate of riches, how much more easily may he avoid the spoilers hands,
that never has allured an envious eye. For no naked man is sought after to be
rifled. Little things being by their littleness secured. Touching the
execution done and the number of the dead, they that were present do infinitely
vary. Some affirming them of the Spanish side to be at least two hundred,
others not above fourteen. But of the States soldiers, and the townsmen, the
Low Country men and Spaniards, (which is strange) agree upon the number of six
thousand (unless perhaps those out of their hatred, and these out of their
pride, do over-reckon) whereof they say almost three thousand were killed by
the sword, The good fortune of a Low Country trooper.
fifteen hundred burned, or trod to death, and as many drowned in the waters
thereabout, and in the River Schelt: where they say a Low Country horseman
pursued by Pedr^ Taxi^, as he was armed with his Lance in his hand, leaped from
a huge height into the Town-ditch, and swimming it with his horse got off safe,
The fate of Count Oberstein.
without so much as breaking of his Lance. And yet at the very same time, Count
Otho Oberstein Commander of the Germans and Governor of the Town Garrison,
when he was taking boat, upon eaven ground, his foot slipping, was in a moment
devoured by the water. Nothing is therefore to be presumed upon, or despaired
of; since the Level precipitates those that stand on plain ground, and
precipices save men falling headlong.

The End of the eighth Book.
The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The ninth Book.
THe same day that Antwerp was taken by the Spanish and 1576.
Foreign soldiers, November. 4.
Don John of Austria son to Charles the fifth arrived, Don John of Austria
comes into the Low Countries. Disguised.
but not time enough, in the Low Countries; having rid post through France,
with only two in his company. To one of which ( Octavio Gonzaga, Brother to
the Prince of Molphet) he passed for a slave, having blackt his face, and died
his hair and beard like an Ethiop. Discovers himself at Luxemburg.
But at Luxemberg, a Town well affected to him, he put off his counterfeit
shape, and discovered himself to be sent by King Philip, Governor of the
Low Countries: where understanding that Antwerp was ^ackt, he presently
directed his letters to the Senate at Bruxels, and to the Spanish Commanders in
Antwerp, certifying them of his coming and Commission for the Government: by
virtue whereof, he commanded a cessation of arms, between both parties. The
Senators doubt whether or no they should receive him.
The Spanish indeed obeyed, but the Senators and Burgesses either exasperated
by th^^ late affront, or unwilling to lay down their absolute authority, made
some difficulty of admitting the new Governor, especially before they had
consulted their Delphian Oracle, the Prince of Orange: The Prince of Orange
advises them, not to admit him, but upon conditions.
whose opinion was, that Don John They send an arrogant message to Don John.
should not be acknowledged for their Governor, nor that their liberty,
purchased with their blood, should be sold: or at least, that they should not
admit him, before the Low Countries were disburthened of the Spanish and
foreign forces, and that he had by oath confirmed the pacification of Gant. The
Senators following the last part of his advice, sent Ischius to Don John with
such proud and peremptory instructions, that he justly fearing the young
Princes displeasure doubted whether or no he should undertake the employment.
Mar. Delr. l. 2. Turb. Belg.
Being in this anxietie of mind, The Messengers friend gives him most
unfriendly counsel.
they say, Ischius conferred about it, with a person of quality, then lying at
his house. This friend of his, pitying his condition, that must inevitably
either incur the displeasure of Don John of Austria, if he delivered his
Embassage, or of the Senate, if he omitted any thing; said, that he could yet
find out an expedient to disintangle him. Ischius demanding what it might be,
he replied, I would have you use Alexanders sword to cut this Gordian knot;
that is, when you speak alone with Don John, Don John of Austria Son to Charles
ye 5th Governor of the Low countries
portrait resolutely draw your sword, and kill that fraudulent man, who comes
to ruin the Low Countries. The dead will not bite, and the Senate will be sure
to thank you. But Ischius both in words and looks abhorring this unworthy
Counselor, Who notwithstanding treats modestly with Don John of Austria.
that with an impious ostentation revived the old advice given to Ptolomie King
of Egypt by Theodotus of Chios, waited upon Don John, and delivering, with all
the qualification he could give, the Commands of the Estates, he offended not
the Prince, Plutarch in Pompeys life.
and yet fully discharged his duty. And though, as he was much taken with Don
John, Another Messenger from the Estates desires him to sign the Pacification
of Gant and dismiss the Spaniards.
by his infinite commendations of him to the Senate, he distasted many, yet
those praises so wrought with the major part, that correcting their former with
a new Embassage, they sent John Funch to the Prince with far modester
instructions, and humbly offered to receive him, if he would sign the
pacification of Gant.

Don John took time to consider of it, for the disbanding of the Spaniards
troubled him. Don John consults about dismissing of the Spaniards.
And calling to him Iuan Escovedo, and Octavio Gonzaga, his intimate
Counselors and Confidents very much troubled, he desired their advice.
Gonzaga immediately denied, that it could be either advantageous or honorable;
Gonzaga speaks against it.
For (says he) if the Prince of Orange were this day of Counsel with you,
what else do you think he would persuade, but to send away the Spaniards, and
to establish the Government of the Low Countries in the love of the
Low-countreymen, not in the fear of a foreign and hated soldiery? Which is in
effect, that you, dismissing your Garrisons, might with more^ease lie open to
the Plots and Stratagems of turbulent persons: enjoying at present a kind of
Government during pleasure; and upon the first breath of the giddie multitude,
none at all. We are deceived if we hope this people, differing from us in
Manners and Language, many of them in Religion, all in Resentment of our
Countreymens late victory, will be governed of their own accord, without the
terror of our arms. They article with an armed Governor, what will they do
when he is disarmed? Let them know there is come a son of Charles the fifth,
less then his Father in Power, not Courage; to whom it belongs to give, not to
receive the Law. But they are resolved, except this be granted them, not to
admit a Governor: Let them be compelled. If it be disputed by the sword, can
our men and theirs have other thoughts, then such as are familiar to the
Conquerours, and the conquered? If you seek praise by this Indulgence, it is
^ver hasty, and will be of no long continuence with proud people, made impudent
by our modesty. These names of humanity and favor, will show more noble
after a victory, when they are demonstrations not of Necessity, but
Moderation. It may be objected, that some good subjects, well-wishers to the
Royal party, would have all forreiners disbanded. I would gladly know these
Low Country- Royallists; for I am told many live with us at Court, whose
hearts are in Holland with the Prince of Orange; whose consent and endeavors
to send away the Spaniards, the more they appear, the more ought such friends
to be suspected. I am sure the King your brother, when he was in the
Netherlands, promised the Low-countreymen to free them of the Spaniards; but
observing a general conspiracy to eject them, that very unanimous consent
made him pause upon it, and defer his Grant, till the Governesse, the
Duchess of Parma, won him by her entreaties. And yet the Low-countreymen
were not then minded to rebel. Now, by the example of the wisest King, you see
what is the best course for you, that have not obliged your self by any promise
to this publicly offended and armed Nation. I have said thus much, taking it
for granted, that you can at pleasure presently draw our men from their
Garrisons, and send them out of the Low Countries: What, if upon knowledge of
your agreement with the Low-countreymen, made upon condition of their
banishment, they should mutiny, to which they are too much inclined, and refuse
to deliver up the Forts and Cities? truly then you will lose both the respect
of your own soldiers, as if you preferred the Low-countreymen before them and
yet, as if you had but mocked the Low-countreymen, aggravate their hatred.
Lastly, I will never persuade you, the Brother to my King, to receive the
Government of the Provinces on poorer terms, then his Majesty's servants, Alva
and Requesenes. But Escovedo was clear of another opinion. And having sounded
the Princes inclination, began securely in this manner. I shall rather be
willing to show your Highness what I conceive, Escovedo argues for it,
then what I dare advise, because You are still accustomed, to allow the
freedom of my counsels: as I am to admire the wisdom of your Resolutions. And
I shall at present, the freelier express my self, in regard it will, I
presume, be thought a greater truth, which a Spaniard is forced to speak
against his Contrymen. But even our Country must give place unto necessity.
Nor in consultations, is Reason at all times permitted to make a free Election;
but by necessity we are often circumscribed; at which times, men that shun a
tempest must count any poor Creek a Haven. Almost all the Provinces, as well
the Clergy, as the Laity, in the Pacification of Gant, have agreed to out the
Spaniards, and sworn not to admit of any Governor over the Low Countries, till
all foreign soldiers be disbanded. Wherein their resolutions are so fixed and
immovable, that we may despair of winning the Low Countries by any Avenue, but
this; which according to Gonzaga's opinion, we should open with our swords. But
you, Gonzaga, speak what becoms an old Commander to promise, especially to an
invincible General. Nor do I doubt, but if occasion should be, you would
gallantly perform, what you have gloriously advised. But I, that perhaps more
timerously, not less circumspectly, consider our present condition, hold it
our best to try all ways before we make use of Violence and Arms. And this you
know is the Kings Pleasure, and Command. For what, I pray you, have our men all
this while effected in the Netherlands? The Duke of Alva coming in, with the
fame of so great forces, so many victories, feared for the shedding of so much
Low Country- blood, at last losing all the Seacoast, and the strongest
Provinces, left the Low Countries, which he found entire, dismembered. And yet
in all the time of Alva, and his Successor, (whose fortune was little better)
most part both of the Netherlands and the Belgic Nobility, bore Arms for the
King. Now you see how the Low-countrey-men have deserted us. Of all the
Provinces only two continue loyal; the rest, if force be offered, are now
bound by Oath to defend themselves by Arms. Which is the very thing the Prince
of Orange wishes. This pretension for a war he cunningly contrives; and this
alone, if he were present at our Consultation, he would endeavor to persuade,
not the dismissing of the Spaniards. For your Highness may be confident, that
he therefore persuaded the Low Countries to this course, because he feared
nothing more then your Admission; inserting that clause in the Pacification of
Gant, which he hoped you never would allow; and so, excluded from the
Government, be presently necessitated to a War, which that ambitious man
might at his pleasure manage. But this cunning Artist must be fooled, and
contrary to his exspectancy, by approving the Pacification of Gant, your
Highness will be invested in the Government of the Low Countries. Whereto
being once admitted, Seneca l. 9. de Clementia.
you by your clemency and gentleness may bring that about, which others never
could, with their austere and armed mandats. Every one knows the Counsel Livia
gave to Augustus Caesar, Dio. in Aug. Caesar.
that he should imitate Physicians, who if their usual receipts fail, use to
prescribe contraries: and by the same Rule, when Severity could not do his
business, he should try what might be done by clemency. Caesar followed his
wifes advice; and thenceforth all conspiracies ceasing, the Senate and People
of Rome were loyal and obedient to him. And truly, if any man may go this way
with hope of happier success, it is your Highness only. To pass by your
being a German born, son to a Low Country Prince, for which they must needs
love you more then any of their Spanish Governors: The fame of your actions,
your deportment, (which how it has wrought in men's minds you by experience
know) your Aspect lovely even in your enemies eyes, will no doubt gain you the
Affection, Duty, and Obedience of this people. The nature of the
Low-countreymen is easiest cured with lenitives: if violence be offered they
will struggle; they are to be lead, not driven. Besides the greatest persons
will hasten the tender of their services to you, that the former crimes of
Rebellion may be imputed not to their contumacy, but another pride. One Act
there is that may extinguish all their Love, the retaining of foreign
soldiers. The Low-countreymen have still before their eyes the figure of
Antwerp burning, the slaughter of the Citizens, and rifling of their Goods.
Their implacable hatred to the Spaniards, if you keep them here, will likewise
reach your self. For they that hate your army cannot love your Person. Nor can
you be ever safe among those subjects, that cannot think themselves secure
among your soldiers. For security is established by a mutual safeguard. And
therefore if the Low-countreymen desire the cause of their late Quarrels may be
removed out of their sight, grant their Request; and what they perhaps may
force you to by arms, make it your favor to them. By which favor you will
both immortally oblige the Low-countreymen to You, and likewise indear your
self to the King your Brother, weary of the cares and charges of the war, by
pacifying the Low Countries without arms. Nor is it greatly to be feared, that
the Spaniards should refuse to go upon your Command, now the King approves the
discharge of forreiners: for the Obedience which they formerly showed to the
Duchess of Parma, questionless they will not now deny to you, and to the
King himself. But when the Spaniards shall be dismissed, if there be danger,
the Low-countreymen solicited by the Prince of Orange, may soon forget this Act
of Grace; shall we therefore conclude, that we must necessarily be circumvented
by their fraud, and oppressed by their arms? Are not the Loyal Provinces able
to sustain the first charge of an insurrection, till Forces can be sent for,
out of Burgundy had at hand, and out of Germany not far off? And then, we
have so much more reason to look for good success, by how much we shall be
assisted with a more powerful army sent from the King, in defense of his own
commands; and we may with more justice punish the perfidious Rebels. Wherefore
in a word, I deny not, but the foreign soldiers whether retained or dismissed
may somewhat endanger us: If the Spanish be retained.
but when I see on the one side a certain war, and the Kings certain
displeasure, no help; and on the other, that you are offered the possession of
the Government, If they be dismissed.
hope of quieting the Low Countries, the Kings favor and assistance, and
consequently, if a war should break forth, that which would much conduce to
victory; I think in point of discretion this ought to be preferred before the
contrary. Don John follows this opinion.
Don John, though he was very unwilling to forgo his Spanish forces, a greater
secret then I have yet discovered won him to consent. For if he, His Reaons.
by keeping them, should have interrupted the peace of the Low Countries, which
his Majesty had particularly recommended to him; he might well suspect, Fear
of the King.
it would be whispered in the Kings ear (open to such kind of jealousies) that
by laying the plot for a war, he was ambitious of new power and greater
fortunes. Besides he longed exceedingly for the voyage into England, Desire of
a voyage for England.
which, if he were engaged in the Low Country war, Hope of quieting the
Low Countries.
he knew would slip out of his hands. Withal, he took it for granted, that the
Low-countreymens hearts, alienated by the Wars and Taxes of former
Governors, might by contrary arts be reconciled. Therefore, according to man's
nature, thinking himself and his winning carriage would be more prevalent, then
any stratagem of the Enemy, and coveting what others could not get in the
Low Countries, the title of Peacemaker: he resolved to allow the assembly at
Gant, He resolves to confirm the Pacification of Gant.
and to sign their conditions, Especially, because he conceived that he should
sufficiently provide for Religion, and the Crown, forasmuch as the league
concluded in these words, We the Delegates of the Estates whose names are
underwritten, 1577.
and by whose authority the Estates are now assembled, In the beginning of
January.
have and do promise for ever to maintain the League; for the conservation of
our most sacred faith, and the Roman Catholic Religion; for the perfecting of
the pacification of Gant; For the expulsion of the Spaniards, and their
Adherents; due Obedience to the Kings Majesty being still and for ever
rendered. Notwithstanding he asked the opinions of the profoundest scholars,
Moved thereunto by this subscription of the Deputies. He gives the Heads of the
Pacification to be considered of.
whether by those heads (which he gave them accurately to examine) the orthodox
faith, or the Kings honor might receive any prejudice. And when they resolved
him no danger could accrue to either, in case this clause were added, That
nothing in those Articles, or any part thereof, was established, or decreed,
contrary to the Catholic Religion, and the Kings Authority. Don John,
confirmed by their judgments, sent their advice, and the Bishops letters to
the same effect, unto his Majesty. The King allows of it.
Who consenting, and likewise the Emperor Rodolph, Bishop of Liege, and Duke
of Cleveland by their Ambassadors swearing to it; a new Pacification, A new
Pacification made in pursuance of the old.
called the perpetual league was made at Marcha, a City in the Province of
Luxemburg. Wherein, by Don John's Agents, the dismission of the Spaniards, and
the whole pacification of Gant was confirmed: and by the Deputies of the
Estates, Feb. 17.
a caution for constancy to Religion and the Kings obedience, Whereto both
parts subscribe.
which they had formerly sworn for ever to continue, was again expressly
inserted. And now Don John, after he had caused the pacification to be
proclaimed, Proclaimed.
first at Bruxels, then at Antwerp, and in other Cities, set forth from
Luxemburg, being met upon the way by the Low Country Lords, Don John
acknowledged Governor of the Low Countries.
with an infinite number of the Gentry: and at Lovain in the beginning of
March he was saluted, with a general joy, Governor of the Low Countries.
There he thought fit to make some stay, that he might from thence quicken the
dull motion of the Spaniards departure. For they held it a grievous injury, He
presses the Spaniards to be gone.
to be upon a sudden, at the pleasure of the Low-countreymen, dispossessed of
so many Forts and Garrison towns, as they had in so long a time purchased with
their blood. Who are unwilling to obey.
Moreover many of them having lived diverse years in the Low Countries, being
possessed of land, and having married wives of that Nation, by whom they had
children, were brought then by degrees to love the place like Natives. Nor wa^
ted they some Mutineirs, Their Complaints.
that cried out, Was that cashiering a just reward for their labors, and so
much blood as they had spent in Service? must their gaping Soars, their loss
of Limbs, and their cracked Sinews, in stead of Rest and Accommodation, be
recompensed with their Countreymens ungrateful oblivion or neglect, however
with the public hate and execration of the Dutch? Mar. Delv. l. 2. Turb. Belg.
what would the French the Italians and other Nations say, but that the Spanish
Soldiers could be suffered to live no where? Sixteen years ago, the
Governesse, Margaret of Austria, had turned them out of the Low Countries, and
now this Governor, Don John of Austria, had again expelled them; with so much
the greater dishonor, by how much there was then a fairer pretense for the
Kings sending them into Africa, to recrueit his Army. But now plainly, by
public Edict, they (who alone in the Low Countries had maintained the Kings
Right) were now, forsooth, declared Enemies to the King and the Low Countries,
and by a common confederation of the Provinces, expelled; as if Peace and a
Spaniard could not inhabit there together. Thus they discoursed, though
discontentedly, not threatningly, yet fury, as the custom is, by meeting
others, and communicating their Grievances, They begin to mutiny.
increased: the nearer the day of their departure came (grief making them still
more sensible of their condition) the more obstinate they showed themselves;
especially at Antwerp, where their number and late victory had so elevated
them, as there was little hope they would easily deliver up the Fort. But the
care of the vigilant Commanders, and Reverence to the Royal blood, among the
loyal Regiments trained in the old Discipline, prevailed so much, that by
degrees the love of Obedience returned, and Iuan Escovedo, a very prudent man,
sent post to Antwerp by Don John, Escovedo labors to pacify them.
appeased the Mutiniers with an apposite Oration. For after he had read the
Kings letters, wherein the Spaniards were commanded to depart the
Low Countries, beginning with a Commemoration (but without upbraiding) of their
Tumults and insurrections, With a speech that comes home to the men.
he told them, That if they had of late years done any thing so licentiously,
as to offend the King, they might by their present obedience, not only cancel
the memory thereof, but also highly merit at the Kings hand, from which they
could not but exspect far more and firmer fortunes, then they should forgo in
the Low Countries. Could gallant men find no other place but that to exercise
their valor in? Kings, that have large Dominions, never want causes of war,
nor rewards for soldiers. But it was more then needed, to trouble themselves
about other men's opinions touching their departure: it being evident by whom
and with what artifice this was brought about. For such as feared them, could
not endure their company; and no marvel if their inferiors, that more then
once found themselves overmatched, now feared them. Their neighbors saw and
strangers heard, how often the Spaniard had cowed the rebellious Enemy. They
knew the number of Forts, Towns, and victories won by the Army: and that for
ten years together in all Land-battels (for at Sea there was a variation of
Fortune) the Spaniards at all times, excepting that one overthrow of Count
Aremberg, remained Conquerours. They likewise knew, that in the killing of such
multitudes, no less then thirty thousand, as the Low-countreymen themselves
confess, so few Spaniards have been lost, that upon computation Ten Spaniards
were able to rout a Thousand. Truly a miserable slaughter, and to be buried in
silence, if it had not been executed for Religion and the King, upon Rebels
unto both. But with this very name of Rebel, if, by a bloody Edict of the
Estates, the late Spanish Mutineirs were branded; Don John has abundantly
provided against that Edict, by framing a new one of his own, and making void
the old: thereby favoring their Merits, and obliging their Obedience: so as
they may with greater honor obey his Commands: and their valor shown upon the
enemy will not appear more glorious then their Loyalty to their Sovereign; and
not only by taking Forts and Cities with their Arms, but likewise by laying
them down at his Majesty's Command, with equal praise in both, they will be
said to have asserted the Low Countries to the King. This last part of his
Speech moved the Soldiers wavering minds (for rather the spirit of sedition
then of anger vanished) and He reading an honorable Edict, They are quieted
on their behalf, posted up in many placed, They delivered into the hands of
the Estates the Forts of Antwerp, Surrendering the Forts And prisoners they had
taken.
and of the other Cities, and retired to Maestricht. Prisoners on either side
being set free. The Spaniards releasing Count Egmont, Goignius, Caprias, and
six others taken in the storming of Antwerp. The Estates on their part five,
first the Lord Bills Governor of Friezland, Gaspar Robley afterward created
Count of Renneberg.
in the Tumults of those Provinces outed from his Government by his own
soldiers, and by George Latin Lord of Ville imprisoned at Leovard. Then
Mondragonio's wife, that when the Castle of Gant was besieged, Mar. Delr. l. 1.
Turb. Belg.
whilst she manfully discharged the place of her absent husband, was taken
prisoner, and by the Estates Commanders carried as it were in triumph. With
part of their Pay in hand
After the mutual release of prisoners, some part of their money was begun to
be tendered to the Spaniards, the Estates having agreed with them for 600000
Florens, whereof they were to have 300000 in hand, The same Author l. 2. and
Christ. Assonvil in his Relation.
and as much more by bills of exchange at Genoa. But after 100000 was paid
down, the Deputies of the Estates not producing any more; Don John, out of his
own moneys, lent the Estates (never to be repaid) 200000 Florens, lest he might
be thought to favor their stay. They leave the Low Countries.
So toward the end of April the Spaniards, Italians, and Burgundians left the
Netherlands under the command of Peter Ernest Count Mansfeldt, Under the
command of Count Mansfeldt.
chosen on purpose to take away the emulation between Alphonso Vargas, Sancho
Avila, Iuliano Romero, and Francisco Valdez, which might with more honor obey
a General of another Nation, then serve under one another. The Low-countreymen
appeared not more joyful to see the Armies departure, Their sense of this
usage.
then the Spaniards were discontented and angry at the beholders: and the
greater their number was (for besides soldiers and such as belonged to the
carriages, the ways were crowded with horses and wagons loaded with women and
children, the whole number amounting to thirty thousand head of men, and
cattle) the more it troubled them to be looked upon, Their Prediction.
passing through Cities like a Show. Albeit some among them, penetrating
further into the Low-countreymens designs, foresaw, that the war, now raked up
in embers, would shortly break forth again into a flame, and then the Spaniards
would be called to extinguish it. In the mean time, they left the
Low Countries, Al. Cabrer. in Philip. 2. l. 11. c. 15. Mar. Del^. l. 2. Turb. B.
without so much as obtaining the honor, in their passage, to take their leave
of Don John; which exceedingly grieved them, as if by that severitie their
actions were condemned. And marching through Lorain, Burgundy, and Savoy, they
descended into Italy. Their March into Italy.
Where coming into the Province of Millain the Governor the Marquess of
Ayamont quartered them, They are quartered in the mountanous parts of Liguria
Delr. in the same Book.
as he pretended by the Kings Command, along the mountains of Liguria, which
they call Langascho, there (the heat of Summer breeding diseases) for want of
necessaries, and with very grief to think the King should so forget their
services, a great sort of the oldest soldiers dyed.

But Don John, Don John's entrance into Bruxels.
whilst the Spaniards marched away, riding in the middle between the Popes
Legate, and the Bishop of Liege, attended by the three estates in all their
glory, In great pomp, but the most glorious sight was himself.
entered Bruxels. He himself added to the pomp, by the loveliness of his
presence and youth, being not yet thirty two years of age, as likewise by the
fame of his Land-and-Sea-victories; in a word, by the memory of his Father
Charles the fifth, May 1.
honored by the Dutch, His winning ways.
as their beloved Countreyman. No sooner had he solemnly taken his oath, and
was acknowledged Governor, but he yet more indeared himself to that people, by
his admired Clemency, Affability, Graciousnesse, and Bounty, beyond example
extended even unto his Enemies. Insomuch as the Subjects enamoured of the
sweetness of his deportment (above what they could imagine, or had ever heard
related) praised him to the skies; especially because they saw themselves, The
Peoples joy.
at last, freed by his favor from the burden of foreign soldiers: And love
to him.
and with a general gratulation joyed their Country of its ancient happiness
returned with Don John of Austria. The judgment of some that disliked his
Concessions.
Yet many thought it not so prudent an action, for Don John to trust his
person, disarmed, into the hands of the armed Estates, with so much confidence
in himself; being after the dismissing of the Spaniards in a weak and unsafe
condition, if so be the Prince of Orange should invade him that had reserved no
one Fort or Garrison-town in his power, either for refuge, or resistance. And
it was not long before it appeared, how he was overreached in this concession,
and how much wiser King Philip had been, when he suspected the Low Country men
unanimously petitioning for the removal of the Spaniards. For, the Prince of
Orange, The Prince of Orange vexed at Don John's admission.
who had assured himself Don John would never send away the Spanish, May 24.
and consequently never be admitted Governor over the Low Countries; when he
heard the Spaniards were departed, and Don John with a great and general joy
inaugurated at Bruxels; whither Ambassadors daily came to him from
neighbour-Princes, (the Queen of England her self sending Edward Horsey
Governor of the Isle of Wight) and that he likewise saw the Prince and Senate
by their Commissioners required him, with the Provinces Holland, and Zeland,
which only were not included in the League, to subscribe the perpetual Edict:
the man, that would upon no conditions part with the Dominion he had now got
into his hands, Refuses together with the Provinces under his government, to
subscribe the Edict.
answered: That the Provinces with him confederated, were in conscience barred
from consenting with the rest to the maintenance of the Romish faith: and being
pressed by Duke Areschot (for he was sent to the Prince of Orange) to ratify
the common League, he said, he could not do it, for which his reason was, the
Faith of Calvine: presently putting off his hat and laughing; he said to the
Duke, Do you see this bald crown, let me tell you, there is not more Calvisme
on my head, then there is Calvinism in my heart. Then applying himself wholly
to his business, he sent Letters and Messengers to the Senators, the Delegates
of the Estates, and all his friends, pitying, and withal reviling them.
Endeavors to turn the Low-countreymens hearts from Don John of Austria.
What did they intend? whither were their courages and judgments fled; that
they had admitted Don John, not only not enlarging, but not so much as
swearing to preserve, their privilege? Were they so much taken with empty
forms of Courtship, as not to observe the Bird-call, that by sweetness of
sound brings the free creatures of the air into the net? They had now
sufficient experience that new Men came out of Spain, not new Manners, for in
that Shop they were all cast in the same would. But above all the rest, they
should beware of this Gentleman, puffed up with his Imperial blood, and fortune
in the wars, which if he now dissembled, stooping to the civility of a private
person, the more it goes against the hair with a haughty and tyrannical
nature, the sooner would his hypocrisy be laid by, and their slavery
inhaunsed. No proud man carried ever himself like a servant to any, over whom
he did not hope to be a master. Why has he got a Guard, if he be so popular as
wholly to confide in the affection of the Subject? Can any one doubt whither
all these excessive bounties and promises tend, wherewith that princely
Merchant loads men of merit, and no merit? Yet some there are, who,
notwithstanding they see this general Munificence traffic for the liberty of
the Low Countries, think, that fre-men sell themselves into bondage at a
considerable rate. Wherefore let them look into the man, and they will find it
impossible, that he should love the Low Countries, who betrayed to King Philip,
the Patron of the Low Country Lords, Charles, Prince of Spain. The Prince of
Orange not thus contented, A Rumor spread by the Prince of Oranges party.
by those he employed abroad, particularly by Teronius Vascho, lately come over
to his party, made it be privately rumoured, That the Spaniards and foreign
soldiers, whose departure had been so longed for by the Low-countreymen, (let
them not deceive themselves) lay part concealed in the Province of Luxemburg;
part stayed in Burgundy, part fought against the Hugonots in France, and from
these places exspected Don John's Orders for their immediate return. And it was
held more credible, because of Don John's and Escovedo's Letters, intercepted
in France, and about that time published at Bruxels, 1573.
which they said contained complaints to the King against the Estates, Reasons
for the necessity of a war, Don John's letters intercepted.
and an humble suit for money to that end. All which aggravated by a large
printed Comment of the Prince of Orange, took away of much of Don John's
Authority and estimation, The Low-countreymens love to him decreaseth.
that whether his Bounty ebbed or flowed, when their minds were once possessed
with jealousy, they interpreted all in the worst sense. Those very men, to
whom he had shown extraordinary favor, advancing them to honors and great
pensions, on a sudden alienated from him, not only shunned his sight, Their
suspicion and aversion increases.
as if all his graces had been poured into colanders, hearts with holes in
them; but openly railed at, aspersed, and now endeavored to prove themselves
disobliged to him, by their hatred of him. Forgetfulness of benefits received
converts to Hatred.
Thus are unsound mind like unsound bodies, the more you feed the more you
poison them. Nor did the Heretics leave their knavery thus, but represented
his words and actions, Especially Hese.
as things of mere design. The Heretics blow the fire.
Nay, to some that wondered at his unexampled condescentions, they told it as a
secret, That the Low-countrey-men had no great reason to trust the Oath so
willingly taken by his Highness, for confirmation of the perpetual Edict. Out
of the relation of Christ. Assonvil.
Because he had sworn, See Guicciard. l. 2. of his Hist.
before he came out of Spain, not to consent unto any thing in the
Low Countries prejudicial to the King. By which Oath he had preing aged
himself, and as his Religion taught him, the later being contrary to the former
would not oblige him, as being of no validity. A Doctrine long since preached
in many Courts, and now practiced by Princes. So the Florentines were deceived
by Charles the viii. of France; The Prince of Orange designs the taking of Don
John prisoner.
who having sworn to deliver Pisa to them, when they claimed his promise,
answered, that he had first sworn the contrary to the Pisons. When the Prince
of Orange found this to work according to his wishes, His Instruments S.
Aldegund. And Hese.
thinking Don John, that had parted with his Spaniards, and lost the hearts of
the Low-countreymen, might easily be oppressed, he left it to be acted by
Philip Mornixius de Saint Aldegund, whom he sent to Bruxels for that purpose;
and by William Horn Lord of Hese: both undertaking, either by force or
stratagem, to seiz upon his Highness, and carry him into Z^land. Which
attempt, though it was consonant to the rest of Aldegunds life, a man
ignominiously wicked, who when he was a boy, was Calvin's auditour; and now he
himself being an old man preached to others: nor less agreeable to the manners
of the Lord of Hese, especially since the removal of Don John from Bruxels,
would be much to his advantage, that was for be Governor of the Town; and who
being afterward condemned to lose his head, it was thought practiced the like
against Alexander Farneze Duke of Parma. Whether they attempted his murder it
is uncertain.
Yet whether they really plotted it, as Don John understood from many credible
authors, or rather, by the Prince of Oranges direction, were contented with
the fear resulting from the report of such a plot, I dare not positively
affirm. For to breed enmity between Don John and the Low Country Lords (which
was the Prince of Oranges end) the means would be all one, whether they
intended, or only gave out that he should be taken prisoner: the former being
an odious thing, and fit to be revenged by his Majesty: the later, a subject
for jealousy, not easy to be discovered, and which perhaps might be though^
pretended by Don John, seeking color for a war. And truly this artifice
succeeded, as the Prince of Orange could have wished.

For Don John when he found his authority every day lessening, Of Don John's
flight.
the general Odium increasing, and his life sought (as he was made believe) by
strange contrivances, resolved to stay no longer in Bruxels, but, considering
of some place where he might defend himself, He goes to Mechlin, as if it were
only to compose the difference with the Germans.
or offend the enemy, pitched upon the Castle of Namure, strong both in
fortification and situation, and very convenient for receiving foreign forces.
Therefore upon discovery of new plots against his life, he hastened to Mechlin,
under pretense of ending the controversy between the Treasurers and the German
Soldiers, June 5.
about their pay. Margarite Queen of Navarre.
Yet not thinking himself in safety there, he took an occasion of waiting upon
the King of France his Sister in her journey to the Spaw (if she came for
nothing else, but to drink the waters) and with a great train of Gentlemen met
her at Namure. From thence to Namure under another pretense.
Where after he had treated her like a Princess, and brought her on the way:
the next morning, as if he were going to hunt, he rode upon design to the
Castle of Namure, and highly commending the place, which he had never seen
before, being invited in by the Sons to Count Barlamont, Aegidius L. of
Hierg. Lancellot. C. Megen, Florus Floio, and Clodius Haultepenne.
Governor of the Province, with the Governor of the Castle his good liking,
entered with his retinue, and presently seizing upon the arms, changed the
Garrison, bidding the Governor fear nothing, because (he said) it was no
violent invasion of another man's propriety, but only a just recovery of the
Kings Right. Then turning to the Company, Possesser himself of the Castle.
Gives reasons for it to his attendants.
he called that Day the first of his Government: for till then he had enjoyed
nothing thereof, but an airy Title. Acquainting them likewise with the reasons
of that action, he complained of the many affronts offered to him: and showed
them two letters of intelligence, that advised him of dangerous conspiracies;
protesting, he retired to that Castle for his own security, not with intent to
alter any thing in the State, already settled. Writes to the Deputies of the
Estates.
Then writing to the Deputies of the Estates, and sending them (with those
letters that discovered the plot) Maximilian Rassinghem the constant messenger
between both parties, he explained the cause of his departure, to wit, that his
future Government might be more safe for, and worthy of him. The several
senses of the Deputies.
The Deputies of the Estates and the Senators variously interpreted the
action. Many grieved, that it cut off all hope of accommodation. A great sort
rejoiced, that hereby Don John himself sounded the Alarm to a war, in forcing
them to take arms against a naked General; and therefore commended the plot
timously and well laid by the Prince of Orange, to whom they ascribed the
insinuation that counseled him to this flight. Yet all, for fear the King
might charge them with the revivall of the war, Their letters to Don John
July and August.
presently dispatched away letters and messengers to Don John, beseeching him
to satisfy his trivial fears and jealousies; and, if he pleased to return to
Bruxels, Matt. Del. l. 3. Turb. Belg.
promising exactly to examine the conspiracy (if such there was) against him.
Aloys. Cabre^^ in Philip. 2.
l. 11. c. 13. andc. 16.
Don John denied to go back, till the Lord Hese, that had set afoot many
practices against him impiously and ingratefully (for Don John had given him an
annual pension of 6000 Florens) together with the people of Bruxels, should
lay down arms; His answer.
till Aldegund, and Teron (sent by the Prince of Orange to surprise him) were
driven out of Bruxels; till the Deputies of the Estates, that seemed to hold a
correspondence with the Prince of Orange, had renounced his friendship, and
compelled him (all juggling set apart) according to the public agreement, from
which he unjustly dissented, to subscribe the Pacification of Gant, and the
perpetual Edict. Which he writes to the Provinces.
Writing this to the Provinces, and naming not only diverse, which he said had
conspired against him: but likewise some persons of quality and honor, among
whom was Duke Areschot, who had given him much intelligence of that kind; he
made it appear, that his jealousy was not trivial, nor feigned: and also
sufficiently, nor falsely, laid open the Prince of Oranges subtlety, who
merely by those discords endeavored to oppress the Catholic Religion, and
the Kings Authority. But in the mean time upon discovery of Don John's design
to seiz the Castle of Antwerp, The Fort at Antwerp attempted by Don John.
lest, as he heard, it might be delivered to the Prince of Oranges Emissaries,
or to the Estates; Lodwick Blosius Lord of Treslong, Lieutenant-Governour of
the fort, being taken prisoner, and the soldiers that favored Don John, not
without the slaughter of some of them, beaten out; the Castle came into the
hands of the Estates. Is possessed by the Estates. The Estates accuse Don John,
as if his fears were seigned.
Whereby both parties being exasperated, and many threatening Papers on each
side published, whilst the Estates call God and Men to witness their desire of
Peace, Don John shows the plots against him to be real.
and that it was Don John who pretending fear at conspiracies sought to raise a
war: Don John on the contrary attesting, that he had domonstrated his
affection to Peace by sending away the Spaniards, disbanding all his other
forces, and leaving himself no means, men, or munition for a war. Both
parties, in case a war should follow, strove to clear themselves of being the
Causes: and, to avoid the Odium, omitted not to show at least a pretended care
of an accommodation. Wherein they were industriously assisted by Vernerus
Gimnich, Levinus, a very learned man, afterward Bishop of Antwerp.
and Levinus Torrentius Embassedours from the Duke of Iuliers, and the Bishop
of Liege. But Don John took the most pains to bring about a Treaty, in regard
he was unprovided of soldiers, and uncertain of his Majesty's resolution. He
therefore spun out the time in delays, till Escovedo, whom he had sent into
Spain, should bring him an answer of his letters. The Pope sends a Nuncio to
Don John Bishop of Ripa transono afterward Cardinal. S. B. E. To what end.
A little while before, Philip Sega came Nuncio into the Low Countries, sent
thither from his Government of Pisa by Gregory the thirteenth. For, his
Holiness hearing the Provinces stood upon conditions with Don John which he
must swear to, before they would acknowledge him for their Governor,
dispatched a Nuncio whose prudence he relied upon to be with the Prince in
time, lest he should by a law pass any thing prejudicial to Religion. And
likewise that, when he saw a peace concluded, he might animate Don John,
according to agreement betwixt his Holiness and the King, to the Voyage for
England. But the Nuncio, finding Don John had already signed the conditions of
the perpetual Edict, and was notwithstanding engaged in Domestic troubles,
likely after a little time to break forth into a war, so as there could be no
exspectance of a foreign expedition, did all that remained for him to do;
confirmed the young Prince not only with his best advice, but, He furnishes
Don John with Council and Money.
which more advantaged him, with fifty thousand crowns, a sum designed by
Pope Gregory for the war with England, but which by His Command was to be
forthwith presented to his Highness: a supply the more welcome, because so
seasonable to him then destitute both of Men and Money. Then, goes to the
Deputies of the Estates.
Nor did the Nuncio fail to visit the Deputies of the Estates, and the
Senators; but passed from Namure to Bruxels, where delivering, as she had in
Command, his Holinesses letters, and fatherly exhortations to the resuming of
their former Concord and Obedience; which letters were received with more
magnificence, then duty, many of their minds being long since possessed with
the spirit of heresy, a refractorie and sullen disease, that may with less
difficulty be kept out, then shook off. In the mean time Don John, by letters
from the King being enjoined, if an accommodation could no way be made,
strenuously to maintain the Catholic Religion, and the Royal Authority, with
assurance that he should not want an army, In the beginning of Sept. The
Prince of Orange created Ruart.
had notice, that the Prince of Orange was sent for to Bruxels by the Estates,
and created Protector of Brabant, by the old name of Ruart of the Province; an
Office very like that of Dictator among the Romans, or Manbure among the
Leigeois. This Officer, the Brabanters said they were authorized to elect, What
this office is, and who they were that executed it. Mart. Delr. l. 4. Turb.
Belg. Phil. And.
by the privileges of the Joyful Entry, though as far as I observe in their
Annals, besides Anthony son to Philip Duke of Burgundy (when Joan the widow
of Duke Wenceslaus governed Brabant) chosen Ruart by the three Estates of that
Province, and besides Philip Count de Saint Paul (whilst Duke John and his wife
Iaquenette were at difference) whom the Brabanters rebelling against the Duke
created Ruart; 1404.
that people never made use of such a Magistrate. John iv. Duke of Brabant.
And because both those Ruarts came at last to the power and authority of
Dukes, 1420.
the Prince of Orange might by their example hope, that one day, the titles of
temporary modesty laid aside, the House of Nassau might be Dukes of Brabant,
and he the first. For this presumption Don John failed not bitterly and
speedily to reprove the City, and the Estates, by his Ambassador Gaspur
Schetz, Grobendonch the Kings Treasurer.
Lord of Grobendonch. Likewise, a while after receiving other Letters post from
the King, by the hand of Philip Sega (sent at that time Nuncio out of the
Low Countries into Spain, October. 4.
in the place of Ormanetto) wherein the King commanded the Deputies of the
Estates to lay down Arms, What the King requires of the Estates.
not to admit the Prince of Orange, and to obey the perpetual Edict: Don John
sending them a copy of the Letter, What Don John adds.
seriously wished them maturely to advise upon it, whilst they had time; and
not to provoke their Prince his just displeasure, to the ruin of their
Country, and themselves. But, They obey not.
when instead of Answer, they would return nothing (being wholly governed by
the Prince of Orange) but complaints and threatenings; And he not unwillingly,
has recourse to arms chiefly for these reasons.
Don John applied himself to thoughts of violence and War, as some conceived,
not unwillingly. For having lost all hope of quieting these Provinces by
indulgence, and liberality, (an Honor forfeited by the former Governors of
the Low Countries, which he labored to recover) when he found that his
clemency prevailed not, but the Magistrates authority waxed, his waned, and was
rather a kind of entreaty, then command: his life exposed to the daily injuries
and plots of wicked men; He not able to suffer their affronts, having been
accustomed to command great Armies; and finding his hands tied both at home and
abroad, weary of such a life, was glad to lay hold of that occasion, and rather
chose an open War, then a miserable and unsafe Peace.

Indeed it was an Argument of a mind highly offended and incensed, The state of
affairs on both parts.
that a Man of such experience in the Wars, would enter into hostility, at a
time, when he was in strength so much inferior: Only two Provinces declare
for Don John.
For of all the seventeen Provinces, only two, Luxemburg and Namure, continued
faithful to him. The Nobility, Clergy, and Magistrates, a few excepted, were
all confederated with the Estates. The Nobility and Clergy for the Estates.
Not that they renounced their Religion, or Loyalty, Their reasons.
(though there was then a world of such Apostates) but some to ingratiate
themselves with the People, (greedy of Liberty, and still maligning their
Governors) part bought with promises by the Prince of Orange, and being
kinsmen to him: many thinking Don John quite disarmed, and running away,
followed the party of the Estates, as safer. A great sort held their cause to
be likewise honester, conceiving all Don John of Austra's jealousies and fears,
to be only pretenses for the justice of a War. Therefore, by Letters to the
King, they accused him for endeavoring to engage the Low Countries, upon vain
suspicions. It seems, we must not believe Treason to be plotted against any
Prince, that is not slain. Don John's forces.
Nor could he then raise an Army able to contest with theirs: For on the one
side, those few Germans he had retained in the Low Countries; some Companies of
Spanish now called out of France, where they fought for the Crown; and diverse
Wallons and Burgundians, hardly amounting to the number of four thousand. The
Estates Army.
When on the other side, they had at that present no less then fifteen
thousand, which (as it was proposed in their Council of War, and to which end
they marched from Gemblours) if they had presently advanced to Namure, no doubt
they had beat Don John, These were more in number and had carried it.
weaker in Men and Munition, out of the Town and Fort. If they had been
unanimous. The Prince of Orange gover^s all.
But as in consultation where many heads are laid together, whilst they in the
field disputed away their time, they gave Don John opportunity to strengthen
himself with new succors: For the Ruart, the Prince of Orange, after that
Dignity was conferred upon him, would do nothing before Brabant was settled,
that their neighbors might be secure in Holland. He therefore instituted at
Bruxels, and in the Towns adjacent, Magistrates according to the Hollanders new
model. In the end of August.
By his advice the Fort at Antwerp was dismantled, as to that part which
commanded the Town, The Fort at Antwerp demolished by his advice.
with so great a rejoicing of the People, and such a crowd of voluntary
Laborers, that women of the best quality could not be kept within doors, but
they would come in the night to see the men at work; M. Delr. lib. 4. Turb.
Belg. with great rejoicing of the people.
till for abominable things committed in their drinking and dancing, the
night-work was prohibited by Edict. But their Joy was never at the height,
till they came to the triumphall Brasse-statue of the Duke of Alva, laid out of
the way in a private corner of the Fort. Especially when they saw the Duke of
Alva's statue.
They tumbled it into the Court, hackt it with their swords, hewed it asunder
with axes; and, as if they had at every blow drawn blood, and put the brass to
pain, pleased themselves with an imaginary Execution. Some carried home
fragments of the broken Basis, and hung them up in their Halls, as if they were
the enemies spoils, and would signify to Posterity a kind of revenge taken
upon the Duke. The metal, Which was melted, and cast again into Cannon.
as before it was melted out of Cannon into Alva's statue; so afterward the
Statue was again cast into Cannon, and restored to its own nature. Only one
thing displeased many, as if Alva, being wholly composed of terror, and
therefore sufficiently formidable to that very day, were now turned into these
great Gunns, that he might though absent, for ever terrify the Low Countries.
Other Forts dismantled.
The City of Gant, with no less alacrity, forthwith followed the example of
Antwerp; so did Utrecht, Lisle, Valenciens, and other Towns, which slighting
their Forts, as if they had shaken off the yoke of servitude, The Lords
offended at the Prince of Oranges power.
kept the Festival of their new recovered Liberty. These actions, because
they tended to a Rebellion of the People, and (which more troubled some) to the
too high advancement of the Prince of Orange his power, diverse of the Lords yet
loyal to the King, especially Duke Areschott* by reason of the old differences
between him and the Prince of Orange, spoke of choosing a new Governor of the
Low Countries, Mention the choice of a new Governor.
pretending it would strengthen the Estates by accession of greater forces; but
meaning, when the Ruart was out of Commission, whom the Nobility with much
unwillingness obeyed, to balance the Authority of their new Prince. And when
some named the Queen of England, Three proposed.
some Francis Hercules Duke of Alen^on, Brother to the King of France; others
Matthias, Archduke of Austria, the Emperor Rodolph's brother; the Catholics
excepted against Her, as an heretic, and one that would govern them by a
Lieutenant. The Duke of Alen^on, by reason of the constant enmity between the
Low Country men and the French, The Archduke Matthias preferrd.
was not by many so much desired, as the Archduke, who being of the House of
Austria, would not so much offend King Philip: unless some pitched upon the
Archduke, only to engage the House of Austria in a War among themselves:
Ambassadors to this purpose being sent to Vienna, And brought from Germany
into the Low Countries.
easily persuaded the young Archduke to what he longed for; and stealing him
away by night, with a few in his train, brought him sooner then could be
imagined into Brabant, without the privity of the Emperor Rodolph; October. 3.
who, as soon as he knew it, sent post after him to stop his flight; and
afterward wrote Letters to dissuade him, Whereat the Emperor Rodolph is
displeased.
but in vain, from his design. I have likewise heard, from good hands, that
the Emperor was very angry with his brother Maximilian, And chides his brother
Maximilian who knew of the design.
because he had not in time acquainted him of this Plot, imparted unto him by
the Archduke; though Maximilian excused himself; because his Brother made him
take an Oath, that he should not reveal the Secret that night discovered to
him, unto any man living, till the next day at evening. Many think the Emperor
dissembles.
But for all this, the Emperor escaped not the censure of some, that made a
far other construction of the Arch-duke's flight. Truly, at that very time,
many men suspected the sending of this youth to govern the Netherlands, to be
designed, that by occasion of this patronage, the Low Countries might come at
last to be the Patrimony of the Germane House of Austria; a point which
Bartholameo Comes Portia, Gregory the xiii. his Legate.
the Popes Legate to the Emperor, grounding his discourse upon this suspicion,
argued with some Germane Lords. Don John of Austria's Levters upon that subject.
And Don John himself seemed to doubt the Emperors intention. For writing to
Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, among other passages, he says, Yesterday
one brought me Letters from the Emperor, wherein he tells me of his brothers
departure, October. 25.
as he suspects, for the Low Countries, without either his Privitie or
Allowance. Indeed it is a thing that troubles me not a little. For though I am
not ignorant, that it was last year attempted by the Estates, yet I could never
persuade my self, that either the Archduke would undertake it, or that his
Mother the Empress, and the Emperor his Brother, would give their assents.
Howbeit, I wonder not so much at the Empresse-Dowager, who I believe knew
nothing at all of the Design; but am rather grieved on her behalf, and fear
that her sonne's levity will much afflict her. What I should think of the
Emperor, I cannot yet resolve; because when he knew there was such a business
in agitation, He was so far from preventing it, that he never so much as (like
a kinsman) sent word of it to the King. For mine own part, as soon as ever I
hear the Archduke sets his foot in the Low Countries, I will seriously desire
him* as I think it concerus both our interests, not to join nor engage with the
Estates. If he refuse, I shall justly repute him for an Enemy, The Archduke
Matthias enters the Low Countries, and accepting many conditions,
But the Archduke was now come into the Netherlands, though not yet declared
their Governor. For the Estates and the Prince of Orange, being not
sufficiently consulted in the business, purposely delayed it, very busy about
preparing conditions to be offered unto the Archduke; and finally proposing no
fewer then thirty one, whereby they tied his hands: and only allowing him the
honor of precedencie, laid the foundation of such a popular Government, as the
Low Country men had of old, when dividing the administration with their King,
Caesar. lib. 5. Bell. Gall.
they did govern, and were governed. December. 17.
To these conditions when both Catholics and Heretics, being joined in a new
League, Is made Governor of the Low Countries.
had bound themselves by Oath; the Archduke Matthias first at Antwerp,
afterward at Bruxels, with great public joy, Shows, and Revels, was saluted
Governor of the Low Countries. And the Prince of Orange his party prevailed so
far, And the Prince of Orange his Lieutenant Governor.
that he was added to the Archduke, not yet one and twenty years of age, and a
stranger to the Low Country affairs, that under the name of his Lieutenant, he
might be indeed his Governor.

The first Act of the new Government, 1578.
was to purge the House of Lords, A new Senate declares Don John's party, and
himself, enemies to the State.
and discharge all those Senators that were held ill affected to the Estates,
choosing new ones in their places, which immediately pronounced all Don John of
Austra's adherents enemies to their Country. Soon after the same sentence
passed against Don John himself, unless he departed the Low-countr^ys. Lastly,
by the same Senate, and the Deputies of the Estates, an Oath was framed,
wherein both the Clergy and Laity should swear, Holding forth this Oath.
to obey the Archduke Matthias, supreme Governor of the Low Countries, and
(...) defend (...) with their Lives and (...); till another were created by the
King, and the Estates; but to oppose Don John of Austria, as an enemy. This
Law being passed, and in some places in a manner forced, entrapped many of the
Nobility, and ruined some. It is tendered to the Jesuits.
At Antwerp they began with the Fathers of the Society, because their
authority being great in the city, it was thought, if they acknowledged the
Arch duke, others might be invited by their example; or if they did not,
frighted by their punishment. The Heretics exceedingly pressed it, not
doubting but the Fathers (whose constancy they had always hated, but now
wished) upon such an occasion, which they commonly turned to their honor,
would in the mean time be banished the Low Countries, William Hese undertook
it, and meeting Father Baldwin ab Angelo, Provincial of the Jesuits in the
Low Countries, advised him to take the Oath in the name of the Society. They
refuse to take it.
He who knew that Oath was formed by Heretics against the Catholic party,
excusing himself by the rule of his Order, that forbids them to intermeddle
with secular affairs, resolutely denied, nor could by any prayers or threats be
brought to swear. And are beset with armed Heretics.
Whereupon when the Fathers, for some few days having been incommodated, and
abused by the Heretics; Their House plundered.
at length upon the very day of Pentecost, their House and Church was besieged
by armed Heretics, the doors forced open, all, as well sacred as profane
things, Themselves turned out of doors.
plundered, and the Fathers violently thrust out of possession, and sent aboard
the Hollanders, with great scorn of the wild multitude, to be landed in some
other Country. There happened at this time a passage worthy to be recorded. A
remarkable act of one of the Socitie.
The Fathers were turned out of doors, and Pistols set to their breasts till
they were searched, lest they should carry any thing away, Annals of the
Society. Ann. 1578.
when one of them, John Boccace (for it is fit posterity should know the name
of a man so stout and pious) wanne the admiration both of the Catholics and
Heretics. For calling to mind that upon the High Altar, the holy Eucharist was
left in a silver vessel, he presently slip^ away from the soldiers, and
entering the Church full of Heretical Furioso's, with a constantgate and
countenance, approached the altar, and upon his knee adoring Christ reverently,
drew out of the Tabertacle the Pix, but finding it full of little hosts, when
he saw his dry and gasping mouth was not able to swallow so many on the sudden,
the man both of a present wit and faith, held up the Chalice, and carried it to
his brethren, through the midst of those sacrilegious soldiers, none presuming
to attempt any thing against him. The heretics being astonished at the miracle
of his confidence, or rather God approving his piety, and the hope he had
conceived of his Divine assistance. T. Livii l. 5.
For, if in the commemoration of the not much different Act of Caius Fabius,
The like done by one of the ancient Romans.
that whilst the Gauls besieged the Capitol, went through the enemies camp to
the Quirine hill, and returned the same way, bearing things they accounted
sacred in his hands; if (I say) the Roman Historian could affirm, that Fabius
hoped the gods would be propitious to him, from whose worship not the fear of
death could deter him: Why may not I a little more prudently argue, That he I
speak of, hoped he should be protected in that service by the same assistance,
wherewith Christ himself, that afforded his presence to the Jews and when he
was pleased was inobservable, mocked the eyes, or at least the hands of such
like enemies: and moreover, That it came to pass by Gods favor, terr
unerating his rare confidence, that a single man, among three hundred
sculdiers, (for they were no fewer that, with their swords drawn, possessed
themselves of the Quire and Body of the Church) should preserve the Eucharist
from the abuses of the Heretics, Tillemanntis Bredenbach, l. 7. c. 62. colla
sacra.
and the plate from the rapacitie of the soldiers. I shall add another
accident, which it concerns Religion to insert. When the Fathers were expelled
the City, among others that came to see their empty building, A wonderful
accident at the Jesuits Co^ledge.
partly out of curiosity, as it often happens, to view other men's houses,
especially the Jesuits: partly (for most of them were heretics) to feed their
eyes with the joy of their enemies misfortunes; there was a buffoonly
Calvinist, who thought himself a Wit, that to make the people sport, entering
the House put forth, at a window over the door, a wisp of straw, upon the end
of a white Rod, as if he would, according to the custom of the Country, give
notice to the Town that the house was visited with the plague. The sight moved
some passengers to admiration, others to laughter (of which the Calvinisticall
Apelles, standing behind his Venus, had his belly full) and one of them rapping
at the gate, he within cried to him, What with a mischief would you have? Do
you not see the Ensign of Death, the Rod and Wisp before the door? All that
dwe^t here are dead of the plague. Behold a wonderful judgment of God the
same day, when no part of the town was infected with the pestilence, the
impious jeerers own house was visited, and he himself was compelled to weep at
home, what he had laughed at in the mansion of others. They are exp^lled in
other Places.
The like to this usage befell the fathers of the society at Tournay, Bruges,
and Maestricht; they being for the same causes banished from those Cities,
having for the companions of their exile in some places the Franciscan Fathers,
in others honest Priests, So are the Franciscans, and diverse Priests.
and such as had the cure of souls. By whose departure, so much as the
Catholic cause suffered, so much heresy immediately prevailed: To the great
detriment of the Chatholick Cause.
and it was apparent how great a benefit their presence was to the public,
which in their absence so soon suffered: the Calvinists, not long after,
presuming to petition the Archduke and the Estates to establish liberty of
Conscience in the Low Countries. In June.
And though at first they received a denial, yet the Prince of Orange
soliciting their business; they drew up new and bolder petitions for the same
liberty, Churches seized by the Heretics.
and at the very same time were so bold as to exercise it, possessing
themselves of some Catholic Churches. Insomuch as the Estates, for fear of
insurrections likely to grow about it, And liberty of Conscience extorted In
July.
especially their care being wholly fixed upon the business of the war, were
forced to grant the free exercise of Religion, in many cities of Brahant,
Gelderland, and Flanders, the Archduke and the Catholics in vain protesting
against it.

But Don John of Austria, about the end of the Year, was much strengthened by
the coming of Alexander Farneze, Prince of Parma, Alexander Farneze brings the
Spanish Army back from Italy.
with his old soldiers out of Italy. The Spanish army was commanded by King
Philip from the borders of Genoa (whither as I told you Don John sent them
seven months before) to march directly back to the Low Countries, to the great
contentment of their Colonels and Commanders, that conceived themselves, by
that revocation, absolutely restored to the Kings Grace, and their own honor.
The death of Iuliano Romero.
Yet their joy was abated by the death of their first Colonel whom they loved
exceedingly, Iuliano Romero, who busy in providing for the departure of his
soldiers at Cremona, died suddenly of a fall with his horse. These forces, and
others raised in Italy (for there had been a great mortality among the
Spaniards) according to the Kings Orders went, part before, part after the
Prince of Parma. It was thought most expedient for their speedy march, and for
the good of those Provinces through which they passed, that this army
consisting of six thousand, should rather go by troops and companies, then in a
body. But the Prince of Parma himself, with a small train, 18 day.
having appointed Fabio Farneze to follow with the rest of his household, by
long journeys came to Luxemburg, in December. Before you have the reason of his
coming, I hold it worth my pains to give you what I know of Alexander Prince of
Parma, beginning so much higher then I use to do in the description of other
Generals, by how much he will be oftener in the Readers eye, filling up a great
part of our future Annals. Nor will it be unpleasing to know Alexander Farneze
before his Low Country expedition; and to compare him in his former life, to
Himself in the Government of the Low Countries: like Members of a great Body,
every where great.

Alexander Farneze was son to Octavio Farneze Duke of Parma, Of Alexander
Farneze before his coming into the Low Countries. His father Octavio soon
after Duke of Parma.
and Piacenza, a Man, without all question, to be numbered among the examples of
men best versed in the arts of Government. For he had a wit naturally dexterous
in the managing of Peace and War; having been instructed in the school of his
Great Grandfather Paul the third, and his Father in law Charles the fifth, and
perfecting that discipline in the school of various fortune. Affability and
Bounty were eminent in him, Octavio's abilities, and Art of Government* his
wise Popularity.
being no less his natural, then artificial endowments, Succo^^^^ in his
Life.
accommodated to his new and unsettled Sovereignty. Now, I certainly know, that
he made use even of his Courtship and Revels, to which he seemed somewhat
intemperately addicted, to discover, by the example of Augustus Caesar, the
secrets of private families. In hearing the causes of ordinary people, in
common salutations, through the whole course of his life, no Prince in the
world more gracious. Outward complements and emulous flatteries of men, that
strive which should lie loudest, like parts in a Comedy well acted, he looked
upon and laughed. For he regarded the substance, passing by the ceremony. His
equity; and indulgence of popular sports, His bounty.
when often as a private man he would make one* but above all his liberality,
which met the very wishes of such as addressed themselves unto him, justly won
him the repute of one of the most popular and munificent Princes of that Age.
His actings as a Soldier.
Nor was he less famous as a soldier, learning the elements of war in his
youth, almost in his childhood, 1541
under the Emperor Charles the fifth: and first commanding in his service
eleven thousand men, which he brought out of Italy; sent by Paul the third, as
well for the cause of Religion, as of his Affinity to the Emperor: and not a
little conducing to that victory; In Germany.
wherein all Germany between the Rivers of Donan, 1541.
the Elbe, and the Rhine, were conquered by his Imperial Majesty. Out of the
letters of the Bishop of Poggio, Legate Apostolical to the Emperor, directed to
Alex. Cardinal Farneze.
Insomuch as Caesar himself having viewed the army, said, that nobler levies of
Italian horse and foot never came beyond the Alps, and attributed much of that
days glory to their valor, honoring his Son Octavio with great testimonies of
his affection, and particularly with the order of the Golden Fleece, with like
valor, in the following Italian Wars, Octavio defended Parma, besieged a
whole year, against the Pontifician and Imperial Armies, And Italy.
enlarging the proportion assigned to Philip King of Spain at the restitution
of Piacenza, by diverse encounters with the French Generals. 1557.
Then laying down Arms, which unless provoked, he never took up against any,
he spent the rest of his live, according to his Genius, that was sweet and
civil, in settleing and enjoying his Government. Prince Alexander Son to this
Father (for of his Mother Margaret of Austria, The birth of Alexander Farneze.
Daughter to the Emperor Charles the fifth, I have already spoken not a
little, and shall more in its due place) was born at Rome, that very year
wherein Pope Paul the third his paternall Great Grandfather beginning the
Council of Trent, and his maternall Grandfather the Emperor Charles the
fifth raising an army in Germany, asserted the Christian Commonweal against
the Lutheran Heresy; he with sacred Laws, this with triumphant Arms; no vain
presages unto this child then unborn, and Incitements to him in his riper
years, with hereditory virtue to vanquish the same Monster, as an ancient
enemy. Add to this, the prediction of Pope Paul, who gratulating Margaret of
Austria, Paul the III. ^his prediction.
for the birth of Alexander and his Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma and
Piacenza Governor of ye Low countries.
portrait twin-Brother, laying his hand upon Alexanders head, is reported to
have said, That, if his mind could foretell any truths, that child would in
time be a great General. I conceive from his name he divined, the Boy would be
a second Alexander, for all other kinds of divination I hold ridiculous. The
joy of that house was likewise increased about this time, Octavio being created
Duke of Parma, and Piacenza, as if a new Dominion were prepared to grow up with
the Boy. But nothing so much demonstrated Margaret of Austria's felicity, The
joy at Rome for Octavio's male-twines.
as the having two Sons at a birth, which filled Rome with infinite joy,
plays, and all kinds of pastimes and presentiments set forth by the Roman
Nobility, that erected a marble Monument to signify unto after Ages that
fortune, so rarely befalling a Princely family. In the Portico of S. Eusta^.
In the mean time, Octavio, not boasting of that happiness, like Tiberius
Caesar, who (they say) gloried in the Senate house, His Moderation greater then
Tiberius Caesar.
that no Roman of his quality till then, Tacitus. l. 2.
ever had the Honor to have Twin-Sons. But imitating his Father in Law, Annals.
Charles the fifth, that when he heard his Empress was delivered of a Boy,
Philip the 2.
went forthwith to the Monastery of Saint Paul, though it poured down rain,
King of Spain.
a foot, and gave thanks to God, as his first Joy-Offering: so he, His Piety.
when it was told him, his wife Margaret of Austria was brought a bed, would
admit no visits of the Lords that came to joy him, nor partake of the public
Iubile, till leaving his own house, and going directly to the sacred figure of
Christ hanging on the cross, Crucependent
kept by the Brotherhood so named, with great veneration of the Romans, in the
Church of Saint Marcellus, and falling prostrate (for he worshipped the cross
with singular devotion) gave thanks with all his soul, to the divine
Benificence and embracing that tree of life, under its shade deposited the
health and fortune of his children; Prince Alexanders Christning.
worthy for this zeal afterward to see a Son of his displaying this triumphall
Ensign of the cross in the Low Countries, and in this Sign conquering. Three
months after at the font (for the Christning was a while deferred, that the
shows and solemnities of joy might be reiterated,) Giovanni Dominico, Cardinal
de Cuppis, Prince of the sacred Senate, baptized them, the elder Alexander, the
younger Charles; this by the Emperors name, that by the name of Paul before he
was elected Pope. But Charles dying soon after, all their care was fixed upon
the Education of Alexander. Education.
He spent the time of his infancy in the bosom and embraces of his Mother,
Margaret of Austria; his childhood under the best Tutours that Age afforded,
yet with little benefit, at least not answerable to the industry of the
Masters, and aptness of the Scholar: For he, of a restless and fiery nature,
Prospensation to Arms.
hated the fetters of Study; and in the field a hunting, in riding the great
horse, and practicing his weapon, more delighted to exercise his body, then his
mind. That which cherished, or rather made this impression in the Child's mind,
On what occasion he came first to fancy, and by degrees to be deeply in love
with the Wars.
was the arms and warlike preparations in his Fathers house, which he fancied
as his first fine object: by which, much sooner then by the Stars that reign
at our nativities, men's manners commonly are molded. For his Father, hastening
to go beyond the Alps, with forces to the Emperor, all the house clattering
with Armor at his birth, so entertained the infant, that indeed he heard the
sound of the trumpet, before the singing of his nurse, and had the drum for a
Rattle: the first light that saluted his eye, being the glittering of Arms.
Nay, the year following, the Trophies brought out of Germany by his Father, set
the child a longing. A little while after emulous Armies fighting before Parma,
where at six years old the boy was besieged, and bred up in the noise and
thunder of the cannon; with war upon war engaging his Father; the younger he
was, the deeper were military figures stamped in his imagination, He is sent,
very young, into the Low Countries to King Philip.
and formed in him a martial soul. Before he had past his childhood, he was by
his Mother sent into the Low Countries to Duke Octavio, that he might deliver
him to King Philip, as a testimony of renewing his service to the house of
Austria, and likewise that by such a Pledge as their only son, 1557.
they might win the affection of his Uncle, and yet (which they most desired)
the Castle of Piacenza restored, the City being already in their hands. And
King Philip, whatsoever their intention was, willingly received the child,
delighted with the image of his beloved Sister; but especially, because he took
him as an Hostage of the Farnezes friendship. He was a year and an half with
the King in the Low Countries, much pleased with the sight of military
exercises. And, they say, His strange suit to the King.
when the King carried him to the Army at Saint Quintin, that very day the Town
was stormed and taken, he very passionately begged of his Majesty, that he
might be armed, and sent to the assault: but when he was put off, between
admiration and laughter, being but eleven years old, he cried extremely, and
they had much ado to stay him in the Camp. King Philip carries him into Spain.
Going from thence with his Majesty into Spain, he lived there almost eight
years, educated with Charles Prince of Spain, and Don John of Austria: some
part of the time at Alcala (to which University the Prince was sent) the rest
in the Court at Madrid; where he was in his Uncles eye, and pleased him so
well, that he esteemed and loved him as his own son. His Majesty's affection
to him.
The Kings affection to him was increased, by comparing him with Prince
Charles, whose loose and crabbed manners differed much from his fathers
gravity. Nor did this favor (which is rare at Court) expose him to the hatred
of the Grandees; being either above it, How much he was honored by others, and
why.
as Nephew to Charles the fifth, or obliging them with handsome and noble
Ceremonies, continual good offices and bounties wherein he exceeded, and
thereby somewhat prejudiced his House. But in the use of arms, especially in
all presentiments on horsback (often set forth by the military emulation of
Prince Charles, and Don John) his carriage was so princely and advised, though
he sometime undauntedly opposed his unarmed body against eminent danger, that
being in those counterfeited fights applauded by the beholders, to see him was
both their delight and fear. In the twentieth year of his age, His Marriage.
the King resolved to marry him to Princess Mary, daughter to Edward Prince of
Portugal, neice to King Emmanuel, the miracle of that time for rareness of
wit, and sanctity of life. And to do honor to his Sister, then Governess of
the Low Countries, he sent thither her son Alexander, the Bride following
from Portugal in the Royal fleet. His Father Duke Octavio came likewise in
great State from Italy to the Marriage, celebrated at Bruxels, with the
abovementioned gratulation of the Provinces. 1565.
From hence he went to Parma, where after he had had many children by his wife,
His issue.
three of which, Margaret Princess of Mantua (afterward translated to happier
Nuptials with the celestial Bridegroom) Duke Ranucio, 1578.
and Cardinal Odoardo, Her marriage being di^solved, she professed herself a
Nun.
survived their parents when he saw his House established in his issue, and
himself freed from Public cares (his Father Octavio, still in the vigor of
youth and spirit, easily governing alone) he longed to be abroad in the field,
and began to consider where a war was likeliest to rise. In the mean time, by
hunting of wild beasts in the woods, running at Tilt in the City, and those
pastimes which are the near resemblances of war, he at once fed and deceived
his longing. Yet, being naturally fierce, now and then he did things that would
better have become a Gladiatour, then a Prince. For, privily armed, in the
night he used to walk the streets disguised; His D^gladiations in the nighttime.
not like that Caesar who went likewise in disguise by night, but with a guard
of Fencers, who if the Emperor began a quarrel not dangerous, suffered it; but
if he was put to it by those he had abused, cut them to pieces. Tacit l. 13.
But Prince Alexander, commonly alone, or but with one companion, Annal.
would bid nigh-walkers stand, and fight with them, to try both theirs and his
own courage. much more gallant then Nero's were.
And as confidence increases by success, it carried him so far, that if he
heard any one commended for a sword-man, he could not rest till he had met him
by dark, Exposed to hazard.
and compared his strength and skill at his weapon with the other. They say
that once meeting Comes Taurello, a noble and stout Gentleman in the night,
instantly in that very place (where he had often wished the encounter) he
challenged and fought with him; but Taurello, by a torch that accidentally
passed by, perceiving his opposite to be Prince Alexander, throwing down his
Arms craved pardon, if ignorant and provoked, he had wronged his sword, by
lifting it up against his Prince. This being newsed about the Town, many
afterward shunned the occasion of meeting with the Prince, lest they should,
if worsted, loose their reputation: or the Princes favor, if they got the
better.

But in the interim, Alex. Farneze desirous to go upon the Holy War.
a nobler cause of war was offered him, a general peace being concluded among
Christian Princes, against the common enemy. Diverse considerations incited him
to that voyage; the ground of the War, the confluence of noble persons that
engaged; and above all the General, Don John of Austria, His Father consents.
equally near to him in love and blood. Nor was his Father unwilling to let him
go, in hope that his sons military inclination, would produce great effects:
howsoever, that his fierceness would be tamed. But his Mother, But not his
Mother.
that was powerful with her husband, being against it, the Duke said, nothing
could be done till they knew the pleasure of the King his Uncle. Feb. 2. 1571.
In the mean time Margaret of Austria received Letters (as she had ordered it)
from the King, wherein he wished Prince Alexander should not go, Yet he goes.
as yet. But he, beyond measure inflamed with Don John's invitation, at last
prevailing with his Mother, and the King, furnished himself for the Wars, With
a Train of selected Gentlemen and Soldiers.
as young soldiers ever do, magnificently. Forty two Gentlemen of Parma and
Piacenza followed him; and he had three hundred that were a king of Pretorians,
for his Lifeguard, men chosen, with more then ordinary care, by Paulo Vitelli
a great Commander, most of them having been Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns,
or at least above the rank of common soldiers. With this train, Prince
Alexander offered himself as a Volunteer to his Uncle the General. Who, then
by chance being at the Musters of his Army, affectionately embraced him, and
when he had with the Generals leave, selected four hundred seamen of the
Kings, he put them in two Gallyes sent from the Commonwealth of Genoa, Which
he places in the Genoa-Galleys.
to be commanded by Comes Carolo Scotto, and Pedro Francisco Nicello: he
himself with his Lieutenant Vitelli, and part of his Gentlemen and Soldiers
going aboard the Admiral of Genoa. Though in the voyage, especially before the
battle, Don John would never let him be out of the Imperial Galley, where he
was himself; He contribut^s to the atonement of the Generals.
which turned to the benefit of the whole Navy: For a very bitter difference
ensuing between Don John and Venerio the Admiral of Venice, likely to embroyl
the forces of Christendom in a Civil War: when Don John in his first heat,
was about to revenge the wrong offered to the Majesty of the Supreme Admiral;
only Prince Alexander (though some failed not to bring fuel to the fire, that
burned sufficiently in the young Generals nature) had so much power with his
Uncle, that he kept him from striking the first stroke. Till Mark Antonio
Columna the Pope's Admiral, and the Venetian Ambassador Augustino Barbaric^,
by their wisdom joined to Prince Alexander's endeavors, swifter then
imagination, dispersed this Tempest, threatening destruction to the Fleet. For
which service, The Pope commends him for it. They fight the Turk.
when Prince Alexander came next to Rome, Pope Pius commended him before some
of the Cardinals, acknowledging both himself, and Christendom much obliged to
him. But when they were upon the place of Battle, formerly famed for the
victory of Actium, won by Octavius Caesar, and the ships on both sides put in
Battalia; Prince Alexander being aboard Mark Antonio Columna's Gally, in the
midst of the Fleet, passed into his own, the two other Genoa-Gallyes lying to
the wind-ward: and after a^showr of Arrows and Bullets from afarr, the ships
encounting; Alexander Farneze having an eye upon Mustapha, Alex. Farneze boards
Mustapha.
Treasurer of the Turkish Fleet, with all his force stem'd his Gally, and
grappling, found her a great deal stronger then he imagined. She carried the
money, and therefore was manned with above three hundred Ianizaries, all old
and valient Soldiers. When they had fought long upon equal terms, It Is a
measuring cast between them.
sometimes one of them setting up their Colors, At last he takes Mustapha,
sometimes another: Prince Alexander, at once inflamed with shame and anger,
flourishing (as he used to do) a huge great sword, leaped into the Bashaw's
Gally, and laying about him on both sides like a madman, by the flaughter of
the enemy, opened a way to his Soldiers, that were so nettled with the example
and danger of their General, as now all the boldest Turks being slain, the
rest would presently have yeiled, And Scander Bashaw.
if the Bashaw of Alexandria, had not come in with a strong Gally, whereby the
Turks, both strengthened and encouraged, for a while renewed the fight. But one
of Alexander's Farneze's Gallyes sending in fresh supplies, when the Turks
could no longer stand the fury of the conquerours, Mustapha being in many
places run through the body, the Bashaw of Alexandria hurt, and soon after
taken, Prince Alexander made himself master not only of the Treasurer's Gally,
The Boo^y got by his Soldiers.
but likewise of the Auxiliary ship; with so great pillage for his men, that
some of them got 2000 Sultanies (it is a Coin of little less value then the
Venetian Chechine of gold) others 3000, only out of this Gally of the
Treasurers; besides what his two other Galleys found in three of the enemies
Galliouns, and as many of their Galliasses. They say, that Don John of Austria,
after the Battle, when he heard his Nephew Alexander highly extolled, received
him with great expressions of joy and love, Don John's words to Alex. Farneze.
yet praised him with this exception, that he boarded the enemy with better
success, P. Alexander's Answer.
then judgment, they being yet in their full strength, and able to have hindered
his retreat. Which fault he took for an honor, and said, the reason of his
confidence was built upon the sanctity of his wife, by whose prayers to God
for him, he conceived himself protected and secured; so merrily passing over
his uncles reprehension. Nor was the gallantry of Prince Alexander's mind
less manifested the year following, though with less fortune, 1572.
or rather less concord of the Christian Nations. For the league being
renewed, The Sacred League renewed
and the Christian Fleet, somewhat too late after the Battle of Lepanto,
returned to prosecute their victory in Pe^oponnesus, the new Turkish Admiral
Uluciall had now repaired his ships, and to avoid the encounter of the League,
having many times changed his Road, now lay at Anchor near the strong Port of
Methone. And whilst Don John with many offers to fight, Don John sends him to
Navarine.
endeavored to draw the Turks into the Main, He attaques the Town.
he resolved to send Alexander Farneze to besiege Navarinum, not far off by
land. Who with 6000 in two divisions began to batter the Fort, with more
industry, then success. For the place being all rock, or craggy, his men
could hardly get earth to raise their batteries, nor could their tubbs and
Gabions filled with earth and stone, opposed in stead of a curtain, be defense
sufficient against the enemies Cannon. The Seige was nevertheless continued;
and the Navarines, sallying out, but with loss beat back, were thought to be
upon the point of yielding: but finding his endeavors frustrate, Retreats.
When the Turks, either by the connivence or ignorance of Prince Alexander's
Soldiers, put in men by night, and relieved the Garrison. Besides, the Turkish
horse and foot coming from al quarters, Prince Alexander fearing they would
block up his retreat, and not hoping to take the Castle, thought it enough in
his enemies sight to retire with his Cannon to the Fleet. And Don John, since
the Turkish Navy, shunning a general Battle, could by no affront be provoked
to sea, contented to have struct a terror into the enemy, and forced them to
confess themselves not able to appear upon the Main: The League dissolved.
the minds as well as the Fleet of the Christians being divided, he went to
Sicily, the rest to other places. Thus was Alexander Farneze initiated in war,
which as it begat an opinion, both among those great Soldiers, and Princes
absent, specially the successor to Pope Pius, Pius V. Gregory XIII.
Gregory, and King Philip of Spain, that he would prove a gallant General: so
afterward it moved the King of his own accord, to call him, where the war was
most dangerous, into the Low Countries.

For his Majesty pressed with the Low-countrey-mens daily complaints against
Don John of Austria, Prince Alexander joined with his Mother, is to be
commissionated for the Government of the Low Countries.
and very desirous to quiet the Netherlands without Arms, that weaken even the
Conqueror himself; he resolved to satisfy the desires of the Provinces; and
in his Brothers place to substitute his Sister Margaret of Austria, with her
Son Alexander Farneze. Hoping either by her prudence and power with the
Low-countrey-men to find out some expedient toward the concluding of a Peace;
or by his valor, if there was use of Arms, strongly to pursue the war.
Therefore he ordered it, that Cardinal Granvell, Cardinal Granvel treats with
them both in the King's name.
then at Rome, should persuade his sister of Parma, to return into the
Low Countries. The Cardinal taking a journey to Aquila, found there very
opportunely the Duchess and Prince Alexander, and read his letters containing
the Kings desires to both together. Though his Majesty had likewise commanded
the Marquess of Ayamont, Governor of Millaine, Margaret of Parma is doubtful
of accepting the offer.
to treat with Prince Alexander apart. The Duchess answered doubtfully, So is
not her son Alexander.
she would advise upon it; either fearing as she pretended, to displease Don
John: or by that delay and seeming refusal aim to put a higher value upon her
journey. But Alexander Farneze, without the least demurring, said he would obey
the King with all his heart, if it so pleased his mother. He made yet a plainer
answer to two letters delivered him by Raphael Manrique, from Ayamont, (that
was sick and kept his bed;) together with his Majesty's letter, 9 and 11
November. 1577. 11 September. 1577.
wherein, after expression of his grief for the death of Princess Mary, The
Kings Letter to him.
wife to Prince Alexander, he signifies his resolution to employ him in the
Low-countreyes. I am certain (they are the Kings words,) now you know it, with
a ready and undaunted mind you will satisfy my exspectation of you, and my
love, which highly esteems you and your virtue, most illustrious Prince. But
when the King altered his determination of substituting the Duchess in his
Brothers place, by reason of Matthias the Archdukes coming into the
Low-countreyes, it was doubted at Parma, whether it would be handsome for
Prince Alexander to go and fight in the Low-countreyes, commanded by another:
which consideration, he out of duty to the King, and desire of glory in the
wars, easily contemned; especially encouraged by some dark words of Granvell,
promising great matters. Besides Gregory the thirteenth interposed his
Authority and exhortation; The Pope's encouragement.
who, informed of the design by Cardinal Farneze, highly praised it, and bad
the Cardinal write to the Prince of Parma in his name, that the expedition
would be pleasing to God; and therefore under so mighty protection, and upon
encouragement from his Holiness, he should willingly and speedily undertake it.
The Pope, I suppose, did not thus commend the war, only for the King of
Spain's sake, and the common cause of Religion; but for some peculiar benefit,
that might result to the Pontifician Empire. For the Prince of Parma, being a
Feudatary and Homager to the Sea Apostolic, his Holiness thought himself
concerned, in sending the Prince to a Foreign war, whence he might return an
able General, Many Letters from Don John inviting him. 14 and 25 Oct. and 25
November. 1577.
to defend the Church of Rome. Wherefore Alexander Farneze, having within a few
days, received three letters from Don John of Austria, which invited him with
great entreaties, and no less promises, to the society of war and glory;
making ready with all possible speed, the twelvth day after he left Parma,
arrived at Luxemburg; He goes for the Low countries.
and there met Don John: who with expressions of incredible contentment
received Prince Alexander, that stood amazed to see his uncle no less impaired
in his health, then in the presence and Majesty of the most fortunate
General. How he finds Don John.
So true it is, that they are most sensible of adverse fortune, which have been
in most felicity. It is therefore probable, that Don John, not against his
will, or only by the Kings command, That was really glad to see him there.
sent for the Prince of Parma, nor did with dissembled joy welcome him, from
whose long approved fidelity and valor he might promise safety to the
public, and a particular preservation to himself, whose life was sought by so
many plots. At their first meeting, Don John imparted the Kings commands, The
Pension given by the King to Alex. Farneze.
that he should acquaint Prince Alexander with all business of War and
Peace, and reserve for his use 1000 Crowns a month. Both which conditions
pleased him very much, especially the later, usually given by the King to none
but Viceroyes, Governors of Provinces, or Generals of Armies. For some days
the Prince of Parma took the money, (till the Kings high estimation of his
merit was thereby divulged among the people) afterward, 24 December. 1577.
writing his humble thanks to his Majesty, he, And by him refused.
as one more ambitious of honor, then profit, refused the pay; adding, that it
was not fit he should be so remunerated, who had yet done no service, and he
needed no encouragement.

But Alexander Farneze acting nothing without order from Don John, The state of
the Provinces.
wholly applied his mind and endeavors to inform himself of affairs at home
and abroad; which he found to be in a very bad condition. For the King had but
two Provinces that continued loyal; in the rest, the few Forts that held for
his Majesty, daily revolted to the States. Nay even in Holland, Amsterdam it
self began to waver. And in Brabant, Bergen op Zoom: where the Soldiers basely
betraying their Colonel Charles Fugger, yielded to the States. Breda besieged
by the Genera's of the Confederates.
But the Garrison of Breda, a while before deceived by a stratagem of the
enemy, carried themselves yet more basely toward their Colonel. For the
Generals of the Sates Arrmy, Philip Count Holach, and Frederick Perenot Lord
of Campin, Cardinal Granvels Brother.
that besieged Breda, they were gallantly opposed by George Fronsberg Colonel
of the Germans that served Don John: A Messenger with a Letter to Don John,
but the Garrison, because they were some pays behind, daily growing to
mutiny, Fronsberg by a man of know courage and trust, wrote to Don John,
speedily to dispatch away relief, for his men were grown so seditious he could
hold ^ut no longer. Discovered.
But the messenger, either taken by Holach, or else playing the knave, was with
his letters detained in the Leaguer, till such time as they might think he had
been with Don John, Another counterfeit Letter was sent.
that a probable delay might give more credit to the juggling. Then another, in
stead of the first, was dispatched to the Town, that excusing the stay of him,
they sent, who he said was fallen sick, brought a formal answer, as from the
hand of Don John, bidding them upon good conditions render the Town: and that
shortly; when supplies came to him, The Town rendered.
he would send (but yet he could not) forces to recover it. The messenger and
letter was believed, and the Town yielded. The Perfidiousness of the Garrison.
To the Colonell's error was added the villainy of his Soldiers, which during
the time of the Treaty, either corrupted with money or discontent, furiously
laid hands upon him, and perfidiously delivered him bound to Holach and Campin,
that made it one of their conditions. In the interim, whilst they march out,
finding themselves cheated by the enemy, and seeing the supplies, sent by Don
John, at hand; they repented both their haste, and perjury. The Diceran not so
merrily on Holach's side at Ruremund, Ruremond holds out against the
Conf^iderates.
which he with great forces going to assault, found Garrisoned by Don John with
4000 men, commanded by Aegidius Barlamont Lord of Hierg, and likewise by a
Sally of Polvillerius Colonel of the Germans in the Town, beaten from the
Siege, with the loss of his Carriages, Still the Treaty of Peace continues.
and many of his men, he fled. Yet the Treaty of Peace went on, continual
messengers posting from both sides, as if it were out of hope and desire of
success; and not rather to give words for words, that one might seem to take
up Arms justlier then the other. The Queen of England moves for a Cessation of
Arms, in a threatening way.
Nothing else was intended by the Queen of England, at that time moving Don
John for a Cessation of Arms, save only that upon the denial of her request,
she would be thought in a manner necessitated to assist the Estates: her
Majesty threatening Don John and the King, to whom she sent an express
Messenger, that if they refused to do it, She is not listened to.
she would never more pleasure them in any thing whatsover. But her threats
being understood, The hope of Peace vanishes.
she was desired by the King and Done John to move the other side, whom she
might with a great deal more justice persuade to lay down Arms, rendering
obedience to their Prince. Wherefore both parties with the conditions likewise
rejecting the messengers that brought them, Aprodigious Comet.
all Treaties of Accommodation now cut off, In November. and December. 1577. and
January 1578.
no hope was left of quieting the Low Countries, but by Arms. And about that
time, a blazing Star rose with such a fatal Aspect, as Mathematicians labored
to demonstrate, that a more horrid one never had appeared: which minds prone
war looked at, as a Standard set up in heaven.

The first and memorable Battle was fought at Gemblac, Of the Battle of Gemblac.
nine miles from Namure, in the entry of Brabant; both Armies being a wh^le
before mustered, the Catholic at Marcha, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg,
the enemy at Temple, a Village not far from Namure: and those were found less,
these more then was supposed. For it was reported, that Don John had 22000
Foot, Both Armies mustered
whereas upon the Musters appeared not 18000, as Alexander Farneze, that was
present with Don John, set down in his account. On the contrary, January 20.
the States Mustered about 20000, that were, a while before, not thought to be
17000. Don John's is less,
For the number of these was daily increased by Soldiers of Fortune, The
enemie's greater.
that came in hope of Pillage, which they could not have from Don John, that
raised men only with money. And yet his Army though fewer (and weaker in
Horse, But his are better men.
as not full two thousand) because they had the advantage of being the older
and the better Soldiers, were a great deal more desirous of a Battle. The
Catholic Soldiers were likewise much encouraged by the Letters of Gregory the
thirteenth, wishing happiness to them, And more confident, for this respect.
and by the Christian custom, freely granting them a general pardon of their
sins. Which the Commanders making use of, the Army when they were all absolved,
6. January.
with much more cheerfulness marched against the enemy. The Spies likewise
brought in news (which made Don John e^spect no longer) that Philip Count
Lalin, and Robert Melodune Viscount Gant, this commanding the Horse, he the
Foot, and Valentine Pardieu General of the Artillery, Pardieu, Lord de la Mot.
were absent from the enemies Camp, pretending an invitation to a Marriage,
celebrated with great Pomp in Bruxels; but indeed, as it was reported, out of
distaste taken at the Prince of Orange; besides, many others, that could not
away with the sharpness of the Winter (being Summer Captains) had left the
field, and withdrawn into the City. He that now commanded in chief for the
Confederates, Goigny, Commander in chief for the Confederates.
was Anthony Goigny Lord of Vendege in the Wood, an old Soldier, trained up in
his youth under Charles the fifth, from 18.
then a Captain of Lanceirs at the Battle of Saint Quintin: afterward, 1567.
Leivtenant General of the Auxiliaries sent by King Philip to Charles the ninth
of France, under the command of Count Aremberg. 1576.
But two years before the differences between the Spaniards and Low-countreymen
had alienated his endeavors, rather then affections from the Kings Service.
The enemy intended to surprise Don John in Namure, and to this purpose were now
upon their march, but understanding that he had a far stronger Army, then was
imagined, and meant to draw out of Namure, and give them Battle; altering their
determination, they were retiring to Gemblac, there, upon certain knowledge of
the enemies strength, maturely to order their affairs. The States Army
quartered that night in the Village of St. Martin, almost five miles distant
from the Forces of Don John, The Order of his Army.
lying at Namure. Thence before break of day, firing their Huts, they retreated
toward Gemblac, in this manner. First marched Emmanuel Montin, and William
Hese, with their Regiments flanked with Carabines of the Colonels, Villers, and
Fresnoi. The main Battle (consisting of the German and Wallon Regiments, three
of French, thirteen of Scots and English) was led by Maximilian He^^n, Count of
Boluc, a while since revolted from the King, and by Federick Perenot Lord of
Campin. The Rere, in which was their strength of Horse, being commanded by the
Counts Philip Egmont, son to Lamoral, and Lame a Marcha, Marquess of Havre;
Duke Arescot's Brother, and the Campmaster Goigny, Goigny Lievtenant-General to
the Archduke Matthias, for this Expedition.
Lievtenant-General of the Army, riding up and down, with some select wings of
Horse. In the Forlorn they had placed the Pioners and Workmen, intermixed with
a Company of Foot. The Battle was enclosed with their Baggage, and flanked with
some Feild-pieces. They had likewise secured their backs (fearing the enemy
would follow) with their best Musketteirs, Scoutes sent out, and an ambush laid
by Don John.
and stoutest Soldiers. Nor was Don John less active, but a good while before
day, moved from Namure, sending before Antonio Olivera, and Ferdinando Acosta,
with some Horse and Foot, to discover the Wood-land Country, and possess
himself of advantageous places. Part of his Army he left behind at the bank of
Mose under Charles Mansfeldt: the greater and stronger part followed him, The
Catholic Army thus marshalled.
in this order. In the Van, where he had put the strength of his Cavalry, first
marched the Light Horse with Pistols, then the Lanciers at a distance: for
defense to both, came on the whole body of the Curaciers, with their Officers
in the head of every Troop, some Vantcurrers advancing a little before the
Army, with small bodies of the fleetest Horse. The main Battle was a Square,
consisting of two Regiments, Musketteirs and Pikemen, most them Spaniards and
Germans, their Colonels likewise leading up their men. The Rere, contained a
Square Battalion of Wallons, safely flanked with their Carriages and Baggage,
the Burgundian Carabines riding mingled with them. The Vanguard was commanded
by Octavio Gonzaga; the Rere-guard by Ernest Count Mansfeldt, this Camp-master,
he General of the Horse. In the midst was the General himself Don John of
Austria, with the Prince of Parma, attended by the Lifeguard; The Standard.
whence appeared the Royal Standard, in which Don John, as he had conceived an
extraordinary confidence in the Divine Assistance, under the triumphall Cross
of Christ, had caused these words to be written, In this sign I did vanquish
the Turks, and shall the Heretics. He had not marched far, but he came
within sight of the enemy, and learning the Confederates design from a couple
of Prisoners taken in some light skirmishes by Olivera, presently drew out near
six hundred horse, Lanceirs and Carabines, and intermixing with them one
thousand foot, Pikemen and Musketteers, gave them, in two divisions, to Octavio
Gonzaga, and Christophero Mondragonio: Don John's orders.
ordering Gonzaga to charge the enemy in the Rere; but so, as not to engage
their whole Forces, till he with the Prince of Parma and the rest of the Army
were come up. Parties of both sides first skirmish.
At first he obeyed, and skirmishing, only galled their last Troops; till
Gonzaga saw Perotto of Sassofferrata, who that day commanded the Troop of
Camillo Montio, Perotto of Sassoferrata.
so far advanced, that he feared the enemies whole Army would be rashly drawn
upon him, before Don John could advance. He therefore presently sent one upon
the spur, with command that Perotto should immediately retire, without engaging
himself and his horse. But he (for the command was proudly delivered) resenting
it with indignation, as if he were held a coward, bad the man with his
imperious importunity be gone, and tell Gonzaga, that Perotto never yet turned
his back in a battle, The place of battle.
nor could now if he would. There was, upon the flank of the Forces wherewith
they skirmished, a high way, deep in mine and water, more like a Bog then a
Road, which the enemy declining, marched in a way that would receive fewer a
breast: Alex. Farneze's conjecture of the enemy.
Thither Prince Alexander had galloped up, to see how things went (for Don John
kept the Prince from fighting, as if he had use of him to order the battle,
and to send in supplies) and observing that the enemies horse, either by reason
of the ill way, or out of their have to reach Gemblac, marched in no little
disorder (which he conjectured by the waving of their pikes, tangling and
crossing one another) he resolved to exspect no longer, but catching a Lance
from the Gentleman of his horse, and getting upon one of Camillo a Monte's
charging-horses, better managed then his own, his eyes and face speaking the
language of a Battle, His words to the Gentleman of his Horse. Curtius.
and looking upon the Gentlemen, Go, said he, to the General, and tell him,
that Alexander Farneze remembering the old Roman, will cast himself into the
gulf, and hopes by Gods grace, and the fortune of the House of Austria, to
bring out of it this day, a certain and a glorious victory. Then showing those
about him how advantageous it would be, He communicates his design to the
Officers about him.
if advancing a little they would plunge through, and charge the enemy in the
flank; his fervor and example with the same violence, drew along the
valiantest Hors-commanders, Bernardino Mendoza, Henr. Viennius Lord of
Ceuravium.
Giovanni Baptista, Camillo a Monte, Ferdinando Toledo, Martinengo, Viennius,
Mondragonio, and many more. And he himself, riding among the Horse of Mutio
Pagano Captain-Lieutenant to Mondragonio, And they following, he first passes
over the Gulf.
entered the bog, followed by all those gallant Cavaleers; and when a few of
them yet tugging, the rest had fortunately passed over, and got field room to
ease their horses, encouraging one another, they made a little stand, They all
together charge the enemies horse.
till they ranked themselves in one equal front. Then riding full speed,
Alexander Farneze in the head of them, they charged the enemy so home with
their Lances, Gonzaga seconding with the rest of the Cavalry, and Don John
still sending in fresh men, that the Confederates Horse (this division being
amazed) had presently wheeled off, if their Commanders persuasions and threats,
And rout them.
and the example of their betters, had not stop^ them for a while. But having
once taken a thorow-fright, their minds being conquered, at last they turned
their backs; and flying precipitately, fell foul upon their Foot that stood
behind, breaking their Ranks, riding over some, Execution done upon the
Confederates army.
and leaving the rest to the fury of the sword: So as their Foot, forsaken by
their Cavalry, especially those in the middle, that were first broke by the
flight of their own men, and the impression of the enemy, charged in the Rere
and Flanks by the Kings horse, that fiercely now pursued their Victory, Goigny
laboring, but in vain to rally them, were all miserably cut to pieces. Ianuar.
31.
Seldom was known more blood spilt, and a battle sooner won by fewer men, and
with so little loss. Seldom was better experience made, The day won by the
horse.
how much the strength of either side consists in horse: For by six hundred
Horse (they were no more that began, Christ. Assonv. in Relatione, says, One
Spaniard was too hard for ten Confederates.
and but twelve hundred when they won the battle) full ten thousand Foot were
part slain, part taken prisoners; and the rest of the Army (no less then
eight thousand Horse) in the space of an hour and an half, with the loss of
only nine of the Kings men, were routed; thirty four Colors taken, with their
fieldpieces, and almost all their Carriages and Baggage. How great the
Victory. Mar. Delr. says but two were slain. Mich. ab Isselt Leo. Belg.
Their General himself, and some persons of quality came into the enemies
power; the rest, with the greatest part of their Horse, that ran at first, got
basely off, flying, so me to Gemblac, most to Bruxels. Nor secure at Gemblac,
though it was fortified, upon the approach of the victorious Army, diverse,
before the assault, fled further into Brabant, Febr. 2.
the rest promised to render upon certain conditions. But Don John refusing to
give any, Gemblac besieged by the Conquerours. Yielded.
they yielded themselves and the Town to mercy. Nor was this a contemptible
addition to the Victory: For the enemy determining to make Gemblac the seat
of the War, had vict^alled it for many months, and laid in Arms, and store
of Ammunition, which came all into the Conquerours hands. Mercy showed to the
town.
The Town, destined for a prey to the soldiers, by a kind of fate upon the
place; (for ever since the year of our Lord 900, it is famous for many
sackings, burnings, and plundrings) at the earnest suit of Lambert Count and
Abbot of Gemblac, made to Alexander Farneze, and by him unto Don John, was
preserved both from the plunder and injury of the soldier. And to the
prisoners.
The Garrison being only disarmed, such as were Low Country men, taking an
oath never more to bear Arms against the King of Spain, the rest not within a
year, were all let go, save twelve of the principal, detained in stead of
hostages, that were carried to the Castle of Namure, with their General
Goigny. Who was before his departure brought to Don John, Don John's words to
General Goignie.
and (they say) desiring to kiss his victorious hand, he gave it him with
these words, God thus breaks their contumacy, that impiously rebel against
Religion and their King: The success even of this battle, wherein so great an
Army was defeated by so few, shows how much God Almighty favors his Majesty's
just cause. But he only answering, That he never took up arms against
Religion, The Conquerours commended by Don John.
with the other prisoners was removed. Then Don John taking notice of his own
Soldiers merits, graciously calling to him every Commander, and the stoutest
of the Soldiers, with great and glorious words magnificently commended their
service. Among them all he was not ignorant that Alexander Farneze best
deserved; Prince Alexander especially.
yet the more he saw the Army look upon him, and extol his courage, the more
he thought it concerned his Love and Place to praise, not without care and
caution, the virtue of that man whom he both feared, and affected. Therefore
minding the Prince of his danger at the battle of Lepanto, With some
ad^^^ition.
he remembered him of the Office of a General, and said, He was sent thither by
the King his Uncle, to advance the War, not with his hand, and the danger of
a common soldier, Alex. Farneze's Answer.
but with his counsel and conduct. Prince Alexander replying, that he could
think no man fit to command in chief, that had not first valiantly performed
the duties of a common soldier, especially under so great a General; was
received both with the Armies applause, and the Generals embraces. His letter
to the King in praise of Don John.
But the Prince of Parma wrote Don John's praises (not beyond their merit) much
more freely, and without any exception to the King: For together with the
Generals Letters, giving an account of the battle to his Mejestie at
Argenton, Prince Alexander gratulated the Kings victory won, first by Gods
assistance, and in the next place by the prudence and valor of Don John: F^br.
5.
And that as the enemy in the field found him a most valiant General; so when
they had laid down Arms, he showed himself a merciful Conqueror, by his
Majesty's example. And therefore it was to be hoped, that that victory, in all
men's account the greatest ever gained in the Low Countries, would shortly draw
along with it the reducement of many Cities. The like Comm^ndations inserted in
many other letters, from Prince Alexander to Anton. Perez, Marc. Almazar and
Marc. Ayemont.
And writing a Complementall relation of the same victory to some Lords of
Spain, that were his ancient friends and acquaintance, at large to his Mother,
more briefly to his Father, and his uncle-Cardinall; he still inserted the like
commendations of Don John, nothing at all of himself; either out of the
greatness of his spirit, hoping to do yet more glorious things, and therefore
concealing this, as of no moment; or else assuring himself others would write
to the same persons those very actions, Feb. 15.
much more to his glory. But at Bruxels where they yet heard not the
misfortune of their men, Feb. 13.
they consulted in the Archdukes presence, whether Don John should be assailed,
wherein he writes nothing of himself. The Deputies of the Estates, ignorant of
the Victory, sit in Council.
or exspected in the fields; whether they should fight with all their forces,
or a part? when suddenly the sad news ran through the whole city, that they had
fought unfortunately with Don John, and lost a day where the Spaniard had his
fill of blood. Which being confirmed by many that at last had got by their fear
and flight, into the Town. It being further said, that Gemblac was taken by the
enemy, who had the General of their army prisoner, and had put all their Foot
to the sword, some reporting (as fear ever fancies danger near at hand) that
Don John with his victorious army would presently be at the City-gates; Their
trepidation when they heard the news. The Archduke and the Prince of Orange
fly.
Bruxels was so terrified, as the next day, leaving some kind of Garrison in
the Town, the Prince of Orange, with the Archduke, carrying along the Courts
of Justice, and the Senate, retired to Antwerp* Nor was Don John altogether
averse from besieging Bruxels, propounding it to his Council of War. But
being hindered by the thinness of his army, which could not be recruited
unless the King sent money, it was thought best, before men recovered that fit
of terror, to carry into several parts the War and Victory, consisting in
expedition; rather then to dull the soldiers alacrity, with lying before a
Town. Octavio Gonzaga was therefore commanded with five hundred chosen Horse,
and some regiments of Foot, immediately to assault Lovain and Machlin, Cities
well affected to Don John. Lord of Hierg.
AEgidius Barlamont with Charles Mansfeldts French Regiment, Lovain yields to
Don John.
and four colors of Wallons marched to Bovines. And Lovain, not exspecting a
summons, Feb. 5.
turning out the Scottish Garrison, rendered themselves to Ganzaga of their own
accord. And Iudoigne.
So did Iudoignia, a Town of more account for the healthfulness of air, And
Tienen.
then fruitfulness of soil, in which respect the ancient Dukes of Brabant used
to make it a Nursery for their children: Feb. 7.
the like was done by Tienen; And Areschot.
and a while after, not without force, by Areschott. Feb. 17.
To Machlin and Vilvord (newly garrisoned by the States) Gonzaga came too late.
But Bovines (a City accustomed to assaults, never attempted by the enemy in
vain, And Bovines.
often slighted; but ever by the peoples constancy fortified again) received
the Lord of Heirge (but not before a great part of the walls was battered down)
upon conditions.

Don John, while things succeed as he could wish, resolving to reduce the rest
of Brabant, ordered Alexander Farneze to attaque Diestem, a Town belonging to
the Prince of Orange. Sichem summoned.
He, with part of his forces, marching thither, left he should leave Sichem on
his back, a neighbor Town to Diestem, and a place at that time not to be
neglected, both for the Fort (which afterward was ruined, with a great part of
the Town) and for the convenience of the River Demera; sends thither, with his
German Regiment, Lancelot Barlamont Count of Megen. Refuses to treat.
But they of Sichem, confident both in the place, which they had prettily well
fortified, and likewise in their number; Alex. Farneze makes ready for an
assault.
refusing to treat, industriously prepared for their defense. When Prince
Alexander coming up, Febr. 21.
after he had offered his Devotions upon a hill close by the Town, where the
Blessed Virgin works miracles out of an Oak, planted against the old wall of
the Suburbs, standing in diameter to the Lovain-Port, eight demi-Culverins; and
beginning at daybreak to make a Battery no less violent then constant,
Ordering his Forces.
holding till noon day, having made diverse breaches in the Castle, he gave
orders for an assault; which proved the stronger, by reason of the emulation
between several Nations. The Germans, In this manner.
under Count Megen, he commanded to march in the middle right against the Port,
on the right hand the Spaniards, on the left the Lovainers, under the Colonells
Mondragonio and Samblemont. Some companies of Wallons were also ordered to
bring scaling-ladders, which they, when the sign was given, should fasten to
the contrary part of the wall, for diverting the enemy. Then the word going
about, and the soldiers animated, not so much with hope of glory, or plunder,
(great matters being never exspected from a little Town) as with fury at their
preposterous confidence, The fight. The Royalists.
and the shame it would be, if the victorious Army were said to stick at
Sichem, both parties fought most gallantly; and while these, not daunted at the
death of such as fell close by them, ran up the walls: those standing upon
their ruins hindered them from climing, The Sichemers
by the interposition of their bodies; Peter Henriquez, and Baraiaz.
the event for a while was dubious: but the Spaniards having lost two Captains,
such fury and indignation possessed them, to be so affronted, The Town is
taken.
that anger whetting their courage, they made the Defendants turn their backs,
and from their quarter entered first the Town. Likewise in other places the
Townsmen being no longer able to resist, and hearing the Wallons scaled the
walls on the other side, terrified with this rumor, all at once quitted their
Posts. And the Town-souldiers, laying down their Arms, most of them yielded.
But some of the Garrison in the close of the evening (they were about two
hundred) suddenly got into the Castle. Others, They that fly are cut to pieces
almost an hundred and fifty, stealing away in the night out at the breaches,
fell upon the Horse (for that purpose placed by Alexander Farneze, beyond the
River) and were all to a man cut off. The Town plundered.
The Pillage of the Town, as he threatened the enemy, Prince Alexander gave his
soldiers, not permitting them to injure the women, and preserving by his
presence, the Houses of consecrated Virgins. He put the town to their choice of
Mercy, or the Sword, The Castle holds out.
according as they yielded, or stood out. Nothing now remained but the Castle,
secured only by the stubbornness of the Defendants, which stubbornness was
fomented by a hope, that the town-port being dammed up, they could raise no
Battery whereon to plant Cannon, and consequently neither could the Castle be
battered, nor they themselves forced to surrender in so short a time, but that
Relief might come from Diestem. The besieged were also favored by the
Spaniards want of Pioners, But Alex. Farneze batters down their works.
and workmen, to dig and bank. But Prince Alexander's dexterity overcame all
difficulties. For causing all the iron in the camp to be brought forth, and
looking upon the great Commanders round about him, And raises new of his own.
he himself first broke the earth; presently, by his example, the noblest of
them, with emulous alacrity: in conclusion, the Captains, and Common
soldiers, who at first seemed to disdain the work, followed it with such
eagerness, as that very night, though wearied with the day's fight, in four
hours space they not only levelled the earth-work on this side the Port; but
cast it up again within the Town, planting upon it their battery against the
Castle. But the next morning, when they in the Castle saw the new sconce, The
Castle rendered.
and thereon the Cannon, astonished with fear and admiration, they presently
yielded, imploring the Conquerours mercy, The Prisoners executed.
but in vain: Because they were the first that would not stoop, till broken and
subdued; and because most of them, contrary to their oath taken at the battle
of Gemblac, were once more in arms against the King, Prince Alexander
pretermitting unseasonable mercy, and resolving to punish them as traitors,
commanded the Governor of the Fort, with the principal soldiers and
Boutefeues, to be hanged over the Castle-walls; the rest, about four hundred
and seventy, to be put to the sword by night, and cast into the River that ran
below. Thus revenging hostile perjurie, he taught Diestem what to do by others
danger. Diestem terrified.
And they took warning by the example: For being summoned, though at first they
refused to submit, in hope of succors from Antwerp and Lyre; Feb. 24.
Yet when the Kings Horse were quartered beyond the River, and had fortified
some Countrey-mens houses, so, as they saw the enemy possessed of those parts,
by which they hoped relief would come: Submits.
and on the other side the River, Batteries raised, and Cannon drawn thither
with admirable celeritie; by their neighbors misfortune admonished not to be
wise too late, they rendered upon Articles, themselves and their City to the
King. And Alexander Farneze, that he might put a difference between their
Obedience, And are gratiou^^y used.
and others Contumacy, used these of Diastem with all humanity, protected them
and theirs, not suffering so much as one house to be plundered. But the
soldiers (about three hundred, The Garrison-souldiers take Pay of the King
most of them Wallons) with their Arms, and Baggage, not their Colors,
marching out according to Conditions, the Prince of Parma by their firm and
well timbred bodies, making an estimate of their military hearts, made it he
signified to them, That they might, if they would, be received into the Kings
Pay: whereto they assented, and taking a new Oath to serve his Majesty, had
their Colors delivered them, and were disposed of in the Wallon-Regiment.
Levia reduced.
Levia ran the fortune of Diestem; which Town lying between Tienen and Diestem,
Febr. 27.
Prince Alexander being commanded to reduce, it was the same day he attaqued
it, yielded upon conditions, and taking away their Colors from an hundred of
the Garrison, he dismissed them; but another hundred swearing to be faithful
to the King, he honored with the redelivery of their Colors, and gave them
entertainment.

These three Cities being rendered in seven days, Alexander Farneze brought
back the Victorious Army to Don John, and marched with him to Nivell, a Town in
the entrance of Haynolt, seated upon the skirt of Brabant, which Iustus
Villiers with six Colors of Foot, and two Cornets of Horse, C. Mansfeld
attemps Nivel.
kept for the States. Thither Don John had sent Charles Count Mansfeldt with
his French Tertia, who both by Battery and Assault had tried his fortune; Is
repulsed.
but was twice beaten from the walls, rather for want of luck, The Town treats
with Don John
then courage. But Don John and Prince Alexander coming up with the rest of the
Army, the Nivellers finding themselves too weak, wrote Letters to the General,
excusing the delay of their Rendition, not out of contumacy toward the King,
or the Kings brother; but in hatred to the French, unto whom in regard of the
ancient enmity between the Nations, A mutiny in the Catholic Army.
they held it a dishonor to submit. Whilst they treat, a tumult arose in the
Leaguer, caused by the Germans. Some companies of them had for two months
received no pay. Whereupon the soldiers took an occasion to rant; and sending
a Messenger to Don John, unless for their arrears he would give them the
pillage of the Town, proudly threatened to mutiny. Don John, who had resolved to
show his clemency to the Town, dismissed the messenger not without some hope.
Then, to separate the rest of that Battalion from the seditious companies, Don
John severs the Mutineers.
he commanded their faithful and valiant Colonel, Count Megan, with that part
which was not involved in the crime (taking along diverse companies besides them
out of other Regiments) instantly to march towerds Bruxells and Antwerp, as if
from thence the enemy was feared. By which separation, the Mutineers, without
their fellows help, left naked, were presently environed as enemies by the
whole Army. First, they were commanded to lay down their arms, then to deliver
the Authors of the mutiny: Demands the Principal of them.
Twelve they delivered up, out of those were chosen eight by lots: of those
eight four by the same chance were to die; Makes them cast lots for their lives.
for so many Don John resolved to punish. Yet at the earnest suit of several
Nations, petitioning for the particular men, two were, even at deaths door,
pardone; and two only remained to suffer. But one of these an old soldier,
and ever until that day faithful, going to die with one that never did
service, showed his scarrs; and alleging not falsely, his deserts, being
generally pitied, At last one is hanged.
wars pardoned, upon the humble desire of certain noble Spaniards. One
sacrifice finally expiating the offense of All, and quieting the sedition.
March 11.
That done, he returned to the treaty with Nivel, which was soon concluded, The
Nivellers render themselves.
in this manner. The Citizens indemnified were received into grace. The
Garrison leaving (except their swords) all their arms, The Garrison suffered to
depart without their Arms, which are bestowed upon the French.
ammunition, and baggage were permitted to depart. Which arms and baggage, Don
John bestowed upon the French, to make amends for their loss in the assault,
and some kind of satisfaction for the plunder of the Town, which in their hopes
they had devoured. But the Bounty was to many of them fatal. For the French
breaking into the Palace of Justice, where these Arms were kept, A gift that
ruins them. Mar. Delr. l. 5. Turb. Belg. says 200 were lost.
and in despite of their Officers fighting for their shares, not a few were
wounded; in the mean time, a spark by chance falling from a soldiers match,
into a Flask of Powder, and with the flash firing the priming pans of the
Muskets that lay on heaps, and were by the enemy left charged; The like
misfortune formerly happened to their Nation,
almost an hundred and twenty were slain outright, or miserably maimed, and
bloudying the Palace with an unexspected slaughterdearly paid for their
rashness and precipitate avarice. Renewing the memory of that misfortune, Anno
1552.
which, in this very Province, befell their contrymen; who, Pont. Heuter. l.
3. Thuan. lib. 10.
the while their General treated with the inhabitants of Cimace, about the
render of the Town, scaling the walls in hope of plunder, as they ran about the
Castle which they had surprised, the powder taking fire, almost two hundred of
the plunderers were burnt. But at Nivel the rest of the French, The Frenchmen
move for a discharge from the service.
on what motive is uncertain, desired the Generals leave to depart. Whether
angry with their own unfortunate miscarriage in the siege of Nivel, so as they
could not brook the sight of their fellow soldiers; or whether losing their
hopes of pillage (which drew them to it before the Army came up) and therefore
discontented that the General had been so quick in giving them conditions, and
had (only that his clemency might be famed) spared a Town deserving to be
sacked: or lastly, whether (as I rather think) induced thereto by the States
Emissaries, which persuading them, Duke of Alen-Son.
that the Kings brother, the Duke of Alengon would come into the Low Countries
to oppose Don John, won them to his service. I am sure the Spaniard found, that
most of them, two months after, returned enemies out of France. Don John
easily grants their suit.
Whatsoever their reasons were, Don John willingly dismissed them, whom, though
gallant soldiers, yet impatient of military Discipline, especially under a
Spanish General, he could hardly govern: withal being covetous, and making
high demands, he, as it often happens, to avoid their ill opinions, sometimes
gave more, lest he should be suspected to give less, They return in arms
against him.
then they deserved. But almost six hundred of these men, that a while after
came back from France, to serve the enemy, had as evil fortune, as advice. For
surprising some villages in the entrance of Haynolt, whilst they feast, and
think themselves secure, Camillo a Monte falling upon their quarters, who for
his speedier march brought three hundred Horse with every one a Musketteer
behind him, presenting death before battle, killed above two hundred of them.
Part of them slain by surprise Part retire to a Fort.
The rest valiantly fighting, made good their retreat into the neighboring
Castle of Avena, under the command of Randulpho Cenamio a Luccese. To whom
Camillo sent Laurentio Tuccio, Cenamio's old friend (for they were Comrades in
the Wars of France with Sana Martinengo, and Sacramono Birago) in hope he might
persuade him to surrender. After a short parley, And will take no conditions.
broke off with some hot language, Cenamio in a hostile manner, though wounded
and bleeding, sent him away, professing he would sooner part with his life,
then with the Castle. Whereupon Camillo, more enraged, had now drawn out his
men to the assault. But not daring without Cannon to adventure upon the Castle,
new garrisoned by the French, he marched back to the Army, that was at the same
time, with strange celerity, victorious over Haynolt.

For after the render of Nivel, Towns surrendered to Don John.
diverse strong places of that Province, within fifteen days, yielded to the
King. Binch, Binch.
sometimes the delight of Mary Queen of Hungary, and therefore exposed to the
hatred of Henry the second of France. 1554.
It is reported, a stone was there found engraven by King Henry (in revenge of
his House, defaced by Queen Mary,) with these words, Bedlam-Queen, remember
Foblembre. Likewise Malbuge Malbuge.
upon the river of Sambre; Reux, Beaumont, Reux, Beanmont, Soigniac Barlamont.
Cimace taken by Assault.
Soigniac, Barlamont, and other towns, though little, yet very commodious for
quartering the Army in Haynolt. Cimace, the Principality of Duke Areschot,
stormed, and the Castle rendered upon these conditions, April 15.
That the Governor should march out safe, on horseback, The Castle yields
with his sword and dagger, the soldiers (that were six hundred) in the same
manner, only the Foot were to leave the rest of their arms and baggage. But at
Philipvil, a new city of Haynolt, only thirty three years old, yet by the site
and fortification very strong, for keeping off the incursions of the French,
the Army was more put to it then in any other place.

Philipvil stands in a great plain, Philipvil besieged.
upon somewhat a rising ground; its circumference is very narrow, It Is site.
but defended with five sconces, encompassed with high walls, lined thick with
earth to damp the Cannon-bullets, and guarded with a mavelous broad ditch.
Don John considering all this, delivered his opinion, that it was not to be
assaulted with the Sword, but with the Spade, the old and faithful instrument
for taking places fortified; all our great soldiers (even at this day, when we
are grown so much more ingenuous then our Ancestors, in multiplying the engines
of death) being not able to invent a surer way to ruin walls; which are less
endangered by the thunder of the Cannon, then by this slow and silent weapon of
the Pioner; whence soldiers have a Proverb, It Is invaded
that it is the spade and pickax, which build and destroy Forts. Therefore after
he had drawn a line about the town, and brought his trenches near the ditch,
Don John commanded the Pioners, working under long and thick boards, As we read
in Caesar, Livie, and others.
in the form of a Tortois, covered with raw hides to secure them from Grenades
(anciently called Vineyards, and Galleries) to enter the ditch, and with their
Pickaxes and Spades to undermine the foundation of the wall. Which whilst they
(guarded by the soldiers) strongly endeavored, the defendants sallying out,
and at the same time others from the walls pouring down stones and wildfire,
they had diverse bloody encounters, Don John performing the parts of a General
and a common soldier.
with great loss on both sides. Don John in the mean time, omitting no duty
either of a General, or Gentleman; so as at the works, he both called upon,
and contended with the common soldier. At last, the hearts of the besieged no
less shaken then their walls, partly being divided among themselves, so that
first they imprisoned Florineus Governor of the Town for favoring the
Royalists, and afterward released him; partly upon news of the defeat of those
forces, which to relieve the Town, It is rendered.
the Prince of Orange sent for out of France; they began a Treaty, Upon these
terms.
demanding indemnitie for the City; and that so many of their soldiers as
would serve the King, might have three months pay, then due to them from the
States: May 19.
the rest to be suffered to depart, with drums beating, Colors flying, and the
wonted pomp of soldiers, that carry out the funeral of a city. Their demands
being granted, almost five hundred of the Garrison changed their service. As
many, with one Troop of Horse, departed: the Town reduced to the Kings
obedience, was continued under the Command of their old Governor Florineus.

The End of the ninth Book.
The History of the LOW-COVNTREY WARS. The tenth Book.
IN the mean time Don John of Austria, 1578.
having by his daily and nightly Labor contracted a weakness of Stomach, The
expedition of Limburg by Don John in his sickness committed to Alexander
Farneze.
and a Languishing of his whole Body; whilst he went to Namure for his health,
left the Army to Prince Alexander But first holding a Council of War about
the besieging of Limburg, which it was feared would otherwise do much hurt to
the Province of Luxemburg, he commended that Service to the Prince of Parma. He
willingly undertook it, Why he undertakes it.
and the rather, because he hoped to fight with John Casimir Brother to the
Prince Elector Palatine, who, it was said, would bring his Army that way into
the Low Countries, thereby to vindicate (as he told the great Commanders) the
honor of the Royal Army, which in some men's Letters was aspersed, as if they
shunned the Enemy, and durst not come to a Battle with the States; but that
declining the Encounter, they carried the War up and down, only to bug-beare
Towns and Villages. Therefore Prince Alexander, Part of his Forces sent before.
sending before Gabriell Nignio a valiant Spanish Colonel, with seven Colors
of Musketters, and commanding Camillo a Monte should follow with the Horse to
second Nignio, when he stormed the Suburbs of Limburg, he himself, about
Midnight, moved with the Spanish and Wallon Foot, June 7.
leaving Fronsberg's Regiment to conduct ten piece of Cannon that came after.
And Nignio, beating the first Companyes that opposed him, afterward with some
loss taking the Suburbs, The Suburbs taken.
got a huge booty of Cattle and Victual. But as it was a work of too much
time to besiege the Town, so it seemed of too much difficulty presently to
storm it. For Limburg stands upon a high Rock, the Valley about it being all
craggy, The site of Limburg.
and therefore, save only by the higher ground toward the South, inaccessible.
Besides, it might be relieved by the River Vuest running through the Town.
West.
All this troubled not Prince Alexander, who Viewing the Place, Wo^kes in order
to an Assault.
chose a Hill whereon to plant his Cannon, between which and the Town was the
smoothest part of the Valley. From the Hill he commanded the Pioners to run a
Trench sloping down into the Valley, and from thence to carry it within sight
of the Town, thence turning again obliquely, to bring it to the Sconce at the
very City gate: whilst the rest of his Workmen on the other side undermined a
Tower at some distance from the Castle, shooting out like a promontory. In both
Works was more of Terror then Danger to the Town. For they had scarce broke
the Earth two foot deep, when they were hindered by Rock. Yet making blindes
of Boughs they defended their Trenches against the Shot from the Walls: Prince
Alexander himself hastening the men at work, Prince Alexanders Letter to the
Limburgers
sometimes visiting the Diggers, sometimes the Miners. He likewise used
gracious Invitations to the Limburgers sending them Letters by a Trumpetter:
Wherein he forbear to reprove, but rather admonished them, as assured of the
Victory, and only careful not to destroy the King's City and Subjects by the
Sword. They receiving the Letter from the Trumpetter at the Gate, and reading
it in public, bade him return at the same hour next day. They defer the
sending of their Answer.
But when he came, they told him no Resolution could be Pitched upon, by reason
of the difference betwixt the Townsmen and the Soldiers, but if he would come,
yet once again, he should the day following have an absolute Answer. Whereat
enraged.
Prince Alexander knowing that the Besieged used such trifling Delays, only to
gain time, forbade the Messengers to go any more: conceiving it below the
Dignity of the King's Army, and that it would show like a Confession of some
Weakness: He hastens the finishing his works.
but was more industrious in advancing toward the Town his Trenches on the
one side, and his Mines upon the other: Comes Caesius overseeing the Works,
Comes Nicolaus Caesius.
a bold and active man; He himself (fortifying the Hill with Trenches and
Pallisadoes, setting up Gabions to be filled with Earth and turfe, and drawing
Cannon upon their Cariages in sight of the Enemy that shot continually) watched
two nights; both hideous ones, that with rain from Heaven, this with Thunder
from the Walls. But the Battery beginning at the break of day with nine great
Cannon from the Hill: And begins to batter from the hill.
when the Limburgers saw their Walls shaken, and a great Part thereof, A large
Breach made.
no less then thirty Cubits beaten down in four hours space; The besiegers
come up to the City gates.
and likewise a Trench brought down the hill (a thing they held impossible) by
which the Soldiers marched under covert and were ready to assault the Port: A
Messenger from the Town to Prince Alexander.
Instantly sending to Prince Alexander, the Town earnestly beseeched him a
little while to respite the Assault, and grant a Cessation of Arms but for an
hour, for their last consultation. The Prince of Parma, though it was a
welcome Message, because he well knew unless they yielded of themselves it
would be a long Work to force them. Yet lest his facility in condescending
might argue some diffidence in his Strength, putting on a face of Terror he
angerly told the man, His Answer.
there had been now going and coming enough: nor was it necessary his
Soldiers should purchase that by other men's Consultations, which shortly would
be their own by the Law of Arms. Howbeit to mix Clemency with Threats, he
bade him tell the Limburgers, He grants them an hours time to consider.
that he would not deny them an houre's Deliberation: but if they dallyed any
longer he would come with a Mischief to them, The women Supplicate from the
walls.
and break off their Debate. The Cannon scarce left playing, when a Crowd of
Women appeared upon the Walls with their little ones in their arms, their
hands lifted up to the furious Assailants, and begging Peace and Pardon on
their bended knees. June 16. The Town is rendered.
In the very same hour the Limburg-Commissioners (though the Governor would
have hindered it) securing the Lives and Fortunes of the Townsmen and Soldiers,
rendered the City and Castle to the Prince of Parma. All the Garrison (about
1000.) taking the new Oath were entertained into the King's service. Only the
Governor, infinitely detesting the baseness of his men, was suffered with his
Wife to go for Aquisgrane. But Prince Alexander, entering the Town, Thought
fortified.
and viewing the new Fortification, defensive Bulwarks and Sconces turfed and
pallisadoed, strong as Castles, with all that had been done upon the place by
the ingenious Engineer: And in a condition to hold out
besides 15 great Brasse-Cannon, and many less, as also no little Magazine of
Arms and Ammunition: The Conquerours give God thanks.
then, measuring the greatness of his Victory, he himself gave thanks
(commanding the like should be solemnly done by the Army) to God the God of
battles, by whose Favor a Town of that Strength, not to be taken without
much pains, cost, and loss (as it is usual) of the best Soldiers, so easily,
and without blood, ignorant of its own power, had yielded to him.

The same day the Prince of Parma appointed his great Officers to attacque the
remaining Cities of that Province, P. Alexander summons Dalhem.
some one, some another. And all within a few days obeyed his Summons, except
Dalhem, that was stormed. Thither Prince Alexander sent Camillo a Monte with a
Letter exhorting the Town to return to the King's obedience. But the
Soldiers of Holland and Gelderland (not above two hundred and fifty) which
held the Castle, His Trumpet not admitted,
shot at the Messenger, and would by no means suffer a Parley, or the Delivery
of his Letter. Upon notice hereof the Prince of Parma wondering at so much
confidence in so small a Town, calling to him Henry Viennius, Lord of
Ceuranium, Go (said he) to Dalhem, take Cannon and shoot me a Letter into the
Town. He speedily carrying along six great Gunnes with his Regiment of
Burgundians, and four Colors of Germans, The Castle batterred,
daunted the Town, and turning his Cannon upon the Castle, into which
Soldiers had retreated that would soon die then yield, he began a fierce, but
fruitless battery: for the Walls were as stubburne as the Men, To no purpose,
and easily bafled the Cannon. Till the Burgundians undertaking the Scalado,
The Burgundians scale it.
set Ladders to two sides, and with incredible courage fighting hand to hand
upon the Walls, with various success, at last with the losle of ten, though
many more were wounded, they stormed the Castle and the Town; with such a
Slaughter of the Defendants (of whom not one escaped, And take both Castle and
Town by storm
) and Townsmen, that no age, no sex was spared, but the Army long affronted
and kept off, poured their fury like a Torrent equally on all. June 10.
Where an accident happened, as sacrilegious, as barbarous. Into a Church for
Sanctuary with the rest of her weak Sex, With a great Slaughter of the
Citizens. The sad fortune of a Maid.
fled a maid of about 16. years old, Daughter to the Governor slain in the
Assault, and now to be registered among the Examples of unfortunate Beauty. She,
handsome both in her person and her Dress, was taken notice of, and
immediately seized, Two Soldiers strive for her and in their struggle, use
their prisoner most inhumanely,
by a couple of Soldiers, one a German, the other a Burgundian; who
quarrelling about the prize tugged the poor Lady, in vain objecting the
Reverence due to the place, and crying out for succor (which was all she
could) to God and his Saints. But while they fought she being in the middle,
either by chance or by the malice of him that found himself the weaker,
receiving a cruel wound in her neck, all bloody, she fell down upon the
floor; the other was about to have revenged it, when a great sort more coming
in, the man, lest he might lose his prize, and some other should enjoy her, mad
with Rage, struck at the maid looking about her in hope to make an escape, and
holding up her hands to the rest, whom she thought more merciful, and with his
Sword gave her a deadly cut under the Ear; Who wounded and half dead.
ready to double his blow, if the Company (one of which was Signior Paulo
Rinaldo a confident to Prince Alexander, that lifted up his voice and sword
together) had not in time frighted the villain. But the two Soldiers knowing
Rinaldo's Intimacy with Prince Alexander, Is taken from them,
in fear of his Authority ran away. Rinaldo carrying her to her Father's
House, with much humanity took care of the Lady, But immediately dies.
and instantly sent for Surgeons to dress her: but she, past all cure, was
scarce laid upon her bed, when she gave up the Ghost, leaving indeed a foul
blot upon the Catholic Army: which notwithstanding would have been washed out
with the blood of both the Ruffians, if they (condemned with the general
execration, and searched for to be executed) had not prevented punishment by
running quite away. The benefit that followed the taking of Limburg.
But the PrinceS of Parma in the space of twenty days losing just that number
of his men, with so little damage, recovered for the King the whole Province of
Limberg: a very great Addition at this time, to the Royal Party, not so much
for the greatness of the Province (which is indeed but little, compared unto
the rest) as for the opportunity of keeping out the enemy, which might easily
by that way have come from Germany. Besides the private benefit likewise
accruing to the Neighbour-Princes, Thanks sent to Alex. Farneze by the Princes
whose Estates lay near the Town.
particularly to the Bishop of Liege, and the Duke of Iuliers, both which by
several Embassies congratulated Prince Alexander for the happy course of his
Victories, either of them giving thanks in his own behalf, especially for the
destroying or removing the Garrisons of Limburg and Diestem, To the
confederates great grief at first: afterward to their great joy.
that daily robbed their Subjects. But the news of this Victory awakened
diverse Passions in the States at Antwerp. Grief, at first, when they heard
Limburg, was taken, excessive Joy when it was rumoured through the Town, and a
printed Pamphlet likewise published, that the Castle of Limburg the Magazine
being fired, was shattered to the ground, the Spanish Commanders miserably and
deservedly blown up, Upon a Report, that Prince Alexander, with diverse more,
was slain.
the Prince of Parma Mondragonio, Heirg, and the other great Field-Officers
buried in the Ruins: and that Don John of Austria was run mad upon it; and
resolved to make his Retreat from the Low Countries. All this appears to be
forged by the Prince of Orange, that he might the easier keep up the people's
hearts, Coined by the Prince of Orange.
dejected with the Austrian victories, by making a fained, since he could not
make a real Slaughter: and likewise that the rest of the money granted to him
long ago by the Arch-Duke's procurement and command, now by occasion of
hastening the Army against Don John (who had lost all his Commanders) might be
speedily collected. Why such kind of news is often forged,
An ordinary artifice practiced at this day by many, that give out the quite
contrary to what has happened: partly to defraud the adverse party of the first
Heat and Spring of Joy, which afterward will come more languishing; and
perhaps intermixed (as all things humane are) with some improsperous Success:
partly to use that short time wherein they are believed to have got the better,
for ordering their Affairs by a fruitful Anticipation: slighting the future
shame of the lie, balanced with their present profit. What truth was in this
Rumor.
Yet this invention of the Prince of Orange and his Faction had some little
Truth in it. News and Money being never so adulterate, but they must have a
mixture of right-Mettall. For the Day after the Rendition of Limburg-Castle,
the powder that was kept in one of the Towers fired, by chance or upon design,
blowing up the Walls, the Stones which fell again, beat down a great part
of the Tower, killed four, and those only Common Soldiers, hurting six or
seven. One passage among the rest Prince Alexander writes to his Mother for a
Miracle. He had left Christophero Mondragonio with a Company of Spaniards
Governor of the Castle and Town; A Miraculous Accident June 30.
He himself by God's Providence that night returned to the Camp. The Powder
in the mean time took fire, and blew up the Tower with the building round
about, Mondragonio's Chamber by the fall of the upper Lodgings being beaten to
the ground. The Soldiers in the morning, when all fear of the Enemy was past,
ran to behold their fellowe's fortune, lamenting the fate of their valiant and
Noble Commander Mondragonio that lay next the Tower. A strange Story and
Spectacle, they find the Seeling and Walls of the room broken down, but so
much of the floor yet left as bore up Mondragonio's bed, with a Trunk
standing besides it. The Soldiers at once trembling and rejoicing fetched off
their Colonel safe and unhurt, the Trunk (which I suppose Mondragonio
himself had drawn out of the fire and Ruins) they beheld full of Relics,
and consecrated Church-Plate believing that to be the Cause why the fire out of
reverence proved so innocent; and that the very Preservation of those holy
things opportunely saved the Pious preserver. The Deaths of Count Barlamont and
Count Megen.
This while at Namure dyed Charles Count Barlamont and Lancelot his Son Count
of Megen ( this fell sick at the Siege of Philipvill, he was old and had lived
out his time) whose Funerals Don John celebrated with the Sorrow of all good
men. C. Barlamont's Encomion.
Indeed Count Charles as valiantly and constantly as any Low-countreyman
whatsoever, both at home and abroad, fought for religion and his Prince;
teaching the same Arts to his Children; whereof the Lord of Heirg, Aegidius.
was General of the Train of Artillery, and Colonel of the Wallons,
Lancello^ Charles.
Megen Commander of the Germans, Floio Heirge's Lieutenant Colonel, Altapen
Captain of a Troop of Horse, in their Father's life time: and after his death
the first of these succeeded him in the Government of the Province of Namure,
and in the Treasurership.

Hitherto all went prosperously with Don John, Don John's prosperous fortune
troubles the Enemy.
which struck no little fear into the Archduke: and the States openly taxed
the Prince of Orange as taken up with other Affairs. But he was founding his
Empire on the Seacoast of Holland, Amsterdam, attempted by the P. of Orange
whence he might extend it over Brabant. To this Design when he saw the only
Rub was Amsterdam, the richest Town of all Holland, 1577. November.
equally faithful to Religion and their King: all his Endeavors were bent to
get it either forcibly, or by Stratagem; and to use Force was vain; for in the
end of the last year this City being surprised by the Orangians, Beats out
his men.
and they advanced as far the Marketplace, the Citisens taking Arms expelled
those victorious Gheuses, Mar. Del. l. 4. Turb. Belg.
with a great Slaughter of the Enemy, not without the memorable Assistance of
some Women that privately carried a very great Gun, For which the Women are to
be commended,
which they mounted and discharged, killing a huge sort of the Gheuses.
Afterward the Town blockt up with new Forces by Sea and Land held out a long
Siege, February. At last the Town is rendered, and deceived.
till the Prince of Orange promising them free Exercise of the Catholic
Religion, they at last surrendered. Yet he, when they upon this Capitulation
thought themselves secure, contrary to their Articles introduced a strong
Garrison, and Promoters of Heresy, who causing all holy things to be defaced,
their Priests to be turned out, and Heresy by consequence brought in (a surer
Guard then any Garrison to keep Cities from the Spaniard) he secured
Amsterdam, The Prince of Orange votes for a Truce March 10.
and revenged the men lost a month before at Gemblac, Sellio in the Kings name,
with a long-continued Slaughter here. Then designing to bring Forces out of
Germany, he persuaded the Archduke and the States to make a Truce for some
Months with Don John of Austria. For Iuan Sellio was returned from Spain sent
in the Kings name to use his utmost Endeavors for a Peace; Treates with the
Deputies of the Estates.
and delivering Letters of this Tenure to Don John, passed to Antwerp, where to
the Deputyes of the Estates he imparted secret Commands from the King,
promising largely to satisfy their desires: and, if so be they would resume
their old Religion and Loyalty to their Prince, he would call Don John out of
the Low Countries; and substitute in his Place either Alexander Farneze Prince
of Parma, or the Archduke Ferdinand Uncle to the Emperor, or else confirm
the Archduke Matthias; yet proposing, But to no end.
like a King, many other Conditions. But the great Lords had their ears now
luted against the sound of Peace, both with the once tasted sweetness of the
Sovereign Authority, and by many men's Persuasions, That no Peace was to be
hoped from the incensed Spaniard. Besides their Censor, The Prince of Orange
will only give ear to a Truce.
the Prince of Orange, was busy cavilling at the King's Promises, amplifying
the Spanish Tyranny, the Lowcountreymens Patience, and their near approaching
Liberty. So as he made them answer Sellio, they would presume upon the Kings
proffered benignity, and therefore desired, till the Provinces had consulted
about that Election, a Cessation of Arms. Sellio, before he communicated the
Deputy's Answer to Don John, Which Prince Alexander likes not.
discovered to Prince Alexander the King's Resolution to create him Governor
of the Low Countries: and he himself being to treat with Don John for a
Cessation of Arms, March. 25.
was earnest with the Prince of Parma to use his Power with his uncle in
advancing the King's design for Peace. His Letter to his Father Octavio Duke
of Parma.
But Alexander Farneze refused to meddle in it, professing that any Truce at
present would be disadvantageous both to Religion, and the King. Nay in his
Letter to his Father he said, He should not like to be Governor of the
Low Countries upon such Conditions, as Don John of Austria came to it, and gave
the Duke these Reasons. For that were, said he, even to be delivered into these
men's hands a fettered Prisoner, and prescribed a life hateful to my self,
idle, inglorious, and, my Genius considered, most unhappy. Indeed I, that find
the Impulse of Nature inclines me to seek by the Glory of Arms the
Immortality of my name, cannot but hope, the Divine Assistance will enable me
in that profession above the Common sort of men. And I stand upon it the more,
as conceiving how much it behooves the King to suite all his Ministers with fit
Employments. Nor was Don John otherwise opinioned of a Truce. Neither is it
approved of by Don John.
Which in behalf of the States being afterward earnestly pressed by
Ambassadors from the Emperor, Don John the more earnestly denied,
conjecturing by the Requesters unusual Endeavors their Necessity.

And his hope was advanced, New Officers from Spain.
by the opportune Arrival of many in the Camp. For at the same time, beyond
Expectation, were come from Spain, Pedr. de To. ledo.
Pedro de Toledo, Son to Garcia Viceroy of Sicily: Lopez Figueroa* that
commanded a Spanish Regiment, which he brought with him out of the old
Garrisons of Italy, Lopez. Figueroa.
and Alphonso Leva, Son to Sancho Viceroy of Navarre, Alphons-Leva.
with a hundred selected Spanish Gentlemen, to whom the Brother of Alphonso,
Sancho Leva, Gabr. Serbellonio.
was Lieutenant, and Diego Hurtado Mendoza, Alphonso's Uncle, Ensign. Not long
before this Gabriell Serbellonio was released from Tunis by Gregory the
thirteenth (in Exchange for Prisoners kept in Hardrians Tower, ever since the
Battle of Lepanto) an eminent Commander, that both in regard of his perfect
years and judgment in military affairs, was by Don John and all the Royal
Party highly esteemed, especially having levied by Don John's Command 2000
Italians in the Province of Millaine, and brought them along with him. But
nothing more encouraged the Army, then the return of the Lord Bill out of
Spain, June 22.
sent thither by Don John after the battle of Gemblac, to move his Majesty
for new Supplies, which he obtained. New supplies of money from the King to Don
John.
For the King made Don John an Exhibition of 300000. Ducats a month, to pay
30000. Foot, and 6000. Horse, letting him know, this was the sum he could
and would spare for the Low-countrey-Warre, and cutting off all hope of an
enlargment. To the Prince of Parma his Majesty once more offered, To Alexander
Farneze.
which he commanded him to accept, a yearly pension of 10000. Crowns and 2000.
for his Friends and servants; sending him the Arreares thereof since the day of
his coming into the Low Countries. He likewise confirmed Octavio Gonzaga
General of the Horse, To Octavio Gonzaga.
with a stipend of 500. Crowns per Month. To Mondragonio.
Christopher Mondragonio and Francesco Verdugo, Spanish Colonells, had an
Assignation, that of 800. Crowns, this of 500. and Anthonio Olivera chief
Commissary of the Horse was to have 300. To Verdugo. To Ant. olivera.
yearly: Besides he gave Charles Count Mansfeldt 16000. Crowns, and
distributed many Donatives to others. To Count Mansfeldt. New levies in Italy.
But at the same time Don John understood, that by orders from the King new
Forces were raised in Italy for the Low-countrey-service. The Governor of
Millane nominating for their Commanders, Under these Commanders.
Alphonso Count de Somai, a Millanese; Vincentio Carafa, Prior of Hungary, a
Neapolitan; Pyrrho Malvezzi a Bononian, and Stephano Mutino: all men of
quality, and able Soldiers. Yet it stung Don John to the quick, Don John
troubled at it, Stops their proceedings.
that Officers of his Army should be chosen at the pleasure of the King's
Ministers. Therefore dispatching away Letters to the King, after his humble
thanks for the Money and Men sent into the Low Countries by his Majesty; he
showed him. There would be no use of more Soldiers out of Italy; because he
had already ordered the Counts, Altempse and Polvillerio, old and faithful
Commanders to bring men from the nearest parts of Germany, some of which were
arrived: and his allowance, being limited, could hardly maintain the Army now
raised, much less that to be raised. So he stopped the Levies of Italy; yet in
the Low-countrey-Army still kept afoote the once believed Report of new Italian
Recruits, to discourage the enemy, and to animate his own forces. Indeed the
King's men needed no less Encouragement, considering what preparations were
made against them. Three Armies of the Enemy. The States Forces.
For an Army raised in Germany for the States had passed the Mose, and was now
before Nimmenghen; and Duke Alencon Brother to the King of France, of whom we
shall speak much hereafter, was with a French Army come to Mons the chief
City of Haynolt: The Duke of Alencon's,
and John Casimir with a very great strength marched toward Nimmenghen through
Gelderland; July 19.
certain intelligence whereof was brought from all parts to Don John, ^ohn
Casimir's.
who calling a Council of War, July 17.
resolved to fall upon some Quarter of the Enemy, and immediately enforce them
to fight. But either by his delay, or the Enemies expedition, it happened, that
the German Auxiliaries joined with the States Army, near Lyre, and Mechlin,
before Don John could bring his men to their Colors, and muster them. Yet he
had lost the opportunity, not the Desire of fighting, especially when at
another Council of War, Don John's Council of War.
he saw all the rest of the Commanders desirous of a battle, only the Prince
of Parma dissented, to the general Admiration; which he himself observing,
gave his reasons in this manner, and almost in these very words, which he wrote
into Spain to Samaniego. I see, Grandees of the War, you wonder I should not
concur, Alex. Farneze votes against fighting them
as one that many have taxed of Confidence, August 18.
none yet of Fear: you may therefore imagine I am induced by some great
considerations, that contrary to my custom I thus decline a Battle. Which
considerations, though I am better at Action then Discourse, I shall in short
explain. We invade an Enemy strong in number, safe in their ground, and
conveniences for relief, entrenched and pallisadoed by the adjoining woods. If
they, when we come to face them, knowing themselves secure, and therefore
slighting us, shall keep within their Trenches, by what Force, by what Art can
we draw them out into the Field? But if we only show our Army, and having given
them a sight of us, retire, what shall we gain by our troublesome March
hither, and the leaving our Garrisons naked, and consequently exposed to the
danger of the French: Yet their backwardness to fight will make them appear
the weaker, why rather should not our frustrated endeavors and our Retreat
show them to be invincible? Besides, never without loss di^^aany Army fall
off, and give the Word for a Retreat, though never so skilfully and
Souldierly. But suppose the Enemy, as we wish, draw out, and give us Battle
of their own accord. Or say our valor force their Trenches? shall we
presently promise our selves the Victory? Truly a wise General is concerned
not only to consider his own, but likewise the Enemies strength and
Inclination, and industriously in his heart to cast up a just account of what
benefit will result to himself, what to the enemy by the fortunate or
improsperous chance of War. Indeed my opinion is, that our condition and
theirs at the present differs very much. In the Royal Army, here in the Field
with us, all our strength consists; that being defeated (which Omen God turn
upon the Enemy) where shall we raise men to defend our Remainder of the
Low Countries against the Conqueror? But they will not be so much endangered
by the loss of a Battle. For if that Army we march against be routed, they
can recruit, assisted on the one part by Duke Alencon and his Frenchmen, on
the other by Prince Casimir, and the still increasing German Succors. But in
case (which is to be hoped from God's goodness and our Soldiers Courage) the
Catholic Army shall with a better Cause likewise have the better Fortune;
with how much blood, with what exchange of Gold for Dross must we buy the
victory, fighting before their Camp, with their fresh and entire Forces? But
when we have thus weakened our selves by conquering, if the French, that watch
all occasions, fall upon us; how I fear our Conquest will be followed with a
far greater misfortune; we indeed shall have the Honor of the Day, but
others reap the profit. In sum, we may be victorious in the Battle, and
vanquished in the War. Wherefore since in this our voluntary expedition, we
may in reason fear almost the same Disaster, whether conquered or conquering,
my opinion is, that we should give off the attempt, and at present check this
Courage rather great, Only Serbellonio concurres with Prince Alexander.
then fruitful. Don John thought this speech of the the Prince of Parma's,
more true then gallant: and therefore besides Gabriel Serbellonio (one that Don
John used to call Father, and to prefer his judgment before the rest) none
of all the Council of War was of Prince Alexander's mind. The rest, viz.
Gonzaga. Mansfeldt. Olivera Montin. and Mondragonio were of Don John's opinion.
And the General carried it for assaulting of the confederates Camp, before
they should be reinforced with new supplies. Count Mansfeldt the Campe-master
held it a point of Honor for the Royal Army to rouse the enemy within covert,
that trusted more to the place, then either to their Arms or Valor. The
General of the Horse, Octavio, said, the Soldiers Alacrity must be used
before Delay had dulled it, and that they were to follow the happy presage of
victory expressed in their unanimous consent to fight: and a success was to be
hoped, especially at this time, by reason of the enemi's Discord. For Federick
Perenot, Lord of Campin, by the Prince of Orange's Command was sent Prisoner to
Gant, Especially hearing the Prince of Orange was fallen out with Campin.
and his House at Bruxells plundered, because he was reported to be making his
Peace with the King, by means of his Brother Cardinal Granvell: and indeed he
was discontented that the Prince of Orange slighted him in Comparison of
Aldegund. The like was by the Prince of Orange attempted upon Hese, And with
Hese and Glime Mart. Delr. l. 4 Turb. Belg.
and Glime both which they say upon a rumor of the Prince of Oranges Murder
(Spread by his own Ministers and Direction, very ominously for himself, only
to try the faith of others) expressed no dubious signs of Joy. And therefore
in imitation of the Battle at Gemblac, Don John resolve to fight.
they having now intelligence of like divisions among the Confederates, their
Arm factious and destitute of these Commanders, should be forthwith assaulted,
and no doubt but the like Success would follow, as Don John concluded. The
Battle therefore being now resolved on, The site of the Enemy's Camp
described by the Kings Scoutes.
Mutio Pagano and Amator of Abadien, Officers of Horse, sent Spies to discover
the Enemies Camp and to Choose the ground where they should fight, brought back
word, That the Confederates Army was entrenched not far from Machlin, the
Rere guarded by the Village of Rimenant, the Flanks with a Wood and a Fen,
their Front with a Trench and a Line drawn between both the Flanks. Before
that Trench was an open Plain very commodious for drawing out the Enemy to
Battle, but they found no Avenue to the Village, but one, near the Wood, on
the left hand, a way that would only hold six or seven men a breast. Don John
moves toward them.
Upon this Discovery, Don John sending back some Companyes to garrison the
Frontire-Townes for keeping out the French, moved from Tienen, and passing over
his Army at Areschott-Bridge, Marshalls his Army.
the second days March he came within sight of the Enemy: The number of his
forces.
and knowing the Plain, by the Description his Scouts had made, he presently
imbattailed his Army consisting of 12000 Foot and 5000 Horse. Alex. Farneze
sues for the honor to command the Van.
Then the Prince of Parma, whilst Don John put his men into Battalia, was a
very earnest Suitor, in case they fought that day, that he might lead up the
Spanish Infantry ordered to begin the Battle, to demonstrate, as I conceive,
that his Courage to advance the Expedition was no less active, then his
Counsel formerly to retard it. Don John admiring the Greatness of his Spirit,
and Contempt of Danger, at first put him off, at length consented, because he
knew it would be of great Concernement under whose conduct that Battalion
should march, which must give the Omen to the Victory. But till they joined
Battle he would have Prince Alexander's Company to ride about the Field with
him. Don John of Austria challenges the Enemy to a Battle.
In the interim his Army was drawn out in the entrance of the Plain, and by
the ordinary sound of Drums and Trumpets challenged the Enemy to fight. Where
expecting for three hours, They answer him not.
and the Enemy not moved, with any kind of Invitation to the Field, still
keeping within their Trenches; He sends one to anger and rouse them.
Don John called Alphonso Leva that commanded an extraordinary Regiment of
Musketters, and said to him, GoAlphonso, put thy self and thy men into that
narrow way between the Wood and Trench, The flying Squadron. Giovanni Baptista
a Monte.
as if thou had a design to enter the Village in despite of their Army: no
doubt but they will oppose thee, when they come on, do thou retire, to draw
them into the Field. Withal he commands the Marquess a Monte with three
Troops of Curassiers The General for the confederates
and Lanciers to bend that way, Uses the same artifice to deceive the Royalists.
and be in the Rere of Leva's Foot. The Enemies whole Army under the Archduke
and the States was commanded by Maximilian Hennin Count of Bolduc, an
experienced and wary Soldier. He intending to frustrate Don John's endeavors,
either by sitting still, or acting with some Stratagem, commanded John's Norreys
an English Colonel, who defended that Post, to meet the Enemy, but so as not
to fight at too great a distance from the place. The Battle was therefore
begun, between the Spanish and English, The fight At first little increases
more and more.
very gently at first, for neither Leva nor Norreys meant to engage very far,
till to relieve the English, because many of them were slain, Count Egmont
coming in with his Reserve of Horse, A Monte likewise immediately advanced with
His. Against Robert Stuart also bringing up with him some Scotch Foot Don John
sent Ferdinando de Toledo with the rest of those active Foot under his
Command, and Camillo a Monte in the Rere of them, with two Cornets of Horse, he
himself moving forward in Battalia with the whole Army in hope of a general
Battle with the now irritated Enemy. The Prince of Parma also leaping off his
Horse, Alexander Farneze in the Head of the Foot.
took the place which he had so earnestly desired among the Spanish Infantry,
and appeared in in the head of them with his Pike in his hand. And now the
Forlornes of both Armies fell on, not like Skirmishers, but as if the Sum of
Affairs were in dispute. The Kings men beat the (...)-Enemy.
When Leva having happily lined the thickets with his Musketeers, possessed
himself of the Wood on the left hand, and Toledo entering the Pass which had
few left to defend it, both with great Violence, Take their trenches and the
village.
backed by the Horse assailed the Trenches, and at last beat the Enemy,
sometimes retiring, sometimes facing about and fighting, even into the Village.
Nor did their Flight seem to be ended there, but forasmuch as they fired the
Hutts they left behind them, it was undoubtedly believed they meant not only
to leave their Camp but the Village too. But then Toledo and A Monte sending
Comes Caesio to Don John, They send to Don John for more men to make good the
Chase. Co. Nicol. Caesio. Alex. Farneze doubts a stratagem.
beseeched him presently to dispatch away fresh men, for the Victory was his
own. But Prince Alexander, because he had observed, that the Enemies without
much Dispute quitted their Camp, and fled orderly, as if it were upon Design,
began to suspect it was not done by Necessity, but on Purpose. He therefore
instantly met Don John, and finding him unresolved about sending in Supplies,
increased the Generals Doubts, professing his own Opinion was, that the Camp
which the Enemy had so easily parted with, and not formerly secured, as the
custom is, with Fieldpieces, was only chosen by way of Stratagem to deceive
the Royal Army with vain hopes of Victory, and under color of Flight to
bring them into the danger of an Ambuscado. Wherefore it would be good, till
the Place were discovered, to call off his men that pursued the Enemy. And
persuades Don John to call back his men.
And Caesio went from Don John, with whom the Iealously wrought very much, to
command them to make a Stand. But first they were come to the Enemies true
Camp.
But they had already past the Town, (chasing the Enemy that fled
scatteringly, and were entered the Plain toward Machlin hemmed in with the
River Demera on the one side, and on the other with a thick Wood: and such a
military heat transported them, that being blinded with a Cloud of dust, before
they understood the Mys^ery, they saw themselves come to the Enemye's true
Camp lying between the River and the wood, entrenched round, The site of the
Enemies Camp. Their number.
and strongly guarded on the Front with Cannon. There the Enemy had pitched;
being no fewer then 12000 Foot, The fight renewed.
and 7000 Horse, distributed into several Divisions, so as they reached as
far as Machlin. All this daunted not the Royalists, but making a Halt (for
Norreys now supplied from the Neighboring Camp, had rallyed his flying men)
they put themselves (as well they could) in order, suddenly imbattailed, and
with new Ardour began the fight. These were 5000 Foot, all Musketeers, and
most of them Spaniards, the Horse were Italians, Spaniards, and Low-countreymen
about 600, armed with Lances and Pistols. What forces fought on both sides.
The Enemy was equal in Foot, superior in Cavalry. Yet both Armies fought
with strength above their numbers, The Consede rates. The Royalists.
and with Courage above their Strength: those the Success of their plott and
nearenesse to their Camp; these the shame of being cozned and a kind of
Desperation precipitated to a Battle, The Scots fight naked.
and made them join with far more animosity. Some Companyes of Scots made
themselves remarkable, August 1.
who either in bravery, or not able to endure the heat of their Running, and
the Day, the Sun putting the whole Sky into a Flame, stripped themselves,
contented only with their Shirts, some casting off those too, and tying them
about their middles, came on naked among the armed men. Yet many of them were
no less safe then others that wore Arms which made them unweldier, not so
nimble to avoid a hurt, slower to rise when they were down, last in a Retreat,
and often either slain by the Enemy, trod under their horses feet, or taken
Prisoners. But the Enemy's Cannon often and safely thundering from their
Trenches, The Royalists in a sad condition lying open to the Enemies Cannon.
cruelly shattered the Kings men, from which destruction not able to defend
themselves, because no part of the Plain was free from the Shot, they found
but one Remedy, which was with their last endeavors to assault their Trenches.
But those were likewise fortified, and they themselves hardly could stand a
Charge, much less assail others, So that Caesio returning to Don John with a
true account of their Condition, They send to Don John for Fresh men.
beseeched him, since they could not retire without being pursued and ruined,
nor yet much longer sustain the fury of the Cannon, that he would send Aid
which might encourage them with assurance of Success, to invade the Posts of
the Enemy. Who in his Anger at first denies them.
Don John transported with Grief and Anger, though he denied to send so much
as one man to those, that engaging beyond the limits of his express Command,
had brought themselves into those Straites and Intricacyes; Then advises,
yet he was pleased briefly to hear the Judgment of Alexander Farneze,
Octavio Gonzaga, and Count Mansfeldt. All which concurred in opinion, that it
was not safe to send others, who rather would partake their danger, And
resolves to have the place considered.
then come to their relief; yet that such men ought not to be deserted with so
great a loss both of Soldiers and Reputation: but that the place at a nearer
distance should be viewed, and a Resolution taken according to the present
Exigence and Expedient. This Charge was committed to Prince Alexanders Care,
Alex. Farneze goes to view it and contrives a way to fetch off the men.
who galloping thither, and taking a strickt Survey both of the Danger of the
party that fought, and of all the Advantages of the Field for their Retreat,
observed, that in the hollow of the Plain between certain hedges and
well-planted Orchards, lay a Pass, by which he despaired not to bring off the
Foot. He advised about it with Don John, and Gonzaga; not denying, but it was
a dubious and almost a rash Attempt: yet he said, that in acute Diseases
sometimes desperate Remedies are not unskilfully applied by the Phisicians.
Which he executes.
His design being approved, he himself undertook it, the rest easily giving
way that he should fetch them off; which he did in this manner. At the Avenues
of the hedges, planting Musketeers, he ordered them with a sudden hail of
Shot to stop the Advance of the Enemy; and commanded Gonzaga, that rallying
and animating the Horse, he should bring them to guard the Rere whilst they
retreated, and when the Foot were safe among the hedges, give the Enemy a hot
Charge, and by the way they first entered, between the Village and the Wood,
narrow indeed, but fair and commodious for horse, retire to his Post. Nor
with less care the Austrian General in the mean time, riding about the Army,
Don John exhorts his men to keep their ranks.
exhorted the Colonells and Captains, that keeping their men firm in rank
and file, they should receive their fellows returning from the fight, without
Disorder, which was destructive to the enemy at the battle of Gemblac: where
their Horse fled scatteringly, and routed their own Foot: which very
misfortune might befall the Royal Army, if upon the Approach of their fellows
amazed and distracted, the Enemy, animated by others Fear, should then invade
them. Things thus disposed, Prince Alexander before he called off those that
fought, Alex. Farneze makes the Foot give ground upon Design,
commaned the foot, partly as if they gave ground, partly as if they meant to
wheel about and fight again, by degrees to fall back, till they came to that
part of the plain which he had showed to Alphonso Leva: then he gave a
private Sign for the Retreat, And the Horse to make it good
and Gonzaga with his Horse stopped the enemy by renewing of the Fight: Don
John still sending in fresh supplies: Toledo lining the hedges with his
Musketeers: in the mean time Leva's men gave back so happily, that, at first,
they were too quick for the eye of the confederates. Who were sore put to it,
But when they found the Spanish Foot to be upon their Retreat, then the
Battle, if ever any, was a fierce one, and it appeared, The rare valor of
the King's Horse in their Retreat.
both what courage and what necessity could do. The Royaalists (and they were
but a very few, most of them Foot) being now without the danger of pursuit,
had the Cannon turned upon them from the Camp, and were shot at both afar
off, and near at hand. Yet their valor more then the place befriending them,
700. Horse alone commanded by Giovanni Baptista a Monte, and his brother
Camillo, not only stood against many thousands that charged them, but sometimes
beat them back, and fought in their Ranks so firmly, as they forced Colonel
Norreys the stoutest enemy they had that day, I. Norreys, who commanded the
English,
after three horses had been killed under him, to fight afoote; the rest of the
confederate Cavalry not too much presuming upon themselves, and tired, with a
Fight so long doubtful; at first all the Spanish Infantry, and at last the
Horse, Particularly of Camillo a Monte's Troop
in face of the Enemi's Cannon, were brought safely off. Among which Horse, no
doubt but that Troop of Camillo's merited most Commendations, that was last in
the field, commanded by Captain Perott: being a Troop of Reformados, The
Names of the principal Horsemen.
namely, Hanniball, Gonzaga, Flamino Delphino, Giovanni Mauriquio, Lepido de
Romany, Laurentio Tuccio, Nicolao Caesio, and others only Soldiers here, else
where Commanders. The memory of all which men, for example sake should be with
their names extended to posterity, if I could as readily know their persons, as
I do admire their valors. All of one Resolution, And one courage,
These, lest the enemy should break in, opposing themselves and crowding
together like a bulwark, covered the rest of the Cavalry, with such constancy
and contempt of Death, that when any of them fell, as if a piece of a work
were beaten down, the place was presently made good by a fresh man that stood
behind. That which befell Lepido killed with a shot, and Dolphino, who going to
assist him was taken prisoner, could not yet deter Caesio from taking
Delphino's place; either by fear of Death, or of captivity: till at length
they themselves, when all the Horse were safe, left the Field last: and like
excellent Actors in the Tragedy of Mars, came off with infinite Applause. So
General Bolduc sounding a Retreat, for fear his men might fall into a
Counter-Ambuscado, the Battle ended; begun with far greater preparation,
then it was followed by either side, What loss on both sides.
with Execution. For in all not above 400. men miscarried, the loss of both
parts being in a manner equal: only more of the King's Army were hurt and
taken, The Generals censured.
more of their's slain. And the Generals that day merited a quite contrary
censure. For Don John redeemed the rashness of fighting with his judgment in
ordering the Battle; Bolduc was cautious in the beginning, but losing the
opportunity of pursuing with all his Forces, spoiled the conclusion of his
Victory. Wherefore, The Royal Army highly praise Alex. Farneze,
in regard of his greater prudence and valor the Prince of Parma was famed
through all the Royal Army, who by a miraculous foreknowledge of Events
premonished them of all that concerned the expedition: and when the Army was so
dangerously engaged, and the rest easy to be involved in the same Ruin, with
like Judgment and courage fetched them off. Insomuch that truly Alexander
Farneze, who ever till then wrote very sparingly in his own Commendations, Who
conceives that he merits no less commendations as appear^s by his L^t^er to
his Mother
could no longer contain himself, but in his Letters to his Mother Margaret
of Austria inserted, How he could not but think he had that day deserved more
then ordinarily of the King, August 7.
whose Army the nearer it was to destruction, the more be merited that saved
it. Indeed the oldest Commanders seeing their danger that were catched in a
Trappe by the Enemy, openly gave them for lost, so as not one would undertake
to make good their Retreat whose condition they accounted desperate. Therefore
he held it a greater Honor to himself, by whom it was so willingly and
fortunately attempted. But this only her excellence might please to look upon,
as the glorying of a Soldier to his Mother: and he could not but think it fit
to give her an account of those generous Spirits she had infused into him. Don
John very careful in making his Retreat.
This while, Don John marched with his recovered Forces toward Areschott,
prepared, if the enemy should follow him in the Rere to fight. But when the
confederaces either astonished at the extraordinary confidence of the
Royalists, or fearing to be answered with a stratagem, appeared not, Don John
free from further care returned to Thienen, having won more glory among others
with taking their Towns and Camp, then among his own, that had run a
hazard, and well knew their danger. While these things were acted in the
Low Countries, News of the death of Sebastian King of Portugal.
at the same time the Portug^ses fought unfortunately, upon the Coast of
Africa. August 4.
The news of which overthrow Prince Alexander first received from Spain,
Whereupon Alex. Farneze sends a ceremonious Embassage into Portugal
accompanied with a Relation of what exceeded the Loss of that whole Army, the
King of Portugal's Septem. 13.
death: and therefore sending Fabio Farneze to Henry Cardinal of Briganze
Uncle to King Sebastian, he condoled with him, out of the private interest of
Affinity the public Misfortune, and withal congratulated his Succession to
the Crown: presenting him a change of Affections, as sudden, as that of
Clothes in a Play.

But now the States having recruited their Army out of Germany and France, The
Town of Areschot lost by treachery. Mutio Pagano slain.
Don John altered his opinion: and hearing that Areschot was betrayed, the
Governor whereof Mutio Pagano a valiant and faithful man, sick a-bed rose
notwithstanding to quiet the Tumult, and was slain upon the place: Camillo
Schiaffinate a Lieutenant of an undaunted Spirit in vain resisting. He began
to fear, that many other Towns would be guilty of like Treason, which he
could not yet relieve without weakening himself by dividing of his Army. The
Straites whereto Don John was reduced.
He therefore thought it his best, to dismantle some Castles, slight some
Garrisons, and calling away the Soldiers to bring into one place all his
Forces: till such time as money came from the King, and Recruits from Italy and
Germany. But instead of men and money Don John receiving Letters from Spain,
that commanded him to try all ways and means for an Accommodation,
Commissioners on both sides being chosen, A Treaty of Peace.
the business of Peace was set a foot again. But when they had delivered to
Don John three Heads, which the States insisted on, That he should surrender
the Government of the Low countries to the Archduke Matthias upon the same
conditions which they had formerly sworn; The conditions proposed by the
States.
That Duke Alencon, and Prince Casimir, should be comprehended in the Articles
of peace. That the province of Limburg, and whatsoever Don John had taken,
either by Force or Rendition in Brabant and Haynolt, should before the end of
August be restored to the States; extremely offended at these insolent
demands, Alex. Farneze's opinion touching those Propos^ls.
Don John, as he used to do, communicated his Resentment to the Prince of
Parma. He, though he denied not the conditions to be indeed very unjust, yet
said, It would be much worse, if the States despairing of a peace with Spain,
should put into the hands of the King of France the Frontier provinces, which
he had so often attempted. It was to be considered, that even Charles the fifth
(and how great an Emperor was he!) could hardly clear those Provinces of the
French only. What should the King's Forces do at the present (commanded indeed
by a Son to Charles the fifth, but with a less number of men) both against the
French Nation and two other powerful Armies? His opinion was therefore, that
the Commissioners should be put in hope of peace, till the King's pleasure was
known, as to those proposalls, which if he accepted, no doubt but in his
wisdom he would provide another place worthy of his Brother: but if looking
upon their baseness he rejected them, then, in case the Confederates were
prosecuted with more severity hereafter, his Majesty could not accuse his
Brother and the Army, as desirous to keep the War afoote. Don John, Don John
makes some difficulty to approve of this Counsel, but presently after follows
it,
though he did not much fear the Confederates, knowing them to be oppressed
with their own multitude; and understanding that Prince Casimir's Army marched
in a body by themselves, because they refused to obey Count Bolduc General for
the States: Yet constrained for want of men, and money, besides his Sickness
both of body and mind, which is able to break the greatest Spirit, and
forcibly to cast it down upon considerations, at other times contemptible; He
resolved to follow Alexander Farneze's Counsel. Though in his Letters to the
King, certifying their Propositions, he with some bitterness complained, That
the Rebels confidence received Encouragement out of Spain: Writes to the King,
and the Assistance promised to him by his Majesty, was from time to time put
off: and when he entreated money, only a return was made of words; wherewith a
War cannot be managed; unless they imagine, that he is able out of Words to
extract Gold. And fortifies his Camp
He therefore humbly beseeched his Majesty, either to subdue the Enemy, or at
least not to suffer the General of his Royal Army so unhandsomly to conclude
a peace. August 19.
In the interim he commanded Serbellonio speedily to advance the Trenches which
he had a while before designed not far from Namure. The Emperor Charles the
fifth 1554.
Don John had chosen that ground upon the Hill of Buge, With works designed by
Serbellonio,
close by the River Mose; induced by convenience of the place, and his Father's
example, who being pursued by Henry of France with three great Armies, And made
by Campio.
brought his Forces then very small to this ground, and here intrenching
secured them. And now Serbellonio, quick both at raising and defending works,
Serbellonio falls sick.
had finished most of the Redoubts, Don John brings his whole Army within the
Works, and comes himself sick to them.
and drawn about a line, (by the directions of Scipio Campio of Pisaura, an
Engineer not inferior to his Father, Bartholomeo, slain at the Siege of
Harlem) where overtoiled with hasty labor, or struck with a pestilentiall
air, he fell dangerously sick. At the same time, Don John having now brought
all his Army within the Trenches, except the Horse which Octavio Gonzaga had
(...) upon the neighboring Villages, his own sickness increasing, would
needs be carried into the Camp. The Physicians opinions of Don John and
Serbellonio.
Both of them kept their beds, and their Fitts took and left them in the same
manner. But the Physicians made far different Judgments of their two
patients. For they all (and there was a whole College of them) either
deceiving others, or deceived themselves, pronounced that Don John would
certainly recover, but Sonbellonio could not possibly escape with life. False
in both.
And what they said was credible enough, this being above 73 years old, he not
yet 33: and yet when the young man dyed, the old man was perfectly well again.
Doctor Pennonio grows famous for his judgment.
Whereupon Hippolyto Pennonio grew into great Esteem (formerly commended by
Duke Octavio for Physician in Ordinary to his Son Prince Alexander) who durst
against the whole pack of those Doctors affirm, that Serbellonio would live,
and Don John die of that disease. For which a long while being jeered and
scorned, he became thereby better known to the People, and finally more
honored.

Upon the day of Saint Matthew the Evangelist (on which very day was twenty
years dyed the Emperor Charles the fifth) Don John, Septem 21.
as if by remembering of his Fathers death he were minded of a time a like
fatal to himself, Don John declares Alexander Farneze Governor of the
Lowcountreys.
easting off all humane Cares, transferred the whole Power of Peace and War
upon Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, and (in case he should dye) declared
him Governor of the Low Countries, and General of the Army, till the King
should otherwise determine, And truly Prince Alexander doubted for a while
whether he should undergo the Burden, Who cannot well resolve whether he
should so burden himself, yet at length condescends. And gives his Mother in
Account of his resolution.
not ignorant how miserable and broken a Province he must have, and withal how
much it would reflect upon his Honor, if perhaps the King did not confirm
upon him that Assignement. October. 6.
It being more Disreputation to fall from a place of Eminence, then never to
have been advanced. Yet that he preserred his Faith to God and the King, he
writes to his Mother; calling God to Witness, that he should justly think
himself a Traitor, if when they had such an Increase of Enemies, and no
General, he should have deserted the Kings Army in that Conjuncture of time,
wherein undoubtedly all the remaining Catholic Religion and Allegiance to his
Majesty would have been endangered. And, forasmuch as the Duke of Parma did
not very well like this Resolution of his Son's, And his Father disliking it
satisfies him thus
nor gave Assent to his Acceptance of the Regency, but reproved him for his
overmuch confidence; October. 6.
Prince Alexander at length answered his Father in these Words. Sir, Whereas in
your Wisdom your Excellence thought fit to admonish me, as if I were gone too
far in accepting of that Government, which by my endeavors should rather
have been transferred upon the Royal Senate of the Low Countries; it is no
more, then I my self imagined, as when I wrote of Don John of Austria's
Sickness, I signified to your Excellence. But when I called to mind, that
after the death of the great Comendador, the Lowcountreys were undone by that
very Trust of the Royal Power is the Senates hands, which Ruin in all men's
opinions had never happened to the Provinces, if his Successor had been
forthwith nominated. And when I plainly saw the Loss of this Catholic Army,
without a General, to be inevitable, by reason of the feuds among the Lords,
and their discordant minds, some drawing one way, some another, and daily more
slack in asserting the Kings Right: and, which is yet more considerable, one or
two of the greatest in his Army not obscurely wavering in their Fidelity to the
King, which would perhaps, if things among us were troubled, go over to the
States: I, for these Reasons, first making my Prayers to God, resolved, as to
the point of my own Honor, to run the greatest hazard (which I saw impending)
if either the King unmindfull of me should bestow the Place upon another, or
that the War succeeding unfortunately should be censured by the Event: rather
then to refuse the burden laid upon me, and for my own Security and
Iealously, to quit that Remainder of the Low Countries which none sufficiently
defending must needs have come into the Enemies Power. Nor do I so much as
doubt, but God, that only knows I have therefore adventured upon his doubtful
Chance, to show my self actively faithful to my King (now when he wants my
Service, and that for his sake I contemn all dangers) will in his divine mercy
so regulate my affairs, that in the interim I shall do nothing unworthy your
Excellence's prudent Care, or my own infinite affection to my Prince. Yet he
ingenuously confessed, that, besides these Motives, he found himself not a
little touched with a scruple; Another reason that induced him.
Lest in that juncture of difficultyes, when the Confederates in their highest
Iollity surrounded the Army, and were Masters of the Field, he might have been
censured out of fear to have declined the Government. And another.
He was likewise wrought upon by the passionate love of the Army, unanimously
professing, that without any Designation, they would of their own accord have
submitted the Militia only to Prince Alexander. Alexander Farneze's
extraordinary care of Don John. Of ordering the Army. And of certifying every
particular accident of Don John's sickness is the King. By Doctor Ramir.
He himself, in this interim, divided with several Cares, now waited on his
Uncle, and was serviceable to him, not only in Ceremony but Effect; for I find
that he furnished Don John at that time with some thousands of Ducats: now he
looked to the Soldiers military Duties, sounded the Enemies Designs,
industriously performed all the parts of a General, gave the King also an
account of Don John's Sickness, having commanded all that was therein of
moment to be observed and set down in a Diary, (or Ephemerides) with so much
pains and exactness, as if the sick man were not (so Prince Alexander writes)
a particular person, but that military Virtue it self, and the All of a
Generall's Indowments, were in one man endangered. But now Don John by little
and little gathering strength, Don John past hope of life Septem. 28. is
prepared with the Sacraments, Grows rageous,
when they conceived him perfectly recovered, relapsed upon the sudden, and
the 28 of September, having disburthened his Conscience, and from the hand of
the Priest, that said Mass in his Anti-Camera, received the heavenly Vr^ticum,
presently his brain turning, began to rave, and like a General in the Field,
to place his men in battalia, to call upon the commanders, to send forth
Parties of Horse; sometimes to be angry that his men were such fools as to be
circumvented, sometimes with his eyes, hand, and voice crying, Victoria. It was
observed when no industry of his Friends, Comes to himself at the names of
Jesus Maria.
no art of his Physicians could put out of his head those Images of War, at
the only naming Jesus Maria he would be so hushed and still, as he took rest
immediately: and whatsoever for their sakes was desired of him (otherwise
imperious and inexorable) he would do it, not unwillingly. Of so great
concernement it is, to get a habit of Piety, while thou have thy understanding,
And dies religiously.
that being not thy self thou can not but be pious. Finally on the first of
October, in which Month he ever celebrathe memory of his Victoryes at Lepanto
and Tunis, The sum of his life.
being restored, beyond all hope, His Country, St Matthew's day. Feb. 24.
to his senses, once more remembering and confessing his sins, about noonday
with great expressions of Piety, he died.

Don John of Austria was borne at Ratisbon in Germany, 1545.
having the very same birth day, which the Emperor Charles the fifth his
Father had. His Mother was Barbara Blomberg of Ratisbon, His Mother.
no less noble in beauty, then in quality, who therefore being presented to the
Emperor to allay his Melancholy with the sweetness of her voice, for she sang
rarely, had a Son by him, long a Widower, having lost his wife Isabella 7.
years before; for while she lived, they say, he most religiously observed his
matrimonial Vow. Nay he was very careful the City should know nothing of the
child, He was conveyed into Spain in his infancy by Aloysio Quisciada that
only knew the secret of his birth.
and therefore within the year took it from the Mother, delivering it to
Aloysio Quisciada Lord Steward of his Imperial Palace, whom he had found very
trusty, to carry it into Spain, that his Wife Magdalena Vlloa, a nobly-borne
and modest-carriaged Lady, might breed up the Infant: charging Aloysio, that no
creature living should have cause given to guess who should be its Father.
Mag. Vlloa Quisciada's Wife Governesse to the child,
Which trust he singularly well discharged: and when he brought the Infant to
Villa-Gar^ia, a Town of his own, he only commended it to his Wife, as the
child of a special Friend of his. Which for a good while made her suspect it
might be her Husbands, and she was therefore the more tender of it. Nor knows
she who is Father to it.
Yet she began to think the Father a greater man, when she saw her Husband to
have a more then fatherly care of the child's Education. The Infant in danger
of fire Magdalen Vlloa her self made this relation.
A part of the house by accident taking fire, where the Lady and little I^ck
lay together; the flame now crackling about the bed, and waking Aloysio that
lay in the next room, he presently ran thither in his Shirt, and catching up
the Child, carried him out of the danger. Whereat Quisciada is much troubled.
That done, as if he were now secure, he returned to fetch off his Wife, struck
with admiration at his carriage; for knowing, that her husband loved her above
all the World, The child was afterward in like peril at Madrid.
she conjectured by this Action, that the Child's Father was some more eminent
person. And indeed his Princely disposition, his naturally grave Courtship, his
Meene, His nature and garb,
and Aspect, expressed him more then a private person. His manner of Play with
the Boys.
He applied himself to the boys his Companions, but like their Superior or
commander. You would think him to be Cyrus among the Shepherds. He would
wrestle with them, or run, or pitch the Bar, or use any other exercise in the
Field, Herod. l. 1.
only so long as he was getting of the mastry, till his victory was secured.
His love to Horseman-ship
He was therefore much delighted in Horseman-ship, because therein he easily
excelled them all. In the morning when he rose, the first thing he did, was to
get on Horse back, to train the boys, to break Spears to Truncheons,
Wherein he was still victoous.
or at full speed to take the Ring. At which exercises because he continually
had the beholders Acclamations, the emulation of the boys prevailed so far,
as by common consent and at the public charge the Town entertained a
Riding-master to teach their Sons, in hope they might one day conquer this
Conqueror. And Aloysio, being himself a Soldier, The Emperor designs him
for a Priest, But too late,
exceedingly rejoiced at the child's warlike propension, and laying the
foundation (as Aloysio called it) of higher Actions. Till he received the
Emperor's Command, to prepare him with softer breeding to the love of holy
Orders. But as the first stage, after the tincture of pleasure, seldom or
never takes another die: Charles the fifth, on his deathbed reveals his Son
John to King Philip.
the boy was hardly drawn to leave those Sports, and a while after, Charles
the fifth deceased. A little before his death, the Emperor discovered to his
Son Philip King of Spain, (which till then he had concealed from him) that
Philip himself and this John had both one Father, To whom he commends the
Child.
and therefore charged the King, to send for him, and to love and regard him as
his natural Brother. The owning of Don John.


But King Philip deferred to do it, two years after the Emperor's death, till
his Son Charles Prince of Spain was grown up. Then resolving to acknowledge
his Brother, The King goes to bunt.
he went to Validolid to the Abbey of of Spina with a great train of Lords to
hunt: commanding Aloysio to bring the Boy, And bids Quisciada bring the Boy to
him upon the field.
and meet him in the Field. Aloysio, when his Dogs were in a readiness,
mounted a Horse richly trapt, and carried along little Jack, on an ordinary
Horse among the crowd of hunters. When they came to the hill Torose (where he
discovered the King a-hunting) he then leaped off his Horse, Quisciada shows
himself not to be Father to Don John by the new Title he gives him.
and bad Jack do so too: Which done, presently Aloysio, falling on his knees,
Give me said he, your Highnesse's Hand to kiss. What this unusual Honor I
now do you signifiyes, the King, that has sent for you, will explain. Now get
upon this Horse, that had not shone in all this bravery but for you. The Chills
Astonishment.
The Boy stood amazed at the novity, yet gave him his hand to kiss, and got
upon the Horse; the lookers on admiring and longing, as upon a Stage; The
beholders Expectation.
to see how that Scene would end. When behold King Philip with those that
waited on him to the Chase comes in. Immediately little Jack, presented by
Aloysio, bows himself, and handsomely honors the King upon his knee. The
King questions the boy about his Father.
His Majesty raised the boy with his hand, and smiling, asked him if he knew
his Father? And when he doubted what to reply, because he saw himself now
disclaimed by him he formerly though his Father, the King alighting said,
Alegramente, boy, thou art Son to a man of Honor, the Emperor Charles the
fifth, that dwells in heaven, And embraces him as his Brother.
is Father to us both, uttering these words he embraced him as a Brother, set
him upon his horse, and appointed Servants to attend him, as became one of the
House of Austria, and the Son to an Emperor; the whole Plain ringing with the
joyful Halloes of the Hunters, and Gratulations of the Lords cheerfully
wishing that day happy to the King, Assigning him houshold-servants.
happy to the King's new Brother: his Majesty himself often protesting, that
in all his Life he never had better hunting Fortune. Thus Don John of Austria
being acknowledged was brought to Court, The hunters hallow out their joy.
therebred with Charles Prince of Spain, and Alexander Prince of Parma, who
not long before was sent out of Italy by his Parents to the King his Uncle, The
Kings expression.
as I have in its place remembered. Don John brought to Court is bred up with
Prince Charles and Alex. Farneze In the beginning of this year. Prince
Charles, Don John* and Alex. Farneze, compared.
And they were almost all three of one year, the eldest being not about 14.
But they were not al of one disposition, Feature, or Manners. Prince Charles,
saving his hair and Complexion, in all the other parts of his body was
deformed: for one shoulder was higher, and one leg longer then the other, nor
was he less deformed in his furious and hauty mind. Prince Alexander was
indeed of a passionate and military Inclination, but full of Courtship, whereto
his sweet and pleasant Countenance seemed to be naturally composed. But Don
John of Austria, as well in the habit of body, as Generosity of Deportment far
transcended both. His face was not only fair, His person.
but excellently featured. His hair yellowish; his eyes ^uick and shining:
with a lovely proportion of all his limbs, answerable to each other. His
manners infinitely set off his Louelines, His Manners.
and his Loveliness his manners. Civility, Industry, and Integrity, were
eminent in the Youth, and, as in one newly come to his Honors, Modesty. Which
Virtue and Beauty of his, compared with their Contraries in Prince Charles, at
first made him beloved, The King offended with him for refusing to enter into
holy Orders.
afterward envyed, as eclipsing the Prince in his Fathers Court. And King
Philip was somewhat distasted at Don John's Aversion from holy Orders, to which
he had been pressed, upon his Fathers Designation, but too late. His Majestyes
Displeasure was increased by his sudden leaving of the Court, And for
stealing away to go for Malta.
when, inflamed with a desire to fight in Malta, without the King's Leave
(which if he had hoped, he would never have declined) he took Post for
Barcelona, with a great train of Gentlemen, being then 18 years of age. And
this Levity he aggravated with his Pride, not vouchsafing to hear what message
Aloysio Quisciada brought, who followed him by his Majestyes Command. But as he
was going abroad at Barzelona receiving the Kings Letters, But he makes his
peace with riding back post,
which threatningly commanded his Return: swifter then imagination, he rode
back to Vallidolid, and by his ready Obedience not a little qualifyed his
Majestyes Indignation: which a while after he clearly cancelled, And with the
discovery of Prince Charles his journey.
when he first discovered to the King, his Son Prince Charles his new design.
For this Service, his Majesty in the War of Granado, made Don John his
General against the Moors; which held him play for a long while, He commands
in chief against the Moors.
but at last he fortunately defeated them. And that which seemed to be his
Remuneration, was but a step or Earnest of more Honor. For when the Christian
League was concluded, he was made Generalissimo of the Fleet, Winnes the
bat^aile at Lepanto,
that carried the Forces and Hopes o^ Christendom, and joining battle with
the Turks at Lepanto, gained upon the common Enemy a Victory, Storms Tunis,
since the memory of the Othoman Name, the greatest. Thence from the East
turning his Arms into Africa, he conquered Tunis, And Biserta, Takes the King
prisoner.
that commands the Libyan Sea, the Mahometans flying before him; stormed
Biserta, and took prisoner their King Amida with two of his Sons, which he
brought in triumph back to Italy. King Phillip again displeased,
Here the of Spain was highlyer offended, because Don John had not only,
contrary to the Commands sent him from Spain, not dismantled the City, but had
likewise furnished it with Munition, put in a Garrison, and made Gabriel
Serbellonio Governor, as if he had resolved in that Town to fix himself a
Royal Seat. As the King then especially believed, when in that very point of
time he saw the Pope's Legate in the name of Gregory the 13 move him to honor
Don John for his Victoryes in Africa, with the Title of King of Tunis. And
jealous,
Which made King Philip jealous, that the youth, proud of his Conquests, would
not long brook a private Fortune: and now only requested Kingdoms, but
hereafter would invade them. Therefore removing from Don John all such as he
thought advised him to those courses, Places new servants about Don John,
he placed new Servants about him, and made Iuan Escovedo his Secretary, that
is, he changed the names, but not the Natures, of his Brother's Followers. The
King likewise observed, that his Brother grew to a greater Animosity. Because,
when he was called out of Italy into Spain, to go from thence to the
Government of the Low Countries then designed him, Who expects to take place at
an Infanta.
he would not so much as come to Court: but went to the house of Anthonio Perez
to linger there, till he found whether the King would allow him place, The
Kings goes out of town purposely to decline the Grant.
as a Prince-Infanta within the Cloth of State. But the King that went out of
Town lest he might discontent his young Brother with the Assignation of his
Place, stayed on purpose in the Country; receiving him more affectionately,
then magnificently, at Villa Pardo. And from thence, exaggerating, indeed not
falsely, the Necessity of the Provinces, sent him presently into the
Low Countries. His Majesty's Suspicion also appears by the Instructions he
gave Don John, at his Departure. The first and last whereof was, And would have
him govern the Lowcountries without an Army.
that he should quiet the Provinces upon any Conditions whatsoever, but a
War: so as he did it with a Salvo to Religion and Allegiance. For, though the
King now weary of the infinite Expenses of that War, wished this might be the
only Means of settling the Belgic Tumults: Not assured of his temper.
yet howsoever, I believe his Majesty, who thought nothing secure unless
suspested, would not have continued the Command of an Army to one person, lest
he should at last have established a Power irrevocable. For the same reason,
when there was Necessity of a War, Money to pay the Army came very sparingly
from Spain. For this very reason the King's ears were open to the
Low-countreymens Complaints, accusing Don John as longing to be in Arms. The
Prince of Orange ^^^orts that Don John is to marry Queen Elizabeth.
Nay to confirm this Suspicion of the King's, I doubt not but the Prince of
Oranges Design was laid, when he wrote Letters to a Friend in France, which
assured him, that Don John was to marry the Queen of England, adding that for
his particular Service therein, Al. Cabrera in Philip the 2d. l. 12. c. 3.
Don John had given him hope of the free Exercise of Religion in the
Low Countries. Which news Vargas, the Spanish Ambassador in France, that
carefully pried into all Occurrences, privately sent post to King Philip. Iuan
Vargas Mexia
Whereupon followed the death of Iuan Escovedo, as the man that put him upon
it. The death of Escovedo.
I cannot believe this of Don John, though sometimes troubled, and crossed even
to desperation. Many Arguments rather induce me to think it a Finesse of the
Prince of Orange, to alienate the King from his Brother. But the Causes of
Escovedo's Death, and the Tragedies ensuing thereupon in Spain, as fitter for
the Stage, I leave to Writers covetous of such Subjects. Nor to any other end,
a news which they heard in Spain, was the Principallity of the Low Countries
lately offered to Don John. For one of the Low Country Lords, as an expedient
for quieting the Provinces, Don John tempted with an offer of all the 17.
Provinces.
exhorted Don John to take upon him Sovereign Authority; offering to serve him
in it with the Nobility, and ensuring the Event. Which though it so highly
displeased him, that he drew his Stilletto, not as once Germanicus Caesar did,
who turned the point upon himself, but to have stabbed that perfidious and
fraudulent man, Ready to kill the adviser. Tacius. l. 1. Annals.
who with such impudent Counsel tempted his Loyalty. Yet because this passed
without Witnesses, it was liable to the Censure of those that ever think the
worst. Al Cabera in Phil. 2. l. 11. c. 15.
And some kind of Suspicions no Innocence can absolutely clear. But I believe
this bold and subtle Invitation was made, not to bring the Lowcountreys into
Don John's Power, Says that Don John did wound the man.
but to fill the King's ears listening after such Rumors, and to make him
jealous, that his Brother would not all ways retain that Modesty, Why he was
thus courted.
and that it therefore concerned the King in Wisdom to provide, that what his
Brother once modestly refused, might never more be in the Power of his
Acceptance. Nor was King Philip now to be taught the Art of Iealousy, being no
less prudent in keeping, then fortunate in amplifying his Dominions. And Don
John daily found by new proof, His grief upon the Kings displeasure, And for
Escovedo's death,
how jealous the King was of him, not satisfied by the compliance of the
private life which he had so long endured. Hearing likewise of Escovedo's death
(whom he had sent into Spain to procure Money and other warlike Necessaryes)
for whose return he had so often and so anxiously solicited, and every day
finding himself in greater Straits deserted, as he openly complained, by the
King; and exposed to the Scorn of his Enemies: this Prince, of great Spirit
and hope, too much remembering his blood by the Father's side, Breaks his heart,
languished into a Consumption. But whether, besides his Grief a poison strong
enough to kill him, If it were not broke by poyso^ Mat. Dealt. l. 5. Turb. Belg.
there might be another Dose given (for they that saw his Corpse, found shrewd
Signs of poison) I will make no Determination, as in a thing commonly
obnoxious to Presumptions of that Nature. Though there wanted not some that
watched to murder him, August. 20.
as I am well assured by Alexander Farneze's Letters to his Father Duke
Octavio. Those that sought to murder hi^ punished.
And it was sufficiently evident, December.
two Englishmen being apprehended, that had undertaken to kill him, that very
Month wherein he dyed: which, a while after, examined and convicted of the
Crime, The Armies Lamentation for his death,
were by the Prince of Parma put to death. But by what means soever his fate
was brought about, it was deplored with extraordinary Commiseration. And
seldom was it known, that any Army with higher praises of his virtue, mourned
for their General. Whom they parallel with Germanicus Caesar,
There were that compared Don John and Germanicus together; For their Beauty,
for their Years, being 33, for the many battles they had fought in Places
neighboring upon Holland. For the Court-Iealousyes upon them, and for the
Rumor of their approaching Death. Others paralleld him nearer with his Father
Charles the fifth. And with his Father Charles the Fifth,
Both had the same Birthday, almost the same Day of Death; and like
Expeditions by Sea and Land, In the day of their Nativities and deaths, la
their Military expeditions
against the Moors, and Turks. The Kingdom of Tunis was conquered by them
both. King Muleasses, was reestablished in his Throne, and Barbarossa outed by
Charles the fifth. King Amida Son to Muleasses, but the Deposer of his Father
(deposed himself and Mehemet crowned) was by Don John carried away among his
Spoils and Prisoners. The Father had ended more Wars, for he had lived more
Years. The Son in one Navall Victory equalled all his Father's Triumphs. And
no doubt, but if he had enjoyed his Fathers Power, and alone commanded
Kingdoms and Armies, he would have made his Fame as glorious. They likewise
added things for the most part trivial, In the entreating of their Soldiers,
Charles the 5. Don John.
and obvious to all Comparers: That both by like artificial Courtesyes
quickened their Followers Hopes: but he by bestowing Titles of Honor much
increased the Nobility: this remunerated the merits of his Soldiers, because
he had no other Means of Satisfaction, with magnificent Words, sometimes with a
sudden Expression of Joy, giving his Hatt or Stilletto to a Soldier. Indeed
calling every common Soldier by his name, his Memory served instead of a
Reward. In wearing of their (...),
Both of them brought up fashions that added to the handsomeness of the Body,
1529.
especially of the Head, Charles the fifth, when he came into Italy to be
crowned Emperor, was the first that to ease himself of the headache, cut off
his hair: the great Courtiers following his Fashion and Example: So as the
wearing of long hair, esteemed so much for many Ages in one man's Imitation
was by all left off. And also first Don John, because the hair on the left
side of his temples grew upright, used with his hand to put away all the hair
from his forehead; and because that baring of the Forehead looked handsome in
him, thence came the Fashion of combing and keeping the hair up, in so much as
that kind of Foretop is in some places called an Austrian. In their desire to
live a solitary life.
Finally in the last Scene of his life, Don John himself wished to be like his
Father, and as He, resigning his Kindomes, hid himself in solitude among the
Hieronymites at Saint Iustus: so Don John a few months before his death would
have done among the Hermits of Mount Serrat in Spain, for ever after to serve
God, who, as he said, would and could do more then his Brother Philip. Which
Determination, whether it was the issue of Piety, or of the improsperous
Success of his Affairs, Don John's constant custom to clear his Conscience.
I cannot easily distinguish; Nor must omit that, wherein Don John of Austria
far exceeded his Father Charles the fifth; the Purity of Mind, which his
Governesse the Lady Vlloa had so inamoured him of, Mag^alen ^^dy of VillaGarcia.
from his Infancy, that all his Life long he persevered in it, and could not
rest quiet, if never so little a Sin lay upon his Conscience. Therefore twice
every Month (which was his constant course) he came to Confession: his Soul
being a true Prince, that could not brook the basest Servitude. Nay he never
undertook any Expedition, or fought battle, Especially before a day of
Battle.
but first by an exact Confession of his Sins he implored God's Mercy. Which
Care of himself, in a Prince tempted to greatest license by his age,
handsomeness, and Place of General, I suppose will be so much the more
esteemed, by how much this. Piety is rar^r amongst Soldiers: and by how much a
Circumspection of this nature uses not to be alone, nor unattended by a train
of many Virtues. Moreover, if one should add this to his military Praises, His
Virtues as a General.
and diversity of Wars, that before he had been trained a Soldier, he
commanded as a General; and to the Immensenesse of his Courage, that he was
never daunted by any Enemy, either greater in number, or reported by Force to
be invincible; and to his Felicity in all battles, that he came off
perpetually a Conqueror, at least never conquered; Not infer^our to any.
Several Nations contend for precedence in carrying of his Corpse.
truly we may justly number Don John among the most valiant and fortunate
Generals that ever were.

The day after his Death, the Colonells of several Nations, contended which of
them in the funeral Pomp should have precedence, as Bearers of the Corpse. The
Spaniards pretended, because they were the Kings Countrymen. The Germans,
because Don John was their Countreyman. The Low-countreymen disputed the
Prerogative of the Place; But the Prince of Parma instantly decided the
Controversy, Alex. Farneze contents them all.
in this manner. That his maeniall Servants should carry the Body out of the
Court* where it should be received by the Colonells of that Nation whose
Quarters in the Field used to be next the Generals: they were to deliver it to
others, and those again to others that quartered farther off. The funeral
Pomp.
In this Order (the Horse and Foot marching on either side) the Corpse in
complete Armor was carried from the Camp at Buge to Namure with a Crown upon
his Ex litteris Com. Masi^ ad Picum from the Camp
Head according to the funeral Ceremonies of the ancient Princes of the House
of Burgundy. Though others, because diverse Irish Lords, with the Popes
Consent, October. 6.
had offered him the Kingdom of Ireland, which he would not accept till he
knew whether it would be approved of by King Philip, Why a Crown was set on
his head. Mar. Del. l. 5. Turb. Belg.
imagined out of that respect this Mark of a King was given to his Modesty.
His bed was sti^l supported by Colonells and Captains of that Nation, whose
Horse followed the Corpse, Colonels, and Captains are the Bearers.
fresh men still easing the wearyed of their burden, till it came to the
Magistrate of Namure. Four Mourners attended the body, Four great commanders
a^ the four corners of the Hearse.
Peter Ernest Count Mansfeldt Camp. Master, Octavio Gonzaga General of the
Horse, Pedro de Toledo Marquess of Villa-Francha, and John Croi Count of
Reuse, this a principal Commander among the Low-countreymen, he among the
Spaniards, each of them holding in their hands a corner of the Herse-Cloth.
Soldiers march before
A Regiment of Foot, as the custom is, went before, with their Pikes and
Muskets reversed, colo^rs furled, Alex. Farneze follows.
and all the other Complements of Sorrow. Alexander Farneze, Prince of Parma,
followed in close Mourning, with a heart sadder then his Robes: excepting only
so far as the care of the distressed Army, delivered to him, diverted the
current of his Grief. The funeral State ending in the great Church at Namure,
and Don John's, bowels being there buried, Prince Alexander laid his Uncles
body in a temporary Tomb, A Sepuleher only for the present.
expecting what Commands the King would send from Spain. For at his Death Don
John desired three things might in his name be moved to his Majesty, His three
last requests to the King.
That he would command his body to be buried in in the Sepulcher of Charles the
fifth, That his Mother and brother by her might be received into his Royal
Protection, And that he would remunerate the Service of his Follows (whom he
had long sustained with hope) with some real Bounty, Don John Father of two
daughters.
he himself having not had wherewith to pay them. 1570.
He made no Mention at all (which is wonderful) of his Daughters. For Don John
had two Daughters, Anne and Ioane, this at Naples, by Diana Phalanga a
Surrentine Lady; that at Madrid, by Maria, Mendona a Maid of an illustrious
Family, and Beauty. Anne was privately bred by Magdalena Vlloa, Don John's own
Foster-Mother: and went from thence, after she was seven years old, Anne.
to a Nunnery of holy Virgins at Madrigall. Ioane, for almost as long a time,
was educated by the Duchess of Parma, Sister to Don John; after whose death,
she sent her to be bred up in a Monastery of the Order of Saint Clare, at
Naples; But She by Command from the King was translated from Madrigall to
Burgo's a House of Benedictin Nuns, Ioane.
whose perpetual Abbess she was chosen. This, after she had lived twenty
years in the Cloister at Naples, was at last married into Sicilie to Prince
Butero. Both these Ladies in one year, in one Month, Feb. 1630.
only not upon one day, deceased* But I believe Don John among those
Particulars which at his death he commended to the King, Why he named them not,
upon his death bed.
said nothing of his Daughters, because he thought the King knew not of them:
for they were so privately and cautiously brought up, that Alexander Farneze
(to whom he imparted all his other Secrets) knew not of one of these. The other
had long since been discovered to him, not by Don John, but by his own Mother
Margaret of Austria: which was the Cause that, when Don John lay upon
deathbed, Alex. Farneze to his Mother Marg. of Parma. October. 6.
Prince Alexander durst not desire him to commend that Daughter to the King,
lest he might put him to the Blush, or seem willing by such Commendations to
free his Mother of a Trouble. But now Alexander Farneze acquainted his Majesty
with those three last Requests made by Don John, Alex. Farneze writes to the
King about Don John's. Petitions.
and earnestly solicited the King's Grant. Of himself and of the Government
entrusted to him he wrote little, rather like one declining, then ambitious of
the Honor. Only he exaggerated the danger of the Catholic Army, October. 1.
and somewhat concerning himself,
the French being entered into Haynolt, and the States Army ready to besiege
their Camp: so that in this desperate Condition of Affairs, only his Fidelity
to the King compelled him rather undauntedly, then ambitiously to receive that
burden. But very much touching the danger of the present State of Affairs.
Although, as I conjecture, not so much the present Danger, which was indeed
very great, as his doubtfullnesse of the King's mind held Alexander Farneze in
suspense. For he feared lest his Majesty, laying aside the care of Arms,
should call back his Mother into the Low Countries, He is not sure the King
will confirm to him the Government.
where she was popular, and therefore fit to conclude a Peace, or that, upon
certain Conditions which were now in Agitation, he should confirm even the
Arch duke Matthias in the Government. C. Masius ad Equ. Blondum. October. 6.
Which some in Spain dissuade.
To which He might be easily persuaded, by some that were no friends to the
glory of Alexander Farneze. And truly (as David Secretary to the Duke of Parma,
wrote from Spain in Cipher to Prince Alexander) there wanted not some at
Court, that objected many Considerations to the King, for breaking off that
Designation. I believe, because they thought it Imprudency to trust Alexander
Farneze with an Army, Novem. 5.
at that time, when his Son (a boy of a great wit, and it seemed capable of
the greatest fortune) pretended to the Crown of Portugal: Ranucio.
especially, when not without an Affront to Spain, that proud Nation desired
to be governed by an Italian. Yet the King sends him Commission.
But the King, looking upon the Virtue of Alexander Farneze, and considering
him as his Sisters Son, Novem. 29.
cut off the Subject of this discourse, praising the choice and Counsel of Don
John. And presently by Letters to Prince Alexander, his Majesty first gave him,
without any Exception, the Government of the Low Countries, and Burgund^, with
the Militia of those Provinces: all which he prolixly commended to his Nephew's
Faith, and Worth. And answers to the particulars requested by Don John.
To Don John's last Requests he breifely answered, That he would not be
unmindefull of his household Servants, when Alexander Farneze should certify
him too (as afterward he did) of every particular man's Deserts, For his
Mother.
That he had long respected his Mother, which should be done more publicly
hereafter; As indeed it was; For his Majesty that year, sending for her into
Spain, very graciously received her, and within a few Months honorably
disposed of her, in the Royal Cloister of Saint Cyprian. Where after she had
lived four years among the Nuns, nobly attended by Maids of her own,
going for her health to take the air at Lared^, she there religiously dyed.
Although I must not conceal from the Reader, Who was indeed no more but his
supposed Mother. Card a Cueva.
What a man of Eminence discovered to me, touching the Mother of Don John, not
Barbara Blomberg, as to that day the World believed, but a far more noble
Lady, to say the truth, a Princess, for saving of whose Reputation, Charles
the fifth would have another named, and getting Barbara Blomberg to act the
Mother's part, and take upon her the glorious Title of the fault, it was
afterward followed by King Philip to maintain the Scene. So King Philip
himself told his Daughter Isabella (to whom he imparted all his Secrets) which
she at diverse familiar Conferences communicated to that Person of whom I had
it. Clara Eugenia Isabella.
If this be true, I must confess there is no trusting humane Knowledge. When
so great a Prince, that used to discover the very thoughts of his Enemies,
should live and dye so blinded in his own Parentage, and in himself, and
being twice deceived in his Mother, should still ask Blessing of a wrong
Woman, In Mag. Vlloa and Blomberg For his brother.
never of her that bore him. Concerning Don John of Austria's supposed Brother
(his name was Pyramo C^nrado) the King wroteback, that Alexander Farneze should
observe the inclination of his mind, and how he demeaned himself. He did so,
and replied, That the youth had been sent into Burgundy so follow his Book:
Ia. 7. 1579.
but that within a few days, leaving his study and falling into some Deboshes,
he was by Don John's Command committed to the Tower; from whence (after his
Brothers Death) the Youth wrote him a Letter, that since he was not made for a
Scholar, neither his Fancy nor Abilityes agreeing with that course of Life, he
would please to set him at Liberty, and make a Soldier of him, March 18. 1579.
and then he hoped to give a fruitfuller account of himself: and Prince
Alexander certified the King, that he thought no less, therefore beseeched his
pleasure might be signified, where the Youth should be employed in his
Majestyes Service. It pleased the King that he should learn his first Elements
of War under Alexander Farneze, assigning to the young Soldier 50 Ducats a
Month. Lastly, the King consented to the translating of Don John's Body into
Spain, by what Way, and in what Manner Prince Alexander should appoint. Don
John's body privately conveyed through France In. Vargas Mexia.
The Prince of Parma committed that Charge to Gabriel Nignio Zuniga, Master of
the Horse to Don John, commanding him to convey the Corpse through France, and
by means of the Spanish Ambassador at Paris, to get a Pass from King Henry
for some of Don John's Servants that were to return into Spain, without any
mention of the Body; which he would have secretly carried, to avoid those vast
Expenses, and ceremonious Contentions of Magistrates and Priests at City-Gates;
that usually way-lay the Progresses of Princes, whether alive or dead. And
therefore made it be given out, that the Body went with the rest of Don John's
Household through Italy. Being first taken to pieces.
Nay to avert the least Suspicion, he caused him to be took in pieces; and the
bones of his Arms, Thighs, Legs, Breast and Head (the Brains being taken
out) with other the severed parts, filling three Mailes, were by Nignio and the
principal of the Convoy (being about 80) brought safely into Spain.
Afterward set together in Spain and showed to the King. At last interred.
Where the bones being set again, with small wiers, they easily rejoynted all
the Body, which being filled with Cotton, armed, and richly habited, they
presented to the King Don John entire, as if he stood, only resting himself
upon his Commanders Staff, looking as if he lived and breathed. This Sight
having for a while renewed Court-Sorrow, the Corpse was carried thence into the
Church of Saint Laurence at the Escuriall, and buried according to his last
Desire by his Father the Emperor Charles the fifth Alexandder Farneze likewise
in the Church at Namure, Alex. Farneze takes upon him the Government of the
Lowcountries.
where his Uncles body had been deposited, leaving a Monument thereof to
Posterity; applied his whole mind and incleavours to keep the remaining
Provinces in the King's obedience. Then, he sent Agents and Letters to the
Catholic Princes of Europe, holding it requisite to let them every one know,
that Government was consigned to him by his Majesty; minding ther^ of the
danger of the Royal Party* not too sollicitously, lest he should raise the
hopes of such as were disaffected to the Spaniard; nor too sparingly, lest it
might take off the Honor of his Laurel, as the easy purchase of a General,
that must hereafter triumph over the Enemy.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the most remarkable Passages and Sentences.
Note that the figures without l. relate to l. next before.
ABbat of Gemblac lib. 9. page 52. and of Trull l. 2. p. 41. Abbaties in the
Low Countries assigned new Bishops l. 1. p. 29. Abbats complain, ibid. their
complaints answered l. 1. p. 31. They exasperate the Brabanters l. 3. p. 65.
Some of them turn Covenanters l. 5. p. 101 Abdication of the Empire and his
Kingdoms by Charles the fifth l. 1. p. 3. the causes p. 8. Abdication of the
Government of the Low Countries l. 1. p. 4 Acugnia, vide John or Iuan. Adolph
of Nassau Emperor* l. 2. p. 43 Adolph of Nassau brother to the Prince of
Orange enters Frisland l. 7. p. 46. Fights the Arembergians p. 47. kills Count
Aremberg, ibid, and is slain by him, ibid. Adrianus Comes Taurello. l. 9. p. 45
Aegidius Lord of Hierg, son to Count Barlamont; at the siege of Valenciens l.
6. p. 10. at the battle of Mooch l. 8. p. 3. Master of the Ordnance, and
Colonel of Walloons l. 10. p. 5. at Namure, Treasurer after his fathers death,
ibid. Governor of Gelderland, on the borders whereof he takes many Towns l. 8.
p. 8. invites Don John to see Namure l. 9. p. 35. defends Ruremond against the
Confederates lib. 9. p. 49. storms Bovines ^. 9. p. 53, 54. his death l. 10. p.
5. Vide Giles. Aelst a Town of Flanders taken by the mutinous Spaniards l. 8.
p. 18, 19 Alberic Count Lodronio Colonel of a Regiment of Germans l. 6. p. 31,
33 Albert Duke of Bavaria approves of the design of arms against the Rebels l.
5. p. 134. He moves the Duke of Alva in behalf of the impeached Lords l. 7. p.
42 Alcmar l. 7. p. 72, 81 Aldegund vide Philip Manixius of St. Aldegund,
Alencon vide Francis Hercules. Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, born at Rome
l. 9. p. 42. his Father, ibid. the prediction of Paul the third, ibid. his
Christening p. 43. propension to arms, ibid. sent very young by his Mother into
the Low Countries to King Philip p. 44. his suit at eleven years old to the
King, ibid. who carries him into Spain, ibid. his Majesty's love to him, ibid.
He, Charles Prince of Spain, and Don John of Austria compared together, l. 10.
p. 18. He is sent to the University of Alcala, l. 7. p. 43. the King entrusts
him to Count Egmont to conduct him to the Low Countries, l. 4. p. 90. his
marriage, l. 4. p. 91. Solemnized at Bruxels, l. 4. p. 94. and at Parma, l. 4.
p. 95. his sons, ibid. his veneration toward his wife, p, 95. and l. 9. p.
46. his love to arms, l. 9. p. 44. his digladiations in the night with great
hazard to himself p. 45. he goes in the Christian Fleet against the Turk,
ibid. composes the difference between Don John of Austria, and Venerio, ibid.
for which Pius the fifth commends him, l. 9. p. 46. he boards Mustapha's
Galley, ibid. takes him and Scander-Basha, ibid. The prize took by his men,
ibid. his answer to Don John's admonition, ibid. he is sent to besiege Navarine,
ibid. attempts it in vain l. 9. p. 47. he, joined with his Mother, is designed
by the King for the Government of the Low Countries, ibid. animated by Gregory
the xiii. l. 9. p. 48. he goes for the Netherlands, ibid. A pension assigned
him by the King, ibid. He views the Army with Don John, l. 9. p. 49. his
attempt at the battle at Gemblac, l. 9. p. 51. his courage is praised and
reproved by Don John l. 9. p. 52. His letter to the King in honor of Don John,
p. 53. nor mentioning himself to his friends, ibid. He besieges Sichem, l. 9.
p. 54. and the Fort, 55. executes the prisoners taken, ibid. Diestem yields,
ibid. he reduces Levia, ibid. his expedition and victory at Limburge, l. 10.
p. 1, 2. he storms Dalhem, p. 3. recovers the whole Province of Limburge within
twenty days, p. 4. Thanks sent him by the Neighbour-Princes, ibid. A rumor of
his death forged by the Prince of Orange, l. 10. p. 4. The King means to make
him Governor of the Low Countries, p. 6. he likes not the truce proposed,
ibid. his Letter to his Father Octavio Duke of Parma, ibid. The King sends him
money, l. 10. p. 7. his speech at a Council of War, wherein he disswades the
coming to a battle, ibid. He desires of Don John the honor to lead up the
Foot, and has it, l. 10. p. 9. He demonstrates to Don John the enemies
design, p. 10. He brings off the men circumvented by the Enemy, p. 11. and
lying open to their Cannon, p. 12. of which he gives an account to his Mother,
Margaret of Parma, p. 13. he sends a complementall Embassage into Portugal,
ibid. his advice to Don John touching the conditions of peace proposed by the
Estates, p. 14. He is by Don John upon his deathbed, nominated Governor of
the Low Countries, p. 15. he cannot well resolve whether he should undertake
the burden, yet accepts of the his Commission, ibid. he writes to his Mother,
and to his Father, ibid. The causes why he accepted of the Government, l. 10.
p. 16. he attends Don John in his sickness, and supplies him with money, ibid.
his care for his sick Uncle, and for ordering the army, ibid. he puts to death
those that sought the life of Don John, l. 10. p. 20. He satisfies the several
Nations contending who should carry Don John of Austria's body, p. 22. he
attends his funeral to Namure, ibid. builds him a temporary tomb, ibid.
writes to the King of Don John's death, and his last requests to his Majesty,
l. 10. p. 23. and how his Uncle dying commended the Government to him, ibid. he
is not assured the King will confirm it, ibid. the King sends him a Commission
to be Governor of the Low Countries, and General of his army there, ibid. the
King answers him to Don John's requests, ibid. He gives the Corpse of Don John in
charge to Colonel Nignio to carry it into Spain, l. 10. p. 24. he orders it to
be privately conveyed through France, ibid. He takes upon him the Government of
the Netherlands, ibid. whereof he certifies the Catholic Princes of Europe
ibid. Al^xander Medices advanced to the Principality of Florence, l. 1. p. 21.
his marriage with Margaret daughter to the Emperor, p. 22. he is slain within
the year, ibid. Alienation of the Nobility, l. 2. p. 37, 38. and why, l. 3. p.
67, 68, 71 Al^^tanien soldiers, vide Muteneers. Al^s^o Delrio, l. 8. p. 20
Al^ysi^ Quiscioda Lord Steward to the Emperor, l. 10. p. 17. carries Don John
an infant into Spain, ibid. breeds him up, ibid. brings him to King Philip on
the field a hunting who there owned him, l. 10. p. 18 Alice Mother to Francis
the first of France l. 1. p. 12 Alphonso Este Duke of Ferrara l. 1. p. 21
Alphonso Count de Sommai designed Colonel of the Italians at Milain l. 10. p.
7 Alphonso Leva, son to Sancho Viceroy of Navarre, l. 10. p. 6. by orders
from Don I^hm fights the enemy p. 9. worsts him, p. 10. brings off the Foot, p.
12 Alphonse Lopes l. 5. p. 142 Alphonso Vlloa Colonel of the Spanish Foot in
the N^apolitan Regiment l. 6. p. 30 Alphonso Vargas commanding the Spanish
Horse, l. 8. p. 18. Rou^s the Glim^^ens, p. 21. Recovers Ma^stricht, ibid.
marches to Antwerp, takes and plunders it, p. 22, 23. he and the Spaniards
leave the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 32 Altapen vide Charles. Altempse vide
Hannibal. Alvarez Pacecho a Colonel l. 7. p. 72 Alava vide Francisco Alva vide
Ferdinand Toledo Duke of Alva and Garcias. Ambition, Of the Belgic Lords in
arms and at Court, l. 2. p. 37, 38, 41, 42. Of Granvell, ibid. Of Egmont, l. 2.
p. 38. Of the Prince of Orange, natural to him, ibid. and l. 2. p 45. l. 5. p.
121. l. 7. p. 40. reprehended in Senate, l. 3. p. 67. Of Robert Brederod, to be
Archbishop of Cambray, l. 2. p. 41. Vide Emulation. Ambois, vide Conspiracy.
Amity of neighbor Princes to be wished for, l. 4. p. 91 Amida King of Tunis l.
10. p. 19. and 21 Am^rsfort l. 7. p. 75 Amsterdam in Holland threatens to
revolt from the King l. 6. p. 1. The wickedness of the Heretics there l. 5.
p. 131. A Convention of the Convenanters p. 137. Pious courage of the women, p.
131. The Covenanters would have surprised the Town, l. 6. p. 19. are beat back,
ibid. the City receives a Garrison, p. 20. is faithful to the Spaniard, l. 7.
p. 72. begins to wayer, l. 9. p. 41. is assaulted by the Prince of Orange, l.
10. p. 5. resists, wherein the women do special service, ibid. It is rendered,
and deceived, ibid. the destruction of all things sacred in the Town, ibid.
Anabaptists l. 2. p. 36 Andelott, a Low Country man, one of the Covenanters,
l. 6. p. 19 Andelott Coliny General of the French Foot, l. 3. p. 56 Anderlech,
Steward to Count Megan, l, 5. p. 101 Andrew Salazar, a Captain, l. 6. p. 33
Andreas Vesali^s Physician to Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 10 Anguisiola, vide
Iuan. Ani^, a River l. 7. p. 56 Anne of Austria daughter to the Emperor
Maximilian, is designed for wife to Charles Prince of Spain; l. 7. p. 68. after
whose death, his Father King Philip marries her, ibid. She comes into the
Low Countries, ibid. is conducted into Spain, ibid. dies, l. 7. p. 82 Anne
Egmont, first wife to the Prince of Orange. l. 3. p. 53 Anne daughter to Don
John of Austria, l. 10. p. 23 Anne daughter of Mourice Duke of Saxony, wife to
the Prince of Orange. l. 3. p. 53. her marriage, ibid. She is divorced, and
sent back into Germany p. 54 Ann^^s M^morancy Constable of France, l. 3. p. 61.
his death, l. 6. p. 35. he and the Duke of Alva compared, l. 7. p. 83. The
Ancibarian General his Vow against the (...), l. 3. p. 51 Antonio Al^^yda,
Anthony Bomb^rg of Antwerp, l. 6. p. 1. and 2 Anthony Bourbon King of Navarre,
brother to the Prince of Ca^da; l. 3. p. 56. his various fortune, ibid. he
treats with King Philip about the restitution o^ commutation of the Kingdom of
Navarre, p. 58. he withdraws his protection from the Heretics, p. 59.
whereupon he hopes to marry Mary Stuart Queen of Scots. ibid. he takes Roan, p.
61. enters it triumphantly, ibid. dies of a shot received at the Siege, ibid.
Anthony G^ig^y Lord of Vendege, trailed a pike under Charles the fifth, l. 9.
p. 50. was a Commander of horse at the battle of St. Quintin, ibid. Lieutenant
General to Count Aremberg in France, ibid. The discord of the Spaniards and
Low Country men, makes him leave the Kings Service, ibid. he is General of
the Confederates army, p. 50. sent to Antwerp by the Deputies of the Estates,
l. 8. p. 22. taken prisoner, p. 23. exchanged, l. 9. p. 31. took again at the
bat^el of Gemblac, l. 9. p. 52. Committed to the Fort at Mamure, ibid. Antonio
Gusman Marquess of Ayamont, Governor of Milain, l. 9. p. 32. and 47 Anthony
Lalin Count Hochstras, Captain of a troop of Low Country Horse, l. 1. p. 17.
made Knight of the Golden-Fleece by the endeavors of the Prince of Orange, l.
2. p. 46. Governor of Mechlin, l. 5. p. 1^1. one of the Gentlemen Covenanters,
p. 101. he acts for the Heretics, l. 6. p. 1. meets the Covenanters at
Cuilemburg house, l. 5. p. ^109. assigns the Heretics Churches in Mechlin, l.
5. p. 131. gives reasons for it to the Governesse, ibid. comes with the rest of
the Lords to the Convention at Dendermond, b. 5. p. 134. He is Lieutenant
Governor of Antwerp for the Prince of Orange, l. 5. p. 139. sends the Petition
of the Heretics at Antwerp to the Gouerness, ibid. endeavors to draw Count
Egmont to the new League, p. 142. He and the Prince of Orange oppose the
furious Calvinists at Antwerp, l. 6. p. 4. refuses to take the Oath of
fidelity to the King, l. 6. p. 12. loses his Government of Mechlin, ibid.
answers Count Mansfeldt jeeringly, ibid. he and Count Egmont fall out, l. 6. p.
14. and 15. he promises before the Governess to take the Oath, l. 6. p. 15. is
sent for to Bruxels with the rest of the Lords by the Duke of Alva, to set the
State in Order, l. 6. p. 32. hearing of their imprisonment, he flies, p. 33. he
is impeached before the Council of twelve, l. 7. p. 41. pronounced guilty of
High Treason by the Duke of Alva, p. 42. his forces beyond the Mose routed by
Avila, p. 46. he is car^ied off the field sick, l. 7. p. 56. his baggage taken
by the Spaniard, ibid. he is General at the battle by the Bank of Geta, l. 7.
p. 62. dies of a musket shot, ibid. Antonio Mendosa, l. 6. p. 26 Antonio
Olivera, first Commissary of Horse that ever was in the Low Countries, l. 6. p.
30. at the battle of M^och l. 8. p. 4. at the sack of Antwerp, l. 8. p. 22. at
the battle of Gemblac. l. 9. p. 50. brings his Prisoners to Don John, p. 51.
has a Pension assigned him by the ^ing l. 10. p. 7. Anthony Perc^ot Granvell
his birth, l. 2. p. 39. Wit, Languages, and Elocution, ibid. his emulation with
Regnard, l. 3. p. 67. from the Bishopric of Arras first translated to the
Archbishopric of Mechlin, l. 1. p. 18. commended by the Emperor to his son
Philip the second, l. 2. p. 40. His arts to ingratiate himself with the King,
ibid. he answers Charles the fifth for King Philip, l. 1. p. 4. speaks for the
King of the Estates, l. 1. p. 25. his power with the King. l. 3. p. 67, 68. he
stands for Margaret of Parma to be Governesse of the Low Countries, l. 1. p.
20. is commended to her by his Majesty, l. 2. p. 40 his favor and power with
the Governess, ibid. and p. 41. l. 3. p. 68. his dext^rity in giving counsel,
l. 2. p. 40. he Acts for the new Bishops, l. 3. p. 65. is hated by the Lords.
l. 3. p. 66. and Commons, p. 71. The Lords envy, emulation, and malice toward
him, l. 2. p. 39. l. 3. p. 67. and 68, 72, and 74. The greatness of his spirit
in despising his Rivalls, l. 2. p. 42. he approves not the sending away of the
Spanish soldiers out of the Low Countries, l. 3. p. 51. at last consents to
it, ibid. is created Cardinal by Pius the fourth, l. 3. p. 54. why for a while
he deferred the acceptance of his scarle^, ibid. he receives his Robes, and Hat
sent from Rome as an extraordinary favor, ibid. what benefit he aimed at in
being made Cardinal, p. 54. 55. he consults with his brother the Spanish
Ambassador touching the French affairs, p. 55, 58. What his opinion was
concerning the exchange of Sardinia for Navarre, l. 3. p. 58, 59. he is
defended by the Governess, l. 3. p. 68. and 72. by the King, p. 71. Three Lords
write a letter against him to his Majesty l. 3. p. 72. the Kings answer, l. 3.
p. 74. he speaks in Senate against the ambition of the Prince of Orange, l. 3.
p. 67. his power with the Governess decreaseth, l. 3. p. 74. the danger of his
life, p. 75. Scandalous Libels against him, l. 4. p. 77. the giving of Hoods
for Cognizances, was thought to be a combination against him, l. 4. p. 77, 78.
l. 5. p. 115. l. 7. p. 49. he is called out of the Low Countries, l. 4. p. 79.
the Kings letters that discharged him, dejected him not, ibid. his words as if
he desired a manumission from public employment, ibid. he would gladly have
been commanded into Spain, ibid. the King sends him, to Burg^^^di^, l. 4. p.
80. He goes, giving out that he is shortly to return, ibid. a plot to keep him
from coming back, ibid. he goes to Rome to the Conclave, l. 4. p. 81 is
employed by King Philip in his affairs at Rome* ibid. especially in the
transaction of the holy League against the Turk, ibid. He is created Viceroy
of Naples, ibid. and delivers the Christian Colors to Don John of Austria,
ibid. returning to Rome, he labors in the Conclave for the election of Gregory
the xill, l. 4. p. 81. going back to Naples, he offends the Pope in a
controversy with the Archbishop of Naples, p. 82 which is at last composed,
ibid. the report of his return to the Low Countries is there believed, l. 7. p.
68. he treats in the Kings name, with Margaret of Parma and Alexander Farneze,
to accept of a joynt-commission for the government of the Low Countries, l. 9.
p. 47. he is sent for into Spain by the King, and there made President of his
Italian Council. l. 4. p. 82. his liberty in speaking to the Grandees, and to
the King himself, ibid. he governs Spain in the Kings absence, p. 82. is
honored by him at his return, ibid. at Ausburg he marries Katharine daughter
of King Philip, to Charles Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, ibid, what he said when he
heard the Duke of Alva had not taken the Prince of Orange, l. 6. p. 33. he
dies at Madrid, l. 4. p. 83. his body is transported to Besancon* ibid. his
principal commendations p. 83 Antonio Perez Privie-Seal to Philip the second,
l. 6. p. 23. l. 9. p. 53. Anthony, son to Philip Duke of Burgundy, ^uart of
Brabant, l. 9. p. 36 Anthony Painter l. 7. p. 78 Antonio Saulio the Popes
Nuncio to the Viceroy of Naples l. 4. p. 82 Anthony Strall Consul of Antwerp
l. 6. p. 33. intimate with the Prince of Orange, ibid. beheaded l. 7. p. 49
Antonio de Toledo Prior of Leon a Knight of S. John's of Jerusalem l. 6. p. 23
Antwerp one of the chief cities of Brabant l. 5. p. 98. stands much affected to
Bre^erod, l. 5. p. 112. a Mutiny in the Town occasioned by the punishment of an
Apostate l. 4. p. 84. the number and habit of the G^euses there, l. 5. p. 115.
the Calvinists frequent sermons, l. 5. p. 116. their Tumult, l. 5. p. 117, 118.
upon the News of Tholose's overthrow at Oostervel l. ^. p. 4. for the quieting
of which stirs, they desire to have the Prince of Orange for their Governor
l. 5. p. 118. what a multitude of people meet him with acclamations and
applauses ibid. their Iconomachy and violation of sacred things* l. 5. p. 123.
and 124. the great Church restored to its use and beauty; l. 5. p. 130. l. 6.
p. 18. Heretics hold their Consistories in the Town l. 5. p. 138. Solemn
Procession l. 6. p. 28. the sack of it by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 22, 23
Antwerpers animated against the Catholics as far as from Constantinople, l.
5. p. 138. and 139. They cunningly offer money to the King l. 5. p. 139. they
threaten to Revolt, l. 6. p. ^. they sue for pardon to the Governess, l. 6. p.
17. they offer her to render the town, ibid. Antwerp-Fort designed by Margaret
of Parma, l. 6. p. 20. Built by the Duke of Alva l. 7. p. 40. entered and kept
by the mutinous Spaniards l. 8. p. 5. attempted by Don John l. 9. p. 35.
possessed by the Estates, ibid. dimol^shed l. 9. p. 38 Apology published by
the Prince of Orange l. 1. p. 4. l. 2. p. 38. p. 43. 45. p. 47. Aquila a town
l. 9. p. 47 Aranda vide Iuan Archdukes of Austria vide Maximilian and Matthias
An Archbishopric in the Low Countries l. 1. p. 28 Ardingbel l. 4. p. 91
Aremberg vide John Ligneus Aresc^ot rendereth it self to Don John l. 9. p. 53.
is betrayed l. 10. p. 13 Arsc^ot the Duke, vide Philip Croi Arias Montari^s
vide Benedictus Arme^ figures of little men and horses brought to ma^ch upon a
table l. 1. p. 7 Armenterians conspire with the Tournay-Ghe^ses l. 6. p. 7.
their plot is discovered ibid. they are defeated by N^^carmius l. 6. p. 7.
Armenterius vide Thomas Arminius his overthrow compared with that of Lewis of
Nassa^ l. 7. p. 56. and 57 Arms of Castile, l. 4. p. 78. assumed by the
associated Provinces, ibid. The Gheuses Arms l. 5. p. 109. the Arms of the
Empire vide Empire, the Kings Arms, l. 7. p. 65. the Arms of death l. 9. p. 41.
Army prepared for the Duke of Alva from France l. 7. p. 46. from Spain, l. 7.
p. 58. from Italy l. 6. p. 25. By Alva in the Low Countries to be sent into
France, l. 7. p. 64. Alva musters his Army l. 6. p. 29. it marches in three
divisions, p. 30. against Don John raised in Germany, l. 10. p. 7. sent to him
from Italy, l. 9. p. 41. Ranged for battle, l. 9. p. 50. brought off from the
Cannons mouth, l. 10. p. 12. for the Governess from Germany, l. 5. p. 132. and
133. for the Prince of Orange from the Low Countries and France, l. 7. p. 58,
61, 63, 73, 75. l. 9. p. 57. and out of Germany, l. 5. p. 138. l. 7. p. 58. An
Army for the States from France and Germany l. 10. p. 7. 13. from England and
Scotland l. 10. p. 10. The Duke of Alva's Army besieged by the Prince of
Orange, l. 7. p. 77. the Gheuses Army l. 7. p. 75. the Hugonots Army l. 7. p.
79. four Armies at one time vex the Low Countries p, 75 Artois a Province of
the Low Countries l. 1. p. 15. invaded by Cocquevill, l. 7. p. 46. defended by
Cosse, ibid. associated with the rest of the Provinces against the Spaniards,
l. 8. p. 20. its Governor, l. 1. p. 16 Arthur Cosse Commander in chief upon
the Marches of France, forbids the Prince of Orange to enter the Kingdom l. 7.
p. 63. sent by the French King to assist the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 46. 47.
beats Cocquevils Army into the town of S. Valery and storms it ibid. takes the
Commanders ibid. Assonvill vide Christopher. Asper l. 8. p. 9 Ausburg vide
Confession of Ausburg Augustino Barbarico l. 9. p. 46 Augustus Duke of Saxony
succeeds the Prince Elector Maurice, l. 3. p. 53. Christens the Prince of
Oranges son, l. 4. p. 87. joins with the Low country Rebels, l. 5. p. 138.
threatens the Governesse, l. 5. p. 140. makes war with John Frederick son
to the late Elector p. 141. sends to Margaret of Pa^ma an Embassage in Favor
of the Low Country Heretics l. 6. p. 18, 19. Avila vide Sancho. Austrian,
what l. 10. p. 21 Autruxius l. 3. p. 62 Ayala vide Martin. Ayamont vide Antonio
Marquess of Ayamont.
Sentences in A.
WE may safely suspect those for Authors, that are ADVANTAGED by the Design l.
5. p. 102 Thy are most sensible of ADVERSE fortune, that have been in most
felicity l. 9. p. 48 The first AGE after the tincture of pleasure, seldom or
never takes another die l. 10. p. 17^
BAden the Marquess sends an Embassage to the Governesse l. 6. p. 18 Baion l.
4. p. 87, 88 Balduin ab Angelo a Jesuit refuses the Oath pressed upon him l.
9. p. 40. is turned out of Antwerp with the rest of the Society ibid. Barbara
Blomberg of Ratisbone, l. 10. p. 17. commended to the King by Don John dying p.
22. she deceaseth p. 24. Babarino vide Francisco and Raphael Barlamont
surrendered to Don John l. 9. p* 57 Barlamont vide Aegidius, Florus, Lancellot,
and Philip Baronnius one of the Covenanters l. 5. p. 101 Bartolomeo Campio l.
7. p. 80. the famous Engeneer, in the siege of Harlem ibid Bartholmew Entese,
one of the first water- Gheuses l. 7. p. 71. turns Pirat ibid. is committed to
prison l. 7. p. 80 Bartolomeo Miranda Archbishop of Toledo l. 1. p. 8
Bartolomeo Portia the Popes Legate to the Emperor l. 9. p. 39 Bartholmew-Eeue
in France l. 7. p. 76 Basta vide Nicholao Batemburges the Brothers, vide
Gisbert and Theodorick Bavaria the Duke, vide Albert Bavier vide Christopher
and Henry Beavor vide Philip Lanoi Belgium, why called Flanders, l. 1. p. 14.
the lower Germany; and the seventeen Provinces ibid. its situation, opulency,
cities, towns, Villages, Militia, Navy, and Manufactures, ibid. their
Government was ever like a free state l. 2. p. 28 Belgic Provinces how they
were all joined under the Government of one Prince l. 1. p. 15. out of them
Charles the fifth thought to erect a Kingdom l. 1. p. 15 be transferres them
to his son Philip l. 1. p. 4. their division l. 1. p. 15. to what Persons the
King entrusted them, l. 1. p. 16. they petition the King to take off the tenth
part, l. 7. p. 67. they waver upon the news of the surprise of Brill by the
Covenanters, l. 7. p. 72. they conspire against the Spaniards l. 8. p. 19, 20.
they adhere to the States, only two continuing faithful to Don John, ibid. l.
9. p. 37. 48. 50 Bcaumont, rendered to Don John l. 9. p. 57 Bearne, the refuge
of Delinquents l. 3. p. 63 Benedictus Arias Montanus, l. 7. p. 64 Berg^n vide
William and John Glime Bergen op Zoom l. 8. p. 10. comes into the hand of the
Estates l. 9. p. 48. the Garrison soldiers betray their Colonel p. 49.
Berlinguerio Requesenes Admiral for the King of Spain in Sicily l. 8. p. 15
Bernardo Fresneda, a Franciscan, Confessar to King Philip l. 6. p. 23. votes
against a war with the Low Countries ibid. Bernardino Mendoza sent
Ambassador from the Duke of Alva to Pius the fifth l. 6. p. 26. Captain of
foot in the Low Country service p. 30. at the battle of Mooc^ l. 8. p. 4. and
of Gemblac l. 9. p. 49 Bernois l. 6. p. 26 Bersen sent by the Deputies of the
Estates with part of of their forces to Antwerp l. 8. p. 22 Beza vide Theodorus
Bill vide Gaspar Binch sometimes the delight of Mary Queen of H^^gary, yields
to Don John l. 9. p. 57. a stone upon the ^lace engraved by King Henry the
second of France when he demolished Binch ibid. Birth of Alexander Farneze l.
9. p. 42. of Granvell l. 2. p. 39. of William Prince of Orange l. 2. p. 43. of
Margaret of Parma l. 1. p. 20. of Prince Maurice of Nassan l. 4. p. 87. of
Odoardo Cardinal Farntze l. 4. p. 95. of Philip the second of Spain l. 1. p.
9. of Ra^ucio Farneze Duke of Parma l. 4. p. 95. Biseain man of war l 7. p.
65 Biserta stormed l. 10. p. 19 Blanch Queen of France l. 5. p. Blanca Sforza
daughter to Maximilian Duke of M^lain, and wife to the Emperor Maximilion,
killed by a fall from her horse, as she was hunting l. 1. p. 21 Blazer vide
John Blosius vide John and Lodwick. Bobadilla, a Captain l. 7. p. 75 Bobemian
King, vide Maximilian Boisot vide Charles and Lodwick Bomberg vide Anthony
Bommen in the Isle of Sceldt taken by the Royallists l. 8. p. 13 Bona Shorza,
Mother to Sigismund King of Poland dies l. 1. p. 13 Boniface Bishop of Mentz l.
2. p. 30 A Book published in Germany, called the Interim l. 1. p. 9 A Book set
forth by the Prince of Orange against the Duke of Alva l. 7. p. 58
Calvinisticall Books sent into France l. 3. p. 56. Designed for Spain l. 5. p.
137 Bourbon vide Anthony, John and Lewis Borgia, a Captain l. ^. p. 8 Borlutius
of Gant, Speaker for the Estates l. 1. p. 25 Bolduc vide Maximilian and John
Bovines renders it self to Don John l. 9. p. 53, 54 A Boy with two heads four
feet and four hands l. 7. p. 40 A Boy, with a Cat in a Cradle l. 7. p. 69.
Putting ou^ the eyes of Quails l. 7. p. 43. killing Leverets ibid. of eleven
years old begging arms and leave to go to the storming of a town l. 9. ^. 44
Brabant the principal Province of the Low Countries l. 1. p. 15. l. 7. p. 46.
extorts liberty of conscience, l. 9. p. 41. its immunities, and privileges, l.
2. p. 2. 29, 30, 31, 32. l. 5. p. 98. the head of that Province, ibid, the
towns there taken by the Prince of Orange reduced by the Duke of Alva l. 7. p.
77. their Deputies bought by the Prince of Orange l. 8. p. 17. are sent for to
Bruxels by Requesenes l. 8. p. 18. its Governor l. 1. p. 17. Brabanters refuse
the Inquisition l. 2. p. 32. and new Bishops l. 3. p. 65. send Agents privately
to Rome and Spain p. 66. deny to obey the Governesse's Edict proposed unto
them, l. 5. p. 98. Create Prince of Orange, Ruart of their Province, l. 9. p.
36 Bracamonte vide Consalvo Brandenburg, the Electour, sends an Ambassador to
the Governesse l. 6 p. 18 Breda l. 5. p. 142. besieged by the States forces, l.
9. p. 48 sends a Messenger to Don John who was discovered by the enemy, ibid.
it is rendered p. 49. the mutiny and perfidiousnesse of the soldiers ibid. Don
John sends forces to relieve it but in vain, ibid. a Garrison of Spaniards put
upon the town l. 7. p. 42 Brederod vide Henry, Lancellot, and Robert Bride l.
7. p. 54 Briganze vide Isabella and Mary Brill, a Port town of Holland l. 7. p.
72, taken by the Gheuses, ibid. upon the news whereof, many Cities revolt ibid.
the jeering clinch upon the name of Brill ibid. Brime vide Charles Bruges
affronts the Inquisitors l. 4 p. 84 Brunswick vide Erick, Philip, and Ernest
Bruxets a capital City of Brabant l. 5. p. 98. faithful to the King l. 6. p.
31. their privileges l. 5. p. 98. their contumacie against the Duke of Alva's
imposing taxes l. 7. p. 70. they keep off the Prince of Orange l. 7. p. 75.
they mutiny l. 8. p. 18, 20. their fear after the battle at Gemblot l. 9. p. 53
Bucar l. 3. p. 55 Bura taken by assault, l. 8. p. 8 Buran the Count l. 8. p. 19
Burgundy by Charles the fifth assigned to King Philip l. 1. p. 4. the Dukes of
Burgundy, p. 15. the Governor p. 17 Burgundians scale the fort at Dalhem and
take it l. 10 p. 3 Burgundion Princes used in their funeral pomp to have a
Crown set upon their heads, l. 10. p. 22. vide Philip and Mary Bulduc or Bus,
one of the chief Cities of Brabant l. 5. p. 98. refuses Count Megan, l. 6. p.
2. a tumult in the town ibid. they force their Bishop to fly l. 5. 131. they
detain the Governesse Ambassadors l. 6. p. 2. they release and send them to
her, p. 16. they threaten to revolt from the King p. 2. they are declared
enemies p. 16. they crave pardon and render themselves, p. 17. they receive a
Garrison, ibid. Busta vide Pedro Butero, a Prince l. 10. p. 23
Sentences in B.
BENEFITS please like flowers, while they are fresh l. 1. p. 14 Some men's
natures are more obliged by receiving one then many BENEFITS l. 1. p. 24 When
men fall from their hope, whatsoever comes short of their wishes loses the
title of a BENEFIT l. 2. p. 38 A BENEFIT more easily obliges particulars, then
a multitude l. 1. p. 22 A present BOUNTY is the step to a future Rise l. 1. p.
24
CArcass of a girl eaten by her Parents l. 7. p. 80 Cahors the Bishop l. 2. p.
80 Caesar Davalo brother to the Marquess of Pescara pursues the Nassavians l.
7. p. 55 Casius, vide Nicolaus. Caius Fabius his gallant attempt to pass
through the enemies Camp, l. 9. p. 40 Callice taken by the French, l. 1. p. 11
Cooks and Scullions fire Antwerp, l. 8. p. 22 Calvin tries how his books will
take in France, l. 3. p. 56. brings in heresy there, ibid. is author of the
tumult at Ambois l. 3. p. 57 Calvinists imprisoned, l. 3. p. 62. condemned,
ibid. rescued from the Executioner, ibid, carried back to prison, l. 3. p. 63,
taken out by force, p. 64. executed, p. 65. they plunder the Low Country
Churches, l. 5. p. 121. vide Image-breakers. They and their books are designed
to trouble Religion in Spain, l. 5. p. 137. l. 7. p. 45. They have their
Calvinisticall Suppers, l. 5. p. 141. p. 143. they try to get out of Antwerp to
Ostervel, l. 6. p. 4. finding themselves shut up in the Town, they rag^, ibid.
they are enemies to the Lutherans, ibid. they make a mutiny in the Town, ibid.
they petition for liberty of Religion to the Archduke and the Estates, l. 9.
p. 41. which they extort, and seiz upon the Catholic Churches, ibid. One of
them that je^red the Jesuits, finds his own house infected with the plague l.
9. p. 41 Conbray, the Bishop, restores things consecrated at Antwerp l. 6. p.
18 (...) l. 1. p. 15 Cambrey the peacemaking City, l. 1. p. 12. honored with
the Prerogative of an Archbishopric p. 18 Camillo Gonzaga Count de Novellaria
l. 7. p. 60 Camillo a Mont^ comes with the Duke of Alva into the Low Countries,
l. 6. p. 30. his moderation at the sack of Antwerp, l. 8. p. 24. he fights and
defeats the French l. 9. p. 57. in the expedition of Limburg, 1. 10. p. 1. he
is beaten off at Dalhem, l. 10. p. 3. commands Horse in the battle of Rimenant,
l. 10. p. 10. pursues, and is drawn by the enemy to their camp, ibid. the
gallantry of his Troop in sustaining the charge of the enemy, l. 10. p. 12.
Camillo Chiaffinat^ l. 10. p. 13 Campin, vide Frederick Lord Perenatt Cannon,
l. 7. p. 76. six taken by the enemy that had their names from the first six
elements of music, recovered l. 7. p. 56. nailed, l. 8. p. 8. attempted and
taken, l. 7. p. 55. Master of the train of Artillery, vide Gabriel Serbellonio,
Cress^^erio, the Barlamonts, Philip Staveley, and Valentine Pardieu. Captain
Campin, an Engineer, l. 6. p. 21 Cantonet, vide Thomas. Capital besieged by the
Gauls l. 9. p. 40. Caprius sent by the Deputies of the Estates with part of
their forces to Antwerp, l. 8. p. 22. taken by the Spaniard, l. 8. p. 23.
exchanged, l. 9. p. 31 Carafa, vide Marius. Cardinal, Alexandrino, l. 7. p. 43.
Borromeo vide St. Charles, (...) Odoardo, Granvel vide Antonie Perenot; L^rain
vide Caroldo; Pacicho vide Francisco, Spinosa vide Didaco. Cardinalists in the
Low Countries, l. 4. p. 81, l. 5. p. 103 Carloi brother to Ressorius Nohot l.
7. p. 46 Centron vide St. Truden Charlotta Bourbon wife to the Prince of
Orange, l. 3. p. 54 Charles Altapen son to Count Barlamont, Captain of a
Troop of Horse l. 10. p. 5 Charles the fifth goes from Spain to Germany to be
crowned Emperor, and so into Italy, l. 2. p. 27, 33. l. 10. p. 21. his
Military Expeditions, l. 1. p. 4, 8, 9, 15. l. 2. p. 34. l. 6. p. 30. l. 10. p.
14, 21. he quiets the mutiny at Gant, l. 5. p. 132. l. 6. p. 24. as keth the
Duke of Alva what punishment he thinks due to the Gantois, l. 7. p. 39. his
words concerning the magnitude of Gant, ibid. and the nature of the
Low Country men, l. 6. p. 23. he thinks of reducing the Low Countries into the
form of a Kingdom, l. 1. p. 15. why he forbear to do it. p. 16. how he
amplified the Principality of the Netherlands, ibid. he meant to have
increased the Bishoprics of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 17. why he went not on
with his defigne ibid. Charles the fifth, Prince of Burgundy, abrogates the
innovation of taxing the Low Countries at the hundredth part, l. 7. p. 69, 70.
he prepares Edicts and Arms against the Lutberans, l. 2. p. 34. l. 9. p. 42.
his Decrees and Edicts published, l. 4. p. 96. they are thought to be severe,
and breach of privilege to the Brabanters l. 5. p. 98. they are defended, l.
5. p. 104, 105. qualified, l. 5. p. 106. sent into Spain, l. 5. p. 114. He
begets his daughter Margaret at Ondenard in the Law-countreys, l. 1, p. 20. and
Don John of Austria at Ratisbone in Germany, l. 1. p. 16. with whom he is
compared, p. 19. he espouseth Margaret to Alexander Medices, l. 1. p. 21. and
after his death to Octavio Farneze, p. 22. his wife Isabella of Portugal, l.
10. 17. by whom he had Philip the second, l. 9. p. 43. his parity and disparity
with King Philip, l. 2. p. 38. his daughter Mary; l. 7. p. 43. he makes his
Will at Ausburg, l. 1. p. 10. prepares to resign his Kingdoms, p. 3. Creates
his son Philip master of the Order of the Golden Fleece, ibid. gives him the
Low Countries and Burgundy, l. 1. p. 4. then all his Kingdoms, p. 5. repeats
his own actions, l. 1. p. 4. His speech at the resignment of his Kingdom to
his son, ibid. he gives away the Empire, p. 5. he sends the Imperial Crown
and Scepter by the Prince of Orange to his brother Ferdinand, ibid. l. 2. p.
44. his desire to transfer the Kingdom of the (...) to his son Philip, l. 1.
p. 5. from Zeland be weighs anchours for Spain, ibid. The ship he sailed in,
after he was landed, sunk immediately, ibid. his words when he came on shore,
ibid. a suspicion that his mind was changed, l. 1, p. 5. he visites Charles
Prince of Spain, p. 6. builds himself a house adjoining to the Monastery of St.
Iust^m, ibid. his family and furniture, l. 1. p. 6. his daily exercises in that
solitude, ibid. his Whip, or discipline, died in his blood, much reverenced, p.
7. he keeps the anniversary of his mothers death, ibid. he celebrates his own
Funerals* ibid. falls sick, l. 1. p. 7. discovers his son John to King Philip,
l. 10. p. 17. dies religiously, l. 1. p. 8. The prodigies at his death, l. 1.
p. 8. the years of his Government, ibid. the several conjectured Causes of his
Resignation, l. 1. p. 8. Charles of Austria, Prince of Spain, l. 7. p. 43. his
nature ibid. not approved of by his Grandfather Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 6.
his education, l. 7. p. 43. l. 10. p. 18. sent to Alcala, l. 7. p. 43. falls
from a ladder, ibid. is recovered by the help of St. Didacus, l. 7. p. 43.
Isabella daughter to Henry the second of France is designed for his wife, l. 7.
p. 45, 68. so is the daughter of the Emperor Maximilian, p. 68. how unlike he
was to his father, l. 7. p. 43. his hatred to his fathers favorites, ibid. his
patronage of the Low Country men, l. 6. p. 22. l. 7. p. 43. his purpose to
steal away for the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 44. which he imparted to some
friends, ibid. discovered to his father by Don John, l. 7. p. 44. he endeavors
to fright the Duke of Alva from his Low Country expedition, ibid. being to
take horse in the morning, he is in the night seized on by his father, l. 7. p.
44. committed to his chamber, p. 45. his infelicity, ibid. and Death, p. 45.
the causes of his imprisonment and death. ibid. He, Don John, and Alexander
Farn^ze, compared together l. 10. p. 18. Charles Count Barlamont Governor of
Na^^^e, l. 1. p. 16. the asserror of Religion, l. 10, p. 5. his sons, ibid.
his known fidelity to the King, l. 1. p. 25. l. 3. p. 69. l, 10. p. 5. one of
Granvels party, l. 4. p. 81. manifests his readiness to take arms for the King,
l. 5. p* 129. informs the Governess what the Knights of the Order had designed,
l. 3. p. 69. when Duke Areschott and Count Egmont fell out, he mediated between
them, l. 3. p. 72. his vote against the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103. he gives the
name of G^enses, by way of contempt, to the petitioning Covenanters, l. 5. p.
109. takes the Oath of allegiance, l. 6. p. 11. is by force taken out of the
Senate, and imprisoned in Bruxels, l. 8. p. 20 dies at Namure, l. 10. p. 5. his
Obsequies, ibid. his Encomion ibid. Charles Boisot, Governor of Zeland, sent
by the Prince: of Orange into Duveland, l. 8. p. 10. slain by the Royallusts p.
13 St. Charles, Cardinal Borromeo l. 8. p. 1^ Charles Brime Count Megan
Governor of Gelderland and Zurphen, l. 1. p. 17. l. 2. p. 41. gives the
Governess intelligence of the Lords conspiracy, l. 5. p. 99. and of soldiers
levied in Saxony, l. 7. p. 47. discovers to her the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 101.
his vote in Council, l. 5. p. 103. sent before by the Governess to quiet the
sedition at Antwerp, l. 5. p. 118. and to the Buss, and Ma^strieht, l. 6. p. 2.
Megen (printed Mela) takes the Oath of Allegiance, l. 9. p. 11. beats the
Covenanting Rebels out of Amsterdam, l. 6. p. 19. drives them into Waterland,
ibid. is highly favored by the Governesse, p. 48. governs Frisland in the
place of Count Aremberg deceased, ibid. l. 7. p. 58. his Votive montment at
Swoll in Leovard, l. 7. p. 48. he dies, ibid. Charles Croi Marquess of Haure,
returns from Spain to the Low Countries, l. 8. p. 19. sent by the Deputies of
the Estates with an Army to Antwerp, l. 8. p. 22. commands a Wing of Horse, at
the battle of Gi^^slac, l. 9. p. 50. Charles Davalo, son to Vastius, Captain of
a troop of Horse in the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 30 Charles Egmont Duke of
Gelder, l. 1. p. 19 Charles Farneze twin-brother to Alexander Farneze, l. 9. p.
43 Charles Fugger, a Colonel, betrayed by his soldiers, l. 9. p. 48, 49
Charles the seventh of France, his difference with his son Lewis, l. 7. p. 44
Charles the eighth of France, what an Oath he forced upon the Pisans and
Florentimes, l. 9. p. 34 Charles the ninth of France, l. 3. p. 58. at Baion, l.
4. p. 8^. his marriage with Elizabeth daughter to the Emp^rour Maximision, l.
4. p. 88. he desires assistance against the Heretics, l. 3. p. 55, 56. his
victory, l. 3. p. 61. he joins with the King of Spain agianst his Low Country
Rebels, l. 5. p. 134. He denies the Spanish army passage through the Territory
of Lions, l. 6. p. 26. is not persuaded by the Hugonots to fight with the
Spaniards, ibid. sends for auxiliaries into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 34.
which are granted, ibid. fights at St. Denis, l. 6. p. 35. sends Cosse, Colonel
of Horse, to assist the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 46. A rumor that he has
concluded a peace with the Heretics, and would send men into the
Low Countries, in favor of the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 73. he commands the
Hugonots to be massacred, l. 7. p. ^6 Charles Duke of Gelderland, l. 7. p. 47
Charles Count Lalin, l. 2. p. 41. l. 3. p. ^5 Carolo Largilla, l. 8. p. 2
Charles Duke of Lorain, l. 1. p. ^0 Charles Cardinal of Lorain, l 3. p. 56. l.
3. p. 61, 75. l. 7. p. ^6 Charles Mansfult son to Peter Ernest, l. 4. p. 92.
chidden by his father for joining with the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103. he
forsakes them, l. 5. p. 119. besieges Valenciens, l. 6. p. 10. is at the
battle of G^mblat, l. 9. p. 50. his Regiment at Bovines, l. 9. p. 53. attempts
Nivel and is beat off, l. 9. p. 56. the King gives him money, l. 10. p. 7
Charles, the soldier or fighter, l. 1. p. 15 Carolo Scotto, a Count, l. 9. p.
45 Charles Tisnac, the Kings Procurator in Spain for business of the
Low Countries, l. 3. p. 73, 74 Casembrat, vide John. Casimir, brother to the
Palsgrave, vide John. Castaneo, vide Giovanni Baptista. Castile, its Arms, l.
4. p. 78. President of the Council of Castile, l. 4. p. 82. l. 6. p. 23 Castle
in the water, l. 8. p. 20 Catharine of Medices Queen Mother of France, desires
assistance against the Heretics from Philip the second of Spain, l. 3. p. 57.
the like from Margaret of Parma, Governess of the Low Countries, l. 3. p. 60.
she comes to the Conference at Baion, l. 4. p. 87. the death of her son Hemy
foretold her, l. 1. p. 13 Catharine daughter to King Philip the second, l. 4.
p. 82 Catholics and Luth^rans join against the Calvinists, l. 6. p. 4. the
Catholics defeat the Hugonots at Moncoure, l. 7. p. 64. what they think of the
Duke of Alva's departure from the Low Countries. l. 7. p. 81. they consent to
the Pacification of Gant, l. 8. p. 21. they adhere to the Estates, l. 9. p. ^7.
they, together with the Heretics, take the Oath of fidelity to the Archduke
Matthias, l. 9. p. 39. they are expelled the Low Countries by the Heretics, l.
9. p. 41. their Churches possessed by the Calvinists, ibid. C^ttey Governor of
Vlussing, l. 6. p. 2 Causes of the Low Country tumults, vide Tumult Cessation
of Arms, l. 9. p. 49 Cetona a Town, l. 8. p. 14 Chiapino Vitelli Marquess of
Cetona, marches with the Duke of Alva, as his Camp-master into the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 30. defends Graninghen, l. 7. p. 54. desirous to fight
the Enemy, l. 7. p. 61, 62. falls upon an Ambuscado, l. 7. p. 60. encounters
the enemy, and worsts him, ibid. prohihited by the Duke of Alva to move
against the Prince of Orange; l. 7. p. 61. falls upon a Battalion of the Prince
of Orange's severed from the rest, p. 61. fights upon the banks of Geta, ibid.
hurts Coll. Loverall, p. 62. wrests the enemies Colors out of the Ensigns
hand, p. 62. his courage commended by the Duke of Alva, ibid. sent by the Duke
of Alva to the Queen of England, l. 7. p. 66. solicited to revolt by Coliny,
l. 7. p. 73. in a rage throws Coliny's letters into the fire, p. 74 goes to
besiege Men's, l. 7. p. 79. is wounded, ibid. his bold gallantry, p. 79. he
takes many towns in Holland, l. 8. p. 8. is made Genrall of the Zeland
expedition by Requesenes, p. 9. besieges Ziritzee, l. 8. p. 13. dicth, ibid.
his Funerals, l. 8. p. 14. his Corpse carried into his Country, ibid. his
Encomion, ibid. Christian King of Denmark, l. 1. p. 13 Christierne daugthter to
the King of Denmark, Duchess of Lorain, makes a Peace between Spain and
France, l. 1. p. 12. Has the general wishes to be Governess of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 19. what hinders her, p. 20. Christi^rn King of
Denmark, l. 1. p. 13 Christopher Assonvill a Senator, l. 5. p. 99. l. 5. p.
137. l. 7. p. 52, 57. employed by the Duke of the Alva to the Queen of England,
p. 66. his relation, l. 8. p. 19. 22. he is forcibly taken out of the Senate,
and committed Prisoner, l. 8. p. 20 Christopher Bavier son to the Elector
Palatine, General at the battle of Mooch, l. 8. p. 2, 3 Christopher Fabritius
Apostara, executed, l. 4. p. 84 Christopher Mandragonio Captain of a troop of
Horse, l. 6. p. 30. his gallant and bold attempt, ibid. he attends the Queen
with his Regiment into Spain, l. 7. p. 69. General at the wading over the sea
to Goes, where he raised the siege, l. 7. p. 77. he takes the Isle of
Zuit-Beverland, ibid. defends Middelburg against the Zelanders, l. 8. p. 2.
forced to render it by famine, ibid. how much the enemy honored him, ibid.
exchanged for Aldegund, p. 2. Commands in chief at Sea, in the Zeland
Expedition, l. 8. p. 9. sayls to the Isle of Philip-land, l. 8. p. 9, 10.
thence to Duveland, ibid. fo^rds the sea on foot to Sceldt, l. 8. p. 13. the
city of Z^^^zee, the Head of the Island rendered to him, ibid. the mutinous
soldiers choose another General in his place, l. 8. p. 17. the courage of his
wife in holding the Fort at Gant, l. 9. p. 31. victorious at the battle of
Gemblac, l. 9. p. 51. storms Sichem, l. 9. p. 54. is preserved from fire
miraculously, l. 10. p. 5. the King pays his pension, l, 10. p. 7 Chius
The^dotus, l. 9. p. 27 Churches, how they came to be plundered in the
Low Countries, l. 5. 121. when the sacrilege began, ibid. how it continued, p.
123. how great a loss in the principal Church of Antwerp, l. 5. p. 126.
restored to its use, p. 130. l. 6. p. 18. destruction of Churches in Flanders,
l. 5. p. 126. Churches granted to Heretics, l. 5. p. 130. restored to
Catholics, l. 6. p. 10. seized by Calvinists, l. 9. p. 41 vide Ich^o^achy, l.
5. p. 125 Ci^c^onio vide Pedro. Cimace, the Prince, l. 8. p. 19 Cimace, the
Town taken by assault, l. 9. p. 57. the Fort rendered, ibid. Cittadella, a
Captain, and an Engineer, released by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 2. vide
Francesco. Cities in the Low Countries numbered, l. 1. p. 14. Cities the
principal of Brabant, [not the Nether-lands] l. 5. p. 98. their immunities and
privileges, l. 2. p. 28, 29, 30, 31. They mutiny against the Spanish
Garrisons, l. 2. p. 28, 29, 30. they revolt from the King, l. 7. p. 72. submit
to the Prince of Orange, ibid. are reduced, l. 7. p. 77 Clo^a de Medic^s,
sister to Pius the fourth, l. 8. p. 9 Cla^a Isabella Engenia, her birth, l. 5.
p. 132. she is married to Albert Rodulphus the Emperors brother. ibid. Claudia
Chalon wife to Henry of Nasson, l. 2. p. 4^ Claudius Civilis, l. 1. p. 2. l. 7.
p. 58 Claudius Ha^dtepen, l. 9. p. 35 Claudius Vergius Lord of Camplit,
Governor of Burgundy, l. 1. p. 17 Clement the seventh, P. M. l. 1. p. 9, 21
Clement Marot turned David's Psalms into French meetre, l. 3. p. 63. his
manners, ibid. he files to Beern^, ibid. returns to Paris, ibid. goes to
Geneva, ibid. dies, l. 3. p. 63 Cleveland, the Duke, vide William. Cobell, l.
7. p. 57 Coliny, vide Gaspar and Andelat. Calen the Elector dies, l. 2. p. 1^
Columna, vide Marc. Antonio Columna. Column of Marble ingraved at Cuilemburg
house, l. 7. p. 42. In the Prince of Oranges colors, with a Marro, l. 7. p.
62. Comet before the death of Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 8. another,
forerunner to a War, l. 9. p. 49. Vide Prodigies. Commissary of Horse, the
first in the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 30 Comparison, of (...) Monor ancy with
the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 8^. with Count (...), l. 7. p. 48. of the defeat of
(...) with that of Lewis de Nassau, l. 7. p. 56, and 57. of Charles the fifth
with his son Philip the second, l. 2. p. 38. of Charles Prince of Spain, with
Don John of Austria, and Alexander (...), l. 10. p. 10. of Cathorine de Medices
with Margaret of Parma, l. 3. p. 61. of the Cardinal of Lorain with Cardinal
Gravel, ibid. of Count Eg^^t with the Prince of Orange, l. 3. p. 70. of Don
John of Austria, with Charles the fifth, and G^rmanicus Caesar. l. 10. p. 21. of
Captain Pa^ccho with Petreius the Centution, l. 8. p. 12. of the old Brigick
War with the new, l. 7. p. 56. of the French with the Low Country tumults,
l. 3. p. 61 Commander in Chief, or Governor of the Low Country, l. 10. p. 15.
23. of the Camp or camp-master, l. 6. p. 30. of the Ottoman Fleet, l. 8. p. 14.
of the Kings navy, l. 8. p. 15. vide Fleet. Of the Knights of the Golden
Fleece, vide Order and Knights. Of the Lanciers, l. 8. p. 4. of the sea, l. 1.
p. 17. l. 7. p. 69. l. 8. p. 13. l. 9. p. 44. of the Lifeguard, l. 6. p. 33.
of the Kings Exchequer, vide Treasurer. of the Musketeeres, l. 9. p. 51
Combination against Alva, l. 7 p. 46. against Granvel, l. 3. p. 67, 68, 71, 72.
of the people, and of the Merchants. Vide Conspiracy. Commission for the
Government of the Low Countries not signed before his death by Requeseues, l.
8. p. 18 Complaints of the Low Country men against the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p.
70. against Don John of Austria l. 10. p. 20. against the Prince of Orange, l.
7. p. 75. against the Spanish forces, l. 2. p. 28. and l. 3. 50. of the
Corenanters against the Governesse, l. 5. p. 108. of Count Egmont against the
King, l. 4. p. 96, of the old Bishops against the new, l. 2. p. 29. of the
Governess against Count Egmont, l. 5. p. 123. of her to the King, l. 5. p. 136.
of the Spaniards against the Estates; l. 9. p. 30. of Don John against the
King, l. 10. p. 20. of the Lords against the Spaniards, l. 2. p. 38. of them
and others against the new Bishops, l. 2. p. 29. of the Prince of Orange
against the Emperor, l. 5. p. 133. his and Count Egmonts against the King, l.
3. p. 68. and l. 5. p. 104. both theirs against Granvell, l. 3. p. 75. of the
Governors of Provinces against the Governesses Edict, l. 6. p. 98. of Philip
the second against his father Charles, l. 1. p. 9. of the people against the
Inquisition, l. 5. p. 105. and against the imprisonment of the Lords, l. 6. p.
33. of the Senators against the Inquisition and the Emperors Edicts, l. 5. p.
103, 104, (...) of the ^orhon Doctors against Merots Poetry, l. 3. p. 63. Vide
Hatred. Council of twelve cojustituted to examine Delinquents (...)
Low Countries, l. 7. p. 41. they impeach the Lords, ibid. condemn them, l. 7.
p. 42. and many Church-robbers and disturbers of the Peace, ibid. Council of
State governs the seventeen Provinces, l. 8. p. 16. and ruins them, p. 17
Council of Trens be^^^^ by Paul the third, l. p. 42. promulgored by Pius the
fourth, l. 4. p. 85. received by Philip the second of Spain, not refused for
his private difference with the Pope, ibid. the difficulty in setrtling it, l.
4. p. 86. a Edict for its observation published by the Governesse Margaret of
Parma, l. 4. p. 96. which occasions a revivall of the Lords conspiracy, l. 5.
p. 98. Condemnation of the Covenanters, l. 7. p. 42. of (...), l. 3. p. 62.
Vide Punishment. (...), side Lewin. C^dom, a town, l. 2. p. 31. Conference of
Charles the ninth of France, and the Queens (...), l. 4. p. 87. its causes,
ibid. what was acted there, p. 88. how it frighted the heretic^^, ibid.
Confessor to Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 7. to Charles Prince of (...), l. 7.
p. 45. to Margaret of Parma, l. 1 p. 23. to Philip the second l. 6. p. 23
Con(...) of (...) prescribed to all the Covenan^^ (...) l. 5. p. 138. a new one
conceived, and (...) to the Emperor, ibid. the Germane heretics require that
it should be embraced in the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 130, 131 (...), Colonel of
the (...), l. 6. p. 30 sights (...) of (...) l. 7. p. 47. his Regiment rer^^^^
the (...) of Count Aremberg, with the firing of many villages, l. 7. p. 57. he
and his Regiment punished, ibid. and p. 58. by the Duke of Alva he is restored
to his command, l. 7. p. 18 Conscience carefully purified, l. 1. p. 7 Counsels
of State, Justice, and the Finances l. 1. p. 25 Council of War, Vide War.
Counsels fraudulent, l. 9. p. 34. and l. 10. p. 20 impious, l. 9. p. 26, 27. of
the Kings of France and Spain against the heretics, l. 2. p. 46. of expelling
the (...), l. 8. p. 21. of prudent persons about Charles Prince of Spain, l. 7.
p. 44. Vide Consultation. Consistories of heretics, l. 5. p. 13. disturbed, l.
6. p. 7, 8. and l. 7 p. 42. Conspiracy of the Armenterians with the (...) l. 6.
p. 6. of the seventeen Provinces against the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 21. of the
Germane Princes with the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 58. against Don John's life,
l. 10. p. 2. Vide Combination. Conspiracy of the Low Country men, from what
Original. Vide Lords, Gentlemen, and Gheuses. Consultation of admitting the
Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103, 104. of the Kings expedition into the Low Countries,
l. 6. p. 22. of casting the Spaniards in the Netherlands, l. 3. p. 51. and l.
9. p. 27. against sacrilegious plunderrers, l. 5. p. 127 Contention of the
Low Country Lords, l. 2. p. 38. of several Nations in the Camp, l. 10. p. 22
Controversy touching the Conjunction of goods, and Institution of Bishops in
the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 29, 30, etc. defined by the Universitie of Lovain,
l. 2. p. 31, 32. between the Duke of Alva and the Quxn of England, l. 7. p. 65,
66. between the Ambassadors of France and Spain, l. 41. 85 Convention of the
Knights of the Golden Fl(...) at Gant, l. 2. p. 46. of the Princes of the
Empire at Fr^nkford, l. 3. p. 71. of the Cardinals at Rome, l. 4. p. 81. of the
Estates in the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 18. of the Convenanters at Amsterdam, l.
5. p. 137. at E^da, p. 142. of the heretics at Geneva, l. 3. p. 56. of the
Low Country Lords at Dendermond, l. 5. p. 134 of the Gbeuses at Centron or St.
Truden, l. 5. p. 119. of the Electors at Worms, l. 2. p. 34 Conventicles of
heretics in the night, l. 5. p. 116 Convening of the Knights of the Golden
Fleece, l. 3. p. 69. the Estates General not permitted to convene, ^. 3. p.
68, 69. l. 8. p. 20. Covenant of the Gentlemen engagers against Religion, l. 5.
p. 101. published in several languages, ibid. Contrymen rout the
Image-breakers, l. 5. p. 122. and their soldiers, l. 7. p. 75. as Lewis of
Nassau washed his wounds in the Mose, they killed him, l. 8 p. 3. their forces,
l. 6. p. 7 Cor^^lius from a blacksmith come to be a Calvinisti^all Preacher,
l. 6. p. 7. Commander in chief of the Arment^rians in Flanders, ibid. Cornelius
Vandem, l. 8. p. 24 Cosmo Duke of Florence, l. 1. p. 21. (...) p. 14 Cosse,
vide Arthur. Cova^^^vias vide Didato. Courtiers subtle to ingratiate
themselves, l. 1. p. 40. slippery-footed, l. 3. p. 74. a Court-prodigie, l. 1.
p. 3, 8. their fantastical manners, l. 1. p. 8. their derision of the Duke of
Alva, l. 7. p. 65. the change of their faces, l. 4. p. 79. they follow the
Princes example, l. 10. p. 21. Vide Antoxy Perenot Granvell, and the Sentences
in C. Cressouerius a famous Engineer, l. 6. p. 6. and l. 7. p. 54. runs a
Trench to the walls of Val^^cims, l. 6. p. 10. is Governor of Graveling, l. 7.
p. 80. dies, ibid. Crimpen, l. 8. p. 13 Croi, a house great in piery toward
the blessed Virgi^ of Hell, l. 5. p. 111 Croi, vide Charles, John, and Philip.
Cuilemburg vide Florence Palantius. Court of Justice burnt down at Antwerp, l.
8. p. 23. Curtius Comes Martinengo, Captain of a foot company, l. 6. p. 30. not
present at Count Aremberg's defeat, l. 7. p. 47. he pursues the flying
Nassavians, l. 7. p. 55. Cyprian War, l. 5. p. 139.
Sentences in C.
PRinces names, are always registered in the Kalander of public CALAMITIES l.
5. p. 128 CALUMNIES and defamations without any distinction of truth or
falsehood, are ever greedily entertained, and as greedily communicated, l. 5. p.
117 In CONSULTATIONS, reason is not at all times permitted to make a free
Election, l. 9. p. 28 Some evils cured by CONTEMPT l. 4. p. 79 Though Women
conceal their other Virtues, yet they may glory in their CHASTITY l. 4. p. 92
The fire of CIVIL War, can never be extinguished without the Conquerours
loss, l. 6. p. 23 COMPLAINTS though just, loose part of that Justice if they
he importune, l. 5. p. 104 Power seldom grows old at COURT l. 3. p. 55 Favor
at COURT has a better face then inside l. 4. p. 79 No virtue is less raised
at COURT, then that which is most feared l. 4. p. 79 It is hard to decesve the
COURT l. 2. p. 40 Long prosperity makes not COURTIERS more secure of favor,
then impatient of affronts. l. 4. p. 80
D.
Devils accompany Church-Robbers l. 5. p. 125 obsesse their bodies l. 6. p. 17
Dalhem summoned, l. 10. p. 3. the Fort besieged and taken, ibid, the unhappy
fortune of a maid ibid Damianus Morales a Captain l. 8. p. 23 Damme a town in
Frisland surprised by the Nassavians l. 7. p. 47. recovered by the Spaniards
ibid. Death suffered gallantly, Denmark the King l. 1. p. 13 and l. 3. p. 53
Davaso vide Caesar, Charles. Daventry receives a garrison of Spaniards l. 6 p.
20. and l. 7. p. 34. David secretary to the Duke of Parma l. 10. p. 23 David
the Prophets psalms sung by the Heriticks, l. 3. p. 61, 63. and l. 5. p. 124.
prohibited by Catholics l. 3. p 63 Delph in Holland, l. 7. p. 77. receives a
garrison of Spaniards l. 6. p. 20 Delphino vide Flaminio Deputies of the
Estates govern the Low-countryes vide Estates Derdendius Gallus l. 7. p. 80
Diana Phalanga a Surreatine l. 10. p. 22 Destruction of Nardhem l. 7. p. 73
Diary of Battles B. Didacus restores Charles Prince of Spain to his health l.
7. p. 43 Didaco of Austria Prince of Spain l. 7. p. 83 Didaco Cardinal Spinosa
the Grand-Inquisitor for causes of Faith, l. 6. p. 22. President of the
Council of Castile, p. 23. and l. 7. p. 46. called the Spanish Monarch, ibid.
votes for a war with the Low-countryes l. 6. p. 22. presses the King to punish
C. Egmont and C. Horn, l. 7. p. 51. loses the Kings favor l. 3. p. 74
Didaco de Chiaves, Confessor to Charles Prince of Spain l. 7. p. 45 Didaco
Covarrnvia Bishop of Segovia and President of Castile l. 4. p. 82 Didaco Gusman
a Silva Ambassador from Philip the second to the Queen of England. l. 4. p. 94
Didaco Hurtado Mendosa l. 10. p. 6. Difference between the Duke of Alva, and
the Prince of Ebolo, l. 6. p. 23. between Count Attempse, and the Governor of
Axtwerp, l. 8. p. 17. between Don John of Austria, and V^nerio, l. 9. p. 49.
between the Burbons, Colignies, Momorancies, and Guises, l. 3. p. 56. between
Saint Charles Borronco and Requesenes, l. 8. p. 15. between Charles the seventh
of France, and his Son Lewis, l. 7. p. 44. between the Calvinists and
Lutherans, l. 6. p. 4. between Count Egmont and Duke Areschot, l. 3. p. 72. and
Count Aremberg, p. 73. and Count Hochstrat, l. 6. p. 14, 15. between Cardinal
Granvell, and the Archbishop of Naples, l. 4. p. 81, 82. Count Laline, l. 3.
p. 75. between Pope Pius the fourth, and Philip the second of Spain, l. 4. p.
85, etc. between Philip the second, and his Son Charles, l. 7. p. 43. Diesthem
taken by the Prince of Orange l. 7. p. 75 Don John of Austria commands
Alexander Farnese to besiege it, l. 9. p. 54. it is rendered, p. 55. mercy showed
to the town, ibid. the garrison take pay of the King ibid. Dilemburg the
ancient seat of the Nassaus, l. 7. p. 77 Dioclesian the Emperor, l. 1. p. 6
Discipline of War observed by the Army l. 6. p. 31 Disputation between a
Jesuit and Heriticks, l. 6. p. 15 Doway, l. 6. p. 37 Dort or Dordrecbt revolt^
from the Spaniard, l. 7. p. 72 Dreux a Town of Normandy Duel between two
French Gentlemen, l. 1. p. 13 Dui passes the Mose, l. 7. p. 46. is defeated and
taken, ibid. condemned to loose his head l. 7. p. 49 Dullart a Bay l. 7. p. 56.
and 47 Duncher a Pilot. l. 6. p. 19. his ship taken, ibid. Duveland, an Island
drowned by the sea, l. 8. p. 10. reinhabited, ibid. the sea about it waded
over, ibid. the Island taken by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 13.
Sentences in D.
DANGER it self, the best remedy for danger l. 5. p. 113 Men in like DANGER
easily associate l. 5. p. 137 Between the business of life, and day of DEATH,
a space ought to be interposed l. 1. p. 10 Resolutions are given with greater
authority at a DISTANCE l. 4. p. 88 It is more DISREPUTATION to fall from a
place of eminence, then never to have been advanced l. 10. p. 15
E.
EArthquake in Asia, [insert in the reading, 12 Cities of Asia] l. 5. p. 127.
in Brabant, l. 7. p. 40. swallows 33. Villages l. 7. p. 47. Ebolo the Prince
vide Rodorick or Ruigomez Eclipse of the Sun l. 1. p. 22 Edam a town l. 7. p.
72 Edict of the Duke of Alva for exacting of tribute, l. 7. p. 65. and 67.
mitigated, l. 7. p. 70. of Charles the fifth at Worms against Luther and the
Heretics, l. 2. p. 34 seven times renewed, ibid. revived and published. l. 4.
p. 96. reprehended, l. 5. p. 1. l. 5. p. 105. and 106. defefided, l. 5. p. 105.
mitigated, l. 7. p. 106. Of Charles the ninth of France against the Heriticks,
l. 5. p. 138. against the Germans, that should oppose the Spaniards in the
Low Countries, l. 5. p. 134 Of Francis the first of France, against Maroi's
Poetry, l. 3. p. 63. of Margaret of Parma for religion, l. 4. p. 96. against
the Heriticks that dwelt at Antwerp, l. 5. p. 117. against their sermons, ibid.
against their exercises, ibid. against Fugitives from the Low Countries, l. 6.
p. 34. against the Low Country men that should bear arms against France, ibid.
against the French that should fight in the Low-countryes, l. 5. p. 134. of the
Royal Senate, against the soldiers at Aclst, or Aloost, l. 8. p. 18. of the
States against the Spaniards, ib^d. l. 9. p. 39. of the pacification at Gant,
l. 9. p. 30 Edward Horsey Governor of the Isle of Wight. l. 9. p. 33 Edward
Prince of Portugal l. 4. p. 92 Egmond a town in Holland l. 7. p. 53 Egmont
vide Charles, Lamorall, and Philip. Elections of new Bishops in the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 18. made Reversioners to Abbats by ^ius the fourth,
vide Bishops and Abbats. Electors of the Empire, of Brandenburg, l. 6. p. 18.
of Colen, l. 1. p. 14. of Mentz, l. 5. p. 134. the Palsgrave, l. 1. p. 14. l.
5. p. 134. the King of Bohemia, l. 7. p. 43. the Duke of Saxony, l. 6. p. 18.
Trier, l. 5. p. 134. Electo chosen by the Mutineeres, l. 8. p. 5. and p. 8. and
p. 22 Elogy of Alva, l. 7. p. 82. and 83. of Aremberg, l. 7. p. 47. of Don
John, l. 10. p. 21, 22. of Count Egmont, l. 7. p. 53. of Cardinal Granvell, l.
4. p. 83. of Lewis of Nassau, l. 8. p. 3. of Princess Mary of Portugal, l. 4.
p. 92. of Reques^nes, l. 8. p. 15. of Vitelli, l. 8. p. 14. vide Encomion.
Elizabeth Queen of England takes part with the Low Country Conspiratours, l.
5. p. 101. seizes the King of Spains money, sent to the Duke of Alva, l. 5. p.
104. l. 7. p. 65. and 66. which occasioneth a contest between her Majesty, and
the Duke of Alva, ibid. she prohibits the Holland Pirates to come within her
Ports, l. 7. p. 71. her Embassage to the Governesse, when she was to leave the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 37. to Don John when he came to the Government, l. 8. p.
33. she is by the Lords, proposed for Governess for the Low Countries, l. 9. p
38. she sends to Don John for a cessation of arms, l. 9. p. 49. and threatnes,
ibid. is not heard ibid. a rumor that she was to be married to Don John, l.
10. p. 20. Elizabeth Cuilemburg, l. 1. p. 20 Ambassador from the King of Spain,
to the Pope, l. 1. p. 18. l. 3. p. 66. to the Queen of England, l. 4. p. 94. to
the King of France, l. 5. p. 134. l. 5. p. 140. l. 7. p. 79. l. 10. p. 20. l.
10. p. 24. from France to the Pope, l. 4. p. 85. the contest between the French
and Spanish Ambassadors in the council of Trent, ibid. revived at Rome ibid.
what was done thereupon in ^he Emperors Court, ibid. what at Rome, ibid. Emden
a town, l. 7. p. 55 Emmanuell King of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92. and 94 Emmanuell
Montiny, Commander of a Regiment, l. 9. p. 50. Emmanuell Philibert Duke of
Savoy, Governor of the Low countries, l. 1. p. 11. victorious at Saint
Quintin, ibid. his marriage with Margaret, sister to Henry of France, l. 1. p.
13. he and his wife go for Italy, l. 1. p. 26. how highly the King of Spain
valued him, l. 6. p. 21. and 26. Emperor sued unto by the Low Country
Nobility, to accept of the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 135. punishment^ by
Emperors, decre^d against Heriticks, l. 2. p. 33, 3^ Ems a River, l. 7. p. 55,
56, 71 Encomion of Count Barlamont, l. 10. p. 5. of Isidor Pacecho, l. 8. p.
12. of Mondragonio, l. 8. p. 2. of Penonio, l. 10. p. 1^ of Vitelli, l. 7. p.
62. vide Elogit Engelbert Count of Nassau, Governor of the Low Countries, l.
1. p. 1^ Engelbert of Nassau the first, l. 2. p. 43. and 2. ibid. their power
in the Low Countries, how increased, ibid. Englands King vide Philip the
Second. Englands Queen, vide Elizabeth and Mary. The English loose Calice, l.
1. p. 11. do execution upon the French Army from Sea, l. 1. p. 12. their ships
and goods embargued in the Ports of the Low Countries, and Spai^, l. 7. p. 66.
they take the Portugal ships richly laden, ibid. some conspiring against Don
John of Austria, are put to death. l. 10. p. ^0 Engines l. 8. p. 9, ^0
Engineeres, l. 6. p. ^1 Enterprise of Alex Farnese, l. 9. p. 45, 51, of Caius
Fabias, l. 9. p. 40. of Ciacconio, l. 8. p. 8. of John Boccace a l^suite, l. 9.
p. 40. of Mondragonio, l. 6. p. 30. l. 7. p. 77. of him, and others, l. 8. p.
9. -- of Perotto, l. 8. p. ^ Envy at Court, l. 2. p. 37, 41. l. 3. p. 56.
between the Low Country Lords, and Granvell, l. 2. p. 41, 42, and l. 3. p. 72.
between the Spanish, and Low Country Nobility, l. 2. p. 42. between Granvell
and Reguard, l. 3. p. 67. between the Duke of Alva, and the Prince of Ebo^o, l.
6. p. 22. and l. 7. p. 65. between Alva, and Egmond, l. 7. p. 51 vide Ambition.
Epirots, l. 6. p. 30 Erasso, a Courtier very intimate with the King of Spain,
l. 3. p. 66. Erick Duke of Brunswick raises men, l. 5. p. 100. the King of
Spain appoints him to command the horse, l. 5. p. 132. he is dissuaded from the
service, l. 5. p. 134 Ernest Mulart pursues the Fugitives with a Galley, l. 6.
p. 19. Escovedo vide Iuan Eucharist preserved from the contumelies of Heretics
l. 9. p. 40. taken after meat by special indulgence, ^. 2. p. 7. Saint
Eugenius Bishop of Toledo, and Martyr, l. 5. p. 132 Euscaubechius, Commander of
the Confiderates horse, l. 6. p. 1. Eustachius Fiennes, Lord of Esquerd, one of
the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 109 Excomunication, l. 1. p. 9. l. 3. p. 56, 57. l.
4. p. 81, 32. Example of unfortunate beauty, l. 10. p. 3, 4. of a Prince
beloved of his servants, l. 10. p. 21, 22 Exile of the Duke of Alva, and the
cause, l. 7. p. 81, 82. his banishment repealed, l. 7. p. 82. the exile of
Count Lume, l. 7. p. 80 Expedition of the Duke of Alva, against Lewis of
Nassau, l. 7. p. 54. by sea, l. 7. p. 74. 81. to Portugal, l. 7. p. 32. of Don
John designed for England, l. 9. p. 29, 36. Of Gemblac, l. 9. p. 49. Of
Granada, l. 10. p. 19. Of Limburge l. 10. p. 1. His navall expeditions, l. 9.
p. 49. l. 10. p. 19. Of Charles the fifth, v. Charles, Of Charles the ninth of
France, against the Hugonots, l. 6. p. 34, 35. Of the Governess against Bolduc,
l. 6. p. 2. against Maestricht, ibid. -- Against Tolouse, ibid. Against Tornay,
and Armenter, l. 6. p. 7. Against Valenciens, l. 5. p. 143. Of the Hugon^ts, l.
6. p. 26. The Prince of Orange his first expedition out of Germany, into the
Low Countries, l. 7. p. 46. Another to relieve his brother Lewis, l. 7. p. 75.
By Sea, l. 8. p. 10. Of the States of the Low Countries, l. 8. p. 23. Of
Reques^ens to Middelburge by s^a, l. 8. p. 1. For Leiden, l. 8. p. 6. For
Zeland, l. 8. p. ^.
Sentences in E.
EASILY may he avoid the spoile's hands, that never has allured an envious eye
l. 8. p. 24 ELOQUENCE without discretion, is but the unseasonable overflowing
of wit l. 2. p. 40 The Great body of an EMPIRE, must be spirited with a great
soul, and maintaine^ by many hands, l. 1. p. 1 Expedition must be used, whilst
the Multitude have only a taste of ERROR, and have not swallowed down the
falsehood, l. 5. p. 113
F.
FAbio Farneze goes for the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 41. he is sent into
Portugal, l. 10. p. 13 Fabio Lembo, a N^opolitan, l. 5. p. 114 Falcese the
Marquess, l. 8. 11 Famisht, l. 7. p. 79, 56 Farnez^ v. Alexander, Charles,
Fabio, Margaret Princess of Manjua, Octavio Odovardo Ranuccio, Fatness of body
taken down, l. 8. p. 15. Federicke King of Denmark, l. 3. p. 53 Federicke
Perenot, Lord of Campin, governor of Antwerp, brother to Cardinal Granvell,
l. 8. p. 17, 22. the falling out of him and Count Altemps, l. 8. p. 17. he
receives into Antwerp soldiers sent from the States, l. 8. p. 22. He fortifies
the Town against the fort, ibid. He is General of the States Army at the siege
of Breda, l. 9. p. 48. Commander for them in chief, at the battle of Gemblac,
l. 9. p. 49. by command from the Prince of Orange he is imprisoned at Gant. l.
10. p. 9. Federico de Toleda grandfather to the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 82.
Federico Son to the Duke of Alva, brings him men and money from Spain, l. 7. p.
58. sent by his (...) against the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 61. goes to
besiege Mons, l. 7. p. 74. sights with the French, that would hinder him from
sitting down before it, ibid. punishes the women spies, ibid. Takes the Abbie
de Spine, ibid. fights with the French General and defeates him, ibid. storms
Zutphen and plunders it, l. 7. p. 77. takes all the Towns in Gelderland, ibid.
burns Nardhem in Holland, l. 7. p. 78. Besieges and takes Harlem, ibid. is
carried out of the field wounded, l. 7. p. 80. Attempts Al^mer in vain, l. 7.
p. 81. returns into Spain with his father, ibid. Ferdinand King of Castile, l.
8. p. 15 Ferdinand the Catholic King, l. 7. p. 82 Ferdinando Gonzaga Governor
of Millan, and General for Charles the fifth, l. 6. p. 30 Ferdinand the
Emperor, holds a Diet at Francfort, l. 3. p. 71. dies, l. 4. p. 87. His
daughter designed by the King of Spain, for wife to Alex Farneze, l. 4. p. 91
Ferdinand Martin, an incendiary, l. 7. p. 50 Ferdinando de Toledo Duke of Alva,
l. 1. p. 11. l. 2. p. 38, 46, 49. Favors Cardinal Granvell, l. 4. p. 80.
waits upon Isabella Queen of Spain, to the conference at Baion, l. 4. p. 88.
carries the order of the Fleece from King Philip, to Charles the ninth of
France, ibid. His speech for war with the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 23, 24. The
government of the Low Countries committed to him, l. 6. p. 25. falls sick at
Millain, l. 6. p. 27. musters his army at Ast in Piemont, l. 6. p. 29. His
march into the Low Countries, l. 8. p. 9. His invention of the use of
Musketo^nes, l. 6. p. 31. l. 7. p. 55. He enters Bruxells, l. 6. p. 31. visits
the Governess, l. 6. p. 32. how she receives him, ibid. He summons the Lords,
ibid. Arrests the Counts Egmont, and Horn, l. 6. p. 33. Excuses it to the
Governess, l. 6. p. 34. sends the prisoners to Gaunt, l. 7. p. 49. sends forces
into France against the (...), l. 6. p. 35. offers himself to be their
General, ibid. why the causes of the Low-countrey-tumults are charged upon
him, l. 7. p. 39. upon what score the Low-countrey-men hated him, ibid. and 51,
58. -- He builds the Fort at Antwerp, l. 7. p. 40. 41. Institutes a new Court
of Justice, ibid. Impeaches the Prince of Orange, and the rest of the Lords
that fled the Low Countries, ibid. condemns them, l. 7. p. 42. sends the Prince
of Oranges son into Spain, ibid. pulls down Culemburge house, ibid. Ambush
laid against him, l. 7. p. 46. Auxiliaries sent him from the King of France, l.
7. p. 47. He take off the heads of the gentlemen Covenanters, l. 7. p. 48. the
extent of his fault, in prosecuting Egm^nt and (...), l. 7. p. 51. He
pronounces sentence of death against them, ibid. beheads them, l. 7. p. 52. His
expedition against Lewis of Nassau, l. 7. p. 54. He goes to Groninghen, ibid.
fights and routs him, ibid. over-takes the enemy at Geming, l. 7. p. 55.
defeats him with a great slaughter, l. 7. p. 56. sends the news of his victory
to Pius the fifth at Rome, l. 7. p. 57. punishes the Sardinan Regment, for
burning the Country, ibid. contemns the reports of the Prince of Oranges Army,
l. 7. p. 58, 59. his saying, touching the Princes confederate against the King
of Spain, ibid. He could not fright the Prince of Orange from passiing the
River, ibid. would not accept the Prince of Oranges invitation to a battle, l.
7. p. 60. fight only with light skirmishes, ibid. The Prince uses many
provocations to bring him to a battle, ibid. He fights with the Orangians upon
the River bank, ibid. defeates them, l. 7. p. 62. burns those that took a
house, ibid. How often the Prince of Orange changing his ground, was terrified by
the Duke from attempting to take any town, l. 7. p. 63. He had a little blow
given him by the Prince of Orange, ibid. He sends Count Mansfeld into France
against the Hugonots, l. 7. p. 64. Having beaten the Prince of Orange out of
the Low countries, he enters Bruxells in triumph, ibid. Pius the fifth sends
him a helmet and sword, ibid. He builds himself a statue in the Fort of
Antwerp, ibid. The interpretation of that Trophee, ibid. The Court of Spain
hates and jecres him for it, l. 7. p. 65. Nor is the King well pleased, ibid.
but commands the statue to be removed, ibid. he imposes upon the
Low-countrey-men a tribute of the twentieth and hundred part, ibid. A
contestation between him and the Queen of England, occasioned by money
intercepted, ibid. he returns to exacting of the tribute, l. 7. p. 67.
publishes a general pardon at Antwerp, ibid. Is violent to have the tenth part
paid, ibid. Is somewhat quieter after that great inundation, l. 7. p. 69.
publishes for the tribute, his Edict qualified, l. 7. p. 70. prepares force and
halters for the Townsmen of Bruxels, ibid. He is forced to let alone the
Tribute, by the sudden news of Brill taken by the Gheuses, ibid. the people
grow bold when they understood he was to leave the Government, l. 7. p. 71.*
how they mocked him, l. 7. p. 72. his fear when he heard Mons was taken by the
French, l. 7. p. 73. he sends his son Federico and Vitelli to besiege Mons, l.
7. p. 74. he himself follows, and draws a line about the Town, l. 7. p. 76.
beats off the Prince of Orange coming to relieve them, ibid. recovers Mons, and
all the Prince of Orange had taken, l. 7. p. 77. besieges and takes Harlem, l.
7. p. 78. resignes the Government of the Low Countries to Requesenes, l. 7. p.
81. returns into Spain, ibid. -- Upon his departure the several senses of the
Catholics, Heretics, and the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 82. he is confined to
Uzeda by the Kings command, ibid. the temper of his mind in that misfortune,
ibid. he is repealed from banishment, to be General against Portugal, ibid.
His saying, ibid. he dies victorious, ibid. his Elogie, ibid. his brazen statue
broken, l. 9. p. 38. and (...) again into Canon, ibid. Ferdinando, bastard to
the Duke of Alva, General of the horse, l. 1. p. 16. arrests Count Horn in the
Kings name, l. 6. p. 33. waits in his fathers place upon the Queen into Spain,
l. 7. p. 69. Ferdinando de Toledo, Commander of Foot, recovers Maestricht, l.
8. p. 21. commands the horse at the battle of Gemlac, l. 9. p. 51. fights at
the Village of Rimenant, l. 10. p. 10. fights the enemy, ibid. is by stratagem
drawn to the enemies Camp, ibid. -- Lines the hedges with musketteers, l. 10.
p. 12. Feria the Duke, vid. Gomez Figueroa. Ferdinando a Costa, l. 9. p. 50.
Figueroa vide Gomez and Lopez* Flaminio Delphino, l. 10. p. 12. Flanders one of
the seventeen Provinces, l. 1. p. 14. its Nobility and power, l. 1. p. 16.
Governor, l. 7. p. 50. Cities, l. 77. p. 77. l. 8. p. 18, 22. l. 9. p. 47. The
plunder of Churches, and things consecrated* begun in that Province, l. 5. p.
125, 126. French Flanders, its Governor, l. 1. p. 16. Fleet sent from the
Low Countries, to transport Princess Mary of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92. arrives at
Ulushing, ibid. The Spanish Fleet overthrown at Middleburg, l. 8. p. 2. The
Prince of Orange's Fleet sailing over the fields to. Leiden. l. 8. p. 7. into
Sceldt. l. 8. p. 13. to Middelburg, l. 8 p. 2. Florence Count Culemburg, one of
the four first Covenanters, l. 5. p. 102, 107, 109. The Covenanters solemnly
feasted in his house, ibid. -- He comes to the Governess with the rest of his
Faction, l. 5. p. 111. Retires into Gelderland, l. 5. p. 112. Pius the 5 sends
him an admonition, l. 5. p. 114. He flies the Low Countries, ibid. -- He is
impeacht by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 41. condemned in his absence, l. 7. p.
42. His house pulled down, ibid. And a mon^mental pillar erected in that place,
ibid. Florence Lord of Montiny, Governor of Tornay and Tornacese, l. 1. p. 16.
chosen one of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, l. 2. p. 46. visits and
presents the Princess of Orange from the Governess, l. 3. p. 53. quiets the
stirs at Tornay, l. 3. p. 62. is commended, ibid. sent Ambassador into Spain,
l. 3. p. 69. his conference with the King, l. 3. p. 71. he returns to Bruxels,
ibid. -- He is sent again into Spain with the Marquess of Bergen, l. 5. p. 113.
he departs without his Colleague, ib. -- has audience of the King, l. 5. p.
114. writes from Spain, of the Kings coming into the Low Countries, l. 5. p.
134. makes a jest of the Kings preparation for his journey, l. 6. p. 22. is by
the Kings command sent prisoner to Segovia, l. 7. p. 42. he is condemned to
lose his head, ibid. and l. 7. p. 53. Florinaus Governor of Philipvil, l. 9.
p. 58. Florus Floi^, Son to Charles Barlamont, l. 10. p. 5. Flushing, or
Ulushing, a part of Zeland, l. 7. p. 72. Foarding of the river by art, l. 7. p.
59. l. 8. p. 10. Of the Sea at Zeland, l. 8. p. 11. Paralleled with Cesars
foarding of the Thames, ibid. Form of the Oath proposed by the Covenanters, l.
5. p. 107. by the Senate and States of the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 39. Fortune
various, l. 1. p. 6, 8. and l. 3. p. 58. Frances wife to Henry King of France,
l. 7. p. 53. Franciscans turned out by Heretics, l. 5. p. 131. l. 9. p. 41.
the bounty of the Spanish soldiers to them, l. ^. p. 5. Francisco Alava the
King of Spain's Ambassador in France, l. 5: p. 135. and 140. Francisco
Barberino, l. 7. p. 60. B. Francisco Borgia, Duke of Gandia, a Jesuit, l. 1. p.
10. Francisco Cardinal Pac^^ho l. 3. p. 65. l. 4. p. 86. Francisco Cittadells
of Lucca, l. 8. p. 2. Francu C^cquevill comes with the Prince of Orange in his
first Expedition into the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 46. his army routed, ibid.
the Commanders carried to Paris and beheaded, ibid. Francis the first of
France, l. 1. p. 13, 22. he erects an University at Paris, l. 3. p. 55.
prohibits David's Psalms, published by Marot, l. 3. p. 63. severe to the
Heretics. l. 3. p. 55. why he cooled sometimes, ibid. Francis the second of
France, l. 3. p. 56, 58. Francis Duke of Guise, l. 1. p. 11. l. 3. p. 56.
Francis Hangest, Lord of Ienlis, brings supplies out of France to the Prince of
Orange, l. 7. p. 60. persuades him to join with the Prince of Conde, l. 7. p.
63. Francis Hercules Duke of Alencon, l. 2. p. 46. proposed for Governor of
the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 38. sides with the States against Don John of
Austria, l. 9. p. 57. comes with the French Army to Mons in Haynoult, l. 9. p.
37. he is comprehended in the Conditions of Peace, l. 10. p. 14. Francis
Hellevine Lord of Zeveghem -- l. 4. p. 86. Francis Hulst the first Inquisitor
of Faith in Brabant, l. 5. p. 98. Francesco Itarra, l. 6. p. 26. Francisco
Maria Feltrio, Praesect of Rome, l. 1. p. 22. Francisco Montesdocha, a Spanish
Colonel, l. 8. p. 18. ci^cumvented a Maestricht, l. 8. p. 20. Francisco
Paciotto an Engineer, l. 6. p. 30, 33. l. 7. p. 41. Francisco Petrarch, l. 4.
p. 92. Francis Sonnius, l. 1. p. 18. l. 3. p. 71. Francesco Valdez, a Spanish
Colonel, besieges Leyden, l. 8. p. 6. why he puts off the general assault
resolved on, l. 8. p. 7. besieged by water, he is forced to leave the siege, l.
8. p. 8. he invades Antwerp, l. 8. p. 22. departs from the Low Countries, l. 9.
p. 32. Francesco Vargas the King of Spain^ Ambassador to the Pope, l. 1. p.
18. his actings at the Conclave, l. ^ p. 65. Francis Vasseur, l. 8. p. 19.
Francis Vatable, l. 3. p. 63. Francesco Verd^go, servant to Count Mansfield, l.
5. p. 107. a Spanish Colonel, l. 6. p. 30. a pension assigned him by the King,
l. p. 107. Francis Vivon, a French man, fights a duel in the Kings presence, l.
1. p. 13. French victorious over the Spanish, and by them conquered, l. 1. p.
11. how they came to be infected wit^ Heresy, l. 3. p. 55. They desire and
obtain assistance against the Heretics, l. 3. p. 57, 60. l. 6. p. 34. l. 7. p.
64. they fight with the Rebels at Saint Denis, l. 6. p. 35. defeat them at
Droc, l. 3. p. 61. and at Monconteur, l. 7. p. 6^. they rout the Orangians, l.
7. p. 46, 47. take Mons, l. 7. p. 73. are overthrown, l. 7. p. 74. they scale
Nivel, l. 9. p. 5^. the Nivellers arms bestowed upon them, ibid. a gift which
was their destruction. ibid. -- They sue to Don John to be dismissed, l. 9. p.
57. Many of them slain, ibid. The French tumults, l. 3. p. 55. l. 6. p. 26, 34.
l. 7. p. 72. compared with those of the Low Countries, l. 3. p. 61. vide Coliny
Conde. Army. Hugonot Tumult. Fresnoi Commander of horse, l. 9. p. 50.
Frede^ico Borro^aes, l. 4. p. 91. Frederick the third Count Palatine,
sollicites the Governesse in behalf of the heretics, l. 5. p. 134. sends over
to draw Brunswick to his party, ibid. Confederates with the Low Country Rebels,
ibid. promises pay to the German Soldiers, l. 7. p. 58. Frisland a Province
of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 15. -- East, l. 7. p. 55. West, l. 1. p. 15.
Invaded by Lewi^ of Nassau, l. 7. p. 46. infested by Pirates, l. 7. p. 71.
burnt, l. 7. p. 57. over-flow'd, l. 7. p. 69. The Cities of Frisland receive
Spanish Garrisons, l. 6. p. 20. revolt from the King, l. 7. p. 73. The
Governor of the Province, l. 1. p. 16. and l. 7. p. 48, 58. l. 6. p. 20.
Fronsberg vide George. Full moon, l. 8. p. 8. Funeral pomp, l. 10. p. 22. Fury
of the burning brigade, l. 7. p. 57.
Sentences in F.
THey that FALL from the highest point, are easily tossed from one breach to
another, till they come to the bottom, l. 3. p. 56. What FATE has ordained
for every man, is not so easily prevented as foreseen, l. 5. p. 113. FAVOR
will as surely perish as life, l. 3. p. 55. A Prince FAVORS his Ministers of
State so long as they carry themselves as servants, not as authors of his
Counsels, l. 3. p. 74. FEAR the Beadle of the Law, l. 2. p. 33. FEAR can never
be sufficiently entrench't, l. 7. p. 55. FEAR ever fancies danger near at hand,
l. 9. p. 53. Majesty without strength is not safe amongst the FURIOUS
multitude, l. 6. p. 4.
G.
GAbriel Cueva Governor of Millain, l. 6. p. 21. Gabriel Nignio a Spanish
Colonel, takes the Suburbs of Limburg, l. 10. p. 1. Carries the body of Don
John into Spain, l. 10. p. 24. Gabriel Peralta brings up the rear when the Sea
was foarded, l. 8. p. 12. is forced to return, ibid. -- Wades over to Sceldt,
l. 8. p. 13. is slain, ibid. Gabriell Serbellonio, Master of the Train of
Artillery, marches with the Duke of Alva into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 30.
Designs the Fort at Antwerpt l. 7. p. 40. How much he was esteemed by Don
John, l. 10. p. 6, 8. who makes him Governor of Tunis, l. 10. p. 19. Exchanged
by Pope Gregory the 13. l. 10. p. 6. He commands an Italian Regiment, and
returns with it to the Low Countries, Ibid. His vote in a Council of War, l.
10. p. 8. He fortifies the hill at Buge, l. 10. p. 14. Falls sick, ibid. The
Physicians prediction of him, l. 10. p 15. Galcerano Requesenes Governor of
Catalonia, l. 8. p. 15 Galcerano his son Count of Trivento and Avellino, ibid.
Gant what it signifies, l. 7. p. 39. Charles the fifth's answer touching Gant,
ibid. The Town Punished for revolting from the Emperor, l. 5. p. 132. The
Destruction of holy things by the Image-breakers, l. 5. p. 127. The Gantois
pull down a Lutheran Temple, l. 6. p. 20. and demolish the Castle, l. 9. p. 38.
The association at Gant of all the Provinces that rebelled against the
Spaniards, l. 8. p. 20. It Is enlarged, l. 8. p. 21. Intermitted, ibid. --
Revived, l. 8. p. 23. Perfected, ibid. -- Subscribed, l. 9. p. 30. Considered,
approved of by the King, ibid. published, ibid. vide Pacification. Garcias de
Toledo slain by the Moors, l. 7. p. 82. Gaspar Coligny, l. 1. p. 11. Commander
in chief of the Hugonots, l. 5. p. 121. offended at the too great power of the
Guises, l. 3. p. 56. Favors the Cause of the Heretics, l. 3. p. 57. The
Brabanters conspire with him, l. 5. p. 99. He is numbered among the Covenanters,
l. 5. p. 101. He incourages the heretics in the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 121.
treats with the Hugonots, to assist the Low Country men, l. 5. p. 138. Levies
men to succor Geneva, l. 6. p. 26. Persuades his King to fight with the
Spaniard, ibid. Takes many Towns, l. 6. p. 35. Lays a plot to destroy the
King, ibid. Fights at St. Dennis, ibid. is defeated, ibid. Again persuades the
King to fight the Spaniard, l. 7. p. 73. The King makes him his General, ibid.
He trusts himself to the King with too much Confidence, ibid. Makes great
levies in France, ibid. and sollicites the Low Country men to revolt, ibid.
Prepares men to raise the siege of Mons, l. 6. p. 74. he is slain in the
Massacre at (...), l. 7. p. 76. Gaspar Robley, Lord of Bill, Commander in chief
at the siege of Valenciens, l. 6. p. 10. sent by the Governesse into Spain to
the King, l. 6. p. 27, 29. He assailes the Prince of Orange in his Camp, l. 7.
p. 54. Is put out of his Government of Frisland by a Tumult, l. 9. p. 31.
Imprisoned, ibid. Released, ibid. sent into Spain by Don John, l. 10. p. 7.
brings him new supplies from the King, ibid. Gaspar Schetz Lord of Grobendonch,
the Kings treasurer, l. 4. p. 78. l. 9. p. 37. Gattinar vide Merturino. Geldeys
or Gelderland, a Province of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 15. The Governor of
Gelderland, l. 1. p. 16. l. 2. p. 41. The Duke, l. 1. p. 13. l. 7. p. 47. Its
principality anciently belonging to the Dukes of Egm^nt, l. 7. p. 53. The
Towns of Gelderland revolt from the King, l. 7. p. 73. They are recovered, l.
7. p. 77. Gemblac famous for slaughter, l. 9. p. 52. besieged by the
Catholics, ibid. rendered, ibid. The battle of Gemblac, l. 9. p. 49. Geming a
village, l. 7. p. 55. The Battle of Geming, ibid. -- The victory, ibid.
Genethliack presages, l. 1. p. 113. l. 2. p. 43, 44. Geneva, l. 3. p. 57, 63.
l. 5. p. 121. l. 6. p. 26. Terrified by the fame of the King of Spain's army,
ibid, Desires assistance of the French Calvinists, ibid. Gentilina a Staffa of
Perugia, l. 8. p. 14. Gentlemen Covenanters for abolishing the Inquisition, l.
5. p. 100, 101. The sum of their Covenant or Engagement, ibid. Many join with
them, Ibid. They have four Generals, ibid. They prepare a Petition to be
offered to the Governesse, l. 5. p. 102. Put to the Question in Senate, whether
they should be admitted into the Town, l. 5. p. 103. They enter Bruxells led by
Brederod, l. 5. p. 107. In Culemburg house, ibid. They take a new has, ibid.
They march orderly to the Court, ibid. Brederod in their name speaks to the
Governesse, l. 9. p. 108. they present their petition, ibid. Are dismissed by the
Governesse, ibid. when they were gone their Petition was returned them with an
answer in the Margent, l. 5. p. 109. They are feasted by Brederod, ibid. The
name of the Noble concord imposed upon their Conspiracy, ibid. They name
themselves Gucux, or Gheuses, when they were high flown with mirth and drink,
ibid. -- They give a Coat of Arms suitable to their faction, ibid. They walk
the streets accouter'd like beggars, l. 5. p. 110, whence these factions took
their pattern, l. 5. p. 115. Their boldness increases, ibid. The Covenanters
make the Gheuses give over plundering of Churches, etc. l. 5. p. 130. They
design to send into Spain Calvinistical books and Ministers, l. 5. p. 137. They
and the Merchants promise mutual assistance, ibid. They prescribe to all the
Confession of Ausburg, l. 5. p. 138. They institute Consistories and heretical
Commonwealths, ibid. -- They Confederate with the Heretical Princes of
Germany, ibid. Assistance offered them by their Neighbors, ibid. and by
strangers even as far as from Constantinople, ibid. The Report of the Kings
coming for the Low Countries startles them. l. 5. p. 140. The Governesse Courts
them with letters and promises, ibid. They hasten the Design of Arms, l. 5. p.
141. Meet at Breida, l. 5. p. 142. Treat of opposing the King with an Army,
ibid. l. 6. p. 22. Endeavor to draw Count Egm^nt to a new Confederation, l. 5.
p. 142. would have presented a new Petition to the Governesse, but are not
admitted, ibid. They send their Petition, ibid. but have nothing Granted them,
l. 5. p. 143. They prepare men and arms, threaten to revolt from the King, l.
6. 4. 1. terrified by the Governesse, they sue for pardon, l. 6. p. 15. many
renounce the Covenant, ibid. The Contumacious leave the Low Countries, l. 6. p.
16. Their ill fortune in Holland, l. 6. p. 19. They are driven into Walerland,
ibid. taken in Gelderland, ibid. Executed, l. 6. p. 20. Some are taken into
Grace, ibid. They are much troubled at the Duke of Alva's coming, l. 6. p. 29.
Their Expressions of respect to the Governess at her Departure from the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 57. They fly upon a fright, l. 7. p. 46. They lay a
plot in a Monastery to kill the Duke of Alva, ibid. many of them beheaded by
Alva, l. 7. p. 48. They are taken prisoners in the field, l. 7. p. 62. Their
houses and estates in Haynoult plundered and wasted by the Prince of Orange, l.
7. p. 63. They desire their Neighbors helps against the Spaniards, l. 8. p.
20. They make an agreement with the Prince of Orange, ibid. They enter a league
to expel the Spaniards out of the Low Countries, ibid. At Gant they Consult
about depriving the King of his Militia and Government, l. 8. p. 21. They
Confirm and publish the Association of Gant, l. 9. p. 30. Their forces besiege
Breda, l. 9. p. 48. They attempt Ruremund and are beat off, l. 9. p. 49. They
are alienated from the Prince of Orange, l. 9. p. 50. Their Army mustered, l.
9. p. 49. Their slaughter at the battle of Ge^hlac, l. 9. p. 50. Their grief
for the taking of Limburg, l. 10. p. 4. Their Joy upon the news that Alexander
Farnize and other great Commanders were slain, ibid. Their Army, l. 10. p. 7.
vide Covenant, Gheuses, Lords and Nobility. George of Austria Bishop of Liego,
l. 1. p. 18. George Fronsberge Colonel of a German Regiment imposed upon Breda,
l. 9. p. 48. is besieged, ibid. betrayed, ibid. Delivered into the Enemies
hands, l. 9. p. 49. In the Expedition of Limburg, l. 10. p. 1. George Holly a
Germain Colonel, l. 7. p. 51. George Lalin Lord of Vill, l. 9. p. 31. Ge^rard
Grosbech Bishop of Liege denies the Gheuses to hold their Convention at Centron
or St. Truden, l. 5. p. 119. Intercedes to the Governesse for the
Matstrichters, l. 6. p. 15. Frights the Prince of Orange from the Suburbs of
Liege, l. ^. p. 63. Germans Conspire with the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 58.
They run away, l. 7. p. 55. Stir up sedition, ibid. and slain, l. 7. p. 56.
Demand their pay, l. 7. p. 55. l. 8. p. 11. Render themselves to the Spaniards,
l. 8. p. 21. German Forces vide Army. The Custom of the German Nobility in
clothing of their Servants, l. 4. p. 7^. Their Embassages, l. 6. p. 17. Their
Patronage implored by the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 41. Germanicus Caesar son
to Drusus, l. 7. p. 56. and l. 10. p. 20. Geta a River. Gbeuses, when and why
so called, l. 5. p. 109. Compared with the Huganots, l. 3. p. 61. Their habit,
l. 5. p. 110. Their Commanders present a petition to the Governesse, l. 5. p.
111. They Counterfeit a Declaration in the name of the Knights of the Golden
Fleece, l. 5. p. 112. their Lies Credited, ibid. and 113. Their number
increases out of an opinion of impunity, l. 5. p. 115. Their habit and
Cognizance worn by the Common people ibid. They Convene at Centron, l. 5. p.
119. What was acted in that meeting, ibid. They frame a new Petition to the
Governesse, l. 5. p. 12^. They plunder Churches, l. 5. p. 121. -- The Ge^tlemen
Gheuses consent to the Destruction of Churches, l. 5. p. 127. Their Threats
against the Governesse, l. 7. p. 129. From whom they Extort some grants, l. 5.
p. 130. They are slain at the battle near Austervell, l. 6. p. 4. The Tornay
Gheuses take up arms, l. 6. p. 6. are defeated at Lanoi, l. 6. p. 7. Are made
true Gheuses, beggar, l. 6. p. 21. They leave their Country, ibid. are received
into grace, ibid. Sentenced by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 42. The Wood Gheuses
rob by the high way, l. 7. p. 59. The Water Gheuses, l. 7. p. ^1. Their General
and chief Officers, ibid. turn Pirates, ibid. are forbid the English Ports,
ibid. Take Brill, l 7. p. 12. Destroy all things sacred, ibid. Beat off the
Spaniards, ibid. Plunder Amorssort, l. 7. p. 75. Are beat from Amsterdam, l.
10. p. 5. vide Gentlemen Covenanters. Ghibercius, one of the Covenanters, l. 5.
p. 101. Ghisella, a Covenanter, ibid. Giles or Aegidius Clarke, a Lawyer of
Tornay, l. 5. p. 100 127, 141. Giles Smissart, a Lapidary, l. 8. p. 14.
Giovanni Baptista Castaneo, Archbishop of Rossana the Popes Legate, l. 5. p.
132. His Relation to Cardinal Alexandrino of the Commitment and death of
Charles Prince of Spain, l. 7. p. 43. Giovanni Baptista, Marquess a Monte,
Commander of horse at the Battle of Mooch, l. 8. p. 43. a Girl of three years
old buried dig'd up again, and eaten by her parents, l. 7. p. 10. Gisbert
together with his brother Batenburg runs away, is taken and executed. Glime
Vice Admiral of the Belgic sea, l. 6. p. 19. defeated and slain, Ibid. Glime,
Governor of Wallon-Barbant, takes the Senators out of the house, and imprisons
them, l. 8. p. 26. is routed by the Spaniard, l. 8. p. 21. His Enmity with the
Prince of Orange, l. 10. p. 9. Glime, the Marquess, vide John Glime Marquess
of (...). Gniffius, Bishop of Groninghen, or the Groine, l. 7. p. 58. Godfrey
Sterch, Praetor of Antwerp. l. 3. p. 66. -- Goes in Zeland is relieved, l. 7. p.
77, 78. The Sea warled over to Goes, ibid. Gargni vide Anthony. Gomez Figueroa
Duke of Feria, l. 2. p. 38. his disposition, l. 6. p. 23. His vote in Council
for sending an army into the Low Countries, ibid. and 25. He waits upon the
King when his Majesty apprehended Prince Charles, l. 7. p. 44. Gomez a Silva
Prince of Ebolo vide Roderick. Gonzaga vide Hannibal Camillo Ferdinando and
Octavio. Gorcom revolts from the Spaniard, l. 7. p. 72. is taken by assault, l.
8. p. 9. Gorcom Martyrs, l. 7. p. 75. Gotha a Town, l. 5. p. 42. Goude revolts
from the Spaniards, l. 7. p. 72. Governor vide Prefect. Governesse vide
Margaret of Parma. Grange of Narbon a Calvinist, l. 5. p. 6. Ring leader of the
Seditions, Ibid. disswades the Valencenians from the rendering of their Town, l.
6. p. 9. Granvel vide Anthony and Nicolas. Graveling a Port of Flanders, l. 1.
p. 12.and l. ^. p. 53. its Governor, l. 7. p. 80. Gregory the Third multiplyes
the Bishops in Germany, l. 2. p. 30. Gregory the thirteenth offended with the
Vice Roy Granvell, l. 4. p. 82. His Joy for the news of the Massacre at Paris,
l. 7. p. 76. He and the King of Spain resolve to assist the Queen of Scots, l.
8. p. 16. He proposes to the King Don John for Governor of the Low-countryes
and General in the invasion of Great Britain, ibid. He sends Philip Sega his
Nuncio to Don John in the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 36. with supplies of money,
ibid. He incourages Alexander Farneze to go for the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 48.
His letters to the Catholic Army, wherein he pardons their sins, l. 9. p. 49.
His Exchange of Prisoners, l. 10. p. 6. He treats with the King of Spain to
make Don John King of Tunis, l. 10. p. 19. Gromhamberg Colonel of foot, l. 5.
p. 132. Gresser the Queen of Englands Agent, l. 5. p. 133. Graningen or the
Groine threatens to revolt from the King, l. 6. p. 1. receives a Garrison of
the Kings men, l. 6. p. 20. Besieged by Lewis of Nassau, l. 7. p. 54. strongly
defended by Vitelli, ibid. Disposed of by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 58. Its
Bishop and Governor, ibid. A Fort there designed by the Duke of Alva, ibid.
The 6 Cannon of the Groin called by names of the 6 first Elements in Music, l.
7. p. 47, 56. Guerrao de Speo, the King of Spains Ambassador to the Queen of
England, l. 7. p. 66. Guinegas, l. 1. p. 15. Guiniche vide Paula Prince of
Lucca. Guise vide Charles of Loram and Francis of Guise. Guiralto wade^ over
Sea to Duveland, l. 8. p. 10. Gunt^y, Count Swartzenburg, l. 7. p. 51. l. 8. p.
9. a Covenanter, l. 5. p. 101. Commander of horse in the Prince of Oranges
Army, l. 7. p. 58. treats in the Emperors name to make peace between the
Royallists and the Orangians, l. 8. p. 9. Gusman vide Antonio Ayamant and
Didaco. Guy Brai of Mons, l. 6. p. 6.
Sentences in G.
A Good GENERAL can never be long lived, l. 7. p. 83. GOD is not pleased with
those that give out of other men's fortunes, l. 8. p. 6.
H.
HA a River, l. 1. p. 12. Hadrian Iansen, l. 7. p. 80. Heresy how it was
brought into the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 36. The mother of sedition, ibid. --
What occasions it makes use of to raise Tumults, ibid. l. 2. p. 42, 48. Prone
to Atheism, l. 2. p. 36. Teaches Contumacie, ibid. slights Allegiance, ibid.
Heresy in France, l. 3. p. 55, 61, 72, l. 6. p. 35. Protected, l. 3. p. 57.
The Heretical custom of singing David's Psalms in French meeter, l. 3. p. 61,
62, The French Heretics assist the Low Country Heretics, l. 5. p. 138. A
Catalogue of Heretics enclosed in the Kings packet, l. 4. p. 83. brought to
execution with various success, ibid. l. 6. p. 19, 20. The attempt of an
Heretical Minister, l. 4. p. 83. Their Joy for the difference between the King
of Spain and the Pope, l. 4. p. 86. Their Jealousies upon the Conference at
Baion, l. 4. p. 88. The Kings Letters and the Governesse Edict against them, l.
4. p. 96, 97. At the promulgation of the Edict they mutiny, l. 5. p. 100. They
stir up the Covenanters, ibid. -- They break from all parts into the
Low Country Pulpits, l. 6. p. 116. Three Classes or kinds of them, ibid. --
They are permitted to preach, l. 5. p. 130. They turn the Franciscans out of
Doors, l. 5. p. 131. Their design to send Calvinistical books into Spain, l.
5. p. 137. l. 7. p. 45. Their Consistories, l. 5. p. 138. They desire liberty
to exercise their Sects, l. 5. p. 139. They rejoice at the defection of the
Lords from the King, l. 6. p. 1. Their Discouragement at the loss of
Valenciens. l. 6. p. 11. Their Complaints, l. 6. p. 15. Their Preaching
Ministers run away, ibid. They are challenged to dispute, ibid. -- They are
Expelled the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 17, 20. They crave assistance of the
Germans, l. 6. p. 18. Their Temples are destroyed, l. 6. p. 20. Their sense
upon Alva's departure from the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 81. They criminate Don
John, l. 9. p. 34. They and the Catholics swear allegiance to the Archduke
Matthias, l. 9. p. 39. They turn the Jesuits out of Antwerp, ibid. and other
Catholics, l. 9. p. 41. Possess their Churches, ibid. -- are brought into
Amsterdam, l. 10. p. 5. vide Calvinists, Preachers, and Lutherans, Hague, l. 8.
p. 7. Hames vide Nicolas. Hangest vide Francis and John. Hannibal Gonzaga, l.
10. p. 12. Hannibal Count Altemps brings forces out of Germany into the
Low Countries, l. 8. p. 9. Upon the borders circumvented by the Enemy and
wounded, ibid. He is left by Requesenes to secure Brabant, ibid. The difference
between him and the Governor of Antwerp, l. 8. p. 17. He leaves men in
Germany, l. 10. p. 7. Hannibal of Carthage, l. 2. p. 28. Hariaden Barbarossa,
l. 8. p. 14. Expelled from his Kingdom by Charles the fifth, l. 10. p. 21.
Harlem receives a Garrison from the Hollanders, l. 7. p. 78. renounces
Religion, and violates all things sacred, ibid. Besieged by the Royallists,
Ibid. provokes the Spaniards with unheard of Contumelies, ibid. Jeeres at holy
things, ibid. Compelled by famine to yield to mercy, l. 6. p. 79. Very many of
the Town put to death, Ibid. -- A Regiment of of Harlem women, ibid. The
obstinacy and barbarity of the Townsmen, ibid. The siege of Harlem compared
with that of Sancere, ibid. The number of the slain and wounded Royallists, l.
7. p. 80. and Confederates, ibid -- Hassen vide Philip Land^grave of Hessen.
HHaynault a Province of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 15. Its Governor, l. 1. p.
16. The Towns and villages of the Haynaulters plundered, l. 7. p. 63. Their
Delegates called to Bru^ells, l. 8. p. 17. against the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 20.
vide Mons. A Proverb in Haynault, l. 6. p. 5. Haultepen vide Claudius. Haure
vide Charles Croy. Heden a Town, l. 1. p. 10. Hele^nor sister to Charles the
fifth, l. 1. p. 3, 15. Heleonor M^^or^ney wife to Count Hochstrat, l. 6. p. 12.
Haloven vide Francis. He^nin vide John and Maximilian. Henry King of England,
l. 1. p. 9. Henry Bavier Bishop of Vtrecht, l. 1. p. 15. Henry Brederod
Commander of a troop of the Low Country horse, l. 1. p. 17. l. 6. p. 11, 12.
Chief of the Conspirators, l. 5. p. 102, 104. Enters Bruxells with the
Covenanters, l. 5. p. 107. binds them with a new Oath, ibid. Leads them to
Court, ibid. In their name presents a Petition to the Governesse, l. 5. p. 108.
Feasts them at Culemberge-house, l. 5. p. 109. delivers a new Petition, l. 5.
p. 111. Goes to Antwerp. ibid. Is met by a multitude of people, l. 5. p. 112.
offers himself to be their General, and is accepted, ibid. Meets the Prince of
Orange coming to the Town, l. 5. p. 118: Convenes the Gheuses at Centron, l. 9.
119. Is called to a Conference by the Prince of Orange and Count Egmont sent by
the Governesse, l. 5. p. 119, 120. He carries the 9. heads of the Conference to
his Party, ibid. He is Chosen General for raising men and money. l. 5. p. 141.
Endeavors to draw Count Egmont to a new Confederation, l. 5. p. 142. Desires
the Governesses leave to come to Bruxells, ibid. Is denied, ibid. sends a
petition to the Governesse, ibid. Prepares men and arms, l. 6. p. 1. Fortifies
Viana, ibid. Enters Amsterdam, l. 6. p. 2. Refuses to take the Oath of
Allegiance, l. 6. p. 11, 12. His Troop of horse taken from him, ibid. He is
commanded to depart from Amsterdam, l. 6. p. 19. Tryes to reconcile himself,
but in vain, ibid. Despaires of Recovering of Holland, l. 6. p. 20. Leaves the
Low Countries, ibid. Dies, ibid. Henry Dionisius a Jesuit is invited from
Colen to Maestricht, l. 6. p. 15. Disputes with the Heretics, Ibid. Restores
Maestricht to its old Religion and Obedience, ibid. Henry the second of France
desirous of a War with Spain, l. 1. p. 11. Takes Calice, Ibid. Concludes a
Peace with King Philip, l. 1. p. 12. His hatred to Mary Queen of Hungary, l. 9.
p. 57. A Tournament at the Marriage of his Daughter and Sister, l. 1. p. 13.
His Death, ibid. Predicted and the Judgments of Prudent men upon the Accident,
ibid. Henry King of Portugal, l. 10. p. 13. -- Henry Nassau Uncle to the
Prince of Orange, l. 2. p. 43. Henry Nassau brother to the Prince of Orange, l.
8. p. 2. Henry King of Navarre, afterward King of France, l. 7. p. 76. Henry
^sellie, the French Ambassador, l. 4. p. 85. Henry Vien^us Lord of Ceuravium,
Commander of horse in the Battle of Gemlac, l. 9. p. 51. in the siege of
Dalbem, l. 10. p. 3 -- Hercules Duke of Ferara, l. 1. p. 21. His daughter
designed for wife to Alexander Farneze, ibid. and l. 4. p. 91. Hercules his
haven or Port Ercole, l. 8. p. 14. Hese vide William. Hierg vide Aegidius
Barl^mont. Hieronymo Roda, l. 8. p. 18. -- His servant slain, ibid. He himself
endangered, ibid. Hieronym^ Serosqueques, one of the waders over the Sea to
Ziriczee, l. 8. p. 10. Hieronymites, l. 1. p. 6. The site of their Monastery,
Ibid. -- Hippolyto Pennonto a Physician, l. 10. p. 15. Historians how they
should dispute of peace and war, l. 2. p. 27. Their Errors refuted, l. 3. p.
59. l. 7. p. 41, 47. the causes why they differ about the beginnings of the
Low Country Tumults, l. 2. p. 27. Hochstrat vide Anthony Lalin. Holach vide
Philip. Holland a Province of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 15. -- a new State,
l. 1. p. 1. l. 7. p. 72. Its Governor, l. 1. p. 1^. l. 7. p. 72. The
slaughters in that Province, l. 5. p. 127. The first Tumults, l. 6. p. 19. l.
7. p. 72. It yields to the Governess, l. 6. p. 20. The Maritime part of it
drowned by a Sea-breach, l. 7. p. 65. Hollanders anciently free from Tribute,
l. 7. p. 70. For which they rebel'd then against the Romans, Ibid. and now
against the King of Spain, l. 7. p. 71. l. 8. p. 20. They expel the Spaniards,
l. 7. p. 72. Jeer the Duke of Alva, ibid. submit to the Prince of Orange, ibid.
Pira^s from all parts joining with them, make up a Fleet, l. 7. p. 73. For
almost 10 years they have been Constantly victorious at Sea, Ibid. Some of
their Cities recovered by the Spaniard, ibid. and 81. and l. 8. p. 8. Their
hatred to that Nation, l. 7. p. 72, 78. Their Fleet sails over land to Leiden,
l. 8. p. 7. and into Sceldt, l. 8. p. 13. Hoodes parti-colored the Cognizances
of and marks of a Combination, l. 4. p. 78. l. 5. 115. left off, l. 7. p. 84.
Reprehended, l. 4. p. 89. Horn a Town, l. 7. p. 53. revolts from the Spaniard,
l. 7. p. 72. Horn vide William and Philip. Horse disposed into a Militia, l.
1. p. 17. Horse Troops famous throughout Europe, Ibid. To what Officers they
were committed, ibid. Horse levied in Italy for the German war, l. 6. p. 25,
^0. l. 10. p. 6, 10. Hostage given by the King of Spain to the French King, l.
2. p. 46. Hubert a Volle, l. 7. p. ^6 Huc^ell a Town, l. 8. p. 9. Hugonot the
original of the name, l. 3. p. 57, 61. The ^atrons of the Hugonots, l. 6. p.
32. Their Generals, l. 5. p. 111. Their battles, l. 3. p. 61. l. 6. p. 35. l.
7. p. 61. Their fraud, l. 6. p. 26. From France they offer Auxiliaries to the
Low Country Heretics, l. 5. p. 138. Persuade the King of France to fight the
Spaniard, ibid. A rumor of a peace concluded between them and Charles the
ninth of France, l. 7. p. 73. Their Massacre upon Bartolmew-Eve, l. 7. p. 76.
Hungarian Queen vide Marie Hunting beloved, l. 1. p. 21. l. 2. p. 46. l. 3. p.
72. l. 6. p. 18. l. 10. p. 17. Veneur or Justice in Air nominated by the King,
l. 6. p. 28.
Sentences in H.
PRinces like it well to have a servant on whom men may discharge the HATRED
due unto their Masters, l. 2. p. 41. Public Business will never have an happy
End so long as it is ordered by a man generally HATED, l. 3. p. 73. HERESY is
the School of Pride, l. 2. p. 36. For the same man to be a HERETIC, and a good
subject is incompossible, l. 6. p. 24. HERESY is a refractory and sullen
disease, that may with less difficulty be kept out, then s^ook off, l. 9. p.
36. Many times men fight more Eagerly for their HOUSES then for their Altars,
l. 5. p. 126. In HUMANE things however times and persons die, still the same
Causes and Events revive, l. 1. p. 2. All HUMANE things are found to be far
less in the possession, then they are fancied in our hopes, l. 4. p. 79.
J.
JAmes Iungeling, l. 7. p. 64. James Marnixius, Lord of Toulouse, ambitious to
be Lord of Zeland, l. 6. p. 2. beaten by Catt^y, ibid. intrenches at Oftervell
near Antwerp, l. 6. p. 3. fights with Beav^r, ibid. Is defeated, l. 6. p. 4.
Burned, Ibid. His wife stirs up the Calvinists, ibid. -- James Masius, l. 1. p.
5. James Simons, l. 8. p. 2. Iannellus Turrianus of Cremona, l. 1. p. 6.
Iconomachy, or Execution done upon Images in the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 125.
How it came about, and from whence, ibid. -- who were the Assistants, Ibid. The
first battle was in Flanders, l. 5. p. 121. The day and place of battle
decreed, ibid. The image-breakers arms and Condition, ibid. -- They force
their Entrance Ipre, and destroy all things sacred, l. 5. p. 122. They ran to
other Towns, ibid. are routed by the Secliners, ibid. plunder the Churches in
Antwerp, l. 5. p. 123. whether or no the Devil helped them, l. 5. p. 125. They
begin a second plunder, ibid. -- Continue it for three days, l. 5. p. 126.
They Are chas't away by the Townes-men, ibid. How great that ruin was, ibid.
Many of them condemned to die, l. 6. p. 20. l. 7. p. 39, 42. Ienlis vide
Francis Hangest and John. Jesuits refuse money offered them by the mutinous
Soldiers, l. 8. p. 6. The speech they made to the mutineers, and what success
it had, ibid. They were pressed to take the Oath, l. 9. p. 40. Deny to do it,
ibid. Are besieged by armed heretics, ibid. -- Their house at Antwerp
plundered, ibid. They are expelled the Town, Ibid. A gallant act of one of
their society, ibid. A wonderful accident at their house, l. 9. p. 41. One of
their Preachers despised by the seditious Soldiers, l. 8. p. 5. Another of
them heard by some that were to go among heretics, l. 4. p. 93. Another shows
the Merchants of Antwerp a fair occasion for their charity, l. 7. p. 77.
Another implores divine assistance from heaven to the men that were to wade the
Sea, l. 8. p. 11. -- By the endeavors of one of their order, Maestricht is
restored to the Catholic Religion, l. 6. p. 15. Jew vide John Michese.
Ignatius Loyola, Confessar to Margaret of Parma, l. 1. p. 23. Images of little
horses and men in armor, l. 1. p. 7. Images of the Blessed Virgin at Antwerp,
l. 5. p. 123. In Hay^ault, l. 5. p. 111. At Parma, l. 4. p. 95. At Sichem, l.
9. p. 54. -- Of the holy Crucifix at Rome, l. 9. p. 43. Images hallowed
violated in the Low Countries, vide Iconomachy. Images of Saints impiously
jeered and abused, l. 5. p. 123, 125, l. 7. p. 78. Thrown down to the ground,
l. 5. p. 122, 124, 132. Images of the King to be set over City gates, l. 7. p.
65. Imbertus Platerius Bordelon, l. 3. p. 60. Indeveltius, in the tumult at
Valenciens, l. 3. p. 64. Infant with a Cat lying by him, carried away by an
inundation, l. 7. p. 69. Innocent the third, l. 2. p. 33. Inquisition when and
by whom instituted, l. 2. p. 33 -- Its several Judicatories, ibid. when
established at Rome, ibid. How accurately exercised in Spain, Ibid. on what
occasion it was encreas't throughout Christendom, ibid. and 34. By whom and
why it was brought into the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 48. l. 3. p. 70. l. 5. p.
105, 106. It occasions the Belgic tumults, l. 2. p. 33. The Brabanters refuse
it, l. 2. p. 34. l. 5. p. 98. The first Inquisitor in Brabant, ibid. The sense
that many had of the Inquisition and the Emperors Edict, l. 2. p. 35. what
good it did, l. 2. p. 46. Injury offered to an Inquisitor, l. 4. p. 84. The
Kings Letters and the Governesses Edict for the Inquisition, l. 4. p. 96. The
Conspiracy of the Lords against this Edict, l. 5. p. 99, 102, 107. The public
hatred against the Inquisition, l. 5. p. 105, 106. Two kinds of Inquisition,
ibid. -- abrogated in the Low Countries by Decree of Senate, ibid. -- and by
the Kings permission, l. 5. p. 120. A Libel against the Inquisition, published
by the Gheuses, in the name of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, l. 5. p. 112.
the chief Inquisitor, l. 2. p. 33. Temporary Inquisitors, ibid. -- Perpetual,
l. 2. p. 35. l. 5. p. 100, 114, 117, 120. and l. 6. p. 22, 23. Inscription of
the Covenant by the Gentry, l. 5. p. 101. of the Kings Instructions, l. 4. p.
89, 90. Of the Kings Standard, l. 9. p. 51. Of the Basis of Alva's Statue, l.
7. p. 64. Of the Pillar set up where Culemburg-house was pulled down, l. 7. p.
42. Of the Prince of Oranges Colors, l. 7. p. 62. Interim, the name of a book
published in Germany by Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 9. by whom it was writ,
ibid. at whose appointment and why, ibid. Authorized to bind both Religions
till the Council of Trent should end, ibid. but received by neither party,
ibid. -- Invective of the Marquess of Bergen against Cardinal Granvel, l. 3. p.
75. of the Prince of Orange against the Emperors Edict, l. 5. p. 133.
Inundation a most horrid one in the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 69. Ioachim Opper,
l. 8. p. 16. Joan Alibret daughter to Margaret of Valois, and Henry King of
Navarre, wife to Anthony Bourbon, l. 3. p. 56. had implacable hatred to the
name of Rome and Spain, l. 3. p. 57. Compar^d to Tullia Tarquins wife, ibid.
Her Curtain-lecture to her husband when she set him at the Catholics, ibid.
Her indignation against him, l. 3. p. 59. Joan of Austria, l. 10. p. 22, 23.
Joan daughter to Ferdinand the Catholic King, wife to Philip the first, l. 1.
p. 17. Joan daughter to Duke Wenceslaus, l. 9. p. 36. Don John of Austria born
at Ratisbone, l. 10. p. 16. -- Carried into Spain in Swadling-clouts, l. 10. p.
17. Educated at Villa-Garcia, ibid. saved from fire, ibid. His disposition and
behavior, ibid. The Emperor intends to make a Priest of him, ibid. He is
commended to King Philip by their father Charles the fifth, ibid. He is owned
by his brother as he was hunting, l. 10. p. 18. taken to Court, ibid. -- sent
to the university of Alcala, l. 9. p. 44. bred with Prince Charles and
Alexander Farneze, l. 10. p. 18. Compared with them, ibid. He offends the King
because he would not enter into holy Orders, ibid. and by going to the War of
Malta without the Kings leave, ibid. He regaines the Kings favor, l. 10. p.
19. disswades Prince Charles from going into the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 44.
Discovers to the King the Prince's Design to steal away, l. 10. p. 19. Is made
General against the Moors, ibid. -- Admiral of the whole Fleet in the holy War
against the Turk, l. 9. p. 45. l* 4. p. 81. Receives the sacred, Standard of
Christendom from Granvell Viceroy of Naples, ibid. -- The difference between
him and Vernerio, l. 9. p. 45. Wins the Battle of Lepa^ot, l. 10. p. 19. l. 9.
p. 46. l. ^. 10 P. 21. Again commands in chief at Sea, l. 9. p. 46. Besieges
Navarine in vain, ibid. 47. Challenges the Ottoman Fleet, ibid. at the
dissolving of the holy League goes for Sicily, ibid. Takes Tunis and Biserta by
assault, l. 10. p. 19. Carries away King Amida with his two sons prisoners,
ibid. gives his Kingdom to Meh^met, l. 10. p. 21. Returns victorious into
Italy, ibid. Defers the Acceptance of the Kingdom of Ireland, l. 10. p. 22.
Offends the King with putting a Garrison into Biserta, l. 10. p. 19. The Popes
request for the Conferring upon him the title of King of Tunis, ibid. His
household servants changed by the King, ibid. Recal'd from Italy into Spain,
ibid. Desires the Place and honor of a Prince I^^anta, ibid. is by the Pope
proposed to his Majesty for Governor of the Low Countries, l. 8. p. 16. -- The
Government promised to him by the King, ibid. and p. 19. He is designed General
for the Army that was to Land in Great Britain, l. 8. p. 16. It Is falsely
rumor'd, That should marry Elizabeth Queen of England, l. 10* p. 20. l. 8. p.
16. He comes into the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 26. The Senators and Delegates of
the Estates doubt whether or no they should admit him, ibid. He consults about
sending away of the Spaniards from the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 27. Resolves to
dismiss them, and why, l. 9. p. 29. Allows of the Pacification of Ga^t, l. 9.
p. 30. Proclaims it, ibid. Is acknowledged Governor of the Low Countries,
ibid. -- Presses the Spaniards to depart, ibid. Lends money to the Estates to
pay the Spaniards, l. 9. p. 32. Enters Bruxels with extraordinary pomp, ibid.
His gracious carriage, ibid. -- He requires that the Prince of Orange, with the
Hollanders and Zeleanders, shall subscribe the Perpetual Edict, l. 8. p. 33.
His Letters to the King intercepted and published, ibid. Many suspect and fall
off from him, l. 9. p. 34. His dissembled flight, ibid. He seizes the Castle of
Namure, l. 9. p. 35. He certifies the Deputies of the Estates of the cause of
his departure, ibid. Complains of Contumelies offered to, and plots laid
against him, ibid. Writes to the Provinces, ibid. Attempts the Fort at Antwe^p,
ibid. Is by the Estates accused of Counterfeiting his fears, ibid. -- He shows
them to be real, l. 9. p. 36. Receives supplies of money from the Pope, ibid.
Is encouraged by the Kings Letters, ibid. sharply reproves the Estates for
creating the Prince of Orange Ruart of the Province, l. 9. p. 37. -- Prepares
for War, ibid. what forces he had, ibid. It troubles him the Archduke Matthias
was to come into the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 39. The Senate declares him Enemy
to the Country, ibid. He calls back the Spaniards, from Italy, l. 9. p. 41.
Invites Alexander Farneze whom the King had designed for the Low-Countriesl, 9.
p. 48. Joyfully receives him, ibid. Is animated by his coming with the Spanish
Army, l. 9. p. 41. Sends relief to Breda besieged, l. 9. p. 49. Defends
Ruremund, ibid. -- Refuses Conditions of Peace offered by the Queen of England,
ibid. His march to Gemblac, His army, battle, and victory, ibid. and p. 50. --
His words to Goigny General of the Prisoners, l. 9. p. 52. His commendations of
his own men. ibid. Other Cities render themselves to him, l. 9. p. 53. 54. He
commands Alexander Farneze to attacque Dieshem, ibid. and Levia. l. 9. p. 55.
And Charles Mansfeld to besiege Nivell, ibid. Nivel is rendered to himself, l.
9. p. 56. He quiets the Mutiny in his Camp, ibid. Dismisses the Garrison of
Nivell without their arms, ibid. which arms he bestows on his French
soldiers, but the gift was fatal to them, ibid. -- Grants them leave to
^epart, l. 9. p. 57. Many Towns yields to him, ibid. ^^e He storms, Cimace,
ibid. besieges Philsipvill and takes is, ibid. and 58. Goes to Namure to
recover his heal^h, l. 10. p. 1. commits the Expedition of Limburg to Alexander
Farn^ze, ibid. -- Performs the Rites of ^^neral to Count Barlamont, and his son
Megan, l. 10. p. 5. Receives money from the King, l. 10. p. 7. Calls a Council
of War about invading of the Enemy, ibid. Moves to Rimcnant. l. 10. p. 9.
begins the fight, l. (...). p. 10. suspects the enemy to fly upon design,
ibid. ^^s angry with his men, which the enemy had Circumvented, Ib. and p. 11.
Considers how to bring them off, ibid. -- Leaves it to be managed by Alexander
F^^n^ze, ibid. -- The fight is renewed with equal loss to the Enemy, ibid.
and p. 12. His care in his etreat, ibid. and p. 13. He loses the town of
Aresch^t, Ibid. -- Sets a foot a treaty of Peace, l. 10. p. 14. Demolishes some
Forts, and quits certain Towns, ibid. Is offended with the Conditions of peace
offered, ib^d. writes in fury to the King, ibid. Entrenches upon the hill of
Buge. ibid. -- The Complaints made against him to the King, l. 10. p. 20. The
Kings continual suspicion of him, ibid. The Principality of the Low Countries
offered him, and why, ibid. -- He is enraged, and abhors the Perswader, ibid.
-- His grief for the Kings Jealousy and Escovedo's death, ibid. His complaints
against the King, ibid. -- He is sick in the Camp, l. 10, p. 14. the Physicians
prediction of him, l. 10, p. 15. He transfers the Government of the
Low Countries upon Alexander Farn^e, ibid. receives the Sacraments, l. 10. p.
16. raves, ibid. -- Dying makes three requests to the King, ibid. -- Dies
religiously, ibid. How his death came to be hastened, l. 10. p. 20. A
conspiracy against his life, ibid. His death deplored by the Army, ibid. They
compare him to Germanicus Caesar, l. 10. p. 21. and to his father Charles the
fifth, ibid. -- His mili^ary Expeditions, ibid. His desire of a solitary li^e,
ibid. -- His care of his Conscience, and to purify it by Confession,
especially before a Battle, ibid. His piety, ibid. and 22. His liberality to
the Soldiers, l. 10. p. 21. His virtues as a General, l. 10. p. 22. His
daughters, ibid. His custom to wear the hair of his foret^p upright, l. 10. p.
21. The Contention of several Nations who should bear his body, l. 10. p. 22. A
crown set upon his head, ibid. His obscquies in the Church of Namure, ibid. His
temporary sepulcher there, ibid. his body dissected is privately conveyed into
Spain, l. 10. p. 24. set together again and showed to the King, ibid. buried in
the Escureall with Charles the fifth, ibid. -- John Baptista Bertius,
Secretary, l. 6. p. 12, 13. John or Giovanni Baptista Castaneo, Archbishop of
Rossaza, the Popes Nuncio, l. 5. p. 132. his relation to Cardinal Alexandrino
of the Commitment and death of Prince Charles, l. 7. p. 43. John or Giovanni
Baptista, Marquess a Monte, Commander of the horse at the battle of Mooch, l.
8. p. 3. in the battle of Gemblas, l. 9. p. 51. a pension assigned him by the
King, l. 8. p. 3. In the battle of Rimenant, l. 10. p. 9. at a Council of War
with Don John and others, l. 10. p. 7. John Barnise Commander of horse, l. 5.
p. 132. Iolm Blaser, l. 3. p. 6^. John Blosius Treslong, l. 7. p. 7^. John
Boccas, a Jesuit. l. 9. p. 40. John the fourth, Duke of Brahant, l. 9. p. 36.
John Calvin, l. 3. p. 56. vide Calvinists. John Cassembrot, Secretary to Count
Egmont, l. 6. p. 33. (...) l. 7. p. 50. taken by the Duke of Alva's command, l.
6. p. 33. beheaded, l. 7. p. 49. John Cassimir, brother to the Prince Elector
Pala^ine, l. 10. p. 1, 14. -- John Croy Count Reuse, l. 1. p. 17. Governor of
Tornay, l. 6. p. 8. one of the four mourners that held the corners of the
hears-cloth when Don John's corpse was carried to Namure, l. 10. p. 22. John
Friderick, son to the late Elector of Saxony, l. 5. p. 140. maintains a War
against the Duke of Saxony, l. 5. p. 141. John Funch, l. 9. p. 27. John Glime,
Marquess of Berg^n, Governor of Haynault, l. 1. p. 16. Justice in Air of the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 28. taken along by King Philip to his marriage with
Mary Queen of England, l. 3. p. 71. Elected Knight of the Golden Fleece, l. 6.
p. 28. slow to quiet tumults raised by heretics, l. 3. p. 62, 64. At last he
quiets them, ibid. -- writes to the Pope in behalf of the Agent Molin, l. 3. p.
66. conspires against Granvell, l. 3. p. 69. Inveighers against him to the
Governesse. l. 3. p. 75. sent into Spain by her Excellence of Parma, l. 5. p.
113. Is hurt by accident which puts off his journey, ibid. when he was
perfectly recovered, the Governesse presses him to Depart, l. 5. p. 117.
Relapsing he sends his Major Domo before, ibid. -- what he wrote of the King
from Spain, l. 5. p. 134. He cannot get leave to return to the Low Countries,
l. 6. p. 27. He falls sick, ibid. His complaints of the King, ibid. and 28. He
dies, ibid. -- His Elogie, ibid. After his decease, he was impeached and
condemned by the Duke of Alva, ibid. How the King disposed of his goods and
heir, ibid. John Gnissius, Bishop of Groninghen, l. 7. p. 58. John Hangest,
Lord of Ienlis, marches out of France to relieve Mons, l. 7. p. 74. fights with
Duke Federico son to the Duke of Alva, ibid. is Defeated, Ibid. John Hennim
Count Bolduc, sent for to compose the stirs at Valenciens, l. 3. p. 64. John
James Medices, Marquess of Marigan, l. 8. p. 9. John Immarsel, Praetor of
Antwerp, l. 5. p. 124 Ioln Lanoi, Lord of Molembase, Governor of Haynault, l.
1. p. 16. John Lignius Count Aremberg, Governor of Frisland, and Over-ysell,
ibid. and l. 3. p. 65. chosen one of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, l. 7. p.
47. His difference with the Prince of Orange and Count ^gmont, l. 3. p. 72, 73.
He withdraws himself from the Combination against Cardinal Granvell, ibid.
Likes not the Conspiracy of the Lords and Gentlemen, nor the Covenant, l. 5. p.
103. Ready to take arms for the King, l. 5. p. 129, 141. Pursues the fugitive
Rebels, l. 6. p. 19. Is by the Duke of Alva sent into France General of the
Spanish foot and horse, l. 6. p. 35. l. 7. 47. Encounters Lewis and Adulp of
Nassau, ibid. Recovers Dam, and beats the Nassauvians, ibid. -- fights a
battle, ibid. kills Adulph, brother to the Prince of Orange, and is himself
slain by Adulp, ibid. His army lost, ibid. His Elogy, ibid. His death
otherwise related, l. 7. p. 48. his death, and the death of Momerancy
Constable of France, compared together, ibid. The Duke of Alva celebrates his
funerals, l. 7. p. 54. his loss revenged by the Sardinian Regiment, l. 7. p.
57. John the third, King of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92. Iohm Manric de Lara speaks
at the Councell-board before the King, l. 6. p. 23. John Mamique, at the battle
of Rimenant, l. 10. p. 12. John Marnixius, one of the first Covenanters, l. 5.
p. 101. John Michese, a Jew, flies from Spain to Antwerp, l. 5. p. 138. from
thence to Venice, ibid. from Venice to Constan^^^ople, ibid. Ingratiates
himself with Selimus afterward Emperor of the Turks, ibid. 139. moves him to
assist the Moors against the Spaniards, Ibid. offers arms from Constantinople
to the Low Country Rebels, ibid. Puts Selimus upon the war with Cyprus, to
spite the Venetians, ibid. and in hope of the Kingdom of Cyprus, Ibid. He is
author of the firing of Venice, Ibid. John Momorancy, Lord of Courir, Governor
of Fren^h Flanders, l. 1. p. 16. His death, l. 5. p. 123. John de Nassau,
brother to the Prince of Orange* l. 5. p. 132, 134. John Noreys, Colonel of
English, l. 10. p. 10. John Count of East Frizland, l. 1. p. 16. John Osorius
Ulloa, one of the Sea waders, l. 8. p. 10. Commander of the Van, 18. p. 11.
Animates his men* ibid arrives in Duveland, fights and Conquers, l. 8. p. 13.
John Pettin, l. 8. p. 2. John the 22, Pope, l. 2. p. 30. John Regula, Confessar
to Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 7. John Sellius in the Kings name treats for
peace with the Deputies of the Estates. l. 10. p. 5. 6. John Sorean, General of
the Gheuses, has a plot upon Lisle, l. 6. p. 6, 7. Attempts Lanoi in vain,
ibid. fights with Norcarmius, ibid. is Routed, ibid. John Spell, Provost
Marshal, chief actor in the execution of the Lords and Gentlemen, l. 7. p. 49.
hanged, ibid. John Valhart, Commander of horse, l. 5. p. 132. John Vangest,
maternal Grandfather to Margaret of Ausria, l. 1. p. 20. John Vargas Mexia, the
King of Spain's Ambassador, l. 10. p. 20, 24. Joy for the Peace between the
French and Spaniard, l. 1. p. 12. For the departure of Cardinal Gra^vell, l. 4.
p. 80, 81. At Rome for the twins, Alexander and Charles Farneze, l. 9. p. 42,
43. At the marriage of Alexander Farneze and Princess Mary of Portugal, l. 4.
p. 94 -- For the Emperor disclaiming the plunder of Rome, l. 1. p. 9. Joyful
entry, l. 2. p. 30. the Privileges therein contained, ibid. and l. 9. p. 36.
Ipre, a town of the lower Flanders, l. 5. p. 122. Bishop of Ipre, Ibid. and l.
7. p. 52. vide Iconomachy. Ireland offered to Don John, l. 10. p. 22. Isabella
Briganze, wife to Edward Prince of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92. Isabella, wife to
Charles the fifth, l. 10. p. 17. Isabella, sister to Charles the fifth, l. 1.
p. 19. Isabella, the Catholic Queen, l. 4. p. 78. Her arms, ibid. Isabella
Clara Eugenia, daughter to Philip the second, is born, l. 5. p. 132. baptized
by the Popes Nuncio, ibid. married to Albert Rodolp the Emperors brother, and
endowed with the Low Country, ibid. -- Isabella, daughter to Henry the second
of France, l. 1. p. 12, 13. why she was called the Princess of Peace, ibid.
promised to Charles Prince of Spain, ibid. and l. 7. p. 68. married to his
father Philip the second, l. 1. p. 12. is brought into Spain, l. 3. p. 57.
present at the Conference at Baion, l. 4. p. 87. Dies, l. 7. p. 45. Isabella of
Portugal, mother to Philip the second, l. 4 p. 92. Isabella of Portugal, wife
to Philip Duke of Burgundy l. 4. p. 94. Ischius sent by the Senate to Don John,
l. 9. p. 26, 27. refuses the Counsel given him by the way, ibid. Incurs the
hatred of many for his Commendations of Don John of Austria, Ibid. Isell, a
River, l. 8. p. 7. Isidor Pacecho, a Spanish Captain at the wading over Sea to
Duveland, l. 8. p. 10. Dies shot, l. 8. p. 12. His courage and last words,
ibid. He and Caesar's Centurian paralleled, ibid. Italians attribute the
victory at Mooch to the Marquess of Monte, l. 8. p. 3. depart the
Low Countries, l. 9. p. 32. are brought back thither by Alexander Farneze, l.
9. p. 41. Their valor at the Battle of Rmenant, l. 10. p. 12. who was called
the Paladin of Italy, l. 8. p. 4. Forces raised in Italy, l. 6. p. 25, 30. and
l. 10. p. 6. Iuan Acugnia sent by the King to Savoy, l. 6. p. 21. Iuan
Auguisciola, a Colonel, l. 3. p. 60. Iuan Aranda sounds the Foard in the Zeland
Expedition, l. 8. p. 9. His relation to Requescenes, ibid. He wades the Sea to
Duveland, l. 8. p. 10. Iuan a Cer^a, Duke of Medina Coeli, made Governor of
the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 68. goes into the Netherlands, and presently
returns for Spain, ibid. Iuan Escovedo persuades Don John to dismiss the
Spaniards, l. 9. p. 28. His speech to the Spaniards, l. 9. p. 31. He is sent
into Spain, l. 9. p. 36. l. 10. p. 20. His death, ibid. Iuan Zuniga, Father to
Requesenes, great Commendador of the Knights of St. Iago in Castile, l. 8. p.
15. Iuan Zuniga, brother to Requesenes, the Kings Ambassador at Rome, l. 4. p.
81. Iudoignia rendered to Don John, l. 9. p. 53. Iuliers, the territory, l. 7.
46. The Duke, l. 9. p. 36. and l. 10. p. 4. Iuliano Romero, l. 6. p. 30. a
Spaniard, ibid. Colonel of the Sicilian Regiment, ibid. wounded, l. 7. p. 80.
Joined with Glime to relieve Middelburg, l. 8. p. 2. His life endangered in a
Tumult at Bruxells, l. 8. p. 18. Invades Antwerp, l. 8. p. 22. takes Philip
Egmont, ibid. Departs with the Spaniards from the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 32.
Dies of a fall with his horse, l. 9. p. 41. Iulio Pavesio, the Popes Legate to
the Emperor, l. 5. p. 114. Julius the second, Pope, l. 3. p. 57. l. 8. p. 15.
S. Iust^us, Monastery, l. 1. ^6. Iusticium, or the Courts of Justice forbidden
to sit in a time of public mourning, l. 1. ^9. Iustus Scowemburg, solicited
by Brederod, l. 6. p. 20. Enters Frisland, l. 7. p. 46. represses the seditions
of the Germans, l. 7. p. 55. At the battle of Geming, l. 7. p* 56. His
Carriages taken, ibid. Iustus Villers defends Nivell for the States, l. 9. p.
56.
Sentences in I.
OCcasion cannot be long wanting to IMPROBITIE, l. 7. p. 40. INFANTS manners
are molded by the example of their Parents, much sooner then by the Stars that
reign at their Nativities, l. 9. p. 43. It seems to be an argument of JUST
anger, not to be friends upon the sudden, l. 5. p. 1^4.
K.
KEunava, Colonel of a Regiment of women in the siege of Harlem, l. 7. p. 79.
admired even by the enemy, ibid. King of Cyprus, l. 5. p. 139. King of the
Romans, l. 1. p. 5. King of Spain vide Philip. King of France, vide Charles,
Francis and Lewis. Kingdom resigned, l. 1. p. 3, 5. translated, l. 1. p. 4.
Erected, l. 1. p. 15. Knights of the Golden Fleece, who and by whom created, l.
1. p. 16, 44. l. 6. p. 28. l. 7. p. 47, 53. l. 9. p. 42. The Order it self when
and by whom instituted, l. 1. p. 17. l. 4. p. 94. To what number the Knights
was increased, l. 1. p. 25. yet farther augmented by Charles the fifth, ibid.
Under the Patronage of what Saint, l. 4. p. 94. The Master of the Knights, l.
1. p. 3. l. 5. p. 107. t^eir Herald commonly called Tosond'or, l. 5. p. 101.
In whom the power is to create them, l. 2. p. 46, 47. Their legal Judge, l. 7.
p. 50. Their Convention at Gant, l. 2. p. 46. Their Assembly, l. 1. p. 3, 25.
Their Convocation, l. 3. p. 69. The result thereof, ibid. Their Combination
against the power of Granvel, ibid. some of them numbered among the Covenanters
l. 5. p. 101. Their Joy at the marriage of Alexander Farneze and Mary Princess
of Portugal, l. 4. p. 94. A Libell published in their name by the Gheuses, l.
5. p. 112. Knights of Calatrava, l. 7. p. 58. Of St. John's of Jerusalem, l. 6.
p. 23, 30. Of St. Jago, l. 8. p. 1. Of St. Stephen, l. 8. p. 14.
Sentences in K.
KINGS that have large Dominions, never want causes of War, nor rewards for
Soldiers, l. 9. p. 31. It concerns the Wisdom of a KING to provide that a
Crown, once moderately refused by a subject, should never more be in the power
of his acceptance, l. 1. p. 20.
L.
LAlin vide Anthony, Charles, George and Philip. Lambert, Count and Abbat of
Gemblac, l. 9. p. 52. Lambert Wirtzemberg, l. 7. p. 80. Lamentation at the
Obsequies of Charles the fifth, Celebrated by himself, l. 1. p. 7, 8. at the
death of Count Egmont, l. 7. p. 25. and of Don John, l. 10. p. 21. vide
Obsequies. Lamoral, Count Egmont, created Knight of the Golden Fleece by
Charles the fifth, l. 7. p. 53. General of the Low Country horse, l. 1. p. 11.
victorious at St. Quintine, and at Graveling, ibid. and l. 7. p. 53. Governor
of Flanders and Artois, l. 1. p. 16. and l. 7. p. 53. Commander in Chief of the
Spanish Forces in the Low Countries, and Designed by the Peoples wishes for
Governor of all the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 18, 19. his Alienation from the
King, l. 2. p. 38. l. 3. p. 67. his freedom of speech, ibid. his Envy and
Emulation against Granvell. l. 2. p. 41. the Prince of Orange preferred before
him by Charles the fifth, l. 2. p. 44. he joins with the Prince of Orange and
the rest that dissent^rom Granvell, l. 3. p. 67. his first Complaint to the
King, l. 3. p. 68. he combines against Granvell, ibid. and 72. and exasperates
others, l. 3. p. 73, 74. his Letter to the King against Granvell, l. 3. ^p. 72,
73. his dissimilitude to the Prince of Orange, l. 3. p. 70. the King invites
him into Spain, l. 3. p. 74. he will not go, ibid. he differs from Count
Aremberg, l. 3. p. 73. his Complaints against Granvel, l. 3. p. 75. he
discovers Granvels danger to the Governesse, Ibid. and l. 4. p. 80. when others
leave the Court, he stays, l. 3. p. 75. he is Author of the Liveries and
Cognizances worn by the Lords servants, l. 4. p. 78. Invents a New Cognizance
instead of the Old, ibid. the Governesse sends him Ambassador into Spain, l.
4. p. 87. he is very graciously received by the King, l. 4. p. 89. he excuses
himself to his Majesty, ibid. returns into the Low Countries with Alexander
Far^eze, l. 4. p. 90. his Complaints occasioned by the Kings Letters, l. 4. p.
96. he writes to the Governesse of Confederation Decreed by the Nobility, l. 5.
p. 99. his Vote in Senate for the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103. he denies to fight
for the Inquisition, or the Emperors Edicts, l. 5. p. 106. he meets the
Covenanters at their Feast in Culemburg house, l. 5. p. 110. he is sent by the
Governesse to Centron to disturb the Convention of the Gheuses, l. 5. p. 119,
120. the Covenanters desire his mediation for them, ibid. he disputes with the
Governesse touching the plunder of Churches, l. 5. p. 123. resists not the
Church-robberies of the Gheuses, l. 7. p. 50. speaks in Senate against a War,
l. 5. p. 129. meets the rest of the Lords Conspirators at Dendermund, l. 5. p.
136. and l. 7. p. 50. his letter to Count Mansfeldt, l. 5. p. 136. his
Complaints against Count Mansfeldt, and the Governesse, ibid. he refuses to
enter into the new League, l. 5. p. 142. is offended with the Valencenians,
letter, l. 6. p. 6. sent by the Governesse to Valenciens, l. 6. p. 9. what his
opinion is of the strength of the town, ibid. and p. 10. he promises to take
the Oath of Allegiance, l. 6. p. 11. and does it, l. 6. p. 14. his Conference
with the Prince of Orange at Willebroc, ibid. he adheres to the Kings party,
ibid. opposes the Covenanters, ibid. breaks friendship with them, ibid. is
called to sit in Council with the Duke of Alva, l. 6. p. 32, 33. invites Count
Horn to come likewise to the Councel-table, ibid. is Arrested in the Kings name
by the Duke of Alva, ibid. imprisoned in the Castle at Gant, l. 7. p. 49. Many
are Suitors to the King for his life, ibid. his Ladies humble Petition, ibid.
the Crime charged against him by the Kings Advocate, ibid. and p. 50. his
Answer to the Charge, ibid. diverse of those particulars formerly objected
against him by the Governesse, l. 7. p. 51. the Peoples affection to him, ibid.
he is brought from Gant to Bruxels, ibid. sentence of Death pronounced against
him by the Duke of Alva, ibid. and 22. his letter to the King, ibid. He
religiously prepares himself to die, ibid. is beheaded, ibid. the Extraordinary
lamentation at his death, with threats and presages, confirmed by a strange
portent, ibid. and 53. the saying of the French Ambassador touching his
execution, ibid. his Elogy, ibid. many hate and threaten Alva for putting him
to Death, ibid. Lancelot Barlamont, Count Megan. l. 9. p. 35. Colonel of the
German Regiment, l. 10. p. 5. attempts Sichem. l. 9. p. 54. the Mutiny of his
men, l. 9. p. 56. his Death, l. 10 p. 5. Lancelot Bastard son to Brederod, one
of the Water Gheuses, l. 7. p. 31. turns Pirat, ibid. Dies in the siege of
Harlem, l. 7. p. 80. Lanciers at the battle of Mooch, l. 8. p. 3, 4. worst the
Raiters, ibid. at Gemblac, l. 9. p. 50. at Riminant, l. 10. p. 10. their
Commanders in Chief, l. 8. p. 3. Langafco, the Mountainous part of Liguria, l.
9. p. 32. Lanoy, the town, assaulted, l. 6. p. 7. Lanoy, an Heretical
Calvinist, l. 3. p. 62. Lanoy vide John and Philip. Landtgrave of Hessen vide
Philip. Laurentio Priulo, Duke of Venice, l. 1. p. 14. Laurentio Tuccio, l. 9.
p. 57. and l. 10. p. 12. Lazarus Swend, l. 2. p. 41. Lec, a River in Holland,
l. 8. p. 9. Lefdal, Servant to Count Egmont, one of the first Covenanters l. 5.
p. 101. troubles Holland, l. 6. p. 19. is defeated, ibid. Leiden befieg'd by
Valdez, l. 8. p. 6. relieved by a Seabreach, l. 8. p. 8. Levcadia, Patroness
of Toledo, l. 7. p. 75. Leovare, a Town in Frizland, l. 7. p. 48. Lepido de
Romany, l. 10. p. 12. Lerodam, l. 8. p. 9. Letters of Alexander Fa^neze to
Philip the second, joying his Majesty for the Victory at Gemblac, l. 9. p. 53.
to his Father Octavio, Duke of Parm^, l. 10. p. 15. to his Mother Margaret of
Austria, l. 10. p. 13. to Samaniego, how he dissuaded Don John from giving
battle, l. 10. p. 7, 8, Of a namelesse person to the Duke of Alva, praying him
to take off the tenth part, l. 7. p. 67. Of Count Egmont to Count Mansseldt, l.
5. p. 135. to the King of Spain against Granvel, l. 3. p. 72. to his Majesty
after Sentence of death, l. 7. p. 52. Of the Duke of Alva, enraged, to the
Provinces, l. 7. p. 67. of his son D. Federico, chiding him, l. 7. p. 78. Of
the French Ambassador to Charles the ninth, touching the Death of Egmont, l.
7. p. 53. Of George Fronsberg to Dan John, l. 9. p. 48. Of Cardinal Granvel to
the Prince of Ebolo, and the Duke of Alva, concerning the King of Navarre, l.
3. p. 58. Of the Spanish Officers to the King, l. 8. p. 22. Of Count Hochstrat
in answer to Count Mansfeldt, l. 6. p. 12. Of Count Horn to the King against
Granvell, l. 3. p. 72. Of Don John to Alexander Farneze, touching the Emperor
Redolph, and the Archduke Matthias, l. 9. p. 39. to the King his brother, l.
10. p. 14. another counterfeited and sent for his, to Fronsberg, l. 9. p. 49.
Of John Michese the Jew, encouraging the Calvinists at Antwerp to Rebel, l. 5.
p. 139. Of Margaret of Austria to Philip the second, touching the dismission of
the Spaniards, l. 3. p. 51. and Cardinal Granvell, l. 3. p. 68. Of Concessions
made against Religion, l. 5. p. 130. Of her Letters betrayed at the Kings
Court, l. 5. p. 137. Of the storming of Valenciens, l. 6. p. 8. Of the Duke of
Alva's Army, l. 6. p. 27. Of the authority granted to the Duke of Alva that
much troubled her, l. 9. p. 48. Of her desire to be discharged from the
Government, l. 6, p. 34. before her departure, l. 6. p. 36. to Granvell
touching the acceptance of his Cardinals robes, l. 3. p. 54. to the Provinces
against the Valencenians, l. 6. p. 6. to the Governors of Provinces to take
away Heretical Exercises, l. 5. p. 141. in answer to the Covenanters, l. 5. p.
143. to the Lady Marquess of Bergen, when she sent a Garrison into the Town of
Bergen, l. 6. p. 28. to the Duke of Alva, that he would lossen his Army, l. 6.
p. 29. Leva vide Alphonso and Sancho. Levia Rendered to Alexander Farneze, l.
9. p. 35. Levinus T^rentius, l. 9. p. 36. Lewis of Granado, a Dominican Friar,
l. 7. p. 82. Lewis of Nassau, brother to the Prince of Orange, infected with
heresy in his travels, l. 9. p. 99. sets a foot a conspiracy in Low Countries,
ibid. and in Germany, l. 5. p. 100. commands the Conspirators in chief, l. 5.
p. 102. enters Bruxells with the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 107. collects money for
them assisted by Brederod, ibid. at a feast with the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 110.
goes with his Companions to the Governesse, l. 5. p. 111. asks leave of the
Bishop of Lieg for the Gheuses to convene at Centron, l. 5. p. 119. offers
another Petition to the Governesse, l. 5. p. 120. his Letter consenting to the
Iconomachy, l. 5. p. 127. the Principal Boutefeu, ibid. and 134. his threats
against Bruxels and the Governesse, l. 5. p. 129. he is present in the
Convention at Dendermund, l. 5. p. 134. the Kings displeasure against him,
ibid. he persuades the Antwerpers to conform unto the Confession of Ausburg, l.
5. p. 138. is chosen General for the Covenanters, to raise men and money, l. 5.
p. 141. follows the Prince of Orange out of the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 15. is
impeached and condemned absent, l. 7. p. 41. enters Frizland, l. 7. p. 47.
takes Damme, ibid. Fights Count Aremberg and defeats him, ibid. besieges the
Groine, l. 7. p. 54. the number of his Forces, ibid. he encamps at Ge^^ng, l.
7. p. 55. a mutiny in his Camp, ibid. he fights with the Duke of Alva, Ibid.
and 56. loses his Army, ibid. and Carriages, abid. his Arms and his Clothes
are brought to the Duke of Alva, ibid. he flies, ibid. his battle by the ^^yer
Emmes, compared with the overthrow of Arminius by the River Visargis, ibid.
General of the Hugonots in France, he is Routed by Count Mansfeldt, l. 7. 64.
he moves the French King to invade the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 73. take Mons in
Hayndt, ibid. is besieged, renders the Town, l. 7. p. 76, 78. goes to
Dilemburg, ibid. is defeated at Mooch, his Death, l. 8. p. 3. diverfly
reported, ibid. his Elogy, Ibid. Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, Enemy to
the Guises, l. 3. p. 56. advances the Conspiracy at Ambois, l. 3. p. 57.
sentenced to lose his head, l. 3. p. 58. restored to liberty and the Kings
favor, ibid. is a friend to the Heretical Cause, l. 3. p. 60. his Activenesse
to raise men in the Low Countries, ibid. Taken at Dort, l. 3. p. 6. Sollicites
the Heretics to plunder Churches in the Netherlands, l. 5. p. 121. is
accounted one of the Covenanting Gheuses, ibid. Favors those of Geneva, l. 6.
p. 26. Persuades the King of France to fight the Spaniard, ibid. the
Low Country Fugitives have recourse to him, l. 6. p. 34. he makes the Duke of
Alva's March an occasion to raise Forces, Ibid. he is routed at St, Denis, l.
6. p 35. renewes the war, ibid. revives the third Civil War of France, l. 7. p.
63. vide Lodwick and Lodovico. Libels in France against the King and the
Guises, l. 3. p. 57. in the Low Countries against Religion, the Bishops, and
Cardinal Granvel, l. 4. p. 77. against the Inquisition, l. 5. p. 100. one
fathered upon the Knights of the Golden Fluce, l. 5. p. 112. Of Heretics at
Autwerp for liberty of Conscience, l. 5. p. 139. another with in blood, l. 4.
p. 84. one offered to the Arck-Duke for liberty of Conscience, l. 9. p. 41.
Liberty naturally defited by the Low Country men, l. 1. p. 23. l. 8. p. 21 l.
9. p. 37. Licherth, a Fort, l. 8. p. 19. Lieg, a Monster born there, l. 7. p.
40. Bishop of Lieg, l. 1. p. 18. l. 5. p. 119. the Town joins in the
Association of Gant, l. 9, p. 30. gratulates Alexander ^arneze, l. 9. p. 52.
the Mambure of the Legeois, l. 9. p. 36. Life contemned, l. 8. p. 12. Lignius
vide John. Lily taken for a happy Omen, l. 1. p. 8. Limburg, a Province of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 16. and l. 10. p. 14, its Governor, l. 1. p. 16.
recovery, l. 10. p. 4. Situation, l. 10. p. 1. Suburbs, ibid. stormed, ibid.
and p. 2. the Town taken by assault, ibid. defended, Ibid. the Fort burnt, l.
10. p. 4. (...), the Chief City of Flanders, l. 6. p. 6. against it they of
Tornay and Armenter conspire, ibid. the Consistorial Merchants attempt to
betray it, ibid. the Plot discovered, ibid. and p. 7. the City freed, ibid. the
Townsmen of Lisle demolish the Fort, l. 9. p. 38. the Governor of L'Isle, l.
6. p. 7. Livia's advice to Aug. Caesar, l. 9. p. 28. Low Countries, how all the
Provinces were anciently consotlated under one Principality, l. 1. p. 15.
Charles the fifth thought to have made them into a Kingdom, ibid. and p. 16.
They are transferred by Charles the fifth to his son Philip, l. 1. p. 4. their
division, l. 1. p. 15. to whom the King assigned their Governments, l. 1. p.
16. they Petition the King to take off the tenth part, l. 7. p. 67. they waver
at the new^s of the taking of Brill by the Covenanters, l. 7. p. 72. they
conspire against the Spanish l. 8. p. 20. they adhere to the Estates, only two
continuing faithful to Don John, l. 8. p. 21. l. 9. p. 37, 48. Low Country
Governor Chosen by the Lords without the Kings consent, l. 9. p. 3^. confirmed
by the Estates, l. 9. p. 39. Governor of all the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 16,
21, 25. l. 6. p. 35, 36. l. 7. p. 69, 81. l. 8. p. ^7, 18, 19. and of every
particular Province, ^. 1. p. 16. Low Country Estates vide Estates. Lodronius
vide Albericke. Lodwick Boisote, Admiral of Holland, loses his Eye in a
Sea Fight, l. 8. p. 2. Defeats the Enemy, ibid. Admiral for the Expedition of
Ziriczce, where he is drowned, l. 8. p. ^3. Lodwick Blosius Treslong taken
prisoner, l. 9. p. 35. v^de William and John. Lodovico Berlingu^ is, son to
Requesenes, defeats the Turkish Fleet, l. 8. p. 15. Recovers the Popes Colors,
and returns them, ibid. Lodovico Requesenes, great Commandor of the Knight of
St. Jago, l. 8. p. 1. Ambassador to the Pope, presses him to determine the
Controversy between himself and the French Ambassador, l. 4. p. 85. Departs
from Rome in great Indignation, ibid. Governor of ^^^lain, l. 7. p. 81.
Difference betwixt him and St. Charles Borromeo, l. 8. p. 15. Going from Milain
he asks forgiveness of S. Charles, ibid. Governor of the Lowcountries, He
receives the Provinces from the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 81. Enters upon the
Government, l. 8. p. 1. Takes away the Duke of Alva's statue, i^st. sends a
Fleet to relieve Middelburg besieged, ibid. Beholds from the shore the loss of
his men, l. 8. l. 2. Pawnes his furniture to pay the mutinous Spania^ds, l. 8.
p. 5. Sends them to the siege of Leyden, commanded by Valdez, l. 8. p. 6.
Proclaims a general pardon at Bruxells, Ibid. Quiets another sedition of the
Spaniards, by sending of their pay, l. 8. p. 8. Le^ves Count Alt^mpse his
Forces to secure Brabant, l. 8. 29. Undertakes the Zeland Expedition, Ibid.
Designs the Officers, the way, and the Soldiers, ibid. stands on the shore
and views his Soldiers wading over the Sea, l. 8. p. 11. A flame seen in the
form of a Crown, inclining toward him, Ibid. Takes Duveland, l. 8. p. 13.
besieges Ziriczee, ibid. Performs Vitell^'s Funeral obsequies, l. 8. p. 14. His
death, l. 8. p. 15. El^gy, ibid. Ancestors, ibid. Fortunate for Victories
at^^ea, ibid. His errors in Governing the Netherlands, l. 8. p. 16. Dying he
nominates a Governor and a General, ibid. Lombere, a City, l. 2. p. 3^.
Londognia vide Sancho. Lopez Figueroa, l. 7. p. 55. The piety of his Soldiers,
ibid. They take the Cannon, Ibid. and 56. and open a way to victory, ibid.
Lopez Figu^^oa, a Spanish Colonel brings the It^^ian Garrisons into the
Low Countries, l. 10. p. 6. Lopiu Gallus, l. 6. p. 29. Lords of France join
with the heretical multitude, l 3. p. 57. Lords of Spain, neglect Charles the
fifth, l. 1. p. 5. Lords of the Netherlands advanc'^ by the King to the
Governments of Provinces, l. 1. p. 16. Their Indignation, l. 3. p. 69.
Accounted Patrons of the ^ugonots, l. 3. p. 72. They leave the Court, l. 3. p.
76. Their Letters to the King against Granvell, l. 3. p. 72, 73. The Cognizance
of their Combination invented at a Feast, l. 4. p. 78. Impatient at the power
of strangers, l. 4. p. 78, 79. In obedience to the King they (...) to the
Court, l. 4. p. 8. Some of them thought to be Covenanters, l. 5. p. 101. Their
design to change the Government of the Low Countries, ibid. and 135. l. 7. p.
49, 50. Their private meeting at Dendermund, l. 5. p. 134. They have
Intelligence of the Kings resolutions in Council, l. 5. p. 137. Their cause
defended in the Kings Court, l. 6. p. 22. l. 7. p. 43. They come to Council
with the Duke of Alva, l. 6. p. 33. They are impeacht, l. 7. p. 41. They refuse
to give their appearance, Ibid. They are condemned in their absence, ^bid. They
take up arms against the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 20, 21, 23. are offended at the
Prince of Orange', power, l. 9. p. 38. Consider of a new Governor of the
Low Countries, ibid. Lords, Patrons to the Commons, vindicators of the
Low Country Privileges and liberty, vide Nobility, Covenanters, and Knights of
the Golden Fleece. Lorain, the Dukedom, l. 1. p. 16. p. 31. Lorain, the Duke,
l. 1. p. 12, 19. and l. 6. p. 26. Lorain, the Cardinal, l. 3. p. 56, 61, 75. l.
7. p. 76. the Captain, l. 6. p. 31. vide Charles Christien and Francis. Lovein,
a City. l. 5. p. 98. Faithful to the King, l. 7. p. 75. taken by the Prince of
Orange, and fined, ibid. Assaulted by Gonzaga, l. 9. p. 53. rendered to Don
John, ibid. The famous University of Lovain, l. z. p. 31. Its privileges, l.
7. p. 42. It raines blood near the Town, l. 7. p. 53. Lovervall vide Philip.
Lucas Gauriem, the Mathematician, l. 1. p. 13. Lucemburg, a Province of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 16. l. 6. p. 31. l. 9. p. 26. Famous for slaughter, l.
1. p. 16. Adheres to Don John, l. 9. p. 37. Its Governor, l. 1. p. 16. l. 4.
p. 96. Lumo a Marcha vide William. Lutheran Heresy, l. 9. p. 42. upon what
occasion it was brought from Germany into France, l. 3. p. 55. By whom it was
promoted, ibid. Almost extinguished by the King of France, ibid. It breaks out
in the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 116. The Lutherans, enemies to the Calvinists,
l. 6. p. 4. Join with the Catholics against them, ibid. Luther vide Martin,
Sermons, and Heresy. Lies, how they come to be. so artificially composed, l.
10. p. 4. The Advantage by them, ibid. Many times they are sprinkled with soon
portion of truth, ibid. Made use of, like Scaffolds in building, lib. 5. p.
113.
Sentences in L.
LAWS before they pass should be debated; after they are passed, obeyed, l.
5. p. 105. A State cannot be more endangered, then by altering of their LAWS,
Ibid. It is more dishonor to a Prince to keep LAWS in force, which his
Subjects will not obey, then to apply them to their natures, and so keep his
people in obedience. l. 5. p. 105. It Is wisdom to wave those LAWS, the
Contempt whereof we have not power to punish, l. 5. p. 117. They favor
LEARNING, whose Actions are worthy of a Learned Pen, l. 3. p. 55.
LICENTIOUSNESS more easily increases, then begins, l. 6. p. 24. LITTLE things
are by their Littleness secured, l. 8. p. 24.
M.
MAchiavell's Institution studied by the Prince of Orange, l. 2. p. 46.
Machiavell, Secretary to the Governesse, sent into Spain, l. 6. p. 34. returns,
l. 6. p. 35. Ma^stricht threatens to revolt from the King, l. 6. p. 1. sues for
pardon to the Governesse, l. 6. p. 15. the Embassage in behalf of that Town
sent to the Governesse by the Bishop of Lieg, ibid. it is rendered to
Norcarmius, l. 6. p. 16. punished, ibid. to whom the City of right belongs, l.
6. p. 15. the Spanish Garrison turned out, l. 8. p. 21. they recover and
plunder the town, ibid. Magdalen Vlloa, Lady of Villagarcia, l. 10. p. 17, 21,
23. Magistrate of Brabant not unlike to the Dictator of Rome, l. 9. p. 36.
Magistrate of Antwerp, l. 5. p. 112. l. 6. p. 17, 33. Of Bruxells, l. 5. p.
127. Of Bolduc, l. 6. p. 2. Of Ipre, l. 5. p. 122. Of Nam^^, l. 10. p. 22. Of
Nivell, l. 9. p. 56. Of Ma^stricht, l. 6. p. 15. Of Valenciens, l. 6. p. 5.
Malberg, a Commander of Horse, l. 6. p. 1. Malbuge rendered to Don John, l. 9.
p. 57. Malb^^g, one of the Prince of Orange's Captains slain by his own men, l
7. p. 61. Malta, an Island besieged by the Turk, l. 4. p. 88. l. 8. p. 14.
Malvezzi vide Pyrrho. Mambure, l. 9. p. 36. Mandevill, a Captain, l. 6. p. 28.
Marick de Lara, l. 6. p. 23. Manriquez vide Iuan and Raphael. Mansfeldt vide
Charles, and Peter Ernest. Marbose vide Philip. Marcha, a Town, l. 9. p. 30,
49. Marquisate of the Sacred Empire, a Province of the Low Countries, l. 1. p.
16. Marc Antonio Columna, Admiral of the Popes Fleet, l. 9. p. 45, 46. Margaret
of Austria, Duchess of Parma, her birth, Mother, and Mothers Parents, l. 1.
p. 20. given to the Emperors Ant to breed her up, ibid. and 21. afterward to
the Emperors Sister, ibid. delighted in hunting, ibid. Promised in Marriage to
the Prince of Ferrara, ibid. designed for wife to Alexander Duke of Florence,
ibid. their Nuptials Celebrated at Naples and Florence, l. 1. p. 22. After
Alex: mutther, she is married to Oct^vio Farneze, ibid. disagreement between
her and her husband, ibid. and 23. her Masculine Spirit and Garb, ibid. her
Wit, Prudence, and Religion, especially toward the holy Eucharist, ibid. and
24. sent for out of Italy, to govern the Low Countries, ibid. why the
Netherlands were committed to her, ibid. she comes into the Low Countries,
where the King meets her, ibid. instructed by his Majesty, ibid. and 25. and a
Pension assigned her, ibid. she Commands the Governors of Provinces to see the
Emperors Edicts observed, l. 2. p. 34. Labors to qualify the Lords Envy
against Granvel. l. 2. p. 41. why she defers to send the Spaniards out of the
Low Countries, l. 3. p. 50. she prevails with the King to let them go, l. 3.
p. 52. Orders the Foot Militia, ibid. Likes not the Prince of Orange his
Marriage with P. Anne of Saxony, l. 3. p. 53. presents her with a Diamond Ring,
ibid. Granvel by her means is created Cardinal by Pius the fourth, l. 3. p. 54.
She doubts of sending Auxiliary horse to the King of France, l. 3. p. 60.
instead of men, she sends him money, ibid. Quiets the Tumult raised by the
Calvinists at Tornay, l. 3. p. 62. and at Valenciens, l. 3. p. 64. by her Care
the Designed Bishops are brought in every one to his Sea, l. 3. p. 65. she
anticipates the Agents of Brahant, by sending of her own before to Rome and
Spain, l. 3. p. 66. she certifies the King by Letter of Count Egmont and the
Prince of Orange's alienation, l. 3. p. 67. She moves the King to remove
Regnard from the Low Countries, defends Granvell to the King, l. 3. p. 68. and
to the Low Country Lords, l. 3. p. 69. gives his Majesty an account why she
communicates not all concernments with the Senate, ibid. will not give way to a
General Assembly of the Estates, ibid. Grants a Convocation of the knights of
the Golden Fleece, ibid. what she writ to the King to sever the Interests of
the Lords, l. 3. p. 70. she complains of Count Egmont to the King, l. 3. p. 73.
her mind changes toward Granvell, l. 3. p. 74. l. 4. p. 79. she is active to
get him sent for out of the Low Countries, ibid. why she omitted her intended
Inquiry after infamous Libels, l. 4. p. 77. she advises the Lords to leave off
the incitements to new factions, l. 4. p. 78. troubled at the Report of
Cardinal Granvels return into the Netherlands, l. 4. p. 81. Religion taken
into her Care, l. 4. p. 83. she doubts in what way to proclaim the Council of
Trent, l. 4. p. 86. Sends Count Egmont into Spain, and Hallevin into Germany,
l. 4. p. 87. her joy at the coming of her son Alexander, l. 4. p. 91. she sends
her Fle^^ to Portugal for P. Mary Espoused to her Son Alexander, l. 4. p. 92.
writes the Complaints of Count Egmont to the King, l. 4. p. 96. l. 7. p. 51.
conceives and publishes an Edict concerning Religion, l. 4. p. 96. informs
the King of his Governors Complaints upon the proposal of the Edict, l. 5. p.
98. gives his Majesty Intelligence of the Covenanters Designs, and of the
state of the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 102, 103. She calls a Senate
Extraordinary, ibid. her speech to the Senate, l. 5. p. 104, 105. her Answer to
Brederod, l. 5. p. 108. She returns the Covenanters their Petition, with her
Answer annexed, l. 5. p. 109. signifies to his Majesty the Actings of the Gheu
ses, l. 5. p. 113. warnes the Provinces of the Gheuses Fraud, ibid. resolves to
send the Marquess of Bergen, and the Lord Montiny into Spain, ibid. and 117.
sends before a secret Messenger, l. 5. p. 114. takes not the money offered her
by the Popes Nuncio, l. 5. p. 115. Gives the Nuncio the Bishops several
Characters, ib. her piety and prudence admired by the Nuntio, ibid. she
entreats the King to pardon and Secure the Covenanters, ib. She banisheth
strangers from Antwerp by Proclamation, l. 5. p. 117. renews Edicts the against
Heretical Sermons, ibid. sends Orange and Egmont to disturb the Convention at
Centron, l. 5. p. 119, 120. her too great favor to the Prince of Orange, ibid.
she nominates him Governor of Antwerp, ibid. her words to Count Egmont when
she was struck with the News of the Churches being plundered, l. 5. p. 123. her
words in Senate when she heard the certainty of the Sacrilegious Spoil, l. 5.
p. 128. the sum of her Consultation, l. 5. p. 129. she thinks to steal out of
Bruxells, ibid. is stayed by Prayers and force, ibid. what she grants to the
Covenanters, l 5. p. 130. she condemns her own concessions, and beseeches the
King not to ratify them, ibid. she provides in time for the Town, and for her
self, ibid. reprehends Orange, Hochstrat, and Horn, for allowing Churches to
H^reticks, ibid. she gives the King an account of the Horeticks, proceedings,
l. 5. p. 132. the King permits her to use Arms against them, ibid. and sends
her money, ibid. and 133. she gives his Majesty Intelligence of what the Lords
had decreed, l. 5. p. 134. commends to the King the fidelity of Count
Mansfeldt, l. 5. p. 136. complains to the King of the betraying of her letters
in his Court, ibid. and 137. premonisheth the King of the Covenanters Designs,
ibid. and of Calvinistical books and Ministers that were to be dispersed through
Spain, ibid. Courts the Wavering Covenanters with Letters and promises, l. 5.
p. 140. begins her work against the Heretics with prayers and humiliation,
ibid. informs the King of France of the Hug^nots preparations, ibi^. and the
Emperor of the Low-countrey-mens Petition that was to be presented at the
Diet, ibid. she enlarges the Militia of the Low Countries, ibid. and 141. puts
rubs in the Way of Lewis of Nossau, l. 5. p. 142. writes to his Majesty what
the Covenanters had done, ibid. admits not the Covenanters with their new
Petition, ibid. Grants them nothing, l. 5. p. 143. sends Commanders to Bolduc,
or the Bus, to settle the Commotion, l. 6. p. 2. Commits the Expedition to
Count M^gan, ibid. prevents the Designs of Th^lose, ibid. sends Beavor to
fight him, who defeats Tholose, l. 6. p. ^. Commands the Valencenians to
receive a Garrison, l. 6. p. 5. upon their refusal Declares them Rebels, l. 6.
p. 6. anticipates the plot of those of Torney and Armiater, l. 6. p. 7. subdues
them both, ibid. besieges V^l^nciens by Norcarmius, l. 6. p. 8. takes it, l.
6. p. 10. forces the Governors of Provinces, and the Lords, to take an Oath
of fidelity to the King, l. 6. p. 11. punis^eth Brederod that refused it, ibid.
and p. 12. and Ho^^strat, ibid. sends Bertius to the Prince of Orange, ibid.
refers the Maestrichters to Norcarnius, l. 6. p. 15. why she would not
condescend to the Bishop of Liege that interceded for them, l. 6. p. 16. the
Bus fears her Forces, ibid. she denies pardon to the Antwerpers, unless they
render the Town, l. 7. p. 17. enters Antwerp ^ a kind of Triumph, ibid. and p.
18. restores things Sacred, ibid. orders the Civil State, Ibid. is hardly won
to ado^^ the Ambassadors of the Heretical Princes of Germany, ibid. what
Answer she gave them, ibid. and p. 19. she Commits to Prison the chief of the
Covenanters taken by her Soldiers, ibid. puts Garrisons into the Towns
rendered, l. 6. p. 20. fines them, ibid. Designs Forts to be built, ibid.
re-adotnes the Catholic Churches, ibid. destroys the Heretical Temples, ibid.
restores all the Low Countries to their ancient tranquillity, ibid. she holds
it necessary for the King to come in Person into the Netherlands, l. 6. p. 21.
endeavors to persuade him from his preparation of Arms against the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 27. takes Begen op Zoom in the Kings name as soon as
she hears of the Marquess of Bergens death, l. 6. p. 28. is troubled at the
News of the Duke of Alva's coming, ibid. pleased again with the Kings Letters,
l. 6. p. 29. makes ready a Fleet to meet the Kings in his Voyage for the
Low Countries, ibid. makes public supplications for his prosperous Expedition,
ibid. she is offended with the Duke of Alva's too large Commission, l. 6. p.
31. humbly entreats the King to discharge her of the Government, ibid. what she
thought of Egmont and Horns Captivity, l. 6. p. 34. she prays the King to
License her Departure from the Low Countries, ibid. ^n the interim she is very
vigilant in the Civil administration, ibid. by her Edict stays the
Low Country men that were leaving of their Native Soil, Ibid. Conceives
another Edict in favor of the French Ambassador, ibid. receives power from
the King to leave the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 35. rites to the Estates of the
Low Countries, ibid. w and 36. and to the King concerning herself and the
present Condition of the Netherlands, and in commendation of the
Low-countrey-men, ibid. surrenders the Government to the Duke of Alva, l. 6. p.
35. the Ceremonies used at her departure by the Neighbor Princes and Cities,
l. 6. p. 37. and by the Low Country men themselves, ibid. she leaves the
Netherlands, ibid. (...) Annual Pension given her by the King, the great love
showed toward her after she was gone, ibid. the Low-countrey-men desire her
again, ibid. and l. 7. p. 69. the King Resolves to send her with her Son
Alexander into the Low Countries. l. 9. p. 47. Margaret of Austria, daughter to
the Emperor Maximilian the first, and to Mary Duchess of Burgundy betrothed
to Charles the Dolphin of France, l. 1. p. 15, 21. And so Charles the fifth
mediates and makes a Peace betwixt him and Francis, l. 1. p. 12. Governesse of
the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 21. she breeds up the Governesse Margaret of Parma,
ibid. Margaret Farneze Princess of Montua, l. 9. p. 44. Margaret Sister to
Henry the second of France marryeth Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, l. 1. p. 13. goes
into Italy, l. 1. p. 26. Margaret of Vallois sister to Francis the first of
France wi^e to Alibret King of Navarre, l. 3. p. 55, 57. how she came to hate
the Pope, l. 3. p. 55. the Ostentation of her wit, ibid. what she did to
advance Heresy in France, ibid. and p. 63. she undertakes the Patronage of the
Heretics, l. 3. p. 55. dies a Catholic, ibid. Margaret of Valois sister to
Charles the ninth, goes to the Spaw, l. 9. p. 34. her marriage with Henry King
of Navarre, l. 7. p. 76. Margaret Vangest, mother to Margaret of Austria, l. 1.
p. 20. her Birth, Education, and Beauty, ibid. the Emperor falls in love with
her, ibid. Mary Queen of England married to Philip the second Prince of Spain,
l. 1. p 3. l. 3. p. 71. A five years Truce by her endeavors concluded between
Charles the fifth, and Henry the French King, l. 1. p. 3. she purges her
Kingdom of Heresy, l. 2. p. 36. her Death, l. 1. p. 12, 13. Mary of Austria
sister to Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 3. l. 5. p. 106. wife to Lodwick King of
Hungary, l. 1. p. 14. l. 1. p. 21. Governesse of the Low Countries, ib. l. 3.
p. 52. l. 6 p. 3. for her love to hunting called the Foresttresse, l. 1. p. 21.
she educates Margaret of Parma, ibid. resigns the Government of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 5, 11. the Emperor used her to move that his son
Philip might be King of the Romans, l. 1. p. 5. she goes with her brother to
Charles the fifth into Spain, ibid. her beloved Villa, l. 9. p. 57. her death,
l. 1. p. 14. Mary of Burgundy wife to the Emperor Maximilian, l. 1. p. 16.
killed with a fall as she was hunting, l. 1. p. 21. Mary Daughter to Charles
the fifth, Governs Spain, l. 7. p. 43. her grief conceived upon the Commitment
of Charles Prince of Spain, l. 7. p. 46. Mary Cocquamb, mother to Margaret
Vangest, l. 1. p. 20. Mary Princess of Portugal, daughter to John the third
of Portugal, and wi^e to Philip the second of Spain, l. 4. p. 92. Mary
Princess of Portugal, daughter to Prince Edward, Grandchild to King Emmanu^l,
l. 4. p. 91, 92. designed for wife to Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, ibid.
her Nobility, ibid. her Wit and Litterature, Ibid. Sanctity of Life, ibid.
preciseness of Chastity, ibid. she weighes Anchor from Portugal, ibid. and 93.
is persecuted with a tempest, Ibid. why she would not send one to salute the
Queen of England, ibid. she Courts an Heretical Lady, Ibid. arrives in the
Low Countries, l. 4. p. 94. her Nuptials Celebrated at Bruxells and Parma,
ibid. and l. 9. p. 44. she passes from the Low Countries into Italy, l. 4. p.
94. is met upon the way with Royal Pomp, ibid. and 95. she Reforms Parma, ib.
her pious Invention to obtain Sons from God, ibid. P. Alex. veneration toward
her, ibid. the education of her sons, ibid. it is desired that she might govern
the Low Countries, l. 7. p. p. 69. her patience on her deathbed, l. 4. p. 95.
The King Condoles her death, l. 9. p. 47. the daily exercises of her life
written by her self, l. 4. p. 95. Mary Mendoza, l. 10. p. 23. Mary Momorancy,
wife to Count Mansfeldt, l. 6. p. 12. sails for Portugal to attend Princess
Mary into the Low Countries, l 4. p. 92. her suit for the life of her brother
Count Horn, l. 7. p. 49. Mary Stuart Queen of Scots, wife to Francis the*
second of France, l. 3. p. 56. a report that she is to be married to the
Emperors son, to the Prince of Spain, and to the King of Navarre, l. 3. p. 59.
King Philip supplies her with money, l. 5* p. 104. the Pope and the King of
Spain join in a design to free her from imprisonment, l. 8. p. 16. Marius
Carafa, Bishop of Naples, in suit with the Viceroy Granvell, l. 4. p. 82.
Marius Carduin, l. 6. p. 3. Marnixius vide John and Philip. Marot vide Clement,
Marquet the Monastery plundered, l. 5. p* 122. Marriage of Albret of Austria,
and Clara Isabella Eugenia, l. 5. p. 132. of Alexander Farneze, and Princess
Mary of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92. and l. 9. p. 44. of Alexander Medices and
Margaret of Austria, l. 1. p. 21. of Charles the Dolphin, and Margaret of
Austria daughter to the Arck-Duke Maximilian, l. 1. p. 15. of Charles Emmanuel
Duke of Savoy, and Katherine of Austria, l. 4. p 82, 83. l. 6. p. 35. of
Charles the ninth of France, and Elizabeth daughter to the Emperor Maximilian,
l. 4. p. 88. of Charles Duke of Lorain, and Claude daughter to King Henry of
Feance, l. 1. p. 20. of Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, and Margaret sister to Henry
the second, l. 1. p. 13. of Francis the second of France, and Mary Steuart* l.
3. p. 56. of Henry of Nassau, and Claudia Chalon, l. 2. p. 43. of Henry King of
Navarre, and Margaret sister to Charles the ninth, l. 7. p. 76. of Lodowick
King of Hungary, and Mary sister to Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 14. and 21. of
Maximilian Ark-Duke of Austria, and Mary daughter to Charles Duke of Burgundy,
l. 1. p. 15. of Octavio Farneze, and Margaret of Austria, l. 1. p. 21, 22. of
the Prince of Orange, and Anne Egmont, l. 3. p. 53. and Anne Princess of
Saxony, ibid. and Charlotte Bourbon, l. 3. p. 54. of Philip the second of
Spain, and Mary daughter to John King of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92. and Mary Queen
of England, l. 1. p. 3, 14. and l. 3. p. 71. and Isabella daughter to Henry the
second, l. 1. p. 12, 13. and Anne of Austria daughter to the Emperor
Maximilian, l. 7. p. 68. Martinengho vide Curtius and Sarra. Martin Ayala
recovers Maestricht, l. 8. p. 21. Martin Luther whence he took his beginning to
stir up difference in Religion, l. 2. p. 33. Edicts against him and Heretics,
l. 2. p. 34. how he brought his Heresy into France, l. 3. p. 56. vide Heresy
and Lutherans. Martin Aspilcueta Doctor of Navarre, the Casuist, what his
opinion was in the Case of Charles Prince of Spain, l. 7. p. 44. Martin
Prutius, one of the Covenanters, l. 7. p. 80. Martin Rithouvius, Bishop of
Ipre, hated by the Heretics, l. 5. p. 132. the Messenger of, and the assistant
in the Deaths of Count of Egmont and Count Horn, l. 7. p. 52. Masius vide
James. Mass, l. 7. p. 67. l. 10. p. 16. St. Matthew the Evangelist his day
alike fatal to Charles the fifth, and to his son Don John of Austria. l. 10. p.
15. St. Matthew's Feast the birthday to Charles the fifth, and Don John, l.
10. p. 16. Matthias Archduke of Austria, brother to the Emperor Rodolph, is
elected Governor of the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 38. brought from Germany into
the Netherlands, ibid. Jealousies concerning his private departure, l. 9. p.
39. he enters the Low Countries, ibid. upon how many conditions he is received,
Ibid. the form of obedience promised to him, ibid. his flight to Antwerp, after
he heard the News of the loss of Gemblac, l. 9. p. 53. by the States he is
confirmed Governor of the Low Countries among the Conditions of Peace, l. 10.
p. 14. they treat with the King to confirm him, l. 10. p. 23. Maurice Count
Nassau is born, l. 4. p. 87. baptized with Catholic Rites, but his Godfathers
were Heretics, ibid. by the United Provinces substituted in his Fathers place,
ibid. the Companion of his Fathers fortunes, l. 7. p. 42. dies of grief for the
seige of Breda, l. 4. p. 87. Maurice Duke of Saxony, l. 1. p. 8. marries his
Daughter Anne to the Prince of Orange, l. 3. p. 53. Maximilian the first,
Emperor, victorious at Guinigate, l. 1. p. 15. marries Mary Duchess of
Burgundy and Blanca Sfortza, l. 1. p. 21. Artois and Burgundy are acknowledged
to be his in the name of a Dowry, l. 1. p. 15. both his wives killed as they
were hunting, l. 1. p. 21. Maximilian the second, Emperor, promises Philip
the second of Spain to serve him with his best endeavors, l. 4. p. 87.
Disswades him from Invading the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 133. offers himself to
arbitrate the Difference between the Governesse and the Covenanters, ibid.
writes to the Low Countries to make a Peace, ibid. by his Edict prohibits the
Germans from bearing Arms against the King of Spain, ibid. the Low Countries
desire to have him their Sovereign, l. 5. p. 135. they sue for his Parronage,
l. 5. p. 138. the Governesse certifies him of the Low-countrey-mens Petition to
be presented him at the next Diet, l. 5. p. 140. his Daughter Designed for wife
to Charles Prince of Spain, l. 7. p. 48. Maximilian brother to the Emperor
Rodolph, l. 9. p. 38. Maximilian a Bergen, by Granvells means made Bishop of
Cambray, l. 2. p. 41. Celebrates the marriage-Masse at the Nuptials of the
Prince of Parma, and Mary Princess of Portugal, l. 4. p. 94. Maximilian King
of Bohemia, Governes Spain for King Philip, l. 7. p. 43. Maximilian Hennin
Count Bolduc, l. 1. p. 17. Admiral of the Belgic Seas, l. 7. p. 69. attempts
Valenciens, l 6. p. 10. Convoyes the Queen into Spain, l. 7. p. 69. is
Governor of Holland, he is sent by the Duke of Alva to the Brill, l. 7. p. 72.
repulst, and his Fleet fired, ibid. kept out of Dort, ibid. defeated at Sea by
the Covenanters and taken Prisoner, l. 7. p. 81. Forsaking the Kings Party,
Commands the States Forces, l. 9. p. 50. General for the Archduke Matthias and
the States at the Battle of Rimenant, l. 10. p. 9. Challenged to a battle by
Don John, he keeps his Trenches* Ibid. Counterfeits to fly, l. 10. p. 10. the
Site of his Camp and number of his Forces, ibid. he renewes the fight, ibid.
sounds a retreat, l. 10. p. 12. a Note upon his Management of that days
Battle, ibid. he retreats to Tillem^nt, l. 10. p. 13. Prince Casimir refuses
to obey him, l. 10. p. 14. vide John Hennin. Maximilian Rassinghem, Governor
of French Flanders, l. 5. p. 123. the Armeterians conspire against him, l. 6.
p. 6, 7. he encounters and destroys them. ibid. enters Lisle victorious, ibid.
pursues the Tornois, ibid. is sent into Spain by the Royal Senate, l. 8. p. 19.
employed to the King by the Deputies of the Estates and by the Senators, l. 8.
p. 23. and by Don John to the Deputies of the Estates, l. 9. p. 35. a Maid
Sacrilegiously slain in the Church, l. 10. p. 3. of 3. years old, buried,
dug up again and eaten, l. 7. p. 80. M^^hlin, a fair and rich City, l. 7. p.
77. its Governor, l. 5. p. 131. l. 6. p. 12. Churches in the Town assigned to
Heretics, l. 5. p. 131. a fire there, l. 7. p. 40. the King's Garrison
refused, l. 7. p. 75, 77. it is rendered to the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 75.
recovered by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 77. when it was plundered, how pious the
Merchants and Soldiers were, ibid. how much the Duke of Alva was hated for
suffering of the spoil, Ibid. it is Garrisoned by the States, l. 9. p. 53.
attempted by Gonzaga when it was too late, ibid. made an Archbishopric, l. 1.
p. 18. its first Archbishop, ibid. the Archbishop of M^^hlin delivers the Popes
Present to the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 64. Medalls how they came in use, and
accounted sacred, l. 5. p. 111. Medalls of the Gheuses with the Picture and
inscription of the King of Spain, l. 5. p. 110. Medalls hallowed at Hall, l. 5.
p. 111. Megan vide Charles Brime and Lanc^llot Barlamout. Mehemet, son in law
to the Turkish Emperor Sclimus, l. 5. p. 139. King of Tunis, l. 10. p. 21.
Meinser, one of the first Covenanters, l. 5. p. 101. Melancthon vide Philip.
Mendoza vide Antonio Bernardino Didaco and Maria. Menin, a Town, l. 5. p. 1^.
2. Mentz, the Bishop and Elector, l. 2. p. 30. l. 5. p. 134. Merchants bring in
Heresy to the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 36. one of them procures 3000 of Calvin's
volumes, l. 5. p. 137. and pays the Prince of Orange's Army; they fortify
themselves at Antwerp, l. 7. p. 58. they conspire with the Gentlemen
Covenanters, l. 5. p. 137 raise money, l. 5. p. 139. join with the Tornay
Gheuses, l. 6. p. 6. the great men's differences put them out of heart, l. 6. p.
15. they transfer their Manifactures to Neighbor nations, l. 6. p. 21. l. 7.
p. 65. they steal out of the Low Countries into England, l. 6. p. 34. ^ribute
imposed upon them by the Duke of Alva, l 7. p. 65, 69. the piety of the Antwerp
Merchants, l. 7. p. 77. their loss when the Town was plundered, l. 8. p. 24.
Merchandise of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 14. l. 7. p. 66. of the Indies,
ibid. Mercurius Arboreus, Cardinal Gatinar the Emperors Chancellor, l. 2. p.
39. Merodius, Lord of Petersemi sent by the Governesse to the Bus, l. 6. p. 2.
Contumeliously used by the People, ibid. l. 6. p. 16. released and returned to
the Governesse, ibid. vide Bernard. Messenger of Victory, l. 7. p. 56, 75. l.
9. p. 53. Of the last necessity, l. 7. p. 52. Mettle Sacred vide Medalls. Metz
taken by the French, attempted in vain by the Emperor, l. 1. p. 8. Michael
Hernandes, a Jesuit upon the shore with Requesenes, prays for the men that
are to wade the ^ea, l. 8. p. 11. Michael Hovey, 3. p. 64. Michese vide John
Michese. Midelburg receives a Garrison from the Governesse, l. 6. p. 20. is
besieged by the Zelanders, l. 8. p. 1. a F^eet sent to relieve it by
Requesenes, Ibid. and p. 2. rendered* to the Heretics, ibid. the Townsemen
redeem the plunder with a sum of money, ibid. Milain, l. 6. p. 30. the
Milian-Regiment, ibid. the Government of Milain* l. 7. p 65. Military
Discipline observed, l. 6. p. 31. funeral po^p, l. 1. p. 22. Stratagem, l. 8.
p. 21. Piety, l. 7. p. 57, 77. Military Proverb vide Proverb. Militia of the
Foot strengthened with a new invention, l. 6. p. 30, 31. Militia of the Knights
of the Golden Fleece, and St John's of Jerusalem vide Knights. Militi^ of Horse
disposed, l. 1. p. 17. and of the Foot, l. 3. p. 52. Militia of the
Low Countries new-modelled, l. 6. p. 30. Miracles, l. 5. p. ^ 31. l. 9. p. 40.
l. 10. p. 5. Mode of Combing up the hair before, l. 10. p. 21. of the Ammonites
and Spaniards in punishing Women, ^. 7. p. 74. Mooch, a Village, l. 8. p. 3.
the battle, ibid. the description of the fight, ibid. Moulin, a Lawyer, l. 3.
p. 66. Mombrune, a French Colonel, l. 6. p. 26. Momorancy vide Anne, Florence
Lord of Montiny Heleonor, John, Mary and Philip. Mompencier, the Duke, l. 3. p.
54. Monastery of St. Michael, l. 8. p. 22. of Greenvale, l. 7. p. 46.
Mondragonio vide Christopher. Monfort, a Town, l. 8. p. 8. Money the best Spy
to discover Princes Councels, l. 5. p. 137. it Buys out Hostile Injury, l. 7.
p. 75. sent by Gregory the 13. to Don John, l. 9. p. 36. lent him by Alexander
Farneze, l. 10. p. 16. sent to Alexander Farneze by the King, l. 9. p. 48. and
to the Governesse, l. 1. p. 25. l. 4. p. 90. l. 5. p. 132. to the Queen of
Scots, l. 5. p. 104. and to his Great Commanders in the Low Countries. l. 10.
p. 7. and to the Bishops, l. 2. p. 32. to the Duke of Alva by Pius the fifth,
l. 7. p. 57. offered by his Holiness to Margaret of Austria, but refused, l.
5. p. 115. lent by Don John to the Deputies of the Estates, l. 9. p. 32. by the
Governesse sent into France, l. 3. p. 60. Collected by the Covenanters, l. 5.
p. 139, 141. taken by the Conquerors in the sack of Antwerp, l. 8. p. 5, 24.
got by the Prince of Orange, and how, l. 7. p. 58. vide Plunder, Stipend, and
Tribute. Monster at Liege, l. 7. p. 40. Montesdocha vide Francisc. Mons, a Town
of Haynolt, l. 7. p. 73. taken by Lewis of Nassau, ibid. besieged by the Duke
of Alva, l. 7. p. 47. the fight before they suffered him to Encamp, ibid. the
Fortifications of the Besiegers, ibid. a Monastery near the Town taken, ibid.
Auxiliaries sent to the Town by Coligny, Ibid. the Prince of Orange comes to
relieve it, l. 7. p. 75. it is rendered to the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 77. a
description of the recovery of Mons, ibid. Montiny vide Emmanuel and Florence.
Montio vide Camillo and Giovanni Baptista. Monumental pillar erected where
Culemburg house stood, l. 7. p. 42. Monument Votive, l. 7. p. 48. More beyond,
being the Motto of Charles the fifth, (under the figure of Hercules Pillars)
More on this side, was applied by way of Jeer, l. 1. p. 8. Moron reported to be
burnt alive with a soft fire, l. 5. p. 107. Mose, a River, l. 8. p. 7. foorded
by an Army with strange Artifice, ibid. Mulct imposed upon a Regiment, l. 7. p.
58. upon those that refused to take up Arms, l. 8. p. 20. Muleasses King of
Tunis, l. 10. p. 21. Mott vide Valentine Pardieu. Mustapha Counselor to
Selimus, l. 5. p. 139. Mustapha, Teasurer to the Turkish Fleet, l. 9. p. 46.
Musters vide Army. Musquetoons, used first in field service by the Duke of
Alva, l. 6. p. 31. l. 7. p. 55. Musketeers on horseback, l. 8. p. 3. l. 9. p.
50. l. 10. p. 10. Foot Musketeers, l. 6. p. 7. l. 8. p. 11. l. 9. p. 50. l.
10. p. 9. Mutino vide Stephano. Mutio Pagano, Commander of Horse, goes for the
Low Countries with Requesenes, l. 7. p. 81. ventures into the bogg with
Alexander Farneze, l. 9. p. 51. at the battle of Rimenant, l. 10. p. 9.
Governor of the Town of Areschot, l. 10. p. 13. his death, ibid.
Sentences in M.
IT is MADNESS to hope for Mercy when Subjects have received an Angry and an
armed Prince. l. 5. p. 135. Their MANNERS either absolve or condemn every one,
l. 5. p. 136. It is very considerable whether MISFORTUNES succeed or meet, l.
2. p. 48. MODESTY sets off one newly come to Honor, l. 10. p. 18. Nothing is
so pernicious to MONARCHY, as when the people are taught publicly to contest
with their Prince. l. 2. p. 32. Ready MONEY is not so refused, as when it is
only promised. l. 8. p. 6. A MULTITUDE is easiest Pardoned; and where all
offends, none suffers, l. 7. p. 67.
N.
NAked men fighting in a battle, l. 10. p. 11. Namur, a City and Province of
the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 15. faithful to Don John, l. 9. p. 37. its
Governor, l. 1. p. 16. Bishop, l. 7. p. 73. Magistrate, l. 10. p. 22. Castle
surprised by Don John, l. 9. p. 35. Nancy, the battle, there, l. 1. p. 15.
Narbon, the bishop, l. 2. p. 30. Nardhem, a Town in Holland, l. 7. p. 78.
Razed, ibid. Nassan, the Earldome, l. 7. p. 77. the Nobility thereof, l. 2. p.
43. Nassau vide Adolph, Engelbert, William, Henry, John, Lewis, Maurice, Otho,
Philip, and Renatus, or R^ne. Nature probably conjecturd to be evil, l. 7. p.
43. Navarr the Kingdom, l. 3. p. 58. made a Province to Spain, l. 7. p. 82.
its Viceroy, l. 7. p. 68. l. 10. p. 6. Navarr vide Anthony Bourbon, Henry and
Peter. Navarin besieged, l. 9. p. 47. Navarr vide Martin Doctor Navarr. Naples,
l. 1. p. 22. l. 3. p. 59. Ncapolitan Regiment, l. 6. p. 30. Archbishop, l. 4.
p. 81. Viceroy, ibid. Monastery, l. 10. p. 23. Nervii besiege Quintus Ciccro
in his Winter Quarters, l. 8. p. 8. Newport, a Town of Flanders, l. 8. p. 21.
Nicolao Basta, l. 6. p. 30. Nicolao Caesio, l. 10. p. 2, 10, 11. his valor, l.
10. p. 12. Nicolao Ormanetto, Bishop of Padua, departs from the Low Countries,
l. 9. p. 37. the Popes Agent to the King of Spain, l. 8. p. 16. moves the King
to make Don John Governor of the Low Countries, ibid. Nicolao Vitelli, l. 8.
p. 14. Nicholas Lord of Granvel, l. 2. p. 39. Nicholas Hames Tosond'or, or
Herold to the Knights of the Golden Fleece, l. 5. p. 101. Night illuminated
with Torches burning in the sky, l. 8. p. 11. n^ghtly Coventicles of
Heretics, l. 5. p. 116. famous for two Armies fighting in the Air, l. 7. p.
59. Niguio vide Gabriel. Nimenghen, l. 8. p. 3. Nivell, a Town, l. 9. p. 56.
rejects Count Mansfeldt, ibid. makes conditions with Don John, ibid. Nobility
of the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 34. l. 4. p. 94. their Complaints and
grievances, l. 2. p. 29. l. 3. p. 75. how they were grounded; l. 2. p. 38, 39.
l. 3. p. 75. disputed against, l. 2. p. 30, 31. their alienation from the
Spaniards whence it proceeded, l. 2. p. 37. their discontents increased by
reason of Granvells power, l. 2. p. 39. l. 3. p. 65, 66. their emulation,
malice and endeavors against Granvel, l. 2. p. 41. l. 3. p. 67, 72. l. 4. p.
79. the like Conspiracies of the French and Low Country Noblemen, l. 3. p.
55, 61. they post up scandalous Libells, l. 4. p. 77. their joy for Granvels
departure, l. 4. p. 80 a rumor of their Conspiracy against the Edict proposed
by the Governesse, l. 5. p. 99. how they came to be infected with Heresy,
ibid. how they came to procure Liberty of Conscience, ibid. and p. 100. they
sound the affections of the Heretical Princes of Germany, ibid. they mutiny at
the promulgation of the Edict, ibid. they publish books to seduce the people,
ibid. in threatening manner they Inveigh against the Edict, Ibid. Norcarmius
vide Philip. Norryes vide John. Novellaria, the Count, l. 7. p. 60. Nuncio sent
by the Pope to the Emperor, l. 9. p. 39. to the French King, l. 3. p. 58. to
the King of Spain, l. 5. p. 114, 132. l. 8. p. 16. l 9. p. 37. to the Viceroy
of Naples, l. 4. p. 81. into the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 18, 24. l. 3. p. 65.
l. 5. p. 114. l. 7. p. 64. l. 9. p. 36. Nyssus sent into Spain by the
Brabanters, l. 3. p. 66.
Sentences in N.
SOme men's NATURE is easiest Cured with Lenitives, if Violence be offered they
will strugle, they are to be led; not driven, l. 9. p. 29. No NAKED man is
sought after to be rifled, l. 8. p. 24. It is a great support of Power to join
in alliance with NEIGHBOR Princes, l. 4. p. 91. NO difficulty to put them upon
any Resolutions, that are resolved to dye, l. 8. p. 13. NO such Conquering
VVeapon, as the Necessity of Conquering, l. 8. p. 13. NOTHING is to be presumed
upon, or despaired of, l. 8. p. 25.
O.
OAth of the Prince of Bra^ant at his Inaguration, l. 2. p. 30. of the
Covenanters, l. 5. p. 107. required by the Low Country Lords, l. 6. p. 11, 15.
Made to the Prince of Orange by the Cities of Holland, l. 7. p. 72. to the King
of Spain by the Low Country Lords, l. 7. p. 83. by Charles the eighth imposed
upon the Pisanes, and Florentines, l 9. p. 34. Proposed to the Jesuits by the
Heretics of Antwerp, l. 9. p. 39. Obsequies of Count Aremberg, l. 7. p. 54. of
Count Barlamont and his Son, l. 10. p. 51. of Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 7. of
Don John, l. 10. p. 22. of Vitelli, l 8. p. 14. Occasion of the Low Country
War, vide Belgic War and Tumult. Octavio Farneze Nephew, that is, Grandchild
to Pope Paul the third, Perfect of Rome, and Duke of Camertio, marties the
Daughter of Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 22. his Wit and Civil Arts, l. 9. p.
42. Bounty, ibid. Moderation in his Joy, l. 9. p. 43. Piety, ibid. Services in
Germany and Italy, ibid. Preparations for the War, l. 9. p. 42. the Order of
the Fleece bestowed upon him by Charles the fifth, ibid. Advanced to the
Principality of Parma and Piacenza, ibid. and l. 1. p. 23. he defends Parma for
a whole year besieged, l. 9. p. 42. Piacenza restored to him, ibid. he goes
with the Emperor into Africa, l. 1. p. 23. falls desperately sick, Ibid.
returns to Rome, ibid. Joins with the Spaniard against the French, l. 9. p. 42.
Serves as a Voluntier in the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 24. in respect to him his
Wife is Created Governesse of the Low Countries by the King, ibid. be waits
upon his Majesty to meet his Wife designed Governesse, Ibid. persuades her to
dismiss the Spanish Soldiers, l. 3. p. 50. she brings him two sons at a
birth, l. 9. p. 43. he delivers his son to Philip the second, then in the
Low Countries, l. 9. p. 44. his Opinion touching the Marriage of his son
Alexander, l. 4. p. 91. his Judgment of the Amity of Neighbor Princes, ibid.
he Consents to march his son with Princess Mary of Portugal, ibid. and p. 92.
from Italy he comes into the Low Countries to his sons Nuptials, l. 4. p. 94.
meets his Wife Margaret of Austria inher return from the Netherlands, l. 6. p.
37. likes not his sons Resolution to accept the Government of the
Low Countries, l. 10. p. 15. Octavio Gonzaga, brother to the Prince of M^lphe^,
comes into the Low Countries with Don John, l. 9. p. 26. disswades Don John
from sending the Sp^niards out of the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 27. General of
the Horse at the Battle of Gemblac, l. 9. p. 50. confirmed by the King, l. 10.
p. 7. receives Lovain, l. 9. p. 53. attempts Mechlin and Villvord, ibid. money
sent him by the King, l. 10. p. 7. delivers his Opinion at a Council of War for
fighting the States Army, though they were entrenched, l. 10. p. 8. fights at
R^menant, l. 10. p. 12. his Place in the ^uneral of Don John of Austria, l. 10.
p. 22. Odoardo Cardinal Farneze obtained of God by the Prayers of Princess
Mary of Portugal, l. 4. p. 95. l. 9. p. 44. Offenses how they began to rise in
the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 46, 47. Olennius the Roman Exactor of the Belgic
Tribute, l. 7. p. 70. Olhain, one of the first Covenanters, l. 5 p. 10^.
Olivera vide Antonio. Omen in a sinister sense, l. 1. p. 22. vide Prodigy.
Orange vide William. Oration, or Counsel, or Speech of Alexander Farneze to Don
John at a Counsel of War, l. 10. p. 7. at another time, l. 10. p. 14. of Albret
to the King of Navarre her Husband against the Catholics, l. 3. p. 57. of Duke
Areschot in Senate against the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103. of the same against
the Valencenians, l. 6. p. 9. of Ba^berino to the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 62. of
Count Barlamont against the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103. of the Marquis of Bergen
to the Prince of Ebolo, l. 6. p. 27. of Brederod in the Name of the Covenanters
to the Governesse, l. 5. p. 108. of the same to the Antwerpers, l. 5. p. 112.
of the Emperor at his Resignment to the Estates of the Low Countries, l. 1. p.
4. of the same to his son Philip, when he transferred his Kingdoms to him,
ibid. of the same performing his own Funeral Rites, l. 1. p. 17. of the Prince
of Conde and Gasper Coligny to Charles the ninth of France, persuading him to
fight the Spaniards, l. 6. p. 26. of Count Egmont to the Valencenians, to bring
them in obedience, l. 6. p. 9. of the Duke of Alva to his son Duke Federico,
when he Commanded him to fight the Enemy, l. 7. p. 61. of the same to the King
of Spain, persuading him to a War with the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 23, 24. of
the same in answer to Barberino, l. 7. p. 62. of his Council dissuading the
Exaction of the tenth part, l. 7. p. 69. of the Duke of Feria to the King,
arguing against a War, l. 6. p. 24. of Gallus by way of unfriendly advice to
Ischius, l. 9. p. 26, 27. of Granvel against the Prince of Orange, l. 3. p. 68.
of the same to his friends, l. 4. p. 79. of the Governesse in Senate. that the
Covenanters should not be admitted, l. 5. p. 104. of the same in answer to the
Covenanters, l. 5. p. 108. of the same to the Senate touching the Violation of
sacred things, l. 5. p. 128. of the Heretics against Don John, l. 9. p. 34. of
the Spaniards leaving the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 30. of the enemy reviling and
wounding the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 12. of a Jesuit to the Mutineers, l. 8. p. 6.
of Escovedo moveing Don John to send away the Spaniards, l. 9. p. 28. of the
same to compose a mutiny among them, l. 9. p. 31. of the Ambassadors from the
Heretical Princes of Germany to the Governesse in Senate, l. 6. p. 18. of the
Lords against the King, l. 2. p. 38. of Octavio Gonzaga, dissuading Don John to
part with the Spaniards, l. 9. p. 27. of the Prince of Orange against the King,
l. 5. p. 104. of the same at his departure from the Low Countries, to Count
Egmont, l. 6. p. 14. of the Estates desiring they might not pay the tenth part,
l. 7. p. 65. of Osorius Ulloa animating his men, l. 8. p. 11. of Captain
Pacecho dying to his fellow Soldiers, l. 8. p. 12. of Petrieus the Centurion
to his Companions in Arms, ibid. of Philibert Bruxellius for the Emperor, at
his abdication, to the Estates of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 4. of Ruigomtz a
Silva, Prince of Ebolo, to put off the King from a War with the Low Countries,
l. 6. p. 23. of Scaremberg in Answer to the Ambassadors from the German
Heretics, l. 6. p. 18. of the Seditious Valencenians, l. 3. p. 64. of the
Mutinous Spaniards against Avila, l. 8. p. 4. of the same to a Jesuit
exhorting them, l. 8. p. 5. of the Senators at Bruxells, for the Imperial
Edicts, l. 5. p. 105. of others against them, ibid. and 106. their joint answer
to the Covenanters, ibid. touching the dismission of the Spaniards, l. 3. p.
51. of the People against the Inquisition and the Emperors Edicts, l. 2. p.
35. Ordination of the Low Country Provinces, l. 1. p. 16. of the
Horse-Militia, l. 1. p. 17. of the Foot Militia, l. 3. p. 52. of the
Bishoprics, l. 1. p. 17. Order of the Golden Fleece, when and by whom
Instituted, l. 1. p. 17. l. 4. p. 94. vide Knights. Order of St. Stephen
Instituted by Cosmo Duke of Florence, l. 8. p. 14. Original of the Belgic
Conspiracy, l. 5. p. 99. vide Gentlemen Covenanters. Ormanceto vide Nicolao.
Osnaburg the Bishop, l. 7. p. 51. Osorio vide Iuan. Osteat in the Heavens
portending the Low Country Tumults, l. 7. p. 53. l. 8. p. 11. vide presages and
Prodigies. Osservell, a Village, l. 6. p. 3, 4. the Battle, ibid. description
of the fight, ibid. Otho Count Obersten, Colonel of the Germans, sent for out
of Germany with his Regiments to the siege of Valenciens, l. 5. p. 132.
receives the Duke of Alva at his Entrance into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 31.
Fortifies Antwerp against the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 22. the unhappy fortune of
his flight, l. 8. p. 25. Otho Nassau. l. 2. p. 43. Oudenaerd the Town, taken
and plundered by the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 75. the Devastation of things
Sacred there, by the Sacrilegious, l. 5. 126. Overysel, a Province of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 16. its Governor, Ibid. Iconomacby, l. 5. p. 126.
Cities revolted from the King, l. 7. p. 73. Oudewater, a Town, l. 7. p. 72. l.
8. p. 8. Owning of Don John vide Agnition.
Sentences in O.
MAny OFFER their service with huge Courtship to such as they know will not
accept it, l. 5. p. 141. Some ingraft an OPINION whilst they are over
sollicitous to eradicate it, l. 4. p. 97.
P.
PAcecho vide Francisco Cardinal Pacecho and Isidor. Pacification of Gant, l.
8. p. 20. the heads of it weighed, l. 9. p. 30. both parts subscribe it, ibid.
it is approved of by the King, Ibid. published by Don John, ibid. vide
Association. Paciotto vide Francisco. Pagano vide Mutio. Palatine the Count,
Prince Elector of the Empire, a favourer of the Low Country Rebels, l. 5. p.
100. l. 7. p. 58. his Death, l. 1. p. 1. 14. vide Elector, Frederick,
Christopher and John. Palace at Bruxels; l. 1. p. 3. at Antwerp, l. 8. p. 23.
Pandupho Cenamio of Lucca, Commander of French Forces, l. 9. p. 57. Papists how
they came to be so Called, l. 3. p. 57. Pardieu vide Valentine. Pardo, a
Village of the King of Spains, l. 10. p. 19. Pardon general published in the
Low Countries, l. 7. p. 67. sued for by the Governesse, ibid. granted by the
King, ibid. Promulgated by the Duke of Alva, ibid. and by Requesenes, l. 8. p.
6. Parish Priest at Mass exhorts the People to fight for liberty, l. 7. p. 72.
Paris, l. 1. p. 11. l. 3. p. 63. l. 6. p. 35. an University there founded, l.
3. p. 55. a fatal marriage there celebrated, l. 7. p. 76. Parma joyed at the
Coming of Princess Mary of Portugal, and by her Reformed, l. 4. p. 95. Parma
the Prince, vide Alexander Farneze. Parma the Governesse, vide Margaret of
Austria Duchess of Parma. Parma the Duke vide Octavio. Paul the third, of the
house of Farneze, Pope, l. 1. p. 22. goes to Nice to meet the Emperor and the
French King, ibid. takes a Journey to Lucca, to the Emperor, carrying with him
Octavio and Margaret, l. 1. p. 23. dislikes the Expedition of Algiers. ibid.
delivers Octavio, to the Emperor bound for Africa, ibid. sends Forces to serve
the Emperor beyond the Alps, under the Command of Octavio, l. 9. p. 42.
begins the Council of Trent, Ibid. his prediction of his Grandchild Alexander
Farneze, ibid. and p. 43. Paul the fourth, P. M. how he established the
Inquisition at Rome, l. 2. p. 33. a War between him and the Spaniard, l. 8. p.
33, 34. his Death, l. 1. p. 14. Paulo Guinichi, Prince of Lucca, l. 8. p. 2.
Paulo Rinaldo, l. 10. p. 4. Paulus Termus the French General invades the
maritime parts of Flanders, l. 1. p. 11. overcome at Graveling, ibid. and p.
12. Paulo Vitelli, l. 9. p. 45. Peace when it is to be hoped for, l. 1. p. 12.
concluded by the mediation of Women, ibid-agitated, l. 9. p. 49. l. 10. p. 5,
6, 14. vanishing, l. 8. p. 9. l. 9. p. 49. restored to the Low Countries, l. 6.
p. 21. diflembled by Charles of France with the Hugonots, l. 7. p. 73. the
opinion touching breach of peace with the Spaniards, ibid. peace between
Charles King of France, and Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and his son
Philip, l. 1. p. 15. between Lewis the eleventh of France, and the same
Maximilian, ibid. between Philip the second, and Henry the French King, l. 1.
p. 12. vide Cessation of Arms and Truce. People, never constant, l. 2. p. 34.
over-joyed to see the fall of powerful men, l. 4. p. 80. easily believing what
they wish, l. 5. p. 112. Ambitious to be made Judges of Religion, l. 1. p. 10.
desirous to show their Countries wealth and power to strangers, l. 2. p. 45.
they Design a Governesse for the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 19. Solicited by the
Nobility to oppose the Inquisition, l. 5. p. 101. their boldness, l. 1. p. 71.
their acclamations to the Prince of Orange upon the high way, l. 5. p. 118.
their opinion touching the imprisonment of the two Lords, l. 7. p. 51. their
love to Count Egmont, ibid. their shoutes when they saw the G^enses, l. 5. p.
107, 108, 110. their Alacrity in pulling down Heretical Temples, l. 6. p. 20.
their hatred to the Duke of Alv^, l. 7. p. 51, 64, 70. to the Spaniards, l. 8.
p. 19. to Granvel, l. 2. p. 41, 42. vide Hatred, their joy for his departure,
l. 4. p. 80. and at the breaking of the Duke of Alva's Statue, l. 9. p. 38.
their fear by reason of Domestic and external rigor, l. 7. 46. their popular
government in the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 39, their Conspiracy, l. 5. p. 115.
they of Antwerp favor Bredered. l. 5. p. 112. Peralta vide Gabriel. Pirotto
vide Pedro Antonio Pirotto. Perez vide Anton. Pesti lence in his house that
made a mock of it, l. 9. p. 41. Petition to the Archduke for liberty of
Conscience, l. 9. p. 41. to the Governesse, presented by the Covenanters, l. 5.
p. 102. the Contents thereof, l. 5. p. 108. another, l. 5. p. 142. the
Countess of Egmonts Petition, l. 7. p. 49. Petreius, the Centurion, l. 8. p.
12. Pedro Antonio Perott^, in the battle of Mo^ch, l. 8. p. 3. his gallant
attempt, l. 8. p. 4. styled the Paladine of Italy, ibid. in the battle of
Gemblac, l. 9. p. 51. in the fight at Rimenant, l. 20. p. 12. Pedro Cebellio, a
Spanish Captain, l. 5. p. 21. Pedro Ciacconio, l. 8. p. 8. Piedro Busto, a
Commander of the Italians, l. 7. p. 81. Pedro Camaiano, Bishop of Asculum the
Popes Agent to the King of Spain, l. 5. p. 114. exhorts the King to a War with
the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 21. Pedro Francisco Nicello, l. 9. p. 45. Pedro
Henri quez, l. 9. p. 54. Pedro Nava^re, a Commander in the Isle of Gerben, l.
7. p. 82. Pedro Taxio, l. 8. p. 24. Pedro de Toledo, Marquess of Villa Francha,
comes from Spain into the Low Countries, l. 10. p. 6. his place at the Funeral
of Don John, l. 18. p. 22. Peter Trigose a ^esuite, to what he perswaded-the
Antwerp Merchants, l. 7. p. 77. to what the Mutinous Soldiers, ibid. Peter
Ernest Count Mansfeldt, Governor of Lucemburg, l. 1. p. 16. the first that
promises to take the Oath of fidelity, l. 6. p. 11. sent with the Fleet to
transport Princess Mary from Portugal, l. 4. p. 91. high in the Kings esteem,
l. 5. p. 135. l. 8. p. 17. his disposition, l. 5. p. 136. combines with other
Lords against Granve^l, l. 3. p. 75. is with the Gentlemen Covenanters in the
Prince of Orange his house, l. 5. p. 107. opposes some of them, ibid. gives
his Vote in Senate against the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 103. is enraged at his son
for joining with them, ibid. discovers to the Governess many particulars,
concerning the Gheuses, and their Design, l. 5. p. 121. his opinion of the
I^onomachy in the Netherlands, l. 5. p. 127. of Lewis of Nassau, ibid. of using
Arms to suppress the Gheuses, l. 5. p. 129. is Lieutenant Governor of
Bruxells for the Governe^s, l. 5. p. 130. Count Egmonts Letter to him, l. 5. p.
136. his answer, ibid. ready to serve the King in all things, ibid. and l. 8.
p. 17. the Duke of Alva sends him General into France, l. 7. p. 64. there he
gives a total Rout to Lewis of Nassau's horse fighting for the Hugonots, ibid.
his right Arm shot, ibid. he writes to Margaret of Parma what the Duke of Alva
did in the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 68. endeavors to pacify the seditious
Spaniards, l. 8. p. 18. is designed by Requeseres on his deathbed Commander in
Chief of the Low Country Militia, l. 8. p. 16. violently taken out of the
Senate and committed to Prison, l. 8. p. 20. Chosen to Command the Spanish Army
departing out of the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 32. Camp Master in the battle of
Gemblac, l. 9. p. 50. his Vote in a Council of War, l. 10. p. 8. his place at
Don John's Funeral, l. 10. p. 22. Philibert Chalon the last of the Chalons that
was Prince of Orange, l. 2. p. 43. Philibert Bruxellius speaks to the Estates
of the Low Countries for the Emperor, when he resigned. l. 1. p. 4. appointed
by the Governess to examine the Tumults at Valenciens, l. 3. p. 62. in Senate
he reads a Letter touching the Lords Conspiracy, l. 5. p. 103. Philipland, a
Desert Island, l. 8. p. 10, 13. Philipland besieged, l. 9. p. 57. its site,
Ibid. Governor, l. 9. p. 58. it is invaded, ibid. rendered, ibid. Philip the
first son to the Emperor Maximilian, and Mary Duchess of Burgundy, l. 1. p.
^7. Philip the second son to Charles the fifth, and Isabella of Portugal is
born, l. 1. p. 9. l. 4. p. 92. why public joy was forbidden at his birth, l.
1. p. 9. he marryeth Mary Daughter to John the third of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92.
Mary Queen of England married to him, l. 1. p. 3^4. l. 3. p. 71. the English
love him not, l. 1. p. 9. he moves his father and hastens his Resignment of the
Low Countries, ibid. the Emperor resigning makes him Master of the Order, l.
1. p. 3. l. 5. p. 107. all the Emperors Kingdoms given him, l. 1. p. 5. l. 2.
p. 30. what answer he made to one that minded him of the Anniversary day of his
Fathers Abdication, l. 1. p. 6. he makes the Duke of Savoy Governor of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 11. concludes a Truce with Henry the second of France,
ibid. is at War with the Pope, ibid. sets the Queen of England at difference
with the French, ibid. victorious at St. Quintin, ibid. receives a blow at
Calice, ibid. beats the French at Graveling, ibid. and p. 12. makes a peace
with the French, ibid. marries Isabella daugther to Henry King of France,
ibid. thinks of returning into Spain, l. 1. p. 14. settles the State of the Low
countries, ibid. Political, l. 1. p. 16. Military, l. 1. p. 17. and Sacred,
ibid. and l. 2. p. 29. Convenes the Estates and the Knights of the Golden
Fleece at Gant, l. 1. p. 18. Creates Margaret of Austria Gouernesse of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 19, ^4. makes some New Knights of the Order, l. 1. p.
25. l. ^. p. 46. treats with the Deputies of the States, ibid. and 26. goes for
Spain, ibid. as he was hunting acknowledges Don John for his brother, l. 10. p.
18. angry with him for offering to steal away to the War of Malta, ibid. and
19. offended at his fortifying Tnn^s; ibid. suspects him, ibid. the people
discourse and Judgment against the King, ibid. others are for him, l. 2. p. 35.
the diversity of his, and his Fathers Disposition, l. 2. p. 38. he delays the
revocation of the Spaniards from the Low Countries, l. 3. p. 50. l. 9. p. 27.
his reason for it, l. 9. p. 32. he recalls them, l. 3. p. 52. Commands the
Governesse to send assistance to the King of France, l. 3. p. 55, 60, 61, 71,
72. offers Sardinia to the King of Navarre, l. 3. p. 59. his Letters touching
the marriage of the Queen of Scotland, l. 3. p. 59. he sends from Italy
Auxiliaries into France, l. 3. p. 60. gives his reasons for increasing the
Low Country Bishops, l. 3. p. 71. defends Granvel, ibid. his answer to the
Letter signed by Count Egmont, the Prince of Orange, and Count Horn, l. 3. p.
73. a false rumor of his being murdered. l. 4. p. 77. his Commands to the
Governesse concerning infamous Libels, ibid. and the Cognizances given by the
Lords, ibid. and 78. and the punishment of Heretics, l. 4. p. 84. he sends
away Granvell from the Low Countries, l. 4. p. 79. goes to take possession of
the Kingdom of Portugal, l. 4. p. 82. seriously commends to the Governesse the
Care of Religion, l. 4. p. 83. instructs her how to intercept the Heretics,
ibid. his bounty to English Exiles, ibid. his earnestness in receiving the
Council of Trent, l. 4. p. 85. his difference with the Pope, ibid. in great
indignation he recalls his Ambassador from Rome, ibid. gives an account to the
Low Country men, and to the Princes of Europe, of the occasion of the
Conference at Bayon, l. 4. p. 87. why he was not there in person, ibid. and 88.
he consults the Divines what their opinion was touching Liberty of Conscience
desired by the Low Country men, l. 4. p. 89. his words before the Image of
Christ, ibid. his Instructions delivered to Count Egmont, ibid. and p. 90. and
Alexander Farntze, to be conducted into the Low Countries, ibid. his Letter to
the Governesse touching the Marriage of Alexander Farneze, l. 4. p. 91. he
enjoynes her to punish the Heretics, etc. l. 4. p. 96. he receives
intelligence from the Governesse of the Conspiracy of the Low Country Lords,
and of their annual Actings, l. 5. p. 102, 106, 113, 114. is not satisfied
with the Requests made by the Ambassador M^ntiny, ibid. unseasonably defers
the grant of a Pardon to the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 115. promises his personal
presence in the Low Countries, ibid. how he assented to the desires of the
Governesse, l. 5. p. 120. he Commands her to make preparations of Arms, l. 5.
p. 132. gives Reasons to the German Princes why he was to use Arms in the
Low Countries, l. 5. p. 133. sends thanks to the King of France, l. 5. p. 134.
gives notice to the Governesse of his coming into the Netherlands, ibid. writes
very graciously to the Prince of Orange and other Lords, l. 5. p. 140. dislikes
the siege of Valenciens, l. 6. p 8. prescribes rules to the besiegers, ibid.
makes all ready for his expedition into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 11. whereof
he certifies the Princes of Europe, l. 6. p. 21. desires leave to pass through
the King of France's Dominions, ibid. Consults the Duke of Savoy touching his
March, ibid. hastens it upon the news of some Low Country Towns Revolted, l.
6. p. 22. uses new Arguments to show the necessity of his going, Ibid. it is
debated in Council, he sends the Duke of Alva before to make his way, l. 6. p.
25. 26. writes to the Governesse the reasons why he sent him thither with an
Army, l. 6. p. 27. gives her thanks, and promises to come, l. 6. p. 29.
supplications are made in the Low Countries for the Kings happy Voyage, ibid.
he Licenceth the departure of the Governesse, l. 6. p. 35. he commits his son
Charles, l. 7. p. 45. his modesty in refusing to have his Statues and Arms set
up over the Gates of Cities, l. 7. p. 65. he is angry with the Duke of Alva for
placing his Statue in the Fort at Antwerp, Ibid. Commands it to be taken away,
ibid. espouseth Anne Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, l. 7. p. 68.
substitutes Requesenes Successor to the Duke of Alva in the Low Countries, l.
7. p. 81. agrees with the Pope to help the Queen of Scotland, l. 8. p. 16.
Leaves the Government of the Low Countries to the Council of State, ibid. and
p. 17. promises to send into the Netherlands Don John of Austria, l. 8. p. 19.
dispatcheth him thither, ibid. and l. 10. p. 19. would have him govern the
Low Countries without Arms, ibid. prohibits the Convention of the Estates, l.
8. p. 20. approves of the Pacification at Gant, l. 9. p. 30. Commands the
Estates to lay down Arms, and not to admit the Prince of Orange, l. 9. p. 37.
gives Orders to the Spanish to march back into the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 41.
resolves to Recall the Duchess of Parma into the Low Countries, and to join
Alex: Faran^ze in commission with her, l. 9. p. 47. refuses the Conditions of
Peace offered by the Q of England, l. 9. p. 49. treats with the Deputies of the
Estates, l. 10. p. 6. sends new supplies into the Low Countries, ibid. is
Jealous of Don John, l. 10. p. 19. is informed that his brother is to marry the
Queen of England, l. 10. p. 20. entrusts the full power both of the Civil and
Military Government of the Low Countries to Alexander Farn^ze, l. 10. p. 23.
answers to the Requests made by Don John upon his deathbed, ibid. offended
with the Duke of Alva, confines him to Uzeda, l. 7. p. 82. calls him from exile
to be his General against Portugal, ib. his saying touching his experience of
the Vicissitude of Worldly things, ibid. his death, l. 1. p. 7. Philip, the
third son to Philip the second, receives from his dying Father the bloody whip
wherewith Charles the fifth disciplined himself, Ibid. Philip Charles Barlamont
nominated Governor of the Low Countries by Requesenes upon his deathbed, l. 8
p. 16. vide Charles Count Barlamont. Philip Duke of Burgundy, surnamed the
Good, how many Low Country Provinces he had, l. 1. p. 15. he Institutes the
Order of the Golden Fleece, l. 1. p. 17. l. 4. p. 94. to what number he limited
the Knights, l. 1. p. 25. he had it in his thoughts to increase the number of
the Bishops, l. 1. p. 18. his marriage with Isabella of Portugal, l. 4. p. 94.
Philip Connix his head with an Inscription cast by the Spaniards into the Town
of Harlem, l. 7. p. 78. Philip Count St. Paul, Ruart of Brabant, l. 9. p. 36
Philip Croi Duke of Aresebot, Commander of a Troop of Horse, l. 1. p. 17. l. 3.
p. 64. affectionate to Religion and the King, l. 8. p. 17. sent by the
Governesse to the Imperial Diet, l. 3. p. 71. exasperated by Count Egmont
against Granvell, l. 3. p. 72. he withdraws himself from the Combination, ibid.
follows Granvells party, l. 4. p. 78, 81. l. 5. p. 103. votes against the
admission of the Covenanters, ibid. joins to oppose the Faction of the
G^euses, l. 5. p. 111. wears in his Hat the Image of our Lady of Hall, ibid.
his piety commended by the Governesse to Pope Pius, ibid. sent by the
Governesse to the Rebels at Valenciens, l. 6. p. 9. takes the Oath of fidelity
to the King, l. 6. p. 11. is accounted Prince of the Senate, l. 8. p. 19.
invited by the Prince of Orange, ibid. alienated from the Spaniard, ibid. sent
to the Prince of Orange by Don John of Austria, l. 9. p. 33. discovers to Don
John many designs against him, l. 9. p. 35. offended at the Prince of Orange's
power, l. 9. p. 38. Philip Count Egmont son to Lamoral received at Bruxels with
great joy of the Estates, l. 8. p. 22. enters Antwerp with his Regiment of
Walloones, Ibid. undauntedly opposes the Spaniard, is taken Prisoner, ibid.
exchanged, l. 9. p. 31. Commander of Horse at Gemblac, l. 9. p. 50. and at the
Battle at Rimenant, l. 10. p. 10. Philip Eric, brother to the Duke of
Brunswick, l. 5. p. 132. Philip William Count Buron, eldest son to the Prince
of Orange, l. 8. p. 19. left by his father a Student in the University of
L^vaine, l. 6. p. 14. sent into Spain by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 42. bred a
Catholic, ibid. Philip Landtgrave of Hessen, l. 1. p. 9. l. 5. p. 53. his plot
to break the match between the Prince of Orange, and Princess Anne of Saxony,
ibid. he Christens the Prince of Orange his son, l. 4. p. 87. advises the
Governess to the confession of Ausburg, l. 5. p. 134. what he persuaded the
Duke of Brunswick, ibid. he sends an Embassage to the Governess, l. 6. p. 18.
Philip Holach General for the Estates, l. 9. p. 49. besieges Breda, ibid.
takes it by stratagem, ibid. and 49. assaults Ruremond and is beat off, ibid.
Philip Lalin Commander of foot for the Estates, l. 9. p. 49. Philip Lanoy Lord
of Beavor, follows Tholose to Ostervell, l. 6. p. 3. fights him, ibid. is
victorious, l. 6. p. 4. incounters the Covenanters at Tornay, l. 7. p. 50. his
death, l. 8. p. 2. Philip King of Macedon, l. 4. p. 82 Philip Maillard a
Calvinist committed to prison, l. 3. p. 62 rescued by the multitude, ibid.
condemned, ibid. Philip Marbese Lord of Lovarvall a Colonel, holds play with
the Royallists at the river Geta, l. 7. p. 61. wounded and taken, l. 7. p. 62.
beheaded, ibid. Philip Marnixius Lord of Saint Aldegund one of Calvin's
Disciples, l. 9. p. 34. forms the Covenant, l. 5. p. 100. Treasurer to the
Gheuses, l. 5. p. 141. taken by the Spaniards at the Hague, l. 7. p. 81.
intimate with the Prince of Orange, ibid. he with three other exchanged. l. 8.
p. 2. employed by the Prince of Orange to surprise Don John, l. 9. p. 34, 35.
Philip Melanctlhon his prediction of the Prince of Orange l. 2. p. 44. Philip
Momorancy Count Horn Admiral of the Belgic Seas, l. 1. p. 17. l. 7. p. 53.
and Captain of the lifeguard ibid. Knight of the Golden fleece, ibid. first
trayles a pike under Charles the fifth, ibid. his service at Saint Quintin,
ibid. appears against Granvell, l. 1. p. 16. his malice and letter against
Granvell, l. 2. p. 41. l. 3. p. 72, ^3. l. 7. p. 51. Invited into Spain by the
King, but ^efuseth to go, l 3. p. 74. combines with others against Granvell,
ibid. and l. 7. p. 49. is numbered among the Covenanters, ibid. and l. 5. p.
101. his complaints in Senate against the King, l. 5. p. 104. moves his
fellow-Knights to return their order to the King in Spain, l. 5. p. 107. joins
with the Covenanters in Culemburg house, l. 5. p. 110. and at a feast with the
Prince of Orange, ibid. votes it. Senate against a war, l. 5. p. 129. the
Covenanters sue to have him for their Protector, l. 5. p. 120. he acts for the
Heretics, l. 6. p. 1. being Governor of Tornay, he assigns Churches to the
Heretics, l. 5. p. 131. l. 7. p. 50. is present at the private meeting in
Dendermund, ibid. and l. 5. p. 134. the Kings indignation against him, ibid. he
refuses to take the oath of fidelity, l. 6. p. 12. sends a copy thereof to
the Governess, l. 6. p. 15. has an aversion from the sight of Alva, l. 6. p.
32. is drawn in by Count Egmont, to meet the Duke at the Counsel board, ibid.
arrested and disarmed, l. 6. p. 33. imprisoned in the Castle of Gant, l. 7. p.
49. many supplicate for him, ibid. what was charged against him by the Kings
Advocate, ibid. and p. 50. his answer to the particulars, ibid. from Gant he is
removed to Bruxells, l. 7. p. 51. prepares himself for death, l. 7. p. 52. is
beheaded, ibid. his Elogy, l. 7. p. 53. many hate the Duke of Alva for putting
him to death, ibid. and p. 58. Philip Norcarmius a Saint Aldegund Lieftenant
Governor of Haynolt, for the Marquis of Bergen, l. 6. p. 5. puts a garrison
into Valenciens, ibid. offended at their inconstancy, ibid. takes their
commissioners along with him, l. 6. p. 6. besieges the town, ibid. and p. 7.
defeats the forces at Tornay, ibid. enters the town victorious and punishes
them, l. 6. p. 8. returns to the siege of Valenciens, ibid. prepares for an
assault, ibid. takes the Suburbs, l. 6. p. 10. co^es into Valenciens as a
Conqueror, ibid. and p. 11. dis-ameth and punishes the town, ibid. his
Encomion, ibid. he goes into Brabant to reduce Maestricht, l. 6. p. 15. takes
the town, l. 6. p. 16. punishes their Rebellion, ibid. goes for Holland, ibid.
and p. 19. wounded at the siege of Harlem, l. 7. p. 80. Philip Sega the Popes
Num^^. to Don John of Austria, l. 9. p. 36. treats with the Deputies of the
Estates, and the Senators, ibid. goes from the Low Countries into Spain, l. 9.
p. 37. Philip Staveley Lord of Glayo^, Master of the Ordinance, l 1. p. 17.
Philip Valois vide Philip Duke of Burgundy. Physicians, their custom, l. 9. p.
28. their predictions, l. 10. p. 15. Picenian Pres^cture, or the Government of
Ancona, l. 9. p. 36. Pictures made in contempt of God and the King, l. 5. p.
141. in scorn of the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 72. Piety to our Lady of Hall, l.
5. p. 111. of the Spaniards in battle, l. 7. p. 55, 57. of the Mutineers and
Merchant^ at Antwerp, l. 7. p. 77. Pigeons carry Letters to and from the
besieged in Harlem, l. 7. p. 79. and at the siege of Leyden, l. 8. p. 7. Pilot,
l. 4. p. 93. l. 6. p. 19. Piracy exercised in Holland and Frizland, l. 7. p.
71. much confluence to the Pirates out of France and Great-Brittain, l. 7. p.
73. vide plunder. Pisans illuded by Charles the eighth, l. 9. p. 34. Piscorio
vide Charles Davalo. Pius the fourth, P. M. how he endowed the new Bishop^ in
the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 29. he Creates Granv^il Cardinal, with 17. others,
l. 3. p. 54. endeavors to draw the King of Navarre from favoring the
Heretics, l. 3. p. 58. his servants in the Conclave offended at the Spanish
Ambassador, l. 3. p. 65. how active^h^ was to get the Council of Trent
promulgated, l. 4. p. 85. he offends the King of Spain, ibid. intends to
trouble Octavio Duke of Parma, l. 4. p. 91. his Death, l. 4. p. 81. Pius the
fifth P. Max. makes a League against the Y^^k^ l. 4. p. 81. sends the Christian
Colors and Admiral^s Staff to Don John of Austria, ibid. he first consented
Medals to increase the Devotion of the Low Country men, l. 5. p. 111. grants
Indulgences to those that wear those Medalls, ibid. persuades* the King of
Spain to visit the Low Countries, with an Army, l. ^. p. 114. l. 6. p. 21.
sends an Agent to the Governesse, l. 5. p. 114. Commends and offers her
assistance, ibid. desires her to send his Letters to the Prince of Orange and
Count Culemburg, ibid. informs the King of Calvinistical books found at
Tholous and Lions, l. 7. p. 45. animate^ the Duke of Alva against the Gheuses
wi^h Letters and money, l. 7. p. 57. the Duke of Alva's Victory ascribed to his
prayers, ibid. for which he gives Solemn thanks to God, ibid. sends a hallowed
Helmet and Sword to the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 64. his Letters absolving the
Low Country men of Heresy, l. 7. p. 68. praises Alexander F^rneze, l. 9. p.
46. dies, l. 4. p. 82. Platerius vide Imbertus. Plots against Don John, l. 10.
p. 20. of the Hugonots against their King, l. 6. p. 35. of the enemy, l. 7. p.
60. discovered, l. 10. p. 10. against the Duke of Alva at the Monastery of
Greenvale, l. 7. p. 46. Poisoned, or suspected to be poisoned, l. 6. p. 28. l.
10. p. 20. Plunder of Oudenae^d by the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p* ^5. and of
Amersort by the Gheuses, Ibid. of Antwerp by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 23. of
Mechlin by the same, l. 7. p. 77. of Nardhem by the same, of Rome by Diverse, l.
7. p. 78. of Churches, l. 1. p. 9. of Dendermund by the Prince of Orange, l. 7.
p. 75. of Ma^shicht by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 21. of Zu^phen by the same, l.
7. p. 77. of other Cities and Towns, ibid. and p. 75. of Scander E^shaw and
Mustapha's ships, l. 9. p. 46. at the Sack of Antwerp. l. 8. p. 23. Predatory
ships redeemed, l. 7. p. 77. vide piracy. Poesy sacred and prophan. l. 3. p.
63. Polvillerius, Colonel of a German Regiment, beats the Confederates from
Ru^emund, l. 9. p. 49. raises men in Germany, l. 10. p. 7. Pomp vide Funeral
and Triumphal. Portugal taken by Philip King of Spain, l. 7. p* 82 Portugal
Ships with Indian Lading taken by the English, l. 7. p. 66. Pope, Prisoner in
the Castle of St. Angelo, l. 1. p. 9. Ports of England interdicted to the Ships
of Holland, l. 7. p. 71, 72. Port of Brill and Enc^^ysen in Holland, ibid. of
Calice in France, l. 1. p. 11. of Vlushing in Zeland, l. 7. p. 72. of Graveling
in Flanders, l. 1. p. 11. vide Fleet and Ships. Presages and predictions, of
Charles the fifth, concerning the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 37, 38. of Lucas
Gauricus upon Henry the second of France, l. 1. p. 13. of Me^lancthon upon the
Prince of Orange, l. 2. p. 43, 44. of Paul the third upon Alexander Fara^ze, l.
9. p. 43. of Pius the fifth touching the danger of Religion in the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 21. of future Calamities, l. 7. p. 40, 53. l. 9. p. 49.
of prosperous Success, l. 8. p. 11. vide Prodigies. President of the Privy
Council, l. 1. p. 25. of Castile, l. 4. p. 82. l. 6. p. 23. Praetor of Antwerp,
l. 5. p. 124. Priest turned out of Antwerp, l* 9* p. 40. and Amsterdam, l. 10.
p. 5. Banit^hed from Great Britain, fed and supplied by the King of Spain, l*
4. p. 83. put to death with barbarous torments, l. 7. p. 75. their Figures tied
to Posts and whipped, l. 7. p. 78. whether Priests and Religious may write of
War and things Profane, l. 1. p. 2. one praying for the Soldiers wading the
Sea, l. 8. p. 11. wide Religious. Princes must imitate Jupiter, l. 4. p. 85.
what the Philosophy of Princes is, l. 5. p. 147. Privileges of Branat, vide
Brabant and Bruxells. Privilege of the Ioyful-Entry, l. 2. p. 30. Prodigies,
at the Death of Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 8. before the Low Country War, l.
7. p. 40. seen in Heaven, l. 7. p. 59. observed at Florence, l. 1. p. 22. at
Lovain, l. 7. p. 53. vide Comets Eclipse and Presages. Proscription published
against the Prince of Orange, l. 2. p. 45. his defense, l. 1. p. 4. vide
Apology Proscription of Martin Luther, l. 2. p. 34. of the Covenanters, l. 7.
p. 42. Prosper Sanctacruz, Paul the fourth's Nuncio in France, l. 3. p. 58.
Protestation of the Spanish Ambassador to Pope Pius the fourth at Rome, l. 4.
p. 85. Proverb Military among the Wallo^^ Soldiers against timorous Scouts, l.
7. p. 54. Proverb of the Valencenians, a proud one, l. 6. p. 5. Provinces of
the Low Countries their Division, vide Low Countries. Psalter turned into
Meeter, l. 3. p. 63. sung in Fren^h by the Heretics, l. 3. p. 61. l. 5. p.
117. 124. condemned by Edict, l. 3. p. 64. Punishment, ^alls by lot upon the
Author of the Crime, l. 6. p. 31. of the English that sought the life of Don
John, l. 10. p. 20. of Anthony Strall, l. 7. p. 49. of an Apostate, l. 4. p.
83, 84. prepared for the Citizens of Bruxells, l. 7. p. 70. of Casembr^t, l. 7.
p. 49. of the Covenanters, l. 7. p. 40. of Dui, l. 7. p. 49. of Heretics, l.
3. p. 62, 65. l. 4. p. 96. l. 5. p. 130. l. 6. p. 11, 20. l. 7. p. 75. of the
Harlemers, l. 7. p. 78, 79. of the Spaniards, ibid. and p. 72. of Lanoi, l. 3.
p. 62. of Moro, l. 5. p. 107. of the Gentlemen Covenanters, l. 7. p. 48, 72,
74. of the Lords; l. 7. p. 52. of Rebels, l. 6. p. 4, 19, 20. of an Heretical
Minister, l. 4. p. 83, 84. of the Seditious, l. 9. p. 56. of the men taken at
Sichem, l. 9. p. 55. of Spell, l. 7. p. 49. vide Condemnation and Mulct. Pyramo
Conrado, brother to Don John by the Mother, l. 10. p. 24. Pie^rho Malvezzi
designed Colonel of the Italians, l. 10. p. 7.
Sentences in P.
IT concerns PARTICULARS, that the Generality should be governed. l. 2. p. 37.
No tie can oblige the PERFIDIOUS, l. 6. p. 11. It Is Lawful for the poorest
Peasant to PETITION, l. 5. p. 103. PRINCES never can offend alone, l. 5. p. 15.
It is of great Concernment to get a habit of PIETY whilst thou have thy
Understanding, that when thou art not t'y self, thou can not but be Pious, l.
10. p. 16. They do ill that make the Favorers and Pityers of their Cause,
Spectators of the PUNISHMENT, l. 7. p. 53. The Philosophy of PRINCES is to dive
into the secrets of Men, leaving the Secrets of Nature to such as have spare
time, l. 5. p. 137. The people take it as a favor from their PRINCE to be
punished by his hand, left they be enforced to endure torments enflicted by a
Servant. l. 6. p. 21. Easily will Nature shrink into her own Stature and
Condition, if PRIDE that puffs up and distracts her do but once evaporate, l.
1. p. 6. PRINCES dislike not their Ministers Ansterity, rendering them
inaccessible to the subtle Flatterer, l. 7. p. 83. Treasons are not believed
to be plotted against any PRINCE, that is not slain, l. 9. p. 37. Without a
Scene and admiring Spectators, PROUD men do but coldly act their parts, l. 1.
p. 25. Some men's PROUD Natures are enraged, if forbidden; but if left to
themselves, will in time recover. l. 4. p. 79. It Is a fault in humane Nature to
conceive things greater, because PROHIBITED, l. 5. p. 117. No PROUD man ever
carried himself like a Servant to any, over whom he did not hope to be a
Master, l. 8. p. 33.
Q.
Question of Tributes, l. 7. p. 71. in the Council of Trent, of place between
the Spanish and French Ambassador, l. 4. p. 85. Composed, ibid. revived at
Rome, ibid. determined by the Pope, Ibid. Questions of Faith agitated, l. 2. p.
39. Ques^oy. Q. Cicero, l. 8. p. 8. Q. Sertorinus, l. 1. p. 6. Quirin Hill, l.
9. p. 40. Quisciada vide Aloysto
R.
RAge of Women against straggling Fugitives, l. 1. p. 12. Raiters routed by the
Lanciers, l. 8. p. 4. Ranuccio Farneze, Duke of Parma and Piacenza is born, l.
4. p. 95. l. 9. p. 44. how he was begged of God, l. 4. p. 95. Raphael
Barberino, Uncle to Pope Urban the third, l. 7. p. 60. sets down the
particulars of those battles whereat he was present, ibid. advertiseth the Duke
of Alva of the Prince of Orange's Designs, l. 7. p. 61. is sent by Alva to the
Queen of England, l. 7. p. 66. returns the Duke the Queene's answer, and the
state of the Cause, Ibid. prepare^ Shipping for the Zeland Expedition, l. 8. p.
9. raises Fortifications at their Entrance into Zeland, ibid. Does many
Services in Vitell^'s place, ibid. and p. 10. wades over the Sea, ibid. Raphael
Manrique. l. 9. p. 47. Rapine vide Plunder. Rassinghem vide Maximilian. Ramund
de Tassis, Principal Secretary to the King of Spain. l. 7. p. 44. Rebellion of
the Belgic Provinces against the Romans, l. 7. p. 70. of the Moors against
the King of Spain, l. 6. p. 22. of the Hugonots against the King of France, l.
6. p. 26. by the Prince of Orange in the Low Countries attempted and matured.
l. 7. p. 70. the Rebel Cities receive from him Governors, Laws, and
Imposititions, l. 7. p. 72. from whence the Low Country men and the Prince of
Orange had their occasion of Rebeling, l. 2. p. 48. l. 7. p. 70. first from the
Cause of Religion, l. 5. p. 133, 134. l. 6. p. 1. 7. 11. then from Taxes laid
upon them, l. 7. p. 71, 73. afterward from the Mutinous Spaniards, vide
Gentlemen Covenanters, l. 8. p. 20. Recovery of Cities Revolted from the King,
l. 7. p. 77. of Mons, ibid. its description, ibid. of the Province of Limburg,
l. 10. p. 2. its delineation l. 10. p. 1. Reformed vide Religion Reformed.
Regiment of Naples* l. 6. p. 30. of Sardinia cashiered and punished, l. 7. p.
58. a magnanimous one of the Royallists, l. 8. p. 11. a Squadron of Walloones,
l. 9. p* 50. vide Army. Register of the Empire, l. 1. p. 2. Reg^ard vide Simon.
Religion holds forth Worship to God, and Peace to men, l. 2. p. 33. Preserver
of peace and tranquillity, ibid. holds the People in due obedience, l. 2. p. 46.
the manner of advancing it in the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 18. Penal Edicts
against irreligion, l. 2. p. 49. l. 4. p. 96. the Cognizance of the Cause of
Religion to whom it appertains, l. 2. p. 33. l. 4. p. 84, 85. l. 5. p. 105.
against the Violaters thereof what provision was made, l. 2. p. 33. It Is
injured by Luther, ibid. the League for Religion approved of by the Heretics,
l. 5. p. 138. Religion commended by the Emperor to the Estates of the
Low Countries, l. 1. p. 4. by the King to the Covernesse and Estates, l. 1. p.
27. l. 4. p. 83, 90, 96. a Conspiracy against, l. 5. p. 141. wrong offered to
it, l. 1. p. 9. l. 5. p. 113, 116, 121. Scandalous Libels against it, l. 4. p.
77. l. 5. p. 112. hatred to it, l. 3. p. 56. l. 8. p. 8. the Cause of the
Low Country War, l. 1. p. 3. l. 9. p. 1. 9, 30. its Restitution by the
Governesse, l. 4. p. 83. l. 5. p. 130. l. 6. p. 18, 20. by the Duke of Alva, l.
7. p. 64. a new oath formed against it, l. 5. p. 107. l. 9. p. 39. liberty of
Religion sought for in the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 99, 102, 119, 129. extorted,
l. 9. p. 41. Consultations concerning it, l* 1 p. 18. l. 6. p. 15. Religion,
Reformed, secured in the Low Countries, l. 5. p. 127. Councels held in France
and the Low Countries to destroy it, l. 2. p. 46. the Prince of Orange makes
use thereof, to keep Towns against the Spaniards, l. 10. p. 5. vide Gheuses,
the Disturbers of the Catholic Religion, l. 5. p. 134. Revolters from it, l.
9. p. 37. Men of doubtful Religion, l. 3. p. 75. the Religious turned out of
the Low Country Cities, l. 5. p. 132. l* 9* p. 40, 41. their Monasteries, l.
2. p. 30. plundered l. 3. p. 64. l. 5. p. 122, 127, 137. Relics of Saints
preserved from fire and ruin, l. 10. p. 5. more valued then Jewels, l. 4. p.
94. Remedies seasonably applied, l. 8. p. 19. sometimes bettered by Contempt,
l. 4. p. 79. and rash in precip tated misfortunes, l. 10. p. 21. the best when
one Man Governes, l. 8. 16, 17. the Remedy of imminet Mischief, l. 5. p. 112,
113. Rene, daughter to Lewis King of France, married to Hercules Duke of
Ferrara, l. 1. p. 21. her daughter designed for Wife to Alexander Farneze, l.
4. p. 91. Renatus, son to Henry of Nassau and Clande Chalon, l. 2. p. 43.
Rendition of Low Country Cities and Provinces to the Spaniards, l. 6. p. 11.
l. 9. p. 52. of many places to the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 73. of Oudenaerd,
l. 7. p. 75. of Brill, l. 7. p. 70, 72. of Mons, l. 7. p. 73. of Dendermund, l.
7. p. 75. of Centron, ibid. of many Towns to the Royallists, l. 7. p. 77, 78,
l. 8. p. 8. of Bommen, l. 8. p. 13. of Bovines, l. 9. p. 53. of Cimace, l. 9.
p. 57. of the Abbey d' Espine, l. 7. p. 74. of Dallhem, l. 10. p. 3. of Harlem,
li7. p. 78. of Limburg, l. 10. p. 1. of Nard^us, l. 7. p. 78. of Sichem, l. 9.
p. 54. of Maestricht, l. 8. p. 21. of Valenciens, l. 6. p. 10. of St. Valerey,
l. 7. p. 46. of Zeriezee, l. 8. p. 13. of Zuitbeverland, l. 7. p. 78. of
^utphen, l. 7. p. 77. of Aloost, l. 8. p. 18. Rentey, a Castle of Artois, l. 8.
p. 4. Reputation, l. 5. p. 110. Republic of the Hollanders, how great and from
how small beginning. l. 1. p. 1. l. 7. p. 73. Of the Heretics Instituted by
the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 138, 142. advanced by Piracy, l. 7. p. 73. their
Fleet most commonly victorious, ibid. Requesenes vide Berling^erio and Lodovico
his son Galce^an^ and Lodovico Commendador of the Knights of St Iago. Restorer
of lost liberty, an attribute given to the General of the Covenanters, l. 5. p.
109. Revolt of Cities and Provinces from the Spaniard, l. 7. p. 72, 73 l. 9. p.
37. Sollicitors of the Low Country men's Revolt, l. 7. p* 71, 73. Reux rendered
to Don John. l. 9. p. 57. Ryne, a River of Holland. l. 8. p. 7. Roan taken by
the French, l. 3. p. 61. Rich men's unhappy fortune, l. 8. p. 24. Rimenant, a
Village, l. 10. p* 9. the Battle, ibid. Risorius Nohoc lays a plot against the
Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 46. from Iuliers passes the Moes, ibid. Robert Brederod,
enemy to Cardinal Granvell, l. 2. p. 41. stands for the Archbishopric of
Cambray, ibid. Robert Melodune Viscount Gant, l. 9. p. 5. Robert Stuart,
Commander of the Scots at the Battle of Rimenant, l. 10. p. 10. Roderick Gomez
a Silva, Prince of Ebolo, one of the Lords of the Privy Council to the King of
Spain, l. 2. p. 38. of great power with his Majesty, l. 3. p. 8. l. 6. p. 22.
his Contest with the Duke of Alva at the Council Table and in Courr, Ibid. his
opinion touching the Kings Expedition into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 23. He
advertiseth the Governesse of the Marquis of Bergen's death, l. 6. p. 27. and
that she must bring his Cause to a Trial, ibid. writes to her in the Kings name
of the Army that was to march into the Low Countries, Ibid. and acquaints her
with the Cause of the Duke of Alva's coming, l. 6. p. 29. attends the King at
the Commitment of Prince Charles, l. 7. p. 44. jeeres his Rival the Duke of
Alva, for erecting to himself a Statue, l. 7. p. 65. Roderick de Toledo, a
Colonel, carried out of the field wounded into the Camp, l. 7. p. 80. Rodolph
the second, Emperor, by his Ambassador obliges himself to the association of
Gant, l. 9. p. 30. dislikes the Design of his brother Matthias going to take
upon him the Government of the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 38. is angry with
Maximilian privy to the Plot, ibid. many suspect that the Emperor was not
angry in earnest, ibid. and p. 39. Rome, a very Gossip for news, l. 4. p. 86.
the Conclave, l. 3. p. 65. l. 4. p. 81. the Sack, l. 1. p. 9. Nobility, l. 9.
p. 43. Pope, l. 1. p* 7, 9, 22. l. 5. p. 134. Victory known by the Arms of the
Sabines, l. 7. p. 56. the Dictator, l. 9. p. 36. Theaters, l. 8. p. 7. their
Veneration to the Crucifix, l. 9. p. 43. the Kingdom of the Romans transferred
to another, l. 1. p. 5. a Vow made against the Romans, l. 3. p. 51. the Belgic
Conspiracy to eject them. l. 1. p. 2. l. 8. p. 21. hatred to the Roman
Religion, l. 8. p. 8. Romero vide Iuliano. Ronell, a River, l. 6. p. 10.
Rotterdam, l. 8. p. 7. Rumor that Charles the fifth was drowned, l. 1. p. 23.
and Octavio Farneze, ibid. that Don John was fled the Low Countries, l. 10. p.
4. that he was to be married to Queen Elizabeth of England, l. 10. p. 20. that
he was poisoned, ibid. that Alexander Farneze was killed, l. 10. p. 4. that
Count Megan was dead, l. 7. p. 48. that Hierg was dead, l. 10. p. 4. that
Charles Prince of Spain was made away, l. 7. p* 45. that Mondragonio was dead,
l. 10. p. 4. that Philip the second was killed, l. 4. p. 77. that he was to
come into the Lowcountries, l. 5. p. 140. that the Prince of Orange was slain,
l. 10. p. 9. that the Low Country Lords had conspired against the King, l. 5.
p. 99. that the Covenanters would come to Bruxells; l. 5. p. 103. that Granvell
was to return into the Low Countries, l. 4. p. 81. l. 7. p. 68, 69. that the
Castle of Limburg was fired, etc. l. 10. p. 4. that Charles the ninth of France
had concluded a Peace with the Hugonots, l. 7. p. 73. that the King of Navarre
was to be married to the Queen of Scots, l. 3. p. 59. Rupelmund, the attempt of
an Heretical Priest there Prisoner, l. 4. p. 83. Ruremund stormed by the Prince
of Orange, l. 7. p. 75. besieged by the Estates, l. 9. p. 49. relieved, Ibid.
Ruart of Brabant, a title conferred by the Estates upon the Prince of Orange,
l. 9. p. 36. what king of Magistracy it was, ibid. what persons have been
formerly elected, ibid. Rythovius, Bishop of Ipre, vide Martin.
Sentences in R.
RELIGION among Heretics is not their own, but accidental and translatitious,
l. 5. p. 138. RELIGION and Law are to be Patronized and upheld as the Pillars
of a Kingdom, l. 1. p. 4. Cities seldom change RELIGION only, l. 3. p. 36.
As often as the Sacred Anchor of RELIGION is weighed, so often the Ship of the
Commonwealth is tossed, l. 2. p. 36. RELIGION once lost, can never be
repaired with addition either of Wealth or Empire, l. 5. p. 123. In acute
diseases, sometimes desperate REMEDIES are not unskilfully applied, l. 10. p.
11. Never did any Army RETREAT without some loss, l. 10. p. 8.
S.
SAbina Palatina ^avier married to Count Egmont, l. 7. p. 53. her humble
Petition for her husbands life sent into Spain, l. 7. p. 49. Sabines fighting
with the Romans by the Bank of Anio, l. 7. p. 56. Sacr^moro Burago, l. 9. p.
57. Salvator, Bishop of Clusino, l. 1. p. 18. Samaniego, l. 10. p. 7.
Samblemont, a Colonel, l. 9. p. 54. Sencerre in Aquitain, its siege compared
with the Siege of Harlem, l. 7. p. 79, 80. Sancho Avila, Captain of the Duke of
Alva's Lifeguard, l. 6. p. 30. sets a Guard upon Culemburg house, l. 6. p. 33.
beats Hochstrat beyond the Moes, l. 7. p. 46. is wounded, l. 7. p. 63. commands
a Fleet for the relief of Midleburg, l. 8. p. 2. defeats Lewis of Nassau at
Mooch, l. 8. p. 3. the Mutiny of the Spaniards against him, l. 8. p. 4. General
of the Foot in the Zeland Expedition, l. 8. p. 9. Sails into Philipland, ibid.
from thence to Duveland, l. 8. p. 13. his Complaints against the Royal Senate,
and Theirs against him, l. 8. p. 18. he supplies the Spaniards at Alooft, ibid
and p. 22. being Governor of the Fort at Antwerp, he receives the Spaniards
marching thither, ibid. withholds the Soldiers at the Sack of Antwerp, l. 8.
p. 24. departs out of the Low Countries with the Spaniards, l. 9. p. 32. Sancho
Leva, son to Sancho Viceroy of Navarre, l. 10. p. 6. Sancho Londognio, a
Colonel, l. 6. p. 30. takes the Consul of Antwerp by Orders from the Duke of
Alva, l. 6. p. 33. Sancta^ru^ vide Prospero. Saint (...), the Church* l. 9. p.
44. the Battle, l. 1. p. 11. l. 7. p. 53. General of the Horse, l. 1. p. 11.
Sardinia offered in lieu of the Kingdom of Navarre, l. 3. p. 59. Sardinian
Regiment, l. 6. p. 30. l. 7. p. 47. burns many Villages, l. 7. p. 57. punished
by the Duke of Alva, ibid. and 58. how much was lost by that fire, ibid. Sarra
Mortinengo serves in France, l. 9. p. 57. Savoy, the Dukedom, l. 5. p. 137.
and. l. 6. p. 21. Savoy, the Duke, l 2. p. 44. l. 6. p. 30. marries Katherine
daughter to the King of Spain, l. 4. p. 82, 83. l. 6. p. 35. vide Emanuel
Philibert. Saulio vide Antonio. Saxony, the Electorate, l. 5. p. 116. S^x. the
Duke, l. 1. p. 8. vide Augustus and Maurice. Saying of the Duke of Alva
touching the Punishment due to the Ga^tois, l. 7. p. 39. touching the Princes
confederate against his King, l. 7. p. 59. touching the King recalling him from
Exile, l. 7. p. 82. Of the Courage of Vitelli, l. 7. p. 62. of the Mutineers of
Aloo^t, l. 8. p. 22. Of the Low^countrey men concerning Alva, l. 7. p. 9^. of
Charles the fifth after the Abdication of this Empire, l. 1. p. 5. touching the
Nature of the Low Country men, l. 6. p. 23. of the Magnitude of Gant, l. 7. p.
39. of a Captain to Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 10. of Cardinal Granvell when
he heard the Prince of Orange was not caught, l. 6. p. 33, 34. of the besieged
Leideners, l. 8. p. 6. of Octavi^ (...) touching the ^^ity of Neighbor
Princes, l. 4. p. 91. of Philip the second relating to the Duke of Alva's
Death, l. 7. p. 82. of Vitelli to the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 60. of the Common
people on the General of an Army, l. 7. p. 83. vide Words. Scamaneler, a River,
l. 1. p. 2. Scander Bashaw wounded, taken by Alexander Fa^neze, l. 9. p. 46.
Scaremberg sent to meet the German Ambassadors, l. 6. p. 18. answers them in
Senate in the Governesse's name, ibid. Scauwemburg, a Colonel sent for from
Germany to the siege of Valencians, l. 6. p. 8. comes with his Regiment, ibid.
appointed with part thereof to secure Bolduc, l. 6. p. 17* Orders the City and
the State, Ibid. receives the Duke of Alva at his entrance into the
Low Countries, l. 6. p. 31. vide Iustus. Sce^dt, the head City of the Isle of
Zeland taken, l. 7. p. 78. the War carried thither by Requesenes, l. 8. p. 9.
relief sent by the Prince of Orange, l. 8. p. 13. taken by assault, ibid.
relinquished by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 18. Sceldt, the River, l. 1. p. 2. and
l. 7. p. 78. Scheiff, Chancellor of Brabant, sent to quiet the Bus, l. 6. p. 2.
contumeliously used and imprisoned, ibid. and l. 6. p. 16. released and sent
back to the Governesse, ibid. Schonhoven, a City faithful to the Spaniard, l.
7. p. 72. taken by Hierg, Governor of Gelderland, l. 8. p. 8. Sciplo Campio,
an Engineer, l. 10. p. 14. Scotlands Queen vide Mary Stuart. Scots fight naked
in the battle of Mechlin, l. 10. p. 11. Scottish Forces, l. 9. p. 50, 53 and l.
10. p. 11. Sea let into the Woods and Meadows, l. 8. p. 7. waded over, l. 7.
p. 77. l. 8. p. 10. overflowing, l. 7. p. 69. Its Admiral, l. 1. p. 17. l. 7.
p. 69. Sebastian Morales, a Jesuit, Bishop of Iapan, Confessor to Princess
Mary of Portugal, l. 4. p. 92, 93. S^c^in^rs fight and rout the Image-breakers,
l. 5. p. 122. Sedition how begun by the Prince of Orange in the Low Countries,
l. 2. p. 46, 47. Sedition of the Valentenians. l. 3. p. 62. revived, l. 3. p.
64. composed, l. 3. p. 65. at Antwerp occasioned by the Punishment of an
Apostate, l. 4. p. 84. upon the prohibition of Sermons, l. 5. p. 117, 118. by
the Calvinists, l. 6. p. 4. vide Tumult. Sedition Military in the Camp of Lewis
of Nassau by the German Soldiers demanding their Pay, l. 7. p. 55. repressed,
Ibid. itterated, Ibid. sedition of the Spaniards against Avila for not paying
them, l. 8. p. 4. the Seditious Create a new Electo, l. 8. p. 5. enter Antwerp,
ibid. their threats and solemn oath, ibid. they are paid and pacified, ibid.
their pious liberality, ibid. how they demeaned themselves toward the
Jesuits, Ibid. their amendment upon an exhortation made by one of the Society,
l. 8. p. 6. their plunder suspected to be a plot, ibid. Sedition of the
Spaniards at the siege of Leiden, l. 8. p. 8. the Seditious imprison their
General Valdez, ibid. upon the Receipt of their money they are pacified, ibid.
Sedition of the Spanish Horse at Ziriczee for the defering of their pay, l. 8.
p. 16. Sedition of the Spaniards against Mondragonio, l. 8. p. 17. the
Seditious take Alost, l. 8. p. 18. are declared Enemies by the Royal Senate,
ibid. assisted by Avila, ibid. they take the Fort at Licherch, l. 8. p. 19. the
Decree of Senate for expelling them the Low Countries, l. 8. p. 10. Confirmed
by the Association of Gant, l. 8. p. 21. from Alost they march to Antwerp. l.
8. p. 22. their Fury, ibid. they beat the Townsmen out of their Trenches, and
take the Town, ibid. and 23. plunder it, ibid. and p. 24. the Sedition of the
Spaniards upon the Command sent them to depart the Low Countries, l. 9. p. 30.
they are pacified, l. 9. p. 31. Sedition of the Germans defending Breda against
Fransberg, l. 9. p. 48. Sedition in the Catholic Camp raised by the Germans,
l. 9. p. 56. the Seditious are separated, ibid. the Authors of the Sedition are
demanded, ibid. their punishment, Ibid. Sega vide Philip, Seghet, l. 5. p. 139.
Seige of Alemar, l. 7. p. 81. of Amsterdam, l. 10. p. 5. 9. (...) Breda. l. 9.
p. 48. of the Castle at Gant, l. 9. p. 31. ^wor^ of Gemblac, l. 9. p. 52. of
Gocs, l. 7. p. 77. of Groningham* l. 7. p. 54. of Harlem, l. 7. p. 78. of
Leiden, l. 8. p. 6. (...) Mons, l. 7. p. 74. the description of its reducement,
ibid. of Paris, l. 6. p. 35. of Orbatello, l. 8. p. 14. o^ Parma, l. 9. p. 42.
of Ruremud, l. 9. p. 49. of Saneerre, l. 7. p. 79. of Valenciens, l. 6. p. 5.
its description, l. 6. p. 10. of Ziricz^e, l. 8. p. 13. Selimus, the Turkish
Emperor, favors the Jews, l. 6. p. 138 assists the Moors against the
Spaniard, l. 5. p. 139. l. 8. p. 15. converts his Fury against Cyprus, l. 5. p.
139. Sellius vide John. Semer, the Lord, appointed by the Governesse to be
Governor of Mechlin, l. 6. p. 12. Senators, their Cabinet Council, called the
Consult, l. 1. p. 25. how the Senate was to be convened, ibid. what precepts
were therein to be observed, ibid. the Senates opinion touching the sedition at
Valenciens, l. 3. p. 64. the Senate of Briges contumacious against the
Inquisitor of Faith, l. 4. p. 84. the Kings instruction for Ordering the
Senate, l. 4. p. 90. the Senators Suffrages for the Covenanters against the
Inquisition and the Emperors Edicts, l. 5. p. 103, 104. Their grievances,
ibid. confuted by the Governesse, ibid. l. 2 p. 105. the Senate summoned upon
the News of the Violation of Sacred things, l. 5. p. 127. the Decree of Senate
for the Security offered to the Covenanters, l. 5. p. 129. the diverse Senses of
the Senators, l. 5. p. 128. the Senate of the three States attend the
Governes^e to Antwerp, l. 6. p 18. Senate Royal Governes the Low Countries
after the death of Requesenes, l. 8. p. 16. confirmed by the King, ibid. the
Spanish Senators and Patriots who they were, l. 8. p. 17. the discord between
them, ibid. the fall of the Authority, ibid. they are bought by the Prince of
Orange, ibid. they pay the German Regiment, and delay the Spaniards ibid. they
declare the Spaniard Enemies, l. 8. p. 18. they permit diverse Cities of
Flanders and Brabant to take up Arms, ibid. their Complaints against Avila,
ibid. their Edict against the Mutineers at Aloost, ibid. they write to the
King, l. 8. p. 19. they Associate underhand with the Prince of Orange, l. 8.
p. 20, 23. they betray the Kings Cause, l. 7. p. 46. their votes against the
Seditious at Alost, l. 8. p. 19. the Senators that voted for the Spaniards
forcibly taken out of the Senate, and committed prisoners, l. 8. p. 20, 23.
others chosen in their places, l. 8. p. 20. the Authority of the Royal Senate
Nulled, ibid. a New form of Government introduced, ibid. the Senators suspected
by the Estates, removed from Senate, l. 9. p. 39. new ones elected, ibid. they
declare Don John and his Party Enemies to the State, ibid. their flight to
Antwerp upon the News of their loss at Gemblac, l. 9. p. 53. the Senates
Letter to the King, l. 8. p. 19. the Decree of Senate for expelling the
Spaniards, l. 8. p. 20. the Senate house at Antwerp fired, l. 8. p. 23. Prince
of the Senate who he was, l. 8. p. 19. vide Estates. Sepulcher temporary for
Don John, l. 10. p. 22. Sepulchers defaced, l. 7. p. 75. Seradilla, l. 1. p. 6.
Serbellonio vide Gabriel. Sernapulius discovers many designs of the
Covnnanters, l. 5. p. 110. Sermons of the Heretics much frequented, l. 5. p.
116. l. 7. p. 50. not possibly to be silenced, l. 5. p. 127. the Covenanters
desire it may be free for their Audience to come to them, l. 5. p. 129. which
is permitted, l. 5. p. 130, 141, 143. Servants to the Lords what kind of
Liveries they wore, l. 4. p. 78. Siena taken, l. 1. p. 10. the Maritime parts
harrassed, l. 8. p. 14. Sheaf of Arrows an Emblem assumed by the Low Country
Lords. l. 4. p. 78. Shower of blood, l. 7. p. 53. Ship, the Admiral that Carried
Charles the fifth, sunk, l. 1. p. 5. Princess Marie's Ship endangered, l. 4.
p. 93. of the Covenanters taken, l. 6. p. 19. of Count Bolduc, fights
gallantly, yields, l. 7. p. 81. the Turkish Treasurer's Galley taken by
Alexander Farneze, l. 9. p. 46. Ships to meet the King of Spain, l. 6. p. 29.
of the Spaniards and Low Country men stayed by arrest in England, and of the
English in the Low Countries and Spain, l. 7. p. 66. Portugal ships taken,
ibid. Free-booters infest Holland and Frisland, l. 7. p. 71. the Prince of
Orange's ships shooting the Royallists at their pleasure, l. 8. p. 12. 150
Sail, l. 7. p. 73. l. 8. p. 8. a Multitude of ships sailing over Meadows and
Woods, l. 8. p. 7. Naval fights, l. 8. p. 1, 2, etc. vide Fleet, Sichem
possessed by the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 75. summoned by Alexander Farneze,
l. 9. p. 54. refuses to submit, is stormed, ibid. taken and plundered, Ibid.
the Fugitives slain, ibid. the Fort holds out, Ibid. is taken by assault, l. 9.
p. 55. the Garrison punished, ibid. Sicilian Regiment, l. 6. p. 30. Simon
Favean, a Calvinist, imprisoned, l. 3. p. 62. forcibly taken out of the Jail,
ibid. condemned, ibid. Simon Regnard, a Senator, l. 3. p. 67. Delegate from the
King of Spain to confirm the Truce made with the French King, l. 2. p. 41.
loses the Kings Favor, ibid. incourageth private meetings against the King*
l. 3. p. 67. his hatred to Granvel, l. 2. p. 41. an Emulation begun when they
were Children, l. 3. p. 76. sent for out of the Low Countries into Spain, ibid.
Saigniac rendered to Don John, l. 9. p. 57. Solim^n the Turkish Emperor, sends
an Ambassador into France, l. 4. p. 88. Assigns a City and Territory to the
Jews, l. 5. p. 138, 139. Soliman Arais, l. 8. p. 15. Solitude beloved, l. 1.
p. 6, 10. l. 10. p. 21. Sonoi, a Water- Gheuse, Revolts from the King of Spain,
l. 7. p. 71. turns Pirat, ibid. Sorbon D. Complaints, l. 3. p. 63. Sorian vide
John. Spinosa vide Didaco. Spaniards Victorious at St. Quintin, l. 1. p. 11. at
Graveling, ibid. and 12. in Garrison in the LowCountries, l. 1. p. 17, 24. l.
2. p. 47. l. 6. p. 31. l. 7. p. 39. l. 10. p. 5. rebellions against the
Emperor, l. 2. p. 27. Retained in the Low Countries, l. 2. p. 28. dismissed,
l. 3. p. 52. Auxiliaries, at Limoges, l. 3. p. 58. Sail into Spain, l. 3. p.
52. return into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 30. l. 7. p. 58. swim the river
Albis with their Swords between their teeth, l. 9. p. 30. Defeat Count
Hochstrat, l. 7. p. 46. recover Da^, l. 7. p. 48. receives a blow, l. 7. p. 47.
rout Lewis of Nassau, l. 7. p. 54. Conquer at Geming, l. 7. p. 55, 56. and at
the River Geta, l. 7. p. 62. are beaten, l. 7. p. 72. take the Abbey d' Espine,
l. 7. p. 74. overthrow the French at St. Gis^en, ibid. besiege Mons, ibid,
assault the Prince of Orange's Camp in their Shirts, l. 7. p. 76. recover Mons,
l. 7. p. 77. plunder Mechlin, ibid. Zutphen, ibid. raise the siege at Goes,
ibid. take Zuitbeverland, l. 7. p. 78. wade over the Ocean, ibid. burn Nardem,
ibid. besiege Harlem, ibid. take it, l. 7. p. 79. are beaten in the Sea, l. 7.
p. 80. l. 8. p. 2. lose Midelburg, ibid. win the battle of Mooch, l. 8. p. 3.
besiege Layden, l. 8. p. 6. are besieged by the Prince of Orange, l. 8. p. 8.
retreat with loss, ibid. storm Towns, ibid. attempt the Zeland Expedition, l.
8. p. 9. descend into Philipland, ibid. and p. 10. pass through the Sea on
foot, l. 8. p. 12. the last division forced to return, ibid. the middle
Regiment s^ain, ibid. the Van arrives in Duveland, ibid. is Victorious, l. 8.
p. 13. goes over to Sceldt, ibid. takes part of the Island, ibid. besieges
Ziriczee, ibid. takes it, ibid. assists the Alostanians, l. 8. p. 18. loses
the Castle of Gant, l. 8. p. 20, 21. routs the Glimeans, ibid. recovers and
plunders Maestricht, ibid. marches to Antwerpt, ibid. and 22. takes their
Trenches, ibid. and 23. fires the Palace of Justice, ibid. plunders the Town,
ibid. sends an Agent to the King, ibid. goes from the Low Countries into Italy,
l. 9. p. 32, 33. from Italy by Alexander Farneze are brought back to the
Low Countries, l. 9. p. 41. overthrow the Enemy at Gemblac, l. 9. p. 49. storm
Gemblac, l. 9. p. 52. take Sichem, l. 9. p. 54. and Limburg, l. 10. p. 2. their
new Army in the Low Countries, l. 10. p. 6. the confidence of the Spanish
Soldiers, l. 6. p. 30. l. 7. p. 76. the Low-Countrey-mens hatred against them,
l. 2. p. 47. l. 7. p. 71, 72. l. 8. p. 19, 22. their Edict and meeting to
destroy them. l. 8. p. 20. and Consultation, l. 3. p. 51. their Complaints, l.
9. p. 30. piety, l. 7. p. 55, 57. their ships arrested in the Ports of England,
l. 7. p. 66. their Constancy in a siege, l. 8. p. 8. the League of Gant made
against them, l. 8. p. 21. their Execution done upon the Enemy, l. 9. p. 31.
Conquerours for almost 10. years together, ibid. The attempt of a Spanish
Lieutenant, l. 8. p. 8. the Valor of another Captain, l. 8. p. 12. Discord
among the Spanish Governors, l. 8. p. 19. the Spanish Fleet fraughted with
gold from the Indies, l. 1. p. 6. Spanish Regiments, l. 6. p. 29, 30. l. 8. p.
18, etc. Spanish Senators clapped up Prisoners, l. 8. p. 20. vide Expedition,
Sedition and Victory. Soldiers burnt in a house, l. 7. p. 62. carried into
Zeland, l. 6. p. 2. put in Garrison, l. 3. p. 52. l. 6. p. 6. wading the Sea,
l. 8. p. 10. vide Army Expedition, Spaniards, Italians, etc. Sparrowes of Wood
flying about a Room, l. 1. p. 7. Spies under a Jealous Prince, l. 5. p. 134.
their mutual error, l. 6. p. 7. their ridiculous mistake, l. 7. p. 54. wom^n
Spies, l. 7. p. 74. Statue in the Fort at Antwerp, l. 7. p. 64. broken, l. 9.
p. 38. melted again, ibid. State vide Council. States deputed vide Estates and
Senate. Stavely vide Philip. Stephano Mutino, an Italian Colonel, l. 10. p. 7.
Stephano Serra, the Spanish Admiral, l. 7. p. 66. Stephania Requesenes, l. 8.
p. 15. Stipend, vide Money and Sedition. Storming vide siege. Stuart vide Mary.
Swartzemburg vide Count Gunter. Sultanies, l. 9. p. 46. Sun in Eclipse, how
prodigious it was to Florence l. 1. p. 22. Supplications by public Order, l.
6. p. 29. l. 7. p. 64. S^^rentine Archbishop, l. 5. p. 114. Suspicion, upon the
Conference at Baion, l. 4. p. 87, 88. that the Emperors mind was changed in
the Abdication of his Kingdoms, l. 1. p. 5. touching the plunder of the
Mutineers, l. 8. p. 6. that the Low Countries were betrayed, l. 5. p. 127.
Symboles or Badges of a Conspiracy decreed at a Feast, l. 4. p. 78. worn by the
Lords Servants, ibid. inter^reted by the Common People, ibid. Prohibited by the
Governesse, ibid. laid aside by the Lords, and supplied with another device,
Ibid. forbidden by the King, ibid. Switz, l. 6. p. 26.
Sentences in S.
A Prince can never be SAFE among those Subjects that cannot think themselves
secure among his Soldiers, l. 9. p. 25. SECURITY is established by a mutual
Safeguard, Ibid. Nothing SECURE unless suspected, l. 10. p. 15. In a Violent
SICKNESS, there is not a more certain sign of Death, then if Remedies be
applied sparingly, and out of time, l. 8. p. 19. It Is hard to stand long in a
SLIPPERY place, if a man be just led by many, l. 3. p. 74. It Is the SPADE and
Pickaxe which build and destroy Forts, l. 9. p. 58. SPIES, the Ears and Eyes of
Princes, l. 5. p. 10^. The life of SPIES is, to know and not be known, l. 5. p.
134. SUBJECTED people think themselves partly free, if governed by a Native, l.
1. p. 24. Confidence increases by SUCCESS, l. 9. p. 45. SUDDEN and doubtful
Accidents ever strike a Terror, l. 5. p. 125. Those that have not ill Ears,
will be SUFFICIENTLY answered by not being answered, l. 6. p. 16. Some that
they may have SUPPLIANTS, seek to make Delinquents, l. 2. p. 35. Some kind of
SUSPICIONS, no innocence can absolutely clear, l. 10. p. 20.
T.
TAgus, the River, drawn up to the top of the Mountain of Toledo, l. 1. p. 7.
Tarquin the proud, l. 3. p. 57. Tarquin Aruns his Example revived, l. 7. p. 47.
Taxio vide Petor and Raymund. Tavan, a French Colonel, l. 1. p. 6. Taxes
imposed upon Men that for their health drink water at the Wells, l. 7. p. 69.
Taxes of the tenth, twentieth, and hundredth part imposed by the Duke of Alva,
l. 7. p. 65. the Low Country men refuse to pay them, ibid. and p. 67, 69. some
dissuade the Duke of Alva, ibid. others persuade him, ibid. his moderation,
ibid. he forbears to Exact them, ibid. upon occasion of these Taxes the
Low Country men Revolt from the King, ibid. and p. 73. Teli^an, a Divine of
Lovaine, l. 3. p. 75. Temple, a Village, l. 9. p. 49. Tent of the Prince of
Orange invaded by the Spaniards, l. 7. p. 76. T^^^nius Vasco, sent by the
Prince of Orange to sow Enemy between Don John and the Low Country Lords, l.
9. p. 33, 35. Towin stormed by Charles the fifth, l. 1. p. 10. Thames waded
over, l. 8. p. ix. Theodorick Batemburg forced to fly Holland, l. 6. p. 19.
taken, ibid. Executed, Ibid. Theador Beza, author of the Tumult at Ambois, l.
3. p. 5^. his Council for a new Model of Religion like the Profession of
Ausburg, l. 5. p. 138. he finisheth David's Psalms in French Meeter, begun by
Morot, l. 3. p. 63. Theonvill, l. 6. p. 3^. Theoph. Frisio, Camerarius, or of
the Bedchamber to the Pope, brings a red hat to Granvell, l. 3. p. 54.
Tholosiens defeated at Ostervell, l. 6. p. 8 Thole, an Island, l. 8. p. 2, 10.
Tholose vide James Marnixius and John. Thomas Armenterius, sent into Spain by
the Governesse, l. 3. p. 75. heard at large by the King, ibid. and 76. alters
the Kings mind from retaining Granvell in the Low Countries, ibid. returning
from Spain into the Netherlands, he brings Granvells discharge, l. 4. p. 79.
Thomas Perenot, the Spanish Ambassador in France, acts chiefly by advice from
his brother Granvell, l. 3. p. 55, 58. Thomas Raggius sent into England, l. 7.
p. 66. Tiber, l. 7. p. 56. Tiberius Caesar, l. 1. p. 2. l. 2. p. 40. l. 5. p.
126, 127. l. 6. p. 29. manageth his Wars by his Sons, l. 6. p. 23. his boast in
Senate of the Twins his Wife brought him, l. 9. p. 41. Ti^^emont, a Town of
Brabant, possessed by the Prince of Orange, l. 7. p. 75. rendered to Don John,
l. 9. p. 53. the Battle there, l. 8. p. 21. Toledo, the Archbishop, l. 1. p. 8.
the Aquaeduct of Toledo, l. 1. p. 7. Toledo vide Ferdinando Federico, Pedro and
Roderigo. Tholous the Dioces divided, l. 2. p. 30. C^ests full of Calvinistical
books found at Tholous, l. 7. p. 45. Torellii Lords of the Isle of Aenare, l.
8. p. 15. Tongren, l 7. p. 60. Tornay, a Province of the Low Countries, l. 1.
p. 16. Governor, ibid. Tornay, the City, ibid. its Governor, l. 8. p. 8.
Tumults raised at Tornay, -- and quieted, l. 3. p. 61. how frequently the
Heretics preached there, ibid. l. 5. p. 116. Churches allowed to the
Heretics, l. 5. p. 131. they threaten to revolt from the King, l. 6. p. 1.
Tornay Gheuses take up Arms and invade Lisle, l. 6. p. 6. divert Lanoi. ibid.
routed and slain, l. 6. p. 7. a Garrison imposed upon them, l. 6. p. 8. the
Rebels punished, ibid. Tosond'or vide Herald. Tournament, l. 1. p. 13. Trent, a
City, l. 2. p. 39. Council of Trent vide Council. Triumphal pomp, of the King
of Navarre entering Roan, l. 3. p. 61. of Granvell with the King of Spain, l. 4.
p. 83. of the Governesse at Antwerp, l. 6. p. 18. of the Duke of Alva at
Bruxells, l. 7. p. 64. of Don John of Austria, l. 9. p. 32. of the Generals for
the Estates, l. 9. p. 31, 32. Troops of Horse famous through out Europe, l. 1.
p. 17. Trophe erected by Germanicus Caesar, l. 7. p. 57. by the Duke of Alva,
ibid. the interpretation thereof, l. 7. p. 64. vide Statue and Alva. Truce for
5. years between the French and Spaniards, l. 1. p. 3. 11. l. 2. p. 41. broken,
l. 1. p. 11. between Don John, and the Low Country Estates not allowed of, l.
10. p. 6. Truden vide Centron. Tserclasse sent into Spain by the Brabanters, l.
3. p. 66. Tullia Tarquins Wife compared with Albret, l. 3. p. 57. Tumults
presaged to the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 53. their Causes, l. 2. p. 17. l. ^. p.
39. the pr^^^ry and (...) ^^uses, l. 2. p. 36. the sum of the Causes and
occasions, l. 2. p. 27. why they are vario^^, Argued by Historians, ibid. being
laid and almost extinguished by whom they were revived, l. 3. p. 55, 56. The
retaining of the Spanish Soldiers in the Netherlands, whether or no it was a
Cause of the Tumults, l. 2. p. 28. or the increase of the Bishops, l. 2. p. 29.
or the Inquisition introduced by the Emperor's Edicts, l. 2. p. 32. vide
Inquisition, Or the punishment of Delinquents, l. 2. p. 34, 35. vide Heresy
and punishment, Or the alienation of the Nobility, l. ^. p. 37. Occasioned by
Granvell, l. 3. p. 75. by the Kings Letter, l. 4. p. 96. by the Edicts proposed
by the Governesse, l. 5. p. 98. by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 39. by taxes, l.
7. p. 75. by Mutineers, vide Sedition and the Beginning of the Low Country
Tumults, how it came, l. 2. p. 46. l. 3. p. 61. a general Pardon for the
Tumults, l. 7. p. 67. vide Pardon. Tumults in France, l. 3. p. 55, 57, 58. vide
Guises and Conspiracy, the French and Low Country Tumults compared together,
l. 3. p. 55, 61. Tumults of the Moors in Spain, l. 7. p. 45, 66. at (...)
against the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 18. at Antwerp. l. 5. p. 117. l. 6. p. 3. l. 8.
p. 22. at Bolilue and Maestri^ht, 1. 6. p. l. at ^^nt, l. 5. p. 132. 1. 6. p.
24. at Valenciens, l. 3. p. 63. Tunis, the Royal Seat of Libia, taken by
assault, l. 10. p. 19. the Expedition of Tunis, l. 7. p. 69. l. 10. p. 21.
Turks fire the Arcenal at Venice, l. 5. p. 139. Turkish Fleet at Lepanto, l. 9.
p. 4^. the Treasurer of their Army, ibid. Turkish Garrison at Navarine, Ibid.
Tunius the Secretary sent by the Governesse to the Bishop of Lieg, l. 6. p. 16.
to Brederod, l. 6. p. 19. by him retained, ibid. sent away by night from
Amsterdam, ibid. employed by the Duke of Alva to the Queen of England, l. 7. p.
66. Tuscany, l. 8. p. 14. Tw^ntieth part, vide Taxes.
Sentences in T.
SLander is a Shipwreck by a dry TEMPEST, l. 3. p. ^7. THREATS proportioned to
the greatest Spirits will at last humble them, l. 4. p. 82. In a TROUBLED State
the most present Remedy is for one Man to Rule, l. 8. p. 17.
V.
VAbrince, a Bishopric in France, l. 2. p. 31. Vadamont, the Count, l. 7. p.
53. Vahal, a River, l. 8. p. 9. Va^dersong appointed a Captain of Foot by the
King, l. 5. p. 132. Valdez vide Francisco. Valenciens, a City, l. 6. p. 5.
impatient of their Rulers, ibid. the Tumults therein, l. 3. p. 61, 63.
composed, l. 3. p. 64. the state of the Town, l. 6. p. 5. the Valencentians
Commanded by the Governesse to receive a Garrison, Ibid. after some
tergiversation, they refuse, ibid. are pronounced Rebels, l. 6. p. 6. besieged,
l. 6. p. 8. the King unwilling to have them stormed, ibid. besieged yet more
straightly, ibid. the Assault limited by the Kings Order, l. 6. p. 9. they are
invited to render by Count Egmont and Duke Areschot, ibid. they Sally out by
night, l. 6. p. 10. the Site of the Town, ibid. the battery, ibid. the
Valencenians Treat, ibid. they yield to mercy, ibid. and so escape storming,
Ibid. and p. 11. the City is disarmed, ibid. the Authors of the Rebellion
Executed, ibid. the State Sacred and Civil restored, ibid. the Fort demolished,
l. 9. p. 38. Valentine Pardieu Lord de la Mott, Commands the Forces of
Flanders, l. 6. p. 3. Master of that Ordinance, l. 9. p. 50. carried out of the
field wounded, l. 7. p. 80. St. Valery stormed, l. 7. p. 46. Vallidolid, l. 1.
p. 6. l. 10. p. 18, 19. Valois vide Philip Duke of Burgundy. Valois vide
Margaret. Van^^st vide John and Margaret. Vargas vide Alphonso Francisco and
Iuan. Va^^^ination vide Presage. Venice fired, l. 5. p. 139. who was the
plotter of it, Ibid. Verdugo vide Francisco. Venerus Ginnich, Ambassador from
the Duke of Iuliers, l. 9. p. 36. Verse, about half Moons worn in hats to
express their hatred to the Roman Religion, l. 8. p. 8. of Ovid. Sited upon
the Death of Charles Prince of Spain, l. 7. p. 45. Ves^^^^ch employed from
Antwerp to Spain, l. 8. p. (...). (...), the Emperor, l. 1. p. 2. Vestarho^^
rais^^^ Horse in Saxony, l. 5. p. 138 Vienn^, a Town of Holland, l. 6. p. 1,
20. Vibaldus Riperda, General and Governor of Harlem, dies, l. 7. p. 80.
Victory, of Actium, l. 9. p. 46. at the River E^s, l. 7. p. 56. at Calic^, l.
1. p. 11. at the River Geta, l. 7. p. 61. at Graveling, l. 1. p. 11. at St.
Gis^en, l. 7. p. 74. at Gembla^, l. 9. p. 52. at Limburg, l. 10. p. 1. at Mons
in Hayn^lt, l. 7. p. 76. at Ostervell, l. 6. p. 3. at St. Quintin, l. 1. p. 11.
in the Isle of Duveland, l. 8. p. 13. at Mooch, l. 8. p. 3. over the
Armenterians and Tornois, l. 6. p. 7. over the Hugo^ots, l. 3. p. 62. l. 6. p.
34. l. 7. p. 64, 74. over Mustapha's Galley, l. 9. p. 46. in the War of
Portugal, l. 7. p. 82. by every 10. Spaniards over as many thousands of the
Enemy, l. 9. p. 31. the Sea-Victories of the Prince of Orange, l. 8. p. 2. and
of the Holl^nders frequent for ten years together, l. 7. p. 73. thought to be
a miracle, l. 7. p. 57. moderation in Victory, l. 10. p. 13. the news of
Victory strangely brought to the Groine, l. 7. p. 56. the Victory of the
Spaniards paralleled with one of the Romans, ibid. vide Expedition. Vid. Caboce
slain in a duel in the French Kings presence, l. 1. p. 13. Vie^^lus vide Henry.
Viglius vide Ulricus. Villa, of Henry King of France, l. 9. p. 57. Villapardo,
l. 10. p. 19. Villagarcia, l. 10. p. 17. Villages fired, l. 7. p. 57. Viller
Commands the Covenanters Horse, l. 6. p. 1. moves the Bishop of Lieg to suffer
their meeting at Centron, l. 5. p. 119. Villers, a French Marquis joins with
Count Aremberg at Amiens, l. 6. p. 35. Villers Commands the Carabines for the
Estates, l. 9. p. 50. defends Nivell, l. 9. p. 56. vide Iustus Villers. Villres
General for the Covenanters, l. 7. p. 49. is ordered by the Prince of Orange
from Iuliers to pass the Moes, l. 7. p. 46. routed and taken Prisoner, ibid.
and 49. executed, ibid. Villet, Granvells Countryman, undertakes his Murder,
l. 4. p. ^^0. Vilvord, too late attempted by Gonzaga, l. 9. p. ^3.
Vilvord-Prison, l. 5. p. 101. Vinglius, one of the Covenanters, infests
Holland, l. 6. p. 19. defeated, ibid. executed, ibid. Vincentio Carafa, Prior
of Hunga^y, appointed Colonel of Italians, l. 10. p. 7. Violaters of holy
Images punished, l. 6. p. 17, 20. vide I^^nomachy. Vervich, l. 5. p. 1^0.
Visurgis, a River, l 7. p. ^6. Vitelli vide Chiapin^, Camillo, Nicolao, and
Paulo. Viterlotio Vitelli. l. 8. p. 14. Ulloa vide Alphonso Iuan Osorio and
Magdalen. Ulricus Viglius Zuitchem, President of the Privy Co^ncel, l. 1. p.
25. l. 3. p. 68. faithful to Granvell, Ibid* l 4. p. 78. numbered among the
Cardinallists, ibid. and 31. the Gheuses threaten him, l. 5. p. 129.
affectionate to his Religion and his King, l. 8. p. 17. arrested in Senate, and
committed Prisoner, l. 8. p. 20. Ulutial, the Turkish Admiral, l. 9. p. 46.
Ulysses, l. 3. p. 10. Voluntary inheritance, l. 1. p. 4. Vorne, an Isle of
Holland, l. 7. p. ^2. Votive Monument, l. 7. p. 48. Urban VII. P. M. l. 5. p.
132. Urban VIII. P. M. l. 7. p. 60. Vrsel employed from Antwerp into Spain, l.
3. p. 66. Utricht honored with the prerogative of an Archbishopric, l. 1. p.
18. the Townsmen out the Catholics from their Churches, l. 5. p. 131. threaten
to revolt from the King, l. 6. p. 1. Vulgar Apostles, who, l. 3. P. 61. Vulgar
interpretation of the Hoods, l. 4. p. 78. v^de peole. Uzeda, l. 7. p. 112.
Sentences in V.
VICES that pass from hand to hand are soiled with being touched, and grow
still fouler, l. 5. p. 115. It is not easy to hold men's hands when VICTORY
shows them at once, revenge and booty, l. 8. p. 24. What is VISIBLE, is
slighted, l. 1. p. 8. UNSOUND minds like unsound bodies, the more you feed, the
more you poison them, lib. 9. p. 34. The VOTE which nature extorts, we think is
given to the Cause, when indeed we give it to our humor, l. 6. p. 13.
W.
WAcken, sent Admiral into Spain, l. 6. p. 32. Walcheren, an Island, l. 6. p.
2. l. 8. p. 1. Waterland, an Isle, l. 6. p. 19. West, a River, l. 10. p. 1.
Westphalia, l. 2. p. 36. Wight, an Isle of England, and its Governor, l. 8. p.
33. Willebroc, a Village, l. 6. p. 14. W^rk^me, l. 8. p. 9. Wallet, an Emblem
of the Gheuses, l. 5. p. 110. Wallets stuck upon Spear-points, l. 8. p. 10.
Water-Gheuses, l. 7. p. 71. William Count Bergen, one of the four first
Covenanters, l. 5. p. 102. at Bruxells, l. 5. p. 107, 109. feasted with them,
ibid. goes with them to the Governesse, l. 5. p. III. retires into Gelderland,
ibid. and l. 6. p. 15. is impeached, l. 7. p. 41. condemned in absence, ibid.
victorious in Zutphen, l. 7. p. 73. defeated, l. 7. p. 77. William B^osius
Treslong, one of the first Water-Ghen^es, l. 7. p. 71. turns Pirat, ibid. beats
the Spaniards, and fires their Ships, l. 7. p. 72. is the Cause of hanging
Alvares Pacecho, ibid. William Bronchorst dies, l. 7. p. 10. William Duke of
Cleve, l. 9. p. 101. l. 9. p. 30. William Horn, Lord of Mese, Governor of
Bruxells, l. 8. p. 20. by order from him the Royal Senators are Imprisoned,
ibid. the Prince of Orange's Emissary, l. 9. p. 34. Commands a Regiment at the
Battle of Gembl^^, l. 9. p. 50. Ungrateful to Don John, l. 9. p. 35. Advises
the Jesuits to take the Oath, l. 9. p. 40. his Enmity with the Prince of
Orange, l. 1^. p. 9. what ^is End was, l. 9. p. 34. William Lu^^, descended
from the Counts e March^, Commander of Horse among the Covenanters, l. 6. p. 1.
irreconcilable to the name of Catholic, l. 7. p. 58. his Vow to revenge the
Death of Count Egmont and Count Horn, ibid. General of the Water-Gheuses, l. 7.
p. 71. his hatred to the Duke of Alva, ibid. signified in his Colors, ibid. he
robs at Sea, ibid. takes and fortifies Brill, l. 7. p. 72. destroys things
Sacred, ibid. is pictured putting a pair of Spectacles upon the Duke of Alva's
Nose, ibid. by his means the Rebel-Cities submit to the Prince of Orange, ibid.
his own Men offended with him, l. 7. p. 80. Cassed by the Prince of Orange,
ibid, imprisoned and banished, ibid. overthrown at the battle of Gemblac, he
flies to Lieg, ibid. dies miserably, ibid. William of Nassau Prince of Orange,
l. 1. p. 5. his family, birth, presages, Ancestors, l. 2. p. 43, 44. His
Education with Mary sister to Charles the fifth, ibid. Gentleman of the
Bedchamber to the Emperor, ibid. his Services of War, Civil employments and
favor with the Emperor, ibid. Carries the Imperial Crown to Ferdinand King of
the Romans, l. 1. p. 5. l. 2. p. 44. is by Caesar commended to his son Philip,
ibid. Chosen Knight of the Golden Fleece, ibid. the Instrument of making peace
with, and Hostage to Henry King of France, ibid. and p. 46. the Causes of his
discontent and designs, l. 2. p. 44. his Wit and Manners, l. 2. p. 45. the
splendour of his housekeeping, Ibid. what his Religion was, ibid. he Studies
Machiavil, l. 2. p. 46. his marriages, l. 3. p. 53. his daughter born, l. 3. p.
^1. and his son Maurice, l. 4. p. 87. General of the Spanish Horse in the
Low Countries, l. 2. p. 28. Governor of Holland, Zeland, and ulricht, l. 1. p.
16. and Burgundy, l. 1. p. 17. designed by the people's wishes for Governor of
all the 17. Provinces, l. 1. p. 19. which he says he ought to be of right, l.
2. p. 45. what hindered him, l. 1. p. 19. out of hope of the Government, l. 2.
p. 45. from whence sprung his indignation and complaints against the King, l.
2. p. 38. and his alienation, l. 3. p. 67. his Envy and Emulation against
Granvell, l. 2. p. 39, 41, 42. who did him mischief, l. 3. p. 54, 67, 68. when
he took the first occasion of raise troubles, ibid. whence the beginning, l. 2.
p. 46. l. 5. p. 100. he favors the Seditious Citizens and Heretics, l. 2. p.
46. l. 3. p. 66. draws in Count ^gmont, l. 3. p. 68. with whom he is compared,
l. 3. p. 70. exasperates the Brabanters, l. 3. p. 68. combines against
Granvell, l. 3. p. 69, 71. writes against him to the King, l. 3. p. 72. his
Complaints at the Convention of the Golden Fleece, l. 3. p. 69. and in Senate
before the Governesse, l. 3. p. 75. his dissension with Count Aremberg, l. 3.
p. 73. and with Duke Areschot, l. 5. p. 103. resolves to come no more to
Senate, l. 3. p. 75. advertiseth the Governesse of the Lords Conspiracy, l. 5.
p. 99. whether he was one of the Conspirators, ibid. at his City of Breda the
Covenant was signed, l. 5. p. 100, 101. he complains in Senate that he is
reported to be a Covenanter, Ibid. gives his vote for the Covenanters admission
into Bruxells, l. 5. p. 103. his Complaints against the King, l. 5. p. 104. the
Covenanters light at his house, l. 5. p. 107. what was acted there, ibid. he
meets them at Culemburg-house, l. 5. p. 110. Feast the Covenanters, Has a
monitory letter sent him from Pius the fifth, l. 5. p. 114. having been
formerly admonished by Pius the fourth, touching the same point, ibid. the
Governesse at the desire of the Citizens of Antwerp sends him to compose the
tumult there, l. 5. p. 118. the applauses, shouts, and acclamations of the
Heretics as he came in, ibid. what he acted at Antwerp, ibid. and 120. sent by
the Governesse to trouble the meeting at Centron, ibid. he moves to be made
Governor of Antwerp for settling of the Town, ibid. he is Commissionated and
suffered to have a Lifeguard, ibid. his design to invade the Principality of
the Low Countries, ibid. 129, 130. l. 7. p. 40. and Holland in the first place,
l. 6. p. 1. he argues in Senate against the Le^ying of a War, l. 5. p. 129.
disswade^ the Governesse from leaving Bruxels, ibid. by his endeavo^rs Religion
at Antwerp is restored, l. 5. p. 130. he assigns Churches to the Heretics in
Antwerp, ibid. (...) against the Emperors Edicts, l. 5. p. 133. meets the
other Lord at Dendermund, l. 5. p. 134. l. 7. p. 50. what was there concluded,
l. 5. p. 134. l. 7. p. 50. boasts and glories that he has penetrated into the
Kings design, l. 5. p. 137. Essays to draw Count Egmont into a new
Confederation, l. 5. p. 142. how he carried himself in the tumult at Antwerp,
l. 6. p. 3. ^he refuses to take the Oath of fidelity, l. 6. p. 12. of his own
accord resignes his Government, ibid. is troubled at the Duke of Alva's coming
into the Low Countries, l. 6. p. 13. his Conference with the Lords at
Willebroc, l. 6. p. 14. his words, at his departure, to Count Egmont, ibid. and
his Letter to the Governesse, ibid. he departs from the Low Countries, ibid. is
impeached by the Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 41. condemned absent, ibid. and 42.
what he answered, ibid. his complaints for the sending of his son into Spain,
ibid. his first Expedition from Germany into the Low Countries, l. 7. p. 46. he
publishes in Apology against the King, l. 2. p. 45. and a book against the
Duke of Alva, l. 7. p. 58. musters at Aquisgrane, ibid. passes his Army over
the Moes, contrary to the Duke of Alva's opinion, l. 7. p. 59. fights only
with light skirmishes, l. 7. p. 60. ^routs Vitelli, ibid. Challenges the Duke
of Alva to a battle, ibid. attempts ^ivers Towns in vain, l. 7. p. 61, 63. his
danger upon a mutiny in his Camp, l. 7. p. 61. he moves to receive the French
Forces, ibid. Takes Centron, ibid. fights at the River Geta, ibid. and 62. with
great loss, ibid. is recruited by the French Auxiliaries, ibid. intends to
join with the Prince of Conde in France, l. 7. p. 63. plunders the territory of
Lieg and the Villages of Hayn^lt, ibid. fights more fortunately with the Duke
of Alva at Que^cy, ibid. is prohibited from entering France, ibid. a mutiny in
his Camp, ibid. defeated of his hopes, he goes for Germany, Ibid. derides the
Duke of Alva's pride, in erecting his own Statue, l. 7. p. 64. Sollicites the
Low Country men to revolt upon occasion of the Taxes, l. 7. p. 71. compasses
his desire, ibid. uses the Water-Gheuses against the Duke of Alva, ibid. the
Rebellious Cities willingly yield to him, l. 7. p. 72. his second Expedition
out of Germany into the Low Countries to relieve his brother (...), l. 7. p.
75. he takes some Towns in Brabant, ibid. the Cruelty of his Men, ibid. he
quickens his march to Mons, ibid. admires the Duke of Alva's Camp as he lay at
the siege, l. 7. p. 67. attempts in vain to break through, ibid. retreats, ibid.
is invaded in the night ibid. he confirms the Harlemers to hold out, by
letters sent them by Carryer-Pigeons, l. 7. p. 79. his Sense of the Duke of
Alva's departure; l. 7. p. 81. his victory and the rendition of Midelburg^, l.
8. p. 2. he prepares Men and Shipping to defend (...), which he ^oseth, l. 8.
p. 10. he sends relief to Sceldt* l. 8. p. 13. having taken Crimpen, he
marches to Ziriczee, Ibid. is bear, off, Ibid. persuades the Governors of
Provinces, and the Senators to stand for liberty, l. 8. p. 19. associ^tes with
some of them, Ibid. Courts Duke Ares^h^^, Ibid. is invited to the Confederation
of Gant, l. 8. p. 21. assists the Estates against the Spaniards, Ibid.
instructs the Senators and Deputies of the Estates against Don John, l. 8. p.
26. moves them to command the Spaniards out of the Low Countries, Ibid. is
vexed at Don John's admission, l. 8. p. 33. denies, together with his
Provinces, to subscribe the Edict, Ibid. professes himself a Calvinist, Ibid.
labors to poison the Low Country Country men's hearts against Don John, ibid.
Sowes dissension between Don John and the Low Country Lords, l. 9. p. ^4. in
Created Ruart of Brabant, l. 9. p. 36. Institutcs new Magistrates by the Copy
of Holland, l. 9. p. 38. by his Design the Fort at Antwerp in demolished,
Ibid. at his too great power the Lords are offended, ibid. he is joined with
Archduke Matthius, as his Lievtenant-Governour of the Low Countries, l. 9. p.
39. he flies to Antwerp, upon the news of the Catholics Victory at Gemb^ac,
l. 9. p. 53. he gives out that all the Royallists are slain in the Fort at
Lunburg, l. 10. p. 4. blamed by the Archduke and the Estates, l. 10. p. 5. he
founds his Empire by the Sea of Holland, Ibid. attempts Amsterdam, Ibid.
deceived by his (...), rendered to him, Ibid. he raises men i^ Germany, Ibid.
persuades the Estates to a cessation of Arms, ibid. and p. 6. dislikes a
Truce, Ibid. his Enmity with Campin, Glime and Hese, l. 10. p. 9. he cunningly
spreads a rumor of his own murder, ibid. his report of a marriage to be
between Don John, and the Queen of England, l. 10. p. 20. Granvell called him
Silence, l. 6. p. 33. Writers of History, l. 1. p. 2. why they differ about the
beginning of the Belgic Tumults, l. 2. p. 27, all. Wallon Militia and Proverb,
l. 7. p. 54. Regiment, l. 9. p. 50, 55. Winschot, l. 7. p. 47. Wood- Gheuses,
l. 7. p. 59.
Sentences in W.
NEver shines a greater hope of Peace, then when a WAR is seriously
prosecuted. l. 1. p. 1^. The fire of Civil WAR is carefully to be watched,
where they are near that feed the flame, they far off that should extinguish
it, l. 6. p. 2^. In WAR a General fears nothing more then to be thought to
fear, l. 7. p. 59. WICKEDNESS prospers by sudden attempts. l. 2. p. 34.
Quarrels of WIT use to be irreconcilable among Children, l. 3. p. 67.
Z.
ZAchrias, the Pope, increases Bishoprics in Germany, l. 2. p. 30. Zeland, a
Province of the Low Countries, l. 1. p. 15, 16. its Governor, Ibid. l. 3. p.
51. l. 8. p. 10, 13. infested by the Image-^ighters, l. 5. p. 126. the head of
Zeland attempted by Tholose, l. 6. p. 2. the Cities receive Garrisons from the
Governesse, l. 6. p. 20. some Islands belonging to it covered with a del^ge, l.
7. p. 69. a great part of it revolts from the Spaniards, l. 7. p. 72. the Chief
City of Zeland assaulted, l. 8. p. 1. yields to the Prince of Orange, l. 8. p.
2. the Zeland-Expedition undertaken by Requesenes, l. 8. p. 9. the Site of
Zeland, ibid. the Courage of the Royallists in wading over the Sea to Zeland,
l. 7. p. 76, 77. l. 8. p. 13. the Principal Isle of Zeland taken, ibid. it
adheres to the other Rebel-Provinces, l. 8. p. 21. Zeveghem, a Lord, sent by
the Governesse on a Ceremonious Embassage into Germany, l. 4. p. 87. Ziriczee,
the Island, fortified by the Prince of Orange, l. 8. p. 10. Ziriczee, the City,
befieged by the Royallists, l. 8. p. 13, 16. forced by Famine to render, l. 8.
p. 13, 17. relinquished by the Spaniards, l. 8. p. 19. Zvichem, vide Ulric^s.
Zuitheverland, an Island possessed by Mondragonio, l. 7. p. 78. Zuniga vide
Gabriel Nignio and Iuan. Zutphen, a Province of the Low Countries, sold to
Charles the Fighter, l. 1. p. 15. Conquered by Charles the fifth, Ibid. its
Cities revolt from the King, l. 7. p. ^3. are recovered, l. 7. p. 77. its
Governor, l. 1. p. 16.
FINIS
ERRATA.
LIB. 1. Pages. To great soul, add, and maintained by many hands. L. 1. p. 9.
Great Aunt, de^^e Great. L. 1. p. 10. For Ships, read Galleys. L. 1. Earl of
Holland, read, defended from the Earls of Holland. L. 1. p. 17. For Archbishop
of Liege, read, Bishop. L. 1. p. 21. For Duke of (...), read, of (...). L. 1.
p. 15. For Na^s, read, Nanty. L. 3. p. 53. For Mothers grand father, read
grandfather by the Mother. L. 5. p. 1. Chief Cities of the Netherlands, dele,
of the Netherlands. L. 6. p. 22. For Prince of Elora, read, Ebolo. L. 8. p.
(...). For Sp^^^^, read, Sp^leto. L. 9. p. 36. For Fisa, read, Ancom^. L. 9. p.
42. Great Grandfather, dele, Great. These, many of them his Mistakes to whom
the English of this History was dictated, the noble Reader is desired to excuse
and correct: and to examine the mere literal Errors, with the Table.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses, in Humane Learning, etc.
1 THe History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance, translated by I. H. Esquire
Folio. 2 The History of Polyxander, a Romance, Englished by William Brown,
Gent. Printed for T. W. and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, in Fol. 3 Mr.
James Howels History of Lewis the thirteenth, King of France, with the life of
his Cardinal de Richelieu, in Folio. 4 Mr. Howels Epistolae Ho-Esianae,
Familiar Letters, Domestic and Foreign, in six Sections, Partly Historical,
Political, Philosophical, first Volume with Additions, in 8o. 1650. 5 Mr.
Howels New Volume of Familiar Letters, Partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions, 1650. 6 Mr. Howels third
Volume of Additional Letters of a frether date, never before published, in 8o.
1650. 7 Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, first part in 12o.
with many Additions. 1650. 8 Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest,
second part in 8o. never printed before, 1650. 9 Mr. Howels Englands Tears for
the present Wars, in 12o. 1650. 10 Mr. Howel of the Pre-eminence and Pedigree
of Parliament, in 12o. 1650. 11 Mr. Howels Instructions and Directions for
Foreign Travels, in 12o. with diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey and
the Levant, 1650. 12 Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to his late
Majesty, in 4o. 13 Mr. Howels Augliae Suspiria and lachrymae, in in 12o. 14
Policy Vnveyled, or Maxims of State, done into English by the Translator of
Gusman the Spanish Rogue, in 4o. 15 The History of the Inquisition, composed by
the R. F. Paul Servita, the compiler of the History of the Council of Trent, in
4o. 16 Biathanatos, a Paradox of Self-homicide, by Dr. Io. Done, Dean of St.
Paul's London, in 4o. 17 Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi's Romulus and Tarquin,
Englished by Hen. Earl of Monmouth, in 12o. 18 Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi's
David persecuted, Englished by Rob. Ashley, Gent. in 12o. 19 Marquis Virgillio
Malvezzi, of the success and chief events of the Monarchy of Spain, in the
year 1639. of the revolt of the Catalonians, Englished by Robert Gentilis, in
12o. 20 Marquis Virgillio Melvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades
and Coriolanus, Englished by Robert Gentil^^, in 12o. newly printed 1650. 21
Gracious Privileges granted by the King of Spain to our English Merchants, in
4o. 22 The History of Life and Death, or the promulgation of Life, written by
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban, in 12o. 23 The Antipathy between the
French and the Spaniard, translated out of Spanish in 12o. 24 Mr. Birds grounds
of Grammar, in 8o. 25 Mr. Bulwers Philocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb man's
friend, in 12o. 26 Mr. Bulwers Pathomyotomia, or a Dissection of the
significative Muscles of the Affections of the Mind, in 12o. 27 An itinerary
containing a voyage made through Italy in the years 1646, 1647. illustrated
with diverse Figures of Antiquity, never before published, by John Raymond,
Gent. in 12o. 28 The Use of Passions, written by I. F. Senault, and put into
English by Henry Earl of Monmouth, in 8o. 29 Choice Music for three voices,
with a Thorough Base, composed by Mr. Henry, and Mr. William Laws, Brothers,
and servants to his late Majesty, with diverse Elegies set in Music by several
friends upon the deathof Mr. William Laws, in 4o. 30 Judicious, and select
Essays, and Observations, written by the renowned and learned Knight, Sir
Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana, in ^^. newly printed
1650. 31 Unheard of Curiosities concerning the Talismanical Sculpture of the
Persians, the Horoscope of the Patriarks, and the reading of the Stars, by
James Gaffarel; Englished by Ed. Chilmead Chapter Chapter Oxon, in 8o. newly printed
1650.
Choice Poems, with excellent Translations, and incomparable Comedies and
Tragedies, written by several ingenious Authors.
2 COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher, Gent.
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Original Copies,
containing 34 Plays, and a Masque, in Folio. 33 Epigrammata Thomae Mori Angli,
in 16o. 34 Fragmenta Aurea, A collection of the Incomparable Pieces, written by
Sir John Suckling Knight, in 8o. 35 All Iuvenals 16 Satyrs, translated by Sir
Robert Stapylton, Knight; wherein is contained a Survey of the manners and
actions and mankind, with Annotations, in 8o. 36 Museus on the loves of Hero
and Leander, with Leanders Letters to Hero, and her Answer, taken out of Ovid,
with Annotations, by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight, in 8o. 37 Poems, etc. written
by Mr. Edward Waller of Beckonsfield, Esquire in 8o. 38 Pastor Fido, the faithful
Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly translated out of the Original, by Richard Fanshaw,
Esquire in 4o. 39 Poems, with a Discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by Richard
Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o. 40 Aurora Ismenda and the Prince, with Oronta the Cyprian
Virgin, translated by Thomas Stanley, Esquire, the second Edition corrected and
amended, in 8o. 1650. 41 Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with
Annotations, by Thomas Stanley, Esquire in 8o. 1650. 42 Medea, a Tragedy written in
Latin, by Lucius Aunaeus Seneca, Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn, Esquire with
Annotations, in 8o. 43 Seneca's answer to Lucilius his Quaere, Why good men
suffer Misfortunes, seeing there is a Divine Providence; translated into
English Verse by Mr. Edward Sherburn, Esquire in 8o. 44 Poems of Mr. John Miston,
with a Masque, presented at Ludlow Castle, before the Earl of Bridgewater, then
president of Wales, in 8o. 45 Poems, etc. with a Masque, called, The Triumph of
Beauty, by James Shirley, in 8o. 46 Steps to the Temple, Sacred Poems, with the
Delights of the Muses, upon several occasions, by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge,
in 12o. 47 The Mistress, or several Copies of love Verses, written by Mr.
Abraham Cowley, in 8o. 48 Divine Poems written by Francis Quarles Senior, in
8o. 49 The Odes of Casimire, translated by George Hills, in 12o. 50 Arnalte and
Lucenda, or the melancholy Knight; a Poem translated by L. Lawrence, in 4o. 51
The Sophister, a Comedy, in 4o. by Dr. S. 52 The Women-hater, or the Hungry
Courtier, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher, Gent. in 4o.
53 The Taagedy of Thierry, King of France, and his brother Theodoret, written
by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher, Gent. in 4o. 54 The unfortunate Lovers,
a Tragedy written by William Davenant, Knight, in 4o. 55 Love and Honor, a
Comedy written by William Davenant, Knight, in 4o. 56 Madagascar, with other
Poems, written by William Davenant, Knight, in 12o. 57 The Country Captain, and
the Variety, Two Comedies written by a person of Honor, in 12o. 58 The Cid, a
Trage-Comedy, in 12o. 1650. 59 The Sophy, a Tragedy written by John Denham,
Esquire. 60 Coopers Hill, a Poem by John Denham, Esquire the second Edition, in 4o.
with Additions, 1650. 61 Clarastella, with other occasional Poems, Elegies,
Epigrams, and Satyrs, written by Robert Heath, Esquire, 1650. 62 The Academy of
Complements, wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers, may
accommodate their Courtly Practice with Gentile Ceremonies, Complemental,
Amorous, high Expressions, and Forms of speaking, or writing of Letters, most
in fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems, and pleasant new Songs, newly
printed 1650. 63 Poems, with a Masque, by Thomas Carew, Esquire, Gentleman of
the Privy Chamber to his late Majesty, revised and enlarged with Additions, in
8o. 1651. 64 The elder Brother, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John
Fletcher, Gent. 1651. 65 The scornful Lady, a Comedy written by Francis
Beaumont, and John Fletcher, Gent. 1651. 66 Hymnus Tobaci, Authore Raphicle
Thorio, 1651. 67 Hymnus Tobaci, or the Excellency of Tobacco, set forth in an
Heroic Poem by Raphiel Thorius, and now Paraphrastically rendered into English
by Peter Hausted Camb. newly printed 1651. 68 Comedies Trage-Comedies, with
Other Excellent Poems, by Mr. William Cartwright, late Student of Christ Church
in Oxford, and Proctour of the University. The Airs and Songs set by Mr. Henry
Laws, servant to his late Majesty, in his Public and Private Music, 1651.
Several Sermons, with other excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some most
eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
69 A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o. Newly printed 1651. 70 A Manual of Directions for the Sick,
with many sweet Meditations and Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God,
Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24o. 71 Ten Sermons upon
several occasions, preached at St. Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the right
reverend Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Bishop of Bath and Wells, in 4o. 72
Six Sermons upon several occasions, preached at the Court before the Kings
Majesty, and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done,
Dr. in Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o. 73 Precious Promises and
Privileges of the faithful, written by Richard Sibbes, Dr. in Divinity, late
Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of Grayes Inn London, in
12o. 74 Sarah and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genesis, opened in
nineteen Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that
learned Orthodox, and indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josias Shute,
B. D. and above 33. years Rector of St. Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet, in
Folio. 75 Christ's tears, with his love and affection toward Jerusalem,
delivered in sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maiden, B. D.
Preacher of the Word of God, and late Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge,
4o. 76 Ten Sermons preached upon several Sundays; and Saints days, by Peter
Hausted, Mr. in Arts, and Curate at Vppingham in Rutland, in 4o. 77 Eighteen
Sermons preached upon the Incarnat on and Nativity of our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, wherein the greatest mysteries of godliness are
unfolded, to the capacity of the weakest Christian, by John D^wson, Oxon. in
4o. 78 Christian Divinity, written by Edmond Reeve, Bachelour in Divinity, in
4o. 79 A description of the Newborn Christian, or a lively pattern of the
Saint militant, child of God, written by Nicolas Hunt, Master in Arts, in 4o.
80 The true and absolute Bishop, wherein is showed, how Christ is our only
Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, by Nicolas Darton, Master in Arts, in 4o.
81 Divine Meditations upon the 91 Psalm, and on the History of Agag, King of
Amalek, with an Essay of Friendship, written by an honorable person, in 12o.
82 Lazarus his Rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious, learned,
and orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephraim Vdal, by Thomas Reeve, Bachelour in Divinity,
in 4o. 83 An historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory,
Oxon. in 8o.
FINIS.

